Eighth Session, Thursday night, 1 Sha'ban, 1345 A.H.
====================================================

Sayyid Abdu'l-Hayy: Respected sir, last night you contributed to discord
among the Muslims.

Well-Wisher: Tell me how I did that.

Sayyid: While explaining "ourselves", you divided Muslims into two
groups: Muslims and believers. But Muslims are all one and the same.
Those who say the words "There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is His
Messenger" are all brothers. They should not be separated into two
groups because this is harmful to Islam. The Shi’as call themselves
believers, and they call us Muslims. You must have seen in India that
Shi’as are called believers and the Sunnis are called Muslims.

The fact is that 'Islam' and 'Iman' (conviction) are identical terms
because Islam means acceptance of the commands of religion. This
recognition is the reality of 'Iman.' The whole community has agreed
that Islam is pure Iman. You have gone against the common view.

Difference between Islam (submission) and Iman (faith)
------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, your reference to the common people does not mean
the people of the community as a whole. It refers to the common people
of a group of the Sunnis. Second, your statement about Islam and Iman is
not accurate.

Not only do the Shi’as differ with the Sunnis but the Ash'aris,
Mu'tazalis, Hanafis, and Shafi'is also have different views about it.
Third, I frankly don't understand why learned men like you should resort
to such trivial objections.

This division into two groups has been made by Allah in the Holy Qur'an.
Perhaps you have forgotten the matter relating to Companions of the
Right and the Companions of the Left referred to in the Holy Qur'an
which says:

***"The dwellers of the desert say: 'We believe.' Say: 'You do not
believe but say, we submit; faith has not yet entered your hearts.'"
(49:14)***

Certainly you must know that this verse was revealed in condemnation of
the desert tribe of the Bani Asad, who were Muslims in name only. During
a year of famine, they flocked to Medina and, in order to get relief,
claimed to be believers.

But at heart they were unbelievers in Allah and the Holy Prophet. This
verse verifies that there are two groups of Muslims: sincere Muslims,
who have acknowledged the realities of Iman, and those who make mere
verbal declarations of faith.

In our social sphere the latter group is entitled to the safety and
benefits of the laws meant for all Muslims. But, according to the
injunction of the Holy Qur'an, they are not entitled to any reward in
the hereafter. Their declarations that there is no god but Allah and
that Muhammad is His messenger, and their making a display of the fact
that they are Muslims, have no real significance.

Sayyid: You are right, but Islam without Iman (faith or conviction) has
no meaning, just as Iman without Islam has no merit. Allah says in the
Holy Qur'an:

***"And do not say to anyone who offers you peace: 'You are not a
believer.'" (4:94)***

This verse proves that we must treat one according to one's outward
semblance. If anyone says, "There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah," we should accept his Iman. This in itself is
the best proof that Islam and Iman are identical terms.

Well-Wisher: This verse was revealed about a particular person, either
Usama Ibn Zaid or Muhallam Ibn Jasama al-Laisi, who, it is said, killed
a man in battle who had declared "There is no god except Allah." He was
killed on the assumption that he had said these words in fear. But
because you think it is in the general sense, we also regard all Muslims
as being pure. Unless of course, we see them denying the fundamentals of
religion.

But there is a difference between Islam and Iman because there are
various classes of Iman. Imam Ja'far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq says in the
narration of ‘Umar and Zubair: "For Iman there are conditions, ranks,
and stages. Some of them are defective and their defect is apparent;
some are of better value and are weighty; some of them are complete and
have reached perfection."

Defective Iman is the very first stage of Iman through which a person
passes into Islam from infidelity. Higher degrees of Iman are possible.
Reference to them has been made in some of the hadith.

Among them is a narration in Usul Kafi and in Nahju'l-Balagha from the
Commander of the Faithful and Ja'far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq who said:
"Allah has divided Iman into seven classes which consist of goodness,
truthfulness, conviction of the heart, submission to the will of Allah,
loyalty, knowledge, and forbearance.

These seven qualities have been unequally distributed among human
beings. One who completely possesses all these qualities is a perfect
believer. Hence, Islam is in the first category of Iman, in which there
is only verbal declaration of belief in the prophethood of Muhammad and
the unity of Allah. Iman has not entered such person's heart. The
Prophet of Allah told a group of his people: 'O people! You are among
those who have accepted Islam with your tongue, but not yet with your
heart.'"

Obviously Islam and Iman are different. But we are not required to probe
the hearts of others. I said last night that the sign of a believer is
his deeds. But we have no right to make inquiries about the actions of
Muslims. We are compelled, however, to indicate the characteristics of
Iman, so that those who are immersed in sleep may be inspired to perform
their duties.

Thus they will be aware of the reality of Iman and will know that
salvation in the hereafter will come only through performing good deeds,
as the hadith says: "Iman means acceptance with the tongue, conviction
in the heart, and performance with our limbs." Acceptance with the
tongue and conviction in the heart are the preface to action.

Of course we know that this nasty world is only a preface to the next
world. The way of salvation for such a man is closed in the hereafter
unless he becomes a man of good deeds here. Allah Almighty says in the
Holy Qur'an:

***"I swear by the declining time, surely man is in loss, Except those
who believe and do good...." (103:1-3)***

In short, according to the Holy Qur'an, piety is the root of Iman. And
if one has no good deeds to his credit, his verbal acknowledgement or
conviction at heart will still leave him far from Iman. If it is true
that we should consider anyone a Muslim who says, "There is no god but
Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah," why do you regard the
Shi’as as infidels?

Certainly Shi’as believe in the unity of Allah, the prophethood of
Muhammad, one Qibla, one Book. They perform all obligatory acts, observe
prescribed fasts, go on the pilgrimage, pay khums and zakat (religious
taxes), believe in bodily resurrection, and the Day of Reckoning.

Isn't it you who cause disunity among Muslims? You keep millions of
Muslims separated from you and call them infidels although you have not
the smallest evidence to support such charges. You do not recognize that
these are the devices of enemies who want to create discord among
Muslims by means of such lies. The fact is that we have no differences
in the fundamentals of our belief except the Imamate and vicegerency.
And what if there were differences in the practices of the faith?

Such differences exist among your own four schools of law, and they are
more serious than those between us. (It would not be proper now to point
out the differences between Hanafis and Malikis or between Shafi'is and
Hanbalis.)

In my opinion you have not the slightest evidence to establish the
polytheism or infidelity of Shi’as. The only unpardonable fault of the
Shi’as, according to what the Kharijis and Nasibis have propagated by
means of the Umayyads, is that the Shi’as do not misinterpret the
traditions.

They do not give people like Abu Huraira, Anas, and Samura a place
between the Holy Prophet and ourselves. Even your own jurists and your
own great Caliphs condemned them as liars.

The greatest fault ascribed to the Shi’as is that they follow the
progeny of the Prophet, ‘Ali and the twelve Imams, and not the four
Imams. But you have no evidence from the Prophet to show that Muslims
must follow the Ash'aris or Mu'tazalis in the fundamentals and Maliki,
Hanafi, Hanbali or Shafi'is in the articles of practice.

On the other hand, there are innumerable instructions from the Prophet
telling us that the progeny and Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet are the equals
of the Holy Qur'an, and that the community should attach themselves to
them.

Among these hadith are the hadith Thaqalain, hadith al-Safina, hadith
al-Bab al-Hitta. Can you quote a single hadith in which the Holy Prophet
said that his people after him should follow Abu'l-Hasan Ash'ari and
Wasil Ibn Ata, etc. in the fundamentals and one of the four
individuals - Malik Ibn Anas, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Abu Hanifa, or Muhammad
Ibn Idris Shafi'i?

Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter IV,
reports from Fara'id Hamwaini quoting from Ibn Abbas that the Holy
Prophet said to the Commander of the Faithful: "O ‘Ali! I am the city of
knowledge and you are its gate. No one can enter the city without having
first entered the gate.

He is a liar who claims to love me while he is your enemy because you
are from me, and I am from you. Your flesh is my flesh, your blood is my
blood, your soul is my soul, your appearance is my appearance. Blessed
is the man who obeys you, woe be to one who disobeys you. Your friend is
fortunate, and your enemy is in loss. One who is with you is successful,
and one who is aloof from you is lost. After me, you and all the Imams
in your progeny are like the ark of Noah: whoever boards it will be
saved and whoever refuses to board it will be drowned. Their (the
Imams') likeness is like that of the stars: when a star sets, another
rises. This order will continue until the day of judgement."

It has been clearly narrated in the hadith al-Thaqalain (acknowledged by
both the sects) that "If you are attached to the Ahlul Bayt, never,
never shall you be misled." Even the fanatical Ibn Hajar Makki records
his findings in his Sawa'iq Muhriqa, chapter 2 Sub-chapter, 1, page 92,
in connection with the verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***"And stop them, for they shall be questioned." (37:24)***

And Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi has also quoted from Sawa'iq in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 95, page 296, (printed in Istanbul) saying
that this hadith has been narrated in different ways. Ibn Hajar says:
"Verily, the hadith of Attachment to Two Great Things (Thaqalain) has
been narrated in different ways. It has been narrated by more than 25
companions of the Holy Prophet."

Ibn Hajar says regarding the above Qur'anic verse that on the Day of
Judgement, the people will be questioned about the Wilaya of ‘Ali and
the descendants of the Prophet.

He writes that according to some sources, this hadith was narrated on
the occasion of 'Arafa, and some say it was narrated when the Prophet
was on his death bed with his apartment full of his Companions. Others
say that it was included in his last address after his final Hajj.

Ibn Hajar gives his opinion regarding the different occasions of this
hadith: "There is no inconsistency in the possibility that the Prophet,
in his desire to show the glory of Qur'an and his Holy descendants,
repeated this hadith on these and other different occasions.

It is reliably reported that the Prophet said: 'I leave among you two
great things: if you follow them, you will never be misled. And these
two are the Book of Allah (Qur'an) and my Ahlul Bayt.'"

Tabrani has reported this hadith with this addition: "I question you
about these two: the Holy Qur'an and the Ahlul Bayt, so do not try to
outstrip them. Otherwise, you will be destroyed. Do not disregard them,
otherwise you will be ruined. Do not try to teach them, for they know
better than you."

Even the fanatical Ibn Hajar, after quoting from Tabrani and others,
writes: "The Prophet called the Qur'an and his progeny, 'two great
things' because these two are so weighty and dignified in every aspect."
The Prophet also said: "I praise Allah who has filled the hearts of my
Ahlul Bayt with wisdom." And the Prophet also said in a hadith referred
to earlier: "....and never try to teach them (my progeny) anything since
they are the most learned of you all. Consider them superior to all your
ulama’ because Allah has created them pure and has introduced them to
the Community with supernatural powers and innumerable other merits."

There is one point in the hadith which stresses attachment to the Ahlul
Bayt: namely, that the successive generations of the Ahlul Bayt, will
not be severed until the Day of Judgement. It is astonishing that some
people admit that the members of the Ahlul Bayt possess great learning
but violate the Prophet's orders and take as their religious leaders
those who had no right of preference. Can you or we change the Holy
Qur'an? Can we select any other book?

Sayyid: No, never. This is the Prophet's trust, a divine message, and
the greatest source of guidance.

Well-Wisher: May God Bless you! You have spoken the truth. When we
cannot change the Holy Qur'an and replace it with another book, the same
principle must be followed regarding those who are the equals of the
Holy Qur'an. So, according to which principle were those people who did
not belong to the Prophet's progeny allowed to supersede his progeny?

I want a simple answer to this question so that we may know whether the
three Caliphs - Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman - belonged to the Ahlul Bayt
of the Prophet, and were included in the hadith we've mentioned
(Thaqalain, Safina, Bab al-Hitta). If they are included, then we must
follow them, according to the orders of the Prophet.

Sayyid: No one believes that any of the Caliphs except ‘Ali was included
in the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. Of course, the three Caliphs mentioned
were good companions of the Prophet.

Well-Wisher: Did the Prophet tell us to follow a particular individual
or group? If one faction says that it is expedient to follow other
people, should we obey the Prophet or follow expediency as determined by
the community?

Sayyid: It is obvious that obedience to the Prophet is obligatory.

Well-Wisher: After the Prophet has instructed us to follow the Holy
Qur'an and his progeny, why have others been preferred? Did Abu'l-Hasan
‘Ali Ibn Isma'il Ash'ari, Wasil Ibn Ata, Malik Ibn Anas, Abu Hanifa,
Muhammad Ibn Idris Shafi'i, and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal belong to the progeny
of the Prophet or the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali and his eleven
descendants?

Sayyid: Obviously, no one ever said that these people belonged to the
Prophet's progeny, but they were notable jurists and pious men of the
community.

Well-Wisher: But according to the consensus of the community, the twelve
Imams are the direct descendants of the Prophet. Your own ulama’ agree
that they are the equals of the Holy Qur'an, and that obedience to them
leads to salvation. Moreover, the Prophet said that they are the most
learned of men.

In light of these emphatic injunctions, what reply will they give when
the Prophet asks them why they violated his dictates and let others
supersede his progeny? Is there any injunction from the Prophet that the
Asharis or Mu'tazalis should follow their leaders or that the Malikis,
Hanbalis, Hanafis, and Shafi'is should follow their leaders in the
practice of the faith? Nobody so much as mentioned their names for 300
years after the death of the Prophet.

Only later, for political or other reasons which I am not aware of, they
appeared on the stage. But the Imams and the descendants of the Holy
Prophet were well known during the Prophet's own time. ‘Ali, Hasan,
Husain and Fatima were known as Ahlul Kisa, that is "the people of the
mantle."

They were the ones in whose praise "the verse of purity" was revealed.
Is it proper to call those who follow ‘Ali, Hasan, Husain, and other
Imams infidels? You have preferred those who did not belong to the
progeny of the Prophet, to those who were ideal jurists.

What answer will you give in the divine court of justice when you will
be asked as to why you misguided the poor people, why you called the
followers of the Ahlul Bayt infidels and innovators?

You fault us because we are not the followers of the creeds of Hanafis,
Malikis, Hanbalis, or Shafi'is. And yet you don't follow ‘Ali, despite
the clear and vivid injunctions from Allah and the Holy Prophet that you
should do so. Without good reason, you follow one of the four schools of
law and have closed the doors of jurisprudence.

Sayyid: We rely on the four Imams in the same way as you rely on the
twelve Imams.

Well-Wisher: Well done! What a good thing you have said!

The number of the twelve Imams was not specified by the Shi’as or their
ulama’ many centuries after the death of the Prophet. Many hadith,
narrated from both Sunni and Shi’as sources, prove that the Prophet
himself specified the number of the Imams as twelve.

Among your many ulama’ who have recorded this fact is Sheikh Sulayman
Qanduzi Hanafi, who writes in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 77,
concerning the statement: "There will be twelve successors after me."

Yahya Ibn Hasan in his Kitabu'l-Umma has narrated in twenty ways that
the Holy Prophet said that his successors would be twelve in number, and
all of them would be from the Quraish. It has been narrated in three
ways in Sahih. Bukhari, in nine ways in Sahih Muslim, in three ways in
the Sunan of Abi Dawud, in one way in the Sunan of Tirmidhi, and in
three ways in Hamidis Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain.

There are many of your ulama’, such as Hamwaini in Fara'id, Khawarizmi
and Ibn Maghazili, each in his Manaqib, Imam Tha'labi in Tafsir and Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, and Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i
in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda 10.

All have recorded 12 hadith narrated by Abdullah ibn Abbas, Ubaya ibn
Rabi'i Zaid ibn Haritha, Abu Huraira and the Commander of the Faithful,
‘Ali. All of these narrate in different, but similar, words that the
Prophet said that the number of his successors and Imams would be
twelve, and that all of them would be from the Quraish.

Some hadith say that they would be from the Bani Hashim. In some
traditions, the specific names of the twelve successors have also been
given. Some give only the number. I have cited only one example out of
the many hadith of your ulama’. Now can you cite a single hadith
indicating that the number of his successors would be four? Even if
there were one such hadith, we would accept it in preference to our own.

Regardless of the fact that you cannot quote a single hadith about your
four Imams, there is a great difference between the Shi’as Imams and
your Imams. Our twelve Imams are the divinely appointed successors.

Regarding your Imams, only this much can be conceded: they possessed the
knowledge of fiqh (jurisprudence) and could interpret the Holy Qur'an
and the hadith. Some of them, like Abu Hanifa, according to the
admission of your own ulama’, were not included among narrators of
hadith, jurists, or mujtahids, but were people who relied on their own
opinion. This in itself is evidence of their lack of knowledge.

On the other hand, the Shi’as Imams are divinely appointed guides,
ordained successors of the Holy Prophet. Of course in every age there
are some highly learned jurists and scholars among the Shi’as who
interpret the commands of Allah, keeping in view the Holy Qur'an, the
hadith, and the consensus of opinion. We follow the verdicts of such
ulama’.

Although your jurists were pupils of, and derived most of their
knowledge from, the Shi’as Imams, you blindly follow your elders, those
of their students who deviated from the bases of knowledge and relied on
speculation.

Sayyid: How can you claim that our Imams derived benefits from your
Imams?

Well-Wisher: It is an historical fact that Imam Ja'far Sadiq excelled
all others in knowledge. The eminent Alim, Nuru'd-Din ibn Sabbagh Maliki
acknowledges in his Fusulu'l-Muhimma that the Holy Imam was
conspicuousLy known for his learning. He writes: "People derived
knowledge from him in different spheres. People came from distant lands
to receive instruction. He became well known in all the lands and the
ulama’ narrated more hadith from him than from any other member of the
Ahlul Bayt...."

A large group of the distinguished people of the community, like Yahya
Ibn Sa'id Ibn Jarih, Malik Ibn Anas, Sufyan Thawri, Abu Ainiyya, Abu
Ayyub Sijistani, Abu Hanifa, and Saba - all have quoted his narrations.

Kamalu'd-Din Abi Talha also writes in his Manaqib that prominent ulama’
and religious leaders have quoted hadith from the Holy Imam and have
gained knowledge from him. Among them he mentions the names of those
mentioned in Fusulu'l-Muhimma. Even enemies acknowledged the merits of
the Holy Imam.

For instance, Maliki in his Fusulu'l- Muhimma and particularly Sheikh
Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Salmi in his Tabaqatu'l-Masha'ikh write: "Verily, Imam
Ja'far Sadiq excelled all his contemporaries. He had instinctive
knowledge and expertise in religion, complete piety in the world,
abstinence from all worldly desires, and deep wisdom."

And Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i has recorded all these merits of the Holy
Imam in his Matalibu's-Su'ul, chapter VI, page 81: "This learned man was
of the distinguished leaders of the Ahlul Bayt. He was endowed with deep
knowledge and was always in a state of remembrance of Allah. He often
recited the Qur'an and gave its interpretation.

His companions gathered pearls from the sea of his knowledge. He divided
his time in the day and night in different forms of devotion. A visit to
him served as a reminder of the hereafter. To listen to his speech led
one to adopt piety, and to follow his instructions led to the attainment
of paradise. His luminous face signified that he belonged to the family
of the Holy Prophet. The purity of his actions also showed that he was
of the progeny of the Holy Prophet.

Many of the ulama’ have received hadith and gained knowledge from him.
Among them were Yahya Ibn Sa'id Ansari, Ibn Jarih, Malik Ibn Anas,
Sufyan Thawri, Ibn Ainiyya, Sha'ba and Ayyub Sijistani. All were
grateful for their good fortune and privilege in learning from him."

Association of Shi’as'ism with Imam Ja'far Sadiq
------------------------------------------------

Nawab: Shi’as believe in the twelve Imams. Why is Shi’as’ism associated
with the name of Imam Ja'far Sadiq and called the Ja'farite sect?

Well-Wisher: Every prophet, in accordance with the divine command,
appoints his successor. Muhammad declared ‘Ali to be his successor and
ordered the community to obey him. But after the death of the Prophet,
the caliphate was seized by Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman.

During their caliphate, except during the earlier days, Abu Bakr and
‘Umar consulted ‘Ali on all matters and acted upon his counsel.
Moreover, the great ulama’ and eminent scholars of other religions who
came to Medina in search of religious knowledge were completely
satisfied with their discussions with ‘Ali.

Throughout his life, ‘Ali continued to serve Islam in many ways. After
his martyrdom, when the Bani Umayya became rulers, the imamate was
cruelly suppressed. Imam Hasan Mujtaba, Imam Husain, Imam
Zainu'l-Abidin, and Imam Muhammad Baqir were victims of the extreme
cruelty of the Umayyads. All roads of approach to them were closed and
except for a few of their followers, others could not benefit from their
knowledge. Every one of them was murdered.

In the beginning of the second century after the hijra, however, under
the heavy pressure of the atrocities of the Umayyads, the people rose up
against them. Bloody fighting ensued between the Bani Abbas and Bani
Umayya. While the Bani Umayya were busy defending their own ruler, they
could not continue their oppression of the Ahlul Bayt. Accordingly, Imam
Ja'far Sadiq emerged from the seclusion imposed by the Umayyads. He
instructed people concerning religious laws.

Four thousand lovers of knowledge gathered around his pulpit and
quenched their thirst from the Holy Imam's limitless ocean of knowledge.
Some of his chief companions have recorded four hundred doctrines which
are known as Usul al-Arba'mi'atin - meaning "The 400 Verdicts."

Yafi'iy Yamani wrote that Imam Ja'far excelled all others in his
knowledge. Jabir Ibn Hayyan Sufi, wrote a thousand-page compilation,
listing nearly 500 booklets based on the teachings of Imam Ja'far.

Some of the great Sunni jurists were also his students. Abu Hanifa,
Malik Ibn Anas, Yahya Ibn Sa'id Ansari, Ibn Jarih, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq,
Yahya Ibn Satid Qattan, Sufyan Ibn 'Uyayna, Sufyan Thawri - all
benefitted from his immense learning. This great flowering of learning
occurred at this time because the Bani Umayya obstructed the way of his
ancestors, and unfortunately the Bani Abbas would restrain his
descendants from speaking freely.

The reality of Shi’as'ism was unveiled and the merits of the Ahlul
Muhammad were proclaimed by Ja'far Sadiq. Accordingly, this sect became
known as "Ja'fari," but there is no difference between Imam Sadiq and
any of the four Imams among his ancestors and the four Imams who
preceded him or the six who came after him. All were divinely
commissioned spiritual guides.

Although both friends and enemies recognized his excellence in knowledge
and perfection in all merits, your predecessors refused to treat him as
the most learned theologian and perfect man of his age. They refused to
recognize his school of law along with the other four schools, even
though he held the most exalted rank in learning and devotion, as
admitted by your own ulama’. Since he belonged to the Ahlul Bayt of the
Holy Prophet, he had a right to receive preference over others.

In spite of these factors, your fanatical ulama’ have shown such callous
disregard for the progeny of their Prophet that your high-ranking
theologians, like Bukhari and Muslim, would not even record hadith from
this faqih (jurist) or the Ahlul Bayt.

Moreover, they did not quote hadith from any of the Imams or Sa'dat of
the Holy progeny: Alawi, Husaini, Abidi, Musawi, Rizawi or from such
ulama’ and jurists, like Zaid Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Husain, the Martyr, Yahya Ibn
Zaid, Muhammad Ibn Abdullah, Husain Ibn ‘Ali, Yahya Ibn Abdullah Ibn
Hasan and his brother Idris, Muhammad Ibn Ja'far Sadiq, Muhammad Ibn
Ibrahim, Muhammad Ibn Zaid, Abdullah Ibn Hasan, ‘Ali Ibn Ja'far (Arizi),
and others, all of whom were outstanding ulama’ and jurists and who
belonged to the family of the Prophet.

On the other hand, they have quoted hadith from people Like Abu Huraira,
whose character is known to you all, and from the great liar and forger,
Akrama, the Kharijite. Your own ulama’ have confirmed that these men
were liars and yet, they accept their hadith with all their hearts. Ibn
Bayyit writes that Bukhari has quoted as many as 1,200 hadith from the
Kharijis and Nasibis, like Imam Ibn Hattan, the admirer of Ibn Muljim,
the murderer of the Commander of the Faithful.

The followers of Imam al-Azam (Abu Hanifa), Imam Malik, Imam Shafi'i and
Imam Hanbal consider them pure Muslims though none of them belonged to
the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, and every one of those sects is free to
adopt his own ways though there are great differences in fundamentals as
well as practices among them. How regrettable it is that they call the
followers of Ja'far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq infidels!

And in all places dominated by Sunnis, including Mecca, about which
Allah says, "Whoever enters it is free," they are not free to express
their faith or to perform their prayers. So you good people should know
that we Shi’as are not the cause of differences in Islam; we have not
brought about disunity among Muslims. As a matter of fact, much of the
disruption appears from your side. It is you who call 100 million
Muslims infidels, although they are faithful believers along with you.

Hafiz: It is true, as you said, that I am not an unjust man. I admit
that there have been outrages due to fanaticism. I would like to say
without any pretension or flattery, that I have benefitted greatly from
your talk and have learned a great deal.

But with your permission, let me say one thing, which is a complaint, as
well as a defense of the worthy Sunni Sect. Can you tell me why Shi’as
preachers and ulama’ like you do not check your common people from
making statements which lead to unbelief?

The result is that others get a chance to use the word unbelief against
them. A man may become the target of attacks because he has made an
improper assertion. So you people should also not make the Sunnis the
target of your attacks. The Shi’as utter things which affect the hearts
of the Sunnis, who in turn ascribe unbelief to the Shi’as.

Well-Wisher: May I know which statements or actions lead to unbelief?

Hafiz: The Shi’as find fault with the chief companions and some of the
pure wives of the Prophet; this is obviously an act of unbelief. Since
the companions fought for years with the Prophet against the infidels,
it is obvious that their services were free from all moral imperfection.
They certainly deserve Paradise, particularly those who gained divine
blessings. According to the Holy Qur'an:

***"Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the*** ***tree." (48:18)***

There is no doubt that the Holy Prophet respected them. One who denies
their excellence is certainly misled. The Qur'an says:

***"Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed." (53:3-4)***

Such a person denies the Holy Prophet and the Holy Qur'an, and one who
denies them is undoubtedly an infidel.

Well-Wisher: I hoped that such topics would not be raised in this public
meeting. My reply might reach the uninformed people, and they might
spread adverse propaganda. It would be better if we discussed these
matters privately. I will call on you some day, and we will solve this
problem in private.

Hafiz: I am sorry, but many of our people for the past several nights
have insisted that this topic be discussed. Your discussion is always
reasonable. If you make a convincing reply, there will be no unpleasant
repercussions. Otherwise, you concede the point to us.

Nawab: It is right. We all want the issue to be resolved here and now.

Well-Wisher: I only comply with your wish. I did not expect that an able
man like you, after the complete explanations that I have given during
previous nights on the question of infidelity would attribute infidelity
to the Shi’as sect. I have already submitted complete proof that the
Shi’as Ithna Asharis are the followers of Muhammad and his Holy
descendants. You have raised several issues. I will reply to each of
them separately.

Criticizing the companions does not mean infidelity
---------------------------------------------------

First, you said that Shi’as criticism of the Companions (sahaba) and
some of the wives of the Prophet leads to infidelity. I don't understand
the basis of this statement. If criticism is supported by evidence, it
may be allowed. And even if one makes a false charge, this doesn't make
him an infidel. He would be called a sinner, like one who drinks wine or
commits fornication. And certainly every sin against divine law is
pardonable.

Ibn Hazm Zahiri Andalusi (born 456 A.H.) says in his book Al-Fasl
fi'l-milal wa'n-Nihal Part III, page 227: "If one abuses the companions
of the Prophet ignorantly, he is not to blame. If he does it with
knowledge, he is a sinner like other sinners who commit fornication,
theft, etc. Of course if he curses them intentionally since they are the
companions of the Prophet, he is an infidel because such behavior'
amounts to enmity against Allah and His Prophet. Otherwise, simply
abusing the companions does not amount to infidelity."

Accordingly, Caliph ‘Umar asked the Prophet to permit him to behead
Hatib, the hypocrite, although he was one of the great companions, a
muhajir (emigre), and one who took part in the Battle of Badr. For his
abusing and attributing hypocrisy to him, ‘Umar was not called an
infidel. So how is it possible that the Shi’as should be called infidels
for abusing some of the companions, supposing for the moment that what
you say is correct.

Moreover, the great ulama’ of your sect have rejected your point. Among
them is Qazi Abdu'r-Rahman Shafi'i, who in his Muwafiq has rejected the
reasoning of your fanatic ulama’ about the infidelity of the Shi’as. And
Muhammad Ghazali writes that cursing and abusing the companions is never
an infidelity; even cursing the two sheikhs does not constitute
infidelity.

Mulla Sa'd Taftazani writes in Sharhe Aqa'id al-Nas'i that "Some
intolerant people say that those who curse the Sahaba are infidels. It
is difficult to accept that view. Their infidelity is not proved because
some of the ulama’ favored them, overlooked their evil deeds, and made
foolish pleas in their support. They said that the companions of the
Prophet were free from all sin, although this assertion was contrary to
facts. Sometimes they fought among themselves.

Jealously and love for power often moved them to commit evil actions.
Even some of the prominent sahaba were not free from sinful actions. So
if, on the basis of some evidence, one criticizes them, he should not be
condemned for it. Some people, because they favored the sahaba, covered
up their evil actions. But some did record their evil actions and
censured them."

Apart from this, Ibn Athir Jazari, the author of Jam'u'l-Usul, has
included the Shi’as in Islamic sects, so how can you call them infidels?
During the period of the first caliphs, some people cursed the sahaba
for their evil deeds. Nevertheless, the caliphs did not order them to be
put to death for their infidelity.

Accordingly, Hakim Nishapuri in his Mustadrak, Part IV, pages 335, 354,
Imam Ahmad Hanbal in his Musnad Part 1, Page 9, Dhahabi in his Talkhise
Mustadrak, Qazi Ayaz in his Kitab al-Shifa, Part IV, chapter 1 and Imam
Ghazali in his Ihya'u'l-Ulum, Volume II, report that during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr, a man came to him and uttered such filthy
language and curses against him that those present there were moved to
indignation. Abu Barza Salmi asked the Caliph if he would permit him to
kill the man because he had become an infidel. Abu Bakr said that it
could not be since no one except the Prophet could pass such a
judgement.

Caliphs themselves did not regard cursing them as infidelity
------------------------------------------------------------

In fact, the Sunni gentlemen surpass even those whom they support. The
Caliphs themselves heard abuses and charged people with infidelity or
ordered them to be killed. Moreover, if cursing the sahaba is a cause of
infidelity, why don't you call Mu'awiya and his followers, infidels.
They cursed and abused the most perfect of the sahaba, ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib. Being selective in this matter only shows that your aim is
something else.

You wish to fight against the Ahlul Bayt and their followers! If cursing
the sahaba is infidelity, why don't you charge Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha
with infidelity? All your historians have said that she frequently
abused Caliph Uthman and openly declared: "Kill this old idiot, for
truly he has become an infidel." If, however, a Shi’as says that it was
good that Uthman was murdered because he was an infidel, you will
instantly rise up against him.

But when A’ysha told Uthman to his face that he was na'thal and an
infidel, neither the Caliph forbade her to do so nor did the sahaba
reproach her. Nor do you find fault with her.

Nawab: Respected sir, what do you mean by the term na'thal?

Well-Wisher: Firuzabadi, who is one of your high-ranking ulama’, gives
its meaning in his Qamusu'l-Lughat as "an old idiot." Also there was a
Jew with a long beard in Medina with this name, with whom Uthman was
compared. The commentator on Qamus, Allama Qazwini, also giving the same
meaning, says that Ibn Hajar in his Tabsiratu'l-Muntaha, writes,
"Na'thal, the Jew with a long beard, lived in Medina; he resembled
Uthman very much."

Caliph Abu Bakr abused ‘Ali
---------------------------

Finally, if one who abuses the sahaba is an infidel, why did Caliph Abu
Bakr, in the presence of sahaba and a gathering of Muslims, abuse the
most exalted sahabi, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib? You praise the merits of Abu
Bakr although you should condemn him.

Hafiz: Why do you falsely accuse him of this charge? When did Caliph Abu
Bakr abuse Caliph ‘Ali?

Well-Wisher: Excuse me! We do not report anything until we have made
complete inquiries. Perhaps you should consult Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha,
Volume IV, page 80, where it is recorded that Abu Bakr, taunting ‘Ali
from the pulpit of the mosque, said: "He (‘Ali) is a fox, the evidence
of which is its tail. He creates disturbances, minimizes the importance
of big disturbances, and incites people to make uproar.

He seeks help from the weak and accepts assistance from women. He is
like Ummi't-Tahal (an adulteress in the days of ignorance, as explained
by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid) with whom the men of his family were fond of
committing adultery."

Now you may compare Abu Bakr's abuse of ‘Ali with the criticism made by
Shi’as against the sahaba. If abusing any of the sahaba amounts to
infidelity, then Abu Bakr, his daughter, A’ysha, Mu'awiya and his
followers should be labelled infidels. If it does not constitute
infidelity, then you cannot call the Shi’as infidels on that score.

Caliph ‘Umar held that cursing a Muslim is not infidelity
---------------------------------------------------------

Moreover, according to the verdicts of your own great jurists and
Caliphs, those who curse the Caliphs are not infidels. Imam Ahmad Hanbal
in his Musnad, Volume III, Ibn Sa'd Katib in his Kitab al-Tabaqat, Qazi
Ayaz in his Shifa, part IV of chapter 1, report that the governor of
Caliph ‘Umar, Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz, wrote from Kufa that a man had reviled
and abused ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, the second Caliph. The governor sought
permission to execute the man. ‘Umar Ibn Khattab replied that it was not
permissible to take the life of a Muslim for abusing or cursing any
Muslim excepting one who abuses the Prophet.

According to Abu'l-Hasan Ash'ari even calling Allah or Holy Prophet by evil names is not infidelity
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some of your prominent ulama’, like, Abu'l-Hasan Ash'ari and his
followers, believe that if a man has faith in his heart and yet displays
infidelity (by practicing Judaism or Christianity, for example) or rises
up to fight against the Prophet, or calls Allah or the Prophet evil
names, even then he is not an infidel. Faith means belief in the heart
and since no one can be aware of another's heart, it cannot be said
whether the apparent infidelity was from the heart or not.

The Ash'ari ulama’ have also discussed these issues in their books. Ibn
Hazm Andalusi has written in detail about these points in his
Kitabu'l-Fazl (Part IV, page 204, 206). In light of these facts what
right have you to charge the Shi’as with infidelity?

Most companions abused one another but not regarded as infidels
---------------------------------------------------------------

In your authentic books, like Musnad of Ahmad Hanbal, Volume II, page
236; Sirat al-Halabiyya, Volume II, page 107, Sahih Bukhari, Volume II,
page 74, Sahih Muslim, Kitab al-Jihad wa Asbabu'n-Nuzul Wahidi, page
118, there are many hadith indicating that most of the companions abused
each other in the presence of the Holy Prophet.

But the Prophet didn't call these men infidels. He admonished them. (The
narrations about these quarrels and mutual enmity are recorded only in
the books of the Sunnis, not in Shi’as books).

In view of these remarks, I hope that you are satisfied that cursing or
abusing any companion does not constitute infidelity. If we curse
someone without any reason, we will be sinners, not infidels. And every
sin is forgivable.

Holy Prophet of Islam knew all good and bad actions of sahaba
-------------------------------------------------------------

Second, you said that the Prophet respected and honored his companions.
This is correct. In addition, all Muslims and men of learning agree that
the Holy Prophet knew the good and bad actions of the people. He
appreciated their good deeds.

Accordingly, he esteemed Nushirwan's justice and Hatim Ta'i's
munificence. If he respected someone, it was for his good deeds. But
appreciation shown to one for doing a good deed does not prove that his
end will be fortunate.

Perhaps he will commit evil deeds in the future. If he does, upbraiding
him beforehand is unjustified, even though it may be known that he will
commit the sin in the future. ‘Ali knew of the sin and damned end of
Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Muljim Muradi and repeatedly told him that he was his
assassin.

At one point he explicitly said: "I want him to live, but he is bent
upon killing me, and this treacherous friend belongs to the clan of the
Murad." This statement has been recorded by Ibn Hajar Makki towards the
end of Part I of Sawa'iq, page 72.

Yet ‘Ali did not intend to punish him. Hence the hadith, which indicates
that the merit of some particular action or statement, is not
necessarily influential for all time to come.

Merit of being a party to Bai'at al-Rizwan
------------------------------------------

Third, you said that since the sahaba were at the Bai'at al-Rizwan and
pledged their fealty to the Prophet, they were not subject to
condemnation, but deserved praise because they are the referents of the
Holy verse you cited [48:18].

Research scholars and ulama’ have commented extensively on this topic,
saying that the divine pleasure of this verse refers only to the
particular action, Bai'at (allegiance), and that it does not extend
indefinitely.

You are aware yourselves that on the occasion of the Bai'at in
Hudaibiyya, there were 1,500 people of the community present, of whom
afterwards a number of people were included in the 'verses of
hypocrisy'. Allah promised them Hell for ever.

Is it possible that Allah and the Prophet might be pleased with some
people and that some of them might remain in hell forever? It follows
that the divine pleasure was not due to the Bai'at al-Shajara
(allegiance under the tree) alone, but was based on sincere faith and
good deeds.

Those who believed in divine unity and Prophethood and pledged fealty
deserved divine pleasure. They were declared to be the people of
Paradise. But those who paid allegiance without faith, or who did not
pay allegiance, deserved His wrath.

Obviously, the Sahaba performed commendable actions, and for their good
actions (like allegiance under the tree) they should be praised. And
even if a believer, whether he be a sahabi or not, commits a fault, he
may be criticized.

Shi’as do acknowledge merits of sahaba
--------------------------------------

The Shi’as sect has always reported the good performances of the sahaba.

Moreover, it acknowledges the good performance even of those who have
been the targets of sharp criticisms. For instance, it appreciates their
allegiance under the tree, their migration with the Holy Prophet, taking
part in battles, but it also criticizes and condemns their bad actions.

Hafiz: I'm surprised to hear you say that the Prophet's companions
committed misdeeds. The Prophet declared each of them the guide and
leader of the community. He said in a well known hadith: "Verily, my
companions are like stars; if you follow any one of them, you will be
guided." Your faith is distinctly unconventional, and we do not accept
unconventional faith.

Hadith of "following companions" examined
-----------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: I am constrained to discuss some aspects of this hadith
before I venture to reply. Of course we will not talk about the source,
correctness, or weakness of the hadith by way of criticism, for we would
drift from the main point. Our discussion will focus on its meaning.

Those who were blessed with the honor of seeing the Holy Prophet, or who
had narrated hadith from him, are called sahaba and ashab (companions)
whether they were emigres (muhajir) from Mecca or those who helped them
(ansars) in Medina or others.

The greatest misunderstanding among you is that, on account of your good
will towards the companions, you consider all of them free from all
faults although the fact is otherwise. Among the companions of the Holy
Prophet, there were both good and bad people, of whom Allah and His
Prophet were fully aware.

This can well be proved by the chapter Munafiqun (Hypocrites) and verses
of some other chapters, like Tauba also known as Al-Bara'a (The
Immunity) and Ahzab (The Clans), which were revealed in condemnation of
companions who were hypocrites and sinners.

Your own prominent ulama’ have recorded some of the companions' faults
and misdeeds in their authentic books. Hisham Ibn Muhammad Sa'yib Kalbi,
one of the illustrious ulama’ of your sect has compiled a book on the
faults and defects of the sahaba.

The hypocrites, whom Allah Almighty (in the Holy Qur'an) and the Holy
Prophet have condemned, were two-faced people, who were Muslims in
appearance only. Their hearts were stained with corruption and
misguidance; and all of them were included in the companions.

So how can we have goodwill towards all the companions? And how can we
be sure that following any of them will ensure salvation? Is it not a
fact that in the affair of Aqaba there were companions who appeared to
be faithful but were determined to kill the Holy Prophet?

Aqaba affair and design to kill Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------

Hafiz: Some ulama’ consider the Aqaba affair the invention of the
Shi’as.

Well-Wisher: It is unkind of you to rely on the beliefs of some who have
the mentality of the Kharijis and Nasibis. This affair is so clearly
known to all that your own ulama’ have acknowledged it.

Please refer to Dala'ilu'n-Nabuwat compiled by Hafiz Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn
Husain Baihaqi Shafi'i, who is one of your eminent scholars and jurists.
He has recorded the story of Batn al-Aqaba with an authentic chain of
narrators; and also Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, towards the end of v. V of
his Musnad, reports from Abu Tufail, and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes in his
Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, and it is known to all the ulama’, that the Holy
Prophet on that night cursed a group of the companions.

Nawab: What was the matter, and who were those who wanted to kill the
Holy Prophet?

Well-Wisher: The great ulama’ of both sects have written that on
Muhammad's way back from the Tabuk expedition; fourteen hypocrites
conspired to kill him. The plan was to push him from his camel into a
precipice as he rode by night over al-Aqaba, a narrow passage through
which only one man could pass. When they tried to execute their design,
the Angel Gabriel informed the Holy Prophet of it. The Holy Prophet sent
Hudhaifa Nakha'i to hide behind a hill.

When the conspirators arrived and talked together, he recognized them
all. Of them seven belonged to the Umayyads. Hudhaifa came to the Holy
Prophet and named all of them. The Holy Prophet ordered him to keep the
plot secret and said that Allah was their guard. In the early part of
the night, the Holy Prophet began the journey, followed by his army.
Ammar al-Yasir led the camel from the front and Hudhaifa drove it from
behind.

When they reached the narrow passage, the hypocrites threw their leather
bags full of sand (or their oil-cans) before the camel making a huge
noise, hoping that the frightened animal would throw the Holy Prophet
down the steep cliff. But Allah Almighty protected him and the
conspirators fled away in the crowd.

Were these people not included among the companions? Is it true that to
follow them means the path of guidance?

When we talk of the companions of the Holy Prophet of Allah why should
we shut our eyes to their faults?

The Prophet never bade us follow liars
--------------------------------------

I have referred in past nights to Abu Huraira's character, telling you
that Caliph ‘Umar had lashed him because he used to quote false hadith
from the Prophet. Was he not among the companions? Had he not falsely
narrated a large number of hadith? Similarly, were not the other
companions, like Sumra Ibn Junda, included among them? Can the Holy
Prophet of Allah order the community to follow liars and forgers?

If this hadith is correct, that is, that if we follow any one of the
companions, we will be guided, then please let us know whom we should
follow, if two companions go in opposite directions. Or if there are two
groups of them, each fighting against the other, or each contrary to the
other, whom should we support?

Hafiz: First, the revered companions of the Prophet of Allah were never
hostile to each other. And even if one opposed the other, we should
assess the facts properly. The one who is purer and whose statement is
more logical should be followed.

Well-Wisher: If, according to your statement, we made careful inquiries
and found one of them pure and on the right side, then the opposite
group of the ashab must be impure and on the wrong side. Then this
hadith basically loses credence because it is impossible that
disagreeing companions can both be sources of guidance.

Opposition of companions at saqifa
----------------------------------

If this hadith is genuine why do you raise objection against the Shi’as
because they followed a group of the companions like Salman, Abu Dharr,
Miqdad, Ammar al-Yasir Abu Ayyub Ansari, Hudhaifa Nakha'i and Khuzaima
Dhu'sh-Shahadatain, etc., to whom I have referred in past nights?

These men certainly did not pledge fealty to Abu Bakr. Therefore, of the
companions who opposed each other, who was on the right side? Decidedly
one was on the wrong side though the hadith you have quoted tells us
that we may follow any of the companions and be guided.

Sa'd ibn ubaida's opposition to Abu bakr and ‘Umar
--------------------------------------------------

Was Sa'd Ibn Ubaida not one of the companions who did not pay allegiance
to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar? All the Shi’as and Sunni historians unanimously
hold that he went to Syria and lived there until in the middle of the
caliphate of ‘Umar, he was murdered. So following him and opposing Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar, according to this hadith is the path of guidance.

Talha and Zubair confront ‘Ali at Basra
---------------------------------------

Were Talha and Zubair not among the companions who pledged allegiance
under the tree? Did they not oppose the rightful successor of the Holy
Prophet, the acknowledged fourth caliph according to your own belief.
Were not these companions responsible for the bloodshed of innumerable
Muslims?

Now please let us know which of these two groups of companions who
fought with each other was the truly guided one. If you say that, since
both groups were obedient both were on the right side, you will be
wrong. It is impossible to claim that opposing factions are both guided.

It therefore follows that the companions who were on the side of ‘Ali
were definitely the guided ones. The group on the opposite side took the
wrong way; and this is another proof to refute your statement that all
those companions who were present in Bai'at al-Rizwan, under the tree,
were rightly guided.

Among those who pledged fealty under the tree were these two, Talha and
Zubair, who also fought against the rightful caliph. They actually
fought against the one about whom the Holy Prophet had said:

"O ‘Ali, fighting against thee is fighting against me." Doesn't it
amount to fighting against the Holy Prophet of Allah? So how can you say
that the word Ashab or presence under the tree of allegiance is a
guarantee for salvation?

Mu'awiya and 'Amr as used to curse and abuse ‘Ali
-------------------------------------------------

Mu'awiya and 'Amr As were companions and yet they fought against the
successor of the Holy Prophet and cursed and abused ‘Ali at public
meetings and even in the addresses given after Jum'a (Friday) prayers.
They did so despite the fact, as reported by prominent ulama’ of your
sect in their authentic books, that the Holy Prophet had repeatedly
said, "He who abuses or curses ‘Ali, abuses me. He who abuses me, abuses
Allah."

The learned Taftazani has elaborately dealt with this topic in his
Sharhe Maqasid. He writes that since the companions were inimical to one
another, some of them had deviated from the right path. Some of them, on
account of envy and worldly aspirations, perpetrated all kinds of
cruelty. It is evident that most of the companions who were not ma'sum
(infallible) committed heinous acts. But some ulama’ because they
favored them, have tried to cover up their faults.

There are many clear arguments to reject the hadith in question. There
is no doubt that this hadith is forged. Many of your ulama’ have
expressed their doubts about the authenticity of its sources.

Sources of hadith "My companions are like stars." are weak
----------------------------------------------------------

After quoting this hadith in his Sharhu'sh-Shifa, v.II, p.91, Qazi Ayaz
says that Darqutni in his Faza'il and Ibn Abdu'l-Birr say that this
hadith is not authentic.

It is also narrated from Abd Ibn Hamid in his Musnad who quotes from
Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar that Bazar refused to acknowledge the authenticity of
this hadith. Also he says that Ibn Adi quotes in his Kamil with his own
references from Nafi, and he from Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, that the sources
of this hadith are very weak. Baihaqi is also reported to have written
that the matter of this hadith is commonly known but its sources are
weak.

Among the sources of this hadith are Harith Ibn Ghazin, whose character
is unknown, and Hamza Ibn Abi Hamza Nussairi, who was charged with
lying. The weakness of the hadith is evident. Ibn Hazm also says that
this hadith is a fabricated one and is to be rejected.

So in our argument we cannot rely on a hadith with such a weak chain of
sources. Even assuming, however, that the hadith were correct, it could
not be applied in the general sense; it would refer only to the devoted
and pious companions who, in accordance with the command of the Holy
Prophet followed the book of Allah and the Holy progeny of the Prophet.

Companions were not infallible
------------------------------

Having said this, if I criticize some of the companions, you shouldn't
consider me unjust. They were after all, human beings and were likely to
err.

Hafiz: We also believe that the companions were not infallible, but at
the same time it is an accepted fact that all of them were righteous
people. No fault was committed by them.

Well-Wisher: You claim too much if you insist that they were all just
and free from faults since in the authentic books written by your own
ulama’ they argue against it. They tell us that even some of the chief
companions sometimes committed faults.

Hafiz: We are not aware of such records. Please let us know about them
if you can.

Well-Wisher: Ignoring what they did during the days of ignorance (i.e.
before the advent of Islam), they committed many sins after they had
embraced Islam. It is enough to mention only one event by way of
example.

Your own prominent ulama’ write in their authentic books that in the
year of the conquest of Mecca (8 A.H.) some of the leading companions
indulged in festive amusements and gaiety and secretly took wine.

Hafiz: This is definitely a concocted story. When drinking was announced
to be unlawful, the respected companions did not so much as attend such
parties, not to mention drinking wine.

Well-Wisher: It was never concocted by opponents. If it was concocted at
all, it was done by your own ulama’.

Nawab: If there were such a party, the names of the host and the guests
also must have been mentioned. Can you explain that point?

Well-Wisher: Yes, your own ulama’ have explained it.

Taking wine by ten companions in a secret meeting
-------------------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar writes in his Fathu'l-Bari, v.X, p.30, that Abu Talha Zaid Ibn
Sahl arranged a wine party at his house and invited ten people. All of
them drank wine and Abu Bakr recited some couplets commemorating some
infidels who were killed in the battle of Badr.

Nawab: Have the names of the guests also been mentioned? If so, please
let us know.

Well-Wisher: (1) Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Qahafa, (2) ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, (3) Abu
Ubaida Garra, (4) Ubai Ibn Ka'b, (5) Sahl Ibn Baiza, (6) Abu Ayyub
Ansari, (7) Abu Talha (the host), (8) Abu Dajjana Samak Ibn Kharsa, (9)
Abu Bakr Ibn Shaghuls, (10) Anas Ibn Malik, who was 18 years old at that
time and who served the wine. Baihaqi in his Sunan, v. VIII, p.29, has
also narrated from Anas him self that he said that he was the youngest
of them at that time and was serving the wine. (At this there was great
commotion in the meeting.)

Sheikh: I swear by Allah that this story has been concocted by the
enemy!

Well-Wisher: You are too much agitated and you have made a profane oath!
But you are not totally at fault. Your studies are limited. If you had
read more widely, you would know that your own ulama’ have written all
this. Now you should seek Allah's pardon.

I am now constrained to explain facts according to the statements of
your own ulama’. Muhammad Ibn Isma'il Bukhari in Sahih (commenting on
Ayat al-Khamr, "verse concerning wine", in the chapter Ma'ida of the
Qur'an); Muslim Ibn Hajar in his Sahih (Kitab al-Ashraba Bab
al-Tahrimu'l-Khamr); Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, v.XXX, p.181
and 227; Ibn Kathir in his Tafsir, v.XI, p.93; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in
his Durru'l-Mansur, v.II, p.321; Tabari in his Tafsir, v.VII, p.24; Ibn
Hajar Asqalani in his Isaba, v.IV, p.22 and Fathu'l-Bari, v.X,p.30;
Badru'd-din Hanafi in his Umdatu'l-Qari, V.X, p.84; Baihaqi in his
Sunan, pp.286 and 290; and others have recorded these facts with
detailed explanations.

Sheikh: Perhaps these things took place before wine was made unlawful.

Well-Wisher: What we gather from the commentary and history shows that
even after the prohibitory verses some Muslims and companions continued
taking forbidden wine.

Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari reports in Tafsir al-Kabir, v.II, p.203, on
the authority of Abil Qamus Zaid Ibn ‘Ali, who said that Allah had
revealed three times the verses prohibiting the use of wine. In the
first verse He says,

***"They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin and means of profit for men, and their sin is
greater than their profit." (2:219)***

But the Muslims did not immediately give up wine. When two men, being
intoxicated, offered their prayers and talked nonsense, another verse
was revealed, saying:

***"O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated
until you know (well) what you say." (4:43)***

Even after this, the drinking of wine continued, but people did not
offer prayers while intoxicated. One day a man took wine (according to
the report of Bazar, Ibn Hajar, and Ibn Mardawiyya the man was Abu Bakr)
and composed an elegy for the pagans who were killed in the battle of
Badr.

When the Holy Prophet heard of this, he became angry. He went to the
party and wanted to beat him. The man said, "I seek Allah's shelter from
Allah's and His Prophet's wrath. Allah be my witness, I will not take
wine again."

Then the following verse was revealed:

***"O you who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance and (sacrificing
to) stones set up and*** ***(divination by) arrows are only an
uncleanness, the Shaitan's work; shun it therefore that you may*** ***be
successful." (5:90)***

Among the companions of the Holy Prophet there were good and bad men
just as there are among other believers and Muslims. Those of them who
tried to obey Allah and His Prophet reached an exalted rank. Those who
followed their worldly aspirations were looked down upon by others. So
those who fault the worldly companions do so with some reason.

The wicked actions of some of the sahaba which are recorded in the
authentic books of your own ulama’ are also condemnable according to the
evidence of the Holy Qur'an. The Shi’as condemn them on that basis. If
there is a logical reply to this argument, we are ready to accept it.

Companions' breaking their pledge
---------------------------------

Well-Wisher: It is astonishing that even after hearing their condemnable
qualities (I have mentioned only a few out of a large number) you still
ask me about their misdeeds! Now I should like to submit another example
of their odious actions, which are recorded in all the books of both the
sects: the breaking of their pledge. Allah has made it compulsory to
keep one's promise. He says:

***"And fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have made a covenant, and
do not break the oaths after making them fast." (16:91)***

And again Allah has called those who break a pledge the cursed ones. He
says:

***"And those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and
cut asunder that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief
in the land; (as for) those, upon them shall be a curse, and they shall
have the evil issue of the abode. (13:25)***

So it is clear both from the Qur'anic verses and from a large number of
hadith that breaking a pledge is a great sin, particularly a pledge made
with Allah and His Prophet. The seriousness of this offense was graver
for the companions of the Holy Prophet.

Hafiz: What pledge with Muhammad did the companions break? How can it
come under the target of the Qur'anic verses?

I think that if you consider the matter carefully you will admit that
all these things are sheer concoctions of the Shi’as. The companions of
the Holy Prophet were free from all such actions.

In the Holy Qur'an "Truthful Ones" refers to Muhammad and ‘Ali
--------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: I have told you repeatedly that the Shi’as are pledged to
follow their leaders. Otherwise they cannot be Shi’as. The Holy Qur'an
has given evidence of their leader's truthfulness. Your prominent
ulama’, for instance, Imam Tha'labi and Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti in their
Tafsir, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in his Ma Nazal mina'l-Qur'an fi ‘Ali,
Khatib Khawarizmi in Manaqib, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.39, narrating from Khawarizmi, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim
and Hamwaini and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib,
ch.62 - all of them have quoted from the history of the great scholar
Muhaddith al-Sham that in the Holy verse

***"O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with
the truthful ones." (9:119)***

The “truthful ones” refers to Muhammad and ‘Ali. So the followers of
this exalted family cannot be liars or forgers because he alone would
tell lies or fabricate stories who has no true and strong reasons to
fall back upon this cause.

What the Shi’as say has been written by your own ulama’. First you
should object to your ulama’, who wrote these things. Had your ulama’
not written about the pledge-breaking of the sahaba in their authentic
books, I would not have mentioned it in this meeting.

Hafiz: Who of the Sunni ulama’ has written that the sahaba broke the
pledge? Simply vain talking won't do.

Well-Wisher: I am not merely talking. My argument is completely logical.
The companions broke their pledge a number of times. They broke the
fealty for which the Prophet of Allah had commanded them; the most
important was the pledge and fealty at Ghadir al-Khum.

Ghadir Hadith and its nature
----------------------------

All the Shi’as and Sunni ulama’ acknowledge that, in the 10th of the
Hijra year, the Prophet of Allah, returning from his last pilgrimage,
gathered together all his companions at Ghadir al-Khum on the 18th of
Dhi'l-Hijja. Some of those who had gone ahead were called back by order
of the Holy Prophet and those who had lagged behind were awaited.

Most of your ulama’ and the historians and the Shi’as sources give the
figure of 70,000 people there, and some of your other ulama’, for
instance Tha'labi in his Tafsir, Sibt Ibn Jauzi in his Tadhkirat'u-
Khasa'isi'l-Umma fi Ma'rifati'l-A'imma and others have written that
there were 120,000 people gathered there.

The Holy Prophet ordered a pulpit to be prepared. He mounted the pulpit
and delivered a long sermon, a greater part of which contained the
virtues and merits of the Commander of the Faithful. He recited most of
the verses, which had been revealed in praise of ‘Ali and reminded the
people of the Holy rank of the vicegerency of the Commander of the
Faithful. Then the Holy Prophet said, "O you people! Have I not the
greater claim than you have on your lives?" The reference is to the Holy
verse

***"The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves." (33:6)***

The crowd with one voice shouted "Certainly, O messenger of Allah!" Then
the Holy Prophet declared: "Of whomsoever I am the maula, (master) this
‘Ali is his maula." After this he raised his hand and prayed to Allah.
"O Allah, be you a friend to him who is a friend to him (that is, ‘Ali)
and be an enemy to him who is an enemy to him (‘Ali). Help him who helps
him and forsake him who forsakes him.

Then a tent was pitched by order of the Holy Prophet who ordered the
Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali to sit in the tent. The whole umma was
commanded to offer bai'at (allegiance) to ‘Ali. The Holy Prophet said
that he gave this instruction in compliance with the command of Allah.
The first one to offer allegiance on that day was ‘Umar. Then Abu Bakr,
Uthman, Talha, and Zubair followed suit, and all these people continued
offering allegiance for three days (i.e., while the Holy Prophet
remained there).

Hafiz: Can you believe that an event of such importance occurred as
claimed by you and that none of the prominent ulama’ have reported it?

Well-Wisher: I did not expect such a statement from you. The Ghadir
al-Khum affair is as clear as day and no one but a bigoted and obstinate
person would invite ignominy by denying such an event. This important
matter has been recorded by all your pious ulama’ in their authentic
books. I should like to mention here some of the names of the authors
and their books so that you may know that all your eminent ulama’ have
relied on this hadith.

1. Imam Fakhru'd-Din Razi - Tafsir al-Kabir Mafatihu'l-Ghaib.

2. Imam Ahmad Tha'labi - Tafsir al-Kashfu'l-Bayan.

3. Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti - Tafsir al-Durru'l-Manthur.

4. Abu'l-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad Wahidi Nishapuri - Asbabu'n- Nuzul.

5. Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari - Tafsiru'l-Kabir.

6. Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani - Ma Nazal Mina'l-Qur'an fi ‘Ali and
Hilyatu'l-Auliya.

7. Muhammad Ibn Isma'il Bukhari - Ta'rikh, Vol.1, p.375.

8. Muslim Ibn Hajjaj Nishapuri - Sahih, Vol.2, p.325.

9. Abu Dawud Sijistani - Sunan.

11. Hafiz Ibnu'l-Iqda - Kitabu'l-Wilaya.

12. Ibn Kathir Shafi'i Damishqi - Ta'rikh.

13. Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal - Vol.4, pp.281&371.

14. Abu Hamid Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Al-Ghazali - Sirru'l-Alamin.

15. Ibn Abdu'l-Birr - Isti'ab.

16. Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i - Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.16.

17. Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i - Manaqib.

18. Nuru'-d-Din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki - Fusulu'l-Muhimma.

19. Husain Ibn Mas'ud Baghawi - Masabihu's-Sunna.

20. Abu'l-Mu'ayyid Muwafiq Ibn Ahmad Khatib Khawarizmi - Manaqib.

21. Majdu'd-Din Ibn Athir Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Shaibani -am'u'l-Usul.

22. Hafiz Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Nisa'i - Khasa'isu'l-Alawi
and Sunan.

23. Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi - Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Ch. IV.

24. Shahabu'd-din Ahmad Ibn Hajar Makki - Sawa'iq Muhriqa and
Kitabu'l-Manhu'l-Malakiyya, particularly Sawa'iq, Part 1, p.25. In spite
of his extreme fanaticism, he says: "This is a true hadith; its veracity
cannot be doubted. Verily it has been narrated by Tirmidhi, Nisa'i and
Ahmad, and if studied, its sources are sound enough."

25. Muhammad Ibn Yazid Hafiz Ibn Maja Qazwini - Sunan.

26. Hafiz Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Hakim Nishapuri-Mustadrak.

27. Hafiz Sulayman Ibn Ahmad Tabrani - Ausat.

28. Ibn Athir Jazari - Usudu'l-Ghaiba.

29. Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi - Tadhkiratu'l-Khasa'isu'l-Umma, p. 17.

30. Abu ‘Umar Ahmad Ibn Abd Rabbih - Iqdu'l-Farid.

31. Allama Samhudi - Jawahiru'l-Iqdain.

32. Ibn Taimiyya Ahmad Ibn Abdu'l-Halim - Minhaju's-Sunna.

33. Ibn Hajar Asqalani - Fathu'l-Bari and Tahdhibu't-Tahdhib.

34. Abdu'l-Qasim Muhammad Ibn ‘Umar Jarullah Zamakhshari -
Rabiu'l-Abrar.

35. Abu Sa'id Sijistani - Kitabu'd-Darayab Fi hadithi'l-Wilaya.

36. Ubaidullah Ibn Abdullah Haskani - Du'atu'l-Huda Ila Ada
Haqqi'l-Muwala.

37. Razin Ibn Mu'awiya Al-Abdari - Jam Bainu's-Sahihi's-Sitta.

38. Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi says in Kitabu'l-Arba'in that the whole
Community unanimously confirms this hadith.

39. Muqibili - hadithu'l-Mutawatira.

40. Suyuti - Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa.

41. Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani - Mawaddatu'l-Qurba.

42. Abul Fath Nazari - Khasa'es'u'l-Alavi

43. Khwaja Parsa Bukhari - Faslu'l-Khitab

44. Jamaluddin Shirazi - Kitabu'l-Araba'in

45. Abdul Ra'ufu'l-Manavi - Faizu'l-Qadir fi Sharh-i-Jame'u's-Saghir

46. Muhammad ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i - Kifayatu't-Talib, Part. 1

47. Yahya Ibn Sharaf-Nauvi - Tehzibu'l-Asma wa'l-Lughat

48. Ibrahim ibn Muhammad Hamwaini - Fara'adu's-Simtoun

49. Qazi Fazlullah ibn Ruzhahan - Ibtalu'l-Batil

50. Shamsuddin Muhammad ibn Ahmad Sharbini - Siraju'l-Munir

51. Abul Fath Shahristani Shafi'i - Milal wa'n-Nihal

52. Hafiz Abu Bakr Khatib Baghdadi - Tarikh

53. Hafiz Ibn Asakir abul Qasim Damishqi - Tarikh-i-Kabir

54. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mutazali - Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha

55. Ala'uddin Samnani -Urwatu'l-Wuthqah

56. Ibn Khaldun - Muqaddima

57. Molvi ‘Ali Muttaqi Hindi - Kanzu'l-Ummal

58. Shamsuddin Abul Khair Damishqi - Asnu Matalib

59. Syed Sharif Hanafi Jurjani - Sharh-i-Mawaqit

60. Nizamuddin Nishapuri - Tafsir-i-Ghara'ibu'l-Qur'an

Hadith of Ghadir related by Tabari, ibn Iqda and ibn Haddad
-----------------------------------------------------------

I have related the sources I could remember. But more than three hundred
of your prominent ulama’ have narrated the hadith of Ghadir, the verses
of baligh (preaching), kamalu'd-Din (perfection of religion), and the
talk in the courtyard of the mosque, on the authority of more than one
hundred companions of the Holy Prophet. If I were to relate the names of
all these chroniclers, it would form a complete book. This much,
however, is sufficient to prove that the hadith is unanimously accepted
as true.

Some of your great ulama’ have written books on this topic. For
instance, the well known commentator and historian of the fourth century
hijri, Abu Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari (died 310 A.H.), gives
complete details of the hadith of Ghadir in his book Kitabu'l-Wilaya and
has narrated it through seventy five chains of transmission.

Hafiz Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad Ibn Sa'id Abdu'r-Rahman Al-Kufi, popularly known
as Ibn Iqda (died 333 A.H.), narrated this Holy hadith in his book
Kitabu'l-Wilaya through 125 chains on the authority of 125 companions of
the Holy Prophet.

Ibn Haddad Hafiz Abu'l-Qasim Haskani (died 492 A.H.), in his
Kitabu'l-Wilaya, has narrated in detail the event of Ghadir along with
the revelation of the verses of the Qur'an. In short, all your
accredited scholars and high-ranking ulama’ (except a small number of
fanatical opponents), quote the origin of this hadith from the Holy
Prophet, who declared ‘Ali his vicegerent on the 18th of Dhu'l-Hijja in
the year of his last pilgrimage.

It is also a fact that the Caliph ‘Umar was the first among the
companions to express his pleasure on this occasion. Seizing ‘Ali by the
hand, he said: "Congratulations to you, ‘Ali! This morning has brought
you a great blessing. You have become my maula (master) and the maula
(master) of all believing men and believing women."

Gabriel's advice to ‘Umar
-------------------------

The Shafi'i jurist, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani of the eighth-century
hijri, one of the reliable scholars of your sect, writes in his book
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda V that a large number of the companions have
quoted Caliph ‘Umar in different places as having said: "The Prophet of
Allah had made ‘Ali the master, the chief and the leader of the nation.

He announced in a public gathering that he (‘Ali) was our maula
(master). After praying for his friends and cursing his enemies, he said
O Allah! You are my witness. (That is, 'I have completed my duty of
prophethood.')

On this occasion a handsome and sweet smelling youth was sitting beside
me. He said to me, 'Verily, the Prophet of Allah has bound with a
covenant which none but a hypocrite would break. So ‘Umar! Eschew
breaking it.'

I told the Prophet of Allah that when he was speaking to the crowd, a
handsome, sweet smelling youth was sitting beside me and that he told me
such a thing. The Holy Prophet said, ' He was not of the progeny of
Adam, but was Gabriel, (who had appeared in that form). He wanted to
stress the point which I had announced about ‘Ali.'"

Now I should like to seek justice from you, was it proper for them to
break the firm covenant with the Prophet of Allah within two months, to
go back on their pledge of sacramental allegiance to ‘Ali, to set fire
to his house, to draw swords against him, to insult him, to drag him to
the mosque to force his allegiance?

Hafiz: I did not expect that a respectable and cultured Sayyid like you
would attribute worldliness to the companions of the Holy Prophet. The
Holy Prophet declared them the source of guidance for the Community when
he said: "My companions are like stars; if you follow any one of them,
you will be guided."

Hadith of "Following Companions" is unauthentic
-----------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First I should like you not to repeat the same thing time
and again. You have just argued from the same hadith and I have given
you its reply. The companions, like all others, were fallible. So when
it is proved that they were not infallible, why should one wonder if,
with proper evidence, worldliness is attributed to them?

Second, in order to clear your mind, I will again give you a reply, so
that you may not rely on such hadith in the future. According to the
research of your own eminent ulama’, this hadith is not reliable, as I
have stated earlier.

Qazi Ayaz Maliki quotes from your own prominent ulama’ that since the
narrators of this hadith include the names of the ignorant and
uninformed Harith Ibn Qazwin and Hamza Ibn Abi Hamza Nasibi, who have
been found to be liars; this hadith is not worth reporting. Also, Qazi
Ayaz, in his Sharh al-Shifa and Baihaqi in his Kitab, have declared that
this hadith is forged and have regarded its source as unreliable.

Some of companions were slaves to their wishes and turned against truth
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Third, I never said anything rude; I say only what your own ulama’ have
written. I advise you to read Fazil Taftazani's Sharh al-Maqasid, in
which he states clearly that there are many instances of hostility among
the Companions, which shows that some of them had become sinners and
tyrants. So we see that people are not to be honored merely because they
were companions of the Prophet. Real honor lies in their deeds and
character.

If they did not belong to the hypocrites but were obedient and faithful
to the Holy Prophet they are certainly to be revered and respected. We
would apply the dust of their feet to our eyes.

So, you men of justice, do you claim that the many hadith in your own
reliable books concerning fighting against Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali (such
as the Holy Prophet saying: "fighting against ‘Ali is fighting against
me," are all baseless? Or do you admit that these hadith are perfectly
authentic?

Are they not recorded with reliable sources in the books of your own
distinguished ulama’? We need not mention that these hadith are recorded
by Shi’as ulama’ with perfect unanimity of opinion in all their books.

If you accept these hadith, you must acknowledge that many of the
companions were transgressors and sinners, as was Mu'awiya. ‘Umar Ibn
As, Abu Huraira, Samra Ibn Jundab, Talha, Zubair all of whom rose to
fight against ‘Ali in fact rose against the Holy Prophet himself.

And since they fought against the Prophet, they certainly deviated from
the right path. So, if we said that some of the companions were slaves
to their desires, we were not wrong, because what we said was true.
Besides this, we are not alone in holding that some of the companions
were sinners, tyrants, and transgressors. We base our stand on the
authority of your own great ulama’.

Imam Ghazali’s view about companions breaking the pledge taken on the day of Ghadir al-Khum
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you study Sirru'l-Alamin, compiled by Abu Hamid Muhammad Ibn Muhammad
Ghazali Tusi, you would never object to what I say. I am, however,
compelled to quote a portion of his fourth treatise in support of my
statement.

He says: "Proof and reasoning became brighter, and there is unanimous
accord among Muslims concerning the text of the address on the day of
'Ghadir al-Khum' that the Holy prophet said: 'Of whomsoever I am maula
(master), ‘Ali is his maula (master).' Then ‘Umar immediately said,
'Congratulations to you, congratulations to you, O Abu'l-Hasan! You are
my master and also the master of all faithful men and women.'"

This sort of congratulation clearly indicates the acknowledgment of the
Holy Prophet's order, and acceptance of the leadership and caliphate of
‘Ali. But later on they were overpowered by their worldly desires. Love
for power and authority deprived them of compassion. They took it upon
themselves to appoint a caliph at Saqifa al-Bani Sa'dat. They wanted to
raise the flag of their own ascendancy and to conquer territory so that
their names might be preserved in history.

They were intoxicated with lust for power. They ignored the injunctions
of the Holy Qur'an, and the orders of the Holy Prophet. They sold their
religion for this world. What a bad bargain they made with Allah! When
the Holy Prophet was on his death bed he asked for pen and ink so that
he could clarify the issue of succession. (May God forgive my saying
it), But ‘Umar said: "Leave this man. He is talking nonsense."

So when the Holy Qur'an and the hadith could not help them, they relied
upon Ijma (consensus). But this is also void because Abbas, his
descendants, ‘Ali, his wife and their descendants did not associate
themselves with those who offered allegiance to Abu Bakr.

Similarly, the Saqifa men also refused allegiance to the Khazraji, and
the Ansars rejected them also. Respected people! Please remember, the
Shi’as do not claim anything except what your own fair ulama’ claim. But
since you hate us, you find fault with what we say, however reasonable
it might be. But you never criticize your own ulama’ as to why they have
written such things although they have in fact revealed the truth and
have stamped these realities on the pages of history.

Sheikh: Sirru'l-Alamin was not written by Imam Ghazali. His position was
too lofty for him to write such a book, and notable ulama’ do not
believe that this book was written by him.

Sirru'l-Alamin is Imam Ghazali's book
-------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Many of your own ulama’ have admitted that this book was
written by Imam Ghazali. Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi was careful in his
references to other scholars (and was also a fanatic in his religion).

In his Tadhkira Khawasu'l-Umma, p. 36, he argues from the same statement
of Imam Ghazali in his Sirru'l-Alamin and quotes the same passage which
I have quoted. Since no comments have been made regarding it, it shows
first that he acknowledges this book to be written by Imam Ghazali.

Second, he also agrees with his views, which I have briefly cited,
although he himself cited them in detail. If he had not agreed with them
he would have commented on them. But of course your fanatical ulama’
when they come across such statements of prominent scholars and find
themselves unable to reject them logically, either say that the book was
not written by that author, or that it was an invention of the Shi’as.
Or they sometimes even go so far as to say that these just men were all
sinners and infidels.

Reference to ibn Iqda's status
------------------------------

There is evidence that many of your distinguished ulama’ were persecuted
simply because they spoke the truth. Fanatical ulama’ and uninformed
people of your sect considered it unlawful to read nonconformist books.
The authors of such works were even put to death as was Hafiz Ibn Iqda
Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad Ibn Sa'id Hamadani who died 303 A.H. He
was one of your prominent ulama’. Many notable scholars of your own
sect, like Dhahabi and Yafi'i, have acknowledged him and said that he
had learned 300,000 hadith with their sources and that he was a man of
great piety.

At public gatherings in Kufa and Baghdad in the third century A.H., he
openly narrated the failings of the Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.) People
therefore called him Rafizi and refrained from quoting hadith from him.
Ibn Kathir Dhahabi and Yafi'i write about him: "Sheikh Ibn Iqda sat in
the Basra Mosque (a famous Mosque between Baghdad and Kazimain) and
narrated the defects and shortcomings of the Sheikhs (Abu Bakr and
‘Umar) to the people.

For this reason the hadith reported by him have been rejected. Otherwise
there is no doubt about his being a true and pious man." Al-Khatib
Baghdadi also has praised him in his Ta'rikh but in the end he says:
"Since he described the defects and failings of the Sheikhs, he was a
Rafizi."

So you people should not be under the impression that it is only the
Shi’as who expose the truth of these issues. Your own great ulama’ like
Imam Ghazali and Ibn Iqda used to point out the flaws in the chief
companions.

Reference to Tabari's death
---------------------------

In every era of history there have been many instances of ulama’ who
have been tortured or persecuted on account of their speaking or writing
the truth. For instance the well known commentator and historian
Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari, who was the pride of your ulama’, died in 310
A.H. in Baghdad.

But because the authorities feared a civil disturbance, they refused to
allow his coffin to be taken out during the day. Perforce he was laid to
rest in his own house during the night.

Nisa'i's murder
---------------

Another instance of persecution was Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali
Nisa'i's murder. He was a dignified man and is regarded as one of the
Imams of Sahih Sitta (Six Authentic Books). He belonged to the
high-ranking ulama’ of your sect in the 3rd century A.H.

When he reached Damascus in 303 A.H., he saw that, because of the Bani
Umayya, the residents of that place openly abused the name of
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib after every ritual prayer,
particularly in the address of congregational prayers.

He was much grieved to see this and he decided to collect all the hadith
of the Holy Prophet in praise of Amiru'l-Mu'minin with the chain of
their sources, all of which he remembered. Accordingly, he wrote a book,
Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, in support of the exalted position and virtues of
‘Ali. He used to read to the people from the pulpit the hadith from his
book the praises of the Holy Imam.

One day when he was narrating the high merits of ‘Ali, a rowdy group of
fanatics dragged him from the pulpit and beat him. They punched his
testicles and, catching hold of his penis, dragged him out of the mosque
and threw him into the street. As a result of these injuries he died
after a few days. His body was taken to Mecca where he was laid to rest.
These events are the consequence of enmity and ignorance.

Now I beg your pardon that I have been driven a little far from my
point. What I meant was that the position of Wilaya (Vicegerency) of
Amiru'l-Mu'minin was not recorded by the Shi’as ulama’ alone. Your own
prominent ulama’ have also narrated that the Holy Prophet in the
presence of 70,000 or 120,000 people, raised ‘Ali's hands and introduced
him as Imam (leader and guide) of the people.

Sunnis' doubt about meaning of “maula”
--------------------------------------

Hafiz: Of course there is no doubt about the occasion and the text of
this hadith, but at the same time it does not have the significance
which your passionate eloquence suggests.

Apart from this, there are some doubts regarding the text of this
hadith. For instance, the word "maula," you told us, means, "one who has
a greater claim on others," although it is known that in this hadith
"maula" means "lover, helper and friend."

The Prophet knew that ‘Ali had many enemies, and so he wanted to exhort
the people that whomsoever he loved or was friend or helper to, ‘Ali
also loved him and was his friend and helper. The reason he demanded
allegiance from the people was that he did not want them to cause ‘Ali
trouble.

Well-Wisher: I think you sometimes unnecessarily adopt the habits of
your predecessors. If you would consider the facts carefully, the truth
of this issue would become clear.

Hafiz: What are the facts which prove your point of view? Please let us
know.

Meaning of “maula” as "guide," "master" in light of the verse “Ya ayyuha'r-rasul baligh”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: The first proof is the Holy Qur'an and the revelation of
the verse: "O Apostle! deliver that which has been revealed to you from
your Lord; and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His
message, and Allah will protect you from the people." (5.67)

Hafiz: How can you claim that this verse was revealed on that day and
for this purpose?

Well-Wisher: All your reputable ulama’ have accepted it: Jalalu'd-din
Suyuti: Durru'l-Mansur; vol. II, p. 298; Hafiz Ibn Abi Hatim Razi:
Tafsir al-Ghadir; Hafiz Abu Ja'far Tabari: Kitabu'l-Wilaya; Hafiz Abu
Abdullah Mahamili: Amali; Hafiz Abu Bakr Shirazi: Ma Nazala
mina'l-Qur'an Fi Amiri'l-Mu'minin; Hafiz Abu Sa'id Sijistani:
Kitabu'l-Wilaya; Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya: Tafsir al-Ayah; Hafiz Abu'l-Qasim
Haskani: Shawahidu't-Tanzil; Abu'l-Fatha Nazari: Khasa'isu'l-Alawi;
Mu'inu'd-din Meibudi: Sharh al-Diwan;

Qazi Shekani: Fathu'l-Ghadir, vol. III, p. 57; Sayyid Jamalu'd-din
Shirazi: Arba'in; Badru'd-din Hanafi: Umdatu'l-Qari Fi Sharh al-Sahih
Bukhari, vol. 8, p. 584; Ahmad Tha'labi: Tafsir Kashfu'l-Bayan; Imam
Fakhru'd-din Razi: Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. III, p. 636; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim
Ispahani: Ma nazala mina'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali; Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad
Hamwaini: Fara'idu's-Simtain; Nizamu'd-din Nishapuri: Tafsir, vol. VI,
p. 170;

Sayyid Shahabu'd-din Alusi Baghdadi: Ruhu'l-Ma'ani, vol. II, p. 348;
Nuru'd-din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki: Fusulu'l-Muhimma, p. 27; ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad
Wahidi: Asbabu'n-Nuzul, p. 150; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i:
Matalibu's-Su'ul, p. 16; Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i: Mawadda V
from Mawaddatu'l-Qurba; Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi:
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 39.

In short, as far as I know, thirty of your leading ulama’ have written
in their authentic books and in their own commentaries that this Holy
verse was revealed on the day of Ghadir al-Khum in regard to
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali.

Even Qazi Fazl Ibn Ruzbahan, despite all his ill will and fanaticism,
writes: "Verily it is proved in our authentic Sahih that when this verse
was revealed, the Prophet of Allah holding ‘Ali by the hand, said: 'To
whomsoever I am the maula (master), this ‘Ali is also his maula.'"

It is, however, very surprising the same perverted Qazi in Kashf Ghumma
gives a strange report from Razi Ibn Abdullah: "In the days of the Holy
Prophet we used to read this verse thus: 'O our Prophet (Muhammad)
deliver what has been sent down to you from your Lord, that is, ‘Ali is
the master of the believers. If you do not, then you have not delivered
His message.'"

Also Suyuti in his Durru'l-Mansur from Ibn Mardawiyya, Ibn Asakir and
Ibn Abi Hatim from Abu Sa'id Khadiri, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud (one of the
writers of Wahi - revelations) and Qazi Shukani in Tafsir
al-Fathu'l-Ghadir narrate that in the day of the Holy Prophet they also
recited that verse in that very way.

In short, the warning contained in this verse says: "If you do it not
then (it will be as if) you have not delivered His message (at all)..."
shows that the message which the Holy Prophet had been ordered to
deliver was of great importance. It was in fact essential to the
completion of Prophethood itself.

Therefore, the issue in question was surely the matter of the imamate,
the conferring of authority on one who would guide the people according
to the tenets of Islam after the death of the Holy Prophet.

Revelation of verse "This day have I perfected for you your religion." at Ghadir al-Khum
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The second circumstance which proves my point is the revelation of the
verse:

***"This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed my
favor on you and chosen for you Islam for a religion." (5:3)***

Hafiz: But it is an admitted fact that this verse was revealed on the
day of Arafa, and no one of the ulama’ has claimed that it was revealed
on the day of Ghadir.

Well-Wisher: I ask you not to make undue haste in denying this fact.

Of course, I admit that some of your ulama’ have said that this verse
was revealed on the day of Arafa, but a large number of your reputable
ulama’ have also said that it was revealed on the day of Ghadir. Also
some of your ulama’ hold the view that perhaps this verse was revealed
twice, once at the close of the day of Arafa and then again on the day
of Ghadir.

Accordingly, Sibt Ibn Jauzi says in his Khawasu'l-Umma, p. 18: "It is
probable that this verse was revealed twice, once on the day of Arafa
and once on the day of Ghadir al-Khum, just as the verse: 'In the name
of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful' was revealed twice, once in
Mecca and then again in Medina."

Your trustworthy scholars, such as Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in
Durru'l-Mansur, vol. II, p. 256 and Itqan, vol. I, p. 31;
Imamu'l-Mufassirin Tha'labi in Kashfu'l-Bayan; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani
in Ma Nusala Mina'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali; Abu'l-Fatha Nazari in
Khasa'isu'l-Alawi; Ibn Kathir Shami in Tafsir, vol. II, p. 41, following
Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya: Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari, scholar, commentator
and historian of the 3rd century A.H. in Tafsir al-Kitabu'l-Wilaya;
Hafiz Abu'l-Qasim Haskani in Shawahid-ut-Tanzil;

Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira al-Khawasu'l-Umma, p. 18; Abu Ishaq Hamwaini
in Fara'id-us-Simtain, ch. XII; Abu Sa'id Sijistani in Kitabu'l-Wilaya;
Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi in Ta'rikh al-Baghdad, vol. VIII, p. 290; Ibn
Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i in Manaqib, ch. XIV and Maqtalu'l-Husain, ch.
IV, all have written that on the day of Ghadir al-Khum the Holy Prophet
appointed ‘Ali by divine order to the rank of wilaya (Vicegerent).

He told the people whatever he was ordained to say about ‘Ali and raised
his hands so high that the white of both his armpits was visible. He
addressed the people thus: "Salute ‘Ali because he is the amir (lord) of
the believers. The whole Community complied with his order. They had not
yet departed from one another when the aforesaid verse was revealed."

The Holy Prophet was highly pleased with the revelation of this verse.
So, addressing the people, he said: "Allah is Great, He who has
perfected for them their religion and has completed His favor on them
and is satisfied with my Prophethood and ‘Ali's vicegerency after me."

Imam Haskani and Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal have given the complete details
of this event. If you, respected people, would leave behind your
preconceived ideas on this matter, you would understand the Holy verse
and hadith, which show that the word "maula" means "wali" (master) i.e.,
one having authority over all others.

If "maula" or "wali" did not mean "one who has a greater claim on
others," the latter phrase "after me" would be meaningless. And this
sentence, which the Holy Prophet repeatedly uttered from his sacred
tongue, proves that "maula" and "wali" mean "one who has greater claim
on all others," because he said that rank in particular was granted to
‘Ali after him.

Third, you might consider the circumstances. In that hot desert, where
there was no protection for the travellers, the Holy Prophet gathered
the whole umma. People sat in the shade of the camels, with their feet
covered, in the scorching heat of the sun. In these conditions the
Prophet delivered a long address, which Khawarizmi and Ibn Mardawiyya in
their Manaqib, and Tabari in his Kitabu'l-Wilaya and others have
narrated.

Does it make sense to think that the Prophet would require thousands of
his followers to spend three days in the blazing desert to swear
allegiance to ‘Ali merely to indicate that ‘Ali was their friend? In
fact there was no one in the whole Community who did not already know
the close association between the Holy Prophet and ‘Ali or had not heard
about him (as I have already pointed out earlier). The revelation of the

Qur'anic verse in question for the second time, particularly in
different circumstances and with such serious instructions that people
might be put to great inconvenience and suspense, could not simply mean
that they should be friends of ‘Ali. Either the Holy Prophet's
performance was meant to indicate great significance or it was
frivolous. And certainly the Holy Prophet is free from all frivolous
actions.

It is reasonable to conclude therefore, that these arrangements were
made not merely to indicate that people should befriend ‘Ali. The event,
in fact, marked the completion of the Prophet's message: the
establishment of the Imamate, the source of the umma's guidance after
the death of the Prophet.

Sibt ibn Jauzi's view about the meaning of "maula"
--------------------------------------------------

Some of your reputable ulama’ have acknowledged that the primary meaning
of "maula" is "master." Among them is Sibt Ibn Jauzi, who after giving
ten meanings of the word in his Tadhkira al-Khawas, ch. II, p. 20, says
that none of them except the tenth one corresponds with what the Holy
Prophet meant to say.

He says: "The hadith specifically means obedience; so the tenth meaning
is correct, and it means 'mastery over others.' Hence, the hadith means
'of whomever I am the 'maula' (master) ‘Ali is also his 'maula'
(master).'"

In the book Maraju'l-Bahrain Hafiz Abdu'l-Faraj Yahya Ibn Sa'id Saqafi
interprets it in the same way. He narrates this hadith with his own
sources from his leaders, who said that the Holy Prophet, holding ‘Ali
by the hand, said: "Of whomsoever I am 'wali' or master over himself,
‘Ali is also his 'wali' or master over himself."

Sibt Ibn Jauzi says, "The saying of the Holy Prophet that ‘Ali has
authority or is the master over the selves of all the believers clearly
proves the Imamate or vicegerency of ‘Ali and that obedience to him is
obligatory."

View of ibn Talha Shafi'i about the meaning of maula
----------------------------------------------------

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in his Matalibu's-Su'ul in the middle of Part
V, ch. 1, p. 16, says that the word maula has many meanings, for
instance: "master," "helper," "successor," "truthful one," and "leader."
He then says that this Holy hadith furnishes an inner interpretation to
the verse of Mubahala. (3.61)

In it Allah Almighty has called ‘Ali the 'self' of the Holy Prophet.
There was no separation between the self of the Holy Prophet and the
self of ‘Ali since He combined the two with the pronoun referring to the
Holy Prophet.

Muhammad Ibn Talha adds: "In this hadith the Holy Prophet indicated that
whatever obligations the believers had in respect to him, they had also
in respect to ‘Ali. As the Holy Prophet was certainly master of the
believers in all of their matters, their helper, leader, and chief - all
of these being connotations of the word "maula" - then it follows that
he meant the same thing for ‘Ali (a.s.) also.

And this is of course, an exalted position, an eminently high rank,
which was specifically assigned to ‘Ali. It is for this reason that the
Day of Ghadir was a day of eid and rejoicings for the lovers and friends
of ‘Ali."

Hafiz: In view of your statement, since the word "maula has a number of
meanings, it would be wrong to conclude that it was used in this case to
indicate a single meaning, "master," to the exclusion of other meanings.

Well-Wisher: You are well aware of the basic principles of scholars that
while a word may have different meanings, it has only one basic meaning
and that the rest of the meanings are derived. The basic meaning of the
word "maula" or "wali" is master.

For instance, the "wali" of "nikah" (wedlock) means one who acts as
attorney, or trustee. The "wali" of a woman is her husband; the "wali"
of a child is his father, who has full authority over him. The "wali
ahd" (heir apparent) of a king means "one whose right to rule cannot be
denied if he outlives the ancestor."

Apart from this, your objection recoils upon you as to why you have
restricted its meaning to "friend" and "helper" when it has many other
meanings. So this specification without any specific object is void. The
objection you have made comes back to you and not to us because the
meanings that we have specified are not without the specified object.
The verses of the Holy Qur'an, the hadith, and the opinions of scholars,
all prove the same meaning which we have given.

Among these are the reasons which your own prominent ulama’, like Sibt
Ibn Jauzi, Muhammad Ibn Abi Talha Shafi'i have given regarding its
meaning. Moreover, it is narrated in a large number of hadith both from
your sources and mine that this Holy verse was read thus:

"O Prophet of Allah! Deliver what has been sent down to you from your
Lord about ‘Ali's wilaya (vicegerency) and his being master of the
believers."

Jalalu'd-din Suyuti, who is one of your reputable ulama’ has collected
these hadith in his book Durru'l-Mansur.

‘Ali's argument based on hadith of Ghadir in the Mosque at Kufa
---------------------------------------------------------------

If this hadith and the word "maula" had not been proof of ‘Ali as Imam
and Caliph, Amiru'l-Mu'minin would not have repeatedly argued from it.
In fact in the committees of counselors he referred to it as evidence
for his Imamate, as Khatib Khawarizmi in his Manaqib, p. 217; Ibrahim
Ibn Muhammad Hamwaini in his Fara'id, ch. 58; Hafiz Ibn Iqda in
Kitabu'l-Wilaya; Ibn Hatim Damishqi in Durru'n-Nazim, and Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. II, p. 61, have recorded
it. Particularly important is the evidence given by thirty companions at
Rahba.

Many of your distinguished ulama’ have narrated the discussion ‘Ali led
with the Muslims at Rahba al-Kufa (i.e., in the courtyard of the Kufa
mosque). Following is a partial listing of those who recorded this
event.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Part 1, p. 129; Ibn Athir Jazari in
Asadu'l-Ghaiba, vol. III and vol. V, pp. 206 and 276; Ibn Qutayba in
Ma'arif, p. 194; Muhammad ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib;
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. I, p. 362; Hafiz Abu
Nu'aim Isfahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, vol. V, p. 26; Ibn Hajar Asqalani
in Isaba, vol. II, p. 408; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Dhakha'ir al-Uqba, p.
67; Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, p. 26; Allama
Samhudi in Jawahiru'l-Iqdain; Shamsu'd-din Jazari in Asnu'l-Matalib, p.
3; Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 4; Hafiz Ibn Iqda in
Kitabu'l-Wilaya.

‘Ali stood before the people and asked them to bear witness about what
they had heard the Holy Prophet saying about him at Ghadir al-Khum.
Thirty of the companions, including twelve Badris (those who had fought
in the Battle of Badr), stood up and said that they saw on the Ghadir
al-Khum day the Holy Prophet holding up Hazrat ‘Ali's hand and saying to
the people:

"Do you know that I have greater claim on the believers than they have
on their own selves?" All of them said: "Yes." Then the Holy Prophet
said: "Of whomsoever I am "maula" (master), this ‘Ali is his "maula"
(master)."

Sad plight of those who did not confirm hadith of Ghadir
--------------------------------------------------------

Out of this gathering three men did not bear witness to the event. One
of them was Anas Ibn Malik, who said that because he had become
enfeebled with old age he had forgotten all about it. ‘Ali cursed the
three.

He said: "If you are telling lies, may Allah afflict thee with leprosy,
which even your turban would not conceal." No sooner did Anas stand up
from his place when leprosy appeared on his body. (According to some
reports he became both blind and a leper.)

Fourth argument: "Have I not a greater claim on you than you have on yourselves?"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Fourth, the way in which the hadith has been narrated in
itself proves that the work "maula" means "master." The Holy Prophet, in
his address at Ghadir, asked the people: "Have I not a greater claim on
you than you have on yourselves?" This refers to the words of the Holy
Qur'an:

***"The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves." (33:6)***

Moreover, there is a reliable hadith in the books of both sects which
records that the Holy Prophet said: "There is no believer on whom I have
not a greater claim in this world and in the Hereafter, than he has on
himself.

All of them said with one voice that he had a greater claim on them than
they had on themselves. After that the Holy Prophet said: "Of whomsoever
I am the "maula," this ‘Ali is also his "maula." So from the context of
his speech, it follows that the Holy Prophet meant "authority" or
"mastery over others" when he used the word "maula."

Hafiz: In many of the books there is no such record of the Holy Prophet
having said these words: "Have I not a greater claim on you than you
have on your own selves?"

Well-Wisher: In narrating the hadith of Ghadir, narrators have used
slightly different words, but so far as the hadith of the Shi’as are
concerned, all of the Ithna Ashari ulama’ say that the text and context
of hadith of Ghadir are as narrated above.

And in most of the authentic Sunni books, written by your prominent
ulama’, like Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira al-Khawasu'l-Umma, p. 18; Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal in Musnad; Nuru'd-din Sabbagh Maliki in
Fusulu'l-Muhimma; and a host of others who have narrated hadith of
Ghadir, the sentence "Have I not a greater claim on you than you have on
yourselves" does exist.

Now for the sake of blessedness I submit the translation of this hadith
which has been narrated by the Imam of the traditionists, Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, in his Musnad, vol. IV, p. 281, on the authority of Bara'a Ibn
Azib.

He said: "I was travelling with the Holy Prophet. We reached Ghadir. The
Holy Prophet announced: 'Assemble for prayers.' It was customary when
something serious was about to happen that the Holy Prophet ordered the
people to assemble for prayers.

When the people had assembled and prayers had been offered, the Prophet
used to preach a sermon. A special place was provided for the Holy
Prophet between two trees. After the performance of the prayers the Holy
Prophet, raising ‘Ali's hand above his head, spoke to the crowd: 'Do you
not know that I am the master of the believers and have more rights over
them than they over their own selves?' All of them said, 'Yes, we know
that.' He again said, 'Do you not know that I have greater rights over
every believer than he has over his own self?'

All of the answered, 'Yes, we know it.' Thereafter the Holy Prophet
said, 'Of whomsoever I am the maula (master) this ‘Ali is his maula
(master).' Then he prayed to Allah: 'O Allah! Be a Friend of him who is
a friend of him (i.e. ‘Ali) and be an enemy of him who is an enemy of
him.' Immediately following this, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab met ‘Ali and said,
'Congratulations to you, O son of Abu Talib! You have now become maula
(master) of all the believing men and women.'

Also Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda V;
Sulayman Balkhi in his Yanabi and Hafiz Abu Nu'aim in his Hilya have
recorded this hadith with slight variations in the wording.

Hafiz Abu'l-Fatha, from whom Ibn Sabbagh also had quoted in his
Fusulu'l-Muhimma, has narrated this hadith in these words: "O people!
Allah Almighty is my "maula" (master), and I have a greater right over
you than you have over yourselves. You should know that of whomsoever I
am the 'maula' (master) ‘Ali is also his 'maula' (master)."

Ibn Maja Qazwini in his Sunan and Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in his
hadith (pp. 81,83,93,24) have narrated this hadith in the same way.

And Zaid Ibn Arqam writes in his hadith No. 84 that the Prophet of Allah
said in the course of his address: "Do you not know that I have a
greater authority over all believers, men or women, than they have over
themselves?" All of them said: "We bear witness that you have greater
authority over every believer than he has over his own self." At that
time the Prophet said: "Of whomsoever I am the maula (master) this ‘Ali
is also his maula (master)." Then he raised the hand of ‘Ali.

In addition Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn Al-khatib Baghdadi (died 462 A.H.), in
his Ta'rikh al-Baghdad, Vol. 8, pp. 289, 290, has narrated a detailed
hadith from Abu Huraira that if any one fasts on the eighteenth day of
Dhu'l-Hijja (The Day of Ghadir), he will be rewarded for sixty months of
fasting. He then records the above hadith in the same way.

Hasan's couplets before the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------

The fifth circumstance to prove the wilaya (vicegerency) of ‘Ali is the
reading of his couplets, which Hasan Ibn Thabit read with the permission
of the Holy Prophet, in the gathering in which ‘Ali's rank of Vicegerent
was announced. Sibt Ibn Jauzi and others have written that when the Holy
Prophet heard those verses, he said, "Oh, Hasan! so long as you continue
helping us or praising us with your tongue, ruhu quds, the Holy spirit,
will also be supporting you."

The well known commentator and narrator of hadith of the fourth century
A.H., Hafiz if Ibn Mardawiyya (died 352 A.H.), in his Manaqib; the Chief
of the Imams, Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi in Manaqib and
Maqtalu'l-Husain, part IV; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in his Risalatu'l-Azhar
fi ma Aqdahu'sh-Shu'ara and many of your scholars, narrators and
historians report from Abu Sa'id Khadiri that on the day of Ghadir
al-Khum, after the address of the Holy Prophet and the appointment of
‘Ali as his successor, Hasan Ibn Thabit said: "Do you permit me to
recite some couplets on this occasion?"

The Holy Prophet said: "Yes, recite with Allah's blessings." So he stood
up at a raised spot and recited spontaneously composed verses. The
meaning of the verses is as follows:

"On the Day of Ghadir al-Khum, the Holy Prophet called together the
umma, and I heard his voice calling them. The Prophet said to the
people, "Who is your maula and wali?" The people said clearly, "Allah is
our maula (Lord) and you are our wali (Guardian) and no one denies this
fact." So then the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "Stand up! I am content
with your becoming the imam (vicegerent) and hadi (guide) after me. So
of whomsoever I am the maula (master) this ‘Ali is also his maula
(master).

Hence, all of you people should loyally and faithfully help him." Then
the Prophet prayed to Allah: "O Allah! Be a friend of him who is a
friend of him (‘Ali) and be an enemy of him who is enemy of him."

These couplets are a clear proof of the fact that on that day the
companions of the Holy Prophet did not interpret the word "maula" in any
other way except "imam" and that ‘Ali would be the caliph after the
Prophet died. If the word "maula" did not mean "imam" or master over
others, the Prophet would have at once interrupted Hasan when he had
recited the line: "I am content with your being imam and guide after
me," and would have told him that he was mistaken and that he did not
mean ‘Ali to be the imam and successor after him and that he meant by
the word "maula" "friend" or "helper."

But in fact the Holy Prophet supported him by saying "Ruhu'l-Quds will
also be supporting you." Apart from this, the Holy Prophet clearly
explained the position of imamate or wilaya (vicegerency) of ‘Ali in his
sermon.

You should study the sermon of the Holy Prophet, which he delivered on
the Ghadir al-Khum day and which has been reported in full by Abu Ja'far
Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari (died 310 A.H.) in his book Kitabu'l-Wilaya.
He writes that the Prophet said: "Listen and obey. Verily, Allah
Almighty is your maula and ‘Ali is your imam. Until the Day of Judgment
the imamate will belong to my progeny, the descendants of ‘Ali."

Companions breaking their promise made on the day of Ghadir
-----------------------------------------------------------

Whatever interpretation you may give to the word "maula," it is an
acknowledged fact that the companions made a promise to the Prophet on
that day. There is complete concurrence between the two sects on this
point. Then why did they break that pledge?

Even if we suppose for the moment that by maula the Holy Prophet meant
merely "friend" or "helper," for Allah's sake tell us if you think that
friendship meant that they should set fire to ‘Ali's house, terrify his
family, and threaten him with drawn swords.

The Prophet gave clear instructions that the companions should pledge
allegiance to ‘Ali. Do you think that he intended that they should
therefore terrorize his own son-in-law? After the death of the Prophet,
didn't they break their pledge? Did they, who broke the pledge, fulfill,
in your opinion, the conditions of friendship? Did they read verse 15 of
ch. 13, Al-Ra'd (the Thunder) of the Qur'an?

***"And those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and
cut asunder that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief
in the land; (as for) those, upon them shall be a curse, and they shall
have the evil (issue) of the abode." (13:25)***

Companions breaking the promise at Uhud, Hunain, and Hudaibiyya
---------------------------------------------------------------

In the battles of Uhud and Hunain, when the Holy Prophet had made all
his companions promise that they would not run away that day, didn't
they actually run away? They ran from the battlefield and left the Holy
Prophet to face the enemy. This has been recorded by your own
historians, like Tabari, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, and Ibn A'same Kufi. Wasn't
this breaking a solemn pledge?

I swear by Allah that you unreasonably find fault with the Shi’as when
we say only what your own renowned ulama’ and historians have said.

Shi’as condemn only those companions whose acts were unjust
-----------------------------------------------------------

I don't understand why you people have been attacking us for
generations. Whatever you write is accepted, but if we write what the
great Sunni ulama’ have written, we are labelled as infidels simply
because we criticize the injustice of some of the companions.

If, however criticism of the companions means Rafizi'ism, then
apparently all the companions were Rafizis, because all of them
criticized one another's bad actions. Even Abu Bakr and ‘Umar did so.

Some of the Prophet's companions were pious believers and were highly
respected. Others indulged their lower desires and were condemned. If
you want historical proof of this fact, I suggest that you read Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid's Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.IV, pp. 454, 462, and study
Zaidi's detailed reply to Abu'l-Ma'‘Ali Juwaini's objection, which Abu
Ja'far Naqib has recorded. Then you will know how much controversy
existed among the companions, who in fact cursed one another as sinners
and infidels.

Companions running away at Hudaibiyya
-------------------------------------

In his account of the Hudaibiyya affair, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, and others of your historians have also written
that, after the conclusion of the treaty of peace, most of the
companions, including ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, expressed their anger
concerning the terms of the treaty. They told the Holy Prophet that they
were not satisfied with peace and wanted to fight. The Holy Prophet said
that if they wanted to fight, they were at liberty to do so. So they
attacked.

But the companions suffered a crushing defeat and fled to the hills and
did not even return to protect the Holy Prophet. Then the Holy Prophet
asked ‘Ali to draw the sword and repel the Quraish. Seeing ‘Ali before
them, the Quraish drew back. Later the companions who had fled returned
and begged the Prophet's pardon.

The Holy Prophet said to them: "Do I not know you! Are you not the same
people who trembled in fear in the Battle of Badr until Allah Almighty
sent angels for our help! Are you not the same companions of mine who on
the Day of Uhud fled to the hills and left me unprotected? Although I
kept on calling you, you did not return."

The Holy Prophet recounted all their weaknesses, and they continued
expressing their regret for their actions. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says at the
conclusion of his work that this rebuke was directed specifically
against ‘Umar, who did not believe any of the promises made by the Holy
Prophet. Then he writes that, in light of the statement of the Holy
Prophet, Caliph ‘Umar must have fled from the Battle of Uhud because in
his talk the Holy Prophet had referred to that also.

Now you can yourself see that if we relate this fact, which is recorded
by your eminent ulama’ like Abi'l-Hadid and others, we shall at once be
subjected to attack because we have insulted the Caliph, but there is no
objection to Abi'l-Hadid. In fact we have no intention of insulting
anybody. We merely relate historical facts, and you look at us with
scornful eyes. You ignore those facts.

Shi’as will seek redress on the Day of Judgment
-----------------------------------------------

The Shi’as will have many complaints on the Day of Judgment against your
ulama’. The world will perish, but you must appear in Allah's Court of
Justice to answer for your oppression.

Hafiz: Please tell me for what oppression you will seek justice on the
Day of Judgment?

Well-Wisher: There are instances which I might cite. When the Day of
Divine Justice comes I will certainly seek justice.

Hafiz: I ask you not to excite the emotions of others. Tell us what
oppression you have suffered.

Well-Wisher: Oppression and tyranny is not a new thing for us today. But
its foundation was laid immediately after the demise of our ancestor,
the Holy Prophet. The right of our oppressed grandmother, Fatima Zahra,
which was bequeathed to her by her father, the Holy Prophet, for the
bringing up of her children, was usurped. No notice was taken of her
complaints and protestations.At last she passed away in the prime of her
youth with a broken heart.

Hafiz: Please you are unnecessarily exciting the people. Tell us what
right of Fatima was usurped? Please remember that if you fail to prove
your claim you will, to some degree, fail in the Divine Court of
Justice. Please yourself to be in the Divine Court of Justice and argue
your case.

Well-Wisher: One day we shall be before the Divine Court. We expect
justice. If you too have a sense of justice you should, like a just
judge listen to my submissions without prejudice. I believe you will
acknowledge the validity of our claim.

Hafiz: I swear that I have no prejudice or stubborness. Surely you have
observed during these nights that I do not argue perversely. When I have
heard reasonable arguments I have accepted them. My silence was an
indication itself of my accepting the just cause. By nature I am not
disposed to quarrel. I admit that before I met you here, I wanted to
defeat you.

But I have been so impressed by your purity, your politeness, good
manners, simplicity, and sense of reality, that I have taken a solemn
vow before Allah that I bow down to accept all logical facts even though
this posture might disappoint the expectations of others.

Believe me, I am not the man of the first night. I tell you quite
frankly that your arguments have left a deep impression on my heart. I
earnestly hope that I may die with love and affection for the Holy
Prophet and his descendants, so that I may stand happy and contented
before the Holy Prophet.

Well-Wisher: Of course such integrity was expected of a scholar like
you. I have really been much impressed by your remarks as well, and I
have developed a friendly feeling towards you. Now I would like to make
a request. I hope you will accept.

Hafiz: Yes, please.

Well-Wisher: Tonight I would like to be a judge and the others to be
witnesses, so that you may decide without any prejudice whether my claim
is just. Some of the uninformed believers say that it is no use
discussing a matter which happened over 1,300 years ago. They do not
understand that matters relating to knowledge are debated in every age.

Fair discussions reveal the truth and the claim of inheritance can
legally be made by an heir at any time. Since I am one of the heirs, I
would like to put a question to you. Please give me a just reply.

Hafiz: Yes, I shall be very pleased to hear your statement.

Well-Wisher: If by divine command a father gives property to his son,
and, after the death of the former, if the property is taken from the
son who is in possession of the property, what would be the nature of
the claim?

Hafiz: The usurper's action would be completely unjust. But whom are you
referring to when you say the oppressor and the oppressed?

Fadak and its usurpation
------------------------

When the forts of Khaibar were conquered, the nobles, landlords, and
prominent of Fadak came to the Holy Prophet. Fadak was an area in the
valley of the Medina hills. It contained seven villages which extended
as far as the sea coast.

Many were very fertile and there were oases there. There was a peace
treaty with the people stating that half of the whole of Fadak was to be
in their possession and the other half would be the property of the Holy
Prophet.

This fact has been narrated by Yaqut Hamawi, the author of
Majimu'l-Buldan in his Futuhu'l-Buldan, vol. VI, p. 343; by Ahmad Ibn
Yahya Baladhuri Baghdadi (died 279 A.H.) in his Ta'rikh; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali in his Sharh al-Nahju'l- Balagha, (printed Egypt), vol. IV, p.
78, quoting from Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz Jauhari; by Muhammad Ibn
Jarir Tabari in his Ta'rikh al-Kabir, and by many others of your
traditionists and historians.

Revelation of the verse "Give to near of kin"
---------------------------------------------

When the Holy Prophet returned to Medina, Gabriel revealed the
following:

***"And give to the near of kin his due and (to) the needy and the
wayfarer, and do not squander wastefully." (7:26)***

The Holy Prophet pondered the significance of this revelation. Gabriel
appeared again and informed him that Allah had decreed: "Let Fadak be
given to Fatima." The Holy Prophet called Fatima and said: "Allah has
commanded me to bestow Fadak as a gift to you." So he immediately gave
possession of Fadak to Fatima.

Hafiz: Please clarify what you say about the occasion on which this Holy
verse was revealed. Is it written in the books of history and the
commentaries of the Shi’as, or have you seen it in our reliable books
also?

Well-Wisher: The chief of the commentators, Ahmad Tha'labi in his
Kashfu'l-Bayan; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in his Tafsir, vol. IV, reporting
from Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya; the famous commentator Ahmad Ibn Musa (died
352 A.H.) reporting from Abu Sa'id Khadiri and Hakim Abu'l-Qasim
Haskani; Ibn Kathir; Imadu'd-din Isma'il; Ibn ‘Umar Damishqi; Faqih
al-Shafi'i in his Ta'rikh, and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 39, reporting from Tafsir al-Tha'labi,
Jam'u'l-Fawa'id and Uyunu'l-Akhbar - all narrate that when the verse
"and give to the near of kin his due" was revealed, the Holy Prophet of
Allah called Fatima and bestowed the great Fadak upon her as a gift.

Accordingly, so long as the Holy Prophet lived, Fadak remained in
Fatima's possession. That exalted lady leased the land; its revenue was
collected in three installments. Out of this amount she took enough
money for food for her and her children and distributed the rest to the
poor people of Bani Hashim. After the demise of the Holy Prophet, the
officers of the ruling caliph snatched this property from Fatima.

I ask you, respected people to tell me in the name of justice how you
would term this act.

Hafiz: This is the first time I have heard that the Holy Prophet gave
Fadak, by command, to Fatima.

Well-Wisher: It is possible you might not have known about this. But, as
I have told you, most of your prominent ulama’ have written about it in
their reliable books. In order to establish the point clearly I refer
you to Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya, Waqidi and Hakim (see their Tafsir and
Ta'rikh); Jalalu'd-din Suyuti Durru'l-Mansur, Vol. IV, p. 177;

Mullah ‘Ali Muttaqi's Kanzu'l-Umma and the brief note which he had
written on Ahmad Ibn Hanbal's Kitabu'l-Akhlaq of Musnad about the
problem of Sila al-rahm; and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid's Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha,
Vol.IV. All of these ulama’ have narrated in different ways, apart from
Abu Sa'id Khadiri's statement, that when the above verse was revealed
the Holy Prophet gave Fadak to Fatima Zahra.

Argument from hadith 'la nuris' - we do not leave legacies
----------------------------------------------------------

Hafiz: It is an admitted fact that the caliphs confiscated Fadak on the
basis of the well known hadith narrated by Abu Bakr, who declared that
he had himself heard the Holy Prophet say: "We prophets do not leave
behind any legacy; whatever we leave as inheritance is charity" (i.e.,
the property of umma).

Fadak was a gift - not a legacy
-------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, it was not an inheritance, but a gift. Second, the
purported hadith is unacceptable.

Hafiz: What argument would you advance for the rejection of this hadith?

Well-Wisher: There are many reasons for rejecting this hadith.

Hadith 'la nuris' is concocted
------------------------------

First, whoever contrived this hadith uttered it without thinking about
the words he used. If he had been careful about it, he would never have
said: "We prophets do not leave any inheritance," because he would have
known that his lying would be exposed by the very wording of this
concocted hadith. If he had used the words "I have not left behind any
legacy," his attempted hadith would have been more plausible.

But when he used the plural "We prophets..."we are obliged to
investigate the truth of the hadith. Now on the basis of your own
statement we refer to the Holy Qur'an for guidance. We find that there
are a number of verses which tell us that the prophets in fact did leave
inheritances. This proves that this hadith is to be rejected outright.

Fatima argues her case
----------------------

In his Kitab al-Saqifa the great scholar and traditionist, Abu Bakr
Ahmad Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz Jauhari, about whom Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says in his
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha that he was one of the eminent ulama’ and
traditionists of the Sunnis; Ibn Al-athir in his Nihaya; Mas'udi in
Akhbaru'z-Zaman and in Ausat; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. IV, p. 78, quoting from Abu Bakr Ahmad
Jauhari's book Saqifa and Fadak in different ways and from a number of
sources, some of which refer to the fifth Imam Muhammad Baqir through
Siddiqi Sughra Zainab al-Kubra and some of which refer to Abdullah Ibn
Hasan on the authority of Siddiqi Kubra Fatima Zahra and on the
authority of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha and also on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn Imran Marzabani, he from Zaid Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Husain; he from
his father, and he from his father Imam Husain; and he from his
illustrious mother, Fatima Zahra; and many other ulama’ of your sect
have narrated the speech of Fatima before a large gathering of the
Muslims.

The opponents were stunned when they heard her reasoning and could not
reply. Since they had no answer to make they caused a disturbance.

Fatima's arguments rejecting hadith la nuris
--------------------------------------------

One of the arguments of Fatima rejecting the hadith was that, if the
hadith were true, then why there were so many verses about the
inheritances of the prophets. She said:

***"At one place the Holy Qur'an says, 'And Solomon was David's
heir.'"(27:16)***

About the prophet Zakariyya the Holy Qur'an says:

***"Therefore grant me from thyself an heir, who shall inherit of me and
inherit (also), of the house of*** ***Jacob." (19, 5-6)***

About Zakariyya's invocation the Holy Qur'an says:

***"And Zakariyya, when he cried to his Lord: 'O my Lord, leave me not
childless, though Thou art the*** ***best of inheritors.' So we
responded to him and gave him Yahya." (21: 89, 90)***

After that she said: "O Son of Abu Qahafa! Is it there in the Book of
Allah that you are an heir of your father and I am deprived of my
father's legacy? You have committed a great slander. Have you people
deliberately abandoned the Book of Allah (the Holy Qur'an) and ignored
it altogether? Am I not the descendant of the Holy Prophet? Why are you
depriving me of my right? Why are all these verses of inheritance, which
are intended for all people in general and for the Prophets in
particular included in the Holy Qur'an?

Is it not a fact that the verses of the Holy Qur'an shall remain
unchanged until the Day of Judgment? Does not the Holy Qur'an say:

***'And those who are akin are nearer one to another in the ordinance of
Allah...' (8:75)"***

and:

***'Allah enjoins you about your issue! The male shall have the equal of
the shares of two females.' (4:12)***

and:

***'Bequest is prescribed for you when one of you approaches death, if
he leaves wealth, that he bequeaths unto parents and near relations in
kindness. (2:180)***

(This is) a duty for all those who ward off (evil).' Then why have I, in
particular, been deprived of my father's legacy? Has Allah revealed some
special verses to you, which exclude my father (from his right). Do you
know the outward and inner meanings of the Holy Qur'an better than my
father, Muhammad, and my cousin, ‘Ali?"

Fatima pleading in vain
-----------------------

When they were silenced by these arguments and true facts, they had no
answer. They resorted to deception and abusive language.

She cried: "Today you have broken my heart. On the Day of Judgment I
will file a suit against you in the Divine Court of Justice and Allah
Almighty will decide the case justly. Allah is the best judge. Muhammad
is the master and lord; our and your promised time is the Day of
Resurrection.

That day the transgressor will be losers, and your repentance will do
you no good. For everything there is an appointed time and you will know
before long who will be afflicted with scornful chastisement."

Caliph used abusive language
----------------------------

Hafiz: Who could dare to abuse part of the body of the Holy Prophet,
Fatima Zahra? I do not believe this. Deception may be possible, but
using abusive language is not possible. Please do not say such things.

Well-Wisher: No one had the courage to say such things except your
Caliph, Abu Bakr. Unable to rebut the cogent reasoning of the oppressed
lady, he immediately mounted the pulpit and insulted Fatima and her
husband and cousin, the loved one of Allah and of His Prophet,
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali.

Hafiz: I think these slanderous reports have been spread by fanatics.

Well-Wisher: You are mistaken. These reports have not been spread by
Shi’as fanatics. Prominent Sunni ulama’ have spread them. However
intolerant our common people might be, they never fabricate hadith.

If you study your authentic books, you will admit that your great ulama’
have acknowledged these facts. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.IV, p. 80, printed in Egypt, reporting from Abu
Bakr Ahmad Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz Jauhari, has written in detail about Abu
Bakr's mounting the pulpit after the remonstrances of ‘Ali and Fatima.

‘Ali's remonstrating with Abu Bakr
----------------------------------

Many scholars have recorded that when Fatima finished pleading her case,
‘Ali began his remonstrance in the public gathering of Muslims in the
mosque of Medina, turning towards Abu Bakr, he said: "Why did you
deprive Fatima of her father's legacy, though she was its owner and
possessed it during the lifetime of her father?"

Abu Bakr replied: "Fadak is the booty of the Muslims. If Fatima produces
complete evidence that it is her own property, I will certainly give it
to her; otherwise, I will deprive her of it."

The Holy Imam said, "Is it not a fact that when you pronounce a judgment
about Muslims, in general, you pass quite a contradictory judgment
concerning us?"

"Hasn't the Holy Prophet said that the onus of proof lies on the
plaintiff and that of defense on the defendant? You have rejected the
judgment of the Holy Prophet and, contrary to religious law, you demand
witnesses from Fatima who has been in possession of the property since
the time of the Holy Prophet. Moreover is the word of Fatima, who is one
of the Ashab al-Kisa (people of the mantle) and who is included in the
verse of purity, not true?"

"If two persons were to give evidence that Fatima had committed some
wrong, tell me how would you treat her?" Abu Bakr said, "I would inflict
punishment on her as I would any other woman."

The Holy Imam said, "If you did this, you would be an infidel before
Allah, because you would have rejected Allah's evidence about Fatima's
purity. Allah says 'Verily, Verily, Allah intends but to keep off from
you every kind of uncleanness, O you the People of the House, and purify
you (with) a thorough purification.' Is this verse not revealed in our
praise?"

Abu Bakr said: "Why not?"

The Imam said: "Is it possible that Fatima, whose purity Allah has
verified, would lay a false claim to a petty property? You reject the
evidence of the purified one and accept the evidence of the Arab who
urinates on the heel of his own foot!"

After saying this Imam returned to his home angry. His protest excited
the people. Everyone said: "Truth is with ‘Ali and Fatima. By Allah,
‘Ali speaks the truth. Why is the Holy Prophet's daughter treated so
outrageously?"

Abu Bakr’s Insolence
--------------------

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid narrates that the people were deeply impressed by the
protests of ‘Ali and Fatima and began to cause a disturbance. Abu Bakr,
who saw that the two Holy persons had already left the mosque went to
the pulpit and said:

"O people! Why are you so disturbed? Why do you listen to everybody?
Since I have rejected their evidence, they are talking nonsense. The
fact is that he is a fox who is betrayed by his own tail. He creates all
sorts of disturbances. He minimizes the importance of disturbances and
incites the people to create agitation and uproar. He seeks help from
the weak. He seeks assistance from women. He is like Ummu't-Tihal with
whom people of her own house were fond of fornicating."

Aren't these remarks outrageously abusive? Do they accord with praise,
respect, love and sympathy, which the Holy Prophet had said were due his
family? How long will you remain absorbed in this misguided faith and
fanaticism? For how long will you oppose the Shi’as and call them
Rafizis and infidels because they criticize the words and actions of
people which are recorded in your own books?

History judges a man
--------------------

Consider the matter justly. Was the insolence of the aged companion of
the Prophet justified? The wicked and abusive language of Mu'awiya,
Marwan, and Khalid was not as distressing as that which comes from the
mouth of the man who is called the "companion of the cave." Respected
men! We were not present at that time. We hear the names of ‘Ali, Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar, Uthman, Talha, Zubair, Mu'awiya, Marwan, Khalid, Abu
Huraira, etc.

We have neither friendship nor enmity with any of them. We see two
things: first, those whom Allah and His Prophet loved and for whom
respect and loyalty was commanded. Second, we examine their deeds and
utterances. Then we decide with a fair mind. We resist letting our
preference for someone distort our judgment.

Hadid's surprise at Abu Bakr's abusing ‘Ali and Fatima
------------------------------------------------------

We aren't the only ones who are shocked at such behavior. Even your own
fair ulama’ are amazed to learn it. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l- Balagha, Vol.IV, p. 80, that the utterances of the Caliph
filled him with astonishment. He asked his teacher Abu Yahya Naqib
Ja'far Ibn Yahya Ibn Abi Zaidu'l-Basari to whom the caliph's words
referred. He said that the statements were not indirect. The reference
was explicit.

Ibn Hadid said: "If they had been explicit, I would not have put the
question." Upon this he laughed and said: "These things were said
against ‘Ali." Ibn Hadid repeated the words in astonishment: "Were all
those words said against ‘Ali?" His teacher said: "Yes, O son! This is
what rulership means."

Resorting to abusive language is the tactic of one who has no convincing
reply. All this was done to ‘Ali about whom, as reported by all your
leading ulama’ in their reliable books, the Holy Prophet said: "‘Ali is
with the truth and the truth is with ‘Ali."

Tormenting ‘Ali is tormenting the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------------

In reference to both ‘Ali and Fatima, the Holy Prophet said that their
trouble was his own trouble. The Holy Prophet said: "He who troubles
these two troubles me, and the one who troubles me troubles Allah." It
is also written in all your authentic books that the Holy Prophet said,
"He who reviles ‘Ali reviles me, who reviles me reviles Allah."

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i, in his Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 10,
narrates a detailed hadith on the authority of Ibn Abbas, who told a
section of the Syrians, who were cursing ‘Ali that he had heard the Holy
Prophet saying about ‘Ali: "He who abuses you abuses me, and he who
abuses me abuses Allah, and he who abuses Allah will be thrown straight
into Hell."

After this hadith he quotes many other hadith from authentic sources all
of which prove that those who abuse ‘Ali are infidels. Chapter 10 of his
book is entitled: "Concerning the Infidelity of One who Abuses ‘Ali"

Also Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 121, has quoted this same
hadith. So according to all these hadith, those who curse ‘Ali, curse
Allah and his Prophet. All of them (like Mu'awiya, the Bani Umayya, the
Nasibi's, and the Kharijis) are themselves cursed. Now this much is
sufficient. The Day of Judgement will surely come. Since our oppressed
ancestor assumed silence and left the decision to that Day, we shall
also remain silent.

There is a second point which disproves the supposed hadith: "We leave
no inheritance..." The Holy Prophet said: "I am the city of knowledge
and ‘Ali is its gate; and I am the house of wisdom and ‘Ali is its
door." Both sects accepted this. Certainly, one who was the gate of the
Holy Prophet's knowledge understood all hadith and instructions of the
Holy Prophet, particularly those concerned with the problems of
inheritance.

On them depends the welfare of the whole nation. The Holy Prophet also
said: "One who wishes to acquire knowledge should come to ‘Ali's door."
If his knowledge had been incomplete, the Holy Prophet would not have
said that ‘Ali was the best judge in the whole community. He said: "‘Ali
is the best of all among you in interpreting the laws." This hadith is
recorded in all your authentic books.

Would the Holy Prophet proclaim the superiority of a man's mastery of
the laws, if that man did not understand the problems of inheritance and
the rights of the people? Part of the purpose of the Holy Prophet was to
secure social reform for the people in this world and peace and comfort
for them in the hereafter. How could he make ‘Ali the Commander of the
Faithful and yet not convey to him a tradition such as this which
affects the entire social order?

Sheikh: Neither of these two things is proved according to us. The
hadith of Medina is not accepted by our distinguished ulama’ and the
problem of vicegerency and succession has also been rejected by the
reputable ulama’.

Bukhari and Muslim in their collections of hadith and others of our
prominent ulama’, report on the authority of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha that
the head of the Holy Prophet at the time of his death rested against her
chest until he passed away. She stated that he did not make a Will. Had
he made a Will, Ummu'l-Mu'minin would have narrated it, and the question
of the Will would have been settled.

Hadith "I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate
-------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Regarding the hadith you have been very unfair. I have
already told you that both sects have unanimously accepted it and that
it has been reported with almost perfect continuity. The following of
your notable ulama’ have confirmed the authenticity of this hadith: Imam
Tha'labi, Firuzabadi, Hakim Nishapuri, Muhammad Jazari, Muhammad Ibn
Jarir Tabari, Suyuti, Sakhawi, Muttaqi Hindi, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji
Shafi'i, Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i, Qazi Fazl Ibn Ruzbahan, Munawi, Ibn
Hajar Makki, Khatib Khawarizmi, Sulayman Qanduzi Hanafi, Ibn Maghazili
Faqih Shafi'i, Dailami, Ibn Talha Shafi'i, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani,
Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani, Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali, Tibrani, Sibt Ibn Jauzi and Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i.

Vicegerency conferred on ‘Ali (a.s.)
------------------------------------

Regarding the problem of vicegerency there are many authoritative
statements confirming that the Holy Prophet did make his Will. No
knowledgeable person denies this fact.

Nawab: The caliph of the prophet is also his vicegerent, the one who
conducted his domestic affairs. For example they paid allowances to the
wives of the Prophet. Why do you say that ‘Ali was appointed vicegerent?

Well-Wisher: You are right. It is obvious that the Holy Prophet's caliph
was also his vicegerent. During previous nights I have submitted my
arguments and authoritative statements concerning the caliphate. That
the Holy Prophet appointed ‘Ali his caliph and vicegerent is quite
right. While others were busy with their own conveniences and political
conspiracies, the vicegerent of the Holy Prophet performed the funeral
rites of the Holy Prophet.

Afterwards he was occupied in returning the trust money and other
valuables and caring for other matters with which the Holy Prophet had
entrusted him. This is too clear to require any proof. Both our ulama’
agree regarding this fact.

Hadith about the vicegerency
----------------------------

To prove my point let me refer to some hadith:

(1) Creating Brotherly Relationship - Imam Tha'labi in his Manaqib and
Tafsir, Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i in his Manaqib and Mir Sayyid ‘Ali
Hamadani in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba (Mawadda VI) narrate from the second
caliph, ‘Umar ibn Khattab, who, when the Holy Prophet established
fraternal and brotherly ties between the companions, said:

'This ‘Ali is my brother in this world and in the hereafter. Among my
descendants he is my caliph; he is my successor (vicegerent) in my
community. He is the heir to my knowledge; he is the payer of my debt.
What belongs to him belongs to me; what belongs to me belongs to him;
his benefit is my benefit and his loss is my loss. He who is a friend of
his is really a friend of mine and he who is an enemy of his is really
an enemy of mine."

(2) Enquiry by Salman - Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi, ch. 15 of his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda has narrated twenty hadith in support of the
vicegerency of ‘Ali from Imam Tha'labi, Hamwaini, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim,
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Maghazili, Khawarizmi and Dailami. I submit some
of them for your guidance. He reports from Ahmad Ibn Hanbal's Musnad
(and Sibt Ibn Jauzi in his Tadhkirat al-Khawasu'l-Umma, p. 26, and Ibn
Maghazili Shafi'i in his Manaqib have also narrated these hadith) that
Anas Ibn Malik said:

"I asked Salman to ask the Holy Prophet who was his Wasi (vicegerent).
Salman asked the Holy Prophet 'O Prophet of Allah! Who is your
vicegerent?' The Holy Prophet said, 'O Salman! Who is Salman's
successor?' He said 'Yusha Ibn Nun.' Then the Holy Prophet said, 'My
successor and my heir, who will pay my debt and will fulfill my
promises, is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.'"

(3) Every prophet had a successor. ‘Ali is my successor. It is reported
from Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad, who quotes from Buraida that the Holy Prophet
said: "Every prophet had a successor and heir, and verily, my successor
and heir is ‘Ali." Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his
Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 62, p. 131 quotes the same hadith which has also
been narrated by Muhadith of Syria in his Ta'rikh.

(4) ‘Ali is the seal of vicegerents. Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini narrates
from Abu dharr Ghifari, who said, "The Holy Prophet said, I am the seal
of the prophets and you, O ‘Ali, are the seal of the vicegerents until
the day of judgement."

(5) ‘Ali is my vicegerent from my progeny. It is reported from Khatib
Khawarizmi, who reports from Ummu'l-Mu'minin Umm Salma, who said: "The
Holy Prophet said, 'Allah has selected a successor for every prophet and
after me my vicegerent from my progeny and my community is ‘Ali.'"

(6) ‘Ali asserts his position in a sermon. It is reported from Maghazili
Faqih Shafi'i, who narrates from Asbagh Ibn Nabuta, one of the chief
companions of Amiru'l-Mu'minin, and Muslim and Bukhari also have quoted
from him that his master Amiru'l-Mu'minin said in one of his sermons: "O
people! I am imam (guide) of the whole creation. I am the successor
(vicegerent) of the choicest of creatures; I am the father of the
completely pure and guiding progeny; I am brother of the Holy Prophet,
his successor, his trusted friend, and comrade.

I am the master of the believers; I am the leader of those who have
bright faces, bright hands and bright feet; I am the chief of all the
successors. To fight against me is to fight against Allah; to make peace
with me is to make peace with Allah. Obedience to me is obedience to
Allah; friendship with me is friendship with Allah; my followers are
friends of Allah; and my helpers are helpers of Allah."

(7) Allah made me prophet and ‘Ali my vicegerent. Also Ibn Maghazili
Shafi'i in his Manaqib quotes from Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud that the Prophet
of Allah said: "The message of prophethood ended with me and ‘Ali;
neither of us has ever prostrated before an idol; so Allah made me
prophet and ‘Ali the vicegerent."

(8) ‘Ali's vicegerency is part of the formula of allegiance to Holy
Prophet. Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i reports in his
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda IV, from Atba Ibn Amir Jahni, who said, "We
offered bayya (allegiance) to the Holy Prophet, acknowledging the fact
that there is no god but Allah. He is one and has no partner and verily
Muhammad is His prophet and ‘Ali is His vicegerent. So if we omit any of
these three things, we shall become unbelievers."

(9) I call people to truth and ‘Ali illuminates it. In the same
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, it is also recorded that the Holy Prophet said:
"Verily Allah has appointed a vicegerent for every prophet: Seth,
vicegerent of Adam; Joshua, vicegerent of Moses; Simon Peter vicegerent
of Christ; and ‘Ali, my vicegerent; and my vicegerent is superior to all
vicegerents. I call the people to truth and ‘Ali illuminates it."

Allah selected ‘Ali from among all men to be my vicegerent
----------------------------------------------------------

The author of Yanabi quotes from Manaqib of Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad
Khawarizmi, who narrates from Abu Ayyub Ansari, who said that when the
Prophet of Allah was lying ill, Fatima came and began to weep. Then the
Holy Prophet said: "O Fatima, you are particularly blessed by Allah who
has given you a husband whose Islam is foremost, whose knowledge is
superior to any one else's, and whose patience exceeds all others'
patience.

In fact Allah Almighty granted special favors to the people of this
world. From among them He selected and appointed me His Prophet and
Messenger. Then He granted another special blessing and from among the
people He selected your husband. And He revealed to me that I should
marry you to him and should make him my vicegerent."

Ahlul Bayt endowed with seven matchless qualities
-------------------------------------------------

After recording this hadith in his Manaqib, Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i
records these additional words of the Prophet: "O Fatima! We Ahlul Bayt
have been endowed with seven qualities, which none of the progenitors of
mankind have had, and none among their progeny will have. The most
exalted of the prophets belongs to us, and he is your father.

My vicegerent is superior to all other vicegerents, and he is your
husband. Our martyr excels all other martyrs and he is your uncle,
Hamza. From among us (Ahlul Bayt) there is a man who has two wings with
which he flies, whenever he likes, to Paradise, and he is your cousin,
Ja'far.

From us there are two grandsons who are the chiefs of the youths of
Paradise, and they are your sons. And I tell you, by Allah who controls
my life, that the Mahdi of this umma, behind whom Jesus, son of Mary,
will offer prayers, will be a descendant of yours."

Mahdi to fill the earth with justice
------------------------------------

Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Hamwaini, after narrating this hadith, has quoted
these additional sentences:

After naming the Mahdi, the Prophet said: "He will fill this world with
justice when it will have been full of cruelty and tyranny. O Fatima! Do
not be sad and do not weep. Because of my love and respect for you,
Allah Almighty is more kind to you than I. He has bestowed on you a
husband of the highest spiritual attainment, most exalted in family
rank, most gracious to the people, most equitable in dealing with men's
affairs, and most accurate in his decisions."

I think this much is sufficient to satisfy the curiosity of Nawab Sahib
and to remove the misunderstanding of Sheikh Sahib.

At the time of his death, the head of the Holy Prophet was on the chest of Amiru'l-Mu'minin (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As for the claim that at the time of the Prophet's death, his head was
on the chest of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha, it is not true. Your own ulama’
point out that at the time of the Holy Prophet's death his head rested
on the chest of Amiru'l-Mu'minin.

Sheikh: In what book have our ulama’ recorded this fact?

Well-Wisher: Read Kanzu'l-Ummal, Vol. IV, p. 55 and vol. VI, pp. 392 and
400; the Tabaqa of Muhammad Ibn Sa'd Katib, part II, p. 51; Hakim
Nishapuri's Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 139; Talkhis al-Dhahab; Sunan of Ibn
Shabih; the Kabir of Tabrani, Musnad of Imam Hanbal, Vol. III;
Hilyatu'l-Auliya of Hafiz Abu Nu'aim.

With minor differences in wording, all of these works narrate from
Ummu'l-Mu'minin Umm Salma and Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari that at the time
of his death, the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali and rested his head on ‘Ali's
chest until he (the Prophet) died.

In addition to these reports, there is Amiru'l-Mu'minin's own statement,
which is recorded in his Nahju'l-Balagha. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Vol. II, p. 561 states that the Holy Imam clearly
said: "Verily, the soul of the Holy Prophet departed from this world
while his head rested on my chest; he breathed his last while he was in
my hands.

So I rubbed my hands on my face." Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Vol. II, p. 562, of
his book comments on this statement of ‘Ali, that when the Holy
Prophet's head rested on ‘Ali's chest, some drops of the Prophet's blood
flowed down, which ‘Ali rubbed on his own face.

And on page 590 of the same book, in the course of his writing about the
burial of Fatima, he says that ‘Ali, addressing the Holy Prophet, said,
"Verily, I laid you to rest in the grave; your soul had departed between
my neck and my chest."

All these authentic records and weighty arguments clearly prove that
A’ysha's version cannot be accepted. It is a known fact that A’ysha
opposed Amiru'l-Mu'minin from the very beginning. Allah willing, I will
tell about this also when the occasion requires it.

Inquiring about immediate succession or vicegerency
---------------------------------------------------

These hadith clearly indicate that Allah appointed the prophets and the
vicegerents. He also appointed ‘Ali as the Holy Prophet's vicegerent.
Moreover, "successor" here refers to the caliphate, and not merely a
family successor. Therefore the vicegerent was granted full authority
over individuals and society in all their affairs, the same authority as
the Prophet possessed.

All your notable ulama’ have acknowledged this guardianship of the umma,
which was assigned to ‘Ali. No one has denied it except the few
fanatical and hostile individuals, who have refused to accept the high
merits of the Holy Imam.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Vol. I (printed in
Egypt): "According to us there is no doubt that ‘Ali was the wasi
(vicegerent) of the Holy Prophet, and only that man opposes this fact
who, in our opinion, has a grudge or enmity against him."

Couplets of some companions about the vicegerency
-------------------------------------------------

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid quotes a number of couplets which confirm the
vicegerency of Amiru'l-Mu'minin. Among them are two couplets of Abdullah
Ibn Abbas, who said: "Apart from your being one of the Ahlul Bayt, you
are also his wasi (vicegerent) and when somebody challenges you on the
battlefield, you are the best warrior."

He quotes the couplets of Khazima Ibn Thabit: "Apart from the fact that
you are included in the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet you are also his
immediate successor (vicegerent), and you are a witness to whatever came
to him." He also quotes the couplet of the companion, Abu'l-Hakim Tihan,
who said: "Verily, it is the immediate successor (vicegerent) of the
Holy Prophet who is our imam and our master. The curtain has been raised
and the secrets have been revealed."

This is perhaps sufficient. If you want to see other couplets on this
point you may study the same book. As Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says, if he had
not feared extending the work unduly, he would have filled many more
pages with such couplets confirming the vicegerency of ‘Ali.

It follows however, that Vicegerency and Prophethood are
inter-dependent. This is a stage after the rank of Prophethood and this
is what is meant by Divine Sovereignty.

Holy Prophet's will concerning ‘Ali’s vicegerency exists in all authentic books
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: If these reports are correct, why do we not find any such record
of the Will and Testament of the Holy Prophet, as we have those left by
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar at the time of their death?

Well-Wisher: You could easily learn about these matters from the
authentic Shi’as works, which have recorded them with unanimity of
opinion from the Ahlul Bayt, but since we agreed on the first night not
to have recourse to one-sided traditions, I am obliged to refer to some
of the traditions which are found in your own authentic books such as
those of Tabaqa of Ibn Sa'd, Vol. II, p. 61, 63; Kanzu'l-Ummal of ‘Ali
Muttaqi, Vol. IV, p.54, and Volume VI, pp. 155, 393, 403; Musnad of Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Vol. IV, p 164; and Mustadrak of Hakim, Vol. III, pp
59, 111.

Besides these, your eminent scholars, like Baihaqi in his Sunan and
Dala'il, Ibn Abdu'l-Barr in his Isti'ab, Tabrani in his Kabir and Ibn
Mardawiyya in his Ta'rikh as well as others have recorded in different
words the directions and instructions of the Holy Prophet, who said: "O
‘Ali! You are my brother and my minister; you will pay off my debt. You
will fulfill my promises and will discharge my responsibilities. You
will wash my dead body, pay my debt, and deposit me in the grave." Apart
from these explicit reports, there are a large number of other firmans
or ordinances, which were pronounced by the Prophet in this regard.

Holy Prophet was prevented from writing his will at the time of his death
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: The Holy Qur'an says,

***"Bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you if he
leaves behind wealth for parents and near relations, according to usage,
a duty (incumbent) upon those who guard (against evil)." (1:180)***

Therefore it was necessary for the Prophet to make his will and appoint
his immediate successor. When he saw his death approaching why did he
not make his will as Abu Bakr and ‘Umar did?

Well-Wisher: First, by the words "when death approaches one of you" do
you mean the last moments of life? At that time there is hardly anyone
who is in his right mind and is able to perform his duties consciously.
Certainly this passage refers to the time when the signs and symptoms of
old age, infirmity and disease are appearing.

Second, this statement of yours has again wounded my feelings and
reminded me of a tragedy which cannot be forgotten, my Holy grandfather,
the Prophet of Allah, stressed the importance of Muslims making a will.

He said: "He who dies without making a will dies the death of ignorance,
lest there should be discord among the heirs." During the 23 years of
his public life he repeatedly announced who was his 'wasi,' the one whom
Allah had ordained as vicegerent.

When he himself was on his death bed, he desired to repeat what he had
so often declared so that the Community might not be misled and fall
into warring factions. It is a pity that the political jugglers opposed
him and prevented him from performing his religious duty. The result was
that you, too, have an occasion to ask why the Prophet did not make a
will.

Disobedience to Holy Prophet's command unbelievable
---------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: I think this statement of yours has no factual basis. Certainly
no one could prevent the prophet from performing his duty. The Holy
Qur'an clearly says:

***"Whatever the apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back." (59:7)***

Also in several other verses obedience to the Holy Prophet has been made
obligatory. For instance, Allah says: "Obey Allah and obey the Prophet."

Obviously, refusing to obey the Prophet of Allah is infidelity. Hence
the Companions and the followers of the Prophet could not prevent him
declaring his Will. Possibly it is a forged report, which has been
circulated by the unbelievers to prove the recklessness of the umma.

Authentic reports concerning the Prophet's being prevented from making his will
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Please don't pretend to be ignorant. This is not a forged
report. It is a recognized report, which all Islamic sects accept. Even
Bukhari and Muslim, who have been strictly cautious about any such
report, which might threaten their own point of view, have narrated this
event in their books of hadith.

They write that the Holy Prophet, while on his death bed, asked for
paper and ink so that he might have certain instructions recorded for
them which would preserve them from going astray after he died. Some of
those present, incited by a politician, caused such disturbance that the
Holy Prophet became extremely annoyed and ordered them to go away.

Sheikh: I cannot for a moment believe this. Who could be so bold as to
oppose the Prophet of Allah? Even if an ordinary man wishes to write his
will, no one can prevent him. How could anybody prevent the Holy Prophet
from making his will? To disobey him is infidelity.

Since the will of the great ones of a community is a source of guidance,
no one would prevent it from being executed. Caliphs Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
made their wills, and no one prevented them from doing so. I repeat, I
do not accept such a report.

Well-Wisher: You may believe it or not. In fact every Muslim is
surprised to hear it. Every one, of whatever race or community he may
be, is dumbfounded to hear of such an event.

Ibn Abbas weeping because the Holy Prophet was prevented from writing his will
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not a matter of grief for you and us alone. The companions of the
Holy Prophet also lamented this tragic event. Bukhari, Muslim, and other
prominent ulama’ of your sect have reported that Abdullah Ibn Abbas
often shed tears and said: "Alas! That Thursday! Alas! How it was on
that Thursday!" Then he wept so much that the ground became wet with his
tears. People asked him what had happened on Thursday that caused him to
weep.

He replied that when the Holy Prophet lay on his death bed he asked for
paper and ink so that he might write a will, which would prevent them
from going astray after him, some of those present prevented him from
doing so and even said that the Holy Prophet was talking nonsense (may
Allah forgive me!). That Thursday cannot be forgotten. They did not
allow the Holy Prophet to write his will and they injured him with their
words.

‘Umar prevented the Holy Prophet from writing his will
------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Who prevented the Prophet of Allah from making his will?

Well-Wisher: It was the second caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, who prevented
the Holy Prophet from making his will.

Sheikh: I am thankful that you have put me at ease. These statements
trouble me. I was inclined to say that these reports have been forged by
the Shi’as, but I kept quiet out of respect for you. Now I tell you what
is in my heart. I advise you not to spread such concocted stories.

Well-Wisher: I advise you not to accept or reject facts without proper
consideration. You have made undue haste in this matter and have charged
the innocent Shi’as with forgery. Your own books are full of reports
which support our point of view.

Sources of hadith of "Prevention of will"
-----------------------------------------

If you consult your own books, you will find that your own accredited
ulama’ have narrated this event. For instance Bukhari, in his Sahih,
vol.II, p. 118; Muslim, in his Sahih (end of his Kitab al-Wasiyya);
Hamidi in Jam'i Bainu's-Sahihain, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, in his Musnad,
vol.I, p. 222, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.
II, p. 563; Kirmani, in his Sharh al-Sahih Bukhari; Nuwi in his Sharh
al-Muslim; Ibn Hajar, in his Sawa'iq; Qazi Abu ‘Ali; Qazi Ruzbahan; Qazi
Ayaz; Imam Ghazali, Qutbu'd-din Shafi'i; Muhammad Ibn Abu'l-Karim
Shahrastani, Ibn Athir; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani; Sibt Ibn Jauzi; and
others of your ulama’ in general have confirmed this tragic episode.

They have written that the Holy Prophet on returning from his last
pilgrimage fell ill. When a group of the companions came to see him, he
said: "Bring me ink, and paper, so that I may write for you a will which
will not let you go astray after me."

‘Umar said: "This man is speaking nonsense, the Qur’an is sufficient for us"
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ghazali has written in his Sirru'l-Alamin, Maqala IV, from which
Sibt Ibn Jauzi also quotes in his Tadhkirat, p. 36, and many others of
your eminent ulama’ have reported that the Holy Prophet asked the people
to bring him ink and paper and according to some reports he said:

"Bring me ink and paper so that I may remove from your minds all doubts
about the caliphate after me; that is so that I may tell you who
deserves the caliphate after me." At this point they write, ‘Umar said,
"Leave this man for he is really talking nonsense (may Allah forgive
me!); the Book of Allah is sufficient for us."

The Holy Prophet orders the quarreling companions to leave him
--------------------------------------------------------------

Some of the companions agreed with ‘Umar, and some agreed with the Holy
Prophet. There was so much chaos and confusion that the Holy Prophet
said: "Get away from me; it is not proper to become angry near me."

This was the first disturbance among the Muslims in the presence of the
Holy Prophet in all of his 23 years of his strenuous service. The cause
of this trouble was Caliph ‘Umar, who sowed the seeds of discord among
the Muslims. Today you and I, two brothers in Islam, are consequently
facing each other in opposition.

To call the holy prophet "this man" was great insolence
-------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: It was not expected of a man like you to be so bold as to utter
slander about such an eminent person as Caliph ‘Umar.

Well-Wisher: Tell us whether I showed any boldness in narrating
historical facts from your own book. Do you think that Caliph ‘Umar was
bold when he prevented the Prophet from writing his will? Was he bold
when he abused the Prophet to his face? A poet has rightly said: "You
see the mote in my eyes, but you do not see the beam in your own." Does
Allah Almighty not say: "Muhammad is not father of any of your men, but
the Prophet of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets?"

The name of the Holy Prophet should always be pronounced with due
respect and deference. He should be called "the Prophet of Allah or the
Seal of the Prophets." But ‘Umar showed no regard for the divine
ordinance, instead referring to the Holy Prophet as "this man." Now
please say in Allah's name whether insolence was committed by me or by
the Caliph?

The word 'hajar' used by ‘Umar means nonsense
---------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Why do you say that "hajar" means "nonsense?"

Well-Wisher: All commentators and your great ulama’ give the meaning of
Hajar as "nonsense." For instance Ibn Athir in his Jam'u'l-Usul, Ibn
Hajar in his Sharh-i-Sahih Bukhari, and the authors of other
compilations of hadith give the same meaning. Respected Sir! If somebody
says "this man is uttering nonsense" about the Holy Prophet of Allah has
he not violated manners and the injunction of the Holy Qur'an?

Insolence against Holy Prophet is infidelity
--------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet had not lost his prophethood or his infallibility. If
someone describes his words as "nonsense," does it not mean that such a
person was a disbeliever in Allah and the Holy Prophet?

Sheikh: Is it proper in light of his rank as a caliph to find fault with
him saying that he did not believe in Allah and the Holy Prophet?

Well-Wisher: When you hear that the Prophet is accused of uttering
nonsense you do not object. But when a man who occupied the caliphate is
cited by many of your own ulama’ as having insulted the Prophet, you
immediately fault the Shi’as rather than place the fault where it
rightly belongs.

Your own ulama’ such as Qazi Ayaz; Shafi'i in his Kitab al-Shifa;
Kirmani in his Sharh al-Sahih Bukhari, and Nuwi in his Sharh al-Sahih
Muslim have written that the man who used these words clearly had no
belief in the Prophet of Allah. So if anybody opposes the Holy Prophet,
particularly with abusive words or saying that he was talking nonsense,
we see clearly that he had no belief in the Messenger of Allah.

First mischief in Islam in the presence of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------------------

You asked me why I charged him with creating discord among the people.
Your own ulama’ have admitted this fact. The great scholar Husain
Meibudi says in his Sharh al-Diwan that the first disturbance in Islam
happened in the presence of the Holy Prophet himself, when he was on his
deathbed. The trouble began when ‘Umar prevented the Prophet from
writing his will.

Shahrastani says in his book Milal wa Nihal, Muqaddama IV, that the
first antagonism between groups of Muslims began when ‘Umar refused to
allow ink and paper to be brought to the Prophet on his deathbed. Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid confirms this fact in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Vol. II,
p. 563.

Could the Holy Prophet speak nonsense?
--------------------------------------

Sheikh: If Caliph ‘Umar said these words, I do not find it discourteous.
When a man is seriously ill he may become delirious. If he speaks
incoherently, we might refer to his speech as nonsense. In this matter
there is no difference between the Holy Prophet and other men.

Well-Wisher: You are well aware that all prophets are infallible and
that this characteristic remains until death. The Prophet Muhammad was
certainly infallible on this occasion when he said he wanted to prevent
his people from going astray after his death.

If you attend to the Holy verses of the Qur'an which say: "And he speaks
not of (his own) inclination; It (the wording) is naught but a
revelation revealed (to him)," "And you should follow what the Prophet
enjoins upon you," "And obey Allah and obey the Prophet," you will
yourself clearly understand that preventing the ink and paper from being
brought to the Holy Prophet was really opposition to Allah. That it is
an admitted fact that the word "nonsense" was open abuse, and the
Caliph's pointing him out as "this man" was still more insulting.

Words "this man speaks nonsense" were most insulting
----------------------------------------------------

Now I would like you to tell me how you would feel if somebody in this
assembly, pointing at you, were to say "this man is uttering nonsense."
You and I are not faultless and we can talk nonsense. Would you call it
good manners or insulting? If such talk is insulting in this case, you
will have to admit that any such impudence against the Holy Prophet was
highly insulting.

And nobody can deny the fact that it is the religious duty of every
Muslim to keep aloof from a man whose behavior towards the Holy Prophet
was so offensive and insolent, when Allah has clearly called him in the
Holy Qur'an His Prophet and Seal of the Prophets. If you would abandon
your prejudice, what would your common sense say about a man who instead
of looking to the Holy Prophet as the Prophet of Allah and Seal of the
Prophets said, "This man is uttering nonsense?"

A caliph cannot be exonerated for disobeying the Holy Prophet
-------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Suppose we admit that he was at fault. But since he was the
Caliph of the Prophet and he had exercised his discretion for the
security of religion he was free from all blame.

Well-Wisher: First, your remark that since he was the Caliph of the
Prophet and he exercised his discretion is quite irrelevant, because on
the day on which he said those words, he was not the Caliph. Perhaps he
had not even dreamed of it.

Second, your remark that he exercised his discretion is also
astonishing. Have you not considered that in face of an explicit
injunction, discretion has no place? In fact it is a fault for which one
cannot be exonerated.

Third, you said that he did so for the security of the religion. It is
really astonishing that ulama’ like you should lose all sense of
justice.

The Holy Prophet, not ‘Umar was responsible for the security of the religion
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Respected Sir! Who was responsible for the preservation of religion -
the Prophet of Allah or ‘Umar Ibn Khattab? Does your common sense accept
the point that the Holy Prophet (after stating the condition "You will
not go astray after this writing of the will") might not know that the
writing of the will was against the religion, or that ‘Umar Ibn Khattab
was better aware of it and prevented the Holy Prophet from writing his
will? How incredible!

You know very well that any digression from the essentials of religion
is a great sin, and it cannot be condoned.

Sheikh: There is no doubt that Caliph ‘Umar had assessed the conditions
and circumstances prevailing in the religion and had come to the
conclusion that if the Holy Prophet wrote anything, great differences
and disturbances would be caused. So it was for the support and benefit
of the Holy Prophet himself that he prevented ink and paper from being
brought to him.

Well-Wisher: The purpose of your argument seems to be that the Holy
Prophet, who was infallible, while he instructed his community, was not
sufficiently aware of the potential for conflict after his death, and
that ‘Umar guided him in this case. But the Qur'an tells us:

"And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and his Messenger have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he
surely strays off a manifest straying."(33:36) Caliph ‘Umar disobeyed
the Holy Prophet's order, preventing him from writing his will.
Moreover, he was insolent to say that the Prophet was uttering nonsense.
This outrage so injured the Holy Prophet's feelings that he asked the
people to get away from him.

Holy Qur’an alone is not sufficient for our guidance
----------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: But the good intention of the Caliph is apparent from his last
words "The Book of Allah is sufficient for us" (i.e., we do not stand in
need of the writing of the Prophet of Allah)

Well-Wisher: Actually, these words are the best proof of his lack of
belief and his ignorance of the Holy Qur'an. If he had known the reality
of the Holy Qur'an, he would have known that the Qur'an alone is not
sufficient for all matters. It has laid down essential tenets, but
detailed explanations are left to its interpreters and commentators. The
Qur'an contains orders which are current (nasikh), abrogated (mansukh),
general ('am), particular (khass), limited (muqayyad), comparative
(mutashabih), absolute (mutlaq), synoptic (mujmal), or clear (mu'awwil).

How is it possible for an ordinary man to derive full advantage from
this Qur'an without the help of divine blessings and interpretations
given by its exponents? If the Qur'an alone were sufficient for the
Community, why was this verse revealed: "You should do whatever the
Prophet of Allah enjoins upon you to do; and you should abstain from
whatever he prohibits you from." Allah also says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"And if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in
authority among them, those among them who can search out the knowledge
of it would have known it." (4:83)***

It follows from this that the Holy Qur'an alone would not serve its
purpose without the commentaries of its exponents, that is, Muhammad and
his pure descendants. Here I may refer again to the accepted hadith
(which I have quoted with some of its sources on previous nights) which
the Holy Prophet repeated even at the time of his demise saying: "I
leave behind me Two Great Things: The Book of Allah and my Ahlul Bayt.

If you adhere to these two, never, never shall you go astray after me;
for verily these two will never be separated from one another until they
meet me at the spring of Kauthar."

The Holy Prophet, who was inspired by Allah, did not consider the Qur'an
in isolation sufficient for our salvation. He said that we should be
attached to the Qur'an and the Ahlul Bayt, as they would not be
separated from each other till the Day of Judgment, and that these were
sources of guidance for the people. But ‘Umar said that the Qur'an alone
is sufficient for us. This shows that he not only discarded the Holy
Progeny but also rejected the command of the Holy Prophet.

Holy Qur’an also asks us to consult Ahlul dhikr, that is, Ahlul Bayt
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Who should we obey in this case? No sensible man would say that we
should leave aside the order of the Holy Prophet and follow ‘Umar. Then
why did you accept ‘Umar's opinion, ignoring the order of the Holy
Prophet? If the Book of Allah were sufficient, why were we ordered to
ask the people of dhikr, as the Holy Qur'an says:

***"So ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know." (16:43)***

It is evident that 'dhikr' means the Holy Prophet or the Holy Qur'an and
'the people of dhikr' means the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet.

I have already clarified in previous nights with valid arguments and
authentic sources that your prominent ulama’, like Suyuti and others,
have recorded that the "people of dhikr" means Ahlul Bayt.

Qutbu'd-din shirazi's objection to ‘Umar's words
------------------------------------------------

Qutbu'd-din Shirazi, who is one of your eminent scholars, says in his
book Kashfu'l-Ghuyub: "It is an admitted fact that we cannot make
progress on the way without a guide. We wonder at Caliph ‘Umar's claim
that, since we have the Qur'an in our midst, we do not stand in need of
any guide. It is just like a man saying that, since we have books of
medicine, we do not require a physician. Obviously it is a false
assertion because a man who cannot solve his problems by reading the
books of medicine must consult a physician.

The same thing holds true in the case of the Holy Qur'an. Everyone
cannot derive advantage from it through his ability. He must necessarily
turn to those who have knowledge of the Holy Qur'an."

The Holy Qur'an says:

***"And if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in
authority among them, those among*** ***them who can search out the
knowledge of it would have known it." (4:83)***

In fact the real book is the heart of one who possesses knowledge, as
the Holy Qur'an says:

***"Nay these are clear communications in the breasts of those who are
granted knowledge." (29:49)***

Accordingly, ‘Ali said: "I am the speaking Book of Allah, and this
Qur'an is the mute book."

So according to the people of knowledge ‘Umar was mistaken. It was a
great injustice to the Holy Prophet of Allah that he was prevented from
writing his will.

Abu bakr was not prevented from writing his will
------------------------------------------------

With regard to your repeated claim that Abu Bakr and ‘Umar were not
prevented from writing their wills, I admit it is true. It is
surprising, as all your historians and traditionists have recorded in
their authentic books that Caliph Abu Bakr, at the time of his death,
asked Uthman Ibn Affan to write down what he (Abu Bakr) was saying. It
was his will. He wrote down whatever Abu Bakr dictated to him. ‘Umar and
others were also present on this occasion. No one objected. ‘Umar did
not say: "The Book of Allah is sufficient for us; we do not need Abu
Bakr's will." But he did not allow the Holy Prophet of Allah to write
his will.

This shows that all this insulting behavior and preventing the Holy
Prophet from writing his will was nothing but political conspiracy.

Ibn Abbas was perfectly justified in weeping. The entire Muslim world
should shed tears of blood. If the Prophet had been given the chance to
write his will, the question of the caliphate would have been clearly
resolved. The previous pronouncements of the Holy Prophet would have
been confirmed. But the politicians revolted against him and stood in
his way.

Sheikh: Why do you claim that the Holy Prophet wanted to say something
about the caliphate?

Well-Wisher: Before the Prophet died, all essential religious laws were
revealed. The verse of the "Perfection of Religion" made this clear. Of
course the matter of the caliphate was such that he wanted to make
certain that there would be no confusion regarding it.

I have already told you that Imam Ghazali in his Sirru'l-Alamin (Maqala
IV) has recorded that the Holy Prophet said: "Bring me ink and paper so
that I may remove from your minds any doubts about the caliphate and
that I may repeat to you who deserves that rank.

"His words "so that you may not go astray after me" prove that the aim
of his will was the guidance of the community. In the matter of
guidance, no emphasis was required except in regard to the caliphate and
the imamate.

Apart from this we do not stress the point that the Holy Prophet wanted
to say something about the caliphate or imamate. Certainly he wanted to
write something concerning the guidance of the people so that they might
not go astray after him. Then why was he not allowed to make his will?
Even supposing that preventing him from doing so was proper, was it also
necessary to insult and abuse him?

So it is clear that ‘Ali was Holy Prophet's immediate successor
---------------------------------------------------------------

These things make it quite clear that ‘Ali was the immediate successor
of the Prophet of Allah. Although the latter repeatedly proclaimed this
fact in the past, he wanted at this last stage to record it in his will
so that the responsibilities of the Community might be made secure. But
the politicians knew what he wanted to do, so they prevented him from
doing so and insulted him.

The Holy Prophet had emphasized in many hadith that Allah Almighty
appointed vicegerents for the Holy prophets: Adam, Noah, Moses, Jesus
and others, and that He appointed for him his vicegerent, ‘Ali.

He also said, "‘Ali is my immediate successor (vicegerent) after me in
my Ahlul Bayt and my community."

Sheikh: If these reports are taken to be true, they are not narrated
with perfect continuity. How can you derive authority from them?

Well-Wisher: The unanimity of opinion concerning the Prophet's will
according to us is proved by the statements of the Holy Progeny of the
Holy Prophet. Moreover, you may recall that I told you on previous
nights that your ulama’ regard a lone report as valid. Besides, in these
reports, if there is no exact agreement of wording, there is certainly
agreement of general meaning.

Hadith 'la nuris' rejected
--------------------------

Besides, you attach undue importance to continuity of reports. When you
are silenced by our arguments, you take shelter behind the need for
continuity. Can you prove the continuity of the hadith 'la nuris' (we
leave no heirs)? You yourself admit that the narrator of this hadith was
Abu Bakr or Aus Ibn Hadasan. But millions of monotheists and sincere
Muslims in every age have rejected this so-called hadith. The best proof
of the falsity of this hadith is that it was rejected by the gate of the
knowledge of the Holy Prophet, ‘Ali, and by the entire progeny of the
Holy Prophet. These people have proved that the hadith was concocted.

As I have already said earlier, the Holy Prophet said: "For every
prophet there is a vicegerent and heir; verily, ‘Ali is my vicegerent
and heir."

Caliphate belongs to the heir of knowledge
------------------------------------------

If you say that their inheritance did not mean inheritance of wealth but
that of knowledge (although it has been proven that they meant
inheritance of wealth) my point of view becomes clearer. The heir of the
Prophet's knowledge deserved the position of caliphate more than any one
of those who were devoid of the Holy Prophet's knowledge.

Second, it has been proven that the Prophet made ‘Ali his immediate
successor and heir, according to the hadith narrated by your own ulama’.
Allah appointed him to this rank. Could the Prophet have neglected to
tell his successor and heir?

Moreover, it is very strange that in resolving questions regarding
religious laws Abu Bakr and ‘Umar accepted ‘Ali's decisions. Your own
ulama’ and historians have recorded the judgments pronounced by ‘Ali
during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman.

Hafiz: It is very strange that you claim that the caliphs did not know
the religious ordinances and that ‘Ali used to remind them.

Well-Wisher; There is nothing strange about it. To know all the
ordinances is very difficult. It would not be possible for a man to have
such perfect knowledge unless he were the Prophet of Allah or the 'Gate
of Knowledge' of the Holy Prophet. Your own great ulama’ have recorded
these facts in their authentic books. I cite an example so that
uninformed men may not think that we say these things to offend them.

‘Ali's verdict concerning a woman who gave birth to a child after a six-month pregnancy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ahmad Hanbal in his Musnad; Imamu'l-Haram Ahmad Ibn Abdullah
Shafi'i in his Dhakha'ir al-Uqba; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha; and Sheikh Sulayman Hanafi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda,
Ch.56, quoting from Ahmad Ibn Abdullah; Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Qala'i; and
Ibn Saman report the following incident:

"‘Umar wanted to stone a woman because she had given birth to a child
after a six-month pregnancy. ‘Ali said, 'Allah says in the Holy Qur'an
that the time, from conception till the prescribed time of suckling,
covers a period of thirty months. Since the suckling period is for two
years, the period of pregnancy is six months. This means that a birth of
a child is possible after a pregnancy of six months.' So ‘Umar set the
woman free and said, 'If ‘Ali had not been there, ‘Umar would have
perished.'"

In the same chapter he quotes from Ahmad Ibn Hanbal's Manaqib: "When
‘Umar faced a difficult problem and was unable to understand it, he
relied upon ‘Ali's understanding." A number of such events took place
during the caliphate of Abu Bakr and Uthman. When they became entangled
in some difficulty, they called ‘Ali as the real arbiter. They
themselves acted according to his decision.

Now you may wonder why they did not accept ‘Ali's evidence in the case
of Fadak. Now in that case they chose to follow their own desires and
snatched away the right of Fatima.

Hadith 'la nuris' not applied to other properties
-------------------------------------------------

The third argument to prove the falsity of this hadith is Caliph Abu
Bakr's own statement and action. If the hadith were correct, whatever
the Holy Prophet had left would have been confiscated. The heirs would
have had no right over anything left behind, but Abu Bakr gave Fatima's
apartment to her and also gave the apartments of the wives of the Holy
Prophet, A’ysha, Hafsa, and others to them as their heritage.

Abu Bakr's returning fadak to Fatima and ‘Umar's intervention
-------------------------------------------------------------

Besides this, if the hadith were correct and if Abu Bakr believed that
it was the Holy Prophet's ordinance, then why, after confiscating Fadak
(which he considered to be charity belonging to the Muslims) did he
write a document that the property be returned to Fatima? Later Caliph
‘Umar intervened and destroyed the document.

Hafiz: This is a unique statement. I have never heard that the Caliph
returned Fadak. What is the source of this report?

Well-Wisher: By now you are probably aware that I never make a claim
which I cannot fully support. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha and ‘Ali Ibn Burhanu'd-din Shafi'i in his Ta'rikh
Siratu'l-Halabiyya, vol. III, p. 391, write that Abu Bakr was moved to
tears by Fatima's impassioned speech. He wept because of Fatima's plight
and subsequently wrote a document stating that the property be returned
to her. But ‘Umar destroyed the document.

It is however surprising that the same ‘Umar, who during Abu Bakr's
caliphate objected to the returning of Fadak, returned it to its heirs
during his own caliphate. Similarly the Amawid and Abbasid caliphs also
returned it to the heirs of Fatima.

Hafiz: What you say is indeed very surprising. How is it possible that
Caliph ‘Umar who, according to your statement, had so bitterly
interfered in the return of Fadak to Fatima returned it to the heirs of
Fatima?

Well-Wisher: Surprising it is, of course. I submit, with your
permission, the reports of your accredited ulama’ on the authority of
the caliphs who returned and took back Fadak.

Caliph's returning Fadak to descendants of Fatima
-------------------------------------------------

The well known traditionist and historian of Medina, Allama Samhudi
(died 911 A.H.), in his Ta'rikhu'l-Medina and Yaqut Ibn Abdullah Rumi in
his Mu'ajamu'l-Buldan, state that during his caliphate, Abu Bakr took
possession of Fadak. ‘Umar, during his reign, returned it to ‘Ali and
Abbas. If Abu Bakr occupied it on the order of the Holy Prophet and
considered it the property of the Muslims, on what principle did ‘Umar
entrust the property of all the Muslims to a single individual?

Sheikh: Perhaps his intention in releasing the property to a single
individual was that it would remain in the custody of the Muslims.

Well-Wisher: Sometimes a witness is cleverer than the plaintiff for whom
he gives evidence. The Caliph had no such idea. If the property had been
returned for the expenses of the Muslims, it must have been so recorded
in history. But all your prominent historians write that it was released
in favor of ‘Ali and Abbas. ‘Ali accepted Fadak as its rightful heir,
not as an individual Muslim. One Muslim may not possess the property of
all the Muslims.

Returning Fadak by ‘Umar ibn Abdu'l-aziz
----------------------------------------

Sheikh: Perhaps the reference is to ‘Umar Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz.

Well-Wisher: ‘Ali and Abbas were not alive during the time of ‘Umar Ibn
Abdu'l-Aziz. That is a separate story. Allama Samhudi in his
Ta'rikhu'l-Medina and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha,
vol. IV, p. 81, narrate from Abu Bakr Jauhari that when ‘Umar Ibn
Abdu'l-Aziz occupied the seat of the caliphate, he wrote to his governor
at Medina to return Fadak to the descendants of Fatima. Accordingly, he
called Hasan Ibn Hasanu'l-Mujtaba (and according to some reports he
called Imam ‘Ali Ibnu'l-Husain) and returned Fadak to him.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes about it in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.
IV, p.81, in the following words: "This was the first property which was
snatched away unjustly and then was given over to the descendants of
Fatima by ‘Umar Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz."

It remained in their possession for a long time until Caliph Yazid Ibn
Abdu'l-Malik usurped it again. Then the Bani Umayya occupied it. When
the caliphate went to the Bani Abbas, the first Abbasid Caliph, Abdullah
Saffa, entrusted Fadak to the descendants of Imam Hasan, who distributed
its income, according to the rights of inheritance, to the descendants
of Fatima.

Returning Fadak to descendants of Fatima by Abdullah Mahdi and Mamun, the Abbasid
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Mansur persecuted the descendants of Imam Hasan, he snatched away
Fadak from them again. When his son, Mahdi, became the caliph, he
returned it to them. When Musa ibn Hadi became the caliph, he again
usurped Fadak. When Mamunu'r-Rashid the Abbasid occupied the seat of the
caliphate, he ordered Fadak to be released to the descendants of ‘Ali.

Yaqut Hamawi quotes Mamun's order in his Mu'ajamu'l-Buldan. Mamun wrote
to his governor at Medina: "Verily, the Holy Prophet of Allah bequeathed
Fadak to his daughter, Fatima. This fact was established and commonly
known to the descendants of the Holy Prophet."

The well known poet, Di'bal Khuza'i, was also present at this time. He
recited some couplets, the first of which means: "Today we are all happy
and rejoicing. Mamun has returned Fadak to the Bani Hashim."

Proof that Fadak had been given to Fatima
-----------------------------------------

It has been proved by irrefutable arguments that Fadak had been given by
the Holy Prophet to Fatima. It was usurped without any justification.
But later caliphs, on grounds of justice or for political
considerations, returned it to the descendants of that oppressed lady.

Hafiz: If Fadak was bestowed upon her as a gift, why did she claim it as
her heritage and not say anything about a gift?

Well-Wisher: At first she claimed it as a gift. But when witnesses were
required from the property's occupants, in contradiction to the
injunction of the Holy Prophet of Islam, she produced witnesses. Their
evidence was rejected. She was thereby forced to seek protection under
the law of inheritance.

Hafiz; I am afraid you are mistaken. We have not seen any record of
Fatima's claim that Fadak was a gift.

Well-Wisher: No, I am not mistaken. This fact is recorded not only in
Shi’as books, but also in those written by your own prominent ulama’. It
is recorded in Siratu'l-Halabiyya, p.39, compiled by ‘Ali Ibn
Burhanu'd-din Halabi Shafi'i (died 1044 A.H.) that at first Fatima
remonstrated with Abu Bakr that she owned Fadak and that it had been
given to her by the Holy Prophet of Allah. Since witnesses were not
available, she was forced to claim her right according to the law of
inheritance.

Also Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi in his Tafsir al-Kabir concerning the claim
of Fatima; Yaqut Hamawi in his Mu'ajamu'l-Buldan; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.IV, p. 80, from Abu Bakr
Jauhari and the fanatical Ibn Hajar in Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p.21, under
the heading Shuhubhat al-Rafza, VII Shubha, narrate that the first claim
of Fatima was that Fadak had been a gift. When her witnesses were
rejected, she was much pained and said in anger that she would not talk
to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar again.

And so it was...she never saw them again and did not speak to them. When
the time of her demise approached, she specified in her will that none
of these people was to take part in her funeral prayers. Her uncle,
Abbas, offered the funeral prayers, and she was laid to rest at night.
According to Shi’as sources and according to the statements of the Holy
Imams, ‘Ali performed the funeral prayers.

Contention that Abu Bakr acted according to "Verse of Evidence" and its reply
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hafiz: Of course there is no doubt that Fatima was very displeased, but
Abu Bakr Siddiq is not much to blame. He was obliged to act according to
the manifest code of religion. Since the "Verse of Evidence" is of
general significance, and a claimant must produce two men, or one man
and two women, or four women as witnesses, and since in this case the
number of witnesses was not sufficient, the Caliph could not give
judgment in favor of Fatima.

Well-Wisher: Hafiz Sahib has said that the Caliph was obliged to act
according to religious ordinances, and since complete evidence was not
available he could not pronounce judgment. I will respond to his point,
and I ask you to be fair in evaluating my comment.

To demand witnesses from occupants was against religious law
------------------------------------------------------------

First, you said Abu Bakr was 'compelled under religious law.' Will you
please tell me which religious ordinance demands witnesses from one who
is in possession of the property? It has been proved that Fatima was in
possession of Fadak. As reported by all your ulama’, Abu Bakr's
demanding witnesses from her was against religious law. Does our
religious law not say that witnesses should be produced by the plaintiff
and not by the holder of the property?

Second, nobody denies the general significance of the 'Verse of
Evidence', but it also has a specific significance.

Hafiz: What do you mean by its specific significance?

Well-Wisher: The proof for this is the report recorded in your authentic
books of hadith, regarding Khazima Ibn Thabit. He gave evidence in
support of the Holy Prophet in a case concerning the sale of a horse. An
Arab had made a claim against the Holy Prophet and his (Khazima's)
single evidence was considered sufficient. The Holy Prophet gave him the
title of Dhu'sh-Shahadatain because he was regarded as being equal to
two just witnesses.

This example shows that the 'Verse of Evidence' allows for exceptions
under some circumstances. When Khazima, an individual believer and
companion from among the community, was made an exception to the verse,
‘Ali and Fatima who were infallible according to the 'Verse of Purity'
were in a better position to enjoy this exception. They were definitely
free from all falsehood. To reject their evidence was to reject the
evidence of Allah.

Rejecting witnesses of Fatima was against religious law
-------------------------------------------------------

Hazrat Fatima claimed that Fadak was bestowed upon her as a gift by her
father and that it was in her possession and control during the Holy
Prophet's lifetime. She was asked to furnish witnesses. She produced
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Hasan and Hussein as her
witnesses. But their evidence was rejected. Was this action not unjust?
It is beyond comprehension how anybody could reject ‘Ali's testimony.

Allah Almighty says in the Holy Qur'an that we should be with ‘Ali, that
is, we should follow him. Zaid al-Adl became the embodiment of truth
because of his extreme truthfulness. Similarly, ‘Ali was also called
'the truthful,' as Allah says: "O you who believe! Be careful of (your
duty to) Allah, and be with the truthful ones." (9:119) "Truthful ones"
refers to the Prophet Muhammad, ‘Ali, and the Holy Ahlul Bayt.

"Truthful ones" refers to Muhammad and ‘Ali
-------------------------------------------

Hafiz: How does this verse prove your view, which may mean that to
follow ‘Ali is obligatory for us?

Well-Wisher: (1) Your prominent scholars have written in their books and
commentaries that this verse was revealed in praise of Muhammad and
‘Ali. "The truthful ones" refers to these two Holy men, and according to
some reports it means ‘Ali; other reports say that it refers to the
progeny of the Holy Prophet.

Imam Tha'labi in the commentary Kashfu'l-Bayan, Jalalu'd-din Suyuti
reporting from Ibn Abbas in his Durru'l-Manthur, Hafiz Abu Sa'id
Abdu'l-Malik Ibn Muhammad Khargushi reporting from Asma'is in his
Sharafu'l-Mustafa, and Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in his Hilyatu'l-Auliya
narrate that the Holy Prophet said: "These truthful ones are Muhammad
and ‘Ali."

Sheikh Sulayman Hanafi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 39, p.1191,
reporting from Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani,
and Hamwaini relates on the authority of Ibn Abbas, who said: "In this
verse 'the truthful ones' are Muhammad and his Holy descendants."

And Sheikhu'l-Islam Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Hamwaini, one of your eminent
scholars, in his Fara'idu's-Simtain, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in
his Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 62, and Muhadith Sham in his Ta'rikh,
reporting from his sources, write: "With the truthful ones, that is,
with ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

(2) ***Allah says: "And he who brings the truth and he who accepts it as
the truth - these are they that guard (against evil)." (39:33)***

Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in Durru'l-Manthur, Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya in Manaqib,
Hafiz Abu Nu'aim in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i
in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.62, and Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh, reporting
from a selection of commentators, narrate the following on the authority
of Ibn Abbas and Mujahid:

"'He who brings the truth' is Muhammad, and 'he who testifies to it' is
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

(3) Allah says in chapter of Hadid (Iron) of the Holy Qur'an:

***"And (as for) those who believe in Allah and his apostles, these it
is who are the truthful and the faithful ones in the sight of their
Lord; they shall have their reward and their light." (57:19)***

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad and Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in
Manazil Mina'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali narrate on the authority of Ibn Abbas that
this Holy verse was revealed in praise of ‘Ali referring to him as being
among the truthful ones.

(4) In the Chapter Nisa (Women) Allah says:

***"And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they." (4:69)***

In this verse also the truthful ones refers to ‘Ali. There are many
hadith narrated by your ulama’ and ours, indicating that ‘Ali was the
truthful one of the community and in fact the most exalted among the
truthful ones.

‘Ali is most exalted among the truthful ones
--------------------------------------------

Many of your prominent ulama’ have written in their books that the Holy
Prophet said: "There are three great truthful ones: - Hizqil, the
Believer of the people of Pharaoh; Habib Najjar of the Sura Yasin, and
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, who is superior to them all." The following have all
recorded this hadith: Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi in his Tafsir Kabir; Imam
Tha'labi in Kashfu'l-Bayan; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in Durru'l-Manthur;

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in the Musnad; Ibn Shirwaih in Firdaus; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. II, p.451; Ibn Maghazili
Shafi'i in Manaqib; and Ibn Hajar Makki in Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa (30th
hadith out of the 40 hadith that he has commented on concerning the
virtues of ‘Ali) quoting from Bukhari, who reports from Ibn Abbas, with
the exception of the last phrase.

Also Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 42, quoting
from the Musnad of Imam Hanbal; Abu Nu'aim Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i; the
great orator Khawarizmi, quoting from Abu Laila and Abu Ayyub Ansari, in
his Manaqib; Ibn Hajar in his Sawa'iq (and a host of others) narrate
that the Holy Prophet said: "There are three truthful ones: - Habib
Najjar, the Believer of the people of the Chapter Yasin who said, 'O
people! Follow the prophets;' Hizqil, the believer of the people of
Pharaoh, who said, 'Do you kill a man who worships Allah?', and ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib, who is the most exalted of them all."

People are astounded to see how your understanding is subdued by your
perversity. You yourselves prove with various hadith in conformity with
the Holy Qur'an, that ‘Ali occupied the highest rank among the truthful
ones and yet you call others as "siddiq" (truthful) although not a
single verse has been reported about their being truthful.

Gentlemen! Please be just. Was it proper to reject the evidence of the
person whom Allah calls "siddiq" in the Qur'an, one whom we have been
commanded to follow?

‘Ali is with truth and with the Qur’an
--------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet said: "‘Ali is always with truth and truth revolves
round ‘Ali." Khatib Baghdadi in his Ta'rikh, vol. IV, p. 321, Hafiz Ibn
Mardawiyya in Manaqib, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Masnad, Fakhru'd-din
Razi in Tafsir al-Kabir, vol.I, p. 111, Ibn Hajar Makki in
Jam'u's-Saghir, vol.II, pp. 74,75, 140 and Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa,
ch.IX,Fasl 11, hadith 21, narrating from Umm Salma and Ibn Abbas also in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch. 65, p. 185, taking from Jam'u's-Saghir of
Jalalu'd-din Suyuti, in addition, in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, p.116,
Faizu'l-Qadir, vol. IV, p. 358, narrating from Ibn Abbas
Manaqibu's-Sabi'in, p. 237, hadith 44 quoting from the author of
Firdaus; Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, ch.59, Part 2, p. 238, narrating from Umm
Salma and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, some of
them narrating from Umm Salma, some from A’ysha and some from Muhammad
Ibn Abu Bakr, all narrate that they heard the Holy Prophet saying: "‘Ali
is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with ‘Ali; there will never be a
difference between the two, and the two will not separate from each
other until they reach me at the pool of Kauthar."

Some narrators have reported these words: "The right is always with
‘Ali, and ‘Ali is always with the right. There will be no difference
between the two, and the two will not be separate from each other."

Ibn Hajar writes in Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, ch. 9, Part 2, p. 77, that the
Holy Prophet on his deathbed, said: " I leave behind with you two
things: The book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt." Then, holding
‘Ali's hand, he raised it and said: "This ‘Ali is with the Qur'an, and
the Qur'an is with ‘Ali. The two will not separate from each other till
they reach me at the pool of Kauthar. Then I will ask each of them about
the matter of succession."

Also it is generally narrated that the Prophet said: "‘Ali is with the
right and the right is always with ‘Ali. They revolve around each
other."

Sibt Ibn Jauzi, in Tadhkirat al-Khawasu'l-Umma, p.20, in connection with
the 'Hadith of Ghadir', narrates that the Holy Prophet said: "Let the
right move round ‘Ali, in whatever direction he moves." Sibt commenting
on this says: "This hadith proves that if there is any difference
between ‘Ali and any other companion, the right will certainly be with
‘Ali."

Obedience to ‘Ali is obedience to Allah and his Holy Prophet
------------------------------------------------------------

It is recorded in the books which have been mentioned and in other
authentic books of yours that the Holy Prophet often said: "He who obeys
‘Ali verily obeys me, and he who obeys me verily obeys Allah. He who
disobeys ‘Ali verily disobeys me, and he who disobeys me verily disobeys
Allah." Abu'l-Fath Muhammad Ibn Abdu'l-Karim Shahrastani reports in his
Milal-wa-Nihal that the Holy Prophet said: "The reality is that ‘Ali is
always on the right, and those who follow him are on the right."

With all these explicit reports, which are recorded in your own
authentic books, wasn't refusing to agree with ‘Ali the same as refusing
to agree with the Holy Prophet?

Caliph Abu Bakr did not follow law of evidence in other cases
-------------------------------------------------------------

The second point that you have made is that the Caliph was compelled to
act according to the outward code of religion, since the "verse of
Evidence" in its general sense applied in this case. Hence, in the
absence of witnesses, he could not give away the "property of the
Muslims" to Fatima, on the basis of her claim alone. Rather, he was so
cautious that he demanded, in contradiction to the religious injunction,
witnesses from the actual occupant of the property. First, I have
already told you that Fadak was not the property of the Muslims.It was
given to Fatima as a gift by her father, and it was held in possession
by her.

Second, if the Caliph actually wanted to follow religious law, he should
have strictly followed it in all cases. Why did he adopt a policy of
double dealing? He used to give property of Muslims to others in
response to mere verbal claims without taking the evidence of any
witnesses. But in the case of Fatima's property he became
extraordinarily cautious.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid has recorded in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. IV,
p. 25, that he inquired of ‘Ali Ibnu'l-Fariqi, a teacher in the Madrasa
Gharbi in Baghdad, whether Fatima was in the right and spoke the truth
about her claim. "He said: 'Yes.' I said: 'If she was right and spoke
the truth, why did the Caliph not release Fadak in her favor?'

He (Fariqi) smiled (though he never jested) and said that if he had
released Fadak to Fatima that day, the next day she would have come to
claim the caliphate for her husband. Then the Caliph would have been
compelled to return that right also, since he would have accepted her
truthfulness in the former case.'"

According to your own prominent scholars, the position was quite clear.
They had accepted the fact that from the first day the right was with
the oppressed Fatima, but their political expediency demanded that they
should deprive the faultless lady of her right.

Abu Bakr giving wealth to Jabir without calling for witness
-----------------------------------------------------------

Hafiz: When did the Caliph give away the wealth of the Muslims without
any witness?

Well-Wisher: When Jabir claimed that the Holy Prophet had promised that
he would be paid from the booty taken at Bahrain, he was given 1,500
dinars from the Baitu'l-Mal (Public Treasury) without raising any
objection or demanding any witness from him.

Hafiz: First, I have not seen such a report. Perhaps it is in your
books.

Second, how can you claim that witnesses were not demanded?

Well-Wisher: It is very strange that you have not seen it. This report
of Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari is one of the arguments of ulama’ in
support of their view that a single report by a just companion is
acceptable.

Accordingly, Sheikhu'l-Islam Hafiz Abdu'l-Fazl Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Hajar
Asqalani says in his Fathu'l-Bari Fi Sharh al-Sahihu'l-Bukhari: This
report proves that the narration of a just companion is acceptable even
though it benefits him personally because Abu Bakr did not demand a
witness from Jabir in support of his claim.

Bukhari records the same report in greater detail in his Sahih. In the
chapter 'Man Yakfal un mayyit dainan' and 'Kitabu'l-Khuma fi Bab al-ma
Qata'an-nabi mina'l-Bahrain,' he writes that when the booty of Bahrain
was brought to Medina, Abu Bakr announced that whoever had been promised
money by the Prophet of Allah or whoever had any unsatisfied claim
should come and receive his due. Jabir came and said:

'The Holy Prophet promised me that when Bahrain was conquered and came
under the control of the Muslims, I would be provided with a gift out of
the booty.' So immediately Abu Bakr gave him 1,500 dinars without
calling for any evidence, merely on the basis of his claim.

Jalalu'd-din Suyuti also has recorded this event in his
Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa in the section on the Caliphate of Abu Bakr.

Men of justice: please let me know in Allah's name if this was not
inequitable. Unless there was some bias at work, how was it lawful for
Abu Bakr to contravene the "verse of Evidence" and give money to Jabir
on the basis of his claim alone?

Besides this, Bukhari in his Sahih and many other of your ulama’ and
scholars of jurisprudence, accept the single evidence of a just
companion even though it gave personal benefit to him.

But they consider ‘Ali's claim unacceptable on the grounds that he
wanted something for his own benefit. Was ‘Ali not a perfect individual
among the companions? If you consider the matter honestly you will admit
that it was not only a denial of justice, but it was all force and open
deceit.

Hafiz: I think Abu Bakr did not demand witnesses from Jabir because he
was one of the closely trained companions of the Holy Prophet. He had
certainly heard the Holy Prophet saying: "If anybody gives a false
account of me, his abode is hell."

Given this strict warning, it is quite evident that a closely trained
companion and believer would not take such a wrong initiative and would
not attribute a false statement to the Prophet of Allah.

Well-Wisher: Was Jabir closer to the Holy Prophet or ‘Ali and Fatima,
who were specially trained by the Holy Prophet?

‘Ali and Fatima were referents of the verse of purification
-----------------------------------------------------------

Hafiz: It is obvious that ‘Ali and Fatima were closer to the prophet of
God, because they had been under his training since their very birth.

Well-Wisher: So you will have to admit that ‘Ali and Fatima must have
been strict followers of this warning and could not, on the basis of the
Holy Prophet's saying, make any false claim. And it is incumbent on Abu
Bakr to accept Fatima's claim, since the rank of both those two persons
was far more exalted than Jabir's (as you yourself admit). In fact,
their rank was superior to all other companions. They were worthy of the
"Verse of Purity" and were infallible ones.

This verse reveals the purity of the five Holy ones: Muhammad, ‘Ali,
Fatima, Hasan, and Husain. In fact your eminent ulama’ also have
testified to the truthfulness of these Holy persons.

With regard to Amiru'l-Mu'minin, I have already told you that the Holy
Prophet has called him "The truthful one of the whole Community," and
Allah also has called him "the truthful one" in the Qur'an.

For the truthfulness of Fatima Zahra, there are also many such hadith.
Among them is one reported by Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in his
Hilyatu'l-Auliya, vol. II, p. 42, from A’ysha, who said: "I have never
seen any one more truthful than Fatima except her father."

Hafiz: Your claim that this verse was revealed in praise of those five
persons cannot be accepted. In these debates you have demonstrated an
extensive knowledge about our books. You should admit that in this case
you are mistaken, since commentators like Qazi Baidhawi and Zamakhshari
believe that this Holy verse was revealed in praise of the wives of the
Prophet. And if there is any report that it was revealed in praise of
those five persons, it must be a weak one.

The reason is that the verse in itself proves contrary to that meaning.
The context of the "Verse of Purity" is connected with the wives and the
middle part cannot be taken out of context.

Proving that the verse of purity was not in praise of the Prophet's wives
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: The claim advanced by you is refutable from many points of
view. You have said that the parts that precede and follow the verse are
connected with the Prophet's wives, and hence the Ahlul Bayt are
excluded from this Holy verse.

I reply that, as often happens in the course of our talk, we shift
attention from one person to another and then return to the first
person. There are many examples of this in the couplets of eminent Arab
writers and poets.

In the Holy Qur'an itself there are many examples of this kind. In fact,
if you examine the chapter in question, al-Ahzab (the clans), after
addressing the wives, attention is turned to the believers. Then
subsequently, the wives are addressed. Time does not permit me to submit
more elaborate evidence to explain the point further.

Second, if this verse were about the wives of the Holy Prophet, the
pronoun used in it would have been feminine. But since the pronoun is
masculine, we know that reference is not to the wives, but to the
progeny of the Holy Prophet.

Nawab: If Fatima is also included in this group why was the feminine not
used?

Well-Wisher: (Turning to the ulama’) Gentlemen: you know that in this
verse, although Fatima is one of the referents, the masculine is used
because of its preponderance. That is, in a group of both males and
females, more weight is attached to the males.

In this verse the use of the masculine is itself a proof that this
statement is not weak, but has full force. Besides this, in view of the
majority of the male members, the pronoun should be in the masculine
gender because in the Holy Five there is one woman and four men.

Of course had this verse been about the wives of the Holy Prophet, the
use of masculine for the females would have been utterly wrong. Apart
from this, the conclusion drawn from the authentic hadith in your own
books is that this Holy verse was revealed in praise of the progeny and
not in reference to his wives.

Even though he was an extreme fanatic, Ibn Hajar Makki says in his
Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa that most commentators believe that this verse was
revealed in praise of ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain.

Wives of Prophet are not included in Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------------------------------

Leaving aside these arguments, the wives of the Holy Prophet are not
included in the Ahlul Bayt.

It is narrated in Sahih Muslim and Jam'u'l-Usul that Hasan Ibn Samra
asked Zaid Ibn Arqam whether the wives of the Holy Prophet were included
in his Ahlul Bayt. Zaid said: "By Allah, no. A wife remains with her
husband for a certain period, but when he divorces her, she goes to her
father's home, joins her mother's family, and is completely cut off from
her husband. The Ahlul Bayt are those members of the family of the Holy
Prophet for whom charity is forbidden. They will not be separated from
the Ahlul Bayt wherever they go."

Apart from the unanimity of views among the Ithna' Ashari Shi’as about
the Holy progeny, there are many hadith recorded in your own books,
which disprove the assumption that the wives of the Prophet are included
in his Ahlul Bayt.

Numerous hadith concerning "verse of purity" being in praise of Holy Five
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Tha'labi in Tafsir al-Kashfu'l-Bayan; Imam Fakhru'd-d Razi in
Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. VI, p. 783; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in Durru'l-Mansur,
vol.V,p.199 and Khasa'isu'l-Kubra, vol. II, p. 264; Nishapuri in his
Tafsir, vol. III; Imam Abdu'r-Razzaq ar-Ra'sani in Tafsir
Rumuzu'l-Kunuz; Ibn Hajar Asqalani in Isaba, vol. IV, p. 208; Ibn Asakir
in Ta'rikh, vol. IV, pp 204 and 206; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in
Riyazu'n-Nuzra, vol. II, p. 188;

Muslim Ibn Hajjaj in Sahih, vol. II, p. 133 and vol. VII, p. 140;
Nabhani in Sharafu'l-Mu'ayyid, Beirut Edition, p. 10; Muhammad Ibn Yusuf
Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.100, with six authentic hadith and
Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.33, in the
authority of Sahih Muslim relying on the narration of Ummu'l-Mu'minin
A’ysha; ten narrations from Tirmidhi, Hakim Ala'u'd-Dowlat Semnani,
Baihaqi, Tibrani, Muhammad Ibn Jarir, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Abi Shaiba,
Ibn Munzir, Ibn Sa'd, Hafiz Zarandi, and Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya as
narrations of Ummu'l-Mu'minin Umm Salma, ‘Umar Ibn Abi Salma, (who had
been brought up by the Holy Prophet), Anas Ibn Malik, Sa'd Ibn Abi
Waqqas, Wathila Ibn Asqa', and Abu Sa'id Khudri said that the "Verse of
Purity" was revealed in praise of the Holy Five.

Even Ibn Hajar Makki, despite his being opposed to the Shi’as in many
respects has acknowledged its real meaning in seven ways. He says in
Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa that this verse was revealed in praise of Muhammad,
‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain and that only these Holy personalities
were referred to in this verse.

Sayyid Abu Bakr Ibn Shahabu'd-din Alawi in his Kitab
al-Rashqatu's-Sa'adi min Bahr al-Faza'il Bani Nabiu'l-Hadi (printed by
A'lamiyya Press, Egypt, 1303 A.H.), ch. 1, pp 14-19, narrates from
Tirmidhi, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Munzir, Hakim, Ibn Mardawiyya, Baihaqi, Ibn Abi
Hatim, Tibrani, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Kathir, Muslim Ibn Hajjaj, Ibn Abi
Shaiba, and Samhudi on the basis of studies of the works of your ulama’,
that this Holy verse was revealed in praise of the Holy Five persons.

In Jam'i-Bainu's-Sihahu's-Sitta, Mauta of Imam Malik Ibn Anas, Sahih of
Bukhari and Muslim, Sunan of Abu Dawud and Sijistani, and Tirmidhi,
Jam'u'l-Usul and other books, your ulama’ and historians generally admit
that this verse was revealed in praise of the Holy Five. And according
to your sect, this hadith has been transmitted without interruption.

Hadith of Umm Salma about 'harrira'(a sweet liquid food) of Fatima and revelation of "verse of purity"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many narrators of hadith have recorded the incident concerning harrira.
Among them are Imam Tha'labi in his Tafsir, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his
Musnad, and Ibn Athir in his Jam'u'l-Usul, quoting from the Sahih of
Tirmidhi and Muslim: all narrate from the wife of the Holy Prophet,
Ummu'l-Mu'minin Umm Salma, who said: "The Holy Prophet was in my house
when Fatima brought a cup of harrira to him. At that time he was sitting
on the porch where he used to sleep. He had a Khaibari mantle under his
feet. I was offering prayers in my apartment.

The Prophet asked Fatima to call her husband and sons. Soon ‘Ali, Hasan,
and Husain came in and all shared the harrira. Gabriel appeared and
revealed this Holy verse to the Prophet:

***'Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the house! and to purify you with a (thorough) purifying.'
(33:33)"***

"Then the Holy Prophet covered all of them with his mantle, raised his
hands towards the sky, and said: 'O Allah, these constitute my progeny.
Keep them away from every impurity and purified with perfect
purification.'"

Umm Salma says that she moved forward and desired to enter the mantle
saying: "O Prophet of Allah, may I also join the group?" The Holy
Prophet replied: "No, remain in your own place, you are in virtue." This
meant that she could not be included among the Ahlul Bayt and attain
their rank, but that her end was to be good.

Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi in his Tafsir adds that the Prophet said: "All
sins have been withheld from you" and "You have been given robes of
blessings." It is of course very strange of your unjust ulama’, who
write in their authentic books that ‘Ali and Fatima were included in the
"Verse of Purity" (and the greatest impurity is telling lies). Yet they
reject ‘Ali's Imamate (vicegerency) and refuse to accept his evidence in
support of Fatima about her claim to Fadak. It is not understood on what
criterion the claimants of justice form a judgment.

Fadak was taken away for political reasons
------------------------------------------

Now let us come back to our original point. Was it proper to reject the
statements of ‘Ali and Fatima and deprive them of their right, but
accept Jabir's claim without any hesitation although he was only an
ordinary Muslim?

Hafiz: It can never be accepted that the Caliph of the Holy Prophet, who
was extremely close to the Holy Prophet, would be inclined to usurp
Fadak. Certainly Fadak was of no use to the Caliph, who had the entire
Baitu'l-Mal (public treasury) of the Muslims under his control.

Well-Wisher: It is quite plain that he did not need it. But the
political group of that time considered it necessary to ruin the Holy
family of the Holy Prophet. They subjected these purified ones to all
kinds of worries, afflictions, and poverty, so that they could not think
of caliphate. Worldly men do whatever is necessary to make themselves
prosper in this world.

These politicians realized that if the grand family had control over
worldly wealth, people would certainly incline towards them. Political
considerations drove them to usurp Fadak and to close all their avenues
of financial means.

Khums interdicted
-----------------

Among the things banned for them was the khums, on which so much stress
has been laid in the Holy Qur'an. Since Allah had forbidden charity for
the Holy Prophet and his descendants, the door of khums was opened to
them. He says in the Holy Qur'an, Anfal (The Spoils of War):

***"And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah
and for the Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the
wayfarer." (8:41)***

This provision was made so that the progeny of the Holy Prophet might
live in peace and might not need the help of their community. But soon
after the demise of the Holy Prophet, they were deprived of this
privilege also. Caliph Abu Bakr denied this right of the Ahlul Bayt and
said that khums should be used for war materials. The Prophet's family
was thus made helpless from all sides.

Imam Shafi'i Muhammad Ibn Idris tells about it in his Kitabu'l-Umm, p.
69: "The descendants of the Holy Prophet for whom Allah has apportioned
khums in place of charity, cannot be given any share, great or small,
out of the compulsory charities. It is forbidden for them to accept it.
Those who deliberately give compulsory charity to them will not be
absolved from their responsibilities. By denying the right of khums to
them, charity, which is forbidden to them, will not become lawful.

Even during the caliphate of ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, the progeny of the Holy
Prophet were deprived of their rightful claim on the grounds that the
amount of khums was so large that it could not be given to the near
relations of the Holy Prophet. It was decided that the money should be
used for military expenditures. They are deprived of this right to this
day.

Hafiz: Imam Shafi'i says that khums should be divided in five parts: one
part goes to the Holy Prophet, which is used for the expenses and needs
of the Muslims, the second part is for his near relatives and the
remaining three parts are for orphans, the needy, and travelers.

Well-Wisher: Commentators in general agree that in the days of the Holy
Prophet this verse was revealed for the help of the descendants and near
relatives of the Holy Prophet. Khums was used for their expenses.

According to Shi’as law, in obedience to the practice adopted by the
Prophet's family and by the Holy Imams and also in conformity with the
meaning of the Holy verse cited above, khums is divided into six parts.
The three parts meant for Allah, the Holy Prophet and his nearest
relatives go to the Imam and, in his ghaiba (occultation), to his
representative, a mujtahid.

He is a just and expert jurist, who spends the money for the benefit of
the Muslims, according to his own discretion. The remaining three parts
are apportioned to orphans, the needy and the pure followers of the Holy
Prophet. But after the demise of the Holy Prophet, this right was denied
his descendants.

Your own prominent ulama’, like Jalalu'd-din Suyuti, in his
Durru'l-Mansur, vol. III; Tabari, Imam Tha'labi in his Tafsir
al-Kashfu'l- Bayan, Jarullah Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf, Qushachi in
his Sharh al-Tajrid, Nisa'i in his Kitab al-Alfiy, and others
unanimously acknowledge the fact that this innovation was introduced by
clever politicians after the demise of the Holy Prophet.

Hafiz: You think that a mujtahid has the right to exercise his
discretion. Didn't Caliphs Abu Bakr and ‘Umar exercise their judgment
and try to help the Muslims?

Caliph may not pass an order in violation of a clear ordinance of Allah and the practice of Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Of course a mujtahid has the right to form a judgment, but
he may not overturn a clear ordinance. Do you prefer the opinion of
Caliphs Abu Bakr and ‘Umar to that of the Qur'anic verse in question and
to the practice of the Holy Prophet? Please be just and tell us whether
they had some particular motives behind all this. A man with common
sense would be led to believe that these were not ordinary affairs, but
they aimed at making the family of the Holy Prophet helpless.

Allah has made ‘Ali witness of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

Apart from all this, Allah has declared ‘Ali the witness of the Holy
Prophet. He says in the Qur'an

***"Is he then who has with him clear proof from his Lord, and a witness
from Him...a guide and a mercy?" (11:17)***

Hafiz: So far as my knowledge goes "who has a clear proof from his Lord"
means the Holy Prophet and "a witness" means the Holy Qur'an. Why do you
claim that here "witness" means ‘Ali?

Well-Wisher: I don't express my personal opinion about Qur'anic verses.
What we have known from the progeny of the Holy Prophet is that
"witness" here means ‘Ali. The ulama’ and the commentators have held the
same view.

Your celebrated ulama’ have recorded about thirty hadith in support of
this. For instance, Imam Abu Ishaq Tha'labi reports three hadith in
Tafsir; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti reports in his Durru'l-Mansur from Ibn
Mardawiyya, Ibn Abi Hatim, and Abu Nu'aim; Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Hamwaini
reports in his Fara'idu's-Simtain from three sources; Sulayman Balkhi
Hanafi reports in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda from Tha'labi, Hamwaini,
Khawarizmi, Abu Nu'aim, Waqidi and Ibn Abdullah Ansari and others; Hafiz
Abu Nu'aim Ispahani reports from three different sources; Ibn Maghazili
Faqih Shafi'i, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali, Ibn Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji
Shafi'i (see his book Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 62) and others of your
ulama’ report with slight difference in wording that "witness" in this
verse means ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

Khatib Khawarizmi writes in his Manaqib that people asked Ibn Abbas what
was meant by "witness." He said: "This refers to ‘Ali, who bore witness
to the Holy Prophet." So, according to these testimonies of your own
reliable books, it was incumbent on the community to accept the evidence
of ‘Ali.

Allah Himself has called him a witness of the Prophet. Just as the Holy
Prophet acknowledged the distinctive quality of Khazima Ibn Thabit and
characterized his evidence equivalent to two Muslims and bestowed on him
the title of Dhu'sh-Shahadatain, Allah Almighty also has expressed in
this verse the exalted position of ‘Ali and has identified him as a
"witness" for the Holy Prophet. One wonders on what religious principle
these people decided to reject the testimony of ‘Ali.

Can you accept their judgment that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, who was most
averse to temporal wealth and whose conduct and character were
acknowledged by friends and foes alike, was a worldly man? Even harsher
words were used against him, which I cannot utter. They are all recorded
in your own books.

So using the words "his personal interest was involved in the case,"
they tried to convince people that it was possible for ‘Ali to give
false evidence for the benefit of his wife and children. (May Allah
excuse my words!) How strange that although Allah has identified him as
a reliable witness, these cunning people rejected his testimony.

‘Ali's mental anguish
---------------------

Even though the Qur'an identifies ‘Ali's truthfulness, he suffered
because of the accusations of the politicians. He said in his
Shiqshiqayya Sermon: "I endured great pain. It was as though I were
being pricked in the eye and strangled."

These words amply prove the Holy Imam's extreme suffering. He said: "I
swear by Allah that the son of Abu Talib is fonder of death than a
suckling is of his mother's breast." When the accursed Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn
Muljim Muradi struck his head with a poisoned sword, he said: "By the
Lord of the Ka'ba, I am victorious."

Gentlemen, what happened should not have happened. But today it is not
proper for sagacious ulama’ like you to cause further trouble to the
dearly loved one of Allah and His Prophet and create misunderstanding
among uninformed people. You are well aware that tormenting ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib is really tormenting the Holy Prophet of Allah.

Hadith condemning tormentors of ‘Ali
------------------------------------

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Imam Tha'labi in his Tafsir and

Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini in his Fara'id have reported that the Holy
Prophet said: "He who oppresses ‘Ali, oppresses me. O people, whoever
oppresses ‘Ali shall rise on the Day of Judgment as a Jew or Christian."

Ibn Hajar Makki on p. 78 of Part II, ch. 9, Tradition 16 from Sa'd Ibn
Abi Waqqas and Muhaddad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib,
ch.68, say on proper authority that the Holy Prophet said: "He who
oppresses ‘Ali, verily oppresses me."

I recall another hadith. Permit me to narrate it. To relate a hadith of
the Holy Prophet and to hear it is worship. This hadith has been
recorded by Bukhari in his Sahih; Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad;
Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim
Ispahani in Manazala Mina'l-Qur'an fi ‘Ali'; Khatib Khawarizmi in
Manaqib and Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in his Manaqib narrate it.

Hakim Abu'l-Qasim Haskani also narrates it from Hakam Abu Abdullah
Hafiz, he from Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abi Dawud Hafiz, he from ‘Ali Ibn
Ahmad Ajali, he from 'Ibad Ibn Yaqub, he from Artat Ibn Habib, he from
Abu Khalid Wasti, he from Zaid Ibn ‘Ali, he from his father ‘Ali Ibn
Husain, he from his father, Husain Ibn ‘Ali, he from his father ‘Ali Ibn
‘Ali Talib; each of those narrators said that the Holy Prophet said
while holding a hair of his beard:

"O ‘Ali, he who injures a single hair of yours, really injures me; he
who injures me really injures Allah, and he who injures Allah is cursed
by Allah."

Sayyid Abu Bakr Ibn Shahabu'd-din Alawi in his Rashfatu's-Sa'adi min
Bahr al-Faza'il Bani Nabiu'l-Hadi, (printed A'lamiyya Press, Egypt, 1303
A.H.) ch.IV, p. 60, reports from the Kabir of Tabrani, Sahih of Ibn
Habban, and Hakim, on the authority of Amiru'l-Mu'minin, that the Holy
Prophet of Allah said: "May Allah's curse be upon him who grieves me
regarding my progeny."

‘Ali was tormented and insulted
-------------------------------

Gentlemen, consider what happened. The evidence of ‘Ali was rejected
publicly. Fatima's property was confiscated. Fatima felt this oppressive
blow so seriously that she left this world in the prime of her youth,
full of indignation.

Hafiz: It is obvious that in the beginning Fatima was quite indignant,
but when at last she saw the Caliph's verdict was correct, she was no
longer angry. At last she left this world perfectly satisfied and
contented.

Fatima remained indignant with Abu bakr and ‘Umar until her death
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: If what you say is correct, why do your eminent ulama’
write just the reverse of it? For instance, two reliable scholars,
Bukhari and Muslim, write in their Sahih that Fatima rejected Abu Bakr
because she was angry. Because of her displeasure she did not talk to
him for the rest of her life. When she died, her husband, ‘Ali, buried
her at night. He did not allow Abu Bakr to join her funeral and offer
prayers for her.

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i has recorded the same report in his
Kifaya, ch.99. Also Abu Muhammad Abdullah Ibn Muslim Ibn Qutayba
Dinawari in his Imama wa's-Siyasa, p.14, writes that Fatima, while sick
in bed, said to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar: "Let Allah and the angels be my
witnesses that both of you have made me indignant. When I meet the Holy
Prophet, I will certainly complain against you." The same book also
records: "Fatima was indignant with Abu Bakr and refused to see him for
the rest of her life."

Besides these, there are many other such reports and hadith recorded in
your authentic books.

Fatima's distress is Allah’s and Prophet's distress
---------------------------------------------------

There is a well known hadith narrated by many of your ulama’, like Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad; Sulayman Qanduzi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda; Mir
Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba; Ibn Hajar in Sawa'iq,
reporting from Tirmidhi, Hakim and others, with a slight difference in
wording, that the Holy Prophet of Allah repeatedly said: "Fatima is a
part of my body, she is the light of my eyes, she is the fruit of my
heart, she is my soul between my two sides.

He who grieves Fatima grieves me; he who grieves me, grieves Allah; he
who makes her angry, makes me angry; what pains Fatima pains me."

Ibn Hajar Asqalani, in his al-Isaba fi tamyiz as-Sahaba, quotes from the
Sahihs of Bukhari and Muslim that the Holy Prophet of Allah said:
"Fatima is a part of my body; what pains her, pains me; that which
exalts her spiritual attainment exalts my spiritual attainment."

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in his Matalibu's-Su'ul; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim
Ispahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, vol. II, p.40, and Imam Abdu'r-Rahman
Nisa'i in his Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, report that the Holy Prophet said:
"Verily, Fatima, my daughter, is a part of my body; what makes her
happy, makes me happy; what is painful to her is painful to me."

Abu'l-Qasim Husain Ibn Muhammad (Raghib Ispahani) narrates in his
Mahadhiratu'l-Ubada, vol.II, p. 204, that the Holy Prophet of Allah
said: "Fatima is a part of my body; hence, he who enrages her, enrages
me."

Hafiz Abu Musa Ibn Muthanna Basri (died 252 A.H.) in his Mu'ajam; Ibn
Hajar Asqalani in Isaba, vol.IV, p.35; Abu Ya'la Musili in his Sunan;
Tibrani in Mu'ajam; Hakim Nishapuri in Mustadrak, vol.VII, p. 154; Hafiz
Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in Faza'ilu's-Sahaba; Hafiz Ibn Asakir in Ta'rikh
al-Shami; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira, p. 175; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in
Dhakha'ir, p. 39, Ibn Hajar Makki in Sawa'iq, p. 105 and Abu
Irfanu's-Subban in As'afu'r-Raghibin, p.171, have reported that the Holy
Prophet said to his daughter: "O Fatima, verily, if you are angry, Allah
is also angry; if you are happy, Allah is also happy."

Muhammad Ibn Isma'il Bukhari in his Sahih, in the chapter Manaqib
Qarabat al-Rasulullah, p.71, quotes from Miswar Ibn Makhrama who said
that the Holy Prophet said: "Fatima is a part of my body, so whoever
enrages Fatima, verily, enrages me."

There are many such hadith recorded in your authentic books, like Sahih
of Bukhari; Sahih of Muslim; Sunan of Abu Dawud; Tirmidhi; Musnad of
Imam Hanbal; Sawa'iq al-Ibn Hajar; and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi's
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda. How would you reconcile these hadith with reports
which say that Fatima did not leave this world angry with those persons?

Allegation about ‘Ali’s intending to marry Abu Jahl's daughter
--------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: These hadith are correct, but it is also reported about ‘Ali
that, when he intended to marry Abu Jahl's daughter, the Prophet of
Allah became angry with him and said: "Whoever grieves Fatima grieves
me, and whoever grieves me is the accursed one of Allah."

Well-Wisher: We should accept or reject things using common sense and
wisdom. Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Therefore give good news to my servants, those who listen to the
word, then follow the best of it; those are they whom Allah has guided,
and those it is who are the men of understanding." (39:19)***

A report was narrated by your elders. Today you support their words
without assessing their merits. I am obliged to give you a brief reply.
First, your own ulama’ have acknowledged the fact that ‘Ali was included
in the "Verse of Purity" and was perfectly pure. Second, in the verse of
Mubahala, Allah has called him the "self" of the Holy Prophet, as we
have already discussed on previous nights. We have shown that he was
also the "gate of the knowledge of the Holy Prophet of Allah" and was
fully aware of Qur'anic injunctions and ordinances.

He knew that Allah said in the chapter of Ahzab (the clans) of the Holy
Qur'an:

***"And it does not behoove you that you should give trouble to the
Messenger of Allah." (33:53)***

Since this is true, how could ‘Ali do or say anything that would annoy
the Holy Prophet? And how can one imagine that the embodiment of virtue
i.e., the Holy Prophet would be displeased with that exalted personality
who was loved by Allah? And would he be displeased for an act permitted
by Allah, as He says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Then marry such women who seem good to you, two, or three, or four"?
(4:3)***

This order of nika (marriage) is of general significance and is meant
for the whole community as well as for the prophets and vicegerents. And
if we suppose that Amiru'l-Mu'minin had any such intention, it was
permitted for him.

The Holy Prophet of Allah could not resent any permissible act, nor did
he use such words. Every sensible man, after careful consideration,
would know that this report is one of the forged reports of the Bani
Umayya. Your own eminent scholars admit this fact.

Fabricating of hadith during Mu'awiya's period
----------------------------------------------

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali quotes a report from his leader and teacher,
Abu Ja'far Iskafi Baghdadi, in his Sharh al-Nahju'l- Balagha, vol. I,
p.358, that Mu'awiya Ibn Abu Sufyan had formed a group of companions and
the 'tabi'in' (the 'second' generation which immediately followed the
Prophet) for the purpose of forging hadith in condemnation of ‘Ali.
Their purpose was to make him a target of reproach so that the people
would keep aloof from him.

Among them were Abu Huraira, Amr Ibn As, Mughira Ibn Shaiba, Urwa Ibn
Zubair, one of the tabi'in was also with them. Abu Ja'far Iskaf has also
referred to some of their fabricated hadith. Speaking about Abu Huraira,
he says that he was the man who narrated a hadith purporting to show
that ‘Ali sought to take Abu Jahl's daughter in marriage during the time
of the Holy Prophet.

This made the Holy Prophet angry, and he said from the pulpit, "A friend
of Allah and an enemy of Allah cannot be together. Fatima is a part of
my body. He who grieves her grieves me. He who wants to marry Abu Jahl's
daughter should seek separation from my daughter."

After this, Abu Ja'far says that this hadith is known as the hadith of
Karabisi', since every baseless hadith is called 'karabisi' (literally
'a clothes-seller'). Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says that this hadith is reported
in the two Sahihs of Bukhari and Muslim from Miswar Ibn Makhrama
az-Zahr.

And Sayyid Murtaza Alamu'l-Huda, who was one of the greatest ulama’ of
the Shi’as, says in his book Tanzia'u'l-Anbia wa'l-A'imma that this
report was narrated by Husain Karabisi, who is known for his extreme
opposition to the Holy Ahlul Bayt.

He belonged to the Nawasib and was one of the bitterest enemies of this
exalted family. His report is not acceptable. According to hadith
recorded in your own authentic books, ‘Ali's enemy is a munafiq
(hypocrite). The munafiq, according to the Holy Qur'an, is an infernal
being. Therefore his report is without merit.

Besides this, the hadith condemning people who caused annoyance to
Fatima are not confined to Karabisi's statement or the forged report by
Abu Huraira about Abu Jahl's daughter. There are many other hadith on
this topic.

Among them is one reported by Parsa of Bukhara in his Faslu'l-Khitab;
one by Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad and by Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani
Shafi'i in Mawadda XIII of Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, on the authority of Salman
Muhammadi, that the Holy Prophet said:

"Fatima's love is useful to us in a hundred places, the easiest of them
being Death, the Grave, the Mizan (the Balance), Sirat (the bridge) and
the Questioning. So, if my daughter, Fatima, is pleased with somebody, I
am also pleased with him. If I am pleased with somebody, Allah is also
pleased with him.

If my daughter, Fatima, is displeased with somebody, I am also
displeased with him. If I am displeased with him, Allah is also
displeased with him. Woe be to him who oppresses Fatima and her husband.
Woe be to him who oppresses ‘Ali and Fatima and their Shi’as."

I ask you what conclusion you draw in light of these authentic hadith
and the hadith recorded by Bukhari and Muslim that Fatima remained
indignant with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar until she died.

Misunderstanding about Fatima’s indignation being non-religious
---------------------------------------------------------------

Hafiz: The hadith are of course correct and are recorded in detail in
our authentic books. In fact, I also doubted Karabisi's report that ‘Ali
wanted to ask Abu Jahl's daughter to marry him. I did not believe it,
and now I am indeed thankful that you have solved this problem for me.

Second, in these hadith "indignation" means religious indignation and
not ordinary worldly indignation. Her indignation regarding Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, which is recorded in all our reliable books, was not religious.

That is, Fatima did not feel angry with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar because they
violated any religious injunction. Of course, if anyone had aroused her
religious indignation, he would have been subject to his Prophet's
curse.

But in fact Fatima's anger resulted from a change in her condition,
which every sensitive person feels when he fails to achieve his object.
Since Fatima had made a request for Fadak and the Caliph did not accept
her claim, she was naturally affected by it and felt indignant at that
time. But later this slight displeasure disappeared from her mind, and
she was satisfied with the decision of the Caliph.

The proof of her satisfaction was her silence. And when ‘Ali took the
reins of the caliphate, he did not for all his supreme authority; take
back Fadak under his control. This, too, is proof that he was satisfied
with the decision of the previous caliphs.

Fatima was free from worldly attachment
---------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, you said that Fatima's anger was not religious but
worldly. You have expressed this view without careful study. According
to the principles of the Qur'anic verses and the hadith of the Holy
Prophet, no perfect believer would ever show such indignation, not to
speak of Fatima, whose eminence is evident from the "Verse of Purity":
"Verse of Mubahala" and the Sura Hal Ata of the Holy Qur'an. (76:1)

There are numerous hadith in your and our authentic books that Fatima
occupied the highest rank of iman (belief) and that the Holy Prophet had
explicitly said about her: "Verily, Allah has filled my daughter,
Fatima, with belief from head to foot."

Fatima's indignation motivated by religion
------------------------------------------

Any believer, man or woman, whose special mark is to admit the truth,
would never show any indignation when a judge issues a just order. Nor
would such a believer cling to that anger and wrath till his death
insisting in his will that none of those who were in any way connected
with those orders should be allowed to join in his funeral prayers.

Moreover Fatima, about whose purity Allah Himself gives evidence, could
never make a false claim, so that a judge might reject her claim.

Second, if Lady Fatima's indignation was merely "worldly indignation" as
you call it, or her disappointment in having her claim rejected, her
anger should have subsided soon, particularly after the regret shown by
those responsible for her anger. There should have been no grief in her
heart.

The Holy Prophet said: "One of the signs of a believer is that he does
not naturally nurse any grudge based on carnal sentiments, against
anybody." Also the Holy Prophet said: "If a believer happens to commit a
fault, the aggrieved believer does not feel antipathy towards him for
more than three days."

So the pure and truthful Fatima Zahra, who was, according to the
testimony of Allah Almighty, imbued with faith from head to foot, could
never bear malice against anybody. And it is acknowledged by both sects
that Fatima left this world angry with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

So it follows from this that Fatima's indignation was purely religious.
When she saw that the order was passed against her in violation of the
commands of Allah and her Holy father, she felt furious with religious
displeasure and this was that anger, which incurred Allah's and His
Prophet's wrath.

Fatima's silence did not indicate her acquiescence
--------------------------------------------------

Third, you have said that since Fatima's silence meant that she
acquiesced in the decision. Here again you are mistaken. Silence does
not necessarily mea nconcurrence. Sometimes the oppressor's rigidity
forces acquiescence.

Fatima was not only grieved, but she left this world indignant. Both
Bukhari and Muslim wrote: "Fatima was indignant with Abu Bakr. She kept
aloof from him and did not talk with him for the rest of her life."

‘Ali was not free to act during his caliphate
---------------------------------------------

Fourth, you said that because ‘Ali did not, during the period of his
caliphate, take possession of Fadak and return it to the descendants of
Fatima, this indicated his acquiescence in the decision of the previous
caliphs. Even here you are mistaken. The Holy Imam was not free to act
during the period of his caliphate so as to have stopped any innovation
or restore any right. Whenever he intended to take such a step, there
was immediate opposition.

If he had returned Fadak to the descendants of Fatima, his opponents,
particularly Mu'awiya and his followers, would have claimed that ‘Ali
acted against the practices adopted by Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Besides this,
in order to pass such orders, authority and independence were necessary.

But people had not allowed him such power. He could not introduce
anything which would have violated the precepts and practices of the
previous caliphs. ‘Ali's powerlessness is evident from the following two
examples.

Since the previous caliphs had removed the pulpit from its place where
the Prophet had placed it, the Holy Imam intended to return it to its
original place. But the people opposed him and would not tolerate
anything contrary to the practice of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, even though it
might be compatible with the practice of the Holy Prophet.

Similarly, when the Holy Imam forbade the people to offer congregational
tarawih prayers, they rose against him and claimed that ‘Ali wanted to
change the way of Caliph ‘Umar.

Nawab: Respected Sir! What was tarawih, which ‘Ali forbade be offered in
congregation?

Well-Wisher: Literally tarawih is the plural of tarawia, which meant
"sitting." Later it came to mean "sitting for rest" after the four
rak'ats of prayer during the Ramadhan nights. Then it came to mean four
rak'ats of recommended prayer. It is a clear ruling of Islamic
jurisprudence that only obligatory prayers may be offered in
congregation, whereas recommended prayers in congregation are
prohibited. The Holy Prophet himself said:

"Verily, the offering of nafila (recommended prayers) in congregation
during the nights of Ramadhan is an innovation. The Namaz al-Chasht
(sometimes called Dhuha and recited in the forenoon) is a sin. O people!
Do not say nafila prayers of Ramadhan in congregation, and do not offer
Namaz al-Chasht. To be sure, performing a minor act of worship which is
according to the Sunna is better than performing a major act of worship
which is an innovation. Let it be known to you that every innovation is
a transgression and every transgression leads to Hell."

One night during the period of his caliphate in 14 A.H. ‘Umar entered
the mosque. He saw that the people had gathered there. He asked them why
they had come together. The people said that they had assembled to offer
Sunna prayers. ‘Umar said: "This performance is an innovation, but it is
a good innovation."

Bukhari quotes in his Sahih from Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Abdu'l-Qari that when
the caliph saw the people offering prayers individually, he told them
that congregational prayer was preferable. He ordered Ubayy Ibn Ka'b to
lead the prayers in congregation. When he came to the mosque on the next
night, he saw the people offering congregational prayers in obedience to
his command. He said: "How good an innovation it is."

It became the common practice until the time of Amiru'l-Mu'minin. He
prohibited it, saying that since it did not exist in the time of the
Holy Prophet, it was then forbidden; in fact it should not be allowed to
continue.

When he came to Kufa, the Kufans asked the Holy Imam to appoint for them
an Imam to lead the nafila prayers during the nights of Ramadhan. The
Imam forbade them to offer that prayer in congregation. In spite of
that, since the people had been accustomed to it, they did not follow
the Imam's order. As soon as the Imam left that place, they gathered
together and appointed one of them to lead the prayers in congregation.

The news soon reached the Holy Imam, who called his eldest son Imam
Hasan and asked him to take a dagger and forbid those people to offer
recommended prayers in congregation. When the people saw this, they made
loud cries saying: "O ‘Ali! Hasan has come, and he does not allow us to
offer prayers."

Although they knew that this practice of offering communal recommended
prayers did not exist during the time of the Holy Prophet, they did not
follow ‘Ali's command which conformed with the orders of the Holy
Prophet.

So how could ‘Ali restore Fadak to the descendants of Fatima? If he had
done so and said that it had been unjustly confiscated, the people would
have cried that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib was inclined towards the world and
was usurping the right of the Muslims for their own descendants.

Hence, he thought it proper to be patient. Since the real claimant had
left this world, he suspended his claim to it, so that when the last of
the divinely guided Imams comes to restore rights to their just
claimants, he will secure his right.

In such a state of affairs the silence of the Holy Imam did not mean
that he was satisfied with the decision. If he had considered the action
of the previous caliphs just, he would not have argued his case before
them. Also, he would not have expressed his anguish and displeasure and
would not have invoked Allah to be the arbiter.

It is recorded in Nahju'l-Balagha that ‘Ali in a letter to the Governor
of Basra, Uthman Ibn Hunaif Ansari wrote: "Among those things on which
the sky casts its shadow was Fadak, which was in our possession. But a
group showed niggardliness and the other side, Fatima, and her
descendants withdrew from pursuing their claim. And the best Judge is
Allah."

You said that Fatima was satisfied with the decision in the last days of
her life and pardoned those responsible for it. I am afraid you are
mistaken here. As has been proved beyond doubt earlier through reliable
hadith that oppressed Lady remained indignant until she died.

Abu bakr and ‘Umar tried to visit Fatima to explain their point, but in vain
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

To prove my point of view I should like to submit the following report.
Abu Muhammad Abdullah Ibn Muslim Ibn Qutayba Dinawari (died 276 A.H.) in
his Ta'rikh al-Khilafa'i'r-Rashidin, known as Al-Imama wa's-Siyasa, vol.
I, p. 14 and others of your ulama’, like Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, write in their
authentic books:

"‘Umar asked Abu Bakr to go with him to visit Fatima. They had certainly
enraged her. (Some reports say that it was Abu Bakr, who asked ‘Umar to
go with him to visit Fatima. This seems more plausible.)

In short, both of them went together to the door of Fatima but she did
not allow them to visit her. When they asked ‘Ali to intervene, he
remained silent, but he allowed them to go in. When they went in and
saluted her, she turned her face to the wall. Abu Bakr said: 'O part of
the Prophet's liver, by Allah, I value the relationship of the Holy
Prophet with you more than my relationship with my daughter, A’ysha.

Would that I had died soon after the Holy Prophet of Allah. I know your
rank and position more than any one else. If I have deprived you of your
right of heritage, it was really because of the Holy Prophet, whom I
myself heard saying: 'We prophets do not leave any heritage. What we
leave is charity (for the Muslims).'

Fatima then said to Amiru'l-Mu'minin that she would remind them of a
hadith of the Holy Prophet and ask them to say in the name of Allah if
they had not heard the Holy Prophet saying it: 'Fatima's pleasure is my
pleasure; Fatima's indignation is my indignation. So one who loves my
daughter Fatima loves me; one who pleases Fatima, pleases me. One, who
offends Fatima, offends me.'

Both of them said: 'Yes we heard these words from the Holy Prophet of
Allah.' Then Fatima said: 'I call Allah and His Angels to witness that
both of you have offended me and did not treat me justly. When I meet
the Holy Prophet I will certainly complain to him of you both.'

Abu Bakr realized the seriousness of Fatima’s anger
---------------------------------------------------

Abu Bakr, being troubled at these words, began to weep and said: 'I seek
Allah's shelter from the Holy Prophet's anger.' Fatima began to weep and
said: 'I swear by Allah that I will certainly call down curses upon you
in all my prayers.'

After hearing this, Abu Bakr went out, weeping. People gathered round
him and consoled him. To them he said: 'Woe be to you. You are all
happy, sitting with your wives comfortably, but I am in this wretched
state. I do not need your allegiance. Rid me of it. By Allah, after what
I have seen and heard from Fatima, I do not want any Muslim to suffer
the burden of allegiance to me.'"

These reports, related by your own notable ulama’, show that the
oppressed Fatima remained indignant with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar until the
last hour of her life.

Fatima was buried at night, a proof of her lasting displeasure with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The clearest proof of Fatima's anger in this regard is that she made the
following will to her husband, Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali: "None of those
persons who have oppressed me and snatched away my right should be
allowed to join my funeral. They are certainly my and the Holy Prophet's
enemies. Do not allow any one of them or their associates to offer
funeral prayers for me. Bury me at night when people are asleep."

Bukhari writes in his Sahih that ‘Ali complied with Lady Fatima's will
and buried her at night quietly. People tried their best to find where
Fatima was buried, but they could not. It is unanimously accepted that
Fatima was, according to her will, buried at night. The Holy Prophet
left a single daughter to serve as his memory.

Your own ulama’ agree that he said: "Fatima is a part of my body. She is
my legacy and trust. Respect her as you respect me. Never do anything to
incite her anger against you. If she is angry with you, I also will be
angry with you."

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Faqih Shafi'i writes in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba
that the Holy Prophet said: "Those who grieve Fatima will be strictly
dealt with by me on the Day of Judgment. Fatima's pleasure is my
pleasure, and Fatima's anger is my anger. Woe be to him with whom Fatima
is indignant."

How tragic is it that for all these declarations, the Community not only
ignored her but also snatched away her right and caused her so intense
torment. Even while still a young woman, she declared: "I was subjected
to so many troubles that if days had been subjected to such troubles,
they would have turned into nights."


