Ninth Session, Friday night, 2nd Sha'ban 1345 A.H.
==================================================

Sheikh: You always fault the actions of the Sunnis but do not care about
the ways of the Shi’as. You unjustly defend them although their actions
are depraved.

Well-Wisher: I am accustomed to defending the truth. Our Imam,
Amiru'l-Mu'minin, exhorted his sons, particularly Hasan and Husain, in
these words: "Always speak the truth and perform your deeds in light of
the hereafter. Be hostile to the oppressor and help the oppressed. "

If I have found fault with the opponents or defended the Shi’as, I have
done so in support of the truth. What I complained of was based on
logical reasoning. I will listen to your charges concerning wrongdoing
of the Shi’as.

Shi’as accusing A’ysha of adultery and its reply
------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: The worst thing that the Shi’as are guilty of is that they
accuse Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha of adultery. It is an acknowledged fact
that she had the honor of sexual intercourse with the Holy Prophet of
Allah and that she was his loving wife. They do not realize what this
slanderous accusation leads to. Have they not read sura an-Nur (Light)
of the Holy Qur'an? Allah says:

***"Bad women are for bad men and bad men are for bad women. Good women
are for good men and good men are for good women." (24:26)***

Well-Wisher: First the charge that the Shi’as accuse Ummu'l-Mu'minin
A’ysha of immoral actions and adultery is absolutely false. Never has
such a thing been said by Shi’as. This assertion is a blatant calumny
circulated centuries ago by the Nawasib and Khawarij in order to
instigate confusion.

They attributed to the Shi’as what they themselves said. Subsequently
others, without making inquiries, attacked the Shi’as as you are now
doing. If you would study Shi’as books, you would not find anywhere that
Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha has been accused of adultery.

A’ysha's exoneration from the charge of adultery
------------------------------------------------

If you read the Shi’as histories and commentaries, you will see how they
have defended Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha from the charges of adultery. The
fact is that such reports were made by a group of hypocrites during the
time of the Holy Prophet. Some of those involved were Mista Ibn Uthatha,
Hasan Ibn Thabit and Abdullah Ibn Ubayy.

Concerning A’ysha's exoneration from the false charges of the
hypocrites, seven verses were revealed in the Holy Qur'an. Shi’as
believe that to make a false charge of adultery or immoral action
against any Muslim is unlawful, not to mention a wife of the Holy
Prophet, whether she is A’ysha or Hafsa.

A husband and wife do not necessarily share the same level of attainment
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second, the Holy verse you have recited does not mean what you have
said. It is not necessarily so that if a husband is a virtuous believer
and worthy of Paradise that his wife will be the same. There are many
instances which prove that spouses may attain different levels of
virtue.

Allah says in the Sura Tahrim (The Prohibition):

***"Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve, the wife of
Noah and the wife of Lot: they were both under two of Our righteous
servants, but they were unfaithful to them, so they availed them nothing
against Allah, and it was said: 'Enter the fire with those who enter.'
And Allah sets forth an example to those who believe, the wife of
Pharaoh when she said: 'My Lord! Build for me a house with Thee in the
Garden and deliver me from Pharaoh and his doing, and deliver me from
the unjust people.'" (66:10-11)***

Sheikh: It is strange that during this short period there appears to be
a clear inconsistency in your statements.

Well-Wisher: Please tell me what you see as inconsistent.

Sheikh: At one point you say that accusing anybody of adultery is
unlawful but at another you say that Noah's and Lot's wives were
unfaithful to their husbands. Are these two sentences not inconsistent
with each other? Is it not unbecoming of you to accuse the wives of the
prophets of adultery and faithlessness?

Well-Wisher: I am sure you know you are adopting a deceptive manner. You
know very well what "faithlessness" means in the Holy verse referred to
earlier.

Meaning of faithlessness of Noah’s and Lot’s wives
--------------------------------------------------

It is strange of you that you mistake faithlessness to mean adultery
though there is a vast difference between the two. The wives of the
prophets were absolutely free from adultery. Here the discussion is
about their faithlessness.

First, if a wife of a prophet acts against the instructions of her
husband, she is certainly faithless. Second, I am not the one who says
that they proved faithless. The Qur'an itself states it: "They were
unfaithful to their husbands," and unfaithfulness was not adultery. As I
have said earlier, the wives of the prophets were free from this kind of
unfaithfulness. So the meaning of their unfaithfulness was disobedience.

The Prophet Noah's wife was opposed to her husband and used to insult
him in public. She said: "My husband is mad. Since I am associated with
him all day and night, I know his true state. Do not be deceived by
him." The Prophet Lot's wife used to inform the people of every guest
that came to his house. She used to create mischief by disclosing the
secrets of the house to his enemies.

Faithlessness of wives does not imply impurity
----------------------------------------------

According to Qur'anic commentators and also according to the statements
of the infallible ones, the meaning of the verse of the sura an-Nur
(Light) from which you make your point is that impure women deserve
impure men and impure men are inclined towards them. Pure women deserve
pure men and pure men are inclined towards them. In the same chapter in
the preceding verse Allah says:

***"The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or idolatress
and (as for) the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or
an idolater." (24:3)***

In short, the Holy verse "impure women are for impure men..." in no way
proves your point.

Reference to A’ysha's conduct
-----------------------------

The criticism of A’ysha is not due to prejudice. It is because of her
wrong conduct. She committed misdeeds which no other wife of the Holy
Prophet, including Hafsa, daughter of ‘Umar, did. Moreover, the Shi’as'
criticism is strictly within the bounds of the comments made by your own
ulama’, who have reported that this anxious woman committed serious
wrongs.

Sheikh: Is it proper for a noble man like you to make such charges
against Ummu'l-Mu'minin?

Well-Wisher: All the wives of the Holy Prophet except Ummu'l-Mu'minin
Khadija, are of equal rank. Umm Salma, Suda, A’ysha, Hafsa, Maimuna, and
the others in our view all are Ummu'l-Mu'minin.

But A’ysha's conduct and her words were certainly different from those
of the other women. Again, this is not merely my version, but your own
prominent ulama’ have written that her life was blemished. The good and
bad actions of people cannot remain hidden forever. Eventually truth
reveals itself.

Sheikh: Assuredly, because she opposed ‘Ali, you find fault with her
regarding insignificant matters.

Well-Wisher: We do not find fault regarding insignificant matters.
A’ysha's opposition to Amiru'l-Mu'minin, Imam Hasan, Imam Husain, and
the Ahlul Bayt is a separate issue. But the foundation of the ugly
history of her life had been laid during the period of the Holy Prophet
himself. She used to vex and torment him.

Sheikh: It is strange that you consider Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha, the
beloved wife of the Holy Prophet, so morally debased that you dare to
say that she vexed the Holy Prophet. How can we accept your assertion
when Ummu'l-Mu'minin had definitely read the Holy Qur'an and the
following verse:

***" Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His
Apostle, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and he
has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace." (33:57)***

So it is possible for her to vex the Holy Prophet so that she could be
cursed by Allah? This is definitely one of the slanders of the Shi’as.

Well-Wisher: No it is not a lie! Regarding these Holy verses, I admit
that not only Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha must have read them, but her father
Abu Bakr and other eminent companions must have also read them. In the
light of those reports and hadith which I have mentioned in previous
nights, many truths may be revealed to us provided that we are just.

A’ysha grieved the Holy Prophet
-------------------------------

The fact that A’ysha grieved the Holy Prophet is not only related by
Shi’as ulama’, but by your own eminent ulama’. Imam Ghazali in his
'Ihya'u'l-Ulum, vol. II, ch. 3, Kitab al-Adabu'n-Nika, p. 135, has
reported many hadith condemning A’ysha's conduct. Among them is her
quarreling with the Holy Prophet and Abu Bakr's intervention.

This event is also narrated by Mulla ‘Ali Muttaqi in Kanzu'l-Ummal, vol.
VII, p. 116; Abu Yala in his Musnad and Abu'sh-Sheikh in his Kitab
al-Amthal. They write that when Abu Bakr went to see his daughter, he
found that there was a grievance between A’ysha and the Holy Prophet.
The decision was left in Abu Bakr's hands.

A’ysha used insulting language in her remarks. In the course of her
conversation, she asked the Holy Prophet to be fair in his attitude.
This insolent remark made Abu Bakr so indignant that he slapped her so
severely in her face that blood flowed down her clothes.

Also Imam Ghazali in the same Chapter on Marriage and others, too, have
narrated that once, when Abu Bakr reached his daughter's house, he found
that the Holy Prophet was displeased with A’ysha. He asked them to tell
him what the cause of their grievance was so that he might bring about
reconciliation.

The Holy Prophet asked A’ysha if she should begin telling it. She
replied, 'You may begin but you should speak the truth.' In her next
sentence she added, 'You are a man who really thinks himself to be a
Prophet!'

These remarks show that A’ysha did not believe that the Holy Prophet was
the divinely appointed Prophet. Such degrading remarks are reported in
your books in large numbers. They were the cause of great anguish to the
Holy Prophet.

No such reports about other wives of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------------

You will note that the ulama’ and historians of both the sects have not
recorded such things about the other wives of the Holy Prophet. They
have not attributed such things even to Hafsa, daughter of ‘Umar. It was
only A’ysha's behavior which led to her indignity.

We related only as much as your prominent ulama’ have said about her.
Have you not studied Imam Ghazali's books, the histories by Tabari,
Mas'udi and Ibn A'tham Kufi etc. which report that all your eminent
ulama’ have described her as disobedient to the Holy Prophet?

Still, you complain because I have criticized Ummu'l-Mu'minin's conduct.
Can there be any clearer blot on one's character than transgression
against the order of Allah and His Prophet and revolution against the
Caliph of the Holy Prophet?

In the sura of al-Ahzab (The Clans), Allah has addressed the wives of
the Holy Prophet:

***"And stay in your houses and display not your finery like the display
of the ignorance of yore." (33:33)***

Of course the other wives of the Holy Prophet complied with this order
and never left their houses without an urgent reason. Even A'mash has
reported this fact.

Ummu'l-mu'minin Suda did not go out even for hajj or umra
---------------------------------------------------------

It is reported in the Sahih and other books of your traditionists and
historians that people asked Suda, wife of the Holy Prophet, why she not
performed the Hajj and the Umra. She replied, "It is compulsory for me
to perform one Hajj and Umra and no more.

And He says: 'And stay in your houses.' So in obedience to this command,
I shall not go out of my house; rather, my intention is that I will not,
as far as possible, go out of the room in which the Holy Prophet of
Allah had placed me until I die." In fact she did this and it was her
dead body which was taken out of the room.

Suda, A’ysha, and Umm Salma, were wives of the Holy Prophet and were
mothers of the believers. Of course they differ from one another because
of their conduct.

According to the community, A’ysha and Hafsa are worthy of respect, not
because they were the daughters of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, though you
respect them on that score, but because they were the wives of the Holy
Prophet. But the wives of the Holy Prophet deserve honor when they are
devout, as it is clearly stated in the Holy Qur'an.

***"O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any of the other women."
(33:32)***

A’ysha goes out to fight against ‘Ali
-------------------------------------

So Suda was a pious, obedient wife of the Holy Prophet of Allah. A’ysha
was a stubborn wife who conspired with Talha and Zubair against ‘Ali and
went to Basra. There Uthman Ibn Hanafi, a great companion of the Prophet
and governor of Basra appointed by ‘Ali, was captured. His hair and
beard were pulled out; he was tortured and driven out.

More than 100 innocent, helpless persons were killed. Ibn Athir,
Mas'udi, Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, and others have
written in detail about this event.

After this outrage, she mounted a camel named Askar, dressed in the skin
of a lion, protected by armor and entered the battlefield like a
soldier. Because of her revolt, thousands of Muslims lost their lives.
Was this initiative on her part not a transgression against the command
of Allah and His Holy Prophet?

‘Ali's virtues are beyond number
--------------------------------

And what is more surprising is that she adopted this shameless stand
against ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, whose virtues and merits have been so
extensively recorded by your own distinguished ulama’ that it is
impossible to recount them all.

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Masnad, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi in his Tafsir al-Kabir, Katib
Khawarizmi in his Manaqib, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Muhammad Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.
62, and Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba,
Mawadda V, narrate from the second Caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab and
Abdullah Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "If all the
oceans were ink, all the trees were pens, and all human beings were
writers and all the Jinn maintained the records, even then, O
Abu'l-Hasan! Your virtues could not be numbered."

When the Holy Prophet states that "all men and jinn combined cannot
account for his virtues," how can we, with our limited means, give a
complete account of his merits?

Apart from the Shi’as ulama’, your own ulama’, for all their fanaticism,
have filled their books with only part of his innumerable virtues.

Hadith in praise of ‘Ali’s virtues
----------------------------------

You should study your Siha al-Sitta, the six books of hadith. Apart from
these, it is stated in Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani's Mawaddatu'l-Qurba;
Tabrani's Mu'ajam Kabir; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i's Matalibu's-Su'ul;
Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal's Musnad and Faza'il; Hamidi's Bainu's-Sahihain;
Khawarizmi's Manaqib; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid's Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.
II, p.449; Ibn Sabbagh Maliki's Fusulu'l-Muhimma, particularly p.124,
from Hafiz Abdu'l-Aziz Ibn Al'Akhzaru'l-Janabiz, who writes in his book
Ma'alimu'l-'Atratu'n-Nabawiyya that Fatima Zahra said that on the night
of Arafa her father, the Holy Prophet of Allah, went to her and said:

"Allah Almighty takes pride in you people before the angels and has
forgiven you all and particularly ‘Ali. I, the Prophet of Allah, say
without any consideration for love due to kinship that verily the most
fortunate and prosperous man is he who is a friend of ‘Ali during his
life or after his death. The most damned of the damned is he who is an
enemy of ‘Ali, during his life or after death."

Also in the above books is a detailed hadith which I think I have
referred to in earlier nights, from Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, who said
that the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "A liar is he who thinks that he
loves me while he is your enemy. O ‘Ali! He who is your friend is my
friend. If somebody is my friend, Allah is his friend. If Allah is
somebody's friend, He admits him to Paradise. He, who is your enemy, is
my enemy. If somebody is my enemy, Allah also is his enemy and He throws
him into Hell."

Friendship with ‘Ali is faith and opposition to him is infidelity and hypocrisy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is also reported from the Kitabu'l-Al of Ibn Khalawayh, narrating
from Abu Sa'id Khadiri, that the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "O ‘Ali!
Friendship with you is faith and opposition to you is hypocrisy. The
first person who enters Paradise shall be your friend, and the first
person who is thrown into Hell shall be your enemy."

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda III,
and Hamwaini in his Fara'id report that the Holy Prophet said while
among his companions: "No one loves ‘Ali except one who is a believer,
and no one is hostile to him except one who is an infidel." On another
occasion he said: "O ‘Ali! It is only the believer who loves you, and it
is only the hypocrite who hates you."

‘Ali 'Best of Mankind' said the Holy Prophet- reported by A’ysha
----------------------------------------------------------------

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, p. 119, ch.62,
quotes from Ta'rikh al-Damishqi, Muhadith al-Sham, and Muhadith al-Iraq,
narrating from Hudhaifa and Jabir that the Holy Prophet said: "‘Ali is
the best of mankind; one who refuses to accept this is an infidel."

It is also reported from Ata that people asked A’ysha about ‘Ali and she
said: "He is the best of mankind. No one except an infidel has any doubt
of it."

He says that Hafiz Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh, a work comprised of 100
volumes three volumes of which are written in praise of ‘Ali, has
reported this hadith from A’ysha.

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.17, Ibn Sabbagh Makki
in Fusulu'l-Muhimma, report from Tirmidhi and Nisa'i that Abu Sa'id
Khudri said: "During the days of the Holy Prophet we used to recognize
the hypocrites by their animosity towards ‘Ali."

It is related in Fusulu'l-Muhimma that the Holy Prophet said to
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali: "O ‘Ali! To fight against you is to fight against
me; your blood is my blood. I fight against him who fights against you;
it is only the legitimate person who loves you, and it is the
illegitimate one who has animosity towards you. It is only the believer
who loves you, and it is only the hypocrite who is hostile to you."

Sheikh: Such hadith are not unique to ‘Ali; they have also been narrated
about other caliphs.

Well-Wisher: Kindly cite other such hadith by way of example.

Sheikh: Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Malik Maghul narrates from his sources that
Jabir said that the Holy Prophet of Allah said: "A believer has no
animosity towards Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and a hypocrite has no love for
them."

Well-Wisher: I am again surprised to hear such a thing from you. Have
you forgotten our mutual agreement on the first night that we would not
rely on questionable hadith. You should not quote concocted hadith,
whose narrators are liars and forgers. Quote authentic hadith.

Sheikh: Your response indicates that you have decided that if you hear
any hadith from us, you will reject it.

Well-Wisher: It is not I alone who has rejected it. Even your own
prominent ulama’ have rejected it. Refer to Mizanu'l-I'tidal of Dhahabi
and Ta'rikh of Khatib al-Baghdadi, vol. X, p.236. You will find that
most of the eminent commentators have written about the character of
Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Malik saying: "Verily, he was such a liar, a
blasphemer, and a forger of hadith that no one has any doubt about it."

Please tell us if such a one-sided hadith narrated by a liar and forger,
can be compared to those hadith which your prominent ulama’ have
narrated and some of which I have already mentioned. I would advise you
to consult Jami'u'l-Kabir, by Suyuti, vol. VI, p.390, Riyazu'n-Nazara,
vol. IX, p.215, by Muhibu'd-din; Jami'i Tirmidhi, vol. II, p.299;
Isti'ab, vol. III, p.46, by Ibn Abdu'l-Barr; Hilyatu'l-Auliya, vol. VI,
p.295, by Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.17, by Muhammad Ibn Talha
Shafi'i; Fusulu'l-Muhimma, p.126, by Ibn Sabbagh Maliki.

You will find that every one of them narrated in slightly different
words from Abu'dh-Dharr Ghifari who said: "During the time of the Holy
Prophet we used to recognize the hypocrites by three signs: the denial
of Allah and the Holy Prophet, failing to offer prayers, and animosity
towards ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib." It is reported from Abi Sa'id Khudri that
Abu'dh-Dharr Ghifari said: "We used to recognize the hypocrites by their
enmity against ‘Ali and in the time of the Holy Prophet we had no other
sign of finding out the hypccrites except that they were hostile to
‘Ali."

Authors who narrate Holy Prophet's hadith about hypocrites' hatred of ‘Ali
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

In addition, the following authors narrate the hadith concerning
hypocrites' hatred of ‘Ali: Imam Ahmad Hanbal in Musnad, vol. I, pp.95,
138; Ibn Abdu'l-Barr in Isti'ab, vol. III, p.37; Ahmad Khatib Baghdadi
in Ta'rikh al-Baghdad, vol. XIV, p.426; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. IV, p.264; Imam Nisa'i in Sunan, vol. VIII,
p.117 and Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, p. 27; Hamwaini in Fara'id, ch.22; Ibn
Hajar in Isaba, vol.II, p.509; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim in Hilyatu'l-Auliya,
vol.IV, p.185; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira, p.15; Suyuti in
Jami'u'l-Kabir, pp. 152, 408; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in
Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.17; Tirmidhi in Jami'i, vol. II, p.13, all these
have reported in their books in slightly different words from Umm Salma
or Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet said:

"O ‘Ali! A hypocrite is not your friend and a believer is not your
enemy. It is only the believer who loves you, and it is only the
hypocrite who hates you. A hypocrite does not love ‘Ali and a believer
does not hate ‘Ali."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. I, p.367, reports
from Sheikh Abu'l-Qasim Balkhi, the chief of Mu'tazilites, that he said,
'All the hadith unanimously report those correct hadith and there is no
doubt in the authenticity of those which say that the Holy Prophet said
to ‘Ali, 'No one is hostile to you except the one who is a hypocrite. No
one is your friend except the one who is a believer.'

Also, in volume IV of his book, on page 264, he quotes the sermon of
Amiru'l-Mu'minin, in which the Holy Imam says: "If I strike a believer
with this sword in his face so that he might be hostile to me, he will
never be hostile to me; but if I give the whole world to a hypocrite so
that he might love me, he will never love me. And this is in accordance
with the utterance of the Holy Prophet who said: 'Only believers love
you, only hypocrites are hostile to you.'"

There are many hadith of this kind in your reliable books. I have cited
only a few of them.

Wasn't A’ysha's revolt against ‘Ali's authority a revolt against the
Prophet himself? Was this fighting or her urging the people to fight
against ‘Ali, due to her friendship or was it due to enmity? Obviously,
it was due to hostility.

In all the hadith which I have just related, the Holy Prophet said that
one of the signs of infidelity is fighting against ‘Ali. How would you
reconcile the stand taken by Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha in fighting ‘Ali
with these hadith? It has just come to my mind that Mir Sayyid ‘Ali
Hamadani Shafi'i in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda 3, has reported from
A’ysha herself that the Holy Prophet said: "Allah has pledged His word
to me that whoever revolts against ‘Ali is an infidel and his place is
in Hell."

It is strange that when people asked her why she revolted against ‘Ali
having heard such a hadith from the Holy Prophet she merely replied: "I
forgot this hadith on the day of the Battle of the Camel. I did not
remember it until I came to Basra."

Sheikh: But how can you find fault with Ummu'l-Mu'minin, when it is
obvious that to forget is but human.

Well-Wisher: Even if I admit that she forgot that hadith on the day of
the Battle of the Camel, didn't she remember it when she was returning
from Mecca and all her friends including the pious wives of the Holy
Prophet warned her that she should not perpetrate such an action, since
opposition to ‘Ali was opposition to the Holy Prophet?

Your own historians who have recorded the Battle of the Camel have drawn
attention to the fact that the Holy Prophet said: "O A’ysha! Fear that
path on which the dogs of Haw'ab may bark at you." When however, on her
way to Basra, she reached the brook of the Bani Kilab, dogs surrounded
her litter and began barking. She asked the people what place it was.
She was told that it was Haw'ab.

Then she remembered what the Holy Prophet had said. Why then did she
walk into the trap of Talha and Zubair? Why did she proceed until she
reached Basra where she created such a tumultuous uproar? Would you say
that she had forgotten this also, or that she trod that path
deliberately?

She deliberately transgressed the order of Allah and the Holy Prophet
and, having conspired with Talha and Zubair, went to fight against the
Caliph and vicegerent of the Holy Prophet, although she had herself
reported that the Holy Prophet said: "One who fights against ‘Ali is an
infidel."

Was it not a cause of distress to the Holy Prophet that as soon as the
Commander of the Faithful assumed the reins of the caliphate,
disturbances were created and conspirators prepared for battle against
him. I have told you earlier with authentic sources that the Holy
Prophet said, "He who distresses ‘Ali, verily distresses me. He who
distresses me, verily distresses Allah. O people! He who distresses ‘Ali
shall be raised as a Jew or Christian on the day of resurrection."

Slaughter of sahaba (companions) and innocent believers in Basra by order of A’ysha
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These reports can be found in your authentic books. Why then should you
find fault with the Shi’as? Responsibility for the blood of innocent
believers, the torture and expulsion of Uthman Ibn Hunaif, and the
murder of more than 100 including the unarmed keepers of the Treasury
who had no concern with the battle - forty of whom were killed in the
mosque - lay squarely on the instigator of the battle. Allama Mas'udi in
his Muruju'z-Dhahib, vol. II, p.7, has written about this in these
words:

"Besides those who were injured, seventy of the unarmed guards of
baitu'l-mal (Treasury) were put to death. Of these seventy, fifty were
beheaded in prison. These people were the first among the Muslims to
have been tortured to death."

Among your ulama’ and historians, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Athir have given
detailed accounts of these events.

Shi’as say about A’ysha exactly what history shows
--------------------------------------------------

Perhaps you should expunge these reports from your authentic books. In
fact, in the reprints of these books, some of your ulama’ have changed
some of this disagreeable information and in some cases have omitted it
altogether. You should either refuse to accept what your notable ulama’
and historians have written, or you should give up censuring the Shi’as.
They say only what is recorded in your own reliable books.

No evidence that A’ysha repented
--------------------------------

Sheikh: What you say is of course true, but Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha was
only a human being; she was not infallible. Having been misguided she
committed a fault. It was because of her simplicity that she fell into
the trap of two prominent companions, but later she repented for her
revolt. Allah excused her for that.

Well-Wisher: First, you have admitted that some of the prominent
companions were sinners, although they were among those who were present
"under the tree" and at Bai'atu'l-Rizwan. On previous nights you argued
that the Sahaba (companions) were like stars, and should we follow any
of them, we would be rightly guided.

You now admit that this is not true. Second, you have said that
Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha repented of her action. It is only a hollow
claim. While the revolt, battle and the slaughter of the Muslims are
unanimously accepted, there is no evidence for her repentance.

A’ysha prevents burial of Imam Hasan near the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------------------------

Of course, it is a fact that Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha was restless. She
committed many foolish mistakes. But you claim that she repented of her
fault and, being ashamed, confined herself to her house. But if this
were true, why did she treat the body of the grandson of the Holy
Prophet so shamefully?

We have discussed how she vexed the Holy Prophet and how she
subsequently went into battle mounted on a camel to fight against his
successor. But later, this time mounted on a mule she stopped the corpse
of the elder grandson of the Holy Prophet from moving ahead for burial
near the Holy Prophet.

Your own eminent ulama’ and historians, including Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi
in his Tadhkira Khawasu'l-Umma, p.122; Allama Mas'udi, author of
Muruju'z-Dhahab, in Isbatu'l-Wasiyya, p.136; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. IV, p.18, reporting from Abu'l-Faraj and Yahya
Ibn Hasan, author of Kitabu'n-Nasab; Muhammad Khwawind Shah in his
Rauzatu's-Safa, and many others have written that when the corpse of
Imam Hasan was being transported to Medina, A’ysha, mounted on a mule
and accompanied by a group of the Bani Umayya and their slaves, stopped
the group with Imam Hasan's body.

They said that they would not let Imam Hasan be buried by the side of
the Holy Prophet. According to the report of Mas'udi, Ibn Abbas said:
"It is strange of you, A’ysha! Was not the Day of Jamal, that is, your
entering the battlefield mounted on a camel, sufficient for you? Now
should the people also keep in memory the Day of Baghl (mule)?

Mounted on a mule, you have stopped the bier of the son of the Holy
Prophet. One day mounted on a camel, another mounted on a mule, you have
torn asunder the modesty of the Holy Prophet of Allah. Are you
determined to destroy the Light of Allah? But surely Allah perfects His
light however unpleasant it is to the polytheists; verily, we are
Allah's and to Him shall we return."

Some people have written that Ibn Abbas said to her: "One time you
mounted a camel and one time a mule. If you live longer, you will also
mount an elephant (that is you will fight against Allah)! Though out of
one-eighth you have one-ninth share, yet you took possession of the
whole."

The Bani Hashim drew their swords and intended to drive them away. But
Imam Husain intervened and said that his brother had told him that he
did not want a drop of blood to be spilled because of his funeral
procession. Accordingly, the corpse was taken back from there and buried
in Baqi' (a cemetery in Medina still visited by pilgrims today).

A’ysha's prostration at martyrdom of Amiru'l-Mu'minin
-----------------------------------------------------

If A’ysha repented of her revolt against Amiru'l-Mu'minin why did she
perform a prostration of thanks when she heard the news of the Holy
Imam's martyrdom? Abu'l-Faraj Ispahani, author of Aghani, writing about
the Holy Imam in his Maqatilu't-Talibin, says: "When A’ysha heard the
news of the martyrdom of Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali, she offered a
prostration (of thanks)."

Later however, she asked the informant who had killed ‘Ali. She was told
that it was Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Muljim of the Bani Murad clan. Instantly
she recited the following couplet: "If ‘Ali is away from me, the news of
his death was brought by a slave, who may not have dust in his mouth."

Zainab, daughter of Umm Salma, was present at that time. She asked
A’ysha if it was proper for her to express her jubilation and utter such
words about ‘Ali. It was a bad thing. A’ysha replied that she was not in
her senses and that she uttered those words through forgetfulness. "If
such a thing appears in me again and I repeat those things, you may
remind me, so that I may refrain from doing that."

These facts clearly show that A’ysha did not repent later in life as you
have claimed.

Contradictory statements of A’ysha about Uthman
-----------------------------------------------

At this time I recall another thing. You people object to the Shi’as
because they criticize Caliph Uthman for his faults, faults which your
own ulama’ have recorded in their books.

Accordingly, you should not look with favor on Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha
either because ulama’ and historians, like Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. II, p.77; Mas'udi in his Kitab
al-Akhiru'z-Zaman and Ausat; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira Khawasu'l-umma,
p.36; Ibn Jarir, Ibn Asakir, and others have written that
Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha always spoke ill of Uthman, so much so that she
called out:

"Kill Na'thal (the old dotard)! May Allah kill him, as he has become an
infidel?" But as soon as Uthman was killed, she, because of her
opposition to ‘Ali, began to say: "Uthman has been killed as an
oppressed one. By Allah, I will avenge his death. So rise up and help
me."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes, "Certainly A’ysha was the greatest enemy of
Uthman. So much so that she hung the garment of the Holy Prophet in her
house and used to tell the people who came there: 'This is the garment
of the Holy Prophet of Allah. It has not yet become old, but Uthman has
made the Holy Prophet's Sunna old and worn out.'"

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes that, when A’ysha heard in Mecca the news of
Uthman's murder, she said, "May Allah reject him from His mercy. He
committed bad actions. And Allah does not oppress His subjects." That
is, if He chastises anyone, it is because of his sinful actions.

You hear these remarks from A’ysha about Uthman without any proof and
yet you take no notice of it. But if the same words are used by Shi’as,
you immediately call them infidels.

We should take an impartial view of things. It is an established fact
that Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha bitterly opposed Imam Amiru'l-Mu'minin. When
she heard that the Muslims had sworn allegiance to the Holy Imam she
said: "The falling of the skies on the earth is better than the
establishment of ‘Ali's caliphate. Uthman has been slain as an oppressed
one."

Certainly these inconsistent statements indicate an unstable mind.

Allah is merciful but the blood of innocent Muslims cannot go unquestioned
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: These inconsistencies of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha have of course
been generally reported, but two things are accepted and proved. First,
that she had been deceived and that for a brief time she was not mindful
of the vicegerency of ‘Ali. She herself said that she had forgotten it
and only remembered it at Basra. Second, she repented for her action.
Certainly Allah, having forgiven her, will give her a high place in
Paradise.

Well-Wisher: I will not repeat what I have already said on the question
of repentance. The blood of those Muslims who were killed for no fault,
the disgrace and insults they were subjected to, and the plundering of
their property will not go unquestioned. It is true that at the place of
forgiveness, Allah is most merciful, but at the place of chastisement He
is most strict. Apart from this, she herself admitted until her death
that she was responsible for all those odious events.

As your own ulama’ have reported, she stipulated in her will that she
could not be buried by the side of the Holy Prophet. She knew that she
had sponsored many of the disturbances after him. Hakim in his
Mustadrak; Ibn Qutayba in his Ma'arif, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Zarandi in his
Kitab al-A'lam bi siratu'n-Nabi and Ibnu'l-Bayya Nishapuri and others
have reported that A’ysha exhorted Abdullah ibn Zubair in these words:
"Bury me beside my sisters in Baqi. I brought about innovations and
novelties after the Holy Prophet of Allah."

A’ysha cannot plead loss of memory because she was reminded by Umm Salma
------------------------------------------------------------------------

You said she recollected the virtues of ‘Ali at Basra and had forgotten
what the Holy Prophet had forbidden her to do. This is not true. You
should consult the authentic books of your own prominent ulama’. For
example, refer to Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol. II, p.77, by Ibn Abi'l-
Hadid.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid reports from the Ta'rikh al-Abi Makhnaf Lut Ibn Yahya
Azadi that Umm Salma also was present in Mecca when she heard that
A’ysha intended to take vengeance for the murder of Uthman and was going
to Basra. She was shocked at this and began proclaiming the merits of
‘Ali in all congregations. A’ysha went to Umm Salma in order to win her
over to her point of view before leaving for Basra.

Umm Salma said to her, "Until yesterday you were abusing Uthman and
calling him a stupid dotard, and now you have turned against ‘Ali to
avenge Uthman's murder. Are you not aware of ‘Ali's virtues? If you have
forgotten them, I would recall them to you."

"Remember the day, when I came to your room along with the Holy Prophet
of Allah? Then ‘Ali came in and began talking privately with the Holy
Prophet. When the private talk continued for some time, you got up to
scold the Holy Prophet. I dissuaded you from doing that, but you did not
pay any attention to my advice. You said to ‘Ali in anger, 'Of every
nine days, one is for me, and on that day too you come in and keep him
engaged in talking.'

At this the Holy Prophet became so indignant with you that his face
became red and he said, 'Get back! I swear by Allah that whoever has any
hostility towards ‘Ali, whether he belongs to my house or otherwise, is
excluded from Iman (belief).' Then, being ashamed, you turned back."

A’ysha said, "Yes, I remember it."

Umm Salma said: "You may remember that one day you were washing the head
of the Holy Prophet, and I was preparing 'hais' (a kind of food). The
Holy Prophet raised his head and said: 'Who among you is that sinner who
will mount the camel, and at whom the dogs of Haw'ab bark, and who will
fall headlong from the Bridge of Sirat?' I then left the 'hais' and
said, 'O Holy Prophet of Allah! I seek refuge of Allah and His Holy
Prophet from such an action. After this the Holy Prophet, striking you
in your back said, 'Eschew this; it is you who will do these deeds.'"

A’ysha said, "Yes, I remember it."

Umm Salma further said, "I remind you that on one of the journeys you
and I were with the Holy Prophet. One day ‘Ali was mending the shoes of
the Holy Prophet, and we two were sitting in the shade of a tree. It so
happened that your father Abu Bakr and ‘Umar came, and sought
permission. You and I went behind the screen. They sat down and after
talking for a while said, 'O Holy Prophet of Allah! We do not know the
value of your companionship. So we ask you to let us know who will be
your successor and caliph, so that after you he may be our guide.'

The Holy Prophet said to them: 'I know his place, rank, and position,
but if I introduce him directly, you will reject him as the Bani Israel
rejected Aaron.' They both were silent and soon left. After they left we
came out. I said to the Holy Prophet, 'Who will be your caliph for
them?' The Holy Prophet said, 'He is mending my shoes.' We saw that
there was no one except ‘Ali. Then I said, 'O Holy Prophet of Allah! I
did not find anybody except ‘Ali.' He said, 'The same ‘Ali is my
caliph.'"

A’ysha said, "Yes, I remember it."

Umm Salma then said: "Since you know these hadith, where are you going?"
She replied: "I am going to make peace among the people."

It is clear, therefore, that Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha had not been merely
deceived by others. She herself caused huge problems and, knowing all
these things, she deliberately rose in rebellion even though Umm Salma
reminded her of the hadith of the Holy Prophet. Even after admitting the
rank and position of Amiru'l-Mu'minin, she left for Basra and created a
violent tumult, which resulted in the killing of many Muslims.

Hadith of mending shoes is the greatest proof of the imamate and caliphate of ‘Ali
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The hadith of mending shoes is the greatest proof for the Imamate and
caliphate of ‘Ali.

The Shi’as make searching inquiries into the affairs of the past 1400
years. With knowledge of the verses of the Qur'an and the authentic
books of the ulama’ of both sects, they draw fair conclusions.
Accordingly, we believe that, although historically ‘Ali was given the
fourth place, this apparently inferior position does not affect his
superiority nor belittle the importance of the hadith that prove his
rightful place as the Prophet's successor.

We also admit that it is a recorded fact of history that Abu Bakr
(through political devices) was nominated caliph in the Saqifa in the
absence of ‘Ali, the Bani Hashim, and other prominent Companions, in
spite of the opposition of the Khazraj clan of the Ansars. After that it
was through personal dictatorship that ‘Umar and Uthman occupied the
seat of the caliphate.

But there is a difference. These men were caliphs of the Community;
their associates made them caliphs. On the other hand Amiru'l-Mu'minin
‘Ali was the caliph of the Holy Prophet and was ordained by Allah and
the Holy Prophet to be the vicegerent.

Sheikh: This is unkind of you. There was no difference between them. The
very people who unanimously decided to entrust the caliphate to the
three caliphs, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman also entrusted it to ‘Ali.

Difference in mode of appointment of the first three caliphs is proof of invalidity of their caliphate
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: There were many clear differences in the manner of the
appointments of the caliphs. First, you referred to the Ijma.'
(Unanimous decision). It is unnecessary to repeat my point. I have
proved the baselessness of the issue of Ijma' in the previous nights.
There was in fact no unanimous decision about the caliphate of any one
of them.

Other proofs for invalidity of consensus (Ijma')
------------------------------------------------

Second, if you rely on consensus as the basis of the caliphate and
consider it permissible from the side of Allah and the Holy Prophet then
whenever a caliph died, the whole Community should have gathered
together to appoint a caliph. Whoever would have been unanimously
elected would have been the caliph of the people (of course not of the
Holy Prophet of Allah). And this procedure should have been followed in
all ages.

You must, however, acknowledge that such an Ijma or consensus has never
been held. Even the incomplete consensus for which the Bani Hashim and
the Ansar were not present was not held for any one except Abu Bakr Ibn
Abi Qahafa. The caliphate of ‘Umar, according to the opinion of all
historians and traditionists of Islam, was based on the solitary verdict
of Abu Bakr Ibn Qahafa.

If consensus were a requirement for the appointment of a caliph, why was
it not held for entrusting the caliphate to ‘Umar and why was consensus
of opinion not obtained thereon?

Sheikh: It is obvious that when Abu Bakr was made the caliph through
consensus, the verdict of the caliph for the appointment of his
successor was quite valid. There was no need for calling another
consensus. Rather, the verdict of every caliph for the appointment of
the caliph after him was basically sound and sufficient. This right is
vested in the caliph that he might appoint a caliph after him so that
the people might not be thrown into confusion and perplexity.

Accordingly, when the acknowledged caliph, Abu Bakr, appointed through
general agreement, nominated ‘Umar as the next caliph, the latter became
the rightful caliph of the Holy Prophet.

Holy prophet's nomination of ‘Ali ignored and abu bakr's nomination of ‘Umar upheld
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: You believe that the acknowledged caliph has the right to
nominate his successor. It is his responsibility not to leave the
Community confused and unguided, and his decision is sufficient for the
appointment of the caliph. But if you believe this, why do you deprive
the Holy Prophet of this right?

And why do you disregard all those clear indications which the Holy
Prophet explicitly and repeatedly gave on different occasions, naming
‘Ali as his successor, and which are all present in your authentic
books. You simply sidetrack the issue and advance irrelevant
interpretations just as Ibn Abi'l-Hadid has rejected the hadith of Umm
Salma on ridiculous grounds.

Moreover on what basis can you claim that the first caliph, who was
appointed by means of consensus, had the right to nominate his
successor? Did the Holy Prophet give any such instruction? No. You also
claim that when the first caliph secured his appointment through
consensus, there was no need for the appointment of other of the caliphs
through ijma. The same caliphs had the authority from the Community to
nominate the caliph after them.

Objection to majlis al-shura (consultative body)
------------------------------------------------

If that were so, why was that principle adopted for the caliphate of
‘Umar alone? For the caliphate of Uthman this principle was not
followed. Instead of nominating a caliph after him, ‘Umar left the
question to be decided by a consultative body of six members. I do not
know what you consider the principle on which the selection of a caliph
is based. You know that if there are basic differences in the arguments,
the real issue becomes void.

If your position is that the basis of the caliphate is consensus and the
entire Community should unanimously make the decision (not to mention
the fact that such a consensus was not held for the caliphate of Abu
Bakr) why then was such a consensus not held for the caliphate of ‘Umar?

If you consider that consensus was necessary only for the first
caliphate, and for the appointment of the future caliphs the verdict of
the elected caliph was sufficient, then why was this principle not
followed in the case of Uthman? Why did Caliph ‘Umar abandon the
principle enunciated by Abu Bakr?

Why did he leave the selection of the caliph to a Majlis al-Shura (a
consultative committee)? Caliph ‘Umar arbitrarily nominated the
committee though it should have been the representative body of the
community (so that there might be some slight representation of the
views of the majority).

Objection to Abdu'r-Rahman ibn Auf being arbiter
------------------------------------------------

The most surprising thing is that the rights of all other members of the
committee were made subservient to Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Auf. We do not know
what the basis of Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Auf's selection was. Was it
religion, reputation, knowledge, or performance? We can only note that
he was a near relation of Uthman and would not support any one else
except him. It was decided that what Abdu'r-Rahman said was right, and
when he swore allegiance to somebody, all others must follow him.

According to the holy prophet, ‘Ali should be followed in preference to all the others
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When we consider the matter carefully we find that it was a dictatorial
order issued under the guise of Shura (consultation). Even today we see
that the principles of democracy are completely contrary to it. But the
Holy Prophet repeatedly said, "‘Ali revolves round the truth and truth
revolves around ‘Ali." Also the Holy Prophet said:

"‘Ali is the 'Faruq' (Discriminator) of this Community and draws a
distinction between right and wrong." Hakim in his Mustadrak, Hafiz Abu
Nu'aim in Hilya; Tabrani in Ausat; Ibn Asakir in Ta'rikh; Muhammad Ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in
Riyazu'n-Nuzra; Hamwaini in Fara'id; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha and Suyuti in Durru'l-Mansur narrate from Ibn Abbas,
Salman, Abu Dharr and Hudhaifa that the Holy Prophet said, "Soon after
me a disturbance will take place.

On that occasion it will be necessary for you to attach yourselves to
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib since he is the first man who will clasp hands with
me on the Day of Judgement. He is the most truthful one and is the Faruq
of his Community; he draws a distinction between right and wrong, and he
is the chief of the believers."

According to a hadith from Ammar Yasir (to which I have referred earlier
with full details of its sources) the Holy Prophet said: "If all the
people go one way and ‘Ali goes the other, you should follow ‘Ali and
leave all the others. O Ammar! ‘Ali will not misguide you and will not
lead you to destruction O Ammar! Obedience to ‘Ali is obedience to me,
and obedience to me is obedience to Allah."

Worst injustice done by ‘Umar to Amiru'l-Mu'minin's position
------------------------------------------------------------

Even then, Caliph ‘Umar, defying the instructions of the Holy Prophet,
makes ‘Ali subordinate to Abdu'r-Rahman in the Shura. Is that authority
justified which repudiates the distinguished Companions? Respected men!
Be fair! Study the historical accounts of this period, such as Isti'ab,
Isaba and Hilyatu'l-Auliya. Then compare ‘Ali with Abdu'r-Rahman, and
see whether he deserved to have the right of veto or Amiru'l-Mu'minin.
You will find that it was through political manipulation that ‘Ali's
right was usurped.

Moreover, if the method of selection adopted by Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Khattab
was worth following, that is, if the Majlis al-Shura was necessary for
the appointment of the caliph, why was it not done when Amiru'l-Mu'minin
was made caliph?

It is strange that for the caliphate of the four caliphs (Abu Bakr,
‘Umar, Uthman, and ‘Ali) four different methods were adopted. Now which
of those methods was basically right and which one was void? If you say
that all four methods were justified, then you must admit that you have
no fundamental principle for the establishment of the caliphate.

Sheikh: Perhaps your statements are correct. You say we should deeply
ponder this question. We find that the caliphate of ‘Ali is also of a
dubious nature since the kind of consensus, which appointed the previous
caliphs, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Uthman also elected ‘Ali caliph.

Well-Wisher: What you say might be considered tenable were it not for
the statement of the Holy Prophet. In fact the caliphate of ‘Ali did not
depend upon the ijma'(consensus) of the Community. It was ordained by
Allah.

Caliphate of ‘Ali was ordained by Allah
---------------------------------------

The Holy Imam assumed the caliphate by way of taking back his right. If
somebody's right has been usurped, he may take it back whenever he gets
the opportunity to do so. Accordingly, when there were no obstructions
and the atmosphere demanded it, the Holy Imam secured his right.

If you have forgotten the points we have made previously, you may
consult the newspapers, which reported information we presented
regarding this issue. We have proved that ‘Ali's occupying the caliphate
was based on Qur'anic verses and on the hadith of the Holy Prophet.

You cannot cite a single hadith accepted by both sects in which the Holy
Prophet said that Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, or Uthman were his successors. Of
course, apart from hadith in Shi’as books, there are a large number of
hadith from the Holy Prophet recorded in your own authentic books, which
show that the Holy Prophet expressly appointed ‘Ali as his successor.

Sheikh: There are also hadith which show that the Holy Prophet said that
Abu Bakr was his caliph.

Well-Wisher: Apparently you have forgotten my argument of previous
nights which disproves the acceptability of those hadith. I will,
however, reply again tonight. Sheikh Mujaddidu'din Firuzabadi, the
author of Qamusu'l-Lughat says in his Kitab al-Safaru's-Sa'adat: "What
ever has been said in praise of Abu Bakr is based on such fictitious
stories that common sense does not admit them as true."

If you properly scrutinize the problem of the caliphate, you will find
that there was actually no consensus for any of the four major caliphs
(Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, Uthman and ‘Ali) or for any of the Umayyad and Abbasid
caliphs. The whole Community was never assembled nor were
representatives of the entire community gathered together to cast their
vote. But, comparatively speaking, we find that ‘Ali's caliphate was
supported by what was very close to consensus.

Your own historians and ulama’ write that for the caliphate of Abu Bakr
at first only ‘Umar and Abu Ubaida Jarra, the grave digger, were
present. Later some of the Aus clan swore allegiance to him only because
they were opposed to the Khazraj clan which had nominated Sa'd Ibn
Ubaida as a candidate. Later on others through intimidation, (as I have
stated in detail earlier) and another group prompted by political
considerations swore allegiance to Abu Bakr. The Ansars, who followed
Sa'd Ibn Ubaida, did not acknowledge the caliphate till the last moment.

Then the caliphate of ‘Umar was founded only on Abu Bakr's proposal,
which had nothing to do with consensus. Uthman subsequently became
caliph through the decision of the Majlis al-Shura (consultative
committee) which had been arbitrarily formed by Caliph ‘Umar.

At the time of ‘Ali's caliphate a majority of the representatives of
most of the Islamic countries, who by chance had come to Medina to seek
redress of grievances, insisted on ‘Ali being the caliph.

Nawab: Did the representatives of the Islamic countries gather in Medina
for the purpose of electing their caliph?

Well-Wisher: No. Caliph Uthman was still caliph. Representatives of most
of the major Muslim tribes and clans assembled in Medina to complain of
the atrocities of the Umayyad governors, officers, and other notables of
the court, like Marwan. The result of this consensus was that Uthman,
who persisted in his oppressive policies, was murdered.

It was after this affair that the people of Medina approached ‘Ali and
with insistent entreaties brought him to the mosque, where all the
people swore allegiance to him. Such an open consensus had not been held
for any of the caliphate of any of the first three caliphs. The people
of Medina and the leaders of the nations swore allegiance to a
particular person and acknowledged him as their caliph.

Real basis of ‘Ali's caliphate is not consensus but the Holy Prophet's declarations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But despite this consensus held for Amiru'l-Mu'minin, we do not consider
it the basis of his caliphate. To validate his caliphate we rely only on
the Holy Qur'an and the ordinances of the Holy Prophet. It was a
practice of the Prophets that they themselves, in accordance with the
command of Allah, appointed their successor and caliph.

You said that there was no difference between Amiru'l-Mu'minin and other
caliphs. And yet there are many indications that there was a vast
difference between ‘Ali and other caliphs.

‘Ali was superior to all the other caliphs
------------------------------------------

The first characteristic of Amiru'l-Mu'minin which made him distinctly
superior to other caliphs was that he was appointed the Prophet's
successor by Allah and His Prophet. All others were appointed by small
groups of people. Obviously the caliph appointed by Allah and His Holy
Prophet must be superior to those who have been appointed by the people.
Of course the most distinguishing characteristic of Amiru'l-Mu'minin was
the superiority of his knowledge, virtue, and piety.

All the ulama’ of the community (except a few Kharijis, Nasibis, and
followers of Abu Bakr) are unanimous in their view that, after the Holy
Prophet, ‘Ali surpassed all others in knowledge, virtue, justice,
nobility, and piety.

In support of this fact, I have previously quoted a number of hadith and
verses from the Holy Qur'an. Now I have recalled still another hadith
regarding this point.

Hadith of Holy Prophet regarding ‘Ali’s superiority
---------------------------------------------------

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad, Abu'l-Mu'ayyid Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad
Khawarizmi in the fourth chapter of the Manaqib; Mir Sayyid ‘Ali
Hamadani Shafi'i in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Hafiz Abu Bakr Baihaqi Shafi'i in
his Sunan, and many others have narrated from the Holy Prophet in
slightly different words and versions that he said: "‘Ali among you is
the most learned scholar, the most virtuous man, and the best judge. He
who rejects his statement, action, or opinion, really rejects me. He who
rejects me, rejects Allah, and he is within the confines of polytheism."

Moreover, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali, who is one of your eminent ulama’,
has written in many places in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha that the
superiority of Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali was the belief of many companions
and followers. The Sheikhs (the chiefs) of Baghdad also acknowledged it.

Would you kindly let me know what you consider to be the virtues in man
which make him superior to others?

Sheikh: In fact there are many virtues and praiseworthy qualities which
can claim superiority to others, but in my opinion the most meritorious
qualities after believing in Allah and the Holy Prophet are these: (1)
pure ancestry (2) knowledge, and (3) piety.

Well-Wisher: Allah bless you! I will confine my discussion to these
three points.

Of course every companion, whether he was the caliph or not, had some
distinctive quality. But those who possessed all these virtues were
definitely superior to all others. If I prove that in these three
characteristics it was Amiru'l-Mu'minin who excelled all others, then
you must admit this Holy man was the worthiest claimant for the
caliphate. And if he was deprived of the caliphate, it was because of
political contrivances.

‘Ali's pure ancestry
--------------------

In the matter of ancestry with the exception of the Holy Prophet, no man
can compare with ‘Ali. Even some of the fanatical ulama’ of your sect,
like Ala'u'd-din Mulla ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ushji, Abu Uthman Amr Ibn Bahr
Jahiz Nasibi, and Sa'idu'd-din Mas'ud Ibn ‘Umar Taftazani have said: "We
are in awe at the words of ‘Ali who said, 'We are the Ahlul Bayt of the
Holy Prophet. No one can bear comparison to us."

Also, in the second sermon of Nahju'l-Balagha, the Holy Imam after
accepting the caliphate said, "No person of this Community can bear
comparison with the family of Muhammad. How can those who have received
blessings, knowledge, and kindness from them equal them? They are the
foundation of religion and the pillars of belief.

Those who diverge from the right path turn to them, and those who lag
behind, step forward to attach themselves to them. They alone have the
exclusive right of vicegerency and Imamate. It was for them alone that
the Holy Prophet made his will. They were his rightful inheritors. Now
the right has returned to its legitimate claimant and has again reached
the place from which it had been removed."

These statements of Amiru'l-Mu'minin about his claim for the caliphate
are the best proof for his right to the caliphate.

But these words were not uttered by Amiru'l-Mu'minin alone. Even his
opponents have acknowledged the same thing. I have pointed out on a
previous night that Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamdani reports in his
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba Mawadda 7, from Abi Wa'il, who reports that Abdullah
Ibn ‘Umar said: "In pointing out the companions of the Holy Prophet, we
mentioned the names of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Uthman. A man asked where
‘Ali’s name was. We said, ‘Ali belongs to the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet,
and no one can bear comparison with him; he is with the Holy Prophet of
Allah in the same rank.'"

Also he narrates from Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Kurgi Baghdadi, who said that
Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Hanbal (the Imam of the Hanbalites) about the
Companions who were worthy of praise, he named Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and
Uthman. He then asked what he thought about ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal said, "He belongs to the Ahlul Bayt. The others cannot be
compared to him."

As for the ancestry of ‘Ali, it has two aspects: one of light and one of
the body. So in this respect ‘Ali had a unique position after the Holy
Prophet of Allah.

‘Ali's creation from light and his association with the Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------

From the point of view of light, Amiru'l-Mu'minin occupied the foremost
place, as many of your illustrious ulama’ point out. Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal in his Musnad, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamdani Faqih Shafi'i in his
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba; Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in his Manaqib and Muhammad Ibn
Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul Fi Manaqib al-alu'r-Rasul narrate from
the Holy Prophet that he said, "I and ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib both were a
single light in the presence of Allah 14,000 years before the creation
of Adam. When Allah created Adam, he deposited that light in Adam's
loins. We remained together as one light until we separated in
Abu'l-Muttalib's loins. Then I was endowed with Prophethood and ‘Ali
with the caliphate."

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamdani Faqih Shafi'i in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Mawadda
VII, mentions this point. "‘Ali and the Holy Prophet are from one Light.
‘Ali was endowed with such qualities as were not given to any one else
in the entire world."

Among hadith which have been recorded in this Mawadda, there is a report
from the third Caliph, Uthman Ibn Affan, who said that the Holy Prophet
said, "I and ‘Ali were created from one light 4,000 years before the
creation of Adam. When Allah created Adam, He deposited that light into
Adam's loins. We remained as one light until we were separated in
Abdu'l-Muttalib's loins. Then I was endowed with prophethood and ‘Ali
with vicegerency."

In another hadith he writes that the Holy Prophet, addressing ‘Ali,
said: "So prophethood and messengership came to me. Vicegerency and the
Imamate came to you, ‘Ali."

The same hadith has been narrated by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali in his
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.II, p.450 (printed in Egypt) from the
author of Kitab al-Firdaus. Also Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, part I, reports from Jam'u'l-Fawa'id, Manaqib of Ibn
Maghazili Shafi'i, Firdaus of Dailami, Fara'idu's-Simtain of Hamwaini
and Manaqib of Khawarizmi, with slight difference in wording but not in
purport, that the Holy Prophet Muhammad and ‘Ali were created from light
thousands of years before the creation of the universe and that both of
them were one light until they were separated from each other in the
loins of Abdu'l-Muttalib.

One part was placed in the loins of Abdullah and through it was born the
Holy Prophet. The other part was placed in the loins of Abu Talib and
through it was born ‘Ali. Muhammad was selected for prophethood and ‘Ali
for vicegerency, as was disclosed by the Holy Prophet himself.

Abu'l-Mu'ayyid Mu'affaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi and many others have
reported from reliable sources that the Holy Prophet said: "I and ‘Ali
were born of one light. We remained together until we reached the loins
of Abu Talib where we were separated from each other."

‘Ali's physical ancestry
------------------------

So far as ‘Ali's physical creation was concerned, he was evidently of
the most exalted rank from both his maternal and paternal side. All of
his forefathers back to Adam himself were worshipers of Allah. This
light never settled in an impure loins or womb. None of the other
companions can make such a claim. The lineage of ‘Ali is as follows:

(1) ‘Ali Ibn (2) Abu Talib Ibn (3) Abdu'l-Muttalib (4) Hashim (5) Abd
al-Manaf (6) Qusai (7) Kilab (8) Murra (9) Ka'b (10) Luwai (11) Ghalib
(12) Fehr (13) Malik (14) Nazr (15) Kinana (16) Khazima (17) Madreka
(18) Ilyas (19) Muzar (20) Nizar (21) Ma'd (22) Adnan (23) Awwad (24)
Al-Yasa' (25) Al-Hamis (26) Bunt (27) Sulayman (28) Haml (29) Qidar (30)
Isma'il (31) Ibrahim Khalil-Ullah (32) Ta'rikh (33) Tahur (34) Sharu
(35) Abraghu (36) Taligh (37) Abir (38) Shale' (39) Arfakhad (40) Sam
(41) Noah (42) Lumuk (43) Mutu Shalkh (44) Akhnukh (45) Yarad (46)
Mahla'il (47) Qinan (48) Anush (49) Seth (50) Adam Abu'l-Bashir.

Except for the Holy Prophet, no one else had such a brilliant ancestry.

Azar was Abraham’s father
-------------------------

Sheikh: You have said that all the ancestors of ‘Ali were monotheists. I
think you are mistaken. Some of his ancestors were idol worshipers. For
instance Abraham Khalilullah's father, Azar, worshipped idols. The Holy
Qur'an clearly says "And when Abraham said to his father, Azar: 'Do you
take idols for gods? Surely I see you and your people in manifest
error.'"

Well-Wisher: You repeat what your elders have said although you know
that the scholars of genealogy unanimously agree that Abraham's father
was Tarukh, and not Azar.

Sheikh: But this is ijtihad (reasoning based on your own judgement) in
face of divine ordinance. You are putting forward the views of the
scholars of genealogy in opposition to the Holy Qur'an, which clearly
says that Abraham's father was Azar, who was an idol worshiper.

Well-Wisher: I never argue in opposition to divine law. My aim is to
know the real interpretation of the Qur'an. In order to accomplish this,
I seek guidance from those who are equal to the Holy Qur'an as sources
of guidance, the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet. The word in the Holy
verse has been used in the general sense because in the general sense
even the uncle and the mother's husband are also called "father."

There are two views about Azar. One is that he was Abraham's uncle and
the second is that in addition to being his uncle, after the death of
Abraham's father, Tarukh, he married Abraham's mother. Hence Abraham
used to address him as his father, since he was his uncle as well as his
mother's husband.

Sheikh: We cannot ignore the explicit meaning of the Holy Qur'an, unless
we find its other meaning in the Qur'an itself, clearly indicating that
uncle or mother's husband are also called 'father'. If you fail to
produce such evidence (and certainly you will fail), your argument will
be unacceptable.

Well-Wisher: There are instances in the Holy Qur'an where words have
been used in their general sense. For example, verse 133 of chapter II,
Baqara (The Cow) of the Holy Qur'an supports my point. It records the
questions and answers of the Prophet Jacob with his sons at the time of
his death. It says:

***"When he said to his sons: What will you serve after me? They said:
we will serve your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham and Isma'il
and Isaac, the one God only, and to Him do we submit." (2:133)***

In this verse the proof of my claim is the word Isma'il. According to
the Holy Qur'an, Jacob's father was Isaac and Isma'il was his uncle,
but, according to the general practice, he used to call him his father.
Since the sons of Jacob also according to the general practice, called
their uncle their father, they used the same word in reply to his
father. God reported their question and answer as it was.

Similarly, Abraham also used to call his uncle and his mother's husband,
'father', although, according to strong evidence of historical and
genealogical accounts, it is an acknowledged fact that Abraham's father
was not Azar, but Tarukh.

Fathers and mothers of the Holy Prophet were not polytheists but they were all believers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The second proof of the fact that the Holy Prophet's ancestors were not
polytheists and infidels is verse 219 of Chapter 26 of Shu'ara (The
Poets) which says,

***"And your turning over and over among those who prostrate themselves
to Allah." (26:219)***

Concerning the meaning of this Holy verse Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi
in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, vol.II, and many others of your ulama’ have
narrated from Ibn Abbas, who said, "Allah transferred particles of the
being of the Holy Prophet from Adam's loins to successive prophets, one
after the other, all of whom were monotheists, until He made him appear
from his father's loins through nika (lawful wedlock) and not
unlawfully."

There is also a well known hadith which all of your ulama’ have
narrated. Even Imam Tha'labi, who is called the Imam of traditionists,
writes in his commentary and Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, vol. II, narrates from Ibn Abbas, that the Holy
Prophet said: "Allah sent me to the earth in the loins of Adam and
transferred me to the loins of Abraham. He continued transferring me
from the distinguished and exalted loins to pure wombs until He created
me from my father and mother, who never met unlawfully."

In another hadith he is reported to have said, "Allah never mixed in me
any base element of ignorance."

In the same chapter Sulayman Balkhi reports from Ibkaru'l-Afkar of
Sheikh Salahu'd-din Ibn Zainu'd-din Ibn Ahmad known as Ibnu's-Sala Halbi
and from Sharh al-Kibrit al-Ahmar of Sheikh Abdu'l-Qadir narrating from
Ala'u'd-Dowlat Semnani, a detailed hadith from Jabir Ibn Abdullah that
the Holy Prophet was asked about what Allah created first. He answered
the question in detail, which I cannot relate at this time. Towards the
end of the hadith the Holy Prophet said:

"Similarly, Allah continued transferring my light from pure side to pure
side, until He deposited me in my father, Abdullah Ibn Abdu'l-Muttalib.
From there He brought me to the womb of my mother, Amina. Then He caused
me to appear in this world and conferred upon me the title of
Sayidu'l-Mursalin (the chief of the Messengers) and Khatamu'n-Nabiyyin
(the Seal of the Prophets)."

The Holy Prophet's statement that he continued to be transferred from
pure one to pure one proves that none of his forefathers was an infidel.
According to the Holy Qur'an, which says:

***"Verily, the polytheists are polluted ones," (9:28)***

every infidel and polytheist is polluted. He said that he was
transferred from pure wombs to pure wombs. Since idol worshipers are not
pure, it follows that none of his forefathers was an idol worshiper.

In the same chapter of Yanabiu'l-Mawadda a hadith from Ibn Abbas is
reported via Kabir that the Holy Prophet said: "I was not born through
the unlawful wedlock of the days of ignorance. I was born through the
Islamic ways of Nika."

Have you not read sermon 105 of Nahju'l-Balagha? The Commander of the
Faithful says about the forefathers of the Holy Prophet: "Allah provided
for them (i.e., the Prophets) the best place (the loins of their
forefathers) and gave them the best placements (the Holy wombs of their
mothers).

He transferred them from distinguished and respectable loins to pure
wombs. When the father of any of them passed away, his son succeeded him
with the religion of Allah, until Allah Almighty made Muhammad His
Prophet and Messenger. So He made the source of the Holy Prophet's
creation the most exalted one. The Holy Prophet's lineage included His
Prophets who were of high rank."

In short, the ancestors of the Holy Prophet, back to the Prophet Adam,
were all believers and monotheists. It is quite obvious that the people
of the Ahlul Bayt (the Progeny) of the Holy Prophet knew more about the
status of their forefathers than others knew.

‘Ali's forefathers were equally free from polytheism
----------------------------------------------------

When it is proved that the ancestors of the Holy Prophet were believers
and monotheists, it naturally follows that ‘Ali's ancestors were also
worshipers of Allah. I have already proved through your own books that
Muhammad and ‘Ali were from one light and always remained together in
pure loins and wombs until they were separated from each other in the
loins of Abdu'l-Muttalib. Every sensible man would admit that such a
distinguished personality was the rightful claimant to the caliphate.

Misunderstanding about Abu Talib's faith clarified
--------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: I accept the fact that Tarukh was Abraham's father, and you have
proved the purity of the Holy Prophet's ancestors. But it is not
possible to find such evidence in the case of ‘Ali. Even if we admit
that all of his ancestors down to Abdu'l-Muttalib were monotheists, his
father, Abu Talib, certainly left this world an infidel.

Well-Wisher: I admit that there are differing opinions among the
community concerning Abu Talib's faith. But we should say, "O Allah!
Curse the first tyrant who showed injustice to Muhammad and curse his
descendants. Allah's curse be on him who fabricated hadith with the
result that the Nasibis and Kharijis began to claim that Abu Talib left
this world an unbeliever.

The Shi’as ulama’ in general and all the members of the entire family of
the Holy Prophet believe in the faith of Abu Talib. Also, many of your
scholars and fair minded ulama’, like Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, Jalalu'd-din
Suyuti, Abu'l-Qasim Balkhi, Abu Ja'far Askafi, their teachers from the
Mu'tazali sect, and Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Faqih Shafi'i - all agree
that Abu Talib was a Muslim.

Shi’as consensus regarding belief of Abu Talib
----------------------------------------------

The Shi’as believe that Abu Talib, from the very beginning, believed in
the Holy Prophet. The Shi’as, following the Holy Ahlul Bayt, acknowledge
with one accord "Abu Talib never worshipped an idol; he was one of the
successors of Abraham."

The same view has also been expressed in the authentic books of your own
ulama’. For instance, Ibn Athir says in his Jam'u'l-usul: "According to
the Holy Ahlul Bayt among all the uncles of the Holy Prophet, only
Hamza, Abbas, and Abu Talib accepted Islam.

The common agreement of the Holy Ahlul Bayt regarding a point must be
considered decisive. The Hadith al-Thaqalain and other hadith which I
have referred to on previous nights clearly prove that the Holy Prophet
made clear statements regarding his family's infallibility. They were
the parallels of the Holy Qur'an and one of the Thaqalain (two weighty
things) which the Prophet left as sources of infallible guidance for his
people. It is necessary for all Muslims to adhere to them so that they
may not be led astray.

Second, according to the saying "The people of the house know better
about family matters," this exalted family knew more about the belief of
their forefathers than Mughira Ibn Sha'ba, the Bani Umayya, the Kharijis
and Nasibis, or other uninformed people.

It is really surprising that your ulama’ do not accept statements of the
Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet, including the chief of the pious, the
Commander of the Faithful, to whose veracity and truthfulness Allah and
the Holy Prophet testified. All say that Abu Talib died a believer. You
do not believe that, but you accept the word of the confirmed liar and
sinner, Mughira, some Amawis, Kharijis, and Nasibis.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali, who is one of your accredited ulama’, says in
his Shahr al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.III, p.310: "There is a difference of
opinion concerning the Islam of Abu Talib. The Imamiyya sect and most of
the Zaidiyyas say that he left this world a Muslim. Apart from the
entire Shi’as ulama’, some of our own chief ulama’, like Abu'l-Qasim
Balkhi and Abu Ja'far Askafi hold the view that Abu Talib embraced
Islam, but he did not reveal his belief so that he might give full
support to the Holy Prophet and, because of his (Abu Talib's) influence,
the opponents might not block the Holy Prophet's way."

Misunderstanding about concocted hadith of Zuhzah clarified
-----------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Apparently you are not familiar with the "Hadith of Zuhzah"
which says: "Abu Talib is in the fire of Hell."

Well-Wisher: This is a fabricated hadith invented during the period of
Mu'awiya Ibn Abu Sufyan by some of the enemies of the Holy Prophet.
Later the Bani Umayya and their followers continued their efforts to
fabricate hadith against ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and circulated them among
the people.

They did not allow Abu Talib's belief to become well known like that of
Hamza and Abbas. The forger of Hadith Zuhza was one Mughira, who was a
sinner and an enemy of the Commander of the Faithful.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.III, pp 159-163;
Mas'udi in Muruju'z-Dhahab and other ulama’ write that Mughira committed
fornication in Basra. When his witnesses were produced before Caliph
‘Umar, three of them testified against him, but the fourth was tutored
to say such things as made his evidence unacceptable. Accordingly, the
three other witnesses had to suffer the prescribed penalty, and Mughira
was acquitted.

The author of this hadith, however, was a fornicator and drunkard upon
whom the penalty prescribed by religion was about to be inflicted. He
invented hadith because of his opposition to the Commander of the
Faithful and to flatter Mu'awiya. Mu'awiya and his followers and other
Umayyads strengthened this spurious hadith and began testifying that
"Abu Talib is in the fire of Hell."

Moreover, those connected with the narration of this hadith like
Abdu'l-Malik Ibn ‘Umar, Abdu'l-Aziz Rawandi and Sufyan Thawri, are weak
and unacceptable reporters. This fact has been verified by your own
eminent commentator and scholar, Zahi, who has expressed this view in
his Mizanu'l-I'tidal, vol.II. So how can one rely on a hadith like this,
which has been narrated by such notorious liars and weak reporters?

Evidence for Abu Talib's belief
-------------------------------

There is plenty of evidence to prove the belief of Abu Talib.

(1) The Holy Prophet says in a hadith (joining his two fingers): "I and
the supporter of the orphan are together in Paradise like these two
fingers."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid also has reported this hadith in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.IV, p.312, where he says that it is obvious that
the Holy Prophets statement does not mean all supporters of orphans,
since most of the supporters of orphans are sinners. So the Holy Prophet
meant by it Abu Talib and his distinguished grandfather,
Abdu'l-Muttalib, who looked after the Holy Prophet. The Holy Prophet was
known in Mecca as the yatim (orphan) of Abu Talib because after the
passing away of Abdu'l-Muttalib, the Prophet, from the age of eight, had
been in the care of Abu Talib.

(2) There is a well known hadith which both the Shi’as and Sunni sects
have narrated in different ways. Some of them say that the Holy Prophet
said: "Gabriel came to me and gave me good news in these words: 'Allah
has definitely exempted from the fire the loins through which you
appeared, the womb which sustained you, the breasts which suckled you,
and the lap which supported you.'"

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Sheikh Sulayman
Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, and Qazi Shukani in his Hadith
al-Qudsi have reported that the Holy Prophet said: "Gabriel came to me
and said 'Allah sends greetings to you and says verily He has exempted
from the fire the loins which gave you shelter, the womb which sustained
your weight, and the lap which supported you.'"

These reports and hadith clearly prove the faith of the Prophet's
supporters, namely, Abdu'l-Muttalib, Abu Talib and his wife Fatima Bint
Asad, and also the Holy Prophet's father, Abdullah, and mother, Amina
Bint Wahhab, and his wet nurse, Halima.

Ibn Abi’l-Hadid’s couplets in prais of Abu Talib
------------------------------------------------

(3) Your great scholar, Izzu'd-din Abdu'l-Hamid Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali, composed the following couplets in praise of Abu Talib. They
are recorded in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.III, p.318: "Without Abu
Talib and his son (‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib), Islam would have no distinction
or strength. Abu Talib protected the Holy Prophet in Mecca and supported
him and ‘Ali in Medina. Abda'l-Manaf (Abi Talib) by order of his father
Abdu'l-Muttalib continued taking care of the Holy Prophet and ‘Ali and
perfected those efforts.

When Abu Talib died through Allah's will, it did not cause any loss
because he left his fragrance (‘Ali) as his memory. Abu Talib initiated
outstanding services in the way of Allah, and ‘Ali perfected them for
the sake of Allah.

Abu Talib's eminence cannot be harmed by the foolish utterances of
people, or by the willful suppression of his virtues (by his opponents),
just as when a man calls the light of day darkness, the light will not
be affected."

Couplets of Abu Talib Prove his Islam
-------------------------------------

(4) Similarly, the couplets Abu Talib himself composed in praise of the
Holy Prophet are a clear proof of his faith. Some of these couplets have
been recorded by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha,
vol.III, p.316. Moreover, your prominent ulama’, like Sheikh Abu'l-Qasim
Balkhi and Abu Ja'far Askafi, have produced them as evidence for Abu
Talib's belief.

Abu Talib wrote: "I seek shelter in Allah from those who rail at us or
attribute profanity to us, from the sinner who speaks ill of us, and
from the person who associates things in religion from which we are
aloof.

I swear by the House of Allah that he lies who says that we shall leave
Muhammad, though we have not yet fought against his enemy with the sword
and lance.

We will indeed help him until we have crushed his enemy. We will offer
such sacrifice that we will forget our wife and children.

His light is such that through the brightness of his face we invoke the
shower of Allah's mercy.

He comes to the assistance of orphans; he is the refuge of widows. The
helpless people of the Bani Hashim go to him for help and are blessed
with all kinds of favors.

I swear by my life that I have a passionate love for Ahmad. I love him
like a pure friend.

I found my self fit for sacrifice to him, so I helped him as he is an
ornament for the people of the world, a curse for enemies, and a grace
for society.

May the Creator of the World support him with His help and reveal His
religion, which is the way to Allah, and in which there is not a
particle of wrong."

There are some special couplets of Abu Talib which Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in
his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.III, p.312, and others have quoted in
proof of his belief. In his panegyric, he says:

"These people expect us to fight against Islam with sword and lance;
they think that we will kill Muhammad. But our faces have not yet been
colored with blood in his help. I swear by the House of Allah that you
have told me a lie; you may fall into disaster.

Hatim and Zamzam may fill to the brim with severed heads. Injustice is
being done to the Prophet, who has been sent by Allah to guide the
people. He has been given the book, which has been revealed by the Lord
of the Sky."

Apart from these clear evidences, which prove the faith of Abu Talib,
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.III, p.315, quotes
the following couplets:

"You bear witness to the existence of Allah! Bear witness that verily I
follow the religion of the Prophet of Allah, namely, Ahmad. Others may
be misled in their religion, but I am one of these who are guided."

Gentlemen! Be fair and tell us if the writer of such couplets can be
called an infidel.

Sheikh: These couplets are not acceptable for two reasons. First, there
is no continuity of narration about them. Second, it was nowhere seen
that Abu Talib acknowledged Islam. Reporting some of his couplets does
not conclusively prove that he was a Muslim.

Well-Wisher: Your objection about lack of continuity of narration is
strange. Whenever you wish, you accept a lone report to be reliable and
when you do not wish, you use the weapon of lack of continuity.

If you reflect for a moment that if these couplets have not been
continuously reported by individuals, even so, taken as a whole, they
prove that Abu Talib believed in the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet.
There are many such things whose continuity of narration is determined
in the same way.

For instance, the battles of the Commander of the Faithful and the
examples of his bravery also depend upon lone reports. But taken as a
whole these reports create the sense of continuity, which gives us the
necessary knowledge of his valor. Hatim's generosity and Nushirwan's
justice are known in the same way.

Since you are so fond of continuity, please let us know how you would
prove that the Hadith of Zuhza has been successively transmitted.

Abu Talib's acknowledgement of his belief in Allah at the time of his death
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

As for your second objection, my reply is quite simple. It is necessary
to express one's acknowledgement of the unity of Allah, prophethood, the
Day of Resurrection, etc. in prose. But if one composes couplets in
which he expresses his belief, it is quite sufficient. When Abu Talib
said,"You who believe in Allah! Bear witness that verily I follow the
religion of the Prophet of Allah, Ahmad," it had the same effect as if
he had said it in prose.

Besides this, he acknowledged his belief at the time of his death in
prose as well. Sayyid Muhammad Rasuli Bazranji, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim, and
Baihaqi have reported that a party of the chiefs of the Quraish,
including Abu Jahl and Abdullah Ibn Abi Umayya, came to Abu Talib when
he was dying. At that time the Holy Prophet said to his uncle Abu Talib:
"Say that 'there is no god but Allah,' so that I may bear witness to it
before Allah."

Instantly Abu Jahl and Abi Umayya said, "Abu Talib! Will you turn away
from the creed of Abdu'l-Muttalib?" They repeated these words time and
again until he said, "You should know that Abu Talib follows the creed
of Abdu'l-Muttalib." The result was that those people went away well
pleased. When the signs of death appeared on Abu Talib, his brother
Abbas, who was sitting on the edge of his bed, saw that his lips were
moving.

When he listened to what he said, he heard him saying: "There is no god
but Allah." Abbas said to the Holy Prophet: "Nephew! I swear by Allah
that my brother (Abu Talib) has said what you ordered him to say." Since
Abbas had not himself embraced Islam at that time, he did not utter
those words.

We have proved earlier that the ancestors of the Holy Prophet were all
believers in the unity of Allah. You should know that it was expedient
for Abu Talib to say that he followed the creed of Abdu'l-Muttalib. He
satisfied those people, and in reality he acknowledged his faith in the
unity of Allah because Abdu'l-Muttalib followed the creed of the Prophet
Abraham.

Moreover, he did utter the words "There is no god but Allah." If you
study the historical facts about Abu Talib, you will certainly
acknowledge that he was a believer.

Holy Prophet's conversation with Abu Talib at the announcement of his Prophethood
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the day of his bi'that (announcement of Prophethood) the Holy
Prophet, along with his uncle, Abbas, went to Abu Talib and said to him:
"Verily, Allah has ordered me to announce His command; verily, He has
made me His Prophet; so how will you treat me?"

Abu Talib was the chief of the Quraish, the Head of the Bani Hashim, and
the most veracious man in the eyes of the people of Mecca. He had reared
the Holy Prophet. Had he been an infidel, he would have at once opposed
him.

And if that had not proven sufficient, since the Holy Prophet had come
to him to seek help to propagate his prophethood, Abu Talib seeing that
it was against his religion, would have confined the Holy Prophet or at
least would have turned him out of his place.

Such a rejection would have hindered the Holy Prophet from his great
resolve. Abu Talib's religion (supposing it to be polytheism) would have
been saved, and he would have earned the gratitude of his associates.
Abu Talib could have rebuked the Holy Prophet as Azar had done to his
nephew the Prophet Abraham.

Abraham's announcement of prophethood and his conversation with Azar
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In the Holy Qur'an, Allah Almighty tells of the raising up of Abraham
Khalilu'r-Rahman as Prophet of Allah. He said to his uncle, Azar,

***"O my father! Truly knowledge has come to me which has not come to
you; therefore follow me, I will guide you on a right path." (19:43)***

***"He said: Do you dislike my gods, O Abraham? If you do not desist, I
will certainly revile you; leave me for a long time." (19:46)***

Abu talib assures Holy Prophet of full support and also recites couplets in praise of Islam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But, on the contrary, when the Holy Prophet sought his help, Abu Talib
said: "O my nephew! Proceed with your mission. Verily, you are high in
rank, strong in your clan and the most exalted in family lineage. I
swear by Allah that the tongue which speaks ill of you will be answered
by me with sharp swords. By Allah, the whole Arab world will kneel down
before you, as an animal humbles itself before its master."

Moreover, he composed the following verses, referring to the Prophet's
mission. These have been recorded by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.III, p. 306, and Sibt Ibn Jauzi in his Tadhkira,
p. 5:

"I swear by Allah that those people with their partisans will never
reach you, till I consign them to their graves.

So you should go on performing your duty. I give you the good news of
your success. Make your eyes cool with it.

You have called me to your religion. I believe that you have guided me
to the right path; you are surely the truthful one and have ever been
trustworthy.

You have brought us a religion which I know is the best of all
religions.

If I had no fear of taunt and reproach, you would have found me openly
supporting you."

These couplets show that Abu Talib recognized Muhammad to be a messenger
of Allah. There are however many other similar couplets which Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, and many other ulama’, have
recorded in their books.

Is a man who recites such couplets an infidel or a true believer?

Abu Talib was a supporter and guardian of the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------------------------

Most of your prominent ulama’ have recorded this fact. You might consult
Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi's Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.52, in which it is
reported from Abu Uthman Amr Ibn Bahr Jahiz that, writing about Abu
Talib, he said, "Abu Talib was a supporter of the prophethood and
messengership of the Holy Prophet. He wrote many couplets in praise of
the Holy Prophet. He was the leader of the Quraish."

This clear evidence proves the sincerity of Abu Talib's faith. Of course
the Bani Umayya encouraged people to curse the chief of the monotheists,
the Commander of the Faithful, and the grandsons of the Holy Prophet,
Hasan and Husain. They also fabricated hadith condemning the Holy imam
and forged reports that his father (Abu Talib) died an infidel.

The reporter was the accursed Mughira Ibn Sha'ba, an enemy of ‘Ali and
friend of Mu'awiya. The Kharijis and Nasibis propagated the view that
Abu Talib was an infidel. The simple people were led to believe that it
was a correct view.

It is strange that they consider Abu Sufyan, Mu'awiya, and Yazid (May
Allah's curse be upon them) believers and Muslims, even though there are
countless indications to the contrary. And yet they attribute infidelity
to Abu Talib in spite of clear proofs which show that he was a firm
believer.

Not proper to call Mu'awiya 'khalu'l-mu'minin'
----------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Is it proper for you to call the Khalu'l-Mu'minin (uncle of the
believers), Mu'awiya Ibn Abu Sufyan "infidel" and always curse him. Will
you let us know what evidence you have that Mu'awiya Ibn Abu Sufyan and
Yazid were infidels and fit to be cursed. These two distinguished men
were among the caliphs. In fact Mu'awiya was both Khalu'l-Mu'minin
(uncle of the believers) and also Katib al-Wahi (scribe of revelations).

Well-Wisher: Would you please tell me how Mu'awiya merits the title
Khalu'l-Mu'minin (uncles of the believers)?

Sheikh: Since Mu'awiya's sister, Umm Habiba, was the wife of the Holy
Prophet and Ummu'l-Mu'minin (mother of believers), her brother Mu'awiya
was Khalu'l-Mu'minin.

Well-Wisher: In your opinion was the rank of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha
greater or that of Umm Habiba, sister of Mu'awiya?

Sheikh: Although both were Ummu'l-Mu'minin, A’ysha was definitely
superior to Umm Habiba.

Well-Wisher: According to your criteria, all brothers of the wives of
the Holy Prophet are Khalu'l-Mu'minin. Then why don't you call Muhammad
Ibn Abi Bakr Khalu'l-Mu'minin? According to you his father was superior
to Mu'awiya, and his sister was also superior to Mu'awiya's sister. No,
Mu'awiya's being Khalu'l-Mu'minin has no reality.

Mu'awiya pronounces takbir at Imam Hasan's martyrdom
----------------------------------------------------

Abu'l-Faraj Ispahani in his Maqatilu't-Talibin, Ibn Abdu'l-Bar in his
Isti'ab, Mas'udi in his Isbatu'l-Wasiyya, and many other ulama’ have
reported that Asma Ju'da, by order and promise of Mu'awiya, gave poison
to Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn ‘Ali. Ibn Abdu'l-Bar and Muhammad Ibn Jarir
Tabari have also reported that when Mu'awiya was informed of the demise
of the Holy imam, he shouted the takbir ("Allah is Great."). Of course,
such a damned person should be called Khalu'l-Mu'minin according to you!

Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was killed thirsty and burnt to ashes for love of Ahlul Bayt
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But look at Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr, who was brought up by the Commander
of the Faithful and was one of the staunchest friends of the Holy Ahlul
Bayt!

Addressing this illustrious family he says: "O descendants of Fatima!
You are a place of safety for me and my guardian. It is through you that
on the Day of Judgement, the significance of my good actions will be
greater. Since my love for you is sincere, I do not mind if somebody
barks near me."

Although he was the son of the first caliph, Abu Bakr, and the brother
of Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha, he was not call Khalu'l-Mu'minin. He was
abused and deprived of his father's legacy!

When Amr Ibn As and Mu'awiya Ibn Khadij conquered Egypt, the supply of
water was cut off to Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr. When he had nearly died of
thirst, he was killed. He was then enclosed in the skin of an ass and
the bundle was thrown into a fire. When Mu'awiya learned of this, he was
very pleased.

Hearing these facts, you do not question why these damned people treated
Abu Bakr's son, Khalu'l-Mu'minin Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr, so cruelly. But
when Mu'awiya is cursed, you immediately become angry. So you see the
opposition to the progeny of the Holy Prophet, and it continues today.

Since Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr was one of the friends of the descendants of
the Holy Prophet, you neither call him Khalu'l-Mu'minin nor regret his
murder. Since Mu'awiya was the bitterest enemy of the Ahlul Bayt of the
Holy Prophet, you call him Khalu'l-Mu'minin. Allah save us from such
fanatical perversity!

Mu'awiya was not a scribe of wahi (revelation) but only of letters
------------------------------------------------------------------

Second, Mu'awiya was not the writer of Wahi. He embraced Islam in the
tenth year of the Hijra when revelation was complete. In fact he was the
scribe who wrote letters. He caused immense trouble for the Holy
Prophet. In the eighth year of the Hijra when Mecca was conquered and
Abu Sufyan embraced Islam, Mu'awiya wrote many letters to his father
railing at him because he had accepted Islam.

When, however, the whole Arabian Peninsula and beyond came under the
influence of Islam, Mu'awiya was himself forced to embrace Islam. In
doing so he lost all his prestige. Abbas then asked the Holy Prophet to
assign Mu'awiya some position so that he might no longer feel
humiliated. In view of the recommendation of his uncle, the Holy Prophet
appointed him as scribe for the writing of letters.

Evidence for Mu'awiya's infidelity
----------------------------------

Third, there are many suras of the Qur'an and hadith proving that he was
an infidel and worthy of curses.

Sheikh: I would like very much to hear these suras and hadith.

Well-Wisher: Only a few will be pointed out. If I narrate them all, it
would form a complete book. Muslim, in his Sahih, reports Mu'awiya was a
scribe of the Holy Prophet. Mada'ini says: "Sa'id Ibn Thabit was the
Wahi (revelation) and Mu'awiya used to write the letters of the Holy
Prophet to other Arabs."

Evidence from suras of the Holy Qur’an and hadith Mu'awiya and Yazid are cursed
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Please refer to ayat 60 of Sura 17 (Bani Israel). Commentators from
your own ulama’, like Tha'labi, Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi, and others say
that the Holy Prophet saw in a dream that the Bani Umayya, like monkeys,
ascended and descended his pulpit.

Thereafter Gabriel brought this Holy ayat:

***"And when We said to you: Surely your Lord encompasses men. And we
did not create the vision which We showed you except as a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur'an as well. And we cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their grievous transgression." (17:60)***

Allah Almighty has called the Bani Umayya, whose leaders were Abu Sufyan
and Mu'awiya, the "cursed tree" in the Holy Qur'an. Mu'awiya, who was a
strong limb of this tree, was definitely accursed.

(2) Again Allah Almighty says,

***"But if you held command, you would surely make mischief in the land
and cut off the ties of kinship. Those it is whom Allah has cursed so He
has made them deaf and blinded their eyes." (47:22-23)***

In this verse those who make mischief in the earth and sever the ties of
kinship are cursed by Allah. Who was a greater mischief monger than
Mu'awiya, whose caliphate was notorious for its evil practices? Besides
this, he severed the ties of kinship.

(3) Also Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Surely as for those who speak evil things of Allah and His Apostle,
Allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter, and He has
prepared them for a chastisement bringing disgrace." (33:57)***

Certainly tormenting the Commander of the Faithful and the two grandsons
of the Holy Prophet Hasan and Husain as well as Ammar al-Yasir and other
distinguished companions of the Holy Prophet was the equivalent of
tormenting the Holy Prophet himself.

Since Mu'awiya did torment these pious people, he was, according to the
explicit wordings of the verse, definitely accursed in this world and in
the hereafter.

(4) In sura Mu'min (The Believer), Allah says:

***"The day on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and for
them is a curse and for them is an evil abode." (40:52)***

(5) In the sura Hud, He says:

***"Now surely the curse of Allah is on the unjust." (11:18)***

(6) In the sura Al-A'raf (The Elevated Places) Allah says:

***"Then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of Allah is on
the unjust." (7:44)***

Similarly, in many other verses revealed about the unjust ones, it is
clear that every unjust one is accursed. I do not think any of you would
deny the open injustices perpetrated by Mu'awiya.

So the very fact that he was unjust proves that he deserved Allah's
curse in the light of these clear indications we too can curse the one
who deserves Allah's curse.

(7) In the sura Nisa (The Women) Allah says:

***"And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is Hell;
he shall abide in it, and Allah will send His wrath on him and curse him
and prepare for him a painful chastisement." (4:93)***

Murder of prominent believers, like Imam Hasan, Ammar Hajar ibn Adi Malik Ashtar, and Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, by order of Mu'awiya
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This Holy verse explicitly says that if a man kills a single believer
intentionally, he deserves Allah's curse and his abode is in Hell.
Wasn't Mu'awiya associated with the murder of believers? Did he not
order the killing of Hajar Ibn Adi and his seven companions? Did he not
order that Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Hasan Al-Ghanzi be buried alive?

Ibn Asakir and Yaqub Ibn Sufyan in their Histories; Baihaqi in his
Dala'il; Ibn Abdu'l-Bar in Isti'ab; and Ibn Athir in Kamil have reported
that Hajar Ibn Adi was one of the eminent companions who, along with
seven companions was brutally murdered by Mu'awiya. Their crime was
refusing to curse ‘Ali.

Imam Hasan was the elder grandson of the Holy Prophet. Was he not
included in Ashab al-Kisa (people of the mantle)? Was he not one of the
two leaders of the youths of Paradise and a believer of exalted rank?

According to the reports of Mas'udi, Ibn Abdu'l-Bar, Abu'l-Faraj
Ispahani, Tabaqa of Muhammad Ibn Sa'd, Tadhkira of Sibt Ibn Jauzi, and
other accredited ulama’ of the Sunnis, Mu'awiya sent poison to Asma'
Ju'da and promised her that if she killed Hasan Ibn ‘Ali, he would give
her 100,000 dirhams and would marry her to his son Yazid.

After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan, he gave her 100,000 dirhams but
refused to marry her to Yazid. Would you hesitate to call Mu'awiya
accursed? Is it not a fact that in the Battle of Siffin the great
companion of the Holy Prophet, Ammar Yasir, was martyred by Mu'awiya's
order?

All your prominent ulama’ say with one accord that the Holy Prophet said
to Ammar Yasir: "It will not be long before you will be killed by a
rebellious and misguided group."

Have you any doubt that thousands of devout believers were killed by
Mu'awiya's subordinates? Wasn't the pure and valiant warrior, Malik
Ashtar, poisoned by Mu'awiya's order? Can you deny that Mu'awiya's chief
officials, Amr Ibn As and Mu'awiya Ibn Khadij, brutally martyred the
Commander of the Faithful's governor, the pious Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr?

Not content with that, they put his body into the carcass of a donkey
and set it on fire. If I were to give you the details about the
believers killed by Mu'awiya and his officials, it would require not one
night, but several.

Murder of 30,000 believers by Busr ibn Artat on order of Mu'awiya
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The greatest atrocity was that of Busr Ibn Artat who killed thousands of
believers on Mu'awiya's orders.

Abu'l-Faraj Ispahani and Allama Samhudi in Ta'rikhu'l-Medina, Ibn
Khallikan, Ibn Asakir and Tabari in their histories; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.I, and many others of your notable ulama’
have written that Mu'awiya ordered Busr to attack San'a and Yemen from
Medina and Mecca. He gave a similar order to Zuhak Ibn Qais Al-Fahri and
others. Abu'l-Faraj reports it in these words:

"Whoever from the companions and Shi’as of ‘Ali is found should be
killed; even women and children should not be spared." With these strict
orders, they set out with a force of 3000 and attacked Medina, San'a',
Yemen, Ta'if, and Najran. When they reached Yemen, the governor,
Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas, was out of the city. They entered his house and
slaughtered his two sons Sulayman and Dawud in the lap of their mother.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.I, p.121,
that in this raid 30,000 people were killed, excluding those who were
burnt alive.

Do you gentlemen still doubt that Mu'awiya deserves to be cursed?

Mu'awiya ordered that ‘Ali be cursed
------------------------------------

Among the many clear proofs that Mu'awiya was an infidel and deserved
damnation was his public rejection of the Commander of the Faithful and
his ordering the people to recite imprecations against the Holy Imam in
their qunuts (supplication in daily prayers). This fact is acknowledged
by both you and us.

Even the historians of other nations have recorded that this vile
practice was openly pursued and that many people were put to death
because they did not utter the curses. This outrage was discontinued by
the Umayya Caliph, ‘Umar ibn Abdu'l-Aziz.

Obviously, one who curses the brother of the Holy Prophet, the husband
of Fatima, the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and who
orders others to do it is definitely damned. This fact has been recorded
by all your eminent ulama’ in their authentic books.

For instance, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Imam Abu
Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in his Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, Imam Tha'labi and Imam
Fakhru'd-in Razi in their Tafsir (commentary), Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his
Kifayatu't-Talib, Sibt Ibn Jauzi in his Tadhkira, Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi
in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba.

Dailami in his Firdaus, Muslim Ibn Hajjaj in his Sahih, Muhammad Ibn
Talha Shafi'i in his Matalibu's-Su'ul, Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in his
Fusulu'l-Muhimma, Hakim in his Mustadrak, Khatib Khawarizmi in his
Manaqib, Abraham Hamwaini in his Fara'id, Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in his
Manaqib, Imamu'l-haram in his Dhakha'iru'l-Uquba, Ibn Hajar in his
Sawa'iq, and your other prominent ulama’ have, in slightly different
words, reported that the Holy Prophet said: "One who reviles ‘Ali,
really reviles me; who reviles me, really reviles Allah."

Dailami in his Firdaus, Sulayman Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda have
reported that the Holy Prophet said: “One who gives pain to ‘Ali, really
gives pain to me, and the curse of Allah is upon him who causes pain to
me." Ibn Hajar Makki in his Sawa'iq narrates a hadith concerning the
consequence to one who curses against any of the progeny of the Holy
Prophet.

He reports that the Holy Prophet said: "If anyone curses my Ahlul Bayt,
there is nothing for him but exclusion from Islam. If anyone injures me
concerning my Ahlul Bayt, may Allah's curse be upon him."

Therefore Mu'awiya was certainly cursed. As reported by Ibn Athir in his
Kamil, Mu'awiya used to curse ‘Ali, the grandsons of the Holy Prophet,
Hasan and Husain and also Abbas and Malik Ashtar in the qunut of his
daily prayers.

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal reports in his Musnad from a number of sources
that the Holy Prophet of Allah said: "If any one injures ‘Ali he shall
be treated as a Jew or Christian on the Day of Judgement." Certainly you
must know that it is one of the tenets of Islam that to call Allah and
the Holy Prophet by ill names leads to infidelity.

Muhammad Ibn Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, part X, reports that
once Abdullah Ibn Abbas and Sa'id Ibn Jabir saw on the brink of Zamzam a
group of Syrians railing at ‘Ali. They went to them and said:

"Who among you was abusing the Holy Prophet of Allah?" They replied:
"None of us was abusing the Holy Prophet of Allah." Then they said:
"Well, who among you was abusing ‘Ali?" They said: "Yes, we have been
abusing ‘Ali."

Then Abdullah and Sa'id said: "You should bear witness that we heard the
Holy Prophet saying to ‘Ali, 'One who abuses you really abuses me; one
who abuses me, really abuses Allah. If someone abuses Allah, He will
throw him headlong into the fire of Hell.'"

The companions of the Prophet were at different levels of understanding
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Is it proper for a man of your caliber to condemn such an able
and dignified companion of the Holy Prophet? Is it not a fact that Allah
Almighty revealed a number of verses in praise of the companions of the
Holy Prophet and gave them the good tidings of their deliverance?

And Khalu'l-Mu'minin Mu'awiya, who was definitely a distinguished
companion, deserved the praise contained in the Holy verse. Doesn't
insulting the companions amount to insulting Allah and the Holy Prophet?

Well-Wisher: Perhaps you have forgotten what I have already told you on
previous nights. No one denies that verses have been revealed in praise
of the companions. But if you understand the meaning of the sahaba or
companions, you will admit that the verses revealed in praise of the
companions are not generally applicable to all. We cannot regard all of
them as entirely pure.

Respected man! You know full well that "sahaba" literally means the
joining together of persons. So it may mean living together or, as is
commonly understood, helping or giving assistance to others.

According to Arab lexicography, the Qur'an, and the hadith, a companion
of the Holy Prophet refers to one who has spent his life in the company
of the Holy Prophet, whether he was a Muslim or an infidel. So your
interpretation that all the companions deserve Paradise is not correct.
This contradicts common sense as well as the hadith.

In the words of the holy Qur’an "sahab" and "sahaba," meaning "companions", have no reverential significance
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I will submit additional Qur'anic verses and authentic hadith from Sunni
scholars so that you will not be mistaken about the word "companion."
This word was used for all companions, whether they were Muslims or not.

(1) In the sura Najm (the Star), Allah says to the Polytheists:

***"Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray." (53:2)***

(2) In the sura of Saba (Sheba), Allah says:

***"Say: I exhort you only to one thing, that you rise up for Allah's
sake in pairs and singly, then ponder: your companion is not possessed."
(34:46)***

(3) In the sura of Kahf (The Cave), Allah says:

***"and said he to his companion while he disputed with him: I have
greater wealth than you and am mightier in followers." (18:34)***

(4) In the same sura, Allah says:

***"His companion said to him while disputing with him: Do you
disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust, then from a sperm drop,
then He made you a perfect man." (18:37)***

(5) In the sura of A'raf (The Elevated Places), Allah says:

***"Do they not reflect that their companion had not unsoundness in
mind? He is only a plain warner." (7:184)***

(6) In the sura of An'am (The Cattle), Allah says:

***"Say: Shall we call on that besides Allah, which does not benefit us
nor harm us, and shall we be returned back on our heels after Allah has
guided us, like him whom the devils have made to fall down perplexed on
the earth. He has companions who call him to the right way, (saying):
'Come to us.' Say: Surely the guidance of Allah, that is the (true)
guidance, and we are commanded that we should submit to the Lord of the
worlds." (6:71)***

(7) In the sura of Yusuf (Joseph) He says: (Yusuf addressing his two
fellow prisoners who were polytheists)

***"O my two Companions of the prison! Are many lords better or Allah,
the One, the Supreme?" (12:39)***

These are a few verses, which I have quoted by way of example. It is
clear that the words "sahaba," "sahib," "musahib" and "ashab" have no
special relationship to Muslims. They are used in reference to Muslims
and polytheists alike.

As I have said, a man who has a social dealing with another man is
called his musahib or ashab. The companions of the Holy Prophet refer to
those who had social dealings with him.

Certainly among the companions of the Holy Prophet and among those who
sat in his company, were all sorts of people, good and bad, believers as
well as hypocrites. The verses revealed in praise of the companions
cannot be attributed to all of them. They refer only to the good
companions.

It is also true that none of these exalted prophets of the past had
companions as distinguished as those of our Holy Prophet. For instance,
the companions of Badr, Uhud, and Hunain were such as stood the test of
time. They helped the Holy Prophet and were firm in their resolve.

But among his companions were also a number of men of debased character,
enemies of the Holy Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt, men like Abdullah Ibn
Ubayy, Abu Sufyan, Hakam Ibn As, Abu Huraira, Tha'labi, Yazid Ibn
Sufyan, Walid Ibn Aqaba, Habib Ibn Musailima, Samra Ibn Jundab, Amr Ibn
As, Busr Ibn Artat (a tyrant and bloodthirsty man), Mughira Ibn Sha'ba,
Mu'awiya Ibn Abi Sufyan, and Dhu's-Sadiyya.

These men, both during the life time of the Holy Prophet and after his
death, caused great tumult among the people. One such man was Mu'awiya,
whom the Holy Prophet cursed in his own time. After the death of the
Holy Prophet, when Mu'awiya got an opportunity, he rose in revolt in the
name of seeking vengeance for Uthman's murder and caused the blood shed
of many Muslims.

In this slaughter, many respected companions of the Holy Prophet, like
Ammar Yasir, were martyred. The Holy Prophet himself foretold his
martyrdom. I have already mentioned some hadith regarding this event.

Holy Qur’an praises good companions but also condemns bad companions
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There are many verses in the Holy Qur'an and hadith in praise of
distinguished companions and pious believers. And there are also many
verses and hadith condemning those companions who were sinners.

Sheikh: How can you claim that the companions of the Holy Prophet caused
social disturbances?

Well-Wisher: This is not merely my claim. Allah Almighty in the sura of
Ahlul Imran (the House of Imran) says:

***"If then he (Muhammad) dies or is killed, will you turn back upon
your heels?" (3:144)***

Apart from this and other verses of the Holy Qur'an, your own ulama’,
including Bukhari, Muslim, Ibn Asakir, Yaqub Ibn Sufyan, Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, Abdu'l-Bar, and others have recorded a number of reports and
hadith concerning the condemnation of some of the companions. I will
refer to only two hadith.

Bukhari reports from Sahl Ibn Sa'd and Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud that the Holy
Prophet of Allah said, "I shall be waiting for you at the fountain of
Kauthar. When a group of you goes astray from my way, I will say, 'O
Allah! These were my companions!' Then a reply from Him will come to me:
'You do not know what innovations they introduced after you.'"

Again Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Tabrani in his Kabir, and Abu
Nasr Sakhri in his Ibana narrate from Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet
said: "I want to save you from the chastisement of Hell. I ask you to
fear Hell and to make no changes in the religion of Allah. When I die
and am separated from you, I shall be present at the Fountain of
Kauthar.

Whoever reaches me there is saved. At the end of time when I find a
large number of people caught in divine chastisement, I shall say: 'O
Allah! These are the people of my Community.' The reply shall come,
'Verily, these people returned to their old creed after you.'" According
to Tabrani's report in Kabir, the reply shall be: "You do not know what
innovations they introduced after you. They adopted their former
religion of ignorance."

Abu Talib was a firm believer
-----------------------------

You insist that Mu'awiya and Yazid are Muslims even though their many
atrocities are recorded in your own books. Some of the Sunni ulama’ have
written complete books in their condemnation, but you stubbornly insist
that they were praiseworthy and that Abu Talib a sincere believer was an
infidel!

It is quite evident that this foolish talk is the product of enmity
against the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali. You try to refute the
arguments which prove the infidelity and hypocrisy of Mu'awiya and
Yazid. And yet you reject Abu Talib's open pronouncements regarding his
belief in Allah and the Holy Prophet.

Additional proof of Abu Talib's belief
--------------------------------------

Is it not a fact that the Holy Prophet's Ahlul Bayt have said that Abu
Talib was a believer and that he died a believer? Has not Asbagh Ibn
Nabuta, a highly trusted man, narrated from the Commander of the
Faithful that he said, "I swear by Allah that my father, Abu Talib, my
grandfather, Abdu'l-Muttalib Hashim, and Abdu'l-Manaf never worshipped
idols."

Is it proper that you should reject the statements of ‘Ali and the Holy
Ahlul Bayt and give credence to the statements of the cursed Mughira,
Amawis, Kharijis, Nasibis, and other enemies of the Commander of the
Faithful?

Ja'far Tayyar's embracing Islam by his father's order
-----------------------------------------------------

Moreover, many of your ulama’, including Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, have written that one day Abu Talib came to the
mosque and saw that the Holy Prophet was offering prayers. ‘Ali was
offering prayers on the right side of the Holy Prophet.

Abu Talib ordered his son Ja'far (Tayyar) who was with him and had not
yet embraced Islam, "Stand on the side of your cousin and perform the
prayers with him." Ja'far moved forward and, standing on the left side
of the Holy Prophet, began to say his prayers. At that time Abu Talib
composed these lines of poetry:

"Verily ‘Ali and Ja'far are my strength and solace in my distress and
disappointment. O ‘Ali and Ja'far! Never leave the company of your
cousin and my nephew, but help him. I swear that I will never leave the
Holy Prophet. Can anyone leave the company of a Prophet of such noble
family?"

So it is the unanimous view of your own ulama’ that Ja'far's embracing
Islam and his performing the prayers with the Holy Prophet were at the
order of Abu Talib.

The Holy Prophet wept bitterly at Abu Talib's death and invoked Allah's blessings on him
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha and Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkirat
al-Khawasu'l-Umma report from Tabaqat al-Muhammad Ibn Sa'd, who reports
from Waqidi and Allama Sayyid Muhammad Ibn Sayyid Rasul Barzanji in his
Kitabu'l-Islam Fi'l-'am-o-Aba' al-Sayyidu'l-An'am, a report from Ibn
Sa'd and Ibn Asakir, who report on authentic sources from Muhammad Ibn
Ishaq that ‘Ali said:

"When Abu Talib died, and I informed the Holy Prophet of Allah about it,
he wept bitterly. Then he said to me, 'Go and wash his body in
preparation for burial, wrap his body in a shroud, and bury him. May
Allah bless him and have mercy upon him!"

Is it permitted by Islam to perform the burial rituals for a polytheist?
Is it right for us to say that the Holy Prophet invoked the blessings of
Allah upon an infidel and a polytheist? The Holy Prophet did not leave
his house for several days and continued praying to Allah for Abu
Talib's eternal peace.

‘Ali’s elergy for his father, Abu Talib
---------------------------------------

If you consult the Tadhkira of Sibt Ibn Jauzi, p.6 you will see what the
Commander of the Faithful said in his eulogy for his father. "O Abu
Talib! You were a haven for the seeker of refuge, a rain of mercy for
dry lands, and a light which penetrated the darkness. Your death has
toppled the pillars of safety.

Now the real Benefactor has bestowed mercy upon you. Allah Almighty has
attached you to His Court. Verily, you were the best uncle of the Holy
Prophet."

Can it be believed that a man who was the embodiment of monotheism would
write such a eulogy for a person who died an infidel?

Abu Talib concealed his faith while Hamza and Abbas proclaimed theirs
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: If Abu Talib was a believer, why did he not reveal his faith as
his brothers, Hamza and Abbas did?

Well-Wisher: There was a great difference between Abbas, Hamza, and Abu
Talib. Hamza was so fearless and formidable that all Meccans dreaded
him. His embracing Islam proved a great help to the Holy Prophet.

Abbas, however, did not announce his Islam immediately. Ibn Abdu'l-Bar
writes in his Isti'ab that Abbas embraced Islam while he was in Mecca,
but he concealed his faith from the people. When the Holy Prophet
migrated from Mecca, Abbas also intended to be with him. But the Holy
Prophet wrote to him that his stay in Mecca would be useful to him (the
Holy Prophet).

Accordingly, he remained in Mecca and used to send the Holy Prophet news
from there. The idolaters brought him with them to the Battle of Badr.
When the infidels were defeated, he was taken prisoner. On the day of
the conquest of Khaibar he was finally allowed to reveal his faith.

Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.56, p.226
reports from the Dhakha'iru'l-Uquba of Imamu'l-Haram Abu Ja'far Ahmad
Ibn Abdullah Tabari Shafi'i, who reports from Faza'il of Abu'l-Qasim
Ilahi that scholars know that Abbas had embraced Islam in the beginning
but that he kept it secret. In the Battle of Badr, when he came along
with the infidels, the Holy Prophet told his men:

"Whoever sees Abbas should not kill him because he unwillingly
accompanied the infidels. He was ready to migrate, but I wrote to him
that he should remain there and give me information about the
idolaters." On the day Abu Rafi'i informed the Holy Prophet that Abbas
proclaimed his acceptance of Islam, the Holy Prophet set Abu Rafi'i
free.

Why Abu Talib concealed his faith
---------------------------------

If Abu Talib had revealed his faith, all of the Quraish and the entire
Arab nation would have united against the Bani Hashim. Abu Talib
understood the expedience of concealing his Islam. He pretended to be
loyal to the Quraish in order to thwart the activities of the enemy.

So long as Abu Talib remained alive the same condition continued, and
the Holy Prophet was protected. But at the death of Abu Talib, the Angel
Gabriel appeared before the Holy Prophet and said: "Now you should leave
Mecca. After Abu Talib, you have no helper here."

Sheikh: Was the Islam of Abu Talib known during the time of the Holy
Prophet of Allah, and did the community believe in it?

Well-Wisher: Yes, it was commonly known to the people and they
pronounced his name with full reverence.

Abu Talib's faith was commonly known during the time of the Holy Prophet
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: How is it possible that during the time of the Holy Prophet a
thing was so much spoken of and commonly known to all, but after a
period of thirty years, a contrary view gained credence because of a
false hadith?

Well-Wisher: This was not a unique instance. Often what was accepted
during the time of the Holy Prophet completely changed its form after a
few years because of a forged hadith. Other religious orders and
practices in force during the life of the Prophet were abandoned after
some years due to the influence of the people.

Mut'a marriage and hajj Nisa were lawful up to Abu Bakr's time but made unlawful by ‘Umar
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Kindly cite one example of such a change.

Well-Wisher: There are many examples; two should suffice to make my
point. I will discuss mut'a (temporary marriage) and hajj nisa. Both
sects agree that these two practices were common during the time of the
Prophet. Moreover, they were practiced during Abu Bakr's caliphate and
also during part of ‘Umar's caliphate. But Caliph ‘Umar brought about a
complete reversal of the Qur'anic order.

He said, "Two mut'as were in effect during the time of the Holy Prophet.
I now decree both of them unlawful and will punish those who engage in
this practice."

What was made lawful by Allah was suddenly abrogated. ‘Umar's decree was
so widely promulgated and so blindly followed that the original law soon
fell into oblivion. Even today many of our Sunni brothers regard mut'a
as an innovation of the Shi’as.

If ‘Umar's whim could overturn the clear ordinance of Allah and the
historical fact that mut'a was practiced, can you doubt that Abu Talib's
well known belief could also be denied?

Sheikh: Are you saying that millions of Muslims have violated the
injunctions of the Qur'an and the sunna of the Prophet? Remember, the
whole world calls us Sunnis, i.e., followers of the sunna. The Shi’as
are called Rafizis, i.e., those who stray from the sunna of the Prophet.

Sunnis are really rafizis and Shi’as are Sunni
----------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: In reality the Shi’as are Sunnis, that is, they follow the
Holy Qur'an and the Sunna of the Holy Prophet. You people are Rafizis
because you violate the injunctions of the Holy Qur'an and the commands
of the Prophet.

Sheikh: This is strange indeed! You have transformed millions of pure
Muslims into Rafizis! Can you advance any argument to support this?

Well-Wisher: I have already told you during previous nights that the
Holy Prophet instructed us that after him we should follow the Holy
Qur'an and his progeny. But you people deliberately abandoned the
progeny of the Prophet and followed others. You rejected the practices
of the Holy Prophet. You left those people by order of your two sheikhs
and then call the real followers of the Sunna of the Holy Prophet
Rafizis.

Among such orders there is another explicit injunction in the Holy
Qur'an which says,

***"And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah
and for the Apostle and for the near of kin and the orphans and the
needy and the way fairer." (8:41)***

The Holy Prophet observed this order and gave khums (1/5) of the wealth
acquired from the enemy to his relatives and kinsmen. But you people
opposed this practice.

The practice of mut'a is another case in point. It was in accordance
with Allah's command. It was sanctioned by the Prophet and his
companions. The practice continued during Abu Bakr's caliphate and also
during a part of ‘Umar's caliphate. But at the command of ‘Umar you
people have made unlawful what Allah made lawful. Moreover, you have
rejected the Sunna of the Holy Prophet. And yet you call yourselves
Sunnis and call us Rafizis.

Caliph ‘Umar himself did not advance any reason for his revoking the
divine order. The Sunni ulama’ have tried in vain to prove that Caliph
‘Umar's decision was just.

Arguments for lawfulness of mut'a
---------------------------------

Sheikh: Can you prove the lawfulness of mut'a? Can you prove that Caliph
‘Umar violated the Qur'anic injunction and the Sunna of the Holy
Prophet?

Well-Wisher: The strongest proof is furnished by the Holy Qur'an. In the
sura of Nisa (The Women) Allah says:

***"...then as to those by whom you benefited (from mut'a), give them
their dowries as appointed...." (4:24)***

Obviously the Holy Qur'an's command is obligatory forever unless it is
abrogated by the Qur'an, itself. Since it has not been abrogated, this
command holds good forever.

Sheikh: How is this verse not related to permanent wedlock? It is this
same verse that gives instruction about paying back dowry.

Well-Wisher: You have confused the main point. Your own prominent
ulama’, like Tabari in his Tafsir al-Kabir, part V and Imam Fakhru'd-din
Razi in his Tafsir al-Mafatihu'l-Ghaib, part III, have confirmed that
this verse refers to mut'a.

Apart from the explicit interpretation of your ulama’ and commentators,
you are also aware that throughout the entire sura of Nisa, several
kinds of marriage and wedlock have been mentioned: nika (permanent
marriage), mut'a (temporary marriage), and marriage with mulk al-Yamin
(servants).

For permanent marriage the Holy Qur'an says in the sura of Nisa:

***"Then marry such women as seem good to you, two and three and four;
but if you fear that you will not do justice (between them), then only
one or what your right hands possess." (4:3)***

About Mulk al-yamin (servants), Allah says:

***"And whoever among you has not within his power ampleness of means to
marry free believing women, then (he may marry) of those whom your right
hands possess from among your believing maidens; and Allah knows best
your faith: you are sprung the one from the other; so marry them with
the permission of their masters and give them their dowries justly."
(4:25)***

The command in verse 4 of sura Nisa to the effect that: "...as to those
by whom you benefitted (from mut'a), give them their dowries as
appointed...." was for mut'a, or temporary marriage. It could not be for
permanent wedlock, for otherwise, it would mean that in the same chapter
the decree regarding permanent wedlock has been repeated twice, which is
against the rule, and if it is for mut'a, then it evidently is a
permanent and separate decree.

Second, not only Shi’as but all Muslims agree that mut'a was practiced
during the early days of Islam. The distinguished companions practiced
it in the time of the Holy Prophet. If this verse refers to permanent
wedlock then which is the verse for mut'a? Evidently this is the verse
regarding mut'a, which your own commentators have accepted. There is no
verse in the Holy Qur'an which abrogates this command.

Ahlul Sunna regarding lawfulness of mut'a
-----------------------------------------

It is reported in Sahih of Bukhari and the Musnad of Imam Ibn Hanbal
from Abu Raja on the authority of Imran Ibn Hasin that "...the verse of
mut'a was revealed in the Book of Allah. So we acted in accordance with
it during the time of the Holy Prophet. No verse was revealed to make it
unlawful, nor did the Holy Prophet ever prohibit it." One man decided to
change this law. Bukhari says that the man was ‘Umar.

Muslim in his Sahih, part I, in the chapter of Nikatu'l-Mut'a, says
"Hasan Halwa'i reported to us that he was told by Abdu'r-Razzaq, who was
informed by Ibn Jarih, who was told by 'Ata that Jabir Ibn Abdullah
Ansari came to Mecca for the Umra and they went to him at his residence.
People asked him many questions.

When they came to the question of mut'a he said, 'Yes, we used to
practice mut'a during the time of the Holy Prophet and during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.'" Also in the same book in part I, in
the chapter of al-Mut'a Bi'l-Hajj wa'l-Umra, it is narrated on the
authority of Abu Nazara that he said: "I was in the company of Jabir Ibn
Abdullah Ansari when a man came and said:

“There is a difference of opinion between Ibn Abbas and Ibn Zubair
concerning the two mut'as, Mut'atu'n-Nisa and Mut'atu'l-Hajj.' Then
Jabir said, 'We have performed both of these during the time of the Holy
Prophet. Thereafter, when ‘Umar forbade it, we could not do it.'"

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, part I, p.25, narrates Abu Nazara's
report in another way. Also both narrate another report from Jabir that
he said: "In the days of the Holy Prophet and Abu Bakr, we used to
practice mut'a for the consideration of a handful of dates and flour
until ‘Umar forbade it in the case of Amr Ibn Harith."

Hamidi, in his Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain, narrates from Abdullah Ibn
Abbas that he said: "We used to practice mut'a during the time of the
Holy Prophet. When ‘Umar was caliph, he said that 'Allah Almighty made
lawful whatever He liked for His Holy Prophet. Now he is dead, and the
Qur'an takes his place. So when you begin the Hajj or the Umra, you
should complete them as Allah has ordered you. You should repent of and
abstain from mut'a. Bring him who has practiced mut'a to me so that I
may stone him.'"

There are many such reports in your own reliable books showing that
mut'a was permissible during the days of the Holy Prophet. The
companions practiced it until ‘Umar made it unlawful.

Besides these reports, some of the companions, like Ubayy Ibn Ka'b, Ibn
Abbas, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, Sa'id Ibn Jabir and Sa'd have recited the
verse of mut'a in this way, "And as such of them you had mut'a with
until such time as was fixed."

Jarullah Zamakhshari reports in his Kashshaf from Ibn Abbas and also
Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari in his Tafsir al-Kabir and Imam Fakhru'd-din
Razi in his Tafsir al-Mafatihu'l-Ghaib, vol.III, writing about this Holy
verse and Imam Nuwi in his Sharh al-Muslim, chapter I, Nikatu'l-Mut'a
report from Nazari that Qazi Ayaz stated that "Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, the
writer of wahi (i.e., recorder of revelations), used to recite this
verse in the same way, that is, 'until such time as has been fixed.'"

Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi, after quoting the statement of Ubayy Ibn Ka'b
and Ibn Abbas, said: "The community did not reject their recitation of
the verse in this way, so what we have said has been accepted through
consensus." Again on the next page he argues in this way: "This reading
evidently proves that mut'a had the sanction of religion. We have no
difference of opinion that mut'a was permitted in the time of the Holy
Prophet."

Command permitting mut'a was not repealed
-----------------------------------------

Sheikh: Can you prove that it was lawful during the days of the Holy
Prophet but was not repealed later?

Well-Wisher: There is plenty of proof that it was not annulled. The most
convincing argument is that mut'a had been permitted from the time of
the Holy Prophet until the middle of the caliphate of ‘Umar.

Caliph ‘Umar's own statement has been generally reported by your ulama’.
They have written that he went to the pulpit and said, "In the time of
the Prophet two mut'as were permitted. I make both of them unlawful, and
if any one does it, I will punish him."

Sheikh: What you say is correct, but my point is that there are many
orders, which were current earlier in the time of the Holy Prophet but
were repealed later. Mut'a was also permitted in the beginning, but
later it was forbidden.

Well-Wisher: Since the basis and foundation of religion is the Holy
Qur'an, if any ordinance is present in the Holy Qur'an and is abrogated,
its abrogation must also be present in it. Now please let me know where
in the Holy Qur'an this order has been repealed.

Sheikh: In sura 23, Mu'minin (The Believers), verse 6 repeals this
order. It says

***"Except before their mates or those whom their right hands possess,
for surely they are not blameworthy." (22:6)***

This verse lays down two conditions for conjugal relations: marriage or
intercourse with slaves. So this verse proves that the ordinance of
mut'a has been repealed.

Well-Wisher: This verse does not in any way prove that mut'a was
repealed; it confirms it. The woman united by mut'a is the real wife of
the man. Had she not been his real wife, Allah would not have ordered
her mehr (dowry) to be paid.

Moreover, the sura of The Believers was revealed while the Prophet was
in Mecca, the sura of Women while he was in Medina. Obviously the Meccan
chapters preceded the Medinan chapter. Can verse A abrogate verse B, if
verse A came before B?

Distinguished companions and Imam Malik insist that the ordinance of mut'a was not abrogated
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari,
Salama Ibn Akwa', Abu'dh-Dharr Ghifari, Subra Ibn Ma'bad, Akwa' Ibn
Abdullah Al-Aslami and Imran Ibn Hasin have stated that the ordinance of
mut'a was not abrogated. Moreover, your eminent ulama’ have also held
that it was not abrogated.

For instance, Jarullah Zamakhshari, in his Tafsir al-Kashshaf regarding
Abdullah Ibn Abbas's statement that the verse of mut'a was one of the
clear ordinances of the Holy Qur'an, says that this verse was not
repealed. Imam Malik Ibn Anas also said that the permissibility of mut'a
had not been repealed.

Mulla Sa'idu'd-din Taftazani in Sharh al-Maqasid, Burhanu'd-din Hanafi
in his Hidaya, Ibn Hajar Asqalani in his Fathu'l-Bari and others also
have reported the statement and verdict of Malik who says: "Mut'a is
lawful. It is permitted by religion. Its lawfulness, as confirmed by Ibn
Abbas, is quite well known and most of his companions from Yeman and
Mecca have practiced it.

At another place he says: "Mut'a is lawful since it has been permitted
and its lawfulness and permissibility hold good unless it is repealed."
You will notice that until Malik's death there was no evidence that the
ordinance of mut'a had been annulled.

Moreover, your prominent commentators, like Zamakhshari, Baghawi, and
Imam Tha'labi have adhered to the position of Ibn Abbas and other
distinguished companions and have believed in the lawfulness of mut'a.

All conditions of wedlock are fulfilled by mut'a
------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Since there are no provisions for a woman united by mut'a, such
as inheritance, divorce, after divorce (waiting period) and maintenance,
as are necessary for a wife, she cannot be a real wife.

Well-Wisher: A woman joined with a man through mut'a is protected by all
the provisions of any wife except those which have been reasonably
excluded. Mut'a is a kind of nika (marriage), which entitles a woman to
wifehood. Of course for the convenience of the community and to save
them from lawlessness, some of its conditions and formalities have been
waived.

As for its conditions, first, it is not proved that inheritance is a
necessary condition of marriage. Many women, in spite of being wives, do
not receive an inheritance from their husbands. For example, disobedient
wives or those who murder are deprived of inheritance.

Second, it is not definitely established whether a woman united by mut'a
is deprived of her right of inheritance. The jurists differ in their
opinions about it, and such differences exist among you also.

Third, the Imamiyya ulama’ unanimously hold the view that a woman united
by mut'a must also observe 'idda (waiting period before re-marriage).
Its shortest period has been fixed as 45 days. If the husband dies, she
should observe the usual 'idda of four months and ten days, whether she
had had sexual intercourse with her husband or not, or whether she has
passed the age of menstruation or not.

Fourth, the right of maintenance is not a necessary condition attached
to marriage. There are a number of wives who are not entitled to
maintenance, such as those who are disobedient or who murder their
husbands.

Fifth, the expiration of the agreed upon period is itself her divorce.
Similarly, with the consent of her husband, she may be divorced before
the expiration date.

Therefore none of the conditions that you have mentioned has any force.
A renowned Shi’as scholar, Allama Jamalu'd-Din Hilli (Hasan Ibn Yusuf
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Mutahhar), has given in detail the same arguments in reply
to the views of your prominent ulama’. I have referred to them briefly.
Anyone who wants to study it in detail may consult Allama Hilli's
Mabahithat al-Sunniyya wa Ma'rifat al-Nussairiyya.

Was qur'anic command for mut'a abrogated by the Holy Prophet?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Besides the Holy verse there are also a large number of hadith
which say that the ordinance concerning mut'a had been abrogated during
the time of the Holy Prophet.

Well-Wisher: Kindly let us know about that order of abrogation.

Sheikh: It has been narrated with some variations. Some reporters say
that it was decreed on the day of the conquest of Khaibar, some say it
happened on the day of conquest of Mecca, some reports say that it was
on the occasion of the Last Pilgrimage, and some say that it was on the
day of Tabuk. Others, however, are of the opinion that the order of
nullity was revealed on the occasion of Umratu'l-Qaza (The Farewell
Pilgrimage).

Arguments concerning its abrogation during the time of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: The contradictory reports clearly prove that there was no
such order of abrogation. And how can those reports be relied upon when,
on the contrary, there are many hadith reported in Sahih al-Sitta, Jam'
al-Bainu's-Sahihain, Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahih al-Sitta, Musnad, etc, from
distinguished companions which prove that this verse was not abrogated
until the caliphate of ‘Umar.

The most compelling argument that your own ulama’ have themselves cited
is the statement of Caliph ‘Umar, who said: "I make both those two
mut'as which were current in the days of the Holy Prophet, unlawful."
Had there been any verse, or order of the Holy Prophet, the caliph would
have said:

"According to the instructions of the Holy Prophet, which is supported
by the Qur'anic verse, if any one committed the unlawful act in
violation of the abrogated ordinance, I will punish him." Such a
statement would have been more impressive for the people. But he merely
said: “Two mut'as were permitted in the time of the Holy Prophet, I make
them unlawful."

If, however, your claim is correct and the verse of mut'a was abrogated,
why didn't the pupils of the Holy Prophet, like Abdullah Ibn Abbas,
Imran Ibn Hashim and other companions act upon it? Your own great
traditionists and historians, including Bukhari and Muslim, have
recorded this fact. All these things clearly prove that from the time of
the Holy Prophet to the caliphate of ‘Umar the companions followed this
ordinance.

Could caliph ‘Umar abrogate mut'a?
----------------------------------

So it is clear that mut'a shall continue to be lawful forever. Abu Isa
Muhammad Ibn Sawratu't-Tirmidhi in his Sunan, which is regarded as one
of the six Sahih by you, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, PART II,
p.95, and Ibn Athir in his Jam'u'l-Usul have reported that a Syrian man
asked Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Khattab what he considered about Mut'a
al-Nisa. He said: "Of course, it is lawful."

The man said again, "But your father, the caliph, forbade the people to
do it." He said, "It was ordered by the Holy Prophet; so if it has been
prohibited by my father that order cannot supersede the order of the
Holy Prophet. I am the follower of the Holy Prophet's order."

For the reports which have been narrated, perhaps people later forged
hadith in order to support Caliph ‘Umar's statement. The matter is too
clear to call for any further elucidation. The fact is that you have no
real evidence for the unlawfulness of mut'a except the statement of
Caliph ‘Umar.

Sheikh: Caliph ‘Umar's statement in itself is the strongest evidence for
Muslims, and they must follow it. If he had not heard it from the Holy
Prophet, he would not have said that.

Well-Wisher: Is Caliph ‘Umar's statement so compelling that Muslims must
follow it? I have not seen a single hadith in your books, in which the
Holy Prophet said that ‘Umar Ibn Khattab's statement was a confirmed
source or that Muslims should follow it.

On the other hand your books are filled with reliable hadith saying that
we should follow the descendants of the Holy Prophet, particularly ‘Ali.
I have referred to some of these hadith on previous nights. The Ahlul
Bayt of the Holy Prophet have said that the ordinance of mut'a was not
abrogated.

You said that had Caliph ‘Umar not heard about the order of cancellation
from the Holy Prophet, he would not have said what he did. But this is
easily disproved. First, if Caliph ‘Umar had heard of the cancellation
of the order of mut'a from the Holy Prophet, he should have spoken about
it during the life of the Holy Prophet up to the period of his own
caliphate.

This would have been especially important since he saw prominent
companions had been practicing it, and it was his duty to tell the
people that the practice of mut'a had been annulled. Why did he not
perform the duty of prevention of evil?

Second, the practice, which had been current among the community by
order of the Holy Prophet, could only be nullified by the Holy Prophet.
There should have been no delay in this case. Does it stand to reason
that if an order for the Community had been circulated and was later
abrogated, would the Holy Prophet have spoken about it to no one except
‘Umar?

And would it have made sense that ‘Umar would not have told anybody
about it until late in his own caliphate? During all this period when
the community continued to follow this (so-called) abrogated order, did
no responsibility lie with ‘Umar?

You say that the prohibition of "nullified and irreligious” practice
could not be made known to others and therefore the community continued
to follow it. Can anybody else except the Holy Prophet be held
responsible for not proclaiming the abrogation of an order, having told
only ‘Umar of it?

Is it not infidelity to say that the Holy Prophet neglected to perform
his mission and that the community because of its ignorance, continued
acting upon an abrogated order for a long time?

Third, if the order of mut'a had been annulled during the time of the
Holy Prophet and ‘Umar had heard of this from the Holy Prophet, ‘Umar
could have said when he prohibited it that he had himself heard the Holy
Prophet say that the practice of mut'a had been banned.

Obviously, if he had referred to the Holy Prophet's statement, the
community would have been much impressed by it. But he said, "During the
time of the Holy Prophet, two mut'as were permitted, but I make them
unlawful. Now I will stone those who do it." Is it not the duty of the
Holy Prophet to declare things lawful or unlawful? Or, can it be the
right of a caliph who has been appointed by the people?

I don't understand on what basis ‘Umar declared unlawful what Allah made
lawful. How strange it is that the Holy Prophet never said that he made
a certain thing lawful or unlawful. Whenever he announced any order, he
said that Allah had ordered him to convey it to the people. How bold
‘Umar is when he says: "Two mut'as were permitted in the time of the
Holy Prophet. I make both of them unlawful. I will punish those who
commit those acts."

Command of Allah or of the Holy Prophet may not be abrogated by a caliph
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Certainly you are aware that some of our scholars of high
learning believe that since the Holy Prophet was a mujtahid (authority)
in the matter of religious orders, another mujtahid, by virtue of his
own findings, may set aside the former order. It was on this basis that
‘Umar said, "I make those two things unlawful."

Well-Wisher: In an attempt to set right one wrong, you perpetrate many
others. Does ijtihad have any significance in contradicting an
injunction of the Holy Qur’an? Is not your statement quite absurd and
opposed to the Qur'anic verses?

Allah Almighty says in the sura of Jonah:

***"Say: It is not proper for me that I should change it myself. I
follow naught but what is revealed to me." (10:15)***

If it is true that the Holy Prophet could not make any changes in
religious order unless he was ordered by Allah to do so, how could
‘Umar, who had no knowledge of revelation, have the authority to make
unlawful what Allah had made lawful?

In the sura of Najm (The Star) Allah says:

***"Nor does he speak out of caprice. It is naught but revelation that
is revealed." (53:3-4)***

In the sura of Ahqaf (The Sand Dunes), Allah says:

***"Say: I am not the first of the apostles, and I do not know what will
be done with me or with you. I do not follow anything but what has been
revealed to me." (46:9)***

Obedience to the Holy Prophet is obligatory. No one, ‘Umar or anyone
else, has the right to interfere with divine orders and make unlawful
what Allah made lawful.

Expediency not grounds for abrogation
-------------------------------------

Sheikh: ‘Umar definitely thought it expedient and considered it in the
best interest of the people to abrogate that order. We find these days
that some people take a woman in mut'a for the sake of pleasure for an
hour, a month, or a year. Later, regardless of whether she is pregnant
or not, they leave her.

Well-Wisher: This is ridiculous! What does the lawfulness of this
Islamic command have to do with people's indulgence in illicit sexual
relations? If we followed your reasoning, perhaps permanent wedlock
should be made unlawful.

After all, people marry noble girls for their money or their beauty and
later leave them, without giving them any financial support. Since some
people do this, do you think that permanent wedlock should be abrogated?

No. We should encourage people to be honest and give them proper
religious instruction. If a righteous man does not find in himself the
capacity to shoulder the responsibility of having a permanent wife, and
if he wishes to avoid an unlawful action, he would, in compliance with
the code of religion, wish to take a woman in mut'a or temporary
wedlock.

Accordingly, he would like to know the conditions of mut'a because he
knows that for every order there are certain conditions. At the time of
mutual agreement, he would provide the amount of mehr (dower) for the
woman which would be sufficient for her maintenance during her 'idda,
which is 45 days, after the term of the period of mut'a.

Second, after the separation, he would look after the woman during the
entire period of 'idda. If she were pregnant, he would take proper care
of the mother so that he might take his child after it is born. If some
people fail to honor these conditions, it does not follow that a valid
order of lawfulness has been abrogated.

The welfare of the community was better understood by Allah and the Holy
Prophet than by ‘Umar. And they did not prohibit mut'a. If they didn't
prohibit it, no caliph or imam, or any other man, even one divinely
commissioned, can of his own accord make unlawful what Allah has made
lawful. So your claim, that it was in the best interest of the community
that people give up mut'a, is untenable.

Mut'a was not the cause of the spread of lawlessness; rather it was the
banning of it which spread lewdness. Those young men and women, who
cannot afford to join in permanent wedlock if they cannot control and
restrain their sexual appetite, will indulge in illicit sex. And of
course widespread adultery and fornication destroy the moral character
of entire nations.

Imam Tha'labi and Tabari in their Tafsir and Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in
his Musnad, writing in connection with the verse of mut'a, narrate from
Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali that he said: "If ‘Umar had not put a restraint on
mut'a, no one, except an unfortunate man, would have committed
fornication."

Also Ibn Jarih and Amr Ibn Dinar report from Abdullah Ibn Abbas who
said: "Mut'a was really a mercy of Allah, which He gave to the community
of Muhammad. If ‘Umar had not banned it, no one except an unlucky man
would have committed adultery."

So according to the views of the companions of the Holy Prophet, the
cause of the prevalence of adultery was the prohibition of mut'a, rather
than the practice of it. In fact all the divine commands regarding
lawful and unlawful acts which have been transmitted to the community
through the Holy Prophet were intended for the welfare of the people.
They continue to benefit them today.

Abu Talib's faith was well known during the time of the Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Our topic of discussion was not this, but I wanted to remove your doubt
since you said that what was known in the time of the Holy Prophet could
be set at naught through forged hadith. Similarly there is no validity
in your objection regarding the faith of Abu Talib.

His faith during the time of the Holy Prophet was also well known and
regarded with respect. But by forging the hadith of Zahza, some people
spread just the opposite report. The uninformed people, blindly
following their elders accepted this false report.

In short, what I have said amply proves that ‘Ali belonged to such a
distinguished family that no one of the eminent companions could match
him.

‘Ali's birthplace was the Ka'ba
-------------------------------

Another indication of ‘Ali's special merit was his birthplace. No one
else, from Adam down through all the prophets, possessed such a
distinction. Of all human beings, he alone was born in the sacred
precinct of the Ka'ba. At the time of the birth of the Prophet Jesus his
illustrious mother was forced to leave the Holy House. A voice said to
her: "O Mary! Leave the Baitu'l-Muqaddas, since it is the place of
worship and not of childbirth."

But when the time of ‘Ali's birth approached, his mother, Fatima Bint
Asad, was asked to enter the Ka'ba. And this was not an accidental
affair as if a woman was in the mosque and suddenly she was delivered of
a child. She was expressly called to enter the Ka'ba, the door of which
was locked. Some uninformed people think that Fatima Bint Asad was in
the Holy Mosque when she felt labor pains, could not go out, and gave
birth to the child.

The fact was otherwise. It was the month of Fatima Bint Asad's
confinement. She went to the Masjidu'l-Haram, where she felt labor
pains. She prayed to Allah in the precinct of the Ka'ba, saying: "O
Allah! I pray to you in the name of your honor and awe, to put me at my
ease in this labor." Suddenly, the wall of the Ka'ba, which was locked,
opened.

Another report says that a voice was heard saying: "O Fatima! Enter the
House." Fatima went into the House of Allah in front of a crowd of
people who were sitting round that place and the wall returned to its
original condition. The people were greatly astonished. Abbas was also
there. When he saw what had happened, he immediately told Abu Talib
because he had the key to the door.

He instantly came there and tried his best to unlock the door, but the
door did not open. For three days Fatima Bint Asad remained inside the
Ka'ba, apparently without sustenance of any kind. This unusual event was
the talk of the town.

At last, on the third day, the passage through which she had entered
again opened, and Fatima came out. The people saw that she had in her
hands a lovely child. Both sects (Shi’as and Sunnis) agree that no one
else had ever been given such distinction.

Hakim in his Mustadrak and Nuru'd-din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in his
Fusulu'l- Muhimma, Fasl I, p.14, say: "No one before ‘Ali was born in
the Ka'ba. This was a distinction given to ‘Ali in order to enhance his
honor, rank, and dignity."

The origin of ‘Ali’s name was the unseen world
----------------------------------------------

Another indication of ‘Ali's special merit was that his name had its
origin in the unseen world.

Sheikh: You have said a novel thing. This means that Abu Talib was a
prophet who named ‘Ali through divine inspiration. Your statement is one
of those lies which the Shi’as have invented in their extreme love
(ghulu') for ‘Ali. But it is farcical to say that Allah ordered that the
child should be named ‘Ali. ‘Ali was an ordinary name which the parents,
of their own will proposed. It had nothing to do with the unseen world.

Well-Wisher: What I said had nothing novel in it. Your astonishment is
due to your lack of knowledge about the merits of wilaya (vicegerency).

First, you think that the child was given the name after his birth,
though it was not so. In all the heavenly books, the names of Muhammad
and ‘Ali have been mentioned. Allah Almighty gave names to them
thousands of years prior to their creation. The names were written on
the skies, on the gates of heaven and on the arsh (the highest heavens).
It had nothing to do with Abu Talib's time.

Sheikh: Surely this statement is an example of excessive love for ‘Ali.
You have raised him so high that you claim his name was written long
before the creation of the universe. The result of such statements is
that your jurists consider pronouncing the name of ‘Ali after the name
of the Holy Prophet in the call to prayer.

Well-Wisher: No, sir. My statement has nothing to do with excessive
love. And it is not I who has written his name in the heavens. Allah
ordered ‘Ali's name to be written along with His own name and the name
of His Prophet.

Sheikh: Kindly refer to any of those hadith.

After the names of Allah and the Holy Prophet, ‘Ali's name is written on Arsh
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari in his Tafsir, Ibn Asakir in his
Ta'rikh, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i, in his Kifayatu't-Talib,
ch.62, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim, in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi
Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, p.238, ch. 56, hadith 52, narrate from
Dhakha'iru'l-Uqba of Imamu'l-Haram Ahmad Ibn Abdullah Tabari Shafi'i on
the authority of Abu Huraira (with a slight variation in wording) that
the Holy Prophet said:

"It is written on the arsh that 'There is no god but Allah, the One Who
has no associate; and Muhammad is my servant and Prophet, whom I helped
through ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.'"

Also in Jalalu'd-din Suyuti's Khasa'isu'l-Kubra, vol.I, p.10 and Tafsir
al-Durr al-Mansur, beginning of the chapter of Isra'il, it is reported
from Ibn Adi and Ibn Asakir, who narrate from Ana's Ibn Malik, that the
Holy Prophet of Allah said that he had seen written on the arsh, "There
is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah; I have given him
support through ‘Ali."

In Yanabiu'l-Mawadda it is narrated from Dhakha'iru'l-Uqba of
Imamu'l-Haram Tabari, according to the report of Sirat al-Mullah that
the Holy Prophet of Allah said: "On the night of the Mi'raj, when I was
taken to the highest heaven, I saw written there on the right side of
the arsh: 'Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah. I have given him help and
support through ‘Ali.'"

It is reported in Yanabi, Hadith 19, from Kitabu's-Sabi'in of
Imamu'l-Haram Tabari, quoting from the Manaqib of Faqih Wasti Ibn
Maghazili Shafi'i, and also Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i writes in
his Mawadda VI from Mawaddatu'l-Qurba two hadith; Khatib Khawarizmi in
Manaqib, Ibn Shirwaih in Firdaus, and Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in Manaqib
narrating from Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari that the Holy Prophet said:

"It is written on the gate of Paradise that 'There is no god but Allah,
Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah, and ‘Ali is the Wali (vicegerent) of
Allah and brother of the Holy Prophet of Allah.' This was written 2,000
years before the creation of the skies and the world."

I recall another hadith. Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Faqih Shafi'i writes in Mawadda
VIII of Mawaddatu'l-Qurba that the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "I have
seen your name coupled with mine in four places:

(1) On the night of the Mi'raj (ascension) when I reached the
Baitu'l-Muqaddas (The Dome of the Rock), I saw written on the rock:
'There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah whom I
gave support through his vizier (deputy) ‘Ali.'"

(2) When I reached Sidratu'l-Muntaha (the loftiest place), I saw the
words: 'Verily I am Allah; There is no god but Me, the One, and Muhammad
among all my creation is My loved one. I gave him support through his
vizier, ‘Ali.'

(3) When I reached the arsh' (the highest heaven) of Almighty Allah, I
saw there written on its pillars: 'Verily, I am Allah, and there is no
god except Me.: Of all my creation Muhammad is my loved one. I have
supported him through his vizier, ‘Ali.'

(4) When I reached Paradise, I saw written on its gate: 'There is no god
but Me. Of all my creation Muhammad is my loved one. I gave him help and
support through his vizier, ‘Ali.'"

Imam Tha'labi in his Tafsir Kashfu'l-Bayan and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 24, reporting from Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani,
Muhammad Ibn Jarir in his Tafsir and Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh, narrate
from Ibn Abbas and Abu Huraira that verse 64 of the sura of Anfal (The
Accessions) of the Holy Qur'an, namely:

***"He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with the believers."
(8:62)***

Then they say that the Holy Prophet said: "I saw written on the arsh'
that There is no god but Allah, the One, Who has no partner, and
Muhammad is My servant and Prophet; I strengthened him with ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib."

Then they narrate other hadith of this kind from Kitab al-Sifa and
Manaqib. The source of the names of Muhammad and ‘Ali is Allah Himself.

Words used by Adam for acceptance of his repentance were the names of the five pure ones
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Also Imam Tha'labi in Tafsir Kashfu'l-Bayan and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi
Hanafi in Yanabi, chapter 24, reporting from Faqih Wasti Ibn Maghazili
Shafi'i are a commentary on verse 37 of sura 2 of the Holy Qur'an,
namely:

***"Then Adam received (some) words from his Lord, so He turned to him
mercifully; surely He is oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful."
(2:37)***

Sa'id Ibn Jabir reported from Ibn Abbas, who said: "The Holy Prophet was
asked about the words which the Prophet Adam had learned and which led
to the acceptance of his repentance. The Prophet said: 'He invoked Allah
in the names of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain. So Allah
accepted his repentance and forgave him.'"

Wahi (revelation) and ilham (intuition) bestowed on persons other than Prophets, even on animals
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In regard to the granting of wahi and prophethood to Abu Talib, you are
again mistaken. Wahi and Ilham have stages which are not peculiar to the
rank of prophethood alone. These terms refer to a being's ability to
understand hidden knowledge directly. This knowledge is granted to
special people as well as to animals.

Was the bee a prophet to whom Allah sent wahi? A verse of the Holy
Qur'an in sura Nahl (The Ants) clearly says:

***"And your Lord revealed to the bee, saying: Make hives in the
mountains and in the trees and in what they build." (16:68)***

Do you think that Nukhabuz (or, according to some commentators,
Yukhabuz), the mother of the Prophet Moses was a prophet? In the sura of
Qasas (The Narratives) is clearly stated that she had been given two
commands, two prohibitory edicts, two pieces of information and two good
tidings through wahi, Allah says:

***"And we revealed to Moses' mother, saying: Give him suck; then when
you fear for him, cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve;
surely We will bring him; back to you and make him one of the apostles."
(28:7)***

Apart from these facts, it is not necessary for the guidance of the
people that all instructions and commands of Allah should be
communicated through wahi. Sometimes He guides the people through a
voice. It has repeatedly happened and the Holy Qur'an bears testimony to
this fact. In sura Maryam (Mary), He says how He guided Mary:

***"Then (a voice) called out to her from beneath her: Grieve not,
surely your Lord has made a stream to flow beneath you. Shake toward you
the trunk of the palm tree; it will drop for you fresh, ripe dates. So
eat and drink and refresh the eye. Then if you see any mortal, say:
'Surely I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent God, so I shall not speak
to any man today.'" (19:24-26)***

Abu Talib was guided by Allah to name his son ‘Ali
--------------------------------------------------

In the same way that the bee, the mother of Moses, and the mother of
Jesus were instructed by Allah, though none of them was a prophet, Abu
Talib was also instructed to give a name to his son.

Moreover, no one has ever said that Abu Talib was a prophet or that wahi
(revelation) was granted to him. A heavenly voice and a tablet contained
the instruction to name the child. Your own ulama’ have written this
fact in their books.

Sheikh: Where have our ulama’ stated this?

Well-Wisher: There are many such books.

Revelation of lawh (tablet) to Abu Talib
----------------------------------------

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Faqih Shafi'i, in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba,
Mawadda VIII, from the report of Abbas Ibn Abdu'l-Muttalib, which
Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi also quotes in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 56,
and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib narrate
with slight variation in wording, that when ‘Ali was born, his mother
Fatima Bint Asad named him after her father, Asad.

Abu Talib did not agree with her and said: "O Fatima! Let us go to the
Qubais hills, and invoke Allah (some reporters say that he said they
should go to the Masjidu'l-Haram). He may tell us the name of this
child."

It was night when they reached the Abu Qubais hills (or the
Masjidu'l-Haram) and began their invocations. Abu Talib prayed: "O
Creator of this dark night and bright moon, let us know Your will
regarding this child's name."

At that time a voice came from the sky. When Abu Talib raised his head,
he saw a tablet like a green jewel, with four lines written on it. He
took the tablet and clasped it to his chest. When he read it, he found
these verses written on it: "I have conferred a special honor on you
both by giving you a pure, distinguished son. He has been given the name
‘Ali' from the side of Allah. It is derived from ‘Ali' (The Exalted)."

Ganji Shafi'i writes in Kifayatu't-Talib that a voice came in reply to
the verses of Abu Talib reciting these two couplets: "O people of the
exalted Prophet's House! I have distinguished you with a pure child.
Verily, he has been named ‘Ali' from the side of Allah Almighty. This
name is derived from Allah's own Name, Al-’Ali."

Abu Talib was immensely pleased and fell down in prostration before
Allah. As a token of thanksgiving for this great event, he sacrificed
ten camels. He hung the tablet in the Masjidu'l-Haram. The Bani Hashim
used to take pride in it before the Quraish. The tablet remained hanging
there until it disappeared in the time of war between Abdullah Ibn
Zubair and Hajjaj.

This report also supports the previously mentioned hadith which say that
from the very beginning Abu Talib had been a believer. He implored Allah
Almighty to name the child. When he saw Allah's merciful bounty, he fell
down in prostration before Him. Is this the behavior of an unbeliever?

‘Ali's name is not a part of the adhan and iqama (calls for prayers)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

You have claimed that Shi’a jurists insist that the name of ‘Ali is
considered compulsory in the Adhan and Iqama (calls for prayer). In fact
not a single Shi’a jurist has stated that the name of ‘Ali is an
integral part of the Adhan or the Iqama. In all the books of
jurisprudence Shi’a jurists invariably say that bearing witness to the
vicegerency of Amiru'l-Mu'minin is not part of the Adhan or Iqama.

To say it in the Adhan and the Iqama with that intention is unlawful.
If, at the time of beginning prayers, the intention is that the name of
the Holy Imam is an integral part of the prayers, the performance
becomes void.

But of course after mentioning the name of the Holy Prophet, to mention
the name of ‘Ali without considering it essential to the purpose, but
merely for the sake of grace and blessedness, is desirable. Allah has
mentioned his name at every place after the name of the Holy Prophet as
I have already said before.

Now we come to our main point: no one among the distinguished companions
had as exalted lineage as ‘Ali did.

‘Ali's piety
------------

As for ‘Ali's piety, no one else compared to him. Both his friends and
his foes agree that, after the Holy Prophet, no one was as pious as ‘Ali
was.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha and Muhammad Ibn Talha
Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, report from ‘Umar Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz that the
Holy Imam was superior in piety to all of mankind. He says: "We do not
know anyone in the community after the Holy Prophet who was more devout
and pious than ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib."

Mullah ‘Ali Qushachi, for all his extreme intolerance, writes that human
beings are at a loss to comprehend the merits of ‘Ali. In his Sharh
al-Tajrid he says: "Men are astounded when they hear of the practices of
‘Ali's life."

Abdullah ibn Rafi'i's report
----------------------------

Abdullah Ibn Rafi'i says that at the end of a fast day, he went to
Amiru'l-Mu'minin. He saw that a sealed bag was brought to him. When ‘Ali
opened it, it was found to contain unsifted flour. The Imam took three
handfuls of flour, ate it, drank a little water, and offered thanks to
Allah. Abdullah Ibn Rafi'i said:

"O Abu'l-Hasan! Why have you sealed the mouth of the bag?" The Imam
replied: "It is so that my sons, who love me, may not mix olive oil or
sugar with the flour, which would cause ‘Ali's self to relish its
taste."

So ‘Ali used to keep himself aloof from delicious foods so that he might
not be subdued by them. Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi has also cited this
hadith in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 51, from Ahnaf Ibn Qais.

Suwaid ibn Ghafla's report
--------------------------

Moreover, the Sheikh, in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Muhammad Ibn Talha
Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, Khatib Khawarizmi in Manaqib, and Tabari in
his Ta'rikh have reported from Suwaid Ibn Ghafla that he said: "One day
I had the honor of visiting Amiru'l-Mu'minin. I saw before him a cup of
milk which was so sour that I could smell its foulness. The Imam had dry
bread in his hand. It was so dry that it could hardly be broken.

The Imam broke it by putting it under his knee and, after making it soft
in the sour milk, ate it. He asked me to eat with him. I told him that I
was fasting. The Imam said: 'I have heard from my friend, the Prophet of
Allah that if one is observing a fast and has an inclination for some
food, but does not eat it for the sake of Allah, then Allah will give
him heavenly foods.'"

Suwaid continued: "Seeing the condition of ‘Ali, I was astounded. I
asked the Imam's servant, Fizza, who was standing near me, why she did
not fear Allah, that is, why had she cooked the barley bread without
removing its husk. Fizza said on oath that ‘Ali himself had ordered her
not to remove its husk.

The Imam asked me what I was saying to Fizza. I told him that I had
asked her why she did not sift the flour. ‘Ali said: 'May my father and
mother be sacrificed to the Holy Prophet! The Holy Prophet never removed
the husk; he never satisfied his hunger with wheat bread for three
consecutive days. I follow the practice of the Holy Prophet.'"

‘Ali's abstaining from eating halwa
-----------------------------------

Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi and Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i write in
their Manaqib that one day during the time of ‘Ali's caliphate, some
halwa (a sweet dish) was brought to him. He picked up a little of it,
smelled it, and said: "How appealing and sweet-smelling it is! But ‘Ali
does not know its taste. I have never yet eaten halwa."

The narrator said to him: "O ‘Ali! Is halwa unlawful for you?" The Imam
said: "What Allah has made lawful can never be unlawful. But can I be
content to fill my stomach while there are starving people in the
country?

Should I sleep with my stomach full when people throughout the Hijaz are
dying of hunger? How can I content myself with my name being
Amiru'l-Mu'minin? Why should I not be associating myself with the people
in their penury and sufferings?"

Also Khawarizmi reports from Abi Ibn Thabit that one day 'faluda' (a
delicious syrup) was brought before ‘Ali, but he suppressed his desire
and did not drink it.

These are some examples of his practice regarding eating and drinking.
He ate dry barley bread sometimes with vinegar or salt and sometimes
with a little vegetable or milk. There were never two kinds of food on
his table cloth.

In the year 40 A.H. on the night of the 19th Ramadhan, when
Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Muljim Muradi inflicted the fatal wound, he was a
guest at the house of his daughter, Umm Kulthum, to end his fast. When
bread, milk and salt were put on the table cloth, ‘Ali who had great
affection for his daughter, Umm Kulthum, angrily said: "I have never
seen a girl being so unkind to her father."

Umm Kulthum said: "Father! What wrong have I done?" ‘Ali said: "Have you
ever seen your father having two kinds of food together on the table
cloth?" Then he ordered that the milk be removed. However he ate a few
morsels of bread with salt and then said: "We shall have to give account
for all the lawful things; for unlawful acts there is chastisement."

‘Ali's dress
------------

‘Ali's dress was very simple. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in Manaqib, Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal in Musnad, Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira, and others of your ulama’
have written that: "His dress was of coarse cloth, purchased for five
dirhams." He patched his clothes.

The patches were of hide or palm leaves. His shoes were also made of
palm leaves. Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, Sulayman
Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali in
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha have written that ‘Ali had so many patches on
his clothing that when during the time of his caliphate, his cousin,
Abdullah Ibn Abbas, saw them and felt sad.

‘Ali said: "I have so many patches on my clothes that now I feel shy of
the patcher. What has ‘Ali to do with worldly adornment? How should I be
content with the pleasure which is to fade away, and the blessing which
is not to last?"

Another person objected to ‘Ali's appearance saying: "Why do you patch
clothes even during the days of your caliphate and supremacy? It makes
the enemy look down upon you." ‘Ali said: "This is the kind of dress
which subdues our passions, removes the sense of pride in man, and is
adopted by a believer."

Muhammad Ibn Talha in his Matalibu's-Su'ul, Khawarizmi in his Manaqib,
Ibn Athir in his Kamil, and Sulayman Balkhi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda
have reported that ‘Ali and his servant had identical clothing. He
purchased two pieces of cloth of the same kind and price. One he wore
himself and the other he gave to his servant, Qanbar.

These were ‘Ali's customs regarding food and clothing. He himself ate
dry barley bread and gave bread made of wheat, sugar, honey and dates to
the beggars and orphans. He wore the patched clothes himself but gave
fine clothes to orphans and widows.

Zurar's conversation with Mu'awiya concerning ‘Ali
--------------------------------------------------

There are many examples of ‘Ali's rejection of the world. Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani
in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, vol. I, p.84, Sheikh Abdullah Ibn Amir Shabrawi
Shafi'i in Kitabu'l-I'ttihad Ibn Hubbi'l-Ashraf, p.8; Muhammad Ibn Talha
in Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.33; Nuru'd-din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in
Fusulu'l-Muhimma, p.128; Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 51; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira Khawasu'l-Umma
at the end of chapter 5, and many others of your accredited ulama’ and
historians have recorded in detail the conversation between Mu'awiya and
Zurar Ibn Zumra.

At the end of his talk with Mu'awiya, Zurar praised ‘Ali in these words:
"On some occasions I have seen ‘Ali at night when the stars were
scattered over the sky, holding his beard and writhing like one bitten
by a snake, crying as in intense pain, saying: 'O World! Deceive
somebody else instead of me. Do you fold me in your arms and are you
fond of me? This can't be.

I have given you three divorces, after which union is not possible. Your
time is short lived, the fear you bring is great, and your pleasure is
very insulting. May Allah save us from the paucity of means of
travelling, the remoteness of the destination, and the perils of the
way!'

Then Mu'awiya began to weep and said, 'May Allah be merciful to
Abu'l-Hasan. By Allah, he was just like that.' Mu'awiya also said,
'Women are unable to beget a man like ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.'"

The Prophet's recognition of ‘Ali's piety
-----------------------------------------

The Prophet himself recognized ‘Ali's outstanding piety. Muhammad Ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, chapter 46, reports from
Ammar Yasir, who said that he heard from the Holy Prophet that he said
to ‘Ali:

"Verily, Allah Almighty granted you adornment the like of which He has
not given to any one else whom He loved. And that is your piety in this
world. He has made you such that you neither take benefit from the
world, nor can it make you inclined towards it. He bestowed upon you the
love for the poor and the needy.

So they were pleased with your Imamate, and I was also pleased with them
on account of their following you. Blessed is he who befriends you and
acknowledges you; and woe be to him who is hostile to you. Those who
love you and acknowledge you shall be your neighbors in Paradise and
shall be your companions in your palace. Those who have been opposed to
you shall be reckoned as liars by Allah on the Day of Judgement and
shall be granted their due chastisement."

Allah and the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali imamu'l-muttaqin (chief of the pious)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

He reached such a high stage of piety that friends and enemies alike
called him Imamu'l-Muttaqin (the Chief of the Pious). In fact the first
person to address him with this title was the Holy Prophet himself.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.II, p.450; Hafiz
Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his
Kifayatu't-Talib, chapter 54, report from Anas Ibn Malik that one day
the Holy Prophet asked him to bring water to him for ablution.

When he had brought water, the Holy Prophet performed his ablution and
then performed two rak'ats of prayer. Then he said to him: "O Anas! The
next person to enter this door is the chief of the pious ones, the
leader of the Muslims, the sovereign of the believers, and the seal of
the successors, who will lead people with bright faces and hands to
Paradise."

Anas says: "I prayed within myself to Allah that He might send an Ansar
through the door, but I kept my invocation secret. Suddenly, I saw ‘Ali
entering the door. The Holy Prophet asked who he was. I replied that he
was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Then the Holy Prophet happily got up to greet
‘Ali. He folded him in his arms and wiped the sweat from his face. ‘Ali
said, 'O Holy Prophet! Your are treating me today as you have never done
before!'

The Holy Prophet said, 'Why shouldn't I do that when you will convey my
prophethood to the community, will make them hear my voice, and will
explain to them those things concerning which they have differences of
opinion.'"

Also Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol II, and Hafiz Abu
Nu'aim in Hilyatu'l-Auliya write that one day ‘Ali came to the Prophet.
The Prophet said to him: "Welcome, leader of the Muslims and the Chief
of the Pious Ones!"

‘Ali said: "I praise Allah for the blessing which He has bestowed upon
me, and I implore His munificence to me." Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i
also narrates this hadith at the end of section IV; part I, of his
Matalibu's-Su'ul and through it proves that ‘Ali was the Imam of all the
pious ones.

Hakim, in his Mustadrak, part III, p.38 and Bukhari and Muslim, each in
his Sahih, report that the Holy Prophet said: "Allah sent me revelations
about ‘Ali concerning three things: (l) he is the master and chief of
Muslims; (2) he is the chief of the pious ones; and (3) he is the guide
who will lead the people with bright faces and hands (to Paradise)."

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i reports in his Kifayatu't-Talib,
chapter 45, on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Asad Ibn Zurara that the
Prophet said: "On the night of Mi'raj (ascension), when I was taken to
the heavens, I was allowed to enter a palace of pearls, whose floor was
of sparkling gold.

Then revelation was sent to me, and I was told three things about ‘Ali:
(1) that he is certainly the master and chief of the Muslims; (2) that
he is the Imam and chief of the pious ones; and (3) that he is the guide
who will lead people with bright faces and hands (to Paradise)."

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal writes in his Musnad that one day the Holy Prophet
addressed ‘Ali thus: "O ‘Ali! to cast a look at your face is worship;
verily you are the chief of the pious ones and leader of the believers.
He who is a friend of yours is a friend of mine, and he who is a friend
of mine is surely a friend of Allah. He who has ill will against you,
has ill will against me, and he who has ill will against me, certainly
has ill will against Allah."

So it is sufficient for the exalted rank of ‘Ali that the Holy Prophet
insisted that ‘Ali surpassed all the companions in piety. He alone had
been given the title of Imamu'l-Muttaqin (chief of the pious ones) and
the Holy Prophet repeatedly referred to him as such.

As Imamu'l-muttaqin ‘Ali had no inclination for self-indulgence or authority
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: One cannot say too much in praise of ‘Ali. Of course, Mu'awiya
said the right thing: the women of the world are unable to give birth to
a man like ‘Ali.

Well-Wisher: Now it is clear that among the venerable companions ‘Ali
was the chief of the pious ones. An idea has just struck me. If you
permit, I will ask you one thing.

Sheikh: Yes, please do.

Well-Wisher: After acknowledging that among the distinguished companions
‘Ali had the exclusive merit of being the chief of the pious ones, would
you assume that he had any inclination for self-indulgence or power?

Sheikh: It is impossible to assume such a thing about him. You have
pointed out the well known fact that ‘Ali gave three divorces to the
world. Having proved his aloofness from the world how could he be
inclined to it. Besides this, his rank is so exalted that it is
impossible to entertain such a false notion of him.

Well-Wisher: So it follows that all the actions of such an embodiment of
piety were definitely for Allah. He never swerved an inch from the right
path.

Sheikh: It is obvious that we don't deny these things about ‘Ali.

‘Ali's refusal to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr proves the method of his appointment as caliph was not right
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: When the Holy Prophet died, ‘Ali, according to the will of
the Holy Prophet, performed the burial rituals. Some people, assembling
at Saqifa al-Bani Sa'ida, swore allegiance to Abu Bakr. Later, when ‘Ali
was called, why did he refuse allegiance?

If the manner in which Abu Bakr was elected caliph was right and the
question of Ijma' (consensus) was proved to be just, then ‘Ali, being so
pious should not have deviated from the truth. You will recall the
hadith which I mentioned on previous nights, in which the Holy Prophet
said: "‘Ali is with the truth and truth is with ‘Ali."

If the proceedings at the Saqifa were based on justice and the
appointment of Abu Bakr as Caliph were valid, the Imam should have
welcomed them and acknowledged Abu Bakr as the rightful caliph. But in
fact he firmly opposed the election. The opposition of ‘Ali must have
been based on one of two things. Either ‘Ali was going against the right
path, and he violated the order of the Holy Prophet, or he considered
the consensus to be a farce.

As for the first possibility, it is out of the question to assume that
‘Ali could deny the truth. According to the Holy Prophet "‘Ali is with
the truth and the truth revolves around ‘Ali." Moreover, no one has ever
claimed that he was interested in worldly power. He divorced the world
three times.

He had no wish to gain political ascendancy. It was the second condition
which prompted him to refuse to acknowledge the caliphate of Abu Bakr.
He knew it contradicted the will of Allah and the Holy Prophet.

Sheikh: It is strange of you to say that ‘Ali did not swear allegiance
to Abu Bakr. References in your and our books of history prove that ‘Ali
did pay allegiance to Caliph Abu Bakr and did not oppose the consensus.

Well-Wisher: Have you forgotten all our previous discussions in which I
gave full details of the statements of your prominent ulama’? Even
Bukhari and Muslim have written each in his Sahih that ‘Ali did not
offer allegiance at that time. Your ulama’ have generally admitted that
on the first day, when the Holy Imam was forcibly and insultingly
dragged from his house to the mosque (as has been state earlier) he did
not swear allegiance but returned home.

Ibrahim Ibn Sa'd Saqafi (died 283 A.H.), Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Tabari, and
others have written that ‘Ali offered allegiance after six months (that
is, after the death of Fatima). Even if we admit, by way of supposition,
that the Imam offered allegiance, why did he wait for six months before
doing so?

Sheikh: Certainly there must have been some reason for that. He alone
knew it. But why should we worry about the mutual discord of our elders?
Why should we pry into their differences after 1300 years? (Loud
laughter from the audience.)

Well-Wisher: When you cannot find a reasonable answer to prove your
point, you depend upon such a reply. But before all fair minded people,
the matter is too clear to require any elucidation or proof.

As for your assertion that we need not interfere in the differences of
our predecessors, of course you are right, insofar as their affairs have
no bearing on us. But in the present case you are mistaken because it is
the duty of every sensible Muslim to have faith based on reason, not on
blind following. In making inquiries regarding religion, we study the
common history of the Muslims.

We find that, after the death of the Holy Prophet, two sects appeared.
Therefore, we should make thorough inquiries in order to understand
which of the two sects is rightly guided. Obviously we should not
blindly follow our predecessors.

Sheikh: Certainly your point is that Abu Bakr's caliphate was not just.
But if Abu Bakr was not the rightful Caliph, and if it was the right of
‘Ali to occupy that position, why did he not use his special strength
and courage to establish justice? He used to attend the prayers also and
often gave useful advice to the distinguished caliphs in important
matters.

Silence of holy prophets
------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, the Prophets and their successors acted according to
the will of Allah Almighty. Accordingly we cannot raise any objection as
to why they did not wage war, or why they adopted silence before the
enemy, or why they suffered defeat.

If you study the historical facts regarding the lives of the Holy
prophets and their successors, you will find many similar instances of
acquiescence. The Holy Qur'an has narrated some of those events. In the
sura of Qamar (The Moon), the Holy Qur'an relates what the Prophet Noah
said when his people rejected him:

***"Verily, I am overcome (by these people), so give help." (54:11)***

In the sura of Maryam (Mary), the Qur'an tells us of the silence of
Abraham when he sought his uncle Azar's help and received a
disappointing reply:

***"And I will withdraw from you and what you call upon besides Allah,
and I will call upon my Lord." (19:48)***

So just as Abraham withdrew from the people when he did not receive
support from his uncle Azar, ‘Ali also must have withdrawn from the
people and gone into seclusion.

Sheikh: I think this isolation signifies withdrawal of the heart. That
is, he withdrew and kept aloof from them but did not assume physical
seclusion.

Well-Wisher: If you study the commentaries of both sects, you will find
that his withdrawal from people was physical, not merely psychological.
I recall that Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi says in his Tafsir al-Kabir, vol.V,
p.809: "Isolation from something means keeping aloof from it. What
Abraham meant was that he wanted to keep aloof from them, both from the
physical and religious point of view."

The chronicles report that after this rejection Abraham migrated from
Babylon to Kuhistan in Fars and lived a solitary life in those
mountainous surroundings for seven years. He then returned to Babylon
and again publicly proclaimed Allah's message and broke the people's
idols. At this the people flung him into the fire.

Allah Almighty made the fire cool and safe for him, and so his
prophethood was firmly established. In the sura of Qasas (The
Narratives), the story about Moses running away in fear of his life has
been narrated in this way:

***"So he went forth, fearing, awaiting, (and) he said: My Lord, deliver
me from the unjust people."(28:21)***

In the sura of A'raf (The Elevated Places), the Holy Qur'an tells us of
Aaron's plight when Moses had left him in charge of the Bani Israel. The
people immediately began to worship the golden calf and, because Aaron
had no one to support him; he remained silent. The Qur'an says:

***"And he (Moses) seized his brother by the head, dragging him towards
him. He (Aaron) said: Son of my mother! Surely the people reckoned me
weak and had well nigh slain me." (7:150)***

‘Ali's situation similar to Aaron's
-----------------------------------

So according to the Holy Qur'an Aaron did not draw the sword against the
people. He assumed silence when they adopted Samiri's Golden Calf as the
object of worship because he (Aaron) recognized that he was outnumbered.

Similarly, ‘Ali, whom the Holy Prophet pronounced to be the counterpart
of Aaron (as we have discussed in detail earlier), was also perfectly
justified in assuming patience and forbearance when he had been left
alone.

The Holy Imam was forcibly brought to the mosque and an open sword was
put on his head to force him to swear allegiance. Later he went to the
tomb of the Holy Prophet and repeated the same words which Allah
Almighty has related through the tongue of Aaron. Aaron had said to
Moses: "Surely the people had reckoned me weak and had well nigh slain
me."

Acquiescence of prophets
------------------------

The Prophet Muhammad's example regarding this point is of course most
instructive. We should consider why he maintained complete silence for
thirteen years in the face of hostile activities of the enemy in Mecca
until finally he had to abandon his native city in the darkness of the
night. The reason was that he had no helpers. In fact, even during the
days of his authority, he could not do away with some innovations.

Sheikh: How can it be you say that the Holy Prophet failed to do away
with innovations?

The Holy Prophet could not effect drastic changes for fear of people
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: It has been reported by Hamidi in his Jam'i
Bainu's-Sahihain and by Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad from
Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha that the Holy Prophet said to her: "Had these
people not been near the age of infidelity and ignorance, and had I not
the fear that it would destroy their faith, I would have ordered the
House of the Ka'ba to be demolished and whatever had been taken out of
it to be restored. Having levelled it, I would have erected two doors
towards its east and west as it was in the days of the Prophet Abraham,
and I would have rebuilt it on the foundations set up by Abraham."

Certainly if the Holy Prophet himself was unable to oppose major
innovations, ‘Ali was justified in observing the same principle when he
faced a similar challenge.

The great jurist, Wasiti Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i, and Khatib Khawarizmi
report in their Manaqib that the Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: "The
community has a strong grudge against you. Shortly after my death they
will deceive you and reveal what they have in their hearts. I order you
to be patient and control yourself at that time so that Allah may give
you its reward and a good recompense."

After the death of the Holy Prophet ‘Ali’s patience was for the sake of Allah
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second, Amiru'l-Mu'minin never looked to himself but was always mindful
of Allah. He was completely absorbed in Allah. He resigned himself and
his people to the will of Allah. Hence, his patience and forbearance in
gaining his right were for Allah's sake so that there might not be
discord among the Muslims and that people might not return to their
previous infidelity.

When Fatima's property was taken from her, she came home, depressed and
dismayed. She said to ‘Ali: "You have receded like a foetus. You have
retired from the world like an accused person and have broken your
hawk-like wings. Now the weak wings of a bird do not support you.

This Ibn Qahafa (Abu Bakr) is forcibly snatching away from me my
father's gift and my children's means of subsistence. In fact these
people abused me with open ill will and railed at me." She spoke for a
long time.

The Holy Imam listened to Fatima until she was silent. Then he gave her
a short reply which satisfied her. He said: "O Fatima! In the matter of
religion and preaching truth, I have never been inactive. Do you wish
that this sacred religion remains secure and that your Holy Father’s
name is called in mosques until eternity?" She said: "Yes, that is my
most ardent desire."

‘Ali said: "Then you should be patient. Your father has given me
instructions regarding this situation, and I know that I should be
forbearing. Otherwise, I have such strength that I could subdue the
enemy and take back your right from them. But you should know that in
that case the religion would be destroyed. So, for the sake of Allah and
for the security of Allah's religion, be patient. The recompense in the
hereafter for you is better than your right which has been usurped."

It was for this reason that Amiru'l-Mu'minin made patience his custom.
He assumed forbearance and silence for the safety of Islam. In many of
his sermons he has referred to this point.

‘Ali's statements on the expediency of his silence after the demise of the Holy Prophet
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Saqafi, who is one of the trustworthy ulama’ of the
Sunnis, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, and ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Hamadani report that when
Talha and Zubair broke their allegiances and left for Basra, ‘Ali
ordered the people to assemble in the mosque. Then after praising Allah
Almighty he said:

"After the death of the Holy Prophet, we said that we were his Ahlul
Bayt, his successors, and the rightful people to receive his heritage.
No one except us could claim the right of rulership after him. But a
group of the hypocrites snatched away our Holy Prophet's rulership from
us and entrusted it to those who were our opponents. By Allah, our
hearts and eyes wept for it. By Allah, we were full of grief and
indignation.

I swear by Allah that if there were no fear that the Muslim community
would be shattered, we would have overturned the caliphate. They
occupied the seat of power until they reached their end. Now Allah has
returned the caliphate to me. And these two men (Talha and Zubair) also
swore allegiance to me. Now they have proceeded to Basra intending to
cause dissension among the people."

Among your great scholars, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid and Kalbi, have reported that
at the time of his setting out for Basra ‘Ali addressed the people. He
said: "When the Holy Prophet of Allah died, the Quraish swooped down
upon us and deprived us of the right which we deserved more than anyone
else. So I thought that it was better to adopt patience at that time,
rather than allow the Muslims to disintegrate and their blood to be
spilled, for they had embraced Islam only recently."

‘Ali's silence and his abstaining from challenging the caliphate of Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar was not due to his concurrence with them. It was because
he wanted to avoid causing bitter conflict among the people and because
he wanted to save the religion from annihilation.

So after six months of silence and disapproval, then, as stated by your
ulama’, he offered allegiance and cooperated with them. In a letter sent
to the people of Egypt through Malik Ashtar, he clearly writes that his
silence was for the sake of preserving Islam.

The original text of ‘Ali's letter, which Ibn Abi'l-Hadid has recorded
in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.IV, p.164, is as follows:

Amiru'l-Mu'minin's letter to the people of Egypt explaining his silence when deprived of the caliphate
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Allah Almighty sent Muhammad as a witness of the prophets to warn the
people. So when the Holy Prophet died the Muslims disputed among
themselves as to who should succeed him. I swear by Allah that I never
thought or believed, nor were there the least signs of it, that the
people of Arabia would take away the right of succession from the Ahlul
Bayt and give it to others after him.

It was unimaginable that after the death of the Holy Prophet, in spite
of his clear decree, they would deprive me of that right.

I was greatly distressed that the people ran to a certain person (Abu
Bakr) and swore allegiance to him. So I withdrew myself until I saw that
a group of people diverged from Islam and intended to destroy Islam.
Then I feared that if I did not help Islam and the Muslims, Islam would
suffer such destruction as would be more painful to me than the
snatching away of the caliphate.

Of course political power cannot last long. It must dissipate like the
clouds. It was under these conditions that I had to rise, so that
paganism would become weak and Islam becomes firm."

Amiru'l-Mu'minin's sermon after martyrdom of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.II, p.35, reports
from Kitabu'l-Gharat of Ibrahim Ibn Sa'd Ibn Hilal Saqafi, who reports
from Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Jundab, who reports from his father that when the
enemy occupied Egypt and Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr was martyred,
Amiru'l-Mu'minin gave a sermon in which he expressed his bitter feelings
against the attitude the Muslims had adopted after the death of the Holy
Prophet.

He wrote his remarks in a letter to the people of Egypt. The Holy Imam
said: "A man said to me 'O son of Abu Talib! How greedy you are for the
caliphate.'"

I said to him: 'You are greedier than I and are far removed from that
position. Who is the greedier between us? Is it I, who am demanding my
right, for which Allah and His Holy Prophet have made me the most
rightful claimant, or you, who have debarred me from that right and have
created obstruction between me and my right?'

They were all dumbfounded and could not utter a word. Verily, Allah does
not help the oppressors."

This account and other sermons of Imam ‘Ali show that the reason the
Holy Imam did not confront the enemy, but assumed silence and (as
alleged by your ulama’) offered allegiance after six months, was not
that he concurred with them in their decision concerning the caliphate.
It was because he feared that Islam would perish and that the Muslims
would be divided.

If ‘Ali had risen to secure his right, some of the people would
certainly have supported him (many had urged him to come forward) and
civil war would have started.

The Holy Prophet had only recently died. The Muslims were quite close to
the age of infidelity, and the roots of belief had not been securely
established. The Jews, the Christians, the idol worshipers, and the
hypocrites, who were the worst enemies, would have had an opportunity to
destroy the honor of the Muslims. Consequently, Islam would have
collapsed.

Amiru'l-Mu'minin understood these matters. Moreover, the Holy Prophet
had told him that the basis of Islam would not be destroyed and that
religion was like the sun, which could be concealed for some time under
the clouds of ignorance and hostility but would eventually come out,
shedding its light everywhere.

In short, he claimed his right for six months and proved the
righteousness of his cause in a number of congregations and assemblies,
but did not swear allegiance. Though he did not resort to fighting, he
continued claiming his right through arguments and protests.

Sermon of Shiqshiqayya also explains ‘Ali’s silence
---------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imam begins his sermon of Shiqshiqayya with the same point. "By
Allah! The son of Abu Qahafa (Abu Bakr) dressed himself with it
(caliphate) though he certainly knew that my relation to it was the same
as the position of the axis in relation to the mill. The flood water
flows down from me, and no one can reach the height of my knowledge. I
kept myself detached from the caliphate.

Then I began to consider whether I should take my right by force or
calmly endure the darkness, wherein the mature are enfeebled, the young
grow old, and the true believer acts under strain until he meets Allah
(at death). I found that endurance was a wiser course to adopt.

So I was patient although there was pricking in the eye and suffocation
in the throat. I watched the plundering of my inheritance until the
first one went his way. But he handed over the caliphate to Ibn Khattab
(‘Umar) after himself."

This sermon is filled with the powerful emotions of ‘Ali. But this much
is sufficient to prove our point.

Doubt about the Sermon of Shiqshiqayya
--------------------------------------

Sheikh: In the first place this sermon does not prove the displeasure of
the Imam. Second, this sermon does not concern ‘Ali. In fact, it is the
work of Sayyid Sharif Razi, who has included it in the sermons of ‘Ali.
In fact, ‘Ali has no complaint against the caliphs. Rather, he was quite
pleased with them.

Well-Wisher: This statement of yours is based on extreme prejudice. What
‘Ali stated and complained of has already been narrated earlier. The
Holy Imam's grievances are not confined to this sermon.

Your allegation that the author of this sermon was the pious and
distinguished scholar, Sayyid Raziu'd-din, is inaccurate. Your eminent
scholars, like Izzu'd-din Abdu'l-Hamid Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, Sheikh Muhammad
Abduh, Mufti of Egypt, and Sheikh Muhammad Khizari (in Muhazirat
al-Ta'rikhu'l-Uma'imu'l-Islamiyya, page 127, have declared that this
sermon is ‘Ali's.

Your own scholars have written commentaries on it. Some of your
fanatical ulama’ of the later age made passionate efforts to create
doubts about its authenticity, but none of the more than forty prominent
Sunni and Shi’as ulama’, who have written commentaries on
Nahju'l-Balagha, has said such a fantastic thing.

Sayyid Razi
-----------

Of course the piety of the great scholar, Sayyid Raziu'd-din, would
preclude his attributing one of his own sermons to ‘Ali. Moreover,
experts in the Arabic language and its literature, who have studied the
sermons of Nahju'l-Balagha, have decided that, in view of the excellent
style and profound thoughts, the work is inimitable.

Your distinguished ulama’, like Izzu'd-din Abdu'l-Hamid Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali and Sheikh Muhammad Abduh, have admitted that the beauty and
deep knowledge of the sermons of ‘Ali prove that this work is inferior
in merit only to the words of Allah and the Holy Prophet.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid reports Musaddiq Ibn Shabbib as saying that the famous
Ibn Khashshab said: "It is impossible for Razi or for anyone else to
produce such a composition. We have gone through Razi's works; they
stand no comparison to these writings and Holy sermons."

Sermon of Shiqshiqayya recorded long before the birth of Sayyid Razi
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Ignoring all other aspects of the question, many scholars,
traditionists, and historians (both Shi’as and Sunnis) have recorded the
existence of this sermon before the births of the great scholar Sayyid
Razi and his father Abu Ahmad Naqibu't-Talibin.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha writes that he found
this sermon in the books of his Sheikh, Abu'l-Qasim Balkhi Imam
al-Mu'tazila, who lived in the time of Muqtadir B'illah Abbasi.
Obviously, Sayyid Razi was born long after him.

He also writes that he has seen this sermon in the Kitabu'l-Insaf, of
the well known preacher, Abu Ja'far Ibn Qubba, who was one of the pupils
of Sheikh Abu'l-Qasim Balkhi, and who died before the birth of Sayyid
Razi.

Also Sheikh Abu Abdullah Ibn Ahmad, commonly known as Ibn Khashshab, is
reported to have said: “I have seen this sermon in books written 200
years before Sayyid Razi was born. I have also seen this sermon in the
works of literary scholars who wrote them before the birth of Sayyid
Razi's father, Ahmad Naqibu't-Talibin."

As for your claim that ‘Ali was pleased with his opponents, this of
course ignores countless statements to the contrary made by your ulama’,
which I have cited previously. I will cite still another example.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.II, p.561, records
‘Ali as having said: "I remained with the Holy Prophet from the
beginning until his death. The Holy Prophet breathed his last on my
chest. It was I who washed his body with the help of the angels,
performed his funeral prayers, and buried him. So there was no one
nearer, or a more rightful successor, to him than I."

Towards the end of his sermon he refers to his opponents in these words:
"I swear by Allah, the One, that I am on the right path and that my
opponents are on the wrong path."

But you claim that ‘Ali considered his opponents on the right path. I
wish you could seriously look into the verse of the Holy Qur'an, which
says: "They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not permit aught but the perfection of His light, though the
unbelievers are averse." (9:32)


