Tenth Session, Saturday night, 3rd Sha'ban 1345 A.H.
====================================================

Assessment of ‘Umar's knowledge of Islamic law
----------------------------------------------

Nawab: This morning my son, Abdu'l-Aziz, who is a student at the
Islamiyya College, reported to us that his teacher told the class that
Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Khattab was the greatest jurist of his time in Medina.
He had complete knowledge of the Qur'anic verses and their meanings. He
was superior to all other prominent jurists, like ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib,
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Akrama, and Zaid Ibn Thabit.

Even ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, whose understanding of fiqh (jurisprudence) was
extensive, when he was faced with a difficult problem, consulted ‘Umar
concerning the rights of Muslims. The caliph always solved the difficult
problems of ‘Ali. All of us acknowledged this fact because our ulama’
say that Caliph ‘Umar held a unique position in learning and knowledge.
I ask you to explain this point so that all of us, including my son, may
understand the facts.

Well-Wisher: It is strange that the teacher said those things. Even your
ulama’ have never claimed that. If some fanatical people, like Ibn Hazm
Zahiri, said that, they were bitterly opposed by your ulama’. Moreover,
this attribute was not claimed by Caliph ‘Umar himself. None of your
ulama’ has recorded this fact in any of their books.

The traditionists or historians who have written anything of the life of
Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Khattab have remarked upon his cunning nature, his
hard-heartedness, and political contrivances, but they have not dwelt
upon his learning.

‘Umar's knowledge of Islamic law was weak
-----------------------------------------

In fact, the books of both sects are replete with instances which
clearly show that ‘Umar was not well versed in problems of learning and
jurisprudence. Whenever he was faced with such issues he used to consult
with Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, and other jurists of
Medina.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid mentions the name of Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud in particular,
among the jurists of Medina, and says that ‘Umar insisted that Abdullah
should always remain with him so that whenever an occasion arose, he
could be consulted on matters of jurisprudence.

Sheikh: (In anger) Where is it written that ‘Umar was ignorant of
religious problems and the knowledge of jurisprudence?

Well-Wisher: I did not say that Caliph ‘Umar was completely ignorant. I
said that he was not well versed in problems of jurisprudence and
learning. I can prove what I say.

Sheikh: How would you prove that Caliph ‘Umar had weak knowledge in
matters relating to jurisprudence and religious ordinances?

Well-Wisher: There are many hadith in your authentic books. Apart from
this, there is ‘Umar's own admission, which he made on several
occasions.

A woman silences ‘Umar on a point of law
----------------------------------------

Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in his Tafsir al-Durru'l-Mansur, vol. II, p.133; Ibn
Kathir in his Commentary, vol.I, p.468; Jarullah Zamakhshari in his
Tafsir al-Kashshaf, vol.I, p.357; Fazil Nishapuri in his
Tafsir-Gharibu'l Qur'an, vol.I, in connection with the sura Nisa (The
Women) of the Holy Qur'an; Qartabi in his Tafsir, vol.V, p.99; Ibn Maja'
Qazwini in his Sunan, vol.I; Asadi in Hashiyya al-Sunan, vol.I, p.583;
Baihaqi in his Sunan, vol.VII, p.233; Qastalani in his
Irshadu's-Sari-Sharh al-Sahih Bukhari, vol.VIII, p.57;

Muttaqi Hindi in his Kanzu'l-'Ummal, vol.VIII, p. 298; Hakim Nishapuri
in his Mustadrak, vol.II, p.177; Abu Bakr Baglani in his Tamhid, p.199;
Ajluni in his Kashfu'l-Khufa', vol.I, p.270; Qazi Shukani in
Futuhu'l-Qadir, vol.I,P.407; Dhahabi in his Takhlis al-Mustadrak; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.I, p.61 and vol.VII,
p.96; Hamidi in his Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain; Faqih Wasiti Ibn Maghazili
Shafi'i in his Manaqib; Ibn Athir in his Nihaya, and others have
authentically narrated with slight difference in wording that one day
Caliph ‘Umar during the course of his sermon to the people, said:

"If any one marries and fixes a mehr (dowry) for more than 400 dirhams
for his wife, I will inflict the prescribed punishment on him and will
deposit the excess amount in the Baitu'l-Mal (Public Treasury)."

A woman from the audience called out: "‘Umar! Is what you say more
acceptable or Allah's ordinance? Does not Allah Almighty say:

***'And if you wish to have (one) wife in place of another and you have
given one of them a heap of gold, then take not from it anything.'"
(4:20)***

Having heard this verse and the retort of the woman, ‘Umar said: "You
have better knowledge of fiqh and problems than ‘Umar, all of you,
including even the women observing purdah sitting in their homes."

Then ‘Umar again mounted the pulpit and said: "Although I have forbidden
you to give more than 400 dirhams as dowry to your wives, I now permit
you to give as much as you like beyond the appointed limit. There is no
harm in it."

This hadith shows that Caliph ‘Umar was not well versed in the Qur'an
and jurisprudence. Otherwise, he would not have said something so
obviously incorrect that he could be silenced by an informed woman.

Sheikh: No, it is not so. The fact is that the Caliph wanted to force
people to decrease the amount of dowry in compliance with the sunna.
Although Islam allows us to give a large amount, it is better if we
refrain from it so that the poor may not have to suffer. It is for this
reason that he said that the amount of mehr should not exceed the amount
fixed for the wives of the Holy Prophet.

Confiscation of any portion of mehr is unlawful
-----------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: This is such a lame excuse that even ‘Umar had no idea of
it. Otherwise he would not have admitted his own fault and would not
have said: "You are better jurists than ‘Umar, all of you, including the
housewives." Otherwise he also would have said what you are saying.

Besides this, everybody knows that an unlawful act cannot be condoned as
a means to accomplish a desirable and lawful result. Obviously the
property of the woman, which she has owned, according to the Qur'anic
injunction, could not lawfully be snatched away from her and deposited
in the Baitu'l-Mal!

Apart from all these considerations, it is unlawful to inflict corporal
punishment on a person who has not committed a sin. At least I have not
seen any such decision made according to any penal code. Let me know if
you can cite such an example. If there is no such ordinance in the penal
laws, you will have to admit that the claim of the teacher was false.

‘Umar denying the Prophet's death proves that he was ignorant of several verses of the Holy Qur’an
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, ‘Umar had developed the habit of losing his temper, and
in order to frighten others he said: "I will punish you!"

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad; Hamidi in his Jam'
al-Bainu's-Sahihain; Tabari in his Ta'rikh, and other ulama’ have
reported that when the Holy Prophet died, ‘Umar went to Abu Bakr and
told him that he feared that it was possible Muhammad had not died.

Perhaps he had only pretended to be dead so that he might recognize his
friends and foes, or perhaps he had disappeared, like Moses and would
come again and punish those, who were disloyal and disobedient to him.

‘Umar continued to say: "So if anyone says that the Holy Prophet is
dead, I will punish him." When Abu Bakr heard this, he was also
uncertain about it, and the people also were confused and differences
arose among them. When ‘Ali learned of it, he appeared before the crowd
of people and said:

***"People! Why are you making such a foolish commotion? Have you
forgotten the Holy verse, in which Allah said to the Holy Prophet:
'Verily you shall die and so also the people of your community'?
(39:30)***

So according to this verse the Holy Prophet has left this world." This
argument of ‘Ali convinced the people and they believed that the Holy
Prophet had really died. Then ‘Umar said: "It was as if I had never
heard this verse."

Ibn Athir in his Kamil and Nihaya; Zamakhshari in Asasu'l-Balagha;
Shahrastani in Milal wa'n-Nihal, (Muqaddama IV), and many others of your
ulama’ have written that ‘Umar was shouting: "The Holy Prophet has not
died," when Abu Bakr reached him and said:

***"Does Allah Almighty not say: 'Verily you shall die and so also the
people of your community." Also He says: "If then he dies or is killed,
will you turn back upon your heels?'" (3:144)***

‘Umar then became silent and said: "It was as though I had never heard
this verse. Now I believe that the Holy Prophet is dead."

‘Umar's order to stone five people and ‘Ali’s intervention
----------------------------------------------------------

Hamidi reports in his Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain that during the caliphate
of ‘Umar, five people were arrested on the charge of fornication and
brought before ‘Umar. It was proved that the five men had committed
fornication with a certain woman. ‘Umar at once ordered them to be
stoned to death. At that time ‘Ali entered the mosque and having heard
what ‘Umar had ordered said to him: "Here your order is contrary to
Allah's ordinance."

‘Umar said: "‘Ali! Fornication has been proved. Death by stoning is the
prescribed punishment for this sin."

‘Ali said: "In the matter of fornication, there are different orders in
different cases. Accordingly, in the present cases different orders
should be passed."

‘Umar asked him to detail what the orders of Allah and His Holy Prophet
were in those cases, for ‘Umar had heard the Holy Prophet say on a
number of occasions: "‘Ali is the most learned man and the best judge."

‘Ali ordered the five men to be brought to him. He ordered the first man
to be beheaded. He ordered the second man to be stoned to death. He
ordered the third man be given 100 lashes. The fourth man was given 50
lashes. The fifth man was given 25 lashes.

‘Umar, surprised and puzzled, said: "Abu'l-Hasan, how did you decide
these cases in five different ways?"

The Holy Imam said: "The first man was an infidel under the protection
of Islam. He committed fornication with a Muslim woman. Since he lost
the protection of Islam he was liable to be killed. The second man had a
wife, so he was stoned to death. The third man was unmarried; hence, he
was ordered to be given 100 lashes. The fourth man was a slave who
deserves a sentence half that of a free man, that is, 50 lashes. And the
fifth man was an imbecile, so he was given a mild punishment, that is,
25 lashes."

Then ‘Umar said: "If ‘Ali had not been there, ‘Umar would have been
ruined O Abu'l-Hasan! I hope I am not alive when you are not among us."

‘Umar's ordering a pregnant woman to be stoned to death and ‘Ali’s intervention
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib Fi Manaqib
al-Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib; Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his
Musnad; Bukhari in his Sahih; Hamidi in Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain; Sheikh
Sulayman Balkhi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter IV, p.75, from
Khawarizmi's Manaqib; Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi in Arba'in, p.466;
Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nazara, vol.II, p.196; Khatib Khawarizmi
in Manaqib, p.48; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.113;
and Imamu'l-Haram in Dhakha'iru'l-Uqba, p.80, quote the following
report.

A pregnant woman was brought before ‘Umar Ibn Khattab. On being
questioned, she admitted that she was guilty of illicit sexual
intercourse, and so the Caliph ordered her to be stoned. Then ‘Ali said:
"Your order is applicable to this woman, but you have no authority over
her child."

‘Umar acquitted the woman and said: "Women are incapable of giving birth
to a man like ‘Ali: If ‘Ali had not been there, ‘Umar would have been
ruined." He continued, saying: "May Allah not let me live so long as to
face a difficult problem which ‘Ali is not present to solve."

‘Umar ordering an insane woman to be stoned and ‘Ali’s intervention
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad; Imamu'l-Haram Ahmad Ibn Abdullah
Shafi'i in Dhakha'iru'l-Mawadda, chapter II, p.75, from Hasan Basri; Ibn
Hajar in Fathu'l-Bari, vol.XII, P.101; Abu Dawud in Sunan, vol. II,
p.227; Munadi in Faizu'l-Qadir, vol. IV, p. 257; Hakim Nishapuri in
Mustadrak, vol.II, p.59;

Qastalani in Irshadu's-Sari, vol.X, p. 9; Baihaqi in Sunan, vol.VIII, p.
164; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nazara, v.II, p.196; Khatib
Khawarizmi in his Munaqab, p.48; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in
Matalibu's-Su'ul; Imamu'l-Haram in Dhakha'iru'l-'Uqba, p.80; Ibn Maja in
his Sunan, v.II, p.227; Bukhari in his Sahih, chapter la
yarjumu'l-majnun wa'l-majnuna and most of your other ulama’ have
reported the following incident:

One day an insane woman was brought before Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Khattab. She
had committed fornication and admitted her fault. ‘Umar ordered her to
be stoned. Amiru'l-Mu'minin was there. He said to ‘Umar: "What are you
doing?

I have heard the Holy Prophet saying that three kinds of people are free
from the hold of law: a sleeping man until he wakes; a lunatic until he
recovers himself and regains consciousness; and the child until he comes
of age." Hearing this, ‘Umar acquitted the woman.

Ibnu's-Saman in his Kitabu'l-Muwafiqa has recorded many such cases.
There are some accounts which record about 100 erroneous and fallacious
findings of ‘Umar.

‘Ali’s knowledge and merit
--------------------------

Nuru'd-din Ibn Sabbagh Malaki in his Fusulu'l-Muhimma, chapter 3, p. 17,
writing about ‘Ali said: “This chapter contains matter relating to the
knowledge of ‘Ali. One of those aspects is the knowledge of fiqh
(jurisprudence) on which is based the lawful and unlawful acts of man.

‘Ali understood the intricacies of law. Its complex problems were easy
for him, and he fully understood their interpretations. It was for this
reason that the Holy Prophet said that ‘Ali was the most worthy man of
the community to interpret questions of law."

Imam Abu Muhammad Husain Ibn Mas'ud Baghawi in his Masabih reports from
Anas that when the Holy Prophet appointed each one of the Companions to
a particular position, he appointed ‘Ali to the rank of judge and said:
"‘Ali is the best judge among all of you (companions and community)."

Surely when you compare the words of this ignorant college teacher with
the hadith of your own eminent scholars, you will confirm that his
assertion is baseless. This teacher is claiming more than his leader
did. ‘Umar himself always expressed his inferiority to ‘Ali.

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Imamu'l-Haram Ahmad Makki Shafi'i
in Dhakha'iru'l-Uqba, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, chapter 56, and Muhibu'd-din Tabari in his
Riyazu'n-Nazara, vol.II, p.195, quote Mu'awiya as saying:

"Whenever ‘Umar Ibn Khattab faced a difficult problem, he sought the
assistance of ‘Ali." Abu'l-Hajjaj Balawi in his Alif-Ba, vol.I, p.222,
writes that when Mu'awiya heard the news of ‘Ali's martyrdom, he said:
"With the death of ‘Ali, jurisprudence and knowledge have collapsed."

He also quotes Sa'id Ibn Musayyab as saying that Mu'awiya said: "‘Umar
always sought shelter from difficulties for which ‘Ali was not there to
help him."

Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi in his commentary on
Risalat al-Fathu'l-Mubin writes: "The companions of the Holy Prophet
consulted ‘Ali in matters relating to ordinances of the Holy Qur'an and
accepted his verdicts.

‘Umar Ibn Khattab has said on various occasions: "If ‘Ali had not been
there, ‘Umar would have been ruined." The Holy Prophet of Allah also
said: "The most highly learned man among my community is ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib."

What is recorded in hadith and historical accounts proves that ‘Umar was
so devoid of common knowledge and knowledge of jurisprudence that he was
mistaken even regarding ordinary problems. Companions who were his
contemporaries warned him about this weakness.

Sheikh: You are very unkind to impute such things to ‘Umar. Is it
possible for the caliph to be mistaken in religious matters?

Well-Wisher: This unkindness is not from my side. Your own ulama’ have
revealed the truth about it.

Sheikh: If you can, please let us know these things with proper sources
so that truth may be clearly revealed.

Well-Wisher: There are many such instances. About 100 of them are in
your books, but I will submit one of them by way of example.

‘Umar's ignorance concerning tayammum (substitute for ablution)
---------------------------------------------------------------

Muslim Ibn Hajjaj in his Sahih, chapter Tayammum; Hamidi in Jam'
al-Bainu's-Sahihain, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad, vol.IV, p.265,319;
Baihaqi in Sunan, vol.I, p.209; Abi Dawud in Sunan , vol.I, p.53; Ibn
Maja in Sunan, vol.I, p.200; Imam Nisa'i in his Sunan, vol.I, pp. 59-61,
and others of your eminent ulama’ have in different ways and words,
reported that during the caliphate of ‘Umar a man came to him and said:
"It is necessary for me to perform ghusl (the bath of ritual
purification) but no water is available. What should I do in this
circumstance?"

‘Umar said: "Unless you can obtain water and perform ghusl, you should
not offer prayers."

At that time Ammar al-Yasir, a companion of the Holy Prophet was
present. He said: "‘Umar! Have you forgotten that on one of the journeys
you and I happened to be in need of performing ghusl? Since water was
not available you did not offer prayers, but I thought the method of
tayammum in place of ghusl was that dust should be rubbed on my whole
body. So I rubbed dust on my body and offered prayers.

When we went to the Holy Prophet, he said, smiling: 'For tayammum this
much is sufficient that the palms of both hands be tapped on the ground
simultaneously and the palms be rubbed on the forehead; then the back of
the right hand be rubbed with the left palm and then the back of the
left hand be rubbed with the right palm.' Now why are you telling the
man not to offer prayers?"

When ‘Umar could make no reply he said: "Ammar, fear Allah."

Then Ammar said: "Do you permit me to narrate this hadith?" ‘Umar said:
"I leave it to you to do what you like."

In light of this reliable hadith which your own ulama’ have narrated,
you will surely acknowledge that the teacher's claim was utterly false.
Could a man well versed in jurisprudence and who had frequently been in
the company of the Holy Prophet and had heard from the Prophet how
'tayammum' should be performed when water was not available tell a
Muslim that if he does not find water he should abstain from offering
his prayers? This is particularly strange since the Holy Qur'an tells us
that in such a case we should perform 'tayammum.'

The practice of tayammum among the Muslims is so commonly known that
even an illiterate Muslim knows that, under certain conditions it takes
the place of ritual ablution and the ritual bath. Now what should we say
about a companion of the Holy Prophet and caliph? Shouldn't he be
knowledgeable about this matter?

I do not claim in this case that Caliph ‘Umar deliberately changed
Allah's ordinances. But this much is certainly possible: he was weak in
his ability to retain information and it was difficult for him to
remember ordinances.

And this was the reason, as your ulama’ have written; he used to say to
an accomplished jurist Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud: "You should always remain
with me so that whenever somebody asks me a question, you may answer
him."

Now, gentlemen! You should decide what a difference there is between a
man whose knowledge is so meager that he is unable to understand simple
problems and one who immediately understands difficult problems.

Sheikh: Who else can that man be except the Holy Prophet?

Well-Wisher: Obviously, after the Holy Prophet no one among the
Companions had such knowledge except the Holy Prophet's "gate of
knowledge", ‘Ali, about whom the Holy Prophet himself said: "‘Ali is the
most learned of all of you."

All knowledge was clearly visible to ‘Ali
-----------------------------------------

Abu'l-Mu'ayyid Mu'affaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi says in his Manaqib that
one day ‘Umar said to ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib with some surprise: "How is it
that if any question is asked of you, you give its answer without the
least hesitation?"

The Holy Imam opened his hand before him and said: "How many fingers do
you see?"

‘Umar immediately said: "Five."

‘Ali said: "Why did you not ponder over it?"

‘Umar said: "There was no need to ponder since all five fingers were
before my eyes."

Then ‘Ali said: "Similarly, all the problems and issues of knowledge are
clearly visible to me. I give their answers without pondering."

Now, gentlemen! Is it not due to prejudice that the teacher speaks such
nonsense and misleads the uninformed youth? Does it seem likely that the
man, who possessed the deepest knowledge of all sciences and was the
"gate of knowledge" of the Holy Prophet, would consult with ‘Umar in
order to solve his difficulties?

Mu'awiya defending the position of ‘Ali
---------------------------------------

A hadith has just struck me. I put it before you as a further proof of
my point. Ibn Hajar Makki, a scholar known for his intolerance writes in
his Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, ch. II, Maqsad V, p. 110, under verse 14, that
Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal has reported and also Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in
Mawaddatu'l-Qurba and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha have
recorded that a man asked Mu'awiya a question.

Mu'awiya said: "Ask ‘Ali about it since he is the most learned man." The
Arab said: "I prefer your answer to ‘Ali's answer."

Mu'awiya said: "You have uttered a very bad thing: you have rejected the
man whom the Holy Prophet himself trained and to whom he said: 'You have
the same relation to me as Aaron had to Moses, except that there shall
be no prophet after me. Moreover, whenever ‘Umar was entangled in some
difficult matter, he asked ‘Ali about it and sought his opinion.'"

This brings to mind the saying: "Virtue is that to which even the enemy
bears witness."

‘Umar's admission of his ignorance concerning difficult problems and his declaration that if ‘Ali had not helped him, his difficulties would not have been solved
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In order to further support ‘Ali's superiority to ‘Umar, we quote what
your prominent ulama’ have said. Nuru'd-din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in
Fusulu'l-Muhimma; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul; Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad; Khatib Khawarizmi in Manaqib; Sulayman
Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, and many others have written that on
seventy occasions ‘Umar said "If ‘Ali had not been there ‘Umar would
have been ruined."

Nuru'd-din Maliki in his Fusulu'l-Muhimma reports that once a man was
brought to ‘Umar. He was asked before the assembly of people: "How did
you begin your morning?" He said: " I got up in the morning in this
condition: I loved temptation and was averse to the right truth. I
testified to the truth of the Jews and the Christians, believed in what
I had not seen and in what had not yet been created."

‘Umar ordered that ‘Ali be brought to him. When the matter was put
before Amiru'l-Mu'minin, he said,

***"What the man has said is right. He says he loves temptation. He
means by this wealth and children. Allah says in the Holy Qur'an: 'And
you know that your wealth and your children are a temptation.' (8:28)***

By aversion to the right he means death. The Qur'an says,

***'And the stupor of death will come in truth.'(50:19)***

By testifying to the truth of the Jews and Christians, he means what
Allah says:

***'The Jews said that the Christians were not on the right path and the
Christians said that the Jews were not on the right path.' (2:113)***

That is, both the sects belie each other. So the Arab says that he
agrees with them both, or that he rejects both of them.

He says that he believes in what he has not seen, meaning that he
believes in Allah Almighty.

When he says that he believes in what has not yet been created, that is,
not present, he refers to the Day of Judgement, which has not yet come
into existence."

Then ‘Umar said: "I seek Allah's shelter from the difficult situation in
which ‘Ali is not there to help me."

This anecdote has been narrated in a more elaborate and different form,
by others like Muhammad Ibn Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.57,
from Hudhaifa Ibn Al-Yaman, who quoted it from Caliph ‘Umar.

A number of similar incidents during the caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
were incapable of giving a correct answer. It was ‘Ali who gave the
reply. Particularly when the Jewish, Christian, and natural scientists
scholars came and discussed difficult problems, it was only ‘Ali who
solved them.

According to your own ulama’, like Bukhari and Muslim, each in his
Sahih; Nishapuri in his Tafsir; Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i in Manaqib;
Muhammad Ibn Talha in Matalibu's-Su'ul, ch.4, pp. 13 and 18; Hafiz Ibn
Hajar Asqalani (d.852 A.H.) in Tahdhibu't-Tahdhib (printed in Hyderabad
Daccan), p.338; Qazi Fazlullah Ruzbahan Shirazi in Ibta'lu'l-Batil;

Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nazara, vol.II, p.39; Ibn Kathir in his
Ta'rikh, vol. VII, p.369; Ibn Qutayba Dinawari (d.276 A.H.) in Ta'wil
al-Mukhtalafu'l-Hadith (printed in Egypt), pp.201-202; Muhammad Ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i (d. 658 A.H.) in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 57;
Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, p.66; Sayyid Mu'min Shablanji
in Nuru'l-Absar, p.73; Nuru'd-din ‘Ali Ibn Abdullah Samhudi (d.911 A.H.)
in Jawahiru'l-Iqdain;

Al-Hajj Ahmad Afindi in Hidayatu'l-Murtab, pp.146 and 153; Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali As-Sabban in Ishafu'r-Raghibin, p.52; Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi in
Tadhkira Khawasu'l-Ummal, ch.6, p.37; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid (d.655 A.H.) in
Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, vol.I; Mulla ‘Ali Qushachi in Sharh al-Tajrid,
p.407;

Akhtabu'l-Khutaba Khawarizmi in Manaqib, pp.48 and 60; even the
intolerant Ibn Hajar Makki (d.973 A.H.) in Sawa'iq Muhriqa, p.78; Ibn
Hajar Asqalani in Isaba, vol.II, p. 509 and Allama Ibn Qayyim Jauzia in
Turuqu'l-Hikmiyya, pp.47 and 53 have recorded numerous cases showing
that ‘Umar referred intricate and complex problems, particularly the
difficult problems of the King of Rome, to Amiru'l-Mu'minin.

‘Umar time and again referred cases to ‘Ali for solution, and when he
heard the decision, he repeatedly said: "I seek Allah's protection from
that difficult situation in which ‘Ali is not there to help me."
Sometimes he said: "If ‘Ali had not been there, ‘Umar would have been
ruined."

Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in his Manaqib and Hamidi in his Jam'
al-Bainu's-Sahihain write that the caliphs took counsel with ‘Ali in all
matters and that he was the central figure who decided difficult
religious and worldly questions. The caliphs carefully listened to his
remarks and instructions and acted upon them.

‘Ali was most suitable for the office of caliphate
--------------------------------------------------

Knowledge is the best criterion for preference. The Holy Qur'an clearly
states:

***"Is he then who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What then is the
matter with you; how do you judge?" (10:35)***

That is, one who possesses the best qualities of guidance must be the
supreme leader of the people, not the one who is ignorant of the way of
guidance and himself seeks guidance from others.

This verse is the most valid proof that a superior man cannot be made
subordinate to the inferior one. The question of the caliphate, imamate,
and the succession to the Holy Prophet come under the same principle.
This is borne out by another verse which says:

***"Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike?" (39:9)***

By all standards ‘Ali was the fittest man for the caliphate
-----------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: We certainly agree that ‘Ali possessed all the outstanding
qualities you have mentioned. No one except the fanatical Kharijis has
ever denied this fact. But this much also is acknowledged: Sayyid ‘Ali
himself voluntarily and gladly accepted the caliphate of the (first
three) caliphs and admitted their superiority and their right to precede
him. So what is the use of our worrying, after 1300 years, about their
decision and fighting among ourselves as to why the community elected
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman?

So what is the harm if we are at peace and friendly with one another and
admit what history has recorded and what your own ulama’ have also
generally accepted: after the Holy Prophet, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman
successively occupied the caliphate?

We should live together as brothers and jointly acknowledge ‘Ali's
superiority in knowledge and actions and his special relationship with
the Holy Prophet. In the same way that our four schools of law are
united, the Shi’as too should cooperate with us.

We never deny the excellence of ‘Ali's knowledge and character, but you
should admit that in regard to the questions of age, political
astuteness, patience and calm, in the face of the enemy Abu Bakr was
definitely superior to ‘Ali.

It was for this reason that, through the unanimous verdict of the
community, he occupied the seat of the caliphate. ‘Ali was young at that
time and had not the capacity to shoulder the responsibilities of the
caliphate. Even 25 years later, when he assumed the caliphate, many
disturbances took place only because he was not an able politician.

‘Ali's "allegiance" to caliphs was forced
-----------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, you have said that Amiru'l-Mu'minin voluntarily
offered allegiance to the three caliphs. A story comes to mind which is
appropriate for this discussion. In the old days the highways of Iran
were hazardous, and pilgrims to the Holy shrines faced hardships during
their journeys. A certain caravan fell into the clutches of robbers, who
stole the people's property. When they were dividing the booty among
themselves, the shroud of a pilgrim fell into the hands of an old
robber.

He said: "Gentlemen pilgrims! Whose shroud is this?" A pilgrim said: "It
is mine." The robber said: "I have no shroud with me, so please give it
to me so that it may be lawful to me." The pilgrim said: "All my
property is yours, but return this shroud to me, since I am at the last
stage of my life and have taken great pains for the preparation of this
dress for me for the Hereafter. This is my cherished wealth."

The robber emphatically insisted on his demand, but the pilgrim repeated
the same thing, that he would not give up that right of his to anyone.
The robber, drawing his sword, began to strike the pilgrim about his
head and face and said that he would go on hitting him until he
surrendered the shroud to him and said: "It is lawful."

The poor old pilgrim was so beaten that he began shouting: "Sir! Lawful!
Lawful! Lawful! More lawful than one's mother's milk!"

I hope you will forgive me. But I wanted to draw your attention to what
I wish to explain. Perhaps you have forgotten what I have proved on
previous nights. I cited authentic historical records, which Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, Jauhari, Tabari, Baladhuri, Ibn Qutayba, Mas'udi, and
others of your ulama’ have verified, that they threatened to burn down
‘Ali's House, he was dragged to the mosque and was ordered with a sword
at his throat: "Swear allegiance, otherwise you will be beheaded."

Is this an example of voluntary allegiance?

There should be no "blind faith" in religion
--------------------------------------------

Second, I have said earlier that we should not have "blind faith" in the
fundamentals of religion. You say that since history tells us that the
four caliphs became rulers, we should follow our elders and have faith
in them. But common sense and hadith tell us that faith in principle
should be based on reason.

I repeat again that your and our historians have written that after the
death of the Holy Prophet, the community was divided into two sects. One
sect said that Abu Bakr should be followed and the other sect believed
that ‘Ali should be followed. The Holy Prophet said: "To obey ‘Ali is to
obey me; and to disobey ‘Ali is to disobey me."

Therefore obedience to ‘Ali was, according to the order of the Holy
Prophet, compulsory. So it was the duty of every individual of our two
sects to listen to the arguments of the two sides and to choose the
right course.

Faith should be based on reason and honest inquiry
--------------------------------------------------

My faith in Allah is based on wisdom. I have studied books of various
sects and religions. I accept the fact that Muhammad was the last
Prophet based on reasoning and not on blindly following my elders.

Similarly, I have deeply studied hundreds of books of both the sects,
particularly those of the Sunni sect in which there are clear arguments
to prove the Imamate and Caliphate of Amiru'l-Mu'minin. You people cast
only a cursory glance at the verses and hadith in praise of ‘Ali and
then make ridiculous interpretations of them.

Third, you say that we should accept the historical order of the
caliphs: Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, Uthman, and Hazrat ‘Ali. But this is absurd.
Man's superiority to animals is due to his knowledge and wisdom. So we
cannot blindly follow our elders.

According to your own prominent ulama’, ‘Ali's superiority in knowledge
has been fully established. Therefore, the right of his priority as
caliph must also be acknowledged. Since he was the "Gate of Knowledge"
of the Holy Prophet, deviation from his is deviation from guidance.

We admit that after the death of the Holy Prophet, Abu Bakr was caliph
for two years and three months, followed by ‘Umar for ten years, and
Uthman for twelve years. But these facts do not eliminate the proper
place of reason and hadith. History cannot deprive the "Gate of
Knowledge" of the Holy Prophet of his right.

Firdaus Dailami, Abu Nu'aim Ispahani, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Muttalabi,
author of the book Maghazi, Hakim, Hamwaini, Khatib Khawarizmi and Ibn
Maghazili report either from Ibn Abbas, or Sa'id Khadiri, or Ibn Mas'ud,
all of whom quote the Holy Prophet as saying: "They shall be questioned
about the wilaya (vicegerency) of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

Prophet's order to obey ‘Ali
----------------------------

***"And whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back." (59:7)***

Therefore, we must obey the command of the Holy Prophet.

When we look to the instructions of the Holy Prophet we find (as is
recorded in your reliable books) that among the whole of his community
the Holy Prophet has called only ‘Ali his gate of knowledge and has
ordered us to obey him. In fact, he said that obedience to ‘Ali was the
same as obedience to him.

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Imamu'l-Haram in
Dhakha'iru'l-'Uquba; Khawarizmi in Manaqib; Sulayman Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda; Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib
and other ulama’ have reported that the Holy Prophet of Allah said:
"Ansars! Shall I show you the person to whom you should adhere and who
will never lead you astray?" The people said: "Yes, let us know him."
The Holy Prophet said: "He is ‘Ali. Be his friend, respect him, and
follow him. Verily, he is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with him.
Surely he will lead you to the right path and will not let you be
ruined. Whatever I have told you, has been told to me by Gabriel."

Also, as recorded by your ulama’, the Holy Prophet said to Ammar
al-Yasir: "If all of mankind is on one side and ‘Ali on the other, you
should adopt the way of ‘Ali and leave the others."

Also, on different occasions and in different places, the Holy Prophet
repeatedly said: "He who obeys ‘Ali, really obeys me. He who obeys me,
really obeys Allah."

No hadith exists designating other caliphs as the "Guides of the Community" or "Gates of Knowledge"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is not a single hadith in your books in which the Holy Prophet
says: "After me the guide to the right path or ‘my gate of knowledge
‘or’ my successor and caliph is Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, or Uthman." Can you
cite such a hadith which is not fabricated by the Bakari or Amawi
groups?

But you ask us to give the fourth place to the Holy Prophet's "Gate of
knowledge," the Holy Prophet's "successor and caliph," to quote the Holy
Prophet's own words, and follow those about whom there are no
instructions whatsoever. If we follow your advice, shall we not be
disobeying Allah and His Holy Prophet?

Sunni ulama’ do not want cooperation with us
--------------------------------------------

Fourth, you say that like the four schools of law (Hanafis, Malikis,
Hanbalis and Shafi'is), we should also be united with you. But you
people call the Shi’as Rafizis, polytheists, and infidels. Obviously,
polytheists and believers cannot be united.

We are, however fully prepared to cooperate with our Sunni brothers. Of
course the condition is that you and we should be equally free to
advocate our religious beliefs.

Just as followers of the four schools of law are free in their actions,
the followers of the progeny of the Holy Prophet should also be free in
their actions. We see that among your four schools of law there are such
serious differences that some of them call the others infidels and
sinners.

Yet you consider them Muslims and allow them freedom of actions. But,
calling the poor Shi’as polytheists and infidels, you turn them out of
the Muslim fold and deprive them of their freedom to practice their
religion. How can we hope for unity and cooperation?

Prostration on dust by Shi’as objected to by others without reason
------------------------------------------------------------------

Take the example of our prostration on dust. What a fuss you make about
the dust and turba, a small block of clay of the Holy land of Karbala,
on which we put our forehead while prostrating! You insist that it is an
idol and call us idol worshipers, though we prostrate on the dust with
permission of Allah and His Holy Prophet.

The Qur'anic verses enjoin us to perform prostration, and prostration
means to put the forehead on the ground. Of course there is a difference
of opinion between you and us as to the things on which we prostrate.

Sheikh: Then why do you not perform the prostration as all other Muslims
do so that there may be no difference and this misunderstanding may
disappear.

Well-Wisher: First, please let us know why you Shafi'is differ so much
with the Malikis and Hanbalis, regarding both the articles of practice
and the fundamentals of your belief. Sometimes they go so far as to call
each other "sinner" and "infidel." It would be better if all of them sat
together and develop a common belief, so that there may be no
difference.

Sheikh: There is a difference of opinion among the jurists, but whoever
among us follows any of the jurists - Imam Shafi'i, Imam A'zam, Imam
Malik, or Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal - will be rewarded by Allah.

Differences among the four schools are ignored but Shi’as are not tolerated
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: For Allah's sake be fair. You have no reason to follow the
four jurists except that some of them were learned men. You blindly
follow them. Your are led by the nose, and still you claim that your
actions will be rewarded even though there are differences in
fundamentals as well as in articles of practice among them.

We follow the orders of the family of the Holy Prophet, who were,
according to the Prophet himself and to your own eminent ulama’, most
learned and you say we are infidels. You should admit that these
hostilities are not due to differences in views. Their cause is that we
love the family of the Prophet, and our opponents nurse a grudge against
them.

So far as the differences in fundamentals and articles of practice are
concerned there are many - among your four schools. Most of the verdicts
of your Imams and jurists are contrary to the clear injunctions
contained in the Holy Qur'an. But you never utter a word against those
who pronounce such verdicts and those who act upon them. Yet when the
Shi’as prostrate on pure dust, according to the ordinance of the Holy
Qur'an, you call them infidels!

Verdicts by Sunni scholars in contradiction to Qur'anic injunctions
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Where have the Sunni scholars of jurisprudence and the four
imams given verdicts in contradiction to the Holy Qur'an?

Well-Wisher: They have often given orders in contradiction to ordinances
of the Holy Qur'an and against the unanimous view of the community. Your
own ulama’ have written a number of books on the differences among the
four schools of law.

I advise you to read the illustrious book Masa'ilu'l-Khalif fi'l-fiqh by
Sheikhu't-Ta'ifa Abu Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Tusi, who has
recorded all the differences of the jurists of Islam from the chapter
Tahira (Cleanliness) to the chapter on Diyat (reprisals).

I will point out one of many examples of legal injunctions passed in
contradiction to the Holy Qur'an.

Sheikh: Yes, give us an example of this.

In absence of water ghusl and wuzu' one should perform tayammum
---------------------------------------------------------------

You gentlemen are aware that ceremonial washing is an essential ritual
of Islam. Depending on circumstances, one washes the entire body (ghusl)
or part of it (wuzu').

***"When you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and hands as far as the
elbows." (5:6)***

Accordingly, we should perform the ablution with pure water. When we do
not have water, we should perform tayammum, according to the verse:

***"And (if) you find not water then betake yourself to (pure) earth and
wipe your faces and your hands." (4:43)***

We should perform tayammum with pure earth. In the first case water for
ablution is necessary. In the second case, water is not available, or if
there is some other extenuating circumstance then, whether we are on a
journey or at home, we should perform tayammum, wiping the hands and
face with pure dust, in place of wuzu'. On this point all jurists of
Islam are unanimous, whether they are Shi’as Ithna Asharis, Malikis,
Shafi'is or Hanbalis.

Abu Hanifa's verdict that if water is not available we can perform ghusl and wuzu' with Nabiz (syrup of date)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But your greatest Imam, Abu Hanifa (most of whose verdicts are based on
speculation) insists that while we are on a journey and if we cannot
find water, we should perform ghusl and wuzu' with nabiz (date syrup).
But everybody knows that nabiz is the juice of dates and it is not
lawful to perform ablution with adulterated water.

The Holy Qur'an ordains that it is necessary for us to perform the
ablution for ritual prayer with pure water. If water is not available,
we should perform tayammum. Imam A'zam Abu Hanifa says that we may
perform ghusl or wuzu' using nabiz. This is a clear violation of the
Qur'anic ordinance. On the other hand, Bukhari in his Sahih has written
"It is not lawful to perform ablution with nabiz or an intoxicant."

Hafiz: I follow the Shafi'i school of law and fully agree with you on
this point. If there is no water, we should perform tayammum, and it is
not permissible to perform ablution with nabiz. This verdict has been
ascribed to Imam Abu Hanifa on the basis of its general popularity.

Well-Wisher: Knowing the real fact you make this excuse. This verdict of
Abu Hanifa has been consecutively narrated. I quote Fakhru'd-din Razi,
who says in his commentary Mafatihu'l-Ghaib, vol.III, p.553, regarding
the verse of tayammum, problem V, Shafi'i says that "Wuzu' using Nabiz
(date juice) is not lawful, and Abu Hanifa says that it is lawful while
one is on a journey." Also Ibn Rushd has recorded this verdict of Abu
Hanifa in his book Hidayatu'l-Mujtahid.

Sheikh: How can you say that this verdict is contrary to the ordinance
of the Qur'an? Some Hadith clearly prove it from the action of the Holy
Prophet.

Well-Wisher: Can you cite any hadith supporting your point?

Sheikh: In a hadith which Abu Zaid, slave of Amr Ibn Harith, reports
from Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, the Holy Prophet said to him, on the night of
the jinns (Lailatu'j-Jinn - the night when the Prophet took the oath of
allegiance from the jinns-tr.): "Do you have some water?" He (Abu Zaid)
said: "No, there is only a little nabiz." The Holy Prophet said: "The
date is clean, and water is also clean." Saying this he performed the
ablution.

There is another hadith which Abbas Ibn Walid Ibn Sabihu'l-Halal
Damishqi reported from Marwan Ibn Muhammad Tahiri Damishqi who reported
it from Abdullah Ibn Lahi'a, who reported it from Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud,
who said:

"The Holy Prophet said to me on Lailatu'j-Jinn: "Do you have water with
you?" I said: "No, but there is nabiz in the pail." Then the Holy
Prophet said: "The date is clean, and the water is clean. Pour it on
me." So I poured it on him, and he performed the ablution with it."

Obviously, the action of the Holy Prophet is an example for us to
follow. No doctrine or argument is superior to his actions. It is for
that reason that our Imam al-A'zam has approved its lawfulness.

Well-Wisher: Perhaps it would have been better, if you had remained
silent. Now our Sunni brothers will know that their leaders were
mistaken. They passed verdicts only on the basis of speculation.

First of all, let us examine who the narrators of this hadith were.

First, Abu Zaid, slave of Amr Ibn Harith, is not a known figure, and
according to the traditionists, he is a rejected man as reported by
Tirmidhi and others. Dhahabi in his Mizanu'l-I'tidal says: "This man is
not known to us and this hadith, which is narrated from Abdullah Ibn
Mas'ud, is not correct." Hakim says: "No other hadith is narrated by
this unknown man."

Bukhari also designated him as an unreliable narrator of hadith. For
this reason distinguished ulama’, like Qastalani and Sheikh Zakariyya
Ansari, wrote in their commentaries on Sahih Bukhari that "wuzu' (ritual
ablution) is not lawful with nabiz or intoxicants." They point out that
the hadith referred to above is weak.

The second hadith is also unacceptable. First, no scholar, except Ibn
Maja, narrated it in this way.

Second, prominent ulama’ have not included it in their sunan because the
chain of its reporters is faulty.

Dhahabi in his Mizanu'l-I'tiqad has quoted a number of statements
showing that Abbas Ibn Walid is not reliable. Hence, critics and
commentators have rejected him altogether. As for Marwan Ibn Muhammad
Tahiri, he belonged to the misguided group of Marhaba. Ibn Hazm and
Dhahabi have proved that he was an unreliable narrator of hadith.

Similarly, Abdullah Ibn Lahi'a has also been discredited by
distinguished ulama’ and commentators.

Therefore, when the chain of narrators of a hadith is of such a dubious
nature that your own ulama’ reject it, the hadith loses its value.

Third, on the basis of a hadith, which your ulama’ have narrated from
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, there was no one with the Holy Prophet on
Lailatu'j-Jinn. Abu Dawud in his Sunan, chapter on Wuzu' and Tirmidhi in
his Sahih, report from Al-Qama that Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud was asked: "Who
among you was with the Holy Prophet on Lailatu'j-Jinn?" He said: "No one
from among us was with him."

Fourth, Lailatu'j-Jinn occurred in Mecca prior to the Hijra (migration),
while all the commentators say that the verse of tayammum was revealed
in Medina. So this ordinance certainly annuls the previous order. It was
for this reason that your great jurists, like Imam Shafi'i, Imam Malik,
and others have declared it unlawful.

It is strange that the Sheikh puts forward a weak hadith as
authoritative in the face of the Holy Qur'an and tries to prove Abu
Hanifa's pronouncement correct.

Washing of the feet in wuzu' is against the Qur'anic ordinance
--------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the accepted rules of wuzu' mentioned in the above verse,
after washing the face and hands, a part of the head and the feet up to
the ankles are to be wiped. The Holy verse clearly says: "And wipe a
part of your heads and a part of your feet up to the ankles." But all
your scholars of jurisprudence insist that the feet be washed,
contradicting the clear ordinance of the Qur'an. There is a difference
between washing and wiping.

Sheikh: There are a number of hadith which indicate that the feet are to
be washed.

Well-Wisher: First, only hadith which conform with Qur'anic ordinances
are acceptable.

Obviously, the revoking of an explicit Qur'anic verse by a lone report
can never be lawful. The Holy verse clearly enjoins the wiping, not
washing, of the feet. If you think a little more carefully you will find
that the whole verse leads to the same point. It begins with the order
"Wash your face and your hands."

The conjunction "and" denotes that after washing the face, we should
also wash the hands. Similarly, in the second order: "and wipe a part of
your head and a part of your feet", the wiping of the head and of the
feet are joined by the conjunction "and." This clearly shows that after
wiping of the head the feet must also be wiped. It goes without saying
that washing cannot be substituted by wiping.

So just as the washing of the face and hands is necessary, the wiping of
the head and feet is also necessary. It is inadmissible that one be
wiped and the other washed. Otherwise, the conjunction and would be
meaningless.

Moreover, apart from these clear meanings, Islamic law does not contain
harsh and austere orders. Washing the feet is more difficult than wiping
them. The religious order is intended to make the performance of wuzu'
easy, as the tone of the verse also suggests.

Imam Fakhru'd-din Razi, an eminent Sunni commentator, makes a detailed
argument concerning the compulsory nature of wiping the feet in wuzu'.
You would benefit from studying it.

Wiping over the socks against the explicit ordinance of the Holy Qur’an
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Even more strange than washing the feet is the wiping over stockings.
There are differences among the Sunni jurists whether it may be done
while on a journey or at home.

This order is contrary to the Qur'anic injunction which stipulates that
we are to wipe the feet and not the socks. This order is also opposed to
the former order of washing the feet. If wiping the feet is not lawful,
why have they made wiping over the socks lawful?

Sheikh: There are many hadith which show that the Prophet wiped the
socks. Accordingly, the jurists considered it as proof of the lawfulness
of this act.

Well-Wisher: I have repeatedly submitted that, according to the order of
the Prophet a hadith alleged to have been reported from him which does
not conform to the Holy Qur'an is to be rejected. The forgers and
political jugglers have fabricated many hadith. Accordingly, your own
prominent ulama’ have rejected such hadith.

Besides the fact that these hadith are incompatible with the clear
ordinance of the Holy Qur'an, they are also mutually contradictory. Your
own great ulama’ have accepted this fact. For instance, the great sage,
Ibn Rushd Andalusi, in his Badayatu'l-Mujtahid wa Nihayatu'l-Muqtasid,
vol. I, pp.15 and 16, says about this difference:

"The reason that they differ is that the reports about them are opposed
to each other." In another place he says: "The reason that they differ
is that the reports about them are inconsistent."

Hence, to base an argument on reports and hadith which are mutually
contradictory and also clearly opposed to Qur'anic injunctions is quite
absurd. You know that among the hadith which are contradictory to each
other, only those which are compatible with the Holy Qur'an are
acceptable. If any hadith is opposed to the Holy Qur'an it is to be
rejected outright.

The wiping over the turban is against the Quranic ordinance
-----------------------------------------------------------

The verse clearly states “And wipes part of your heads" (after the
washing of the face and the hands). On the basis of this Qur'anic
injunction, the Shi’as jurists, following their Imams, insist that the
head itself is to be wiped in performing 'wuzu'. The Shafi'i, Maliki,
and Hanafi jurists concur.

But Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ishaq, Thawri, and Quza'i have said that
wiping over the turban is lawful. This has been reported by Imam
Fakhru'd-din Razi in his Tafsir al-Kabir. Every sensible person knows
that wiping the turban and wiping the head are quite different.

Shi’as alone blamed for such differences
----------------------------------------

There are other serious differences among your jurists and among the
four schools of law. Although most of them are clearly inconsistent with
Qur'anic injunctions, you do not find fault with one another. Every one
of them is free to maintain his point of view.

You do not call Abu Hanifa and the Hanafis polytheists, when they allow
wuzu to be performed with nabiz (fermented date liquor), nor do you
condemn self-contradictory interpretation of laws which violate Qur'anic
ordinances. But you object to Shi’as, who follow the progeny of the Holy
Prophet. In fact, you call the followers of the exalted family, Rafizis
and infidels! You have repeatedly said on previous nights that the
practices of the Shi’as prove that they are polytheists.

You asked why we do not offer prayers like Muslims. We offer the same
prayers that you and all other Muslims do: two units (rak'ats) of fajr
(the morning prayer), four rak'ats of zuhr (the noon prayer), four
rak'ats of asr (the afternoon prayer), three rak'ats of maghrib (the
sunset prayer), and four rak'ats of 'isha (the evening prayer).

As for the differences in the articles of practice, they are present in
abundance in all the sects of Islam. For example, there is a clear
difference between Abu'l-Hasan Ash'ari and Wasil Ibn Ata in the
fundamentals and articles of practice. Also your four imams (Abu Hanifa,
Malik, Shafi'i, and Ahmad Hanbal) and other great jurists like Hasan,
Dawud, Kathir, Abu Sur, Quza'i, Sufyan Thawri, Hasan Basri and Qasim Ibn
Salam, etc. have differences among them.

In the same way, the orders of the Holy Imams of the Ahlul Bayt differ
from the statements of your jurists. If the legal interpretations of the
jurists and their different opinions can be criticized, why should the
same criticism not be made against the different sects of Sunnis?

According to Sunni ulama’ prostration on dry excrement and dung is lawful
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many Sunni ulama’ accept legal interpretations which contradict the
explicit ordinance of the Holy Qur'an, and yet they offer lame
interpretations to clear ordinances. Other jurists give an opposite
opinion. Still, you do not regard their interpretation or practice as
infidelity.

But in regard to our performance of sajda (prostration), you raise loud
objections, saying that the Shi’as are idol worshipers, while you ignore
the pronouncement of your own ulama’ that prostration on dry excrement
is lawful.

Prostration on floor coverings instead of the ground is against Qur'anic injunction
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The legal decisions of the Shi’as jurists, following the Holy Imams, are
clearly in accordance with the ordinances of the Holy Qur'an. For
instance, your jurists consider wool, cotton, silk, and other floor
coverings the same as earth. But it is obvious that these coverings are
not the earth.

But the Shi’as, in obedience to their Imams of the Ahlul Bayt of the
Holy Prophet say: "Prostration is not lawful on any thing except the
earth or those things which grow from the earth and are not used for
eating or wearing."

For this you assail them and call them polytheists. On the other hand,
you do not call prostration on dry excrement polytheism. It is quite
evident that prostrating on the earth (as ordained by Allah) and
prostrating on floor coverings are quite different things.

Sheikh: You people perform the sajda (prostration) on pieces of earth
from Karbala. You keep the small blocks of earth from that land. They
are like idols, and you consider prostration on them compulsory. Of
course, this performance is against the principles and practices of
Muslims.

Well-Wisher: It has become your second nature to follow your elders
blindly, though it does not befit a just man like you to say that the
pure dust of Karbala is like an idol.

Respected friend! Criticism of any belief must be based on proof. If you
would consult the Shi’as books of theology, you would find the answer to
your criticism, and you would not mislead our Sunni brothers with false
objections.

Shi’as do not consider prostration on dust of Karbala compulsory
----------------------------------------------------------------

If you can show us in any of our commentaries a single hadith or
pronouncement that indicates prostration on the dust of Karbala is
compulsory, we shall accept all your statements as correct. In fact, in
all our books of religious practices, there are clear instructions that,
according to the Qur'anic ordinance, prostration must be performed on
pure earth.

This includes dust, stone, sand and grass, provided that it is not a
mineral. Moreover, prostration may be performed on those things which
grow from the earth, provided that they are not used for food or worn.

Sheikh: Then why do you regularly keep small blocks of dust from Karbala
with you and perform prostration on them at the time of the ritual
prayer?

Shi’as keep sajdagahs (tablets of earth) for prostration during prayers
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Prostration on clean earth is compulsory. The ritual prayer
is generally offered in houses furnished with carpets. Even if the
carpets are removed, the earth under them generally contains lime and
other substances on which prostration is not permitted.

Therefore, we keep a piece of earth with us so that we may prostrate on
it. (Many Shi’as Mujtahids consider chalk, plaster, lime and mined
stones such as agate to be permissible, in the absence of the preferable
substances, but nevertheless they exclude actual ores and refined
minerals. tr.)

Sheikh: What we notice is that all the Shi’as have tablets of the soil
of Karbala and consider performance of sajda compulsory on it.

Why we prostrate on the soil of Karbala
---------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: It is true that we perform the sajda on the dust of
Karbala, but we do not consider it compulsory. In accordance with the
instructions given in our books of jurisprudence, we consider sajda
compulsory on clean earth. However, according to the Ahlul Bayt,
prostration on the pure earth of Husain's burial place (Karbala) is
preferable.

It is a pity that some people maliciously insist that the Shi’as worship
Husain. They support their view by pointing out that Shi’as perform
their prostrations on soil taken from Karbala. In fact we never worship
Husain, ‘Ali, or Muhammad.

We worship only Allah, and it is in accordance with Allah's order that
we perform sajda only on pure earth. Our prostration is not for Husain.
But according to the instructions of the infallible Imams of the progeny
of the Holy Prophet, prostration on the clean soil of Karbala leads to
greater recompense for us, but it is not compulsory.

Sheikh: How can you claim that the earth of Karbala is possessed of
special properties so that it deserves preference to other soil?

Characteristics of soil of Karbala
----------------------------------

Well-Wisher: First, it is a fact that different places have different
properties. Every piece of earth has special properties which only
expert geologists know. Nonspecialists don't understand these things.

Second, the special characteristics of the soil of Karbala were known
before the time of the Holy Imams. It was an object of special attention
during the time of the Holy Prophet also, as had been recorded in
authentic books of your own ulama’.

In Khasa'isu'l-Kubra, by Jalalu'd-din Suyuti, a number of hadith of
Ummu'l-Mu'minin Ummi Salma, Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha, Ummu'l-Fazl, Ibn
Abbas, and Anas Ibn Malik, etc. about the soil of Karbala have been
narrated by your prominent ulama’ and reliable reporters, like Abu
Nu'aim Ispahani, Baihaqi, and Hakim.

A report says: I saw Husain sitting in the lap of his grandfather, the
Holy Prophet, who had a red block of soil in his hand. The Holy Prophet
was kissing the dust and weeping. I asked him what that soil was.

The Holy Prophet said: "Gabriel has informed me that my son, this
Husain, will be murdered in Iraq. He has brought this earth for me from
that land. I am weeping for the suffering that will befall my Husain."

Then the Holy Prophet handed the dust to Umm Salma and said to her:
"When you see this soil turn into blood, you will know that my Husain
has been slaughtered."

Umm Salma kept the soil in a bottle and kept watch over it until she saw
on the Day of Ashura, 61 A.H. that it turned to blood. Then she knew
that Husain ibn ‘Ali had been martyred.

It is recorded by your prominent ulama’ and by Shi’as jurists that the
Prophet and the Imams paid special attention to the pure soil of
Karbala. After the martyrdom of Imam Husain, Imam Sayyidu's-Sajidin
Zainu'l-Abidin ‘Ali Ibn Husain picked some up, declared it to be sacred
dust, and kept it in a bag. The Holy Imam used to perform his
prostrations on it and made a tasbih out of it, and recited Allah's
praises on it.

After him all the succeeding Imams considered that soil sacred and made
tasbihs out of it and a small block to prostrate on. They persuaded the
Shi’as to perform prostrations on them, with the understanding that it
was not compulsory, but with a view to achieving greater recompense. The
Holy Imams insisted that prostration before Allah must be on clean earth
only and that it was preferable if it was performed on that earth of
Karbala.

The great scholar, Abu Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Hasan Tusi, reports in his
Misbahu'l-Mutahajjid that Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq kept a little soil from
Imam Husain's tomb in a yellow cloth which he opened at the time of
prayers and performed his prostrations on it.

Shi’as for a long time have kept this earth with them. Then, fearing it
might be desecrated, they kneaded it into small tablets or pieces, which
are now called mohr. We consider it sacred and during prayers we
prostrate on it not as a compulsory act but in view of its special
nature. Otherwise, when we have no pure soil with us, we prostrate on
clean earth, or clean rock. In this way our compulsory act is performed.

We are astonished at the behavior of your ulama’, who do not find fault
with the legal pronouncements of the four schools of Sunni law. That is,
if Imam A'zam says that in the absence of water ablution should be
performed with nabiz, the Shafi'is, Malikis and Hanbalis do not object
to it. If Imam Ahmad Hanbal believes in the visibility of Allah or
considers it lawful to wipe water over the turban in the ritual
ablution, the ulama’ of the other sects do not criticize him.

Similarly, they do not condemn other unique pronouncements like that of
joining in wedlock with young boys while on a journey, prostration on
dung or any polluted object, or copulation with mothers using a cloth
wrapper.

But when we say that the progeny of the Holy Prophet have said that
prostrating on the earth of Karbala is praiseworthy, you say that Shi’as
are polytheists.

Old age is no criterion for the caliphate
-----------------------------------------

Now I will reply to your point. Talking about advanced age and
consensus, you said that because of his age, Abu Bakr was entitled to
preference. Even after ten nights, during which I have disproven your
argument regarding "consensus" and preference based on age, you raise
the issues again as if nothing has been said. Nevertheless, I will not
leave you unanswered.

‘Ali appointed for conveyance of verses of sura bara'a (the immunity) of the holy Qur’an
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You have argued that Abu Bakr deserved priority because of his age and
political astuteness. But how is it that some people decided that for a
great cause it was necessary for a man to be old and politically astute,
but Allah and His Prophet did not understand this. For conveying the
first forty verses of Bara'a to the people, the Holy Prophet deposed Abu
Bakr and sent the young ‘Ali in his place.

Nawab: Respected Sir! Please don't leave this point vague. Let us know
for what purpose Abu Bakr was deposed and ‘Ali appointed in his place.
When I asked these people (pointing to his ulama’) about it, they gave
only a vague answer, saying that it was an unimportant matter. Please
explain this matter.

Well-Wisher: The Muslim community, including the ulama’ and historians
of both sects (Shi’as and Sunnis), acknowledge the fact that when the
initial verses of the Sura of Bara'a (The Immunity) were revealed in
condemnation of the idol worshipers, the Holy Prophet called Abu Bakr
and gave him the verses, ordering him to take them to Mecca and to
recite them to the people of Mecca during the hajj.

Abu Bakr had gone only a short distance when Gabriel appeared and said:
"Prophet of Allah! Allah sends His compliments to you and says that the
matter of the Holy Qur'an should be conveyed either by the Holy Prophet
himself or by one who is of him."

Accordingly, the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali and said to him: "Overtake Abu
Bakr and take the verses of Bara'a from him and read them to the idol
worshipers of Mecca."

‘Ali set out immediately. He met Abu Bakr at Dhu'l-Halifa and conveyed
the message of the Holy Prophet. He took the verses from Abu Bakr and,
reaching Mecca, read them to the assembly of the people.

Nawab: Has this affair been recorded in our authentic books?

Well-Wisher: I have just told you that the whole community is unanimous
on this point. I will give you some references at present so that when
you think over the matter, you may know that it was a very significant
affair.

The following eminent writers have reported this matter in their books
and generally testified to its veracity:

Bukhari in Sahih, parts IV and V; Abdi in Jam'
al-Bainu's-Sihahi's-Sitta, part II; Baihaqi in Sunan, pp.9 and 224;
Tirmidhi in Jam'i, vol.II, p.135; Abu Dawud in Sunan; Khawarizmi in
Manaqib; Shukani in Tafsir, vol.II, p.319; Ibn Maghazili in Faqih
al-Shafi'i in his Faza'il; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in
Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.17; Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.18; Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nazara, p.147
and Dhakha'iru'l-Uquba, p.69; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira Khawasu'l-Umma,
p.22, Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i (one of the Imams of Siha) in
Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, p.14 (has reported six hadith relating to this
point); Ibn Kathir in Ta'rikh al-Kabir, vol.V, p.38 and vol.VII, p.357;

Ibn Hajar Asqalani in Isanaba, vol.II, p.509; Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in
Durru'l-Mansur, vol.III, p.208 (in commentary on the first verse of
Bara'a); Tabari in Jam'u'l-Bayan, vol.X, p.41, (in commentary on
Bara'a); Imam Tha'labi in Tafsir al-Kashfu'l-bayan; Ibn Kathir in
Tafsir, vol.II, p.333; Alusi in Ruha'l-Ma'ani, v. III, p.268; the
fanatic, Ibn Hajar Makki in Sawa'iq, p.19; Haithami in
Majma'u'z-Zawa'id, v.VII, p.29;

Muhammad Ibn Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, p.125, ch.62 (reporting
from Abi Bakr and Hafiz Abi Nu'aim and from Musnad of Hafiz Damishqi as
reported by Abi Nu'aim in different ways); Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in
Musnad, v.I, pp.3 and 151, v.III, p.283, and v.IV, pp.164-165; Hakim in
Mustadrak, v.II, Kitab Maghazi, p.51 and in v.II of the same book,
p.331; Mulla ‘Ali Muttaqi in Kanzu'l-'Ummal, v.I, pp.246 to 249 and
Faza'il-i-’Ali v.VI, p.154.

Reason for ‘Ali’s appointment
-----------------------------

Sayyid Abdu'l-Hayy: Why didn't the Holy Prophet, whose actions were from
Allah, entrust this mission to ‘Ali in the beginning?

Well-Wisher: Since no reason for this fact has been recorded, we do not
know. But my impression is that this change was intended to show the
superiority of ‘Ali. At any rate, it certainly disproves the claim that
age or political experiences were reasons for excluding ‘Ali from the
caliphate.

If ‘Ali had been appointed to this post in the beginning, it would have
appeared an ordinary matter, and would not have been possible for us to
prove to you ‘Ali's superiority. If Abu Bakr's age and political ability
proved his superiority, he should not have been recalled from such a
mission. But the fact is that to convey the message of prophethood is
the work of the Prophet or his caliph.

Accompanying report of Abu Bakr
-------------------------------

Sayyid: According to some reports, Abu Huraira says that ‘Ali had been
ordered to go to Mecca along with Abu Bakr to teach the people the
rituals of Hajj. ‘Ali was to read the verses of Bara'a to the people.
Conveying the message of prophethood in this way indicated that they
were of equal rank.

Well-Wisher: First, this is a forged report of the followers of Abu
Bakr. Others have not narrated it. Second, the whole community agreed
that Abu Bakr was called back and replaced by ‘Ali. This fact has been
consecutively reported in the authentic books of both sects.

Obviously, the consensus of the whole community is that we should rely
on the frequently reported and authentic hadith. If there is a single
report at variance with authentic hadith, we should reject it.

This view is held by all men of principles and by the traditionists.
‘Ali's appointment, Abu Bakr's return in a sad and desperate state, the
Holy Prophet's consoling him and satisfying him that it was Allah's
will - all these are generally acknowledged facts.

Another proof that age is no criterion for the caliphate
--------------------------------------------------------

There is another proof that the right of priority has no relation to
age. The right of preference is achieved through wisdom and piety.
Whoever excels in knowledge and piety shall deserve preference. The Holy
Prophet said: "All men are dead, but the men of learning are alive."

Accordingly, the Holy Prophet gave ‘Ali first place among the Companions
and said: "‘Ali is the gate of knowledge." Evidently the Holy Prophet's
gate of knowledge must supersede others.

Of course the other companions of the Holy Prophet who remained obedient
to him were all virtuous people. We never deny the virtuous position of
the companions, but their merits can bear no comparison to the merits of
the Holy Prophet's gate of knowledge.

Holy Prophet sent ‘Ali to Yemen
-------------------------------

Your prominent ulama’ have written in detail about ‘Ali being sent to
Yemen to guide its people. Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i has recorded six
hadith concerning this point, in his Khasa'isu'l-Alawi.

Also Abu'l-Qasim Husain Ibn Muhammad Raghib Ispahani, in his
Mahadhiratu'l-Udaba, v.II, p.212 and others, have reported that when the
Holy Prophet commissioned ‘Ali to go to Yemen, ‘Ali pleaded that he was
young and felt some reluctance in being placed over old men of the
tribe. The Holy Prophet replied: "Certainly Allah will guide your heart
and give strength to your tongue."

If age was a requirement for preferment, why then did the Holy Prophet
in the presence of older distinguished companions, like Abu Bakr, send
Hazrat ‘Ali to Yemen to guide the people there?

After the Holy Prophet ‘Ali was the guide of the community
----------------------------------------------------------

Addressing the Holy Prophet Muhammad, Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:
"You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people." (13:7)

Imam Tha'labi, in his Tafsir al-Kashfu'l-Bayan; Muhammad Ibn Jarir
Tabari in his Tafsir; Muhammad Ibn Yusuf GanJi Shafi'i, in
Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.62, from Ta'rikh al-Ibn Asakir; Sheikh Sulayman
Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda end of ch. 26 from Tha'labi,
Hamwaini, Hakim, Abu'l-Qasim Haskani, Ibn Sabbagh Maliki, Mir Sayyid
‘Ali Hamdani and the Manaqib of Khawarizmi, reporting on the authority
of Ibn Abbas, Amiru'l-Mu'minin and Abu Buraid Aslami in different words,
have narrated eleven hadith whose main point is that, when the above
verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet, putting his hand on his own chest,
said: "I am the warner." Then, putting his hand on ‘Ali's chest, he
said: "After me you are the guide of the community. Those who receive
guidance from you will be the guided ones."

Conspiracies of enemies
-----------------------

You also said that even after 25 years, when he was caliph, it was due
to his lack of experience in politics that disturbances and bloodshed
resulted. I'm not sure what you mean by politics. If politics means
deceitfulness, conspiring, and intermingling right and wrong (as the
people in all ages have done in order to secure power), I would
acknowledge that ‘Ali was far removed from such politics. To me politics
means justice and the exercise of rightful authority.

‘Ali hated corrupt politics
---------------------------

‘Ali who was an embodiment of justice, kept aloof from corrupt politics.
As I said earlier, when Amiru'l-Mu'minin assumed the apparent caliphate,
he immediately deposed all former officials and servants.

Abdullah Ibn Abbas (his cousin) and others said: "It would be better if
you would postpone this order for a few days, so that the officials and
governors of the regions accept your caliphate. Then you might dismiss
them."

The Holy Imam said: "You have given me counsel regarding the politics of
this matter. But you do not understand that if I am swayed by what is
called 'politics' and allow oppressive rulers to remain at their posts,
even though it would be for a short time, I would be answerable to Allah
for that period. At the time of questioning, I would be accountable for
that. This cannot be expected of ‘Ali."

In order to restore justice ‘Ali immediately ordered the dismissal of
the oppressive rulers. This measure led to the opposition of Mu'awiya,
Talha, Zubair, and others who staged a revolt and caused great tumult
and bloodshed in the country.

Respected gentlemen! You misunderstand the issue. Since you have not
inquired into the matter, you are misled by propagandists who claim that
the rebellion during ‘Ali's caliphate was due to his lack of knowledge
of politics. No. There were other factors at work.

Rebellion during Amiru'l-mu'minin's caliphate was due to enmity against him
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

First, for 25 years people had been encouraged to oppose ‘Ali. It was
therefore difficult for them to accept his vicegerency and caliphate or
to acknowledge his exalted rank. An example of this opposition occurred
on the first day of the caliphate. A nobleman entered the gate of the
mosque and, seeing the Imam on the pulpit, shouted: "May that eye be
blinded which sees ‘Ali on the pulpit instead of Caliph ‘Umar!"

Second, it was not possible for worldly men to accept ‘Ali's justice,
particularly since their self-indulgence had been given a free rein
during the caliphate of Uthman. Hence, they rose against him, so that
somebody who could satisfy their desires might assume power. Their
wishes were fulfilled during the caliphate of Mu'awiya.

Accordingly, Talha and Zubair at first swore allegiance to ‘Ali, but
when their demands for authority were not satisfied, they broke their
allegiance and openly opposed him in the Battle of the Camel.

A’ysha was largely responsible for the revolt against ‘Ali
----------------------------------------------------------

Third, history tells us who the real instigator was of the disturbances
from the beginning of the caliphate. Was it any other than
Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha? Was it not A’ysha who, according to the
statements of both Sunni and Shi’as traditionists, mounted on a camel
(against the express ordinance of Allah and His Holy Prophet that she
should stay in her house) reached Basra and provoked a large battle?

You claim that internecine battles were due to ‘Ali's lack of political
insight. This is a highly misleading statement. If A’ysha had not
revolted against him, no one would have had the courage to oppose ‘Ali,
after the Holy Prophet had clearly declared: "To fight against ‘Ali is
to fight against me." A’ysha incited the people to fight against ‘Ali.

‘Ali's battles of Jamal, Siffin, and Nahrwan were like the battles of the Holy Prophet against the infidels
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

‘Ali's battles against the enemies and hypocrites at Basra, Siffin, and
Nahrwan were like the battles of the Holy Prophet against the infidels.

Sheikh: How were the battles against the Muslims like the battles
against the infidels?

Well-Wisher: Your illustrious ulama’, like Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his
Musnad; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira; Sulayman Balkhi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda; Imam Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in Khasa'isu'l-Alawi;
Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul; Muhammad Ibn Talha Ganji
Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 37, and Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I, p.67, have reported that the Holy Prophet
prophesied ‘Ali's battles against the "Nakisin", "Qasitin", and
"Mariqin", among whom the "Nakisin" meant Talha, Zubair and their
companions; "Qasitin" meant Mu'awiya and his followers; and "Mariqin"
meant the Kharijis (Secessionists) of Nahrwan.

All of them were rebels whose slaughter was permissible and the Holy
Prophet ordered the same punishment for them when he foretold the
fighting of those battles.

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.37, has
reported a hadith from Sa'id Ibn Jabir, who reported it from Ibn Abbas
that the Prophet said to Umm Salma: "This is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. His
flesh is my flesh, his blood is my blood, and he is to me what Aaron was
to Moses except that there will be no prophet after me.

Umm Salma, this ‘Ali is the chief of the believers, the chief of the
Muslims, the repository of my knowledge, my successor, and the gate of
knowledge. He is my brother in this world and in the hereafter; he is
with me in the most exalted place; he will fight against the 'Nakisin,'
'Qasitin,' and 'Mariqin.'"

After citing this hadith Muhammad Ibn Yusuf says that this hadith proves
that the Holy Prophet had informed ‘Ali about the battles against those
three groups and that he had ordered ‘Ali to fight against the three
groups.

Makhnaf Ibn Salim is reported to have said that when Abu Ayyub Ansari
(who was a distinguished companion of the Holy Prophet) was going with
an army to fight in the battle, he said: "Abu Ayyub! How strange of you!

You are the same man who fought against the polytheists on the side of
the Holy Prophet, but now you are bent upon fighting against Muslims!"
Then Abu Ayyub said: "The Holy Prophet ordered me to fight against the
three groups: they are the Nakisin, the Qasitin, and the Mariqin."

Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in Khasa'isu'l-Alawi, Hadith 155,
reporting from Abu Sa'id Khadiri and Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his
Yanabi, p.59, (ch.II) from Jam'u'l-Fawa'id says that Abu Sa'id said: "We
were sitting with the companions, waiting for the Holy Prophet. When the
Holy Prophet came towards us, we saw that his shoe buckle was broken. He
tossed his shoe to ‘Ali, who began mending it.

Then the Holy Prophet said: 'Verily, there is one among you who shall
fight in defense of the proper interpretation of the Holy Qur'an as I
have fought (against the infidels).'

Then Abu Bakr said: 'I am that man?'

The Holy Prophet said, 'No!'

Then ‘Umar said: 'Is it I?'

The Holy Prophet said: 'No! It is the man who is mending my shoes.' "

This hadith shows that ‘Ali's battles were fought for the proper
interpretation of the Holy Qur'an. It follows, therefore, that the civil
disruptions of ‘Ali's caliphate were not due to political weakness of
Amiru'l-Mu'minin but were due to the enmity of the opponents.

After the holy prophet, ‘Ali was the greatest statesman
-------------------------------------------------------

You gentlemen might find it enlightening to study the instructions ‘Ali
sent to his governors and military and civil officers. For instance, the
orders and instructions which he sent to Malik Ashtar and Muhammad Ibn
Abu Bakr for the governance of Egypt, to Uthman Ibn Hunaif and Abdullah
Ibn Abbas of Basra, and to Qutham Ibn Abbas for the administration of
Mecca are models of excellent public administration as well as social
justice. These documents are part of the Nahju'l-Balagha.

‘Ali possessed knowledge of the unseen world
--------------------------------------------

This fact has been acknowledged by both followers of ‘Ali and enemies.
The Holy Imam was Imamu'l-Muttaqin (chief of the pious). He had complete
knowledge of the meaning of the Holy Qur'an. Moreover, he possessed
knowledge of the unseen world.

Sheikh: I have not followed your vague sentence that ‘Ali possessed
knowledge of the unseen world. Kindly explain it.

Well-Wisher: There is nothing vague in it. To be aware of the unseen
means to know the secrets of the universe, which were known through
divine favor by all the prophets and their vicegerents? Each was given
as much knowledge of the unseen as Allah considered necessary for them
to deliver his message. After the Holy Prophet, Amiru'l-Mu'minin was
endowed with such knowledge.

Sheikh: I never expected that you would uphold the views of the fanatic
Shi’as. This praise is so excessive that even the praised one would not
accept it. To have knowledge of the unseen is an attribute peculiar to
Allah alone, none of His creatures can have any concern with it.

Well-Wisher: Believing that the great prophets, their vicegerents, and
other exalted servants of Allah possessed knowledge of the unseen has
nothing to do with fanaticism. Rather, it was one of their merits, which
showed their submission to Allah. We have clear proof of this fact from
hadith and the Holy Qur'an.

Is knowledge of the unseen restricted to Allah?
-----------------------------------------------

Sheikh: The Holy Qur'an contradicts your statement.

Well-Wisher: Can you recite those verses which contradict my statement?

Sheikh: There are many verses in the Holy Qur'an, which support my view.
For instance, the Holy Qur'an says:

***"And with Him are the keys of the unseen treasures - none knows them
but He; and He knows what is in the land and the sea; and there falls
not a leaf but He knows it, nor a grain in the darkness of the earth,
nor anything green nor dry but (it is all) in a clear book." (6:59)***

This is the most convincing evidence that no one except Allah has
knowledge of the unseen. If somebody believes in any one else having
knowledge of the unseen, he has made one of His creatures an associate
in the attributes of Allah.

You claim that ‘Ali was aware of the unseen. This means that apart from
your making him an associate in the attributes of Allah, you have made
his rank higher than that of the Holy Prophet. The Holy Prophet
repeatedly said: "I am a man like you. Allah alone knows the unseen."
The Holy Prophet clearly expressed his lack of knowledge of the unseen.

Have you read the verse of the Holy Qur'an, which says:

***"Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your God
is one God." (18:110)***

That is, the only difference between you and me is that revelation from
Allah comes to me.

At another place Allah says:

***"Say: I do not control any benefit or harm for my own soul except as
Allah please; and had I known the unseen I would have had much of good
and no evil would have touched me; I am nothing but a warner and the
giver of good news to a people who believe." (7:188)***

And again:

***"And I say not to you that with me are the treasures of Allah and I
know not the unseen." (11:31)***

Allah says again:

***"Say: No one in the heavens or in the earth know the unseen but
Allah: And they know not when they shall be raised." (2:65)***

The Holy Prophet himself admitted that he did not know the unseen and
that its knowledge was peculiar to Allah. How can you claim that ‘Ali
had such knowledge?

Your belief is an attempt to assert ‘Ali's superiority to the Holy
Prophet. Doesn't the Holy Qur'an say:

***"Nor is Allah going to make you acquainted with the unseen...."
(3:179)***

On what principle do you believe that anyone but Allah has knowledge of
the unseen?

Well-Wisher: The preface to your statement is correct. But the
conclusion you have drawn is faulty. You have said that the Knower of
the unseen is Allah; that the keys of the unseen are with Allah
Almighty; and that according to the last verse of the Sura al-Kahf (The
Cave), the last of the Prophets, all other prophets, the vicegerents,
and the Holy Imams were similar to other human beings.

In their physical structure they were created like all others. All these
things are true, and the Shi’as sect accepts them all. Also, the verses
you have recited are perfectly true in their proper context.

But the words "the Holy Prophet" from the sura Hud refer to the Prophet
Noah. Verse 50 of the sura of al-An'am (The Cattle) refers to our
exalted Prophet. When the infidels asked him why there were no signs of
his having treasures of God or Knowledge of the unseen, this was
revealed:

***"Say I do not say to you 'I have with me the treasures of Allah, nor
do I know the unseen, nor do I say to you that I am an angel; I do not
follow aught save what is revealed to me.'" (6:50)***

This verse was in response to the ignorant assumption that the Prophet's
actions could be influenced by worldly considerations. As for the
knowledge of the unseen, we believe that the prophets and their
vicegerents possessed it. I do not associate them with Allah's
attributes.

But this gift is part of wahi and ilham (revelation and inspiration from
Allah) which removed the curtains of ignorance from their sight and
disclosed realities to them. I shall explain this in detail.

Knowledge is of two kinds - dhati (self-existent) and arzi (acquired)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

We Shi’as of the Imamiyya sect believe that knowledge is of two kinds:
Dhati and Arzi.

Dhati, or self-existent knowledge, is peculiar to Allah. We can
acknowledge it but cannot comprehend its reality. In whatever way we
might try to explain it, self-existent knowledge is beyond the
comprehension of human beings.

Arzi, or acquired knowledge, is that which is not intrinsically present
in man, whether he is a prophet or not. He is benefited by it later.
This knowledge too is of two kinds: tahsili and ladunni.

Tahsili is the knowledge acquired through study and experience. If a
student pursues the normal course of education, for instance, he goes to
school and learns from his teacher. If Allah wills, he will acquire
knowledge according to his labor and the time that he spends in
learning.

Ladunni refers to that knowledge which man receives directly from Allah.
He does not learn it through letters and words but receives it directly
from the All-Beneficent. Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"And whom we had taught knowledge from ourselves." (18:65)***

Shi’as do not claim that knowledge of the unseen was self-existent in
the Holy Prophet or the Imams or that they understood the unseen as
Allah Almighty does. What we say is that Allah is not confined or
limited. He can give knowledge and power to anyone He likes. Sometimes
He gives knowledge to man by means of a teacher and sometimes directly
from Himself. This directly-bestowed knowledge is called the knowledge
of the unseen.

Sheikh: Your first statement is correct, but the divine will does not
allow such unnatural things as granting a man the knowledge of the
unseen directly, that is, without the agency of a teacher.

Well-Wisher: No, you and your friends are mistaken. In fact, you often
unknowingly contradict most of your own eminent scholars. Allah bestowed
upon all His prophets and their successors knowledge of the unseen.
Whatever was required for them to perform their mission?

Sheikh: In the face of these verses of the Holy Qur'an, which explicitly
reject the idea of man's knowledge of the unseen, what evidence do you
have to support your point?

Well-Wisher: We are not opposed to the verses of the Holy Qur'an. Every
verse of the Holy Qur'an was revealed for some particular purpose, which
was, according to the circumstances, sometimes negative and sometimes
positive.

That is why it is said that among the verses of the Holy Qur'an one
verse strengthens another. Because the unbelievers often demanded
miracles from the Holy Prophet, the negative verses cited above were
revealed. In order to prove the real objective, positive verses were
also revealed so that the position might be clear.

Qur'anic evidence that prophets possessed knowledge of the unseen
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: This is very strange. You say that there are positive evidences
in the Holy Qur'an that the prophets possessed knowledge of the unseen.
Kindly recite these verses.

Well-Wisher: Do not feel astonished. You know them.

Allah Almighty says:

***"The Knower of the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to any
except to him whom He chooses as an apostle; for surely he makes a guard
to march before him and after him, so that He may know that they have
truly delivered the message of their Lord, and He encompasses what is
with them, and He records the number of all things." (72:26-28)***

This verse shows that the exalted messengers of Allah who are endowed
with the knowledge of the unseen are an exception.

Second, the verse of the sura of the Family of Imran, part of which you
recited, proves my point. The whole verse reads as follows:

***"Nor is Allah going to acquaint you with the unseen, but Allah
chooses of His apostles whom He pleases; therefore believe in Allah and
His apostles; and if you believe and guard (against evil), then you
shall have a great reward." (3:179)***

Both these verses clearly show that the messengers of Allah were given
knowledge of the unseen. If no one except Allah possessed knowledge of
the unseen, the clause "chooses of His apostles whom He pleases" would
be meaningless.

Allah says in the sura of Hud:

***"These are announcements relating to the unseen which We reveal to
you; you did not know them - (neither) you nor your people - before
this; therefore be patient; surely the end is for those who guard
(against evil)." (11:49)***

In the sura of The Counsel He says:

***"And thus did We reveal to you an inspired book by Our command. You
did not know what the Book was, nor (what) the faith (was), but We made
it a light, guiding thereby whom We please of Our servants." (42:52)***

If knowledge of the unseen did not exist in the world, how did the
prophets disclose unknown things and tell people about their (the
People's) private lives? Is it not in the Holy Qur'an what Jesus said to
the Bani Israel?

***"And I will declare to you what you eat and what you store up in your
houses."(3:49)***

If I cite all the verses of the Holy Qur'an, which support this fact, it
would take a long time. This much seems sufficient.

Sheikh: Such statements encourage the soothsayers, diviners, palmists,
astrologers, and other cheats who deceive the people and fill their own
pockets with money.

Claims for knowledge of the unseen through other means are false
----------------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Belief in truth does not lead to bad results. It is
people's ignorance which victimizes them. If Muslims followed the
possessor of knowledge, according to the instructions of the Holy
Prophet, in particular, if they had not forsaken the gate of knowledge
from the very beginning, they would not have fallen victim to wicked
people.

The Holy Qur'an clearly says ***"Whomsoever He chooseth from the
Prophets."*** The word "prophet" clearly indicates that there are chosen
servants of Allah who receive knowledge of the unseen directly from Him,
without having to learn it through the usual means.

If any man who is not a prophet or Imam claims that he can predict the
unseen through astrology, palmistry, or casting lots to tell fortunes,
he is a liar. The true Muslims, who follow the Holy Qur'an never believe
in such people, nor do they fall prey to their deceit because they know
that they should not follow any but the Holy Qur'an and the bearers and
commentators of the Holy Qur'an that is, the Holy Prophet Muhammad and
his progeny, who are analogous to the Qur'an.

In short, if anyone except the Holy Prophet and his pure successors
claims that he has knowledge of the unseen and says that he can foretell
future events he is decidedly an imposter, whatever way he may adopt.

Vicegerents of prophets also had knowledge of the unseen
--------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: Since the prophets received divine revelations, they had,
according to your statement, knowledge of the unseen. But was ‘Ali also
a prophet? Or was he associated in the affairs of prophethood through
which he knew the unseen?

Well-Wisher: First, why are you misleading us by using the words
"according to your statement"? Instead of it why do you not use the
words "according to the statement of Allah"? I am not saying anything of
my own accord. I cite the ordinance of the Holy Qur'an, and on the basis
of the statements of the interpreter of the Holy Qur'an, the Holy
Prophet, I am disclosing its real meaning.

I have submitted to you, on the basis of the evidences of the Qur'anic
verses, that the prophets and messengers of Allah were exalted men and
had the knowledge of the unseen. Your own eminent ulama’ have admitted
this fact and have been inclined to report the instances of the Holy
Prophet possessing knowledge of the unseen.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I, p.67
(printed Egypt), reports a hadith from the Holy Prophet that he said to
‘Ali: "After me, you will fight against the Nakisin, the Qasitin and the
Mariqin." He says that this is one of the proofs of the prophethood of
the Holy Prophet because it clearly predicts the unknown future. The
predicted events occurred approximately 30 years later, exactly as they
had been foretold.

Second, the Shi’as do not claim that Amiru'l-Mu'minin or the Holy Imams
were prophets. We believe that Muhammad was the last prophet of Allah.
No one was associated with him in the prophethood.

We believe that if anyone had a belief contrary to this, he is an
unbeliever. Of course we believe in the divinely commissioned imamate of
‘Ali and regard eleven of his descendants as our Holy Imams and the
rightful successors and caliphs of the Holy Prophet. We believe that
Allah Almighty had endowed them with knowledge of the unseen through the
Holy Prophet.

We believe that ordinary people's perception is veiled so that they can
see only visible things. The same was true for the prophets and
vicegerents except that, according to the time and circumstance, Allah,
the All-Knowing, removed the veil and disclosed necessary information to
them from the unseen world. And when knowledge of the unseen was not
necessary, the veil separated them too from the other world.

Hence, the Holy Prophet once said: "If I knew the unseen, indeed, I
would have had much of good." That is, intrinsically, he possessed no
knowledge of the unseen. He knew it only when, with Allah's blessings,
the veil was lifted.

Sheikh: How and where did the Holy Prophet give people information about
the unseen?

Well-Wisher: In the light of the verse of the Holy Qur'an, to which I
have already referred, do you consider Muhammad the seal of the
prophets, the Murtaza (the chosen one), and the true Prophet of Allah?

Sheikh: It is a strange question. Obviously the Holy Prophet was the
Murtaza and the last of the prophets.

Well-Wisher: Then according to the Holy verse:

***"The knower of the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to any
except to him whom He chooses as an apostle," (72:26)***

the Holy Prophet possessed knowledge of the unseen. This verse clearly
says that Allah gives His knowledge of the unseen to His chosen prophet.

Sheikh: Assuming that the Holy Prophet possessed knowledge of the
unseen, how does this relate to your claim that ‘Ali possessed this
knowledge also?

Well-Wisher: Again, if you people would objectively examine the
authentic hadith and Sunna of the Holy Prophet, you would soon
understand the facts relating to this and many other issues.

Sheikh: If our wisdom is limited, you have, by the grace of Allah, a
broad mind and an eloquent tongue. Kindly relate the hadith which proves
that ‘Ali possessed knowledge of the unseen. If knowledge of the unseen
is necessary for the successors of the Holy Prophets, there should be no
exception to this condition.

All the successors, particularly the great caliphs, should have
possessed knowledge of the unseen, though we see that none of the
caliphs ever claimed to possess it. Rather, like the Holy Prophet, they
expressed their inability to know it. Why then do you make ‘Ali an
exception?

Well-Wisher: First, I have already told you that the Holy Prophet did
not possess the inherent power of knowing the unseen. When he said: "If
I knew the unseen, indeed I would have had much good," he meant that
knowledge of the unseen was not inherent in him, as it was in Allah.
When Allah removed the veil from the Holy Prophet, he came to know the
hidden realities.

Holy Imams were true caliphs and had the knowledge of unseen
------------------------------------------------------------

Second, you say that if ‘Ali possessed knowledge of the unseen, the
other caliphs should have possessed it as well. We agree with you. We
also say that the caliphs of the Prophet should possess knowledge of
both apparent and unseen things.

In fact the caliphs' capacities and characteristics should resemble
exactly those of the Holy Prophet in all matters, except the role of
prophethood itself, and messengership, as well as the special conditions
of prophethood, which include the capacity to receive direct revelation
(wali). Of course, you call those people caliphs of the Holy Prophet who
were merely appointed as such by a few men, though the Holy Prophet had
cursed them, e.g., Mu'awiya.

But we say that the caliphs and successors of the Holy Prophet are those
who had been ordained as caliphs by the Holy Prophet himself, just as
past prophets had ordained their own successors. So the caliphs and
successors ordained by the Holy Prophet by the command of Allah
perfectly represented his qualities, and for that reason they possessed
knowledge of the unseen.

Those true caliphs were twelve persons whose names are recorded in your
own hadith. They are the family of the Holy Prophet and include ‘Ali and
his eleven descendants. And the fact that the other people were not
ordained caliphs is indicated by your own statement, which is confirmed
by your great ulama’, that they frequently expressed their ignorance of
even ordinary things, not to mention knowledge of the unseen.

Gate of knowledge
-----------------

Third, you ask what hadith proves that Amiru'l-Mu'minin, ‘Ali possessed
knowledge of the unseen. In fact, there are many hadith which support
this fact. One is called the "Hadith of Medina." It is nearly
consecutively narrated by both the sects (Shi’as and Sunnis) that the
Holy Prophet said on many occasions concerning ‘Ali that he was the"Gate
of his knowledge." These were his words: "I am the city of knowledge and
‘Ali is its gate. So whoever wishes to seek knowledge must come to the
gate."

Sheikh: This hadith is not authentic according to our ulama’. Even if
there is such a hadith, it must be a lone report one of the weak hadith.

Well-Wisher: It is a pity that you call this strong hadith a solitary
report, or one of the weak hadith. Your prominent ulama’ have confirmed
it. You should consult Jam'u'l-Jawami'y by Suyuti; Tahdhibu'l-Ansar by
Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari; Tadhkiratu'l-Abrar by Sayyid Muhammad
Bukhari; Mustadrak by Hakim Nishapuri; Naqdu's-Sahili by Firuzabadi;
Kanzu'l-'Ummal by ‘Ali Muttaqi Hindi, Kifayatu't-Talib by Ganji Shafi'i;
and Tadhkiratu'l-Muzu'a by Jamalu'd-din Hindi. They write:

"If somebody rejects this hadith, he is certainly mistaken." Also in
Rauzatu'l-Nadiya by Amir Muhammad Yamani, Bahru'l-Asanid by Hafiz Abu
Muhammad Samarqandi, and Matalibu's-Su'ul by Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i,
they have generally confirmed the veracity of this hadith.

This hadith has been narrated in different ways and from various
sources. Most of the companions and followers have narrated it,
including ‘Ali, Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn ‘Ali, the eldest grandson of the
Prophet, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, Abdullah Ibn
Mas'ud, Hudhaifa Ibn al-Yaman, Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, Anas Ibn Malik, and
Amr Ibn As.

Among the tabi'in (second generation after the Companions) the following
have reported this hadith: Imam Zainu'l-Abidin, Imam Muhammad Baqir,
Asbagh Ibn Nabuta, Jarir Azzabi, Harith Ibn Abdullah Hamdani Kufi, Sa'd
Ibn Ta'rifu'l-Hanzali Kufi, Sa'id Ibn Jabir Asadi Kufi, Salma Ibn Kuhail
Hazarmi Kufi, Sulayman Ibn Mihran A'mash Kufi, Asim Ibn Hamza Saluli
Kufi, Abdullah Ibn Uthman Ibn Khisam al-Qari al-Makki, Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn
Uthman, Abdullah Ibn Asila al-Muradi, Abu Abdullah Sanabahi, and Mujahid
Ibn Jabir Abu'l Hajjaj al-Makhzumi al-Makki.

Besides the Shi’as ulama’, who unanimously uphold this hadith, many of
your own eminent traditionists and historians have reported it. I have
seen about 200 references from your ulama’ who have reported this Holy
hadith. I will point out some of those illustrious ulama’ and their
books.

Sunni ulama’ who have narrated the hadith of "city of knowledge"
----------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Third-century commentator and historian Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari
(d. 310 A.H.): Tahdhibu'l-Athar.

(2) Hakim Nishapuri (d. 405 A.H.): Mustadrak, v.III, pp. 126,128,226.

(3) Abu 'Isa Muhammad Ibn Tirmidhi (d. 289 A.H.): Sahih

(4) Jalalu'd-din Suyuti (d. 911 A.H.): Jam'u'l-Jawami'y and
Jam'u's-Saghir, v.I, p. 374.

(5) Abu'l-Qasim Sulayman Ibn Ahmad Tabrani (d. 491 A.H.): Kabir and
Ausat.

(6) Hafiz Abu Muhammad Hasan Samarqandi (d. 491 A.H.): Bahru'l-Asanid.

(7) Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ahmad Ibn Abdullah Ispahani (d.410 A.H.):
Ma'rifatu'l-Sahaba.

(8) Hafiz Abu Amr Yusuf Ibn Abdullah Ibn Abdu'l-Bar Qartabi (d. 463
A.H.): Isti'ab, v.II, p. 461.

(9) Abu'l-Hasan Faqih Shafi'i ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Tayyib al-Jalabi Ibn
Maghazili (d. 483 A.H.): Manaqib.

(10) Abu Shuja' Shirwaih Hamadani Dailami (d. 509 A.H.):
Firdausu'l-Akhbar.

(11) Abu'l-Mu'ayyid Khatib Khawarizmi (d. 568 A.H.): Manaqib, p.49 and
Maqtalu'l-Husain, v.I, p.43.

(12) Abu'l-Qasim Ibn Asakir ‘Ali Ibn Hasan Damishqi (d. 572 A.H.):
Ta'rikh al-Kabir.

(13) Abu'l-Hujjaj Yusuf Ibn Muhammad Andalusi (d.605 A.H.): Alif-Bas,
v.I, p. 222.

(14) Abu'l-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Athir Jazari (d. 630 A.H.):
Asadu'l-Ghaiba, v. IV, p.22.

(15) Muhibu'd-din Ahmad Ibn Abdullah Tabari Shafi'i (d. 694 A.H.):
Riyazu'l-Nuzra, v.I, p.129 and hakha'iru'l-Uquba, p.77.

(16) Shamsu'D-Din Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Dhahabi Shafi'i (died 748 A.H.):
Tadhkiratu'l-Huffaz, vol.IV, p.28.

(17) Badru'd-Din Muhammad Zarkashi Misri (died 749 A.H.): Faizu'l-Qadir,
vol.III, p.47.

(18) Hafiz ‘Ali Ibn Abi Bakr Haithami (died 807 A.H.):
Majma'u'z-Zawa'id, Vol.IX, p.114.

(19) Kamalu'd-Din Muhammad Ibn Musa Damiri (died 808 A.H.):
Hayatu'l-Haiwan, vol. I, p.55.

(20) Shamsu'd-Din Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Jazari (died 833 A.H.):
Asnu'l-Matalib, p.14.

(21) Shahabu'd-Din Ibn Hajar Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Asqalani (died 852 A.H.):
Tahdhibu'l-Tahdhib, vol.vii, p.337.

(22) Badru'd-Din Mahmud Ibn Ahmad Aini Hanafi (died 855 A.H.):
Umdatu'l-Qari, vol vii, p.631.

(23) ‘Ali Ibn Hisamu'd-Din Muttaqi Hindi (died 975 A.H.): Kanzu'l-Ummal,
vol. vi, p.156.

(24) Abu'r-Ra'uf Al-Munawi Shafi'i (died 1031 A.H.): Faizu'l-Qadir,
Sharh al-Jami'u'l-Saghir, vol. iv, p.46.

(25) Hafiz ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad Azizi Shafi'i (died 1070): Siraju'l-Munir
Jam'u's-Saghir, vol. III, p.63.

(26) Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Shami (died 942 A.H.): Subulu'l-Huda wa'l-Rishad
fi Asma'i Khairu'l-Ibad.

(27) Muhammad Ibn Yaqub Firuzabadi (died 817 A.H.): Naqdu's-Sahih.

(28) Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (died 241 A.H.): Mujaladab al-Munaqab,
Musnad.

(29) Abu Salim Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i (died 652 A.H.):
Matalibu-s-Su'ul, p.22.

(30) Sheikhu'l-Islam Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Hamwaini (died 722 A.H.):
Fara'idu's-Simtain.

(31) Shahabu'd-Din Dowlat Abadi (died 849 A.H.): Hidayatu's-Su'ada.

(32) Allama Samhudi Sayyid Nuru'd-Din Shafi'i (died 911 A.H.):
Jawahiru'l-Iqdain.

(33) Qazi Fazl Ibn Ruzbahan Shirazi: Ibta'lu'l-Batil.

(34) Nuru'd-Din Ibn Sabbagh Maliki (died 855 A.H.): Fusulu'l-Muhimma,
p.18.

(35) Shahabu'd-Din Ibn Hajar Makki (a bitter enemy and fanatic, died 974
A.H.): Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa.

(36) Jamalu'd-Din Ata'ullah Muhadith al-Shirazi (died 1000 A.H.):
Arba'in.

(37) ‘Ali Qari Harawi (died 1014 A.H.): Mirqat Sharh al-Mishkat.

(38) Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali as-Subban (died 1205 A.H.): Is'afu'l-Raghibin,
p.156.

(39) Qazi Muhammad Ibn Sukani (died 1250 A.H\>): Fawa'idu'l-Majmu'a
fi'l-AHadithi'l-Muzu'a.

(40) Shahabu'd-din Sayyid Mahmud Alusi Baghdadi (died 1270 A.H.): Tafsir
al-Ruhu'l-Ma'ani.

(41) Imam Al-Ghazali: 'Ihya'u'l-Ulum.

(42) Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Faqih al-Shafi'i: Mawaddatu'l-Qurba.

(43) Abu Muhammad Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Asimi: Zainu'l-Fata (Commentary on
Sura 'Hal Ata').

(44) Shamsu'd-Din Muhammad Ibn abdu'r-Rahman Sakhawi (died 902 A.H.):
Maqasidu'l-Hasana.

(45) Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi (died 1293 A.H.): Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Ch.
xiv.

(46) Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi: Tadhkirat al-Khawasu'l-Umma.

(47) Sadru'd-Din Sayyid Husain Fuzi Harawi: Nuzahatu'l-Arwah.

(48) Kamalu'd-Din Husain Meibudi: Sharh al-Diwan.

(49) Haiz Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Khatib Baghdadi (died 463 A.H.):
Ta'rikh, vol. II, p.377, vol. iv, p. 348, and vol. vii, p.173.

(50) Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i (died 658 A.H.): Kifayatu't-Talib,
end of ch. 58. After quoting three authentic hadith from the Holy
Prophet, he says: "In short, the highly learned Companions, the next
generation after them, and the progeny of the Prophet have all
acknowledged the virtues, vast knowledge, and judgment of ‘Ali.

To be sure, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman and other learned Companions
used to consult with him regarding matters of religion and followed his
advice in administrative affairs. They admitted that he was unexcelled
in knowledge and wisdom.

And this hadith does not over estimate him since his rank before Allah,
the Holy Prophet, and the believers is much higher than that., Imam
Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Al-Siddiqi Maghribi in confirmation of this Holy
hadith has written a book, Fathu'l-Mulku'l-’Ali bi Sihat al-Hadith
al-Bab al-Madinatu'l-Ilm, (printed by the Ilamiyyah Press, Egypt, 1354
A.H.). If you are not satisfied even now, I can give you more
references.

To narrate ‘Ali’s merits is worship
-----------------------------------

Sayyid Adi'l -Akhtar: (A scholar, literary man, and leader of the
Sunnis) I have often seen in hadith that the Holy Prophet has said that
to relate ‘Ali's virtues is worship. The great scholar, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali
Hamadani Shafi'i, writes in his Mawaddatu'l-Qurba that the Holy Prophet
said that the angels look with special attention upon the gathering in
which the virtues and merits of ‘Ali are narrated.

They invoke Allah's blessings for those people. Moreover, to narrate the
Holy Prophet's hadith is in itself worship. So I request that you relate
more detailed hadith so that this gathering may be the center of more
perfect worship.

Hadith "I am the house of wisdom"
---------------------------------

Well-Wisher: There is a hadith which has probably been consecutively
narrated. The traditionists of both sects have narrated it. Among your
ulama’ who have reported it are Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (Manaqib, Musnad,
Hakim (Mustadrak, Mulla ‘Ali Muttaqi (Kanzu'l-Ummal, part VI, p.401,
Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani (Hilyatu'l-Auliya, v.I, p.64, Muhammad Ibn
Sabban Misri (Is'afu'r-Raghibin, Ibn Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i (Manaqib),

Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti (Jam'u-s-Saghir, Jam'u'l-Jawami'y and
La'aliu'l-Masnu'a, Abu 'Isa Tirmidhi (Sahih, v.II, p.214, Muhammad Ibn
Talha Shafi'i (Matalibu's-Su'ul, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi
(Yanabiu'l-Mawadda), Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i (Kifayatu't-Talib,
Sibt Ibn Jauzi (Tadhkirat al-Khawasu'l-Umma), Ibn Hajar Makki (Sawa'iq
Muhriqa, ch.9, Fasl 2, p.75, Muhibu'd-Din Tabari (Riyazu'n-Nuzra),
Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini (Fara'idu's-Simtain), Ibn Sabbagh Maliki
(Fusulu'l-Muhimma), Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali (Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha), and a host of others.

They confirm the authenticity of this hadith and have quoted the Holy
Prophet as saying: "I am the house of wisdom and ‘Ali is its gate; so if
somebody is desirous of gaining knowledge, he should come to the gate."

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i has devoted Chapter 21 to this hadith.
After giving its sources and references, he gives his own comment on it.
He says this hadith is highly exalted. That is, Allah Almighty, Who is
the source of wisdom and knowledge of all things, and Who taught the
enjoining of good and the prevention of evil acts to the Holy Prophet,
who also bestowed these gifts upon ‘Ali.

Hence, the Holy Prophet said: "‘Ali is the door of my wisdom. That is,
if you wish to benefit by my wisdom, you should turn to ‘Ali, so that
realities may be revealed to you."

Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in Manaqib, Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh (writing
from his own Sheikhs), Khatib Khawarizmi in his Manaqib, Sheikhu'l-Islam
Hamwaini in Fara'id, Dailami in Firdaus, Muhammad Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in
Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.58, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.XIV, and others of your prominent ulama’ have
reported from Ibn Abbas and Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari that the Holy
Prophet, holding ‘Ali by the hand, said:

"This is ‘Ali - the master and chief of the virtuous and the slayer of
the unbelievers. He who helps him is the supported one, and he who
deserts him shall himself be deserted." Then the Holy Prophet raising
his voice, said: "I am the city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. So
if somebody wishes to obtain knowledge, he should come to the gate."

Also, Shafi'i reports that the Holy Prophet said: "I am the city of
knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. Nobody enters the house except through
the gate."

The author of Manaqib al-Fakhira reports from Ibn Abbas that the Holy
Prophet said: I am the city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. So he
who wants to gain knowledge of religion should come to the gate." Then
he said: "I am the city of knowledge and you, ‘Ali, are its gate. He
lies who thinks that he can reach me through other means than through
you."

Ibn 'Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim Ibn
Sa'da'd-din Muhammad Hamwaini in Fara'idu's-Simtain from Ibn Abbas, the
great Khatib Khawarizmi in Manaqib from Amr Ibn As, Imamu'l-Haram Ahmad
Ibn Abdullah Shafi'i in Dhakha'iru'l-Uquba, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in
Musnad, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamdani in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba.

And even the great fanatic, Ibn Hajar in Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, ch.IX, Fasl
11, p.75, Hadith 9 from Bazaz out of the forty hadith that he has
recorded concerning the merits of ‘Ali, Tabrani in his Ausat from Jabir
Ibn Abdullah Ansari, Ibn Adi from Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Hakim and Tirmidhi
from ‘Ali have reported that the Holy Prophet of Allah said: "I am the
city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. So anyone who seeks knowledge
should come through the gate."

Then they say about the same hadith: The ignorant people have hesitated
to accept this hadith and some of them have said that this is a forged
hadith. But when Hakim (the author of Mustadrak), whose statement you
regard as authoritative, heard these things he said: "Verily, this is a
true hadith."

Elucidation of the hadith of "Gate of Knowledge"
------------------------------------------------

The author of Abaqatu'l-Anwar, Allama Sayyid Hamid Husain Dihlawi Sahib,
has compiled two volumes showing the sources and veracity of this
hadith. Each of these volumes is as large as any volume of the Sahih of
Bukhari.

I do not recall how many sources he has cited from eminent Sunni ulama’
to prove that the narrators of this hadith form an unbroken sequence of
transmission, but this much I remember: When I was reading it, I prayed
for that distinguished man, who was so erudite and who had taken so much
care in compiling the book. The book proves that ‘Ali had a unique
position among the companions of the Holy Prophet.

Now for Allah's sake, be fair. Was it proper to close the door of
knowledge which the Holy Prophet had opened for the community? Were the
people justified in opening the door to a man of their own choice, who
had no relations with ‘Ali's level of knowledge?

Sheikh: We have sufficiently discussed the fact that this hadith is
generally accepted by our ulama’. No doubt, some of the reporters have
said that it is a weak, lone hadith, while others have pronounced it to
have been consecutively narrated. But what has this to do with the
"knowledge of the unseen" which ‘Ali is supposed to have possessed?

‘Ali had knowledge of the unseen
--------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Haven't you admitted earlier that the last of the prophets
was the best man of all created beings? And doesn't the Qur'an say that
Allah reveals his secrets to none "Save to that one of the Prophets whom
He chooses?" Allah removed the veil from him, and bestowed upon him the
knowledge of the unseen. So, apart from other kinds of knowledge he
possessed, he possessed knowledge of the unseen.

When the Holy Prophet said, "I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its
gate”, all of the knowledge of the city could be obtained through the
"gate of knowledge." Such knowledge included the knowledge of the
unseen.

‘Ali knew outer and concealed meanings of the Holy Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------------

Among others, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, v.I, p.65,
Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.74, and
Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda,ch 14, p.74, from
Faslu'l-Khitab quote Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, the writer of Wahi as saying:
"Verily, the Qur'an was revealed on seven letters, each letter of which
has an apparent and a hidden meaning. Verily, ‘Ali understands both the
apparent and the hidden meaning of the Qur'an."

Holy Prophet opened 1,000 chapters of knowledge in ‘Ali’s heart
---------------------------------------------------------------

Your great ulama’ have acknowledged in their authentic books that ‘Ali
possessed knowledge of the unseen. After the Holy Prophet he was murtaza
(the chosen one) among the whole Community.

Abu Hamid Ghazali, in his Bayan al-Ilmu'l-Ladunni, has reported ‘Ali as
saying: "The Holy Prophet put his tongue in my mouth. From the saliva of
the Holy Prophet, 1,000 chapters of knowledge were revealed to me, and
from each chapter another 1,000 chapters were revealed to me."

Your illustrious leader, Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi, in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.XIV, p.77 reports from Asbagh Ibn Nabuta, who
quoted Amiru'l-Mu'minin as saying: "Verily, the Holy Prophet taught me
1,000 chapters of knowledge, each chapter of which opened another 1,000
chapters, making one million. Thus I know what has already happened and
what is to happen up to the Day of Judgement."

In the same chapter he reports from Ibn Maghazili on the latter's own
authority from Abu's-Sabba, who reported from Ibn Abbas, who quoted the
Holy Prophet as saying: "On the night of the mi'raj (ascension), when I
was in the presence of Allah, He talked with me in confidence. Whatever
I learned, I taught to ‘Ali. He is the gate of my knowledge."

The great writer, Mu'affaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi, narrated the same from
the Holy Prophet in this way: "Gabriel brought me a carpet from
Paradise. I sat on it until I was brought near my Lord.

Then He talked with me and told me secret things. Whatever I learned was
communicated by me to ‘Ali. He is the gate of my knowledge." Then the
Holy Prophet called ‘Ali and said, "‘Ali! To be in accord with you is to
be in accord with me; to oppose you is to oppose me. You are the
knowledge that links me and my Community."

Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Mulla ‘Ali Muttaqi in
Kanzu'l-Ummal, v.VI, p.392, and Abu Ya'la report from Ibn Lahi'a, who
reported from Hayy Ibn Abd Maghafiri, who reported from Abdu'r-Rahman,
who reported from Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar, who reported that the Holy Prophet
while on his deathbed said: "Bring my brother to me."

When Abu Bakr came to him, the Holy Prophet turned his face from him.
Again he said, "Bring my brother to me." Then Uthman came, and the Holy
Prophet turned his face from him also. Some others report that after Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar came and then Uthman.

After that, however, ‘Ali was called in. The Holy Prophet covered him
with his blanket and rested his head upon him.

When ‘Ali came out, people asked him: "‘Ali! What did the Holy Prophet
tell you?"

The Imam said, "The Holy prophet has taught me 1,000 chapters of
knowledge and each of those chapters consists of 1,000 chapters."

Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ahmad Ibn Abdullah Ispahani (d.430 A.H.) in his
Hilyatu'l-Auliya, v.I, p.65, writing about ‘Ali's merits, Muhammad
Jazari in Asnu'l-Matalib, p.14, and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in
Kifayatu't-Talib, ch. 48, have reported with reliable sources from Ahmad
Ibn Imran Ibn Salma Ibn Abdullah that he said:

"We were in the company of the Holy Prophet when he asked about ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib. The Holy Prophet said: "Wisdom was divided into ten parts, of
which nine were given to ‘Ali and one was given to all of humanity."

Also Mu'affaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi in Manaqib, Mullah ‘Ali Muttaqi in
Kanzu'l-Ummal, v. VI, pp. 156 and 401 from many prominent scholars, Ibn
Maghazili Faqih Shafi'i in Faza'il and Sulayman Balkhi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda with the same authorities from the writer of Wahi,
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.
14, and many others report from Hulays Ibn 'alqama that when the Prophet
was asked about ‘Ali he said:

"Wisdom has been divided into ten parts, of which nine were given to
‘Ali, and all of humanity received one part. Of that one part ‘Ali's
share was also the greatest."

Also in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.14, it is reported from Sharh al-Risala
Fathu'l-Mubin of Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Hakim Tirmidhi that
Abdullah Ibn Abbas related the following hadith: "Knowledge has ten
parts. Nine parts are exclusively for ‘Ali, and the remaining tenth part
is for all of mankind. Of that one part, too, ‘Ali was granted the
greatest share.

Also Muttaqi Hindi in Kanzu'l-Ummal, v.VI, p.153, Khatib Khawarizmi in
Manaqib, p. 49 and Maqtalu'l-Husain, v.I, p.43, Dailami in
Firdausu'l-Akhbar, and Sulayman Balkhi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.III,
report the Holy Prophet as saying: "After me among my whole Community
the most learned and the wisest person is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib."

Entrusting the Prophet's knowledge to ‘Ali
------------------------------------------

We do not say that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and his eleven descendants, the
Imams, received knowledge directly from Allah through wahi (revelation)
as the Holy Prophet did. But we do believe that the last of the Prophets
of Allah was the center of Allah's blessing. Whatever benefit is granted
to creation comes from Allah Almighty through the Holy Prophet.

So all knowledge, including the important events of past and future
ages, was made known to them during the life of the Holy Prophet. Some
knowledge was entrusted to them by the Holy Prophet when he was about to
leave this world.

Your own ulama’ have cited a hadith from Ummu'l-Mu'minin A’ysha
regarding this point. At the end of it she said: "The Holy Prophet
called ‘Ali and embraced him and covered his head with a mantle. I put
my head forward and tried hard to listen to them, but I could not
understand anything. When ‘Ali raised his head, his forehead was covered
with perspiration. The people said to him, ‘Ali! What did the Holy
Prophet tell you during this long time?'

Then ‘Ali said: 'Verily, the Holy Prophet taught me 1,000 chapters of
knowledge, each of which opened 1,000 other chapters.'"

During the early days of his Prophethood (as I have mentioned during
previous nights), the Holy Prophet gave a feast to forty of his near
relatives at the house of Abu Talib. After he announced his prophethood,
‘Ali was the first to proclaim his belief. The Holy Prophet held him in
his arms and put his saliva into his mouth.

‘Ali later said of this event, "Immediately after this, fountains of
water sprang up in my chest." Your own eminent ulama’ have reported that
while delivering a sermon, the Imam pointed to the same meaning. He
said, "Ask me about what you do not understand before I die. My chest is
the repository of unlimited knowledge."

Then pointing to his stomach he said, "This is the storehouse of
knowledge; this is the saliva of the Holy Prophet; this is what the Holy
Prophet has fed me like grain."

Throughout his adult life the Holy Prophet imparted knowledge and
blessings to ‘Ali in different ways. Whatever knowledge Allah granted
the Prophet, the Prophet placed in ‘Ali's chest.

Jafr al-Jami'a and its nature
-----------------------------

One of the sources of the divine blessings which ‘Ali received from the
Holy Prophet came through the Jafr al-Jami'a, a book which contained
secrets of the universe. Your own distinguished ulama’ acknowledge that
this book and special knowledge are among the blessings peculiar to ‘Ali
and the Holy Imams.

Hujjatu'l-Islam Abu Hamid Ghazali writes that "there is a book from the
lord and chief of the pious, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Its name is Jafr
al-Jam'u'd-Dunya wa'l-Akhira. It contains all the sciences, realities,
obscurities, matters of the unseen, the essence of things and their
effects, the essence of names and letters, which no one knows except
‘Ali and his eleven descendants. The fact is that they have inherited
this from their fathers."

Similarly, Sulayman Balkhi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, p.403, gives a
detailed commentary about it from Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i's
Durru'l-Munazzam. He says that Jafr al-Jami'a, contains keys to
knowledge, is comprised of 1,700 pages, and exclusively belongs to Imam
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

Also it is reported in Ta'rikh al-Nigaristan from Sharh al-Mawaqif that
Jafr and Jami'a are two books which exclusively belong to ‘Ali. They
tell, through the knowledge of letters, all the events until the end of
the world. His descendants, too, prophesy on the basis of those books.

Nawab: Kindly give us more information about the Book of Jafr.

Well-Wisher: In the tenth year of the Hijra, when the Holy Prophet
returned from his last Hajj, Gabriel came to him and informed him of his
death. Then the Holy Prophet raised his hands and said, "O, Lord! You
have promised me and you never go back on your word."

The reply from Allah came: "Take ‘Ali with you and, sitting in the Uhud
Mountains with your back to the Qibla, call to the wild animals. They
will respond to your call. Among them will be a red goat, with large
horns. Order ‘Ali to slaughter it and to remove its hide and turn it
inside out. It will be found to be tanned.

Then Gabriel will come with pen and ink, which will be different from
the ink of the world. Tell ‘Ali to write what Gabriel dictates. That
writing and the hide will remain exactly in the same condition and will
never decay. It will always remain safe. Whenever it will be opened, it
will be found fresh.

The Holy Prophet went to the Uhud hills and complied with the divine
instructions. Gabriel came and placed the pen and ink before the Holy
Prophet, who ordered ‘Ali to prepare himself to write.

Gabriel narrated all important world affairs to the Holy Prophet and he
instructed ‘Ali to record them on the hide. He wrote even on the skin of
the hands and feet.

He wrote down everything that had happened or was to happen up to the
Day of Judgement. He wrote down the names of his unborn children and
their descendants and the names of their friends and enemies. He also
recorded whatever was to happen to each one of them until the Day of
Judgement.

Then the Prophet gave that book and the knowledge of Jafr to ‘Ali and
made it part of the legacy of the Imamate. Each of the Imams in turn
handed it down to his successor.

This is the same book about which Abu Hamid Ghazali says: "Jafr
al-Jami'a is a book which belongs exclusively to ‘Ali and his eleven
descendants. It contains everything."

Nawab: How is it possible that all the affairs of the world are to be
recorded on the hide of a goat?

Well-Wisher: First, the hadith suggests that it was not an ordinary
goat. It was a huge goat which had been created for this purpose.

Second, what was written was not the writing in common books. It was
written in secret letters and signs.

I have already told you that the author of Ta'rikh al-Nigaristan has
reported from Sharh al-Mawaqif that Jafr and Jami'a contains
alphabetical letters through which information is revealed.

Then the Holy Prophet of Allah handed over the key of this secret to
‘Ali who, by order of the Holy Prophet, handed it down to his
successors, the Holy Imams.

Only he who possesses that key can read the secrets from that book.
Otherwise, one is unable to know anything of the unseen. Suppose a king
gives a secret code to his minister, or administrators, whom he sends to
the provinces.

If the key to understanding the code remain with the king or the
ministers, then nobody could make out what that writing meant. In the
same way, no one except ‘Ali and his eleven descendants could understand
the book Jafr al-Jami'a.

One day Amiru'l Mu'minin gave that book to his son Muhammad Hanifiyya in
the presence of all his other sons, but he could not understand anything
in it although he was a highly learned and intelligent man.

Most of the orders that the infallible Imams gave, or the information
that they disclosed, were from this same book. These Holy men understood
the secrets of all things and could tell what sufferings were to befall
them, their descendants and their Shi’as, from the same book. This fact
has been recorded in detail in books of hadith.

Imam ar-Ridha’ prophesied his death
-----------------------------------

The details of the covenant between Caliph Mamun ar-Rashid Abbasi and
Imam ar-Ridha’ are recorded in Sharh al-Mawaqif. After correspondence
for six months with and intimidation by Mamun, Imam ar-Ridha’ was forced
to accept being heir of the Caliph. A covenant was written and Mamun
signed it, stipulating that, after Mamun's death, the caliphate would be
transferred to Imam ar-Ridha’.

When the document was put before Imam ar-Ridha’ he wrote the following
remark about it: " I, ‘Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja'far, do hereby declare that
the servant of the believers (Mamun ar-Rashid), (May he stand firm to
Truth and may Allah guide him to the Right Path), has recognized our
right, which others did not do; so he joined those relations which had
been detached; he provided peace and satisfaction to those persons who
had been stricken with terror, rather, he reanimated them when they had
almost been reduced to destruction; he made them prosperous and
contented when they were leading miserable lives, so that he might
achieve Allah's Blessings and verily Allah will soon give him a good
recompense to those, who offer thanks to Him and He does not nullify the
reward of the upright. Verily, he has made me his heir and has entrusted
me with a great emirate provided that I live after him."

At the end of it, the Holy Imam wrote: "But Jafr wa Jami'a says
otherwise, (that is, I shall not survive him) and I myself do not know
how you and I will be treated. It is only Allah, who commands, whose
command is quite true, and Who is the best judge."

Sa'd Ibn Mas'ud Ibn ‘Umar Taftazani in his book Sharh
al-Maqasidu't-Talibin fi-ilm al-Usulu'd-din, referring to the Holy
Imam's handwritten words "Jafr wa Jami'a" in the covenant, comments in
detail that the Imams meant that according to Jafr and Jami'a, Mamun
would not keep his promise and the world saw what happened.

That dearly beloved descendant of the Holy Prophet was martyred through
poisoning. Thus, the truth and veracity of the Holy Imam's knowledge was
proved, and it was known to every one that this exalted family was aware
of all known and unknown things.

Gabriel brought a sealed book for wasi (successor) of the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the divine gifts received by ‘Ali through the Holy Prophet was a
sealed book brought by Gabriel. The great scholar and historian, Allama
Abu'l-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Mas'ud, who is respected by both sects,
writes in his Isbatu'l-Wasiyya: "Gabriel and the trusted angels brought
from Allah Almighty a sealed book to the Holy Prophet and said to him:
'All those present there with you except your wasi (successor) should
leave so that I may give you the Kitab al-Wasiyya (the book of the last
testament).'

Then the Holy Prophet ordered all those present there to leave except
Amiru'l-Mu'minin, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain. Gabriel said: 'O Prophet!
Allah sends His salaam to you and says that this is the document in
which He has made you a promise and has made His angels witnesses to it
and that He Himself is witness to it.'

Then the Holy Prophet began to tremble and said: 'Salaam (salutation) is
He, and salutation is from Him, and salutation returns to Him.'

Taking the book from Gabriel he read it and gave it to ‘Ali. The Holy
Prophet said: 'This is a promise and trust from my Lord to me. Verily, I
have performed my duty and have delivered Allah's message.'

Amiru'l-Mu'minin said: 'May my mother and father sacrifice their lives
for you! I also bear witness to the truth of this message. My ears,
eyes, flesh, and blood bear testimony to it.'

The Holy Prophet said to ‘Ali: 'Here is my will from the side of Allah.
Accept it and be a guarantor for it before Allah. It is for me to
fulfill my duty.' ‘Ali said: 'I shall be a guarantor for it, and it is
for Allah to help me.'

In this book Amiru'l-Mu'minin has been asked to fulfill the following
promises:

'To be friendly with Allah's friends; to be hostile to Allah's enemies.
To have patience with oppression; to patiently endure and pacify anger
when his rights are usurped, when he is abused, and when he is unjustly
attacked.'

The Amiru'l-Mu'minin said: 'I accept it, and I am content with it. If
indignity is shown to me, if hadith are rejected, if the ordinances of
the Holy Qur'an are set at naught, if the Ka'ba is razed to the ground,
and if my beard is colored with the blood of my head, even then I will
endure and be patient.'

After that Gabriel, Michael, and the other close angels were declared
witnesses of Amiru'l-Mu'minin. Similarly, Hasan, Husain, and Fatima were
also entrusted with the same responsibility.

The problems and conditions that they had to face were told to each in
detail. After that the testament was sealed with a raw gold stamp and
given to ‘Ali. The testament contains hadith of Allah Almighty, the
hadith of the Holy Prophet, the opposition of those who oppose and
change divine ordinances and all the events and calamities that occurred
after the Holy Prophet.

And this is what Allah says***: 'And everything have We secured in a
Manifest Imam (Guide, i.e.*** ***‘Ali).' (36:12)"***

In short, the Holy Prophet transmitted his knowledge to ‘Ali and ‘Ali's
descendants, the infallible Imams. Had it been otherwise the Holy
Prophet would not have called ‘Ali the "gate of knowledge" and would not
have said: "If you want to take advantage of my knowledge, go to ‘Ali's
door."

If the Holy Imam had not possessed all of the Holy Prophet's knowledge,
he would not have declared before all friends and enemies: “Ask me
whatever you like before I die and leave you."

No one else except ‘Ali ever claimed this merit for himself. When others
who claimed to possess knowledge were questioned about known and unknown
facts, they were put to shame.

Hafiz Ibn Abdu'l-Barr Maghribi Andalusi in his Isti'ab fi
Ma'rifati'l-Ashab said, "Whoever uttered the words 'Ask me before I die
and leave you' was a liar, except ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib." Abdu'l-Abbas
Ahmad Ibn Khallikan Shafi'i in his Wafaya and Katib al-Baghdadi in his
Ta'rikh, v. 13, p.163, report that one day Maqatil Ibn Sulayman, who was
one of the distinguished ulama’, renowned for his ability to answer
difficult questions quickly, declared before a public gathering: "Ask me
about anything below the firmament."

A man put this question to him: "When did the Prophet Adam perform Hajj?
Who cut his hair when he finished it?" Maqatil was perplexed and
remained silent.

Another man said to him: "Does the ant absorb food through the stomach
or through another channel? If it is through the stomach, where are its
stomach and intestines?"

Maqatil was again dumbfounded. He said: "Allah has put this question
into your heart, so that my pride in my knowledge might be put to
shame."

Only one who is perfectly competent to answer all questions can make
such a claim. In the whole Community no one except ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
possessed such rank.

Since he was the "gate of knowledge" of the Holy Prophet, he had full
knowledge of all known and unknown matters just as the Holy Prophet did.
Therefore, he was able to say, 'ask me' and gave prompt and satisfactory
answers to all questions. Among the Companions, too, there was not a
single person except ‘Ali, who made such a claim.

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad, Muwaffaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi in
Manaqib, the great Khwaja Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda,
Baghawi in Mu'jim, Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nuzra, v. II, p.198,
and Ibn Hajar in Sawa'iq, p.76 have quoted Sa'id Ibn Musayya as saying
that no one of the Companions, except ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, ever said:
"Ask me whatever you like."

‘Ali's announcement of saluni (ask me) and the reports of the Sunnis
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A large number of your prominent ulama’, like Ibn Kathir in his Tafsir,
v.IV, Ibn Abdu'l-Barr in Isti'ab, Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Muhyi'd-din Khawarizmi in Manaqib, Imam Ahmad in
Musnad, Hamwaini in Fara'id, Ibn Talha in Durru'l-Manzum, Mir Sayyid
‘Ali Shafi'i in Mawaddatu'l-Qurba, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in
Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, and several other eminent Sunni
scholars have reported with slight variation of wording from Amir Ibn
Wathila, Ibn Abbas, Abi Sa'id al-Buhturi, Anas Ibn Malik, and Abdullah
Ibn Mas'ud that Amiru'l Mu'minin announced from the pulpit: "O people!
Ask me anything you like, before I die. Verily, my heart is the
storehouse of all knowledge. Ask me, because I have the knowledge of all
that has passed and all that is to come."

Abi Dawud in his Sunan, p.356, Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, v.I,
p.278, Bukhari in his Sahih, v.I, p.46 and v.X, p.241, have reported
authoritatively that ‘Ali said: "You may ask me about whatever you like;
I understand the nature of any matter which you might ask about."

‘Ali's claim that he could judge cases according to the Torah as well as the gospels
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi, in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.XIV, p.74
reports from Mu'affaq Ibn Ahmad Khawarizmi and Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini
reports from Abu Sa'id Buhturi that he (Abu Sa'id) said: "I saw ‘Ali on
the pulpit while he was putting on the Holy Prophet's mantle, sword and
the turban. He uncovered his chest and said: 'Ask me anything you like,
before I die, because my breast contains great wisdom.

This is my stomach which is a storehouse of knowledge. This is the
saliva of the Holy Prophet; this is what the Holy Prophet has fed me as
grain. I swear by Allah that if a carpet is spread and I sit on it,
verily, I will instruct the follower of the Torah, according to the
Torah.

I will instruct the followers of the Gospels according to the Gospels,
until both the Torah and the Gospels are made to speak and bear witness
to the following: ‘Ali has spoken the truth and the verdict that he has
given is according to what has been revealed in us. When you recite the
Book you don't understand this much.'"

‘Ali's knowledge about verses of the Holy Qur’an
------------------------------------------------

Sheikhu'l-Islam Hamwaini in his Fara'id and Mu'ayyidu'd-din Khawarizmi
in his Manaqib report that the Holy Imam spoke these words from the
pulpit: "Ask me about what you do not understand before I die.

I swear by Allah who split the grain and created man that if you ask me
about any verse of the Holy Book of Allah, I will tell you about it -
when it was revealed, during the day or at night, at a halting place or
on the way, on the plain or in the hills, about whom it was revealed, a
believer or against a hypocrite, what Allah meant by it, and whether the
verse is general or particular."

Thereupon Ibn Kawwa, the Khariji, stood up and said: Let me know what
Allah means by saying, "Those who acknowledged belief and performed good
actions are the best of men."

The Holy Imam said: "The verse refers to us and our followers, whose
faces, hands and feet will be glittering on the Day of Judgement. They
will be recognized by their foreheads."

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad and Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.XIV, p.74, report from Ibn Abbas that ‘Ali spoke
these words from the pulpit: "Ask me about what you do not understand
before I die. There is no verse about which I do not know more than
anyone else does. I know how and when it was revealed. Ask me about any
disturbances, for there is no disturbance about which I do not know who
caused it and who was killed in it."

Ibn Sa'd in Tabaqa, Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in
Kifayatu't-Talib, ch.52, and Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in
Hilyatu'l-Auliya,v.I, p.68, report with authentic references that
Amiru'l-Mu'minin said: "By my Lord, no verse was revealed, but I know
definitely about whom it was revealed, and where it was revealed.
Verily, Allah has bestowed upon me a wise heart and an eloquent tongue."

In the same books it is reported that Amiru'l-Mu'minin said: "Ask me
about the Book of Allah. There is not a single verse about which I do
not know whether it was revealed in the hills or on the plains."

‘Ali's knowledge about people who guide or misguide
---------------------------------------------------

Khawarizmi reports in his Manaqib from A'mash, who reported that Ubaya
Ibn Raba'i said: "‘Ali frequently used to say: 'Ask me about what you do
not understand before I die. I swear by my Lord that there is not a
green field, or a desert land, or a group of people who misguide a
hundred men or guide a hundred men, but I know them. I know better than
anyone else those who lead the people or incite them to evil until the
Day of Judgement.'"

Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, p.124, Badru'd-din Hanafi in
Umdatu'l-Qari, Muhibu'd-din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nuzra, v.II, p.198,
Suyuti in Tafsir al-Itqan, v.II, p.319, and Ibn Hajar Asqalani in
Fathu'l-Bari, v.VIII, p.485 and also in Tahdhibu't-Tahdhib, v.VII,
p.338, report that ‘Ali said:

"Ask me anything you like, and I swear by Allah that I will tell you of
all things that will happen up to the Day of Judgement. If you ask me
about the Book of Allah, I swear by my Lord that there is not a single
verse which I do not understand well. I know if a verse was revealed
during the night or in the day, on the plains or in the hills."

Can anybody, except one who has knowledge of the unseen make such claims
before both friends and foes?

**Prophesying that Sinan** **ibn** **Anas was the murderer of Imam**
**Husain**

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali has recorded the same reports in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I, p.208 from Ibn Hilal Saqafi's Gharat. He says
that a man stood up and said: "Let me know about the hair of my head and
beard."

The Holy Imam said: "My friend, the Holy Prophet has informed me that
there is an angel in the root of each hair of your head who curses you.
There is a devil in the root of each of the hairs of your beard who
misleads you. There is a calf in your house that will kill the son of
the Holy Prophet."

This man was Anas Nakh'iy, whose son, Sinan was a small child at the
time of ‘Ali's prophesy. In 61 A.H. Sinan reached Karbala and was one of
the murderers of Imam Husain.

Some reporters say that the man who had asked the question was Sa'd Ibn
Abi Waqas and that his son ("calf") was the accursed ‘Umar Ibn Sa'd, who
was the chief of Yazid's army, a central figure in the tragedy of
Karbala. It is also possible that both of them had asked the question in
two different meetings.

These reports, however, show that the Holy Imam drew attention to the
fact that he was aware of the unseen.

Foretelling the standard bearing of Habib ibn Ammar
---------------------------------------------------

Your eminent ulama’, like Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad and Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I, p.208 have reported that
during the days of his apparent caliphate, Amiru'l-Mu'minin was sitting
in the Kufa mosque with his companions when a man said that Khalid Ibn
Uwaita had died in Wadiyu'l-Qurba. The Holy Imam said: "He is not dead,
nor will he die, until he becomes the leader of the misguided army. His
standard bearer will be Habib Ibn Ammar."

A young man stood up from the assembly and said: "I am Habib Ibn Ammar
and am one of your true and sincere friends."

‘Ali said, "I have never told a lie and never will. I am, as it were,
seeing Khalid, the chief of the misguided army, and you are his standard
bearer. You people will enter the mosque there (pointing to the
Babu'l-Fil), and the flag of the standard will be torn by the gate of
the mosque."

Years passed. During the caliphate of the wicked Yazid, Ubaidullah Ibn
Ziyad became the governor of Kufa and sent formidable forces to fight
Imam Husain. One day many of those who had heard Amiru'l-Mu'minin's
prophecy about them concerning Khalid and Habib Ibn Ammar were sitting
in the mosque when the noise of the soldiers and their slogans was
heard.

The people saw that Khalid Ibn Uwaita, the chief of the misguided army
going to Karbala to fight against the son of the Holy Prophet, entered
the mosque through the same Babu'l-Fil to stage a demonstration. Habib
Ibn Ammar was carrying his standard. When Habib entered the mosque, the
flag of his standard was torn by the gate of the mosque. The hypocrites
were shown how deep ‘Ali's knowledge was and how true his prophecies
were.

Don't these signs and predictions prove that ‘Ali had knowledge of the
unseen?

If you carefully study the Nahju'l-Balagha, which is a compilation of
‘Ali's sermons and pronouncements, you will find that there are clear
prophecies about calamities and disturbances, affairs concerning the
great kings, the revolts of the Zanj people, the domination of the
Mongols, Genghis Khan's reign, the accounts of the oppressive caliphs,
and their treatment of the Shi’as.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid discussed these facts in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha,
v.I, and p.208-211. The great scholar, Balkhi Hanafi, in his
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, also discusses how ‘Ali frequently displayed his deep
knowledge in his sermons and predictions.

Foretelling Mu'awiya's oppression
---------------------------------

The Holy Imam also foretold that Mu'awiya would subdue the Kufans and
order them to reject him (‘Ali). For instance, the Holy Imam said:
"Shortly after me a man with a large throat and a fat stomach will
dominate you. He will eat whatever he gets; if he does not get it, he
will demand it. So you should kill him. But you will never kill him.
Verily, he will soon order you to call me by ill names and to keep aloof
from me.

So I permit you to abuse me because it is a verbal thing, which for me
is a source of purity and for you security against the harm of this man.
But since aloofness and hatred are from the heart, you should not
acquire hatred for me. I was born in the nature of Islam and unity of
Allah and I have taken the lead in matters of belief and Hijra
(migration)."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, and your other
high-rankingulama’ confirm the fact that the man referred to above was
Mu'awiya Ibn Abu Sufyan. When his domination was firm he ordered the
people to abuse and revile ‘Ali. This wicked practice continued for
eighty years, and the Holy Imam was abused in the mosques, and in the
sermons of the Jum'a prayers.

While ‘Umar Ibn Abdu'l-Aziz Amawi was caliph, however, he forbade this
hateful practice.

‘Ali's foretelling this evil practice is another proof of his possessing
knowledge of the unseen. ‘Ali foretold many events which were confirmed
after many years.

Foretelling of Dhu'th-Thadiyya's murder
---------------------------------------

Before the battle of Nahrwan, the Holy Imam prophesied the killing of
the Kharijis and specifically of Tazmala, known as "Dhu'th-Thadiyya". He
predicted also that of the Kharijis not even ten persons would survive
and that of the Muslims not more than ten persons would be killed.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid and the great scholar, Balkhi, and others have reported
that what the Imam said came true. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, in his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I, p.425 writes:

"This is one of those reports, which have been almost consecutively
narrated. It is quite well known and has been reported widely. It is
regarded one of the miracles of the Holy Imam."

You see, therefore, the vast difference between ‘Ali and other
"caliphs." If he did not possess knowledge of the unseen, how could he
prophesy events which occurred years later?

For instance, he prophesied Mitham Tammar's murder at the hands of
Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad, Juwairiyya's and Rashid Hajari's murder by Ziyad,
and Amr Ibn Humuq's murder at the hands of Mu'awiya's friends. He
foretold the martyrdom of his son, Imam Husain to many people as well.

Prophecy about his own martyrdom and about ibn Muljim
-----------------------------------------------------

He also predicted his own martyrdom. He said that his murderer was
Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Muljim Muradi, though that accursed man claimed to be
loyal and a supporter.

Ibn Kathir writes in Usudu'l-Ghaiba, c.IV, p.25 and others also have
reported that Ibn Muljim came to the Holy Imam, he recited some verses
in praise of Amiru'l Mu'minin in the presence of the companions.

He said: "You are the true guide, free from all faults and doubts. You
are generous and kind and are the son of those lion-hearted and gallant
ancestors, who were so distinguished in bravery from the very beginning.
O, successor of the Prophet! Allah has given you this rank and bestowed
upon you that virtue and greatness present in the Holy Qur'an."

The companions were very surprised at his eloquence and ardent love.
Then the Holy Imam replied in verse: "I advise you to love me
open-heartedly, even though I know that you are one of my enemies."

Ibn Hajar says in his Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p.82 that the Holy Imam,
replying in verse to Ibn Muljim, said: "I wish him to live, but he wants
to kill me. This outward friend belongs to the Murad clan."

Abdu'r-Rahman said: "Perhaps you have heard my name and you dislike my
name."

The Holy Imam said: "No, it is not so; I know without the least doubt
that you are a murderer, and it will not be long before you will stain
my white beard with the blood of my head."

Ibn Muljim said, "If it is so, you may have me killed." The companions
also insisted that he should be killed.

But the Holy Imam said: "It can never be. My religion does not allow
retaliation before the commission of the sin. I know for certain that
you are my murderer, but religious orders concern manifest acts. Since
you have not yet committed an unjust action, I cannot inflict any
penalty on you."

Thomas Carlyle of England writes in his series of lectures, "On Heroes,"
that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib was murdered because of his justice. That is, if
he had retaliated before the commission of the sin, he would have surely
remained safe. This was often the case with kings of the world who
immediately killed anyone - even a near relative - whom they suspected
to be their enemy.

This event is another proof of the fact that no one has a knowledge of
the unseen except a Prophet or Imam who is ma'sum (innocent in the sense
of preserved from error). If he were merely infallible, he might, on
account of his being aware of the realities, cause a disturbance.

But a Prophet or Imam, who is also infallible, even after recognizing
his murderer, does not make reprisals before the actual commission of
the sin. Are these examples not sufficient to prove that the Holy Imam
was fully aware of future events?

‘Ali's Superiority
------------------

Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi reports in the beginning of Yanabiu'l-Mawadda the
verses of Amiru'l-Mu'minin which have been taken from Ibn Talha
Shafi'i's Durru'l-Munazzam. The Holy Imam said:

"Verily, I have complete knowledge of all beginnings, and I am accused
of hiding the knowledge of the ends. I am the discloser of all hidden
and inexplicable matters. I have before me the record of all the past
and the present. Truly, I have dominion over all things, great and
small, and my knowledge encompasses the whole universe."

The Holy Imam also said: "I could load seventy camels with commentary on
the sura of al-Fatiha (of the Holy Qur'an)."

The Holy Prophet has said: "I am the city of Knowledge and ‘Ali its
gate. Also Allah Almighty says that we should enter the house through
the gates. So whoever wishes to seek knowledge should come through the
door."

Apart from other facts, these two instances are sufficient to prove the
superiority of ‘Ali to others. He should have directly succeeded the
Holy Prophet as the leader of the Muslims. When it is an admitted fact
that ‘Ali was the most learned of all, it is absurd to assume that an
ignorant man had the right to supersede him.

Allah could not have willed that the superior be superseded by the inferior
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Even Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his book about the first sermon says: "A man of
low order was given priority over the man of the most exalted rank."
This remark is an acknowledgement of the Holy Imam's superiority, but
his fanaticism compels him to add, "Allah willed that the inferior
supersede the superior man."

This statement is unfortunate, coming as it does from a man like Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid. All sensible people would object to it. His claim
contradicts Allah's justice. But surely Allah is All-Just and All-Wise.
He does not give preference to an inferior man and let him supersede a
more deserving person.

Allah says in the Holy Qur'an,

***"Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike?" (39:9)***

Again He says: "Is then he who guides to truth more worthy to be
followed or he who himself goes not aright, unless he is guided."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid clearly admits that ‘Ali was the man who most deserved
the caliphate. He says in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.I. p.4:
"Verily, ‘Ali was superior to all mankind after the Holy Prophet of
Allah. Regarding the matter of the caliphate, he was the most deserving
of all the Muslims."

"City of knowledge" proves ‘Ali’s right to be the first caliph
--------------------------------------------------------------

Moreover, the Holy Prophet's explicit statement at the conclusion of
this hadith confirms ‘Ali's superiority: "He who is desirous of seeking
knowledge must come to the door." The "door" here is of course ‘Ali.

So is this portal of guidance whom the Prophet has ordered us to seek
more worthy or he whom the people have chosen? The answer is obvious.
The Holy Prophet's order must be obeyed. Second, the Holy Prophet also
established the criterion for priority and preference, which is the
possession of the highest knowledge.

Sheikh: If, ‘Ali had the right of priority because of his superior
knowledge, the Holy Prophet of Allah should have specifically stated it
so the Community might know that obedience to him was compulsory. But no
such categorical statement is to be found.

Well-Wisher: I am greatly pained to hear such statements from you. You
have an unfortunate tendency to reject anything - even the obvious
truth - when it contradicts your view. My respected brother, I have been
citing those statements for the last ten nights.

The audience and several local newspapers will bear testimony to this
fact. But still you say that you have not seen any explicit statement of
the Holy Prophet. Even your own authentic books are replete with clear
declarations on this issue.

Let me ask you this: Does the Community need the Holy Prophet's
knowledge and sirat (traditions and customs)?

Sheikh: It is an obvious fact. All the Companions and the Community need
the guidance, knowledge, and customs of the Holy Prophet until the Day
of Judgement.

Well-Wisher: May Allah bless you! If there were no other specific hadith
except the Hadith of Medina, even this would have been sufficient to
prove my point. The Prophet explicitly says: "I am the city of knowledge
and ‘Ali is its gate; he who wishes to seek knowledge should come to the
door."

According to the Holy Prophet ‘Ali excelled all others in knowledge
-------------------------------------------------------------------

What declaration can be more explicit than this hadith in which the Holy
Prophet says that "Anyone who desires to have the benefit of my
knowledge should come to the door of ‘Ali because he is the gate of
knowledge?"

Now dawn is approaching. For the whole night I have been ardently
discussing this topic and have taken all of your time. But at this
moment you have cooled my ardor. Like your predecessors, you refuse to
listen, and consequently, disregarding all my cogent reasoning, you are
denying the obvious truth.

What declaration can be superior to the declaration about knowledge?
Would any sane person advocate rejecting a wise man in favor of an
ignorant one? Of course not. Therefore, you must accept my point, which
is not only my point but an accepted principle of all knowledgeable
people: since ‘Ali was superior in knowledge and wisdom among the entire
Community, obedience to him is obligatory.

Accordingly, as I have already mentioned, your own prominent ulama’,
like Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (Musnad), Khawarizmi (munaqab), and even the
fanatic Ibn Hajar Makki in Sawa'iq have quoted the Holy Prophet as
saying: "In my Community ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib excelled all others in
knowledge."

There was not a single person among the Companions who compared to ‘Ali
in knowledge. Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in Munaqab, Muhammad Ibn Talha in
Matalibu's-Su'ul, Hamwaini in Fara'id and Sheikh Sulayman Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, ch.XIV, report from Kalbi that the great scholar of
the Community, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, said:

“The knowledge of the Holy Prophet is from Allah's knowledge; the
knowledge of ‘Ali is from the Holy Prophet's knowledge. My knowledge and
all the Companion's knowledge, compared to ‘Ali's, is like a drop of
water before the seven seas."

In Nahju'l-Balagha, sermon 108, ‘Ali says: "We (the infallible Imams)
are the Tree of Prophethood, the secure abode of the divine message, the
descending place of angels, the mines of knowledge, and the sources of
wisdom."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, v.II, p.236 commenting
on this sermon, says: "This attribute was clearly possessed by the Holy
Imam since the Prophet of Allah has said: 'I am the city of knowledge
and ‘Ali is its gate; whoever wishes to seek knowledge should come to
the gate.'

Also the Holy Prophet said: ‘Ali is the best judge among you.'"

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid goes on to say: "The faculty of judgement requires many
kinds of knowledge: The standard of his knowledge was so high that no
one could equal him. In fact no one approached him. So he was entitled
to claim: 'We are the mines of knowledge and the sources of wisdom.'
Hence, after the Holy Prophet no one had better right to claim these
things for himself."

Ibn Abdu'l-Barr in Isti'ab, v.III, p.38, Muhammad Ibn Talha in
Matalibu's-Su'ul, p.23, and Qazi Aiji in Mawaqif, p.276 have quoted the
Holy Prophet as saying: "‘Ali is the best judge among you all."

Suyuti in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, p.115, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim in
Hilyatu'l-Auliya, v.I. p.65, Muhammad Jazari in Asniu'l-Matalib, p.14,
Muhammad Ibn Sa'd in Tabaqa, p.459, Ibn Kathir in Ta'rikh al-Kabir, v.
VII, p. 359, and Ibn Abdu'l-Barr in Isti'ab, v.IV, p.38, quote ‘Umar Ibn
Khattab as saying: "‘Ali is the best judge among us."

It is reported in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda that Ibn Talha, author of
Durru'l-Munazzam says: "You should know that all the secrets and
mysteries of the divine books are contained in the Holy Qur'an. Whatever
is in the Holy Qur'an is contained in the sura al-Fatiha. Whatever is in
the sura of al-Fatiha is contained in the verse 'Bismillah ar-Rahman
ar-Rahim.' (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, and the Merciful).

Whatever is in the verse, 'Bismillah ar-Rahman, ar-Rahim,' is in the Ba
(B) of 'Bismillah.' Whatever is in the Ba of 'Bismillah,' is contained
in the dot below the letter Ba of 'Bismillah.' ‘Ali said: 'I am that dot
which is below the letter Ba of Bismillah.'"

Also Sulayman Balkhi in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, reports Ibn Abbas as
saying: "Once on a moonlit night after the Isha prayer, ‘Ali, taking me
by the hand led me to the graveyard of Baqi and said: 'Abdullah!
Recite.' I recited the verse 'Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim.' The Holy
Imam continued telling me the secrets and mysteries of the Ba of
'Bismillah' until dawn."

Both sects unanimously agree that regarding his knowledge of the unseen
and his being the heir of the knowledge of the prophets, ‘Ali holds a
unique position among all the Companions.

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, Khatib al-Khawarizmi in
Manaqib, and Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda have recorded
from Ibn Talha Halbi's Durru'l-Munazzam that ‘Ali said: "Ask me about
the unseen and unknown mysteries, because truly I am the heir of the
knowledge of the Holy prophets and messengers of Allah."

Also Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha, and Sulayman Balkhi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda report that
‘Ali declared from the pulpit: "Ask me about what you do not understand
before I die. Inquire of me about the paths of the skies because,
verily, I know more about those paths than the paths of the earth."

‘Ali made this long before the invention of the telescope. People often
asked him about the heavenly bodies and he answered their questions.

Description of zones of space in agreement with the modern science of astronomy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The great scholar and traditionist, Sheikh ‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim Qummi of the
3rd century A.H. in his commentary on the sura Saffat (No. 37), the
eminent scholar, Sheikh Fakhru'd-Din Ibn Tarih Najafi, known for his
piety, in his Kitabu'l-Lughat Ma'rafat al-Majma'u'l-Bahrain, which was
compiled about 300 years ago, and Allama Mullah Muhammad Baqir Majlisi,
in his Biharu'l-Anwar, v.XIV, report that ‘Ali said:

"The stars in the skies are populated with cities as the earth is." Now
for Allah's sake, be fair. At that time there was no conception of
modern astronomy. The world accepted the Ptolemaic theory that the earth
was the center of the universe. If a man disclosed something new about
the stellar regions and that was proved to be true a thousand years
later, wouldn't you say that he had knowledge of the unseen?

‘Ali mastered all sciences
--------------------------

The fact is that, after the Holy Prophet, ‘Ali was the most
knowledgeable man in philosophy, grammar, fiqh (jurisprudence),
astronomy, astrology, jafr (divination), mathematics, poetry, rhetoric,
and lexicography. In all the sciences he made significant contributions
which the experts in that field have adopted as a basis for further
development.

For example, he told Abu'l-Aswadu'd-Du'‘Ali (a writer who is generally
credited with having invented the vowel marks of written Arabic) that
there were three parts of speech: the noun, the verb, and the
preposition.

Also, he laid down the principles of grammar and syntax of the Arabic
language as well as details of pronunciation and vocabulary. By fixing
correct pronunciation in writing, he protected the Qur'an from future
misinterpretation.

Ibn abi'l-hadid's admission of ‘Ali’s superior knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------

In the preface of Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali,
you will find how this scholar admitted and praised the merits of ‘Ali
in all fields of knowledge.

He says: "What can I say about the man to whom all the merits are
attributed, who is a perfect model for every nation to follow, and with
whom all wish to identify themselves? He is of course the fountain head
of all merits. After him, whoever achieved prominence received benefit
from him, for he followed in his footsteps."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid says that the knowledge of the four great jurists, Abu
Hanifa, Imam Malik, Imam Shafi'i, and Imam Hanbal, derived from ‘Ali's
knowledge. He says: "Those companions who were well versed in
jurisprudence learned it from ‘Ali."

I do not want to take more of your time by quoting further from this
great scholar. But I urge you to read his preface to his Sharh
al-Nahju'l-Balagha. You would learn how the illustrious historian and
scholar have acknowledged the merits of ‘Ali. He says, "‘Ali's case is
strange. Throughout his life he never uttered the words: 'I do not
know.' He possessed knowledge of everything."

At the end, the author says: "This fact can be counted as one of the
miracles of the Holy Imam. Such knowledge is beyond the reach of human
power and understanding."

Imam Husain’s birth and the Angels’ congratulations
---------------------------------------------------

People came to the Holy Prophet and congratulated him on the birth of
Imam Husain. One of the men said: "O Holy Prophet! We have observed
something strange in ‘Ali." The Holy Prophet asked, "What did you see?"
The man said: "When we came to offer congratulations, we were stopped
and told that 120,000 angels had come from heaven and were with you. We
were astonished as to how ‘Ali could know this and how he could count
them."

The Holy Prophet smiled and asked ‘Ali how he could know that so many
angels had come to him. The Holy Imam said: "May my father and mother
sacrifice their lives for you! Each of the angels who came to you and
saluted you spoke in a different language. On calculation, I found that
they had spoken in 120,000 languages, so I knew that 120,000 angels had
come to you."

The Holy Prophet said: "O, Abu'l-Hasan! May Allah increase your
knowledge and modesty." Then turning to the people the Holy Prophet
said: "I am the city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. There is no
greater event and no greater sign than he is. He is the Imam of the
people, the best of mankind, trustee of Allah and repository of His
knowledge.

He is the 'people of Dhikr', among those referred to by the words of
Allah:

***'So ask you the people of Dhikr if you know not.'(16:43)***

I am the treasury of knowledge and ‘Ali is its key. So whoever wishes to
obtain the treasure must come to the key."

If you can point to a single companion or relation of the Holy Prophet
who could rival ‘Ali's merits, I would certainly bow my head before him.
But if you cannot, then it would be your religious duty to attach
yourselves to the truth without caring what the world might think. (Then
he raised his hands towards the sky and prayed to Allah:) "O, Allah! Be
my witness that I have clearly indicated the way to truth and have
discharged my religious obligation."

Nawab sahib's acceptance of Shi’as'ism
--------------------------------------

Nawab: Holy sir, for the last several nights, we have heard many
discussions in these sessions. Some of us used to discuss the points of
arguments among ourselves each day. I thank Allah Almighty that He has
shown us the way. The utterly false information of the opponents misled
us. Now it is clear that the Shi’as Ithna Asharis are rightly guided.

Both those of us who have attended these meetings and many people of the
city who have read the accounts of these debates in the newspapers have
been shown the truth about Islam. Of course they all cannot publicly
declare their faith because of their personal dealings with the
opponents, but they have told us in private that they have accepted
Shi’as'ism.

But some of us are not afraid of anyone and are prepared to announce
that during these nights we wanted to reveal our change of allegiance.
There was no opportunity to do so. We have heard your convincing
arguments, and now our belief is quite firm.

Permit us now to draw the curtain aside. Let our names be recorded as
Shi’as of our master, Amiru'l-Mu'minin and the twelve Imams. Kindly
announce to the people of the Shi’as sect that we are one with them.

Bear witness on the Day of Judgement before the Divine Court of Justice
and before your exalted grandfather that we have complete faith in the
twelve Imams as the successors and vicegerents of the Holy Prophet of
Allah.

Well-Wisher: I am glad that some of you have recognized the truth.
According to a hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha, by Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i
in Matalibu's-su'ul, by Ibn Maghazili in Faza'il, by Khawarizmi in
Manaqib, by Sulayman Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, and by many others,
the Holy Prophet has guided us to this path. He said, "‘Ali's path is
the path to truth." I hope that my other brothers in Islam will also
give up their intolerance.

Nawab: We are extremely grateful for your kind and learned
interpretation of facts. There is still one point which disturbs us. It
concerns the imamate of the twelve Imams and their names. In the past
ten nights Amiru'l-Mu'minin ‘Ali was the focus of our discussion.

First tell us the verse of the Holy Qur'an which proves the imamate of
the twelve Imams. Second, are the names of the twelve Imams recorded in
our books?

Well-Wisher: It is an appropriate question and I would be happy to
respond. But it is now nearly dawn, and my answer cannot be brief.

Tomorrow is the birthday of the grandson of the Holy Prophet Imam Husain
and the Qizilbash family has arranged a celebration in the Risaldar
Imambara. Perhaps I will reply to your question on that occasion.

Nawab: I quite agree with you.


