Sixth Session, Tuesday night, 28th Rajab 1345 A.H.
==================================================

Mr. Ghulam Imamain, a respected Sunni merchant, came to the meeting
place before sunset. He mentioned the reason for his coming. He said
that he and some others were greatly influenced by the Well-Wisher's
remarks. He said that he heard facts he had never heard before. He and
some other Sunnis had an unpleasant discussion with their ulama’, who
could not refute Well-Wisher's arguments but who stuck stubbornly to
their position. When the time for Maghrib prayers came, Mr. Ghulam
Imamain offered both Maghrib and Isha' prayers led by Well-Wisher. When
the others arrived, the discussion began with a comment by Nawab Sahib.

Nawab: Please continue last night's discourse. The interpretation of the
verse was incomplete.

Well-Wisher: (Looking toward the Sunni ulama’.) Provided you so allow.

Hafiz: (A bit angrily) No harm. If something remains to be said, we are
prepared to listen.

Well-Wisher: Last night I proved, from the grammatical point of view,
that the statement of some commentators that this verse refers to the
manner of determining the caliphate was unacceptable. Now I will argue
from another point of view.

Sheikh Abdu's-Salam Sahib said last night that there are four qualities
mentioned in this verse. These qualities, he said, indicate that the
verse was revealed in reference to the first four caliphs and that the
verse indicates the order of the caliphate. My response to this argument
is, first, reliable commentators have never made such a statement about
the significance of this verse.

Second, you all know that when a quality attributed to a person
corresponds precisely with his characteristics, only then it worth
considering. If we consider the facts objectively, we find that it is
only ‘Ali who had possessed the attributes described in this verse.
These qualities in no way correspond with those named by Sheikh Sahib.

Hafiz: Weren't all those verses you have already narrated about ‘Ali
sufficient? Do you now wish through your rhetorical cleverness to prove
that this Holy verse was also revealed in praise of ‘Ali? If so, let us
know how it does not fit in with the caliphate of the first four
caliphs.

300 hundred verses in praise of ‘Ali
------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: I haven't falsely attributed verses of the Holy Qur'an in
praise of ‘Ali. You are confused. Can you ignore the fact that well
known commentaries and reliable books written by your own ulama’
mentioned many verses of the Holy Qur'an to be in praise of ‘Ali? How
can you regard it as being peculiar to me? Were Hafiz Abu Na'im
Ispahani, the author of "Ma Nazala mina'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali," and Hafiz Abu
Bakr Shirazi, the author of "Nuzulu'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali," Shi’as?

Were the great commentators, like Imam Tha'labi, Jalalu'd-din Suyuti,
Tabari, Imam Fakhru'd-Din Razi, and other high-ranking ulama’, like Ibn
Kathir, Muslim, Hakim, Tirmidhi, Nisa'i, Ibn Maja, Abu Dawud, Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, and even the intolerant Ibn Hajar, who collected in his
‘Sawa'iq’ the verses of the Holy Qur'an revealed in praise of ‘Ali,
Shi’as?

Some of the ulama’, like Tabari, and Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i,
in the beginning of his Part 62, narrating on the authority of Ibn
Abbas, and Muhaddith of Syria in his ‘Ta'rikh al-Kabir’, and others have
recorded as many as 300 hundred verses of the Holy Qur'an in praise of
‘Ali.

Were these men Shi’as or did they belong to your great ulama’? We do not
need to falsely attribute a verse of the Holy Qur'an for proving the
rank of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali. His enemies (Amawis,
Nawasib, and Khawarij) suppress his virtues, and his friends hesitate to
report his excellence for fear of consequences. Still, books are full of
his merits, and they cast light on all aspects of his attainment. So far
as this verse is concerned, I have not indulged in "rhetorical
cleverness." I have revealed the truth, arguing from your own books.

You have observed so far that I have not argued from the reports of
Shi’as authors. Even if Shi’as books are left aside, I will prove ‘Ali's
unique superiority. What I have said regarding this verse agrees with
the views of your own ulama’.

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i, quoted the "Hadith of Similarity" in
his ‘Kifayatu't-Talib’, Chapter 23, from the Prophet to the effect that
‘Ali was similar to the prophets. He says that the reason ‘Ali was
called similar to Noah in wisdom was that ‘Ali was vehement against the
unbelievers and kind to the believers.

Allah has mentioned these attributes in the Holy Qur'an. ‘Ali, who was
always with the Prophet, was "vehement against the infidels and
compassionate to the believers." And supposing, as Sheikh Sahib says,
that the phrase "and those who are with him" refers to Abu Bakr because
he remained for a few days with the Prophet in the cave. Can such a man
equal him who remained with the Holy Prophet from childhood and received
instruction from him?

‘Ali first to declare belief in Prophet of Allah
------------------------------------------------

Moreover, on the crucial occasion of the declaration of his prophethood,
no one supported Muhammad except ‘Ali. Your eminent ulama’, like Bukhari
and Muslim, in their ‘Sahihain, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his ‘Musnad’,
and many others, such as Ibn Abdi'l-Birr in ‘Isti'ab’, Volume III, page
32, Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in ‘Khasa'isu'l-Alawi’, Sibt Ibn Jauzi
in ‘Tadhkira’, page 63, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
‘Yanabiu'l-Mawadda’, Chapter 12, on the authority of Tirmidhi and
Muslim, Muhammad ibn Talha Shafi'i in ‘Matalibu's-Su'ul’, sub-chapter I,
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in ‘Sharh Nahju'l-Balagha’, Volume III, p. 258,

Tirmidhi in ‘Jam' al-Tirmidhi’, Volume II, page 314, Hamwaini in
‘Fara'id’, Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in ‘Mawaddatu'l-Qurba’, and even the
fanatical Ibn Hajar in ‘Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa’, and other prominent
scholars have, with slight variation of words, related from Anas Ibn
Malik and others that "the Holy Prophet was ordained Prophet of Allah on
Monday, and ‘Ali, declared his faith in him on Tuesday."

It is also narrated that "The prophethood of Allah was declared on
Monday, and ‘Ali offered prayers with the Holy Prophet on Tuesday." And,
again, "‘Ali was the first man who declared his faith in the Prophet."
Also Tabari, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, Tirmidhi, and others narrate from Ibn
Abbas that "‘Ali was the first to offer prayers."

Training of ‘Ali from childhood by the Holy Prophet
---------------------------------------------------

I ask you to consider what your own learned theologian, Nuru'd-din Ibn
Sabbagh Maliki in his ‘Fusulu'l-Muhimma’, Chapter "Tarbiatu'n-Nabi,"
page 16, and Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in his ‘Matalibu's-Su'ul’,
Chapter 1, page 11, and others have reported.

During a famine in Mecca, the Prophet told his uncle, Abbas, that the
latter's brother, Abu Talib, had too many children, and that his means
of livelihood were narrow. Muhammad recommended that each of them ask
Abu Talib for one child to support so that the heavy burden on him would
be reduced. Abbas agreed.

They went to Abu Talib with their offer, and he accepted. Abbas took
Ja'far al-Tayyar under his guardianship, and the Prophet took ‘Ali.
Maliki continues, "‘Ali remained continuously with the Holy Prophet
until the latter was formally declared the Prophet of Allah."

‘Ali declared his belief in him, and followed him as a prophet of Allah
when ‘Ali was only thirteen. He was the first male to accept Islam. The
Prophet's wife Khadija was the only person to accept the Prophet before
‘Ali.

In the same chapter, Maliki reports that Ibn Abbas, Jabir Ibn Abdullah
Ansari, Zaid Ibn Arqam, Muhammad Ibn Munkadar, and Rabi'atu'l-Mara'i
said that the first person after Khadija who believed in the Prophet was
‘Ali. He says that ‘Ali referred to this fact, which has been narrated
by your ulama’.

He said: "Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah, is my brother and son of my
uncle; Hamza, the chief of the martyrs, is my uncle; Fatima, the
daughter of the Prophet, is my wife; and his daughter's two sons are my
sons by Fatima. Who of you has shared such distinction as I have?

I was the foremost in accepting Islam when I was only a child. The
Prophet declared on the day of ‘Ghadir al-Khum’ that it was obligatory
to accept me as your guide. (Then he said three times) 'Woe be to him
who faces Allah tomorrow (on the Day of Judgement), if he has subjected
me to cruelty.'"

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in his ‘Matalibu's-Su'ul’, Part 1, Chapter 1,
page 11, and many others of your learned men, have reported that these
statements were in reply to Mu'awiya's letter, to ‘Ali, in which the
former had boasted that his father was the chief of his tribe during the
"time of ignorance," and that in Islam he (Mu'awiya) was the King.

Mu'awiya also said that he was the "maternal uncle of the faithful," the
"writer of the Wahi" (revelations), and a man of virtuous merits." After
reading the letter, ‘Ali said: "A man of his character - the son of the
woman who chewed livers - boasts before me! (in reference to Mu'awiya's
mother, Hind, who, after the Battle of Uhud, in a fit of rage, ripped
open the dead body of Hamza, tore out his liver, and chewed it).
Mu'awiya, even though he was bitterly opposed to ‘Ali, could not deny
these merits.

Moreover, Hakim Abu'l-Qasim Haskani, one of your learned ulama’,
narrates from Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Auf, regarding the above verse of the
ten Quraish who accepted Islam, that ‘Ali was the foremost among them.
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Khatib Khawarizmi, and Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi narrate
from Anas ibn Malik that the Prophet said: "The angels blessed me and
‘Ali for seven years, for during that time no voice proclaimed the
oneness of Allah except mine and ‘Ali's." Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazali, in
‘Sharh al-Nahju'l-Balagha’, Volume I, pages 373-5, recorded several
hadith narrated through your scholars to the effect that ‘Ali was the
foremost of all others in the matter of Islam.

After recording the various versions, and narrations he concludes: "So
the sum total of what we have stated is that ‘Ali is the first of all
men regarding Islam. The view contrary to it is rare, and not worth our
attention."

Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i, author of one of the six books of
authentic hadith, has recorded in ‘Khasa'isu'l-Alawi’ the first six
hadith on this topic and has confirmed that the foremost person in
Islam, and the first to offer prayers with the Prophet was ‘Ali.

In addition, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in ‘Yanabiu'l-Mawadda’,
Chapter 12, recorded 31 hadith from Tirmidhi, Hamwaini, Ibn Maja, Ahmad
ibn Hanbal, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim, Imam Tha'labi, Ibn Maghazili,
Abu'l-Muwayyid Khawarizmi, and Dailami, the conclusion of which is that
‘Ali was the first in the entire Muslim community to have accepted
Islam.

Even the intolerant Ibn Hajar Makki has in ‘Sawa'iq Muhriqa’, Chapter 2,
recorded hadith on the same issue, some of which have been accepted by
Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in his ‘Yanabiu'l-Mawadda’.

Further, in ‘Yanabiu'l-Mawadda’, towards the close of chapter 12, he
related from Ibn Zubair, Makki and he from Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, a
hadith about ‘Ali's merits, which I would like to present here with your
permission in order to conclude my argument.

The Prophet said: "Allah Almighty chose me as a Prophet and revealed
sacred scriptures to me. I said to Him, 'O Allah, My master, You sent
Moses to Pharaoh, Moses asked you to make his brother, Aaron, his vizier
to strengthen his hand, so that his words might be witnessed. Now I ask
you, O Allah, that you appoint for me from among my family a vizier who
may strengthen my hand. Make ‘Ali my vizier and brother, infuse
gallantry into his heart, and give him power over the enemy. ‘Ali was
the first person to believe in me and to witness my prophethood and the
first person to declare the oneness of Allah along with me.' Afterward I
continued to pray to Allah.

Therefore, ‘Ali is the chief of the successors. To follow him is a
blessing; to die in obedience to him is martyrdom. His name appears in
the Torah along with my name; his wife, the most truthful, is my
daughter; his two sons, who are the chiefs of the Youth of Paradise, are
my sons.

After them all the Imams are vicegerents of Allah over His creation
after the prophets; and they are the doors of knowledge among my people.
He who follows them is rescued from Hellfire; he who follows them is
guided to the right path; he who is endowed by Allah with love for them
will surely be sent to Paradise. So, enlightened people, take heed."

I could quote similar hadith all night, all of which have been recorded
by your own scholars. But I think this is enough. ‘Ali alone associated
with the Holy Prophet from childhood, and therefore it is fitting that
we consider him the person referred to in the words "those who are with
him," and not the one who accompanied the Prophet on a few days'
journey.

‘Ali's faith while only a child
-------------------------------

Hafiz: You have proven your point, and no one has ever denied that ‘Ali
was foremost in accepting Islam. But this fact does not qualify him as
pre-eminent in comparison with other companions. True, the high caliphs
professed faith in Islam years after ‘Ali, but their faith was different
from his and better.

The reason is that ‘Ali was only a child, and these people were mature.
Obviously, the faith of older, wise men was superior to that of a child.
In addition, ‘Ali's faith was only blind following, and the faith of
these people was based on reason.

Faith acquired by reason is better than blind faith. Since a child, who
is not under a religious obligation to perform duties, does not profess
faith except by blind following, so ‘Ali, who was only a child of
thirteen, professed his faith only through blind following.

Well-Wisher: Such talk is really surprising coming from a learned man
like you. I wonder how to refute such an argument. If I were to say that
you adopt such a position out of malice, it would be against my
disposition to attribute such a motive to a learned man. Let me put a
question to you: was ‘Ali's acceptance of Islam based on his personal
wish or on the invitation of the Prophet?

Hafiz: Why do you take such a severe view of the way we talk since, when
we have doubts, we must discuss them. In reply to your question, I admit
that ‘Ali accepted Islam at the invitation of the Holy Prophet.

Well-Wisher: When the Prophet invited ‘Ali to accept Islam, did the
former know a child is not bound by religious commitments? If you say
that he did not know it, you attribute ignorance to him, and if he did
know it and invited ‘Ali anyway, then his action was absurd. Obviously,
to attribute absurdity to the Prophet is infidelity since a prophet is
infallible. Allah says about him in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed." (53:3-4)***

The Prophet considered ‘Ali a person worthy to be invited to accept
Islam. Apart from this, youth does not necessarily preclude wisdom.
Maturity is taken into consideration concerning discharge of religious
obligations, but not for matters connected with wisdom. Faith is
concerned with matters relating to wisdom and not religious laws. So
‘Ali's faith during childhood is a virtue for him just as Allah tells us
in the Holy Qur'an about Jesus in these words:

***"He said: Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book
and made me a prophet." (19:30)***

Also in this chapter He says about Prophet Yahya:

***"...and We granted him wisdom while yet a child." (19:12)***

Sayyid ‘Ali Humairi Yamani, (died 179 A.H.), points to the same fact in
his couplets. He says: "Just as Yahya reached the rank of prophethood in
his childhood, ‘Ali, who was the successor of the Prophet and the father
of his sons, was also ordained Vicegerent of Allah and guardian of the
people while only a child."

Virtue and dignity bestowed by Allah do not depend on age. Wisdom and
intelligence depend upon an inborn tendency. I am surprised by your
comment since such arguments were made by the Nasibis and Kharijis at
the instigation of the Umayyads. They denigrated ‘Ali's faith as being
mere blind adherence to what he was taught.

Even your own scholars have acknowledged ‘Ali's merit in this respect.
Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i, Ibn Sabbagh Maliki, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid and
others have quoted ‘Ali's couplets. In one of his couplets he says: "I
was first and foremost among you in embracing Islam when I was only a
small child."

If ‘Ali's faith at such a tender age had not been meritorious, the
Prophet would not have characterized it as such. Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi
in his Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Chapter 55, page 202, narrates from Ahmad Ibn
Abdullah Shafi'i, quoting from the second Caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab, who
said, "Abu Bakr, Abu Ubaida Jarra, and a group of people were present in
the company of the Prophet of Allah when he patted ‘Ali on the shoulder
and said: 'O ‘Ali! You are the first and foremost among all believers
and Muslims in embracing Islam. You are to me as Aaron was to Moses.'"

Also Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrates from Ibn Abbas, who said that he,
Abu Bakr, Abu Ubaida Ibn Jarra, and others were with the Prophet when he
put his hand on ‘Ali's shoulder and said: "You are foremost in faith in
Islam among all the Muslims, and you are to me as Aaron was to Moses, O
‘Ali! He who thinks he is my friend while he is your enemy is a liar."

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki records a similar hadith in ‘Fusulu'l-Muhimma’, p.
125, from ‘Khasa'isu'l-Alawi’ as a narration of Abdullah ibn Abbas, and
Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i reports in ‘Khasa'isu'l-Alawi’ that he
said: "I have heard ‘Umar ibn Khattab saying 'Mention ‘Ali's name with
respect because I have heard the Prophet saying that ‘Ali has three
qualities. I (‘Umar) wished that I had only one of them because each of
those qualities is dearer to me than anything in this world.'"

Ibn Sabbagh has narrated the following in addition to what others have
recorded. The Holy Prophet said about ‘Ali, "He who loves you loves me,
and he who loves me, Allah loves him, and whomever Allah loves, He
brings to Paradise. But he who is hostile to you is hostile to me, and
he who is hostile to me, Allah is hostile to him and condemns him to
Hell."

‘Ali's declaring himself a Muslim even while he was still a boy
establishes the excellence of his wisdom and merit, which no other
Muslim can attain. Tabari in his ‘Ta'rikh’ quotes from Muhammad Ibn
Sa'ad Ibn Abi Waqqas, who said: "I asked my father whether Abu Bakr was
the first of the Muslims.

He said, 'No, more than fifty people embraced Islam before Abu Bakr; but
he was superior to us as a Muslim.'" He also writes that ‘Umar Ibn
Khattab embraced Islam after forty-five men and twenty-one women. "As
for the foremost one in the matter of Islam and faith, it was ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib."

‘Ali's faith was part of his very nature
----------------------------------------

Besides the fact that ‘Ali was foremost in embracing Islam, he possessed
another merit, peculiar to him, and more important than his other
merits: ‘Ali's Islam derived from his nature, while that of others
occurred only after previous unbelief. Unlike other Muslims and
companions of the Prophet, ‘Ali was never an unbeliever.

Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in his ‘Ma Nazalu'l-Qur'an Fi ‘Ali’, and Mir
Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in ‘Mawaddatu'l-Qurba’ narrate that Ibn Abbas said,
"I swear by Allah that there was no one who had not worshipped idols
before embracing Islam except ‘Ali. He accepted Islam without having
ever worshipped the idols."

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his ‘Kifayatu't-Talib’, Chapter 24,
quotes the Prophet as saying, "Those who took the lead in accepting
faith in the oneness of Allah among the followers of the Prophets were
three people who were never polytheists: ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, the man in
the Sura Ya Sin, and the believer of the people of Pharaoh. The Truthful
Ones are Habib al-Najjar, among the descendants of Ya Sin, Ezekiel among
the descendants of Pharaoh, and ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, who excelled all of
them."

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani in ‘Mawaddatu'l-Qurba’, ‘Mawadda 7’, Khatib
Khawarizmi in ‘Manaqib’, and Imam Tha'labi in his Tafsir narrate from
the second Caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab: "I bear witness that I heard the
Prophet say, 'If the seven heavens were put in one balance and ‘Ali's
faith in the other, ‘Ali's faith would surely outweigh the other.'"

The same point has been included in couplets composed by Sufyan ibn
Mus'ab ibn Kufi as follows: "By Allah, I bear witness that the Prophet
said to us: 'It should not remain unknown to anyone that if the faith of
all those living on the earth were placed in one scale of the balance
and that of ‘Ali in the other scale, ‘Ali's faith would outweigh the
other.'"

‘Ali excelled all other companions and the whole community in merit
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani Shafi'i has recorded many hadith in his
‘Mawaddatu'l-Qurba’, which supported ‘Ali's excellence. In the seventh
‘Mawadda’ he quotes from Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet said, "The best
of men of all the worlds in my period is ‘Ali."

Most of your fair-minded ulama’ have accepted the superiority of ‘Ali.
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his ‘Sharh Nahju'l-Balagha’, Volume 111, page 40,
says that Abu Ja'far Iskafi, the chief of the ‘Mu'tazilite’ sect,
declared that Bashr Ibn Mu'tamar, Abu Musa, Ja'far Ibn Mubashshir, and
other ulama’ of Baghdad believed that, "The most excellent person among
all Muslims was ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, and after him his son Hasan, then
his son Husain, after him Hamza, and after him Ja'far Ibn Abi Talib." He
goes on to say that his master Abu Abdullah Basri, Sheikh Abu'l-Qasim
Balkhi, and Sheikh Abu'l-Hasan Khayyat had the same belief as Abu Ja'far
Iskafi regarding the superiority of ‘Ali.

He explains the faith of the Mu'tazilite sect saying: "The best of the
men after the Prophet of Allah, is the successor of the Prophet, the
husband of Fatima, ‘Ali; after him, his two sons, Hasan and Husain;
after them, Hamza, and after him Ja'far (Tayyar).

Sheikh: If you knew the statements of the ulama’ in support of the
excellence of Abu Bakr, you would not have made such remarks.

‘Ali's faith superior to Abu Bakr's
-----------------------------------

Well-Wisher: All the reliable Sunni ulama’ have acknowledged the
superiority of ‘Ali. For instance, you may refer Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Mu'tazali's ‘Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha’, Volume 111, page 264, in which the
same statement has been quoted from Jahiz that Abu Bakr's faith was
superior to that of ‘Ali. However, Abu Ja'far Askafi, one of the eminent
ulama’ of the Mu'tazilite sect, rejected this claim, saying that ‘Ali's
faith was superior to Abu Bakr's and all other companions.

Abu Ja'far said, "We do not deny the excellence of the companions, but
certainly we do not consider any of them superior to ‘Ali." ‘Ali was of
such an exalted rank that to mention his name along with other
companions is unbecoming.

In fact, the virtues of the companions cannot be compared with the
sublime merits of ‘Ali. Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani narrates in his Mawadda
VII from Ahmad Ibn Muhammadu'l-Karzi Baghdadi, who said that he heard
from Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, who asked his father Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal about the rank of the companions of the Prophet.

He named Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman and stopped. Abdullah then asked
his father, "Where is the name of ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib?" His father
replied, "He belongs to the Holy descendants of the Prophet. We cannot
mention his name (being of such prominence) along with those people."

We see in the Holy Qur'an that in the verse of Mubahala ‘Ali is referred
to as the 'self' of the Holy Prophet. There is a hadith in support of
this view, which is recorded in the same Mawadda VII, narrated from
Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Khattab.

He said that one day while counting the names of the companions, he
named Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman. A man said, "O Abu Abdu'r-Rahman! Why
did you omit the name of ‘Ali?" He replied: "‘Ali is one of the
descendants of the Prophet. He cannot be included with anyone else. He
is in the same category as the Prophet of Allah."

Let me relate another hadith from the same Mawadda. It is narrated from
Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari that one day in the presence of Muhajirs
(Meccan emigrants living in Medina) and Ansars ("helpers" of Medina who
received the Muslim emigrants into their community), that the Prophet
said to ‘Ali, "O ‘Ali! If a man offers complete prayers to Allah, and
then doubts that you and your family are superior to all other beings,
his abode shall be Hell."

(After hearing this hadith, all those present, particularly Mr. Hafiz,
showed repentance, lest they should be among the doubtful ones). I have
referred to only a few hadith. Your choice seems to be to reject all
these authentic hadith, which are recorded in your own books, or to
acknowledge that ‘Ali's faith was superior to that of all the
companions, including Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

I also ask you to consider the hadith (acknowledged by both sects) in
which the Holy Prophet said on the occasion of ‘Ghazawa al-Ahzab’ (also
known as the Battle of the Trench), when ‘Ali killed Amru Ibn Abd
al-Wudd with one stroke of his sword: "One stroke of ‘Ali in the Battle
of Khandaq (the Trench) has earned more merit for him than the reward
for good deeds of the whole community (jinn and men) until the Day of
Judgement." If only one stroke of his sword was better in merit than the
prayers of jinn and human beings combined, certainly his preeminence
cannot be questioned by anyone except malicious fanatics.

‘Ali as the self of the Holy Prophet
------------------------------------

Had there been no other proof of ‘Ali's superiority to all the
companions and to humanity at large, the verse of Mubahala is sufficient
to prove his excellence. It refers to ‘Ali as the 'self' of the Prophet.
The Holy Prophet was admittedly superior to all of humanity from
beginning to end.

Hence, the word "anfusana" (ourselves) in the verse referring to ‘Ali
proves that he was also superior to all of humanity from beginning to
end. Perhaps now you will admit that in the phrase "And those who are
with him," the reference is to ‘Ali. He was with the Prophet before
anyone else from the beginning of Islam.

As to why ‘Ali did not accompany the Prophet on the night of his
migration from Mecca, it is clear that the Prophet entrusted ‘Ali with
more important duties. No one was as trustworthy as ‘Ali. He was left
behind to return to its owners the property entrusted to the Prophet.
(‘Ali's second responsibility was to send members of the Prophet's
family and other Muslims to Medina. And even though ‘Ali was not with
the Prophet in the cave that night, he performed a more important duty
as he lay in the Prophet's bed.)

Qur'anic verse in praise of ‘Ali on his sleeping in the Prophet's bed on the night of hijra
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your own scholars have mentioned ‘Ali's merit in their commentaries. For
instance, Ibn Sab'i Maghribi in ‘Shifa'u's-Sudur’, Tibrani in ‘Ausat’,
and ‘Kabir’, Ibn Athir in ‘Usudu'l-Ghaiba’, Volume IV, page 25,
Nuru'd-Din Sabbagh Maliki in ‘Fusuli'l-Muhimma Fi Ma'rifati'l-'aimma’,
page 33, Abu Ishaq Tha'labi Fazil Nishapuri, Fakhru'd-Din Razi and
Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti, each in his Tafsir, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani, the
well known Shafi'i traditionist in ‘Ma Nazala'l-Qur'an fi ‘Ali’, Khatib
Khawarizmi in ‘Manaqib’,

Sheikhu'l-Islam Ibrahim ibn Muhammad Hamwaini in ‘Fara'id’, Muhammad ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in ‘Kifayatu't-Talib’, Chapter 62, Imam Ahmad ibn
Hanbal in ‘Musnad’, Muhammad ibn Jarir through various sources, Ibn
Hisham in ‘Siratu'n-Nabi’, Hafiz Muhaddith of Damascus in ‘Arba'in
Tiwal’, Imam Ghazali in ‘Ihya'u'l-Ulum’, Volume III, page 223,
Abu's-Sa'adat in ‘Faza'ilu'l-Itrati't-Tahira’,

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in ‘Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha’, Sibt Ibn Jauzi in
‘Tadhkira’, and others of your prominent ‘ulama’, report that when the
Holy Prophet intended, by divine command, to leave Mecca for Medina, he
asked ‘Ali to wear his (the Prophet's) green cover sheet and to sleep in
his bed. Accordingly, ‘Ali slept in the Prophet's place.

Then Allah Almighty told the angels Gabriel and Michael that He had made
them brothers, and that one of them would live longer than the other. He
asked them which was prepared to give his brother his excess life, the
extent of which neither of them knew. They asked Him whether the choice
was obligatory. They were told it was not obligatory.

Neither of them chose to part with his excess life. Then followed the
divine words: "I have created brotherhood between my vicegerent ‘Ali and
my Prophet Muhammad. ‘Ali has offered to sacrifice his life for the sake
of the Prophet's life. By sleeping in the Prophet's bed, he is
protecting the Prophet's life. Now both of you are ordered to go to the
earth and save him from the enemy's evil designs."

Accordingly, both of them came to the earth. Gabriel sat at ‘Ali's head
and Michael at his feet. Gabriel said, "Congratulations, O son of Abu
Talib! in whom Allah Almighty takes pride in the presence of His
angels." After this, the following verse was revealed to the Prophet:

***"And there is the type of man who gives his life to earn the pleasure
of God; and Allah is full of kindness to (His) servants." (2:207)***

Now I entreat you, respected gentlemen, to consider this verse carefully
when you return home tonight and to draw your own conclusion. Does
superiority rightly belong to him who remained with the Prophet on a few
days journey, expressing fear and grief, or to him who risked his life
the same night valiantly and joyfully, for the safety of the Holy
Prophet. Imam Ja'far Askafi, one of the great ulama’ and chiefs of the
Mu'tazilites, proves, as recorded in Abi'l-Hadid's Commentary on
‘Nahju'l-Balagha’, Volume III, page 269-281) that ‘Ali's sleeping in the
Prophet's bed was superior to the short stay of Abu Bakr with the Holy
Prophet.

He says: "The Muslim ulama’ unanimously hold that, in reality, ‘Ali's
excellence on this night is so exalted that no man could reach it except
Ishaq (Isaac) and Ibrahim (Abraham) when they were prepared to sacrifice
their lives in obedience to Allah's will." (Most commentators, ulama’,
and historians believe that it was Isma'il who offered himself for
sacrifice and not Ishaq.)

On page 271 of ‘Sharhe-Nahju'l-Balagha’ the statement of Abu Ja'far
Askafi in reply to Abu Uthman Jahiz Nasibi is recorded. He says: "I have
already proved earlier that ‘Ali's sleeping in the Holy Prophet's bed on
the night of the migration was superior to Abu Bakr's remaining in the
company of the Prophet in the cave. In order to emphasize my point, I
will prove it from two other points of view. First, the Prophet of Allah
having old and close associations with ‘Ali, loved him dearly.
Therefore, he felt the loss of love when they separated.

On the other hand, Abu Bakr enjoyed the privilege of going with the
Prophet. Since ‘Ali was suffering the pangs of separation, his
recompense increased because the greater the agony in service, the
greater is the recompense for it.

Secondly, since Abu Bakr intended to leave Mecca, and had even left it
once alone, his situation as a citizen there became increasingly
difficult. So when he left Mecca along with the Prophet, his longing to
depart was fulfilled. Hence, no such moral excellence is due to him as
to ‘Ali, who suffered utmost anguish in risking his life before the
drawn swords of the enemy."

Ibn Sab'a Maghribi says in his ‘Shifa'u's-Sudur’ about the bravery of
‘Ali: "There is complete unanimity among the Arab ulama’ that on the
night of Hijra (migration), ‘Ali's sleeping in the Prophet's bed was
superior to going out with him. ‘Ali made himself the Prophet's
representative and risked his life for the Prophet's sake. This point is
so clear that no one has ever denied it except those afflicted with
insanity or fanaticism."

I stop here and come to my main point. You said that the Qur'anic
phrase:

***"Vehement against the infidels" (48:29)***

refers to the second Caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab. But this claim cannot be
accepted merely because you say so. We must determine whether or not
this attribute is characteristic of him or not. If it is, I am willing
to accept it. Obviously vehemence can be displayed in two ways: in
religious debates in which, through the force of argumentation, the
ulama’ of the opposite side are silenced. Second, it can be shown on the
battlefield.

So far as learned discussions are concerned, there is not a single
instance in history when ‘Umar showed any vehemence. At any rate, I have
not seen any historical records indicating that ‘Umar displayed
vehemence in learned discussion. I shall be obliged to you if you can
cite any such instance.

In fact, your own ulama’ have agreed that it was ‘Ali who solved
difficult legal and religious problems during the period of the first
three Caliphs. Although the Umayyads and the blind followers of Abu Bakr
fabricated innumerable hadith on their behalf, they could not hide the
fact that when men of other faiths came to Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, or Uthman,
to solve difficult problems, the Caliphs referred the problems to ‘Ali.
‘Ali gave them such convincing replies that many non-Muslims embraced
Islam.

The fact that Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Uthman acknowledged ‘Ali's
superiority is sufficient to prove my point. Your own scholars have
written that Caliph Abu Bakr said, "Remove me, remove me, since I am not
better than you so long as ‘Ali is in your midst."

At least seventy times Caliph ‘Umar admitted: "If ‘Ali had not been
there, ‘Umar would have been ruined." Most of the circumstances
involving danger have been mentioned in the books, but I don't want to
dwell on this point. There may be more important topics to discuss.

Nawab: Which topics could be more important than this? Are these matters
mentioned in our books? If they are, will you please let us know?

Well-Wisher: The just ulama’ of your sect agree that ‘Umar often
admitted that ‘Ali came to his rescue.

Evidence regarding ‘Umar's saying "had ‘Ali not been there, ‘Umar would have been ruined"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Qazi Fazlullah Ibn Ruzbahan, the fanatic, in his Ibtalu'l-Batil; Ibn
Hajar Asqalani in his Tihdhibu'l-Tahdid, printed in Hyderabad Daccan,
page 337; Ibn Hajar in Isaba, Volume II, printed in Egypt, page 509; Ibn
Qutayba Dinawari in Ta'wil al-Mukhtalafu'l-Hadith, page 201-202, Ibn
Hajar Makki in Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, page 78; Hajj Ahmad Afindi in
Hidayatu'l-Murtab, page 146 and 152; Ibn Athir Jazari in Usudu'l-Ghaiba,
Volume IV, page 22; Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, page 66;
Ibn Abdu'l-Birr Qartabi in Isti'ab, Volume II, page 474; Sayyid Mu'min
Shablanji in Nuru'l-Absar, page 73;

Shahabu'd-Din Ahmad ibn Abdu'l-Qadir A'jili in Zakhiratu'l-Ma'al;
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali As-Saban in Is'afu'r-Raghibin, page 152; Nuru'd-Din
ibn Sabbagh Maliki in Fusulu'l-Muhimma, page 18; Nuru'd-Din ‘Ali ibn
Abdullah Samhudi in Jawahiru'l-Iqdain; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Mu'tazili in
Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 6, Allama Qushachi in Sharh
al-Tarid, page 407, Khatib Khawarizmi in Manaqib, page 48, 60, Muhammad
ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul sub-Chapter 6, page 29, Imam Ahmad
ibn Hanbal in Faza'il as well as Musnad; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira,
page 85, 87,

Imam Tha'labi in Tafsir Kafshu'l-Bayan, Allama Ibn Qayyim Jauzi in
Turuqi'l-Hakim, recording ‘Ali's judgments from page 41 to page 53;
Muhammad ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, Chapter 57; Ibn
Maja Qazwini in Sunan, Ibn Maghazili Shafi'i in Manaqib; Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad Hamwaini in Fara'id; Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Hasani'l-Hakim in
Sharh al-Fathi'l-Mubin, Dailami in Firdaus, Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi
Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Chapter 14, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in
Hilyatu'l-Auliya as well as in Ma Nazala'l-Qur'an fi ‘Ali, and a host of
other great ulama’ of your sect, with slight variation in words, have
narrated ‘Umar's saying, "If there were no ‘Ali, ‘Umar would have been
ruined."

The great theologian, Ganji Shafi'i, in Chapter 57, of his
Kifayatu't-Talib Fi Manaqib ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, after narrating some
authentic hadith, reports from Hudhaifa Ibn Yaman that "one day ‘Umar
met him and asked him: 'What was your condition when you awoke in the
morning?'

Hudhaifa said, 'I rose in the morning hating the Truth, liking mischief,
bearing witness to the thing unseen; learning by heart the uncreated,
reciting salutations without being in the state of ritual purity, and
knowing that, what is for me on the earth is not for Allah in the Sky.'

‘Umar was infuriated by these remarks and intended to punish Hudhaifa
when ‘Ali came in. He noticed the signs of rage on ‘Umar's face and
asked why he was so angry. ‘Umar told him, and ‘Ali said: 'There is
nothing serious about this remark: What Hudhaifa said was correct. Truth
means death, which he detests; mischief means wealth and children, which
he likes; and when he says he bears witness to what he has not seen,
this means that he testifies to the oneness of Allah, death, the Day of
Judgement, Paradise, Hell, the bridge over it named Sira, none of which
he has seen.

When he says he learns by heart what is uncreated, this refers to the
Holy Qur'an; when he says that he recites salutations without ablution,
this refers to reciting salutations on the Prophet of Allah, which is
permissible without ablution; when he says he has for himself on earth
what is not for Allah in the sky, this refers to his wife, as He has no
wife or children.' ‘Umar then said, ‘Umar would have been lost had ‘Ali
not arrived.'"

Ganji Shafi'i says that ‘Umar's statement is verified according to
reports of most of the narrators of hadith. The author of Manaqib says
that Caliph ‘Umar repeatedly said: "O Abu'l-Hasan! (‘Ali). I would not
be a part of a community without you." He also said: "Women are unable
to give birth to a child like ‘Ali."

Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in his Matalibu's-Su'ul and Sheikh Sulayman
Balkhi Hanafi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Chapter 14, narrating from Tirmidhi,
record a detailed report from Ibn Abbas at the end of which he says:
"The companions of the Prophet used to seek religious judgments from
‘Ali, and they accepted his decisions. Thus, ‘Umar Ibn Khattab said on
various occasions, 'If it were not for ‘Ali, ‘Umar would have been
ruined."

In religious matters and learned discussions ‘Umar showed no vehemence.
On the contrary, he admitted his own inability and acknowledged ‘Ali as
his refuge. Even Ibn Hajar Makki in Chapter III of Sawa'iq Muhriqa,
reporting from Ibn Sa'd, quotes ‘Umar as saying, "I seek Allah's help in
deciding those difficult problems for which Abu-l-Hasan (‘Ali) is not
available."

Caliph ‘Umar’s bravery was never observed on any battlefield
------------------------------------------------------------

As for ‘Umar's vehemence on the battlefield, history recorded no
instance of it. On the contrary, historians of both sects relate that
whenever ‘Umar encountered a powerful enemy, he took to his heels.
Consequently, other Muslims also fled, and the Muslim army was often
defeated.

Hafiz: You have gradually increased the unkindness. You have insulted
Caliph ‘Umar, who was the pride of the Muslims and in whose age the
Muslims achieved great victories. Because of ‘Umar, Muslim armies won
their battles. You call him a coward and say that he ran away from the
battlefield and that the defeat of the Muslim army was due to him! Is it
proper for a man of your caliber to defame Caliph ‘Umar?

Well-Wisher: I'm afraid you are mistaken. Though you have been with me
for many nights, you have not understood me. Perhaps you think that it
is due to enmity that I criticize or praise men. It is not. There is a
great liability in religious debates, which has been a source of
antagonism among Muslims for centuries. Such debates often excite
malicious tendencies, which are not in accord with the injunctions of
the Holy Qur'an.

The Qur'an clearly says:

***"O ye who believe! Avoid suspicion as much (as possible): for
suspicion in some cases is a sin." (49:12)***

You assume that my statements are motivated by malice. The fact is
otherwise. I have not uttered a word contrary to what your own ulama’
have written. You have just said that I have insulted Caliph ‘Umar. But
there was not the slightest indication of an insult. What I said
corresponds to the records of history. Now I am constrained to give a
clearer view of facts in order to quiet this antagonism.

Conquests not due to personal merits of ‘Umar
---------------------------------------------

You said that Caliph ‘Umar was responsible for the Muslim conquests. No
one denies that the Muslims achieved great conquests during the
caliphate of ‘Umar. But remember that, according to the evidence of your
prominent ulama’, like Qazi Abu Bakr Khatib, in his History of Baghdad,
Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in
Sharhe-Nahju'l-Balagha, and many other writers, Caliph ‘Umar sought
guidance from ‘Ali in all administrative and military matters. And he
acted on ‘Ali's advice. In addition, there was a difference in the
Islamic conquests of different periods.

The first kind refers to conquests during the time of the Prophet
himself, which were due primarily to ‘Ali's gallantry. Everyone agrees
that ‘Ali was the bravest of the brave. If he did not fight in a battle,
victory was not achieved.

For instance, in the Battle of Khaibar, he suffered from an eye ailment,
and it was impossible for him to go to battle. The Muslims suffered
repeated defeats until, when he was cured by the Prophet, ‘Ali advanced
toward the enemy and conquered the forts of Khaibar.

In the Battle of Uhud, when the Muslims broke ranks and ran, it was ‘Ali
who stood firm. Dauntless, he protected the Prophet from the enemy until
a hidden voice proclaimed, "There is no sword other than Dhu'l-fiqar,
and there is no brave youth other than ‘Ali."

The second kind of conquest pertains to those battles which were fought
after the Prophet's death. These victories were due to the bravery of
the great Muslim soldiers and their expert planning. But we are not
concerned here with the Islamic conquests during ‘Umar's caliphate. Our
topic is the courage of Caliph ‘Umar himself. It is not verified by any
historical evidence.

Hafiz: It is insulting to claim that Caliph ‘Umar ran from the
battlefield and that this led to the defeat of the Muslims.

Well-Wisher: If citing historical facts about men is an insult, then
this insult has been recorded by your own ulama’.

Hafiz: Where have our ulama’ written that Caliph ‘Umar fled from the
battlefield? When did he cause the defeat of the Muslims?

Abu Bakr's and ‘Umar's defeat in the battle of Khaibar
------------------------------------------------------

Well-Wisher: Since ‘Ali was suffering from an eye ailment on the first
day of the battle of Khaibar, the Prophet gave the Muslim flag to Abu
Bakr, who led the Muslim army against the Jews. Suffering a defeat after
a short battle, he returned. The next day the Muslim flag was given to
‘Umar, but before he reached the place of battle, he fled in panic.

Hafiz: These statements are Shi’as fabrications.

Well-Wisher: The Battle of Khaibar was an important event of the
Prophet's life, recorded in detail by historians of both sects. Hafiz
Abu Nu'aim Ispahani in his Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Volume I, page 62, Muhammad
Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, page 40, from the Sira of Ibn
Hisham, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Kifayatu't-Talib, Chapter
14, and many others of your ulama’ have recorded this event.

But the most authentic narrations are those of two great scholars:
Muhammad Ibn Isma'il Bukhari, who writes in his Sahih, Volume II,
printed in Egypt, 1320 A.H., page 100, and Muslim Ibn Hujjaj, who writes
in his Sahih, Volume II, printed in Egypt, 1320 A.H., page 324, that
"Caliph ‘Umar fled from the battlefield on two occasions." Among the
many clear proofs on this point are the unambiguous verses of Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid the Mu'tazilite, known as "Alawiyyat al-Sab'a, in praise of
‘Ali. Regarding the "Gate of Khaibar," he says: "Have you heard the
story of the Conquest of Khaibar?

So many mysteries are linked together which bewilder even the wise mind!
These two (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar) had no liking for, or acquaintance with,
bearing a flag (leading an army). They did not know the secret of
maintaining the prestige of a flag, they covered it with scorn and took
to their heels, though they knew that fleeing from the battlefield is
tantamount to infidelity.

They did so because one of the brave Jewish soldiers, a tall youth with
a naked sword in hand, riding on a steed of towering stature, attacked
them, like an excited male ostrich, which had gained its strength from
spring air and vegetation. He was like a huge bird which had adorned
itself with a beautiful color and was going towards its beloved. The
blaze of the fire of death from his sword and lance shown and frightened
the two men."

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid addressing them (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar) says further: "I
apologize for you, for your defeat and fleeing, since everyone dislikes
death and loves life. Like all others, you too did not like death
although there is no immunity from death. But you could not court
death."

My purpose is not to insult anyone. I relate historical facts to show
that the Caliph had no such bravery which would entitle him to the
epithet "vehement against the infidels." The fact is that he ran from
the battlefield. The attribute in question belonged to ‘Ali alone, who
in every battle was vehement against the infidels. This fact has been
attested to by Allah in the Holy Qur'an. He says:

***"O you who believe! Whoever of you turns away from his religion, soon
Allah will bring another people; He loves them and they love Him, lowly
before the believers, mighty against the infidels, striving hard in
Allah's way, and they fear not the censure of any censurer; this is the
grace of Allah. He gives it to whomsoever He desires."(5:54)***

Hafiz: It is astonishing that you try to ascribe this verse to ‘Ali. It
refers to the believers who possess these qualities and are Allah's
loved ones.

Well-Wisher: It would be better if you asked me what argument I could
furnish in support of my assertion. My reply is that if this verse were
revealed in praise of the believers, they would never have run from the
battlefield.

Hafiz: Is it fair to accuse the believers and the Prophet's Companions
of fleeing from danger? These people fought bravely in battle.

Well-Wisher: It is not I who have called them "runners." History shows
them as such. Perhaps you have forgotten that in the battles of Uhud and
Hunain both the believers and the companions in general, including the
great companions of the Prophet, sought safety in flight. As reported by
Tabrini and others, they left the Prophet alone among the infidels. Is
it possible that those who turned their backs to the enemy leaving the
Holy Prophet alone to face the enemy were the loved ones of Allah and
His Prophet?

I am not the only one to claim that this verse is in praise of ‘Ali. Abu
Ishaq Imam Ahmad Tha'labi, whom you regard as the chief of your
traditionists, writes in his Kashfu'l-Bayan that this verse was revealed
in praise of ‘Ali because no other person possessed the attributes
mentioned in it.

No historian - ours or foreigners - has written that in any of the 36
battles fought by the Prophet did ‘Ali ever falter. In the Battle of
Uhud, when all the other companions fled, and the enemy's 5,000 troops
attacked the Muslims, the only person who stayed at his post until
victory was achieved was ‘Ali.

Although wounded in several places and bleeding profusely, he rallied
those who had fled and continued fighting until victory was achieved.

Hafiz: Are you not ashamed to attribute "fleeing" to the great
companions? All the companions in general and the two Caliphs - Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar - in particular bravely surrounded the Prophet and protected
him.

Well-Wisher: You have not studied history very carefully. In general,
historians have written that in the battles of Uhud, Hunain, and Khaibar
all the companions fled. I have told you about Khaibar. As for Hunain,
Hamidi in his Jam' al-Bainu's-Sahihain and Halabi in his
Siratu'l-Halabiyya, Volume III, page 123, say that all the companions
fled, except four: ‘Ali and Abbas were in front of the Prophet, Abu
Sufyan Ibn Harith held the reins of the Prophet's horse, and Abdullah
Ibn Mas'ud stood on his left.

The fleeing of the Muslims at Uhud has not been denied by anyone.
Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, Chapter 27,
with his own sources, quotes Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud as saying that the
Prophet said: "Whenever ‘Ali was sent alone in a battle, I saw Gabriel
on his right side, Michael on his left, and a cloud sheltering him from
above until Allah made him victorious."

Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i narrates hadith 202 in his Khasa'is
al-Alawi that Imam Hasan, wearing a black turban, came to the people and
narrated the qualities of his father, saying that in the Battle of
Khaibar, when ‘Ali went toward the fort, "Gabriel was fighting on his
right and Michael on his left side. He encountered the enemy with great
valor until he achieved victory and was entitled to Allah's love."

‘Ali was the loved one of Allah and of the Holy Prophet
-------------------------------------------------------

In this verse Allah says that He loves those who possess these
attributes and that they too love Him. This quality of being loved by
Allah is peculiar to ‘Ali. There is a great deal of evidence in support
of this view. Among the many hadith relating to this matter is the one
reported by Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib,
Chapter 7.

He narrates, through his own sources, from Abdullah Ibn Abbas, who said
that one day he was sitting with his father, Abbas, before the Holy
Prophet, when ‘Ali came in and saluted him. The Prophet stood up, took
him into his arms, kissed him between his eyes, and made him sit down at
his right side. Abbas then asked the Prophet if he loved ‘Ali. The Holy
Prophet replied, "O my respected uncle! By Allah, Allah loves him more
than I love him."

Hadith of the standard in the conquest of Khaibar
-------------------------------------------------

The strongest proof of ‘Ali's being the loved one of Allah, and of his
bravery on the battlefield, is the hadith al-Rayat (Hadith of the
Ensign), which is part of your authentic collections of traditions. None
of your prominent ulama’ has denied it.

Nawab: What is the hadith al-Rayat? If you don't mind, please quote it
with its sources.

Well-Wisher: The prominent ulama’ and historians of the two sects have
both narrated the hadith al-Rayat. For instance, Muhammad Ibn Isma'il
Bukhari, in his Sahih, Volume II, Kitabu'l-Jihad Wa's-Siyar, Chapter
Du'au'n-Nabi, also Volume III, Kitabu'l-Maghazi, Chapter Ghazawa
al-Khaibar; Muslim Ibn Hajjaj in his Sahih, Volume 2, page 324; Imam
Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in his Khasa'isu'l-Alawi;

Tirmidhi in his Sunan; Ibn Hajar Asqalani in Isaba, Volume II, p. 508;
Muhaddith al-Sham in his Ta'rikh; Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad; Ibn
Maja Qazwini in Sunan; Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Hanafi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda Chapter 6; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira; Muhammad ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani in
Hilyatu'l-Auliya; Abu Qasim Tibrani in Ausat.

And Abu Qasim Husain ibn Muhammad (Raghib Isfahani) in
Muhaziratu'l-Udaba, Volume II, page 212. In short, virtually all of your
historians and traditionists have recorded this hadith, so that Hakim
says: "This hadith has reached the stage of unanimity." Tabrini says:
"‘Ali's victory in Khaibar is proved by its unanimity."

When the Muslim army laid siege to the Fort of Khaibar, it suffered
defeat three times under the command of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and they
fled. The companions were greatly frustrated. In order to inspire the
companions, the Prophet announced that Khaibar would be conquered. He
said: "By Allah, tomorrow I will give the standard to one who will
return successful. He is one who attacks repeatedly and never leaves the
battlefield and never retraces his steps until he achieves success.

He loves Allah and the Prophet of Allah, and Allah and the Prophet of
Allah love him." That night the companions could not sleep, wondering
who would be given this special favor. At dawn, all put on their
military garb and presented themselves before the Prophet. The Prophet
asked, "Where is my brother and son of my uncle, ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib?"
They told him, "O Prophet of Allah, he is suffering so much with sore
eyes that he cannot move." The Prophet asked Salman to call ‘Ali. Salman
took ‘Ali by the hand and brought him to the Prophet.

He saluted the Prophet, and after returning the salutation, the Prophet
asked, "How are you, O Abu'l-Hasan?" He replied, "It is all well by the
grace of Allah. I am suffering from headache and so much pain in the
eyes that I cannot see anything."

The Prophet bade him come near. When ‘Ali had moved closer, the Prophet
applied the saliva of his own mouth to ‘Ali's eyes and prayed for him.
Soon his eyes were bright, and his ailment vanished completely. He gave
‘Ali the flag of victory. ‘Ali proceeded to the forts of Khaibar, fought
against the Jews, slew their brave soldiers, like Harhab, Harith,
Hisham, and Alqama, and conquered the hitherto invincible Forts of
Khaibar.

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in his Fusulu'l-Muhimma, page 21, has quoted this
report from the six books of tradition, while Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji
Shafi'i in his Kifayatu't-Talib, Chapter 14, after narrating the hadith
says that the Prophet's chief poet, Hasan Ibn Thabit, was present on
this occasion. He composed couplets in praise of ‘Ali: "‘Ali was
suffering from an eye disorder. Because there was no physician, the
Prophet cured him with his own saliva. So both the curer and the patient
were blessed.

The Holy Prophet said, 'Today I will give the standard to a highly
skilled horseman, valiant and chivalrous, my comrade in battle. He loves
Allah and Allah loves him; so through him He will make us conquer the
Forts.' After this, leaving all others aside, he selected ‘Ali and made
him his successor."

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki narrates from Sahih Muslim that ‘Umar Ibn Khattab
said: "I never aspired for bearing the standard, but that day I had a
keen desire for it. I was repeatedly making myself conspicuous before
the Prophet, wishing that perhaps he might call me, and that I might be
blessed with this honor. But it was ‘Ali who was called by the Prophet
and the glory went to him."

Sibt Ibn Jauzi has recorded this report in his Tadhkira, page 15, and
Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Nisa'i in his Khasa'isu'l-Alawi,
after narrating twelve hadith on the topic of ‘Ali's bearing the
standard at Khaibar, quotes the same report in the eighteenth hadith
about ‘Umar's hope for getting the standard.

Also Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti in his Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, Ibn Hajar Makki, in
his Sawa'iq, and Ibn Shirwaini in his Firdausu'l-Akhbar, narrate that
‘Umar Ibn Khattab said: "‘Ali has been endowed with three things, and if
I possessed only one, I would have preferred it to all the camels in my
possession: ‘Ali's marriage with Fatima; his staying in the mosque in
every condition, and this was not permissible for anyone except ‘Ali,
and his bearing the standard in the Conquest of Khaibar."

My argument, based on the records of your own traditionists, proves that
the reference in the verse - "He (Allah) loves them and they also love
Him" - is to ‘Ali. Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in his
Kifayatu't-Talib, Chapter 13, relates that the Prophet said: "If one
wishes to look at Adam, Noah, and Abraham, look at ‘Ali." He says that
‘Ali is the one Allah refers to in the Holy Qur'an:

***"And those who are with him are strong against the unbelievers,
compassionate among themselves." (48:29).***

As for your contention that the phrase in the verse "Compassionate among
themselves" refers to Uthman and indicates his place as the third
Caliph, this is not supported by historical evidence. In fact, his
character was just the opposite. There are many arguments to prove this,
but I will stop here. What could be said might provoke hostility.

Hafiz: If you confine yourself to authentic references, there is no
reason why we should be displeased.

Well-Wisher: I will mention some of them.

Uthman's character and way of life compared to that of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Khaldun, Ibn Khallikan, Ibn A'sam Kufi (it is also recorded in Siha
al-Sitta), Mas'udi in Muruju'dh-Dhahab, Volume I, page 435, Ibn Hadid in
Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, and others of your ulama’ affirm that
when Uthman Ibn Affan became Caliph, he acted against the examples set
by the Holy Prophet and also against the ways of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

Both sects agree that in the Consultative Council in which he was
selected as Caliph Abdu'r-Rahman Ibn Auf offered him allegiance based on
the Book of Allah, the hadith of the Prophet, and the ways of Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar.

One condition of his allegiance was that Uthman would not let the Bani
Umayya interfere nor would he give them any authority. But when his
position became secure, he violated these pledges. According to the Holy
Qur'an and reliable hadith, to violate an agreement is a great sin.

Your own ulama’ say that Caliph Uthman broke his pledge. Throughout his
caliphate he acted in contradiction to the way of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. He
gave the Bani Umayya full authority over the people's lives and
property.

The wealth of caliph Uthman
---------------------------

Hafiz: In what way did he act against the teachings and practice of the
Prophet and the ways of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar?

Well-Wisher: The famous traditionist, Mas'udi, in his Muruju'dh-Dhahab,
Volume I, page 433, and other historians have recorded that Uthman built
a sophisticated stone house with doors made of sandalwood. He
accumulated great wealth, which he bestowed lavishly on the Umayyads and
others.

For instance, the religious levy (Khums) from Armenia, which was
conquered during this time, was bestowed on the cursed Marwan without
any religious sanction. He also gave him 100,000 dirhams from the
Baitu'l-Mal (the public treasury).

He gave 400,000 dirhams to Abdullah Ibn Khalid, 100,000 dirhams to Hakam
Ibn Abi'l-As, who was cursed and banished by the Prophet, and 200,000
dirhams to Abu Sufyan (as recorded by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharhe
Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 68).

On the day he was murdered, his personal fortune amounted to 150,000
dinars and 20 million dirhams in cash. He owned property in Wadiu'l-Qura
and Hunain valued at 100,000 dinars and huge herds of cattle, sheep, and
camels. As a consequence of his actions, the leading Umayyads amassed
great wealth at the expense of the people.

For a caliph of Islam to accumulate such wealth when many people were
starving was certainly wrong. Moreover, this behavior was completely at
variance with the ways of his companions, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Uthman
pledged in the Consultative Council that he would follow in their
footsteps.

Mas'udi in his Muruju'dh-Dhahab says about Caliph Uthman, that when
Caliph ‘Umar went with his son, Abdullah, to perform the Hajj
(pilgrimage), their expenditure on the journey, both ways, was sixteen
dinars. He told his son that they had been extravagant. If you compare
the frugal ways of ‘Umar with the lavish expenditures of Uthman, you
will admit that the latter's way of life was contrary to his pledge at
the Council.

Caliph Uthman encouraged the evildoers among the Umayyads
---------------------------------------------------------

Uthman also gave the Umayyads authority over the life and honor of the
people. Consequently, disorder prevailed in Muslim lands. He appointed
his favorites to high positions against the wishes of the Holy Prophet,
Abu Bakr, and ‘Umar. For instance, he gave high positions to his uncle,
Hakam Ibn As, and Hakam's son, Marwan, both of whom were banished and
cursed by the Prophet.

Hafiz: Can you prove that they were cursed?

Well-Wisher: There are two ways to prove that they were cursed. Allah
called the Bani Umayya "The Accursed Tree" in the Qur'an (17:60). Imam
Fakhru'd-Din Razi, Tabari, Qartabi, Nishapuri, Suyuti, Shawkani, Alusi,
Ibn Abi Hatim, Khatib Baghdadi, Ibn Mardawaih, Hakim, Maqrizi, Baihaqi,
and others of your ulama’ narrate from Ibn Abbas that the "Accursed
Tree" in the Qur'an refers to the Umayya tribe. In a dream, the Prophet
saw monkeys climbing up and down his pulpit (and driving men away from
his mosque).

When he woke, the Angel Gabriel revealed this verse and told the Prophet
that the monkeys were the Bani Umayyads, who would usurp his caliphate
after him. His place of prayer and pulpit would remain in their control
for a thousand months. Imam Fakhru'd-Din Razi narrates from Ibn Abbas
that the Prophet mentioned the name of Hakam Ibn As. He is, therefore,
accursed since he belongs to the Accursed Tree.

There are many hadith from Sunni sources about their being cursed. Hakim
Nishapuri, in his Mustadrak, Volume IV, page 437 and Ibn Hajar Makki in
Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, quote from Hakim the following hadith from the
Prophet: "Verily, my family will shortly be dispersed and assassinated
by my community. Bani Umayya, Bani Mughira, and Bani Makhzum are the
most callous of our enemies."

The Prophet said about Marwan, a child at that time, "This is a lizard,
son of a lizard, a cursed one, son of a cursed one." Ibn Hajar relates
from ‘Umar ibn Murratu'l-Jihni, Halabi in Siratu'l-Halabiyya, Volume I,
page 337; Baladhuri in Ansab, Volume V, 126; Sulayman Balkhi in
Yanabiu'l-Mawadda; Hakim

in Mustadrak, Volume IV, page 481; Damiri in Hayatu'l-Haiwan, Volume II,
page 291; Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh; Imamu'l-Haram Muhyi'd-Din Tabari in
Zakha'iru'l-Uqba, and others have narrated from ‘Umar ibn Murra that
Hakam Ibn As sought an interview with the Prophet. The Prophet,
recognizing his voice, said: "Let him come in. Curse be on him and on
his descendants, excepting those who believe, and they will be few."

Imam Fakhru'd-Din Razi, in Volume V of his Tafsir al-Kabir, writing
about the verse "The Accursed Tree..." and its meaning, refers to the
statement of A’ysha, who said to Marwan: "Allah cursed your father when
you were present in his semen; so you are also a part of him, who has
been cursed by Allah." Allama Mas'udi says in his Muruju'dh-Dhahab,
Volume I, page 435, that Marwan Ibn Hakam was condemned and banished by
the Prophet.

He was exiled from Medina. He was not allowed to enter Medina during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, but when Uthman became caliph, he acted
contrary to the teaching of the Holy Prophet, Abu Bakr, and ‘Umar and
allowed him to enter Medina. He kept him close to himself with all other
Umayyads and showed them favor.

Nawab: Who was Hakam Ibn Abi-l-As, and why was he banished by the Holy
Prophet?

Well-Wisher: Hakam Ibn As was the uncle of Caliph Uthman. According to
Tabari, Ibn Athir, and Baladhuri, who writes in Ansab, Volume V, page
17, he was the neighbor of the Prophet in the Age of Ignorance. He
abused the Holy Prophet, particularly after the announcement of his
prophethood.

He walked behind the Prophet and ridiculed him by imitating his
gestures. Even during prayers, he pointed towards him scornfully. After
the Prophet cursed him, he remained in a paralytic condition permanently
and eventually he lost his sanity.

After the conquest of Mecca, he came to Medina and apparently embraced
Islam, but he often insulted the Prophet. When he went to the Prophet's
house, the Holy Prophet soon came out of his house and said, "No one
should seek pardon on his behalf. Now he and his sons, Marwan and
others, should leave Medina."

Accordingly, the Muslims immediately banished him from Medina and drove
him out to Ta'if. During the time of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, Uthman
supported him, saying that he was his uncle and that he should be
allowed to return to Medina. But the others did not accept this, saying
that since he was cursed and banished by the Holy Prophet, they would
not let him return.

When Uthman became caliph, he called all of them back. Although many
people objected to it, Uthman showed his relatives and other favorites
special favor. He made Marwan his assistant and chief officer of the
court. He gathered round him many wicked people of the Umayyads and
appointed them to high positions.

The result was that, according to ‘Umar's prediction, they were
responsible for Uthman's fate. Among the people appointed by Uthman was
Walid Ibn Aqaba Ibn Abi Mu'ith, who was sent to be the Governor of Kufa.
According to the report of Mas'udi in Muruju'dh-Dhahab, Volume I, the
Prophet said concerning Walid:

"Verily, he is one of those who will go to Hell." He openly indulged in
sinful acts. According to the statement of Mas'udi in Muruju'dh-Dhahab,
Abdu'l-Fida in his Ta'rikh, Suyuti in Ta'rikhu'l-Khulafa, page 104,
Abu'l-Faraj in Aghani, Volume IV, page 128; Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in
Musnad, Volume I, page 42; Yaqubi in Ta'rikh, Volume II, page 142; Ibn
Athir also in Usudu'l-Uqba, Volume V, page 91, and others said that,
during his governorship in Kufa, Walid passed the whole night in
self-indulgence.

He came to the mosque for the dawn prayer intoxicated and offered four
rak'ats of the morning prayer (instead of two) and then told the people:
"What a pleasant morn! I would like to extend the prayer further if you
consent."

Some said that he vomited under the dome of the mosque which caused
great annoyance to the people, who complained to Caliph Uthman. One of
these well known people was Mu'awiya, who was made Governor of Syria.
Walid was replaced by Sa'id Ibn As as Governor of Kufa.

When people learned of the policies of Uthman, policies in contradiction
to the teachings of the Prophet, they became furious. They took actions
which eventually caused such serious results. Uthman was responsible for
his murder because he did not consider the effects of his deeds. He
rejected ‘Ali's counsel and was misled by servile flatterers. Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid quotes a conversation between ‘Umar and Ibn Abbas in his
Sharh Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume III, page 106.

Caliph ‘Umar said something about each of the six members of the
Consultative Council and pointed out their defects. When the name of
Uthman was mentioned, "After sighing three times, ‘Umar said that if the
caliphate reached Uthman, he would place the sons of Abi Mu'it
(Umayyads) over the people.’Then the Arabs will surely rise in rebellion
against him and kill him.'"

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid agrees with ‘Umar's assessment. When Uthman became
caliph, he gathered round him the Bani Umayya. He appointed them as
governors, and when they abused their authority, he looked the other
way. Caliph Uthman did not even detach himself from Marwan. The people,
seething with discontent, revolted against him and finally killed him.

Holy prophet cursed Abu Sufyan, Mu'awiya and his son Yazid
----------------------------------------------------------

It would be helpful if you would read the great History by Jarir Tabari,
one of your eminent ulama’, who wrote: "The Holy Prophet saw Abu Sufyan
riding a donkey. Mu'awiya was pulling it from the front, and his son,
Yazid, was pushing it from behind. The Prophet said, 'Curse be upon the
rider, the puller, and the pusher.'"

Your own prominent ulama’, like Tabari and Ibn A'sam Kufi, faulted
Caliph Uthman for not putting Abu Sufyan to death when the latter, in
the open court, denied Islam, the wahi (revelation), and the presence of
Gabriel. After giving Abu Sufyan a slight reproof, Uthman brushed the
matter aside.

I also ask you to consider Address 163 of the Nahju'l-Balagha, and the
narration which Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharh Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume II,
(printed in Egypt), page 582, and quotes from Tabari's Ta'rikh al-Kabir
that some of the companions in various provinces wrote letters urging
the people to declare Jihad (Holy war) to protect themselves from
Uthman's cruel oppression. In 34 A.H. people with complaints against
officials appointed by Uthman came to ‘Ali in Medina and asked him to
intervene.

Uthman did not accept counsel of ‘Ali
-------------------------------------

‘Ali went to Uthman and warned him about the horrible consequences of
continuing his present policies. ‘Ali said, "I tell you, for Allah's
sake, let yourself not be a murdered leader of this community. It has
been said that a leader of this community will be killed, after which
the doors of bloodshed and murder will remain open until the Day of
Resurrection." But Marwan and the Umayyad companions rejected ‘Ali's
advice. After ‘Ali's departure, Uthman ordered people to gather in the
mosque.

He went to the pulpit and, instead of pacifying the people, he
antagonized them further. The result was as Caliph ‘Umar predicted:
Uthman was killed by insurgents. Unlike Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, who followed
‘Ali's advice, Uthman rejected his warning and suffered the
consequences.

Uthman mercilessly beat companions of Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------------

Moreover, Uthman beat the companions who objected to his oppression.
Among them was Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud, who was a Hafiz, Qari (Qur'an
reciter), treasurer of the public treasury, a scribe who recorded the
revealed verses, and one of the chief companions of the Holy Prophet. He
was held in high esteem by Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, both of whom used to take
counsel from him. Ibn Khaldun in his History commented that Caliph ‘Umar
insisted that Abdullah remain with him because he possessed complete
knowledge of the Holy Qur'an and because the Prophet spoke highly of
him.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid and others have written the same thing. Your ulama’
agree that when Uthman intended to compile the Holy Qur'an, he obtained
all the copies from the scribes. He demanded the copy of the Holy Qur'an
from Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud also. Abdullah did not give it to him. Uthman
himself went to his house and took the copy of the Holy Qur'an from him
by force.

Later, when Abdullah learned that, like other copies of the Holy Qur'an,
his copy had been burnt, he was much aggrieved. In social and religious
gatherings, he narrated the condemnatory hadith which he knew about
Uthman.

When this news reached Uthman, he had Ibn Mas'ud so severely beaten by
his slaves that his teeth were broken, and he was confined to bed. After
three days he succumbed to his injuries. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid writes in
detail about these facts in Volume I, pages 67 and 226 of Sharh
Nahju'l-Balagha (printed in Egypt) under "Ta'n VI," and goes on to say
that Uthman went to see the ailing Abdullah.

They talked together for some time. Uthman said, "O Abdu'r-Rahman! Pray
to Allah for my forgiveness." Abdullah said, "I pray to Allah to take my
right from you" (that is, that justice be done).

When Abu Dharr, a close companion of the Holy Prophet, was banished to
Rabba, Abdullah went to see him off. For this Abdullah was given forty
lashes. So Abdullah insisted to Ammar Yasir that Uthman not be allowed
to offer Abdullah's funeral prayers. Ammar Yasir agreed, and after
Abdullah's death, he offered the funeral prayers along with a group of
the companions.

When Uthman learned of the funeral arrangement, he came to Abdullah's
grave and asked Ammar why he had said the funeral prayers. He replied
that he was constrained to do it because Abdullah had willed it.

Ammar beaten by order of Uthman
-------------------------------

Another example of Uthman's cruelty was his beating of Ammar Yasir.
Ulama’ of both sects relate that when Umayyad oppression increased, some
companions of the Prophet wrote to Uthman, asking him to relent. They
said that if he continued to assist his cruel Umayyad Governors, he
would not only be harming Islam, but he would himself be subjected to
serious consequences.

They asked Ammar Yasir to deliver the petition since Uthman himself had
acknowledged Ammar's virtue. They had often heard Uthman say that the
Prophet said that faith was blended with the flesh and blood of Ammar.

So Ammar took the letter to Uthman. When he arrived, Uthman asked him,
"Do you have business with me?" He replied: "I have no business of a
personal nature. But a group of the Prophet's Companions has written in
this letter some suggestions and advice for your welfare. They have sent
them to you through me."

After reading a few lines, Uthman threw the letter down. Ammar said: "It
was not good of you. A letter from the companions of the Holy Prophet of
Allah deserves respect. Why did you throw it on the ground? It would be
proper for you to have read it and replied to it?"

"You are lying!" Uthman shouted. Then he ordered his slaves to beat him,
and Uthman himself kicked him in the stomach. He fell, unconscious; his
relatives came and took him to the house of Ummu'l-Mu'minin Umm Salma
(one of the Prophet's wives). From noon until midnight he remained
unconscious. The tribes of Hudhail and Bani Makhzun turned against
Uthman because of his cruelty to Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud and Ammar Yasir.

Uthman was also cruel to Jandab Ibn Junada, known as Abu Dharr Ghifari,
one of the intimate companions of the Holy Prophet and a learned man.
Great traditionists and historians of both sects have reported that this
ninety-year-old man was unjustly exiled from place to place with utmost
ignominy - from Medina to Syria, to Medina again, and then from Medina
to the desert of Rabza. He rode on a naked camel accompanied by his only
daughter. He died in Rabza in penury and neglect.

Your prominent ulama’ and historians, including, Ibn Sa'd, in his
Tabaqat, Volume IV, page 168; Bukhari in Sahih, Kitab al-Zakat; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 240 and Volume
II, pages 375-87, Yaqubi in his History, Volume II, page 148;
Abu'l-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Husain Mas'udi, the famous traditionist and
historian of the fourth century in his Muruju'dh-Dhahab, Volume I, page
438, and many others have recorded Uthman's cruelty.

It has been widely reported how he mistreated the pure-hearted Abu
Dharr, the loved one of the Holy Prophet, and also how Abdullah Ibn
Mas'ud, the hafiz and recorder of Wahi, who was given forty lashes
because he bid farewell to Abu Dharr Ghifari. Insulting treatment was
likewise shown to ‘Ali for the same reason.

Hafiz: If torment was inflicted on Abu Dharr, it was because of unworthy
officials. Caliph Uthman, who was very kind and soft-hearted, was
unaware of these events.

Well-Wisher: Your defense of Caliph Uthman is contrary to facts. The
anguish inflicted on Abu Dharr was due to the explicit orders of Uthman
himself. To prove this fact, one need only refer to your own ulama’. For
instance, you may consult Ibn Athir's Nihaya, Volume I, and his Ta'rikh
al-Yaqubi, and particularly page 241 of Volume I of Sharhe
Nahju'l-Balagha by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid. These scholars have recorded
Uthman's letter to Mu'awiya.

When Mu'awiya sent a malicious report against Abu Dharr from Syria,
Uthman wrote to him, "Send Jundub (Abu Dharr) to me on an unsaddled
camel, alone, with a harsh man driving it day and night."

When he reached Medina, Abu Dharr's legs were bruised and bleeding. And
yet your own ulama’ have recorded hadith saying that Abu Dharr was
specifically mentioned by the Prophet as one whom all mankind must love.
Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Volume I, page 172; Ibn
Maja Qazwini in Sunan, Volume I; page 66.

Sheikh Sulayman Balkhi Shafi'i in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Chapter 59,
recording the fifth of forty hadith written in Sawa'iq Muhriqa by Ibn
Hajar Makki as correct, having been taken from Tirmidhi and Hakim, as
narrated by Buraida, and he from his father; Ibn Hajar Asqalani in
Isaba, Volume III, page 455; Tirmidhi in Sahih, Volume II, page 213; Ibn
Abdi'l-Birr in Isti'ab, Volume II, page 557; Hakim in Mustadrak, Volume
III, page 130; and Suyuti in Jam'u's-Saghir have recorded that the Holy
Prophet said:

"Allah has ordered me to love four people; and He has informed me that
He also loves them." The people said, "O Prophet of Allah! Let us know
their names." The Holy Prophet said, "They are ‘Ali, Abu Dharr, Miqdad,
and Salman." Would justice allow such loved ones of Allah to be treated
so cruelly and call that treatment kindness?

Hafiz: Historians have reported that Abu Dharr was a disturbing figure.
He carried on relentless propaganda in Syria in favor of ‘Ali, drew the
attention of the Syrians to ‘Ali's rank, and said that he had heard the
Holy Prophet saying that ‘Ali was his successor.

Because he called the others usurpers and said that ‘Ali was the
rightful caliph appointed by Allah, Caliph Uthman, to preserve unity and
avoid disturbances, had to call him from Syria. If a man attempts to
cause dissension among the people, it is the duty of the caliph to
remove him from the area.

Well-Wisher: If a man speaks the truth, is it fair to exile him and
torture him because he does so? Does Islam allow us to force old men to
ride a thin, unsaddled camel, driven fiercely by a hot-tempered slave,
without stopping for rest, so that he reaches his destination bruised
and bloody? Does this indicate soft-heartedness?

Apart from that, if Uthman wanted to maintain unity and avoid
disturbances, why didn't he remove the miscreant Umayyads, like Marwan,
who was cursed and banished by the Holy Prophet and the heretic, Walid,
an exposed sinner who offered prayers while drunk and who vomited under
the arch of the mosque? Why didn't he remove the corrupt politicians
from his government, men who oppressed the people, who finally rebelled
and murdered Uthman.

Hafiz: How can you say that Abu Dharr spoke the truth? How do you know
that what he said was based on correct knowledge and that he did not
fabricate hadith in the name of the Holy Prophet?

Well-Wisher: We say so because the Holy Prophet himself testified to Abu
Dharr's veracity. Your own ulama’ have written that the Prophet said:
"Abu Dharr among my people is like Jesus among the Bani Isra'il in
truthfulness, devotion, and piety."

Muhammad Ibn Sa'd, one of the high-ranking ulama’ and traditionists of
your sect, in Tabaqat, Volume IV, pages 167, 168; Ibn Abdu'l-Birr in
Isti'ab, Volume I, Chapter of Jundab, page 84; Tirmidhi in Sahih, Volume
II, page 221; Hakim in Mustadrak, Volume III, page 342; ibn Hajar in
Isaba, Volume III, page 622 Muttaqi Hindi in Kanzu'l-Ummal, Volume VI,
page 169.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in Musnad, Volume II, page 163 and 175; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 241; from Mahidi;
Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani in Hilyatu'l-Auliya and the author of
Lisanu'l-Arab, on the basis of several authorities have related that the
Holy Prophet said: "The earth has not borne nor has the sky covered, a
man more truthful than Abu Dharr."

If the Holy Prophet confirms the truthfulness of a man, we can be
certain that that man spoke the truth. Nor does Allah call that person
his loved one who is a liar. If there were a single instance of Abu
Dharr telling lies, the early ulama’ of your sect would have recorded
it, as they have concerning Abu Huraira and others.

The Prophet testified to his righteousness and also predicted his
torture. Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Isfahani, in his Hilyatu'l-Auliya, Volume I,
page 162, narrates from his own sources that Abu Dharr said that he was
standing before the Prophet when the latter said to him: "'You are a
pious man; soon after me you will suffer a calamity.' I asked: 'In the
way of Allah?' He said, 'Yes in the way of Allah!' I said: 'I welcome
Allah's command!'" Surely the suffering the venerable companion Abu
Dharr endured in the desert by the order of Mu'awiya, Uthman, and their
Bani Umayya was the same calamity predicted by the Holy Prophet.

The hadith "all companions are like stars" applied also to Abu Dharr
--------------------------------------------------------------------

I really wonder at your self-contradictory statements. On the one hand
you narrate the hadith from the Prophet that "All my companions are like
stars; if you follow any one of them, you will be rescued."

On the other hand, when one of the most venerable companions of the Holy
Prophet is tortured and dies in misery, you defend the offender! You
should either disprove the statements of your own ulama’, or admit that
the attributes mentioned in the verse under consideration do not relate
to those who brutalized the revered companions of the Holy Prophet.

Hafiz: Abu Dharr chose to go to Rabza of his own free will.

Well-Wisher: Such statements reflect attempts of your fanatical ulama’
to conceal the misdeeds of their elders. Abu Dharr's forced banishment
to Rabza is commonly acknowledged. As an example, I will confine myself
to quoting one narration, which has been recorded by Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal in Musnad, Volume V page 156, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharhe
Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 241, and Waqidi in his History from
Abu'l-Aswad Du'ili.

Abu Dharr was asked about his journey to Rabna. Abu Dharr said that he
was forcibly exiled and sent to the wilderness. He continued: "The Holy
Prophet informed me about this. One day I fell asleep in the mosque. The
Prophet came and asked me why I was sleeping in the mosque. I said that
I fell asleep inadvertently. He asked me what I would do if I were
banished from Medina. I said I would go to the Holy land of Syria.

He asked me what I would do if I were banished from there, too. I said I
would come back to the mosque. He again asked me what I would do if I
were turned out from here also. I said I would draw the sword and fight.

He asked me if he should tell me something which would be to my benefit.
When I said 'Yes,' he said to me: 'Go to whatever place they take you.'
So I listened to what he said, and I obeyed him. After this Abu Dharr
said, 'By Allah, when Uthman will go before Allah, he will stand a
sinner regarding my case.'"

‘Ali ibn Abu Talib's kindness and generosity
--------------------------------------------

If you consider the facts with an open mind, you will agree that ‘Ali
possessed the attributes of mercy and kindness to the highest degree.
All historians, including, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, report that when ‘Ali
assumed the caliphate, he did away with the abuses and innovations that
had crept in.

He removed the ungodly officials of the Bani Umayya, who had oppressed
the provinces during the period of Uthman's caliphate. Selfish
politicians advised him to postpone his decision about deposing
officials until ‘Ali was more firmly established in authority.

The Holy Imam said: "I swear by Allah that I will not allow such sly
deceptions. You insist that I use conciliatory measures, but you do not
understand that as long as they remain in authority representing me,
they would be perpetrating the same tyranny and outrage for which I
shall be answerable in the divine court of justice. I cannot allow this
injustice."

‘Ali's deposition of officials led to the hostility of power-hungry
people, like Mu'awiya, and prepared the way for the battles of Jamal and
Siffin. If Talha and Zubair had been appointed as governors, they would
not have fomented disturbances at Basra and let the Battle of the Camel
take place.

His kindness and generosity extended to friends and enemies alike.
Uthman had been very unkind to him (more so than Abu Bakr and ‘Umar had
been) but when insurgents enforced a blockade of Uthman's palace,
cutting off water and food, he appealed to ‘Ali for help. ‘Ali sent his
sons, Hasan and Husain, with water and bread.

Ibn Abi'l-Hadid describes this incident in detail in Sharhe
Nahju'l-Balagha. Caliph Uthman had a reputation for charity and
benevolence, but it was only for his family, like Abu Sufyan, Hakam Ibn
Abi'l-As, and Marwan Ibn Hakam. He showered money and gifts on them from
the public treasury without religious sanction.

But the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali never gave more than what was
due, even to near relatives. His elder brother, Aqil, came to him and
requested more money than he was usually given. ‘Ali paid no heed to his
request. Aqil insisted and said that since ‘Ali was the Caliph and had
sole authority over affairs, that his needs should be fulfilled. As a
caution to his brother, ‘Ali secretly heated a piece of iron and placed
it near Aqil's body. He cried out like a man in intense agony, afraid he
would be burned.

‘Ali said: "Let mourners morn your death, O Aqil! You shrieked when an
iron heated by man was brought near you, and yet you draw me toward that
fire which Allah has created of His wrath. Is it proper that you should
seek shelter from this ordinary pain, and that I should not protect
myself from Hellfire?"

‘Ali's kindness to marwan Abdullah ibn Zubair
---------------------------------------------

Even after subduing his enemy, ‘Ali was kind. The cursed Marwan, son of
the cursed Hakam, was ‘Ali's fierce enemy. But when ‘Ali overpowered
Marwan in the Battle of Jamal, he pardoned him. Abdullah Ibn Zubair was
another bitter enemy.

He abused ‘Ali openly, and in Basra when Abdullah read his address
before the people, he said: "Verily, ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib is debased,
mean, and stingy." (Allah forbid) But when the Holy Imam won the Battle
of Jamal and this wicked man was brought as a captive before him, ‘Ali
did not utter a harsh word against him. ‘Ali turned his face from him
and pardoned him.

‘Ali's kindness to A’ysha
-------------------------

The best example of ‘Ali's compassion was his behavior towards A’ysha.
The way she came face to face to fight him and railed at him would have
enraged a lesser man. But when ‘Ali defeated her, he treated her with
dignity. He assigned to Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr, her brother, the duty of
looking after her welfare.

On his order, twenty strong women dressed as men escorted A’ysha to
Medina. When she reached Medina, she expressed her gratitude to the
women and the wives of the Prophet. She said that she would always
remain grateful to him.

She admitted that, although she had been harsh with him and had been
responsible for such tumult, he had not uttered a word against her. She
said she had only one complaint against him. She wondered why he had
sent her to Medina escorted by men. The women slaves immediately removed
their masculine garb. It became clear that this scheme was adopted for
the purpose of protecting their property from bandits.

Another instance of ‘Ali's compassion was his treatment of Mu'awiya in
the Battle of Siffin. Mu'awiya's 12,000 soldiers had sealed off the
Euphrates River. When ‘Ali's army found that their expected supply of
water had been intercepted, ‘Ali sent a message to Mu'awiya saying that
Mu'awiya should not seal off access to the water. Mu'awiya replied that
he would deny them use of the water. ‘Ali sent Malik Ashtar with a unit
of cavalry. He pushed back Mu'awiya's army and secured access to the
Euphrates.

The companions said, "O ‘Ali! Let us retaliate and deny them water, so
that the enemy may die of thirst and the battle will be over." ‘Ali
said: "No! By Allah, I will not retaliate by following their example.
Let their troops have access to the Euphrates."

Your own ulama’, like Tabari, in his Ta'rikh, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in Sharhe
Nahju'l-Balagha, Sulayman Balkhi in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, Chapter 51,
Mas'udi in Muruju'dh-Dhahaba, and other historians have written in
detail about the magnanimity of ‘Ali.

You may examine these accounts and then decide who is the likely
referent of the verse, "And compassionate among themselves...." In the
verse under consideration, Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah, is the
subject, and what follows is its predicate. All those attributes are for
the same person.

To be with the Holy Prophet, to be vehement against the unbelievers on
the battlefield and in learned discourses, to be compassionate to
friends and foes - all these qualities refer to one who never left the
Prophet or even thought of leaving him. That person is ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib. I have already said earlier that the great scholar, Muhammad Ibn
Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i has written in his Kifayatu't-Talib that in this
verse Allah praised ‘Ali.

Sheikh: There are many replies to your statements, but you simply
misinterpret the verse. The phrase "and those who are with him" is
plural and cannot refer to one person only. If the attributes mentioned
in the verse referred to one person only, why were the pronouns plural?

Well-Wisher: First, you say that there are many answers to my statement.
If this were true, then why not mention them? Your silence is proof that
there are not "many replies" to my statements. Second, what you just
said is fallacious. You know that in both Arabic and other languages the
use of the plural for the singular is common as an indication of
respect. There are many examples of this usage in the Holy Qur'an, such
as the verse:

***"Only Allah is your Friend and His Apostle and those who believe,
those who perform the prayer and pay the poor-rate while they bow."
(5:55)***

This verse is unanimously acknowledged to be in praise of ‘Ali.
Commentators and traditionists, such as: Imam Fakhru'd-Din Razi in
Tafsir Kabir, Volume III, page 431; Imam Abu Ishaq Tha'labi in his
Kashfu'l-Bayan; Jarullah Zamakhshari in Tafsir Kashshaf, Volume I, page
422; Tabari in his Tafsir, Volume VI, page 186; Abu'l-Hasan Rammani in
his Tafsir; Ibn Hawazin Nishapuri in his Tafsir; Ibn Sa'dun Qartabi in
his Tafsir, Volume VI, page 221; Nasafi Hafiz in his Tafsir, page 496
(by way of commentary on Tafsir of Khazin Baghdadi); Fazil Nishapuri in
Gharibu'l-Qur'an, Volume I, page 461; Abu'l-Hasan Wahidi in
Asbabu'n-Nuzul, page 148;

Hafiz Abu Bakr Jassas in Tafsir Ahkamu'l-Qur'an, page 542; Hafiz Abu
Bakr Shirazi in Fima Nazala Mina'l-Qur'an Fi Amiru'l-Mu'minin; Abu Yusuf
Sheikh Abdu's-Salam Qazwini in his Tafsir Kabir; Qazi Baidhawi in
Anwaru't-Tanzil, Volume I, page 345; Jalalu'd-Din Suyuti in
Durru'l-Mansur, Volume II, page 239; Qazi Shukani San'a'i in Tafsir
Fathu'l-Qadir; Sayyid Muhammad Alusi in his Tafsir, Volume II, page 329;
Hafiz Ibn Abi Shaiba Kufi in his Tafsir; Abu'l-Baraka in his Tafsir,
Volume I, page 496;

Hafiz Baghawi in Ma'alimu't-Tanzil; Imam Abu Abdu'r-Rahman Nisa'i in his
Sahih; Muhammad Ibn Talha Shafi'i in Matalibu's-Su'ul, page 31; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume III, page 375; Khazin
Ala'u'd-Din Baghdadi in his Tafsir, Volume I, page 496; Sulayman Hanafi
in Yanabiu'l-Mawadda, page 212; Hafiz Abu Bakr Baihaqi in Kitab
Musannaf; Razin Abdari in Jam' Bainu's-Siha Sitta; Ibn Asakir Damishqi
in Ta'rikh Sham; Sibt Ibn Jauzi in Tadhkira, page 9; Qazi Azuda'iji in
Mawaqif, page 276;

Sayyid Sharif Jurjani in Sharhe Mawaqif; Ibn Sabbagh Maliki in
Fusulu'l-Muhimma, page 123; Hafiz Abu Sa'd Sam'ani in Faza'ili's-Sahaba;
Abu Ja'far Askafi in Nagzi'l-Uthmaniyya; Tibrani in Ausat; Ibn Maghazili
Faqih Shafi'i in Manaqib; Muhammad ibn Yusuf Ganji Shafi'i in
Kifayatu't-Talib; Mulla ‘Ali Qushachi in Sharhe Tajrid; Sayyid Muhammad
Mu'min Shablanji in Nuru'l-Absar, page 77;

Muhibu'd-Din Tabari in Riyazu'n-Nuzra, Volume II, page 247 as well as
many others of your notable ulama’ all have narrated from Sadi, Mujahid
Hasan Basri, A'mash, Atba Ibn Hakim, Ghalib Ibn Abdullah, Qais Ibn
Rabi'a, Abaya Ibn Rab'i, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Abu Dharr Ghifari, Jabir
Ibn Abdullah Ansari, Ammar, Abu Rafi', and Abdullah Ibn Salam, and
others acknowledge that this verse was revealed in praise of ‘Ali.

This verse refers to the time that ‘Ali gave a ring to a beggar during
ruku' (bowing in prayer). Here also the words are plural out of
deference and respect to the rank of Wilaya (guardianship), and to prove
that ‘Ali was the Imam and successor to the Prophet.

The emphasis of the word "innama," renders the meaning - the decision of
Allah - final and fixed, i.e., the decision of Allah that the guardian
of the believers should be Allah, His Prophet (Muhammad), and the
believers who give charity while praying, the latter referring
specifically to ‘Ali.

Sheikh: Surely you will admit that your interpretation is not
established since there are different views about it. Some say that it
refers to the Ansar (helpers), some say that it is in praise of Ibadat
Ibn Samit, and some say that it refers to Abdullah Ibn Salam.

Well-Wisher: It is indeed astonishing that scholars like you can
contradict your own ulama’. You take the view of a few ignorant and
unreliable people whose reports are rejected. Your great men of learning
have claimed unanimity on this point, men like Fazil Taftazani and Mulla
‘Ali Qushachi, who says in Sharhe Tajrid: "According to the unanimous
view of the commentators, this verse was revealed in praise of ‘Ali,
who, while in ruku' (bowing) in prayer, gave away his ring to a beggar."

Doubts and complications regarding the "verse of guardianship" and their clarification
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh: In the course of your talk concerning this verse, you have tried
to prove that ‘Ali was the immediate successor of the Prophet, though
the word "Wali" in this verse means "friend" or "loved one," and not
"Imam" or "successor." If your view is accepted, that "Wali" means
"successor" and "Imam," then according to the agreed-upon principle, it
is not confined to one person, but others are included in it, ‘Ali being
one of them.

Also in the verse, "Verily, verily your guardian is Allah, and His
Prophet, and those who believe..." the use of the plural refers to
people in general. To say that the plural form is an indication of
respect is not justified without any valid reasoning, Qur'anic example,
or other authority.

Well-Wisher: You have misconstrued the phrase "...your guardian...."
"Wali" is singular, and "kum" (your) is plural, which refers to the
people and does not imply the singular. Of course, "Wali" is for one
person who is the guardian for the whole community in every age.

Second, in the verse under consideration, where the plural is used, some
of the fanatics have said that it cannot be interpreted as singular as
in the verse "...those who establish prayer..." I replied to this
objection earlier. I said that eminent writers have often used the
plural connoting the singular.

You also claim the plural form in the verse refers to people in general.
We say that according to the emphasis of the word "verily," the
reference is to ‘Ali, but we do not say that the reference is peculiar
to him alone. Others of the Holy family of the Prophet are included in
it.

According to authentic hadith, all the Imams of the progeny of the
Prophet are included in this verse. Jarullah Zamakhshari writes in
Kashshaf that this verse was revealed in particular in praise of ‘Ali,
but the plurals used in it mean that others also should follow him.

Sheikh: In this verse "Wali" definitely means "helper." If it meant
guardian, which includes the rank of successor, then he should have been
appointed to that office during the Prophet's life.

Well-Wisher: The rank of ‘Ali is permanent. The grammatical construction
of the sentence and the word "Wali" used as an attribute prove the
permanent position of ‘Ali. This fact is further supported by the
Prophet declaring ‘Ali his vicegerent on the journey of Tabuk and never
withdrawing it.

Our point of view is further strengthened by the hadith al-Manzila
(Hadith of Rank), which the Holy Prophet repeatedly narrated: "‘Ali is
to me as Aaron was to Moses," which I have explained on previous nights.
This in itself is another proof of ‘Ali being the Wali (guardian) or
vicegerent of the Holy Prophet during the Prophet's life and after his
death.

Sheikh: If we were to give due consideration to the matter, we would
admit that this verse does not refer to ‘Ali. His rank is above that
which we want to prove from this verse. It does not prove any excellence
for him, it rather lowers his position.

Well-Wisher: Neither you nor I - none of the community - including the
great companions of the Prophet, have any right to interfere with the
real interpretation of the verses. Qur'anic verses are not revealed
according to our wishes. If some people interpret their meaning based on
mere opinion or point out the occasion on which they were revealed, they
are certainly irreligious.

For example, followers of Abu Bakr say that according to the hadith
narrated by the notorious forger Akrama, this verse was revealed about
Abu Bakr. Can you tell us how this verse lowers the position of ‘Ali?

Sheikh: One of the characteristics of the dignity of the rank of ‘Ali is
that while offering prayers he never diverted his attention to any other
object. ‘Ali was once wounded in battle. Arrows had lodged in his body,
and it was not possible to take them out without inflicting intense
pain.

But when he stood in prayer, the arrows were taken out, and because he
was engrossed in his worship of Allah, he felt no pain. If while
praying, he gave away a ring to a beggar, there was a great flaw in his
prayer. How could a man be so engrossed in Allah's mercy and at the same
time remove his attention from Allah in response to the voice of a
beggar?

Moreover, in the performance of every good deed and for payment of the
poor-rate, an intention is obligatory. While performing the prayer,
one's attention must be towards Allah alone. How is it possible that his
intention deviated from the prayer and turned toward a created being?

Since we consider ‘Ali's rank to be very high, we do not accept your
interpretation. And if he did give anything to a beggar, it was
certainly not during the prayer, since ruku' (bowing down) means humble
submission before Allah.

Well-Wisher: You have learned well how to recite, but you have missed
the way to invocation. This objection is weaker than a spider's web.
First, ‘Ali's action does not in any way lower his rank. In fact, to
give attention to the beggar to give him charity, is a source of
excellence. In this case, he combined his bodily and spiritual prayer
with a material prayer. Both prayers were in the way of Allah. Dear
fellows! The distraction which weakens prayer is one which is conceived
with selfish notions.

Attention towards another prayer, while performing a particular prayer,
is a sign of excellence. For instance, if during the ritual prayer, one
weeps for the dearest of his relations, his prayer will be invalidated.
But if he weeps in his extreme love for Him, or in fear of Him, then it
is a sign of excellence.

You said ruku' (bowing down) means sincere submission to Allah. This
meaning may be appropriate for some occasions. But if you say that
bowing down in prayer, which is definite and compulsory, carries the
same literal sense, learned men would scoff at you. You also tried to
exclude or ignore the verse's clear meaning. You gave a figurative
meaning to it, even though you know that the term describes a required
action of the ritual prayer, which is bowing down with our palms
reaching the two knees.

And this fact has been acknowledged by your prominent ulama’, as I have
stated earlier. Fazil Qushachi, in his Sharhe Tajrid, explains the views
of the commentators in general that ‘Ali, while bowing down in prayer,
gave the ring to the beggar. Leaving all things aside, please tell us
whether this verse was revealed in praise or in condemnation?

Sheikh: Obviously it was in praise.

Well-Wisher: So when the ulama’ of both sects have said that this verse
was revealed in praise of ‘Ali, and that it contains the commendation
Allah, why would you make frivolous objections, agreeing with the
fanatical Kharijis, whose views have been thrust into your pure mind
from childhood? Why don't you acknowledge this fact?

Sheikh: Excuse me! Since you are an eloquent speaker, you often use
allusions and references which may create in uninformed minds ideas that
may produce unhappy results. It would be better if you refrained from
such talk.

Well-Wisher: In my talk there is nothing but reality. Allah be my
witness, I never intended to use allusions or indirect references. There
is no need for that. Whatever I wish to say, I say clearly. Please tell
me what allusion you mean.

Sheikh: A short while ago during your talk in connection with the verse
under consideration, you said that the attributes mentioned therein are
peculiar to ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, who, from the beginning to the end of
his life, had never any doubt in his faith. In this way you imply that
others were guilty of apostasy. Had the great caliphs or the companions
any doubt in their faith? Assuredly the companions, like ‘Ali, never
doubted the truth of Islam. Never for a moment did they deviate from the
Prophet's teaching.

Well-Wisher: First, I never used the words you just used. Second, you
know that to prove something for someone does not disprove the same
thing for someone else. Third, although you are trying to criticize me,
I think others have no such thing in mind. Allah be my witness, I have
not made any indirect reference to anything, nor have I thought of doing
so. And if anything occurred to your mind, you might have asked me about
it privately.

Sheikh: The manner of your talking shows that there is some point on
which you are silent. I ask you to let us know what you have in mind and
to give authentic references for what you say.

Well-Wisher: It is you who have created such things in our minds; you
insist that the issue be discussed. Again, I ask you to ignore this
matter and not insist on it.

Sheikh: If there was anything unmannerly, it is finished. Now you have
no choice but to reply. If you will not give a clear reply, either in
the affirmative or in the negative, then I will be obliged to conclude
that what you said was baseless.

Well-Wisher: There is nothing unmannerly in my remarks, but since you
insist, I have no choice but to reveal the truth. Your great ulama’
agree that the Prophet's companions whose faith was not yet perfect
often entertained doubts. Some of them maintained that doubt and
apostasy. Some verses of the Holy Qur'an were revealed in their
condemnation.

For instance, there were the munafiqin (hypocrites) in whose
condemnation a full chapter of the Holy Qur'an was revealed. But such
questions should not be discussed openly. I again ask you to refrain
from pursuing this topic.

Sheikh: You mean that the great caliphs were among those who had doubts.

Well-Wisher: If my reply causes an unfortunate reaction among uninformed
people, you are responsible. You have just said, "You say this or you
say that." But again, it is your own ulama’ who have recorded these
facts.

Sheikh: On which topic have they written, and on what occasion did
caliphs express their doubt, and who were the persons who doubted?
Please let us know.

Well-Wisher: Many people had serous doubts but returned to their
original faith. Some of them persisted in their doubt. Ibn Maghazili
Shafi'i, in his Manaqib, and Hafiz Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Abi Nasr
Hamidi in his Jam' Bainu's-Sahihain al-Bukhari, and Muslim write: "‘Umar
Ibn Khattab said, 'I never doubted the prophethood of Muhammad as I did
on the day of Hudaibiyya.'" This statement shows that he doubted
Muhammad's prophethood more than once.

Nawab: Excuse me. What was the occasion in Hudaibiyya which prompted
doubt about the Prophet?

Well-Wisher: The Prophet saw one night in a dream that he went to Mecca
with his companions to perform the Umra. Next morning, when he related
the dream to his companions, they asked him to interpret it. The Prophet
said, "Allah willing, we shall go to Mecca and fulfill this
performance."

But he did not specify the time for it. With the intention of visiting
the House of Allah, the Prophet set out with his companions toward Mecca
the same year. When they reached Hudaibiyya (a well near Mecca), the
Quraish came there and prevented them from moving forward.

Since the Prophet had not gone there prepared to fight, he offered to
make peace with them. A treaty was signed and the Prophet returned to
Medina. On this occasion, ‘Umar had doubts. He went to the Prophet and
said: "Are you not the Prophet of Allah and a truthful man? Did you not
tell us that you would go to Mecca and perform the Umra and have your
head shaved and beard trimmed? Why have you now failed to do this?"

The Holy Prophet asked him whether he had fixed the time for that or if
he had told them that he would go there in the same year. ‘Umar admitted
that the Prophet had not specified a time. The Prophet said that what he
had told them was correct and, Allah willing, they would go to Mecca in
the future and the dream would be realized.

Of course the time for the fulfillment of the interpretation, be it
sooner or later, depends upon Allah's will. Then for confirmation of the
statement of the Holy Prophet, Gabriel appeared and revealed the
following verse of the Qur'an:

***"Indeed Allah has fulfilled for His prophet the vision with truth
(that) certainly you will enter the sacred Mosque, if Allah pleases, in
security, with shaved head, (some) with their hair shortened, without
fear; for He knew you knew not and He had ordained besides this a near
victory." (48:27).***

Victory, here, means the conquest of Khaibar. This was, in short, the
event of Hudaibiyya, which was in fact a test for the faithful and for
the wavering people.

At this stage there followed a discussion of whether to continue the
discussions, in view of the schedule of the Sunni visitors from
Afghanistan as well as Well-Wisher, the outcome of which was a decision
to continue.


