Religiousness During The Occultation Of Imam Mahdi
==================================================

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

"O Ali know that the most strangest of the people of Imaan and the
greatest of them in certainty are those people who will be in
Aakheruzzamaan (the last period of time). They will not meet the
Prophet. And their Imam will be hidden from them. But they will believe
(only) due to black upon white."[^1]

The "black upon white" means the writings on paper. It means that these
people will believe in the Quran and the sunnat as recorded in the
books, even though they may not see their Imam (as).

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) said:

"Certainty, the master of this affair has an occupation. Then those who
are the pious servants of Allah, will hold firmly to their faith".[^2]

Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) said:

"Blessed are our followers (the shiites) who during the time of
occupation (Ghaybah) of the Imam of the Age, identify themselves with
our Authority (wilayah) and keep away from our enemies. They belong to
us and we belong to them. They have accepted our leadership and we are
pleased with their adherence. Therefore, blessed are they. I swear to
Allah that they will be with us in our rank in Paradise".[^3]

It is related from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) that the following dua must
be recited during the time of ghaibat.

"O Allah ! O Beneficient ! O Merciful ! O the knower of the thoughts (of
the hearts) ! make my heart firm upon your religion."[^4]

Longing For Imam Mahdi (aj)
---------------------------

Hazrat Imam Hasan al-Askari (as) said, regarding his son Imam Mahdi
(aj):

"And know that! Those who are obedient and pious will rush towards him
like the birds head for their nests."[^5]

Sorrow And Grief Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
-----------------------------------

Imam Ridhaâ€™ (as) said:

"The most pious of believing men and women are those who are sorrowful
for the (time of) flowing water (Imam Mahdi- aj)"

Flowing water indicates that it is a part of the ayat:

***"Say! Have you considered if your water should go down, who is if
then that will bring you flowing water?" (Sura Al Mulk, 67:30)***

According to Imam as-Sadiq (as) "the flowing water" in this Ayat means
Hazrat Mahdi (aj). Hence the exegesis of this Ayat is as follows:

"Say, if your Imam (as) goes into ghaibat, who is it that will bring
back your Imam to you. Who, like a gushing spring will teach you what is
haraam and what is halal, and quench you thirst with good tidings (news)
of the sky and the earth."[^6]

Weeping For Imam Mahdi (aj)
---------------------------

Imam Jafar as Sadiq (as) said:

"Know him ! The one who would be hidden from you in your time until it
would be said, He is dead! He is killed ! He has gone into wilderness.
And the eyes of the believers will be tearful."[^7]

Praying For The Early Reappearance Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
-----------------------------------------------------

Imam Hasan al-Askari (as) said,

"By Allah they do not truly wish for his reappearance, and do not attain
salvation. Except those, whom Allah the

High and the Mighty, has made firm upon the sayings of their Imams, and
gave them the tawfeeq (opportunity) to pray for the hastening of the
reappearance."[^8]

Imam Mahdi (aj) says:

"And pray more for an early reappearance. For certainly, in it, is your
success."[^9]

[^1]: Kamaaluddin vol.1 Pg.288

[^2]: Al Kafi vol.1 Pg.335 and 336, Ghaibat al-Toosi Pg.455. Ghaibat-
e-Nomani Pg.169

[^3]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.361. Kifayatul Asar Pg.265-266

[^4]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.352

[^5]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.448

[^6]: Refer Kamaaluddin Pg.325-326.

[^7]: Ghaibat al-Nomani Pg.152. 153

[^8]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.384

[^9]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.485, Ghaibat al-Toosi pg.292-293


