Advent Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
=========================

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

"Even if a single day remains for quiyamat, Allah will send a man from
my Ahlul'Bayt. He will fill the earth with justice just like it is
filled with tyranny."[^1]

Dibil Ibne Ali al-Khuzai says:

When I was reciting the Qasida (Panegeric) before my master, Ridha’
(as), I reached to the following lines:

*" I hope in the advent of my Imam. Who will rise up with the name of
Allah and the divine blessings will accompany him.*

*He will separate the truth from falsehood (for us) and he will reward
and punish."*

Imam (as) said to me:

"O Khuzaee! Ruhul Qudus (the angel) has made you recite these two
couplets. Do you know who this Imam is? One who will rise?"

I replied,

"No my master, I only know that one of you, Imams will rise up and clear
the earth of all injustise and fill it will equity."

Imam Ridha’ (as) said,

"O Dibil after me my son Muhammad shall be the Imam and after him his
son Ali, and after him his son Hasan al Askari, and after him his son
Al-Qaim who shall be the awaited one during the period of his ghaibat.
And when he shall be revealed, all the world shall bow down to him. Even
if a single day remains for this world, Allah the High and the Mighty
shall prolong this day till he will appear and fill the earth with
justice as it has been filled with tyranny. And who knows when it will
come to pass! I have heard it from my father, (who had heard it) from
his father, and they had heard it from the Messenger of Allah (S) when
he was asked, "O Prophet of Allah (S) when will the Qaem of your progeny
arise?

He (S) had replied,

***"His likeness is to the Hour (Quiyamat), '.....none but He shall
manifest it at its time; it will be momentous in the heavens and the
earth; it will not come on you but of a sudden'." (Sura Araf
7:187)***[^2]

Universal Government Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
---------------------------------------

Holy Prophet (S) said, "My Caliphs are my legatees and the proofs of
Allah upon the creatures, after me they are twelve. The first of them is
my brother and the last of them is my (grand) son"

He was asked, "O Prophet of Allah, which brother of yours" He replied,
"Ali Ibn Abu Talib"

Again he was asked, "And which Son?"

He said, "Al Mahdi is the one who will fill the earth with justice and
equity just like it had been filled with injustice and tyranny. I swear
by the one who has sent me as the giver of good tidings, even is a
single day remains for the world (to end), Allah shall prolong that day
till he sends (to it) my son Mahdi. Then Ruhullah (spirit) Isa ibne
Maryam will descend and perform prayers behind him. The earth shall be
illuminated by his radiance and his authority shall stretch from the
east to the west."[^3]

Merits of the Rule of Imam Mahdi (aj)
-------------------------------------

Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said,

"He will direct desires towards (the path of) guidance while people will
have turned guidance towards desires, and he will turn their views to
the direction of the Quran while the people will have turned the Quran
to their views."[^4]

According to the submission of Ibne Abil Hadid, this saying refers to
Hazrat Mahdi (aj)[^5]

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) said,

"When the Qaem shall arise, he will rule with justice, the tyrants of
his time shall fear him, the righteous will be safe, the earth shall
reveal its treasures, all the truth- seekers will seek his company and
no follower of any religion would remain except that they see Islam and
declare their faith in it."[^6]

Imam Ridha’ (as) said,

"The fourth of my descendants is the son of the chaste maid. Allah shall
purify the earth from every atrocity through him and rid it of every
injustice. He is the one whose birth shall be doubted. He will have an
occupation before his reappearance. When he reappears, the earth will
light up with his brilliance. And he will establish the scales of
justice among the people. Then, (among men), one will not oppress the
other."[^7]

[^1]: Sunan Abu Dawood vol.4 Pg.107

[^2]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.372-373, Faraidus Simtain vol.2. Pg.337- 338.
Al Fusool al Mohimma Pg. 250-251.

[^3]: Faraidus Simtam vol.2 Pg.312

[^4]: Nahjut Balagha, sermon no, 138

[^5]: Sharhe Nafyul Balagha vol.9. Pg.40

[^6]: Kashful Ghumma vol.3. Pg.255

[^7]: Faraidus Simtain vol.2. Pg.336


