A Short Biography of Imam Mahdi (aj)
====================================

Hazrat Imam Mahdi (aj) is the twelfth and last of the chain of the
Purified Imams (as) and the divine successors. He was born at the time
of dawn, on Friday the 15th of Shaban 255 A.H. in the city of
Samarrah[^1].

His respected father is Imam Hasan al-Askari (as). His beloved mother is
Janab al-Nargis Khatoon (ra). She was the descendant of the Caesar of
Rome from her father's side and from her mother's side she had descended
from shamoon the vicegerant of Hazrat Isa (as).[^2]

This exalted personality has the same name and kunniyat (agnomen) as the
Holy Prophet (S). His titles are Mahdi, Hujjat, Qaem, Montazer,
Sahibuzzaman and Khalaf al-saleh. His most famous honourific however is
Al-Mahdi (aj).[^3]

Ibn Khallikaan writes; "His well-known title is Hujjat. The shias know
him by the titles, Montazar, Qaem and Mahdi"[^4]

The great scholar Mohaddith al-Noori has collected 182 titles of Imam
Mahdi (aj) from the Islamic texts. Each of these titles signify each of
his virtuous qualities.[^5]

The tyrant Abbasid rulers were aware of the prophecies of the Holy
Prophet (S). That the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari (as) by the name of
Mahdi will appear to remove all kinds of corruption and tyranny; hence
they planned to eliminate the child when he is bom. Due to this the
birth of Imam Mahdi (aj) was kept a secret like that of Hazrat Ibrahim
(as). So much so that except for the most trusted of the shias and his
own family, no one knew of the existence of Hazrat (as). In spite of
this whenever there was an opportunity, Imam Hasan al-Askari (as) showed
his son to his trustworthy followers; that in future they may follow
him. This was in order that the shias may remain firm upon the right
path, and not be led astray. A servant Abu Ghanim says:

"Abu Muhammad (as) has a son whose name is Muhammad." On the third day
of his birth he brought him before his companions and said:

"After me he is your Master of the affair, he is my successor, he is the
same 'Qaem', who is awaited by alt When the earth will be fraught with
injustice and oppression then he will reappear and fill the earth with
justice and righteousness."[^6]

The early years of his life were spent in the usual way. When he was in
his fifth year, he lost his respected father.[^7]

After this tragic event the responsibility of guiding the shias was
transferred upon him. At this time, Hazrat (as) possessed all the
qualities and the divine knowledge that was bestowed upon the previous
Imams (as), by the Almighty. In the same way as Hazrat Yahya (as) in his
childhood and Hazrat Isa (as) in his infancy was favoured with the
divine office of Prophethood by Allah.[^8]

Although all the Imams (as) were holding the divine office of wilayat,
the efforts of the enemies to eliminate the twelfth Imam (as) were
maximum. Hence Imam az-Zaman (as) was entrusted to ghaibat and being
away from the sight of people, he had to fulfill all the duties of an
Imam.

It is said that the concealed life of Hazrat Mahdi (aj) is not something
extraordinary. Rather, in the life of so many Prophets (as) and even
Imams (as) it is seen, that they were at some time, in concealment from
the people. The Holy Quran records the concealment of various prophets
(as) like Hazrat Ibrahim (as)[^9], Hazrat Musa (as)[^10] and Hazrat Isa
(as)[^11].

The Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams (as) had pointed out to the people
the imminent occultation of their last proof (Imam Mahdi-aj), so that no
doubt or misunderstanding should remain, regarding this problem.

The occultation (Ghaibat) of the twelfth Imam consists of two phases:
one is Ghaibat al-Sughra (The lesser occultation) and the second is
Ghaibat al-Kubra (The greater occultation). Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (as)
said:

'There are two occultations for Qaem. One is short and the other
prolonged. In the short occultation only the special shias will know of
his whereabouts. And in the longer occultation only his trustworthy
servants will know where he is"[^12]

According to the well-known reports, the lesser occultation (ghaibat
al-sugra) commenced from the year of his Imamat in 260 A.H and continued
for 69 years. Some of the scholars like Shaykh Mufeed and Syed Mohsin
Amin Amili maintain that ghaibat al-sugra began right from the time of
his birth.[^13]

Because, even in those early years, Hazrat (aj) was concealed from the
common people. According to this method, the period of ghaibat al-sugra
comes to seventy four years.

During the period of ghaibat al-sugra. Imam Mahdi (aj) himself appointed
his deputies from among the righteous shias. Four of them succeeded each
other and continued to fulfill the duty of intermediaries. These four
personalities conveyed the questions and problems to Imam (aj) and
brought back the Imam's (aj) answers for the people. The first of these
deputies was Janab Abu Amroo Usman Bin Saeed Amri. Before this he was a
representative of Imam Hasan al Askari (as)[^14]

Shaykh Tusi writes: “On the fortieth day the shias were sitting in the
company of Imam Hasan al-Askari (as), when Imam Askari (as) wished that
they recognise his Hujyat after him..... Suddenly a handsome child was
brought before them. He resembled Abu Muhammad (as).

Then Imam al-Askari (as) said: "He is your Imam after me. And my
successor upon you. Obey him, and do not go astray after me (after my
death), otherwise your religion shall be destroyed and you will be
annihilated. Know that, after today you shall not see him, even if you
spend your whole life for it. Hence, accept what Usman tells you, obey
his commands and listen to what he says. Because he is the
representative of your Imam and holds the responsibility.[^15]

After the death of Usman bin Saeed, his pious son, Muhammad bin Usman
succeeded his father upon the post of the deputyship of Imam az-Zaman
(aj).[^16]

Shaikh Tusi has recorded the letters sent by Imam Hasan al Askari (as)
and Imam Mahdi (aj) to Usman bin Saeed and his son Abu Jafar Muhammad
ibne Usman for the shias. These letters consists of commands,
prohibitions and replies to the questions of the shias.[^17]

Muhammad ibne Usman passed away from this world at the end of
Jamadi-ul-Awwal in the year 304 or 305 A.H.[^18]

During the time of his illness, as he laid on the sick-bed, the shias
and their children came and surrounded him. They asked: "If something
happens, whom should we consult instead of you?" He answered, "This Abul
Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh ibne Bahr Nawbakhti is successor. And he is the
intermediary between you and the Master affair (Imam Mahdi- aj), and his
agent. He is trustworthy and reliable. Consult him, and in case of
important matters, rely upon him. I have been ordered to announce this,
and I have announced it"[^19]

Husain Ibn Ruh Nawbakhti was. one of the agents of Muhammad ibn Usman in
Baghdad. He had been working closely with him for a long time. These
agents used to be in contact with the people and when ordered they
handed over the goods to them[^20]. Husayn ibn Ruh died in Shaban 326
A.H[^21]

The last safir was Abul Hasan Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymoori. He became the
deputy of Imam Mahdi (aj) according to the will of Husain ibn Ruh. He
died after three years on the 15th of Shaban 329 A.H.[^22]

The graves (tombs) of these four respected deputies (Nawwab al -Arba, as
they are commonly known) are situated in Baghdad.[^23]

The most sensitive and crucial period of ghaibat al-sugra was when Ali
Ibn Mohammad died. Because till his death the people were is contact
with Imam az-Zaman (aj) through him. After his death, it was the
commencement of Ghaibat al-Kubra.

Six days before his death, Ali ibn Muhammad Seymoori received a
communication from Imam az-Zaman (aj):

"...so be prepared, but appoint no one in your place, because from the
day of your death, the period of my major occupation (Gaibatui Kubra)
will begin. Henceforth, no one will see me, unless and until Allah makes
me appear. My reappearance will take place after a very long time, when
the world will be full of injustice and violence".[^24]

Ultimately, the shining sun of the divine proof went behind the curtain
of Ghaibat, completely. And the period of communication with Hazrat
(through Nawab al-Arba) came to an end. In spite of this (his Ghaibat)
Hazrat Mahdi (aj) is the Imam of the time and Imam of the world. He is
the Divine Proof. Even though his person may be hidden from our eyes but
his commands are clear.

Amirul Momineen Ali (as) announced from his pulpit at Kufa: "Even if the
person of the Divine Proof is hidden while he guides the people, his
knowledge and manners will be clear for them to follow"[^25]

It is clear that the knowledge and practice of Imam Asr (as) is
impeccable like the Quran. As was the sunnat of the Holy Prophet (S). It
is obligatory for the people of faith (muslims) to act upon the Quran
and sunnat, and to refrain from what they prohibit. The Holy Prophet (S)
said:

"I leave behind two weighty things among you: The Book of Allah and my
Progeny, my Ahlul Bayt If you adhere to those two you shall not go
astray. And know that these two shall not separate till they meet me at
Hauz (Kauthar)"[^26]

During the period of Ghaibat al-Kubra, when it is not possible to
establish communication with Imam az-Zaman (as) at will, the people have
been ordered to follow the true teachings of the Quran and Ahlul Bayt
(as) through the pious and religious scholars and the just jurists. The
people must follow them to know what obligations they are supposed to
fulfill.

Imam as-Sadiq (as):

"And among jurists (Fuqaha) are those who protect their selves (from
sins) guard their religion, defy their carnal desires and are obedient
to their master. It is incumbent upon the people to follow them. Such
characteristics are found only in a few of them (Shias) and not
all"[^27].

The jurists issue decrees for the people and explain to them truth about
faith. They endeavour to fulfill the exalted duty of preparing the
grounds for the reappearance of their master, Hazrat Mahdi (aj). So that
by the coming of Hazrat (as) the Islamic faith may strengthen and that
he may fill the earth with justice and equity.

[^1]: Kamaaluddin vol. 2, Pg. 428, 433 424,430.

[^2]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg. 420,424.

[^3]: Al Fusoolul Muhimma Pg.292, Nurul Absaar Pg. 168.

[^4]: Wafayatui Ayaan vol.4 Pg 176.

[^5]: Najm-us-saaqib Pg. 41-98.

[^6]: Kamaaluddin Vol. 2 Pg. 431.

[^7]: Al Kaft Vol. 1 pg. 503.

[^8]: Quran: Sura Maryam, Ayat 12 and 30.

[^9]: Sura Maryam: 48-49.

[^10]: Sura Qasas: 21-22.

[^11]: Sura Nisa: 157.

[^12]: Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg.340; Ghaibat Nomani Pg. 180.

[^13]: Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg. 340. Ayan ush shia Vol. 2 Pg. 46.

[^14]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 353

[^15]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 357.

[^16]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 362.

[^17]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 356.

[^18]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg.366.

[^19]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 371-372.

[^20]: Gaibat al-Tusi Pg. 369/372.

[^21]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 387.

[^22]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg. 394.

[^23]: Ghaibat al-Tusi Pgs. 358, 366. 376, 396.

[^24]: Kamaaluddin Vol.2 Pg.516; Ghaibat al-Tusi Pg.395.

[^25]: Kamaaluddin vol. I Pg.302.

[^26]: Yanabiul Mawaddah Pg. 35.

[^27]: Tafsir Al Imam Pg. 300.


