Similarity Of Imam Mahdi To The Prophets
========================================

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

"Al Mahdi is from my progeny. His name is the same as my name. And his
kunniyat is the same as my kunniyat. In his physique and character he
looks exactly like me. He will be in a state of occultation and there
will be confusion (Hayra) in which people will wander about (deviate).
Then he will come forth like a sharpy shooting star to fill the earth
will justice and equity as it was filled before with injustice and
inequity." [^1]

Imam Muhammad Al Baqir (as) said,

"Certainly in the Qaem of the Progeny of Muhammad (S.A. W.S.) is the
similarity to five prophets, Yunus bin Mutah, and Yusuf bin Yaqoob, and
Musa, and Isa and Muhammad, salawatullahe Alaihim"

Thus, his similarity to Yunus bin Mutha is his reappearance after
Ghaibat. He looked like a young man inspite of his advanced age. And,
his similarity with Yusuf bin Yaqoob (as) is his ghaibat when he was
away from the sight of the general, as well as the special people; due
to the fear of his brothers.

His affair was hidden from his father. And in such a condition when
there was no distance between his father and family and his friends. And
his similarity with Musa (as) is persistent fear, and his prolonged
ghaibat and a secret birth, and the feverent pleas of his shias after
him, and his return by the permission of Allah, and his assistance by
the people in subduing of the enemy.

And his similarity to Isa (as) is the controversy among the people with
regard to him. A group of them says; 'He is not yet bom.' Another group
says, "He is dead‚Äù and some say: "He was killed and crucified,"

And his similarity with his own grandfather, Mustafa (S), is his advent
with the sword. He shall slay the enemies of Allah and the Holy Prophet
(S), and the unjust, and the tyrants."[^2]

Imam as-Sajyad (as) said,

"In the Qaem is a similarity to Nuh (as) and that is his long life."[^3]

[^1]: Kamaaluddin Vol.1 Pg.286. Faraidus Simtain Vol.2 Pg.335

[^2]: Kamaaluddin Vol.1 Pg.327.

[^3]: Kamaaluddin Vol.1, Pg.322. & Vol.2. Pg.524.


