Reasons For The Occultation Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
==============================================

1. Free From Allegience Of Every Tyrant
---------------------------------------

Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said,

"Certainly', when the Qaem from among us shall arise, he will not have
the allegiance of any one upon his neck. It is for this reason that his
birth is secret and his person is in Ghaibat."[^1]

It must be mentioned that all of our Imams had to pledge allegience to
every tyrant ruler except for a short period during the rule of Umar
ibne Abdul Aziz. This was because, on the face of it, it would seem that
they are not against the ruler, In this way they could protect Islam. In
the absence of popular support, the Imams were left alone and thus they
entered into an understanding with the rulers. Thus even Imam Husain
(as) for a particular period did not find it necessary to revolt against
the regime of Muawiya.

In this regard Hazrat Mahdi (aj) says:

"Verily each of my ancestors had the oath of allegience, upon their
necks, of their contemporary tyrant rulers. But I will reappear at such
a time that I will not have any tyrant's allegience upon my neck."[^2]

2. Test Of The People
---------------------

Imam al Kazim (as) said,

"My son! When the fifth descendant of the seventh of the Imams is not
visible to you ! It is when Allah will test your belief. Ghaibat is
inevitable for the Master of this affair.

Till the time when the religion is completely transformed, and only a
few people will have belief in him. My son! That Ghaibat, It is a trial
through which Allah, the Almighty tests His servants."[^3]

3. Fear Of The Enemy
--------------------

Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) said,

"The Qaem is the one who will purify the earth from the enemies of
Allah, the High and the Mighty. And he will fill the earth will justice
and equity just as it is filled with injustice and tyranny. He is the
fifth of my descendants. He will go into occultation due to the fear of
his own (life)."[^4]

According to common sense it is necessary for man not to throw away his
precious life without a legitimate aim. Thus, the prophets (as) and the
Imams (as) have taught the people that it is their duty to protect their
life under every circumstance and should never put their life in danger.
Therefore it is the duty of the last of these exalted personalities to
protect himself till the time of his reappearance when he will establish
the new world order.

4. Weakness And Lack Of Co-operation Of The People
--------------------------------------------------

Imam Mahdi (aj) said.

"If our shias; may Allah help them in His obedience; would have
fulfilled their covenant with united hearts then there would have. been
no delay in our meeting, and they would have been blessed with our
visitation at the earliest, along with the recognition of truth and
confirmation of our rights."[^5]

[^1]: Kamaaluddin Vol.1. Pg.303

[^2]: Ghaibat Tusi Pg.292, Kamaaluddin VoL2. Pg.485.

[^3]: Ghaibat al-Toosi Pg.166 & 337. Al Kafi vol.1 Pg.336. Kamaaluddin
vol.2 Pg.359 and 360. Kifayatul Asar Pg.264-265.

[^4]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.361. Kifayatul Asar Pg.265-266.

[^5]: Al Ihtejaj vol.2 Pg.602.


