Benefits Of Imam Mahdi (aj) During His Ghaibat
==============================================

Imam Mahdi (aj) said,

"As for deriving benefit from me in my occupation, (it) is like deriving
benefit from the sun when it hides behind the clouds."[^1]

Favours Of Imam Mahdi (aj) Upon His Shias
-----------------------------------------

Imam Mahdi (aj) says,

"Surely, we do not neglect your condition nor are we forgetful of your
remembrance. Had it not been so, then, terrible calamities would have
struck you and your enemies would have destroyed you."[^2]

Awaiting For The Reappearance Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

"The best worship is to await for the reappearance."[^3]

Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said,

"Await for the reappearance and do not despair of the divine mercy.
Because the best deed in the eyes of Allah, the Great and the Mighty is
to wait for the Reappearance. It is the duty of those who are
believers."[^4]

Imam as-Sajjad (as) said.

"The greatest success is to wait for the reappearance"[^5]

Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) said,

"Those of you who die on this affair (shia faith) while you are in a
condition of awaiting, are like those who has served the Qaem (as) in
his tent."[^6]

Imam Al-Jawad (as) said,

"Certainly the Qaem from among us is the Mahdi. Awaiting for whom is
obligatory during (his) ghaibat and obeying him is obligatory after his
reappearance. And he is the third of my descendants."[^7]

Imam as Sadiq (as) said,

"One who desires to be among the companions of the Qaem, must await,
adopt piety and behave courteously. If he dies in such a condition
before the advent of Qaem, then his reward will be similar to the one
who attains his era. Hence, congratulations to you all for your
relentless awaiting."[^8]

Be Prepared For Being Among The Helpers Of Imam Mahdi
-----------------------------------------------------

***"O You who believe! be patient and excel in patience and remain
steadfast and be careful of (your duty to ) Allah, that you may be
successful". (Surah Ali Imran, 3: 200)***

Hazrat Imam Baqir (as) explains the tafseer of this ayat :

"Have patience in fulfilling the religious obligations, Excel in
patience in facing your enemies. And be in contact with your Imam who is
awaited".[^9]

In Service Of Imam Mahdi (aj)
-----------------------------

Imam Jafar as Sadiq (as) said,

"If I am able to reach him, I shall serve him for my whole life."[^10]

[^1]: Kamaaluddin vol.2 Pg.485. Ghaibat al-Toosi Pg.292.

[^2]: Al Ihtejaj vol.2 Pg.598.

[^3]: Kamaaluddin vol.1 Pg.287, Faraidus Simtain vol.2 Pg.335

[^4]: Al Khisaal vol.2 Pg.616

[^5]: Al Ihtejaj vol.2 Pg.154. Kamaaluddin vol.1 Pg.320

[^6]: Ghaibat al-Nomani Pg.200

[^7]: Kamaaluddin, vol.2 Pg.377

[^8]: Ghaibat al-Nomani Pg.200.

[^9]: Ghaibat al-Nomani. pg.27, Yanabiul Mawadda pg.421

[^10]: Ghaibat al-Nomani Pg.245


