Introduction
============

BISM - ILLAH - IR - RAHMAN - IR - RAHEEM (In the name of God, the most
Compassionate, the Merciful)

AL- HAMDU L'ILLAH (All praise be to God) Call unto the way of your Lord
with wisdom and good exhortation, and reason with them in the best way.
Lo! your Lord best knows those . who go astray from His path, and He
knows best those who are rightly guided. (Qur'an, 16:125)

It was about two years ago that I received a long letter from an Iraqi
student in Egypt. Briefly speaking, the writer of the letter had had an
exchange of views with some eminent scholars of al-Azhar. Perhaps they
talked about Najaf al-Ashraf, the scholars of that seat of learning and
their ways of studies and also about those devoted to the spiritual
atmosphere at the mausoleum of Hazrat Ali (a.s.).

There is no doubt, of course, that the educated class of Cairo are all
praise for the great seat of learning at Najaf and are also well
impressed with the intellectual advancement of its scholars. In spite of
all this they do not refrain from saying: "Oh! What a pity! They are
Shi'as."

The writer of the letter says that he was very astonished and often
used to plead with them, "Gentlemen! The Shi'as are a Muslim sect and a
part of the Muslim community." But their reply was, "No, Sir! The Shi'as
are not Muslims. What has Shi'ism to do with Islam? It is wrong to count
it as a sect among the sects and a religion among the religions of the
world; it was a plan devised by the Iranians and a political stunt to
overthrow the Umayyad rule and bring about the 'Abbasid Caliphate. What
has it to do with the ways prescribed by God?"

After this, this young man writes. "Respected Sir, at present I am
young and have no knowledge of religions. I know neither the philosophy
of religious growth, nor do I know the history of its flourishing.
Consequently I have entertained some doubts."

After writing these words this student of the great college at Cairo
desired that I should unveil the truth and rid him of that mental worry.
In this connection he also wrote that if his request proved futile and
he was misled from the right path, I would stand responsible for that.

Accordingly I considered the reply necessary and wrote to him in a
letter answering him according to his intelligence. I must admit,
however, that my own worries were more than the doubts of this youth.

I thought to myself: how is it credible that a cultured country like
Egypt - the cradle of Islamic learning, the centre of the Arabs, nay, of
all the Muslims in such a state of ignorance and hostility among its
intelligentsia! It was by chance that a book entitled "Farjru 'l-Islam"
by the famous writer Ahmad Amin reached my hands. I started wading it
but. when I reached the place where he wrote about the Shi'as, I felt
that the learned author was not writing a book but building castles in
the air. During the present age, even if a man from the distant regions
of China had written such irresponsible things, he could not be easily
forgiven.

Anyhow, I now felt satisfied that all that the Iraqi student had
written was quite correct and instantly it struck me that if the people
used to writing like Ahmad Amin have such a mentality, what can be the
condition of the illiterate or half-literate masses; according to the
spirit of the times, however, every Muslim of today supports unity and
brotherhood among the Muslims and also believes that without such unity
our life as well as death will be without meaning.

In truth, if our Muslim brothers were of the reality of the Shi'a
religion and also proved to be just, such literature which lays the
foundation of mutual enmity and satisfies the cravings of the
Imperialist and irreligious forces would be done away with.

Let us study this passage of "Fajru 'l-Islam" and consider its
repercussions:

"The truth is that Shi'aism was the refuge of the destroyers of Islam."
p. 330.

The writer is not innocent. He knew that the pen of the critics would
pursue him and also knew that his aggressive tendency would injure the
feelings of a nation which comprises tens of millions of people and is a
very great power in the Islamic world.

It was thus quite a surprising event when last year (1349 A.H.), a
cultural delegation from Egypt, comprising thirty members, came here and
included Ahmad Amin himself. All the members of the delegation came to
my residence. It was the month of Ramadan, night time, and the gathering
was large. No sooner had I seen Ahmad Amin than "Fajru 'l-Islam" came to
my mind, since this book had already been seen by a number of our
scholars.

We raised objections, but with respect, in a very mild and soft tone,
so that it might not hurt his feelings. On this occasion the strongest
explanation that Ahmad Amin offered was a lack of information and a
dearth of books. To this we said, "Sir, when someone starts writing on
some topic, he first gathers relevant material and then he fully
examines the matter, otherwise the writer has no right to touch upon the
topic at all."

Consider the libraries of the Shi'as. Row well stocked they are!
Examine our own library. It contains about five thousand volumes and
most of the books are written by Sunnis: this is the collection of books
in a small city like Najaf; strange how Egypt with its many large
libraries is devoid of Shi'a literature!

Of course, these people know nothing about the Shi'as, but never
hesitate in writing anything about them that they wish.

It is even stranger that the fellow Sunni brothers of Iraq living in
our neighborhood are unaware of the Shi'as! Only a few months ago a
promising Shi'a boy of Baghdad wrote in a letter that recently he
happened to go to Dalyam (just adjacent to the Baghdad district). Most
of the people there are Sunnis. The correspondent became intimate with
them and attended their assemblies. Since the people of Dalyam were
unusually impressed by the excellent behaviour and high morals of the
stranger, they warmly welcomed him. But when they came to know that the
person in whom they were taking so much interest was a Shi'a, their
wonder had no bounds. "We were under the impression that the people of
this sect were deprived of even the smallest light of civilisation and
culture - quite wild, totally savage!" Such were their whims and
speculations.

At the end of the letter this young boy appealed to my conscience that,
through the endeavours of my pen, I should remove the misunderstanding
in the minds of such people and introduce a true picture of Shi'aism.

After some time the same youth went to Syria to spend the summer there.
From there he went to Egypt.

From Cairo he wrote another letter, telling me that the condition of
Egypt was not different from that of Dalyam.

He wrote: "Here also the same views about the Shi'as are common. So, it
is requested that you may perform your duty of informing them of the
truth. Believe me, the views that the common people of Islam have formed
about the Shi'as are intolerably obnoxious."

And this is not all. The false imputations, which are being
continuously published in the journals of Egypt, Syria, etc. are no less
grievous; those under attack are as innocent as Joseph, but
unfortunately ignorance and fanaticism have no remedy.

However, silence in the face of transgression is synonymous with the
acceptance of injustice, so I had an obligation to speak out. But it
should be made clear that I do not wish to reply to the slanderers of
the Shi'as but rather to remove that veil of ignorance from the eyes of
the rest of the Muslims so that the truth may be clearly visible to
them; moreover it may serve as the last word to the elements hostile to
Shi'as and as a true picture of Shi'aism. We hope it may also remove the
mutual discord among the Muslims, so that writers like Ahmad Amin may
never get another opportunity to indulge in destructive activities. The
author of "Fajru 'l-Islam" writes "The truth is that Shi'ism was the
refuge of those who wished to destroy Islam through enmity and baseless
talk, and it was the place of shelter for those who wanted to introduce
their ancestral teachings of Israelite, Christian and Zoroastrian
religions into Islam".

Again he writes: "Thus the faith in "raj'at" (the returning) is what
the Isra'elites believe in. The Shi'as believe, moreover, that the fire
(of hell) is "haram" (unlawful) for them.

The Israelites also say that the fire will not touch them except for a
few counted days.

"Christianity's influence appeared likewise in the way in which some of
the Shi'as have given the same relationship for the Imam to God as is
given for Christ to Him.

They also say that the Imam is the confluence of 'Lahut' and 'Nasut'
(where divinity and earthly beings meet). Also, according to their faith
the continuance of prophethood and risalat (messengership) is
unbreakable. They hold the view that he who is absorbed in 'Lahut' is a
prophet. Besides this, transmigration of souls, the physical body of God
and 'hulul' (God's entering another body), which are the old beliefs of
the Brahmins, philosophers and fireworshippers, appeared one by one in
the Shi'a religion . . . ."

For fear of destroying the unity of the Muslim community and inciting
hatred I will refrain from replying. Otherwise it would be quite easy to
show who those people were who introduced un-Islamic ways into Islam to
undermind and divide the Muslim community'.

Of course I should like to ask the author of 'Fajru 'l Islam":
Respected Sir, which was that group of Shi'as which had decided to
destroy Islam? Was it the first group, which includes the selected
companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), for instance. Salman Muhammadi,
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, al-Miqdad, 'Ammar, Khuzayma, Dhu sh Shahadatain,
Abu Tihan, Hudhayfah Yamani, az-Zubayr, al-Fadl ibn al-'Abbas and his
respectable brother 'Abdullah, Hashim ibn 'Utbah, al-Marqal, Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari, Aban and also his brother Khalid, the sons of Sa'id ibn
al-'As, Ibn Ka'b and Anas ibn al-Harith who had heard the Holy Prophet
saying: "My son Husayn (a.s.) will be martyred at the place known as
Karbala'. So any one of you, present at the time of that tragedy must go
to help him." Accordingly Anas drank the cup of martyrdom on the 10th of
Muharram, (see "al-Isabah fi ma'rifati' s-sahabah" and "al-Isti'ab fi
ma'rifati' s-sahabah". These two books on the lives of the Companions
are the most authentic compilations of the Sunni community.)

If we were to attempt to compile a list of the Shi'a companions and
begin to prove their Shi'ism, it would require a complete and
volumionous book. And the fact is that the noble efforts of the Shi'a
'ulema have made it unnecessary to do so: the brilliant masterpiece,
"ad-Darajat 'r rafi'h fi tabaqatu 'sh-Shi'a" written by Sayyid 'Ali Khan
(the author of "as-Salafah" and the standard dictionary "Tarazu
'l-Lughan" describes the eminent personalities of the Banu Hashim family
like Hamza and 'Aqil Sa'id Khudri, Qays ibn Sa'id ibn 'Ubadah, Burayda,
Bura' ibn Malik, Khabab ibn al-Irth, Refa'a ibn Malik, Amir ibn Wa'ila,
Hind ibn Abi Hala, Ju'da ibn Hubayra, Makhzumi and his mother Umm Hani
Bint Abi Talib and Bilal ibn Riyah the mu'adhdhin (caller to prayer)
etc.

But I believe that, from the books on the lives of the Sahaba like
"Isaba", "Asadu 'l-ghaba" and "Isti'ab" we have collected the names of
about three hundred distinguished companions and it is possible some
scholarly person may compile a longer list than this.

Were these persons desirous of ruining Islam? If the Imam of the
Shi'as, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), of whom the "Thaqalayn" (the book of
God and the Ahle Bayt) are the witnesses, had not used his sharp-edged
sword in the battles of "Badr" "Uhud", "Hunayn" and " Ahzab" Islam would
not have flourished or attained an imposing height. Abdu 'l-Hamid
Mu'tazali begins his poem of praise : "lla innama al-Islam law la
hisamahu…" (if his sword had not been there, Islam ...)

Yes, if "Zulfiqar" (Hazrat 'Ali's sword) had not been there, if the
lion of God had not taken the lead, as he did before and after the
hijrat, if there had been no sincere help from Hadrat Abu Talib the
illustrious father of 'Ali (a.s.) and if Hazrat 'Ali Murtada (a.s.) had
not offered extraordinary support in the holy lands of Mecca and Medina,
the rebellious group of the Quraysh and the blood-thirsty wolves of
Arabia would have nipped Islam in the bud.

Muslims pay little respect for Abu Talib's (a.s.) services in that they
do not seem prepared to call him a Muslim. On the contrary when they
talk of Abu Sufyan, the root cause of all the troubles of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) they are prompt in endowing him with Islam, although
everyone knows that he had very reluctantly and unwillingly aligned
himself with the Muslims. When Hazrat 'Uthman got the Caliphate, it was
Abu Sufyan, who cried out, "Sons of Umayyah! Just catch hold of the
caliphate as you would a ball. I swear by him by whom Abu Sufyan can
swear that there is neither heaven nor hell!"

In short, according to he verdict of the Sunni majority, Abu Sufyan is
a Muslim and as to Abu Talib the great supporter of Islam (whose beliefs
are apparent from these lines: "In my knowledge the religion of Muhammad
(s.a.w.) is the best of all religions in the world") he is labelled as a
non-Muslim! Was Abu Talib (a.s.) either so helpless or of such a weak
intellect that he knew that Muhammad's (s.a.w.) religion was the best of
all religions and did not follow it for fear of the people? It should be
clearly understood that he was at the center of all Mecca's forces and
strengths.

Now let us again examine the story of the subversion of Islam. Now were
these people (about whom we have just been talking) the persons who
subverted Islam, or it was the later group, which is known as the
"tabi'in" (the followers), in which are included Ahnaf ibn Qays, Suwayd
ibn Ghuflah, Atiyah, Ufi, Hakam ibn Atibah, salim ibn Abi Ju'd, 'Ali Abi
Ju'd, Hasan ibn Salah, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Sa'id ibn Musayab, Asbagh ibn
Nabatah, Sulayman ibn Mohran, and Yahya ibn Ya'mar 'Adwani'? After them
come the personalities of the "tab'inu 't-tabi'in" (the followers of the
followers) who laid the foundation of Islamic teachings such as Abu
'l-Aswad Du'ali, the originator of syntax, Khalil ibn Ahmad, the founder
of lexicography and the science of rhyme in poetry, Abu Muslim Ma'adh
ibn Muslim Al-Hira', the founder of grammar, whose Shi'ism has been
admitted even by Siyuti (Al-Muzhir, volume II) and as-Sakit Ya'qub ibn
Is'haq, the master of Arabic literature. Also, in the group of
commentators is the distinguished name of 'Abdullah ibne 'Abbas, who
tops the list and whose Shi'ism is beyond doubt. Next come the names of
Jabir ibn 'Abdullah al-Ansari, Abi' ibn Ka'b, Sa'id ibn Musayyab and
Muhammad ibn 'Umar Waqidi, who was the first to collect and arrange the
Qur'anic sciences. (Ibn Nadim and others have acknowIedged that they
were Shi'as. "ar-Raghib" is the name of the commentary of Waqidi).

Among those who laid the foundations of the teaching of "Hadith" is Abu
Rafi', who was the freed salve of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the
author of the book, "al-Ahkam wa 's-sunan wa 'l-qadaya". He had a
special relationship with Amir al-mu'minin (a.s.); during the caliphate
of the Holy Imam (a.s.) he was in charge of the Treasury at Kufa, his
sons also were both remarkable personalities. 'Ali ibn Rafi' was the
secretary of Amir al-Mu'minin (a..s.) He was the first person after his
father who began writing on "fiqh" (jurisprudence) and his brother,
'Abdullah ibn Rafi' took the lead in the writing of history and the
recording of events in the Muslim community.

Abu Hashim ibn Muhammad ibn Hanafiya was the first to write about the
nature of Islamic beliefs. Many fine books on this topic have been
written by him. We may examine also the works of 'Isa ibn Rawzah who
lived up to the time of Abu Ja'far (Imam Baqir). It should be noted that
the above persons lived before Wasil ibn 'Ata and Abu Hanifah, and that
Siyuti's opinion is correct that the latter were the earliest writers on
the philosophy of Islamic beliefs.

Next we may reflect upon two eminent Shi'as, Qays an-Nasir and Muhammad
ibn 'Ali Ahwal, (known as Mu'min at-Taq"), Hisham ibn al-Hakam and
an-Nawbakht. The latter was an exalted family who continued serving the
cause of Islam for more than a hundred years. Among their works, "Faslu
'l-yaqut", is of extraordinary importance. Also among the pupils of
Hisham Ahwal, and an-Nasir, the names of Abu Ja'far Sakak Baghdadi, Abu
Malik Zuhak Khazrami, Hisham ibn Salim and Yunus ibn Ya'qub deserve
special mention. These were the persons who undertook masterly debates
with sages of other religions and provided irreputable arguments on
topics like the unity of God and the Imamate.

If all their scholastic subjects of discussion, particularly the
debates of Hisham ibn Hakam, were collected together, it would make an
excellent book. Similarly, if we included all the Shi'a philosophers and
scholars, a great number of voluminous compilations will be required.

I request therefore that the author of "fajru 'l-Islam" tell me whether
these men wanted to ruin the religion of God, or whether they were so
conscientious that they worked day and night to record historical facts
and events and collect together reports of matters relating to the life,
miracles, battles, and the purity of character of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.)

One of the finest scholars in this connection is Aban ibn 'Uthman
al-Ahmar Tabi'i (died 140 A.H.). He was a pupil of Imam Ja'far Sadiq
(a.s.). After him Hisham ibn Muhammad, ibn sa'ib Kalbi, Muhammad ibn
Is'haq Matalabi and Abu Makhnaf Azdi continued in this particular field
of knowledge. All the writers of the later age depended upon them as
source material in historical matters.

If we examine a list of historians, we will find that all the
distinguished writers were Shi'as; for instance, the compiler of Kitab
al-Mahasin, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid Barqi, Nasr ibn Muzahim
Manqari, Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'd Thaqafi, 'Abdu 'l-'Aziz Juludi
Basri Imami, Ahmad ibn Ya'qub(whose book Tarikhu 'l-Ya'qubi has been
published in Europe), Muhammad ibn Zakariya, Abu 'Abdillah Hakim,
al-Ma'sudi, author of "Muruj adhdhahab" Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn Taba'taba'
the author of "Adabu 's-sultaniyah" and hundreds of other scholars like
them, who cannot be included here.

Among the men of letters, the Shi'as are also in a majority. The
literary men are of different groups. The first group is that of the
companions. All the famous men of letters belonging to this class are
attached to Shi'ism. Nabigha Ju'di, for instance, took part in the
battle of Siffin on the side of 'Ali (a.s.) and the "Rajaz" (rousing
verses) that he composed for the occasion are very well known; 'Urwah
ibn Zayd al-Khayl was also with the Holy Imam (a.s.) in the battle of
Siffin (see al-Aghani). some people acknowledge that Lubayd ibn Rabi'ah
'Amiri was of the Shi'a faith; Abu Tufayl 'Amir ibn Wa'ilah, Abu
'l-Aswad Du'uli, and Ka'b ibn Zuhayr, the author of "Banat Sa'id" are
likewise but a few of the Shia' men of letters we have room to mention
here.

The second group is contemporary with the Tabi'in. In this class
al-Farazdaq, Kumayt, Kathir, Sayyid Humayri and Qays ibn Dharih . have a
very prominent place.

The third group belongs to the second century of the hijrah: Abu Nawas,
Abu Tamam, Bahtari, Da'bil Khuza'i, Dik al-Jin, 'Abd as-Salam, Abu
sh-Shaysh, Husayn ibn Duhak ibn Rumi, Mansur an-Namri, Ashja' asalmi,
Muhammad ibn Wahib and Sari' al-Ghawani. Morevoer, during the reign of
the 'Abbasid rulers all the prominent literary figures, excluding Marwan
ibn Abi Hafsah and his progeny were Shi'as:

Similarly among the celebrated poets and men of letters of the fourth
hijra century were many Shi'as : Mutanabbi Maghrib ibn Hani Andalusi,
ibn at-Ta'awidhi, Husayn Hajjaj (the author of "al-Majnun"), Mahyar
Daylami, Abu Fads Hamdani, (about whom it has been said that poetry
began and ended with him); we may cite also Kashajum, Nashi' saghir,
Nashi' Kabir, Abu Bakr Khwarizmi, Badi' Hamadani, Tughrai, Ja'far Shams
al-Khilafah, , Ammarah al-Yamani, Wida'i Zahi, ibn Basam Baghdadi, Sibt
ibn Ta'awidhi, Salami, Nami who were all Shi'as.

The fact is that the Shi'as attained such an exalted rank in the field
of literature that experts had to say: 'Is there any literary man who is
not a Shi'a?' It is worth noting that in praising some piece of
composition, there was a common saying that such and such a man writes
like the Shi'as. Some people have written that Mutanabbi and Abu
'l-'ula' were also Shi'as (please refer to where some of their verses
are quoted).

Shi'a poets of the Quraysh family such as Fadl ibn 'Abbas (whose life
history is given in "al-Aghani"), Abu Dihbai Jamhi, Wahib ibn Rabi'ah
and the literary scholars such as Sharif Radi, Murtada, Sharif Abu'l
Hasan , Ali 'Alawin Jumani son of Sharif Muhammad ibnja'far ibn Muhammad
ibn Zayd ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) are also worthy of attention.

Sharif Jumani used to say "I am a poet; my father was a poet; my
grandfather was a poet". Muhammad ibn al-'Alawi was an eminent man of
letters. Writing about him Abu 'l-Faraj Isfahani has made available to
us the valuable pearls of wisdom that he left behind. For further
details it is worth while studying "Nasmatu 's-sahr min tashayyu' wa
shi'r". In this esteemed masterpiece of Sharif Yamani, there is not only
a fair account of the 'Alawimen ofletters, but there is also an account
of the Shi'a poets of the Amawi dynasty. For instance Zamakhshari writes
in his book "Rabi 'al-abrar" about 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn Hakam, Khalid ibn
Sa'id ibn 'As and Marwan ibn Muhammad Saruji Amwi; these verses -are
quoted from the latter:

"Oh descendents of Hashim ibn 'Abd Munaf!wherever I amy be I am
yours.

"You are ,God's chosen ones, and Ja'far Tayyar belongs to your own
family.

"Ali, the Lion of God, Hamzah the uncle of the Prophet and al-Hasan and
al-Husayn are the members of your own family.

"Yes, though I am of Amawi lineage, yet I have no concern with Banu
Umayyah."

Similarly, the name of Abu Warda, the well-known author on Najdi and
'Iraqi schools of thought, is also worthy of mention. A part from these
there are also many other notables of this lineage, but since this book
is being written without preparation it is difficult to give details of
all of them.

When we study the history of great kings, distinguished politicians,
statesmen and viziers, we find the Shi'as likewise in prominence also.
Besides the Fatimid and Bawayhid rulers, other kings like the Al Hamdan,
Banu Mazid, Banu Wasis, 'Imran ibn Shahid, Muqallid ibn Musayyab, 'Aqili
and Qarwash ibn Musayyab were all Shi'as. Also the faith in Shi'ism of
Wajihu' d-dawlah Dhu 'l-qarnayn Taghlabi and Tamim ibn Mu'izin the ruler
of Marakish is not a secret thing.

If we now consider the early Muslim viziers (ministers) we find that
nearly all of them are Shi'as.

Ishaq Katib, for example, was perhaps the first person for whom the
appellation of Vizier was formally used. Abu Salmah Khilal al-Kufi was
the vizier of the first 'Abbasid Caliph. In view of his administrative
capability Saffah entrusted him with all the affairs of the State.

Abu Salmah was known as the 'Wazir Al Muhammad and it was because of
his love for Al Muhammad that he was martyred on the order of the same
Saffah.

Abu 'Abdillah Ya'qub ibn Dawud was the Vizier of al-Mahdi al-'Abbasi;
the Caliph confided the entire administration of the state to him. This
verse, "Oh Banu Umayyah! Get up! And arise from your deep slumber!
Ya'qub ibn Dawud is the Caliph", refers to him. He too was to later
suffer captivity for his Shi'a belief.

Al Nawbakht and Banu Sahl are well known as the families of the
viziers. Fadl ibn Sahl and Hasan ibn Sahl were the viziers of Ma'mun
ar-Rashid. Similarly from Banu al-Furat, Hasan ibn 'Ali was thrice made
the vizier of the Caliph Muqtadar. Abu 'l-Fadl Ja'far, Abu 'l-Fath Fadl
ibn Ja'far and , Amid Muhammad ibn Husayn and his eldest son
Dhu'l-kifayatayn Abu'l-Fath 'Ali ibn Muhammad were the viziers of Rukn
ad-dawlah.

Banu Tahir Khyza'i was likewise entrusted with minis tership by.
Ma'mun. Other viziers were Mahlabi, Abu Dalf 'Ajalli, Sahib ibn 'Ibad,
the great politician Maghribi and Abu 'Abdillah Husayn ibn Zakariya, who
is known by the epithet "Shi'i".

There are others besides them, such as Ibrahim Suli, Talaya' ibn Zarik,
Afdal, the commander-in-chief of Egypt and his son Ja'far ibn Muhammad
ibn Fatit, Abu'l Mu'ali Habat-ullah, Vizier of Mustazhir and Mu'yad
Muhammad ibn Abd al -Karim Qummi, who first became the vizier of Nasir
and was later offered ministership by Mustazhir.

During the time of "Baramakah" Hasan ibn Sulayman was the Chief
Secretary. He was also widely known as "Shi'i".

Among other Shi'as entrusted with administrative posts we may mention
the author of "al-Awraq", (Suli) Yahya ibn Salamah Hasfaki and ibn Nadim
(the author of "alFihrist"), Abu Ja'far ibn Yusuf and his brother Abu
Muhammad Qasim (whose panegyrics and elegies upon the Ahlu 'l-bayt have
no parallel: see "al-Awraq") were "mu'tamad 'umumi (general secretaries)
during the time of Ma'mun, and even for a considerable time after the
latter's death. Similarly the names of Ibrahim Uysuf and his son, the
master of the Arabic language and author of "al-Mu'jam", Abu 'Abdillah
Muhammad ibn 'Imran Marzbani, are also worth remembering, Sam'ani has
made mention of their Shi'ism. Viewed in the same perspective there are
hundreds of persons whose administrative abilities, political sagacity
and national services would need volumes and volumes to be recorded.

My late father had tried to collect the life histories of different
groups of Shi'as. He classified thirty groups into alphabetical order in
ten volumes, under the titles "'Ulama (scholars), philosophers, kings,
viziers, astronomers and physicians, etc." The name of this collection
is "al-Husun al-Mani'ah fi Tabaqat ash-Shi'a". This voluminous book
despite its nature is not complete.

At this stage we would also like to ask the author of "Fajru 'l-Islam"
whether, in his opinion, these persons who had established the teachings
of Islam and provided the basis for true knowledge and learning, wanted
to ruin our sacred religion.

And again the question arises whether he and his teacher Dr. Taha
Husayn are true supporters of the Islamic religion. If that is the case,
we can bid farewell to Islam, or rather we may quote the words of a
poet, if one calls Hatim Ta'i a stingy person "it is better to die than
to live oneself with such a narrow outlook on life."

In fact it was not my aim to write at such length but the pen moved on
regardless. We hope that the present-day or future writers might learn
something from it and they may at least be careful in the manner of
their writing and may express their thoughts only after researching into
their subject.

Islam's greatest sage Hadrat 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) says: "A wise
man's tongue is subordinate to his heart, and the heart of an ignorant
person is obedient to his tongue."

Ahmad Amin's opinion that "the belief in Raj'ah" (the return) came from
Judaism among the Shi'as" is extremely deplorable. I wish they would
make it clear whether "raj'ah" is the main element of Shi'ism, whether
it is one of the fundamental beliefs of their religion, so that they may
justify their criticism. If one's knowledge is of this nature, is it not
proper for him to hold his tongue and preserve his dignity?

The fact is that faith in "raj'ah" is not one of the fundamentals of
Shi'ism. Of course recognising its validity is considered necessary,
just as in other Islamic groups one should affirm the events of the
unseen and the signs of doomsday: we may mention for instance, the
coming of Christ and the appearance of the Dajjal, which all the sects
believe in. These are not counted among the principles of Islam nor is
their denial the cause of expulsion from Islam, nor belief in them proof
of one's being a Muslim. The same argument view holds good for faith in
"raj'ah".

Indeed even if it is demonstrated that it relates to the roots of the
faith of the Shi'as, we should ask whether concurrence with any Jewish
belief is the result of Jewish influence. The Muslims believe in the
oneness of God.

The Jews also worship one God. As a result of these shared views, can
anyone have the courage to talk of the influence of Judaism? It would be
interesting to see what these people who indulge in taunts and emotional
slander have to say in this matter.

"God Almighty will give life to a group of people for the second time."
Is it an impossibility? Has this story never been mentioned in the Book
of God ? "Consider, oh Muhammad, Those of a past age who left their
homes in their thousands, fearing death, and God Said to them: Die, and
then be brought back to life." (2:243) Has the following holy verse
never been read by anybody? "And the day on which We shall raise a group
from every "ummah" (27:83). If it means the day of judgement, then on
that day not a group from every ummah but all the ummahs (peoples) will
be restored to life.

This is not a new affair. The 'ulema of the majority community have
been making this matter a target of attack since the very beginning. It
has been noted, in this connection that when they do not find any
grounds for criticising the veracity of an eminent Shi'a reporter of
hadith, they begin taunting the Shi'as about "raj'ah" as if they were
accusing someone of idol-worshipping or polytheism. Relative to this
problem in question is the well known story of Mu'min at-Taq and Abu
Hanifah. We believe, however , that this matter does not merit further
argument.

We consider it sufficient to have established the moral perversion of
certain misguided persons.

The author of "Fajru 'l-Islam" says: "The fire of gehennam will not be
allowed to burn the Shi'as, except for a few among them and then only
for a time." Only God knows from which Shi'a book this view has been
taken. I wish the learned writer had some better evidence and could
provide the necessary proof for this view.

The Shi'a books clearly says: "Paradise is the reward for the obedient
servant of God even if he is an Abyssinian slave, and hell is for the
wicked even if he is one of the Sayyids of Quraysh. Traditions on the
above subject have been related by the Holy Imams (a.s.) and they are so
many in number that they can hardly be counted. If the above mentioned
author is referring to the intercession of the Prophet (s.a.w.) or the
Imams (a.s.) then of course the question of intercession is another
matter which all the Muslims believe in. This matter will be dealt with
in more detail in another book.

Suffice it to say that belief in such a matter is hardly a reason to
say that Shi'ism has been taken from Judaism just because the latter
shows this belief.

Abu Hanifah agrees in some questions of marriage (nikah) with the
Zoroastrians, but would it be appropriate to say that the Imam of the
Hanafis had based his 'fiqh' (jurisprudence) on Zoroastrianism? And for
further proof, advantage could be taken of his being a man of Iranian
descent. In short, these are all baseless ways and means through which
the desires of certain Shi'ahs men for mutual confusion and discord
among the various Muslim sects are fulfilled.

The alleged influences of Christianity in the Shi'a religion is another
taunt, which is hardly less painful. Honesty should demand that Ahmad
Amin research his material more carefully. he erroneously considered
sects like the Khitabiyyah, the Gharabiyyah, the Alawiyyah, the
Mukhmasah, the Bazi'iyyah and the Ghullat as Shi'as, although, like the
Qaramitah, they are apostate groups having no real link with the Shi'as.
The Imania Shi'as and their religious leaders are absolutely aloof from
these schools of thought; the aforesaid sects are hardly like
Christians, but they go so far as to believe that the Imam is himself
god in the the form of an incarnation. Their faculty concepts have a
striking resemblance to the faith and beliefs of mystics. It appears
from the statements of well-known mystics like Hallaj, Gilani, Rafa'i
and Badawi, etc. which they thought that they had reached a stage which
was higher than divinity and godhead itself Those who believe in 'wahdat
al-wujud' (pantheism) also have the same conceptions.

But the Imamia Shi'as who number millions in Iraq, Iran and the
subcontinent of India and Afghanistan are, as Shi'a, free from such
beliefs, and regard these conceptions as infidelity and digression from
the right path. Their religion is pure 'tawhid' (Oneness of God).
Neither do they believe that God resembles any created being, nor do
they tolerate that His perfect attributes be considered defective or
comparable to creation's attributes; rather they consider any concept
which is the negation of His eternal existence and attributes utterly
wrong.

The metaphysical beliefs of the shi'as are carefully explained in
numerous books. The smaller "at-Tajrid" of Khwajah Nasiru 'd-dinn
at-Tusi, or the monumental "Kitab al-Asfar" of Sadru 'd-din ash-Shirazi,
both merit study in this subject. There are thousands of other books in
which the theories of metempsychosis, divine union and re-incarnation
are proved erroneous.

However the author of "Fajru 'l-Islam", by levelling utterly false
charges against the Shi'as, has not done any useful service to the
religion of Islam and its ummat (nation). Since we have shown in some
detail that the book "Fajru 'l-Islam" is full of false claims and
accusations unsupported by evidence we will pass on to consider other
areas- of misunderstanding. (We have mentioned this book and its author
as an example, so that the world may know how ignorant the masses must
be if the 'ulema' and authors of the majority community are as we have
described.)

The difficulty is that those who write about the Shi'as, take such
unlikely authors as ibn Khaldun and Ahmad ibn 'Abdi Rabbih Andalusi as
their source. Moreover the present day writers in their show of
liberality regard Professor Wellhausen and Professor Dozy as
authorities. But no one takes the trouble of referring to the scholarly
works of the Shi'as. The result is that when a Shi'a goes through the
books of these scholars he finds in them the same sort of absurdities
about himself to which Raghib Isfahani has referred to in his book
"al-Muhadirat". The author writes: "In the court of Ja'far ibn Sulayman
a Muslim was giving evidence about someone's infidelity. When he was
asked what he knew about the defendant, he said, "This man is Mu'tazili.
he is Nasibi; he is Harwari; he is Jabri; he is Rafzi; he rails at 'Ali
ibn Khattab, 'Umar ibn Abi Qahafah, 'Uthman ibn Abi Talib, and Abu Bakr
ibn 'Affan. Also he abuses Hajjaj, who pulled down Kufah on Abu Sufyan,
and on the day of Qata'if (the day of Tafur 'Ashura') fought against
Husayn ibn Mu'awiyah". Hearing this Ja'far said, "Damn you! I do not
know for which branch of learning I should envy you - historical,
religious or geographical knowledge!"

As regards 'Abdullah ibn Saba, whose name has been associated with the
Shi'as, if one studies any Shi'a book one will find that he is held in
contempt; rather the mildest works about him that are to be found in the
books written by Shi'a authors are: "'Abdullah ibn Saba - curses be upon
him". We should mention that some people hold the view that 'Abdullah
ibn saba, like Majnun, 'Amiri, and Abu Hilal, were in fact only
ficticious heroes of story and legend.

During the middle period of the Umayyah and 'Abbasid rule,
self-indulgence, sport and play, had reached the middle period of the
Umayyah and 'Abbasid rule, self-indulgence, sport and play, had reached
such a height that story-telling had become a part of the life of the
residents of the palace. It was in such an atmosphere that the stories
were contrived.

Our original aim was to dwell on this subject. But considering the
repeated attacks on the authors of the present age, we thought it
necessary to introduce briefly the beliefs and faiths, important
principles and the articles of practice of the Shi'as. It should be
noted that in the Shi'a religion the door of "Ijtihad" (endeavor to
arrive at a conclusion regarding any religious problem) is always open,
and so long as there is no violation of "ijma"' (consensus), the Book
(the Holy Quran), sunnah, and intellectual reasoning, every "mujtahid"
(religious scholar of exceptional merit) is free in his opinion; anyone
who violates these limits and draws his own conclusion will be
considered misguided; the opinion of such a man will be regarded as
purely personal, individual and unfit to be followed.

In these pages it is not possible to deal with all matters in detail,
so only those fundamentals of Shi'ism will be explained in which there
is no room for disagreement.

Not much attention will be paid to arguments and proofs as this is
appropriate only for larger volumes. Our only aim is that all the
Muslims, individually and collectively, may know the real beliefs of the
Shi'as and, by refraining from attributing false beliefs to their
brothers, may not do injustice to themselves. Rather than considering
Shi'ahs as evil spirits, demons, jinn, beasts and monsters, they should
regard them as a special branch of their society, since by the grace of
God the Shi'as of Hadrat 'Ali (a.s.) are adorned with a true Islamic
character, knowledge of and belief in the Holy Quran and Sunnah,
blessings of faith, and kind manners, and live according to principles
which are based on reasoning and certain proofs.


**Muhammad Husayn Al-Kashifi 'l-Ghita' Najaf al-Ashraf Jamadi 'l-awwal
1350 A.H. (1931 A. D.)**
