Part 4 :allegations Against the Shi'a
=====================================

Refutation of the Claim that their are Un-Islamic Borrowings in Shi'a
Beliefs.

All that we have set down in this book is but a mere indication of the
beliefs and convictions of the Imamiyah sect. It would require many
volumes to deal with them in detail. But the religious leaders, and
indeed the Muslims in general, can tell us if there was anything in the
facts that we have just stated which could be said to be the cause of
the destruction of Islam, or if there is any matter which has been
derived from Judaism, Christianity, or Zorastrianism (see introduction),
or if anything appears which is against the basic principle of
monotheism (tawhid) or against the Book (the Qur'an) and the sunnah
(words and deeds of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)). By God, you should be
just and not simply utter caluminous remarks.

Finally, our prayer is that our brothers in Islam should come out of
the world of doubt and uncertainty, and gather together under the one
banner of the Qur'an, so as to successfully regain their past glory. It
is quite obvious that this is an impossibility as long as our sectarian
conflicts continue.

May God bless us with mutual tolerance and may the bonds of love
between us be strengthened.

**The Problem of Bada'**

In this matter also the Shi'as are much reviled. The misconstrues,
distorting the concept of "bada", try to convince people that according
to the Shi'a faith, God, the Almighty, performs actions of which He has
no knowledge. God forbid. Can there be greater ignorance than this? This
is plain infidelity because, on the one hand, it is a denial of the
attribute of knowledge of God the Almighty, and on the other, He is
considered as being subject to accidents and changes. This negates the
very essence of the infiniteness and absoluteness of God. The Imamiyah
sect vehemently opposes these foolish and absurd ideas. Rather, no
Islamic sect supports this misleading view. Of course, these nonsensical
ideas have been attributed to some of those elements who believe in the
physical body of God. Thus it was one of them who said about God, "Only
excuse Me for My beard and private parts. Otherwise you may ask Me
anything you like."

The correct meaning of "bada", which the Shi'as believe in, is included
in the secrets and mysteries of the House of Muhammad (a.s.),. The
traditions of the ahl ul-bayt (a.s.) say, "There is no other way in
which the duty of worship of God is better performed than it is with the
acknowledgement of "bada". One who does not make "bada" the proof of
this knowledge does not possess a complete understanding of God."

There are many other reports with the same sense. In fact, knowledge is
of two kings: One is that with which God has endowed His angels and
prophets (a.s.). According to this knowledge, whatever has been told
them must surely happen. The second kind is that which is neither known
to an angel close to the Presence of God, nor to any exalted Prophet
(a.s.). It is only He Who knows it. So, according to this, He may cause
something to happen earlier or delay a happening, or efface or write
down something as He pleases. That is the stage of knowledge, which God
the Almighty calls "'umm al-kitab". This shows the perfect Might,
absolute Wisdom and divine Sovereignty of the Lord of the universe.

The problem may also be understood in the following way. "Bada" in the
world of existence has the same status as "naskh" (abrogation) in the
commands of the shari'ah. Thus, just as in the shari'ah, amendments,
additions, changes and alterations give untold advantages, so also, in
the world of being, the secrets and unknown advantages of "bada'" are
beyond human understanding.

"Bada'" can also be explained thus. The highest servants of God have
knowledge of a matter, but they do not know what will facilitate or
hinder its occurrence. For example, Jesus knew that the bridegroom would
die on the first night of his marriage, but he did not know that failing
to give charity was a condition for this. So it happened that the
bridegroom's mother gave out charity and he was spared. When the reality
of the matter was put before Jesus, he said, "you must have given
charity on his behalf. Charity wards off calamities."

There are many other instances of this sort. The advantages that accrue
from these states of affairs is that, in the first place, human beings
are put to the test, and, in the second, they are trained in the habits
of submission. A clear proof of this is the manner in which Abraham was
put to the test over his son.

Also, if there were no "bada'", all the invocations, charity,
intercession, weeping and impoloring of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and his
successors (a.s.), and their fear of God, would be meaningless, despite
their complete obedience to Him.

Evidently the cause of their fearing and trembling is that hidden and
treasured knowledge which nobody is aware of and which is the
fountainhead of "bada'".

If someone wishes to know the details of the different kinds of
"bada"', "qada", "qadr" and the "lawh mahw" and the "lawh ithbat", he or
she should read the first volume of our book "ad-Din aw l-Islam". We
have there gone into these topics in great detail.

**Taqiyah**

(pious dissimulation or concealing one's faith in dangerous
circumstances)

In the matter of taqiy ah also the Shi'as are very much defamed and the
reason for that is that ordinary people are quite ignorant of its
reality. A careful consideration will show that the taqiyah in which the
Shi'as believe is not peculiar to them alone. Rather, it is a logical
necessity and a natural demand. There is no commandment of the shari'ah
which is inconsistent with wisdom and learning. In every problem,
knowledge and wisdom appear together .

If one assesses innate human tendencies, one has to admit that everyone
has a natural disposition to defend himself: life is dear. Of course, if
there is a matter of honour at stake, or a question of protecting the
truth, then, even though life is dear, it is not given any relative
importance. But if circumstances do not reach such an extreme, what sane
man would be prepared to endanger his own life just so that the world
may laugh at him?

What is more, to court danger is against the counsel of wisdom and
religion.

Thus the Holy Lawgiver has permitted the Muslim who is surrounded by
danger and who risks his or her life or his or her honour to hide his or
her belief outwardly although he or she must continue to observe his or
her religion inwardly. There are also verses in the Holy Qur'an
suggesting the same thing and the story of 'Ammar, his parents and some
other companions of the Prophet shows that when he was suffering the
persecutions of the idol-worshippers, he professed unbelief.

There are of course rules for taqiyah. They are three:

1) if life will be lost for no purpose, then it is an obligation;
2) if expressing the truth would serve some useful purpose, then it is
optional;
3) if atheism (kufr) is gaining the upper hand, people are being led
astray, and their is danger of cruelty and oppression, then taqiyah is
forbidden.

Now let us throw some light onto the matter so that a conscientious
person may make up his own mind as to whether the Shi'a are actually
guilty of taqiyah (supposing that it is condemnable), or whether they
were forced to do taqiyah by certain groups who took away their freedom
and forced them to dissimulate their beliefs.

As soon as Mu'awiyyah took over power, he made the shari'ah into a
plaything and victimized the Shi'as of 'Ali (a.s.) with unconcealed
savagery. The blood of the Shi'as was cheaper to him than water. The
Marwanid caliphs also followed the same iniquitous policy. Then came the
'Abbasid period, and they even increased the atrocities. Consequently,
those who loved the ahl ulbayt (a.s.) had to adopt various tactics.
Sometimes they went into hiding, sometimes they rose up. Sometimes they
were forced to conceal themselves and sometimes they stood up against
the oppression in their enthusiasm for the truth so that their blood
might become a beacon lighting the path for others.

Some great Shi'ahs, therefore, paid no heed to taqiyah and braved all
kinds of cruelties, sometimes ending up. as martyrs. There is the very
famous story of the martyrs of Maraj Azra, who were fourteen brave
warriors who sacrificed their lives in the way of God under the
leadership of the pious companion Hajar ibn Abi Kindi. He was also the
military leader who was responsible for the conquest of Syrai.
Mu'awiyyah said of him, "I know what was the case with everyone of those
whom I put to the sword in Maraj Azra, but I am at a loss to understand
what the crime of Hajar was for which he was killed." But we can easily
say what his fault was. He did not feel there was any need to do
taqiyah, because he wanted to let the world know the tyranny of the
Umayyids and the deep religious feelings of his own family.

Let us not forget the events surrounding the ends of the great
companions 'Amr ibn Himq al-Khuza'i and 'Abdu'r-Rahman ibn al-Hasan
al-Ghazi, who were buried alive by ibn Ziyad. Nor Maytham Tammar,
Rushayd al-Hajari and 'Abdullah ibn Yaqfar who were crucified. Moreover,
there are the examples of the hundreds and thousands of other Muslims
who died fighting for their beliefs. in the way of God before the
disbelievers who crushed them to death.

These lovers of truth did not do taqiyah because such was the need of
the moment. Their abstaining from taqiyah protected the truth and showed
up the false religiosity of Mu'awiyyah, Yazid, Ziyad and Ibn Ziyad.

How can we possibly forget the events surrounding the martyrdom of
al-Husayn (a.s.) and his worthy companions? They, of course, considered
taqiyah to be unlawful in its particular circumstances, but there are
other situations in which it may be compulsory, or may be merely
optional.

It is reported that once Musaylimah, the false prophet, captured two
Muslims and forced them to acknowdedge his prophethood and deny the
prophethood of Muhammad (s.a.w.). One of them refused and was therefore
killed, but the other accepted and was released. When the news reached
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), he said, "The first man made haste to reach
heaven, the second man marked his time. Both of them will be
recompensed."

O Muslims! Do not taunt your brothers concerning taqiyah. May God bless
you and us in the hereafter, and may we all be united on the point of
guidance. Salam, peace, to you all, and may God bestow on you His Mercy
and His Blessings.

