Endnotes
========

[^1] (s.a.w.): is the abbreviation of the Arabic phrase "Salla 'llahu
'alayhi wa alih" (may God bless him and his progeny).

[^2] (a.s.): is the abbreviation of "'alayhi 's-Salam" (peace be upon
him)

[^3] The principle of 'awl (proportionate reduction) is applied by Sunni
jurists when the estate of the deceased is 'oversubscribed' by Quranic
heirs. In such a case they scale down all the heirs' portions pro rata,
or, in other words, they increase the number of portions into which the
inheritance is to be divided so that each may take a share.

Shi'ite jurists, on the other hand, maintain that a diminution must be
made only in the shares of daughters and agnate sisters.

The principle of ta'sib is applied by Sunni jurisprudence to give
priority to male agnates as heirs, and this results in many mathematical
complexities in their system of inheritance. The Shi'ite jurists
completely repudiate this.

The tradition from Ibn 'Abbas concerns mainly the question of 'awl
where he establishes two types of Quranic heir, the first whose portions
are fixed, the second whose portions are not guaranteed.

Another peculiarity of the Shi'ahs is the principle that the clothes,
sword, Qur'an and ring of the father are to be left solely to the son.

Finally, the wife can never inherit cultivated or uncultivated land,
neither in itself, nor the money obtained from its sale. Similarly she
cannot inherit trees or buildings, but she can take their sale price.
This matter is attested to by, and can be proved from the ahadith of the
Imams.

There is a basic classification in fiqh of animals whose blood spurts
out when a blood vessel is cut (e.g. cows, dogs, chicken, etc.) and
those whose blood does not (e.g. fish).

The point which this hadith may seem a little obscure. Mu'min at-Taq
wishes to show that the existence of the Imam precludes the need for
reference to numerous and obscure books and traditions. We are to
understand that it is the Imam who has guided him to the correct verse
in the Qur'an for this matter and to its correct interpretation. Thus
Abu Hanifah thinks he will catch him off-guard with an obscure question
about an unusual species of sea creature, but the answer if
forthcoming.

