Part I :the Origins of the Shi'ahs
==================================

Shi'ism is not a new religion. It begins with the beginning of Islam.
The embodiment of the code of religion, that is, the seal of the
Prophets (s.a.w.) planted the tree of Shi'ism together with Islam; with
his own hands, he watered it and looked after it. The plant grew up to
be a green tree which began blooming in the life-time of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.). But it had not yet born fruit, when the light of
prophethood was put out.

We are not alone in advancing this claim. Even the eminent scholars
from among Sunnis agree with us. For instance, 'Allamah Siyuti in his
famous commentary "ad-Durru l-Manthur" Says in connection with God's
words "Hum khayru l-bariyah" (they are the best of created beings)
(Surah: The Clear Proof: Ayat 7):

"Ibn 'Asakir quotes Jabir ibn Adbillah as saying: "We were present in
the company of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) when 'Ali (a.s.) came towards
us. Seeing 'Ali (a.s.) the Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "I swear by God the
Almighty, who is the Master of my life, that he ('Ali (a.s.)) and his
Shi'ahs shall be successful on the day of judgement."

Ibn 'Adi reports from ibn 'Abbas that when the verse "Inna l-ladhina
amanu wa 'amilu 's-salihat" (Verily these are those who believed and did
good deeds) was revealed, the Holy Prophet (s-a.) said to 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.):

"It refers to you and your Shi'as; God will be pleased with them and
they with Him on the Day of Judgement."

Ibn Mardawa'ih quotes Hadrat 'Ali (a.s.) himself as saying: "The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) said to me: 'Oh 'Ali, Did you not hear what God said:
'Inna 'l-ladhina amanu wa 'amilu 's-salihat ula'ika hum khayru
'l-bariyyah.' Verily it means you and your Shi'as. The promise between
your people and me shall be fulfilled at the fountain of Kawthar; there,
when all the nations shall be present to account for their actions, your
people will be called forward, your faces, hands and feet shining with
light'." These three hadith are to be found in as-Suyuti's "ad-Durr
al-manthur".

Ibn Hajar has also reported some of these traditions in his as-Sawa'iq)
from Darqutni- He quotes Umm Salamah as saying: "Oh Ali, You and your
shi'as shall attain Paradise." Ibn Athir writes in connection with the
word "qumh." that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said to Hadrat 'Ali (a-s.):
"When people come into the presence of God, your Shi'as will be there
content with God and He with them, and your enemies shall be subjected
to God's wrath and their hands shall be tied to their necks." The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) demonstrated this by putting his hands behind his neck,
and said: "See, they shall be tied up in this way."

Probably this tradition has been reported by Ibn Hajar also in his
as-Sawa'iq" and other 'ulama' have also reported it in different ways,
showing that it is among the well known hadith.

In az-Zamakhshari's "Rabi' al-Abrar" the following statement of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has been recorded:

"Oh 'Ali, On the Day of Judgement the skirt of God's mercy will be in
my hand and my skirt will be in your hand and your skirt will beheld by
your descendants and the Shi'as of your descendants will be hanging on
to their skirt. Then you will see where we will be taken (i.e.
Paradise)." For further satisfaction, it will be useful to study Ahmad
ibn Hanbal's "al-Musnad" and an-NaSa'i's "Khasa'is" etc., which contain
a number of such traditions.

These traditions show that the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.) spoke a number
of times about the Shi'as of 'Ali (a.s.) and pointed out that on the Day
of Judgement they, in particular, shall be safe and successful, God
being pleased with them and they with Him.

Everyone who believes that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was the embodiment
of truthfulness and that the verse which begins "ma yantiqu 'an il-hawa
. . . " (He does not speak of himself unless 'why' is revealed to him)
refers to the Prophet himself, realise that these hadith must be true.
Those people however who understand the above hadith as referring to all
the companions of the prophet, have failed to recognise their real inner
meaning.

We find that during the days of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) a group of
outstanding companions was attached to Hadrat 'Ali (a.s.). Not only did
every man in this group acknowledge the Holy Imam (a.s.) to be his
spiritual leader, the real transmitter of the Holy Prophet's teachings,
but they also acknowledged him as the true interpreter and commentator
of the orders and secrets of the Prophet (s.a.w.). It is this group
which is popularly known as the Shi'a. Even the lexicographers support
this truth. If you refer to the famous dictionaries "an-Nihayah" and
"Lisan ul-'Arab", you will find the meaning of "shi'a" as "one who loves
and follows 'Ali (a.s.) and his descendants."

If however we are to understand that "shi'a" means any person who loves
'Ali (a.s.) or is not his enemy, then the use of this word would be
inappropriate, because only loving, or at least, not being an enemy of
him, does not mean that a person is a Shi'a; if however, he has the
characteristic of persistent following and obedience then the word Shi'a
would apply; this is crystal clear to those who have an understanding of
Arabic and a notion of the relationship between word, meaning and
context.

In view of these realities, it is unlikely that any sensible man, after
studying the appropriate traditions, could draw the conclusion that the
word shi'a means the Muslims in general, but will understand that it
refers to a particular class which has a special attachment to 'Ali
(a.s.).

Hopefully, after this explanation, no fair-minded man will try to
conclude that the above quoted traditions do not prove the existence of
a group who, because of their special relation with the master of the
pious, 'Ali (a.s.) were superior to all the Muslims of that time, and
who all expressed their love for him.

Personally, I do not agree with the assumption that the Caliphs, who
could not accept this fact, consciously violated the words of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.). It is possible many of them did not hear his edicts,
or that those who heard them were unable to follow his directions.

Moreover, if the Statements of the Prophet (s.a.w.) in which he
announced the rank and high position of Amiru 'l-Mu'minin (a.s.) and the
Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.) are studied with an open mind, it will be seen that
these reports do not only show merits of a general nature, but also
contain clear indications of how to recognise the status and capability
of the Leader of Shi'ism, and of how to contribute to the establishment
and justness of that school of thought. The following traditions may be
cited as examples.

"'Ali (a.s.) bears the same relationship to me as Harun (Aaron) had to
Musa (Moses)".

"Oh 'Ali, only those with faith (iman) are your friends, and only the
hypocrites (munafiqin) are your enemies."

"Oh people of my ummah. I leave behind two things worthy of great
esteem - the Book of God and my progeny, my Ahlu 'l-bayt."

"According to the tradition of at-Tayr, the prophet made the following
prayer: "Oh God. Send to me your most beloved slave", and immediately
Ali entered his presence.

"Tomorrow I will give this standard to the man who loves God and His
Prophet (s.a.w.) and whom God and His Prophet (s.a.w.) also love."

"'Ali is with the Truth and the Truth is with 'Ali."

These traditions are mostly taken from "Sahih al-Bukhari" and "Sahi'h
al-Muslim", and there are thousands of such authentic reports. This
small booklet cannot accommodate details of them. Those who are fond of
research work can study the famous book "Abiqat al-Anwar" by Allama'
Sayyid Hamid Husayn, which is ten times as voluminous as "Sahih
al-Bukhari" and is a master-piece of research in the field of hadiths.

When the light of prophethood was extinguished, a group of the "sahaba"
started to act to prevent the Caliphate from passing to 'Ali.

The cause of this opposition might have been the young age of the holy
Imam, or the feeling among the Quraysh that the prophethood and the
imamate should not be combined in the house of Banu Hashim; there might
have been other causes, we do not have the space to discuss them here.

Both the Sunni and the Shi'a sects Wee however that, when allegiance
was being taken from the Muslims, 'Ali (a.s.) did not accept the
authority of Abu Bakr, and, according to the learned al-Bukhari
("Sahih"', see the chapter on the victory at Khaybar), he did not pay
allegiance until six months had passed. Some of the eminent companions,
like az-Zubayr, 'Ammar and Miqdad and others, also refused to pay homage
to Abu Bakr.

The fact is that 'Ali (a.s.) had no craving for political power, nor
desire to rule, other than in his capacity as Imam.

The talk that he had with ibn , Abbas at Dhiqar clearly proves which
way the son of Abu Talib (a.s.) was going. Amiru 'l-Mu'minin (a.s.) had
only one purpose in view, and it was that "religion" might remain safe,
"right" might prevail and "wrong" might be exterminated. Imbued with
these high feelings, 'Ali (a.s.) resorted to protest only. He did not
adopt any plans to overthrow the caliphs. Rather, in order to lead and
guide the people to the right path he always cooperated with the
government; his wise suggestions enabled Islam to flourish and meant
that religious commands were made known to all. If Ali (a.s.) had not
adopted this course of action, not only would Islamic unity have been
shattered, but the people also would have been lost in the labyrinth of
ignorance.

The Shi'as too continued to follow their leader; the spirit of the time
demanded that differences should be ignored. For this very reason, they
did not try to establish themselves as a sect during the regime of the
first caliphs. Of course Ali's friends silently observed the modus
operandi of every ruler and the changing conditions till at last the
nation itself selected Ali (a.s.) as its leader. When Amiru 'l-Mu'minin
(a.s.) took the seat of the caliphate, Mu'awiyah revolted and sent out a
large number of forces to Siffin.

A group of the "sahaba" (companions) remained from the very beginning
with 'Ali (a.s.). The rest of the companions also sided with the Holy
Imam. Eighty prominent companions, like 'Ammar ibn Yasir, Khuzaymah Dhu
'sh Shahadatayn and Abu Ayub al-Ansari, nearly all of whom were either
Badri (from the battle of Badr) or 'Aqb (Bay'atu 'l-'Aqbi - the pledge
of 'Aqbi), joined 'Ali's party. Most of them sacrificed their lives for
the Holy Imam (a.s.).

The fighting continued however, and Mu'awiyah's intriguings also
increased. When Hadrat , Ali (a.s.) was martyred, the ruler of Damascus
gave a sight of relief Islam disappeared from Mu'awiyah's royal courts
and he began to revive all the tyrannical traditions of the past
kings.

'Ali's (a.s.) pious way of life, devout manners and exalted character
contrasted sharply with Mu'awiy ah's corrupt morals and his dealings
with 'Amr b. al-'As, with the Governorship of Egypt, Yazid and his
despotic caliphate, and Ziyad ibn Abih and his activity against Islam.
Mu'awiyah's notorious over-indulgence and passion for revelry clearly
demonstrated the depraved condition of his mind and of the court
surrounding him. We have thus before us the simple way of living taught
by Islam, and on the other side the pomp and vanity of the son of Abu
Sufyan. Mu'awiyah's kingly aspirations were fulfilled with the
hard-earned money of the Muslims.

The dining cloth of the Amawi palace was always laid with the daintiest
of foods. The vizier, Abu Sa'id al-Mansur ibn al-Husayn al-Abi (died 422
A-H.) recorded an event in his work "Nathr ad-Dur". He writes: "Ahnaf
ibn Qays used to say that one day when he went to Mu'awiyah, the latter
put before him such a large variety of food that it was difficult to
count the different dishes. He was bewildered when Mu'awiyah extended
towards him one of the dishes which he did not recognise. He asked what
it was. The answer was . . . the stomach of duck filled with sheep's
brain, fried in pistachio oil and sprinkled with spices." Ahnaf said
that on hearing this he began to weep. Mu'awiyah said: "Why do you
weep?" He replied: "At this time 'Ali (a.s.) has come to my mind. One
day I was sitting with the Holy Imam (a.s.); the time for breaking the
fast approached. The Imam (a.s.) ordered me to stay. Meanwhile a sealed
bag was brought. I asked: "O Imam, what does it contain?" The Imam (a.s)
said: "Powdered barley". I said: "Was there any fear of theft, O Amiru
l-Mu'minin, or is it because of financial stringency that it has been
sealed?" "It is for none of these reasons," he said, "the reason for
this care is only the thought that my sons al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husayn
(a.s.) might mix this powdered barley with butter or olive oil." Again I
asked: "Is butter or olive oil unlawful?" The Holy Imam said: "It is not
unlawful, but for the true Imams it is necessary that they remain
attached to the ranks of the poor, so that indigence and want may not
make the poverty stricken rebellious." Mu'awiyah said: "Ahnaf, you have
reminded me of a person whose supreme merits are difficult to be
denied."In az-Zamakshari's "Rabi' al-Abrar", and in other compilations,
many such events are related.

Mu'awiyah's bad nature was inextricably linked with these unlawful
actions; he had an inner desire to reach the height of wickedness. So he
broke all the promises that he had made to Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and in
the end had the Prophet's grandson poisoned. As a result of this state
of affairs and these events, the Muslims began to look at Syria's
politics with scorn and contempt; the true believers realised that
Mu'awiyah was only a man of this world, and he himself acknowledged this
truth. In az-Zamakhshari's "Rabi' al-Abrar", the following statement is
narrated from the ruler of Syria: "Abu Bakr wanted to keep aloof from
the world and the world kept aloof from him. 'Umar tested the world and
the world tested him. As to 'Uthman, he took hold of the world and the
world also madly pursued him; and I at every step tried with my heart
and soul to make it a bed of roses- The result was that I became of the
world and the world became mine."

Gradually, the people's opinion was changing; the close companions of
the Prophet (s.a.w.) were letting the ordinary Muslims know about the
superior merits, virtues and character of 'Ali (a.s.) and his
descendants, which they had seen with their own eyes. Who cannot be
moved when he recalls the sight of the Prophet of God (s.a.w.) lifting
his loving grandsons onto his back and saying: "What do you think of
your mount, it is not the best mount; and as for you, you are the best
rifers." And do not these words, full of the purity of revelation,
"al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s.) are the leaders of the youth of
Paradise", demand to be known by all. Truth has a right to spread, and
those who have a sense of truth in them are desirous of spreading it.
The result of this desire for truth was that the common Muslims began
inclining towards Shi'ism and opportunities were created for the
advancement of this sect.

The greatest cause of the advancement of Shi'ism, however, was that
bloody event which revolutionzed the Islamic world. This painful event
of 61 A.H. which is known as the tragedy of Karbala' was the most
momentous of its kind. The effects of the martyrdom of al-Husayn (a.s.)
were felt by all, even those living in the most distant regions of the
Muslim territory. Companions like Zayd ibn Arqam, Jabir ibn 'Abdillah
al-Ansari, Sahl ibn Sa'd as-Sa'idi and Anas ibn Malik survived Karbala'.
The pain they felt had no bounds, and, remembering their duty towards,
and love for, the Prophet and his progeny, they intensified their
efforts to make known the superior merits of Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.). The
Umayyad tyrants pursued them and these remaining sahaba were finally
also victims of the sword and poison. But the cry of the oppressed is
not made in vain. These events were not such that the nation of the
Muslims were unaware of them. Indeed, they keenly observed them, with
the result that a great many groups of people began to declare their
love for 'Ali (a.s.). and his descendants; the numerical strength of the
Shi'as increased dramatically. With the same rapidity with which the
tyranny of Banu Umayyah was increasing, the love for Ahlu 'l-bayt was
also increasing in the hearts of the common people. The descendants of
the Umayyids tortured and tyrannized to the extreme, but every action
has its reaction. It is related that Shu'abi said to his son: "Oh my
son, the world cannot harm the values which religion has brought, but
those things which were made and adorned by the world can all be
destroyed by religion. Just reflect upon 'Ali (a.s.) and his affairs.
Did the descendants of the Umayyids ever relinquish their oppression?
They concealed the merits of Ahlu 'l-bayt. They tried to hide the
realities of the situation and never left off singing the praises of
their ancestors.

But all their plans were reversed: the Umayyids were humbled to dust
and the name of Al Muhammad grew brighter and brighter". Though Shu'abi
was known as an enemy of 'Ali (a.s.), these words of truth came from his
tongue and have been preserved in history.

az-Zamakhshari in his 'Rabi' al-Abrar" reports this statement of
Shu'abi: "Our condition was very perplexing if we loved 'Ali (a.s.)
there was fear of murder, and if we became enemies to him, our ruin was
certain."

The troubles and worries for the Ahlu 'l-bayt did not cease when the
Sufyani throne came under the control of the Marwanid ruIer 'Abdu
'l-Malik. 'Abdu 'l-Malik Was a monster of a man by whose order Hajjaj
razed the Holy House of the Ka'ba to the ground and mercilessly put the
residents of that sacred place to the sword; having killed 'Abdullah ibn
az-Zubayr in the Mosque of al-Haram, he desecrated the holy place and
finally killed his cousin Sa'id ibn Ashdaq, who had been his former
ally.

We must ask ourselves whether the perpetrator of such heinous crimes be
called a Muslim. What should we think of his being called "Khalifatu
'l-Muslimin" (the Caliph of the Muslims)?

In truth, the entire government of the Marwanids Was run on the same
lines, and, with the exception of. Umar ibn 'Abdu 'l-'Aziz, every ruler
showed the same Outrageous tendencies. Thereafter followed the rule of
the 'Abbasids. During their period the height of tyranny far exceeded
that of the Marwanids. A poet of that time said: We would have preferred
to suffer the Marwanids oppression forever. May the justice and equity
of the 'Abbasids go to hell."

How mercilessly the blood of the descendants of the Prophet (s.a.w.)
was spilled, what strange ways were adopted to annihilate them! The
literature of that time presents us with a picture of life at that time.
The poets have, in different ways, described the tyrannical acts of
these people. How true indeed is the picture drawn by a poet of
al-Mutawakkil's age who says: "God be my witness that, if the
descendants of the Umayyids have so cruelly martyred the grandson of the
Prophet (s.a.w.), these 'Abbasids, who call themselves the descendants
of the Prophet's uncle, in no way lag behind the Umayyid family in
oppression and tyranny. Just see, these tyrants have even demolished the
grave of al-Imam al-Husayn. The Banu 'Abbas are repentant, however, for
they feel regret over one thing, that they did not take part in spilling
the spotless blood of al-Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) along with Banu Umayyah;
they have tried to make amends by pulling down the grave of the Imam
(a.s.)." These are just a few examples of the character of Banu Umayyah
and the Marwanid and 'Abbasid kings.

Now, on the other hand, if you reflect upon the life of Ali (a.s.) and
his descendants, you will come to know why Shi'ism spread and how it
spread; moreover the truth will be revealed as to whether Shi'ism was
the innovation of the Iranians, or the ingenuity of the Sabeans, or
whether it was the simple and straight way of Islam as shown by Muhammad
(s.a.w.).

After the martyrdom of Sayyid ash-Shuhadah (the Leader of the Martyrs)
Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), Imam Zayb al-'Abidin (a.s.) became the head of
the 'Alawi family After the tragedy of Karbala', the Holy Imam lived a
secluded life, mostly spent either in worship of God or in giving moral
teachings and spiritual guidance to the people.

Highly pious and devout persons like Hasan al-Basri, Tawus al-Yamani,
ibn Sirin and Amr ibn al-'Ubayd were products of this very school.

The Muslims received great instruction and knowledge from the Sayyid
as-Sajjad (a.s.) at a time when the common people had been driven far
off the paths of reality.

Imam Zayn ul-'Abidin (a.s.) was succeeded by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.) who was also a shining example of the same noble character. His
legacy was handed down to Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.).

The age of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was comparatively more favourable to
the Shi'as because the Umayyid and 'Abbasid powers had been exhausted;
open tyranny and oppression became rare. Accordingly the previously
Suppressed truths and hidden realities rose like the sun and diffused
like the light. Those who had been living in 'taqiyyah', hiding their
beliefs on account of fear and danger to their lives, also disclosed
their identity. The atmosphere was well-disposed to the expansion of
Shi'ism. The Holy Imam (a.s.) spent day and night preaching; his sermons
explained the teachings of Muhammad and Al Muhammad (s.a.w.). The
teachings of the truth were now within the reach of every common man;
larger and larger groups of people began to accept the 'Ja'fari'
religion. This age was called the golden age for the propagation of
Shi'ism, because before this the Muslims could not openly profess
Shi'ism, nor even find out about its teachings.

This academy of learning was Iike a flowing river where people in quest
of knowledge came to quench their thirst and later quenched the thirst
of others. According to Abu 'l-Hasan al-Washsha'. "I personally saw a
crowd of four thousand 'Ulama' (scholars) in the Mosque of Kufah and
heard all of them saying: 'This tradition was related to us by Ja'far
as-Sadiq (a.s.).'"

Banu Umayyah and Banu 'Abbas's wanton love for power, their stormy
violence, extreme worldliness and unlimited indulgence in luxuries,
contrasted sharply with the love for knowledge of the descendants of
'Ali (a.s.), their devotion to God, their truthfulness and their
abstention from corrupt politics, and it was this obvious contrast which
showed people the truth of Shi'ism and led to the rapid expansion of
this sect.

It goes without saying that many people's spiritual lives are ruined by
their attachment to the world. Nevertheless they too have a natural
feeling for the different branches of learning and the validity of
religious matters.

The period about which we are talking was not only close to the period
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), but also the mind of the common Muslims
were imbued with the conviction that the Islamic way of life was endowed
with countless blessings. The Quranic teachings gave them rights which
they had never imagined existed. It was Islam which conquered the
Caesars of Rome and the Emperors of Iran; it was in the name of Islam
alone that they were the rulers of the east and the west; they also knew
that there was sufficient liberality within the laws of this religion to
enable all to accept it without hardship. If the modus operandi is
lawful, it does not restrain anybody from gaining worldly wealth. This
religion is, in fact, pure mercy.

These inner feelings were the hidden motives which made the masses
incline towards a religious way of life.

There always exist men who know that they should mould their social
life according to the light of religious commandment. There are always
men who desire that their entire culture be completely Islamic. But
where could they pin the necessary learning from? Could they get it from
the despots, who claimed to be "khulafa'u 'l-muslimin" (Caliphs of the
Muslims) but did not live accordingly?

Of course, the desire for knowledge was fulfilled by the descendants of
Muhammad (s.a.w.) who were the treasure houses of the Quran and the
repositories of knowledge, and a vivid impression of their superiority
was stamped on the minds of the common people; gradually the Muslims
began to believe that it was these persons who were the true heirs to
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), and that the right of the Imamate must be
theirs alone.

The Shi'as grew so firm that they were ready to undergo anything to
protect their faith. Most of the Shi'as proved to be immeasurably brave,
valiant and inspired with the spirit of sacrifice; Hajar ibn 'Adi
al-Kindi, 'Amr ibn Himq al-Khuza'i, Rushayd al-Hajari and 'Abdullah ibn
Afif al-Azdi to name but a few, were stalwart Shi'as who, on various
occasions, confronted the antagonists; they triumphed despite the fact
that the opposite group was always materially more powerful. The moral
strength of these people showed the weakness of the apparently strong
armies of the enemy; their sacrifices, on the one hand, shook the
governments of the oppressors to their foundations, and, on the other,
awakened the intellect of the elite and changed the way of thinking of
the masses.

We must ask why these chivalrous men played with death in this way. Did
they expect any worldly gain from the descendants of Muhammad (s.a.w.)?
Were they afraid of loss of life and property? History has answered both
these questions in the negative; the sons of 'Ali (a.s.), it is true,
were bereft of material means, but they had no interest in this world.
What had they to give? They gave Islam to those thirsty for the truth;
the luminous hearts of these fighters were filled with strong faith and
perfect sincerity and it was these very sentiments which drove them to
do battle against tyranny and corruption.

If one considers the literary men of the first and second century of
the hijrah, we will find that, in spite of the atmosphere of fear and
despair, the poets of the time expressed their aversion towards the
kings of their age and their misdeeds and praised the Ahlu 'l-bayt of
Muhammad al-Mustafa (s.a.w.).

Numerous men of letters have testified against the ruling Caliphs and
in favour of the true Imams (a.s.) in their works. Farazdaq, Kumayt,
Sayyid al-Humayri, Du'bil, Diku'l-Jin, Abu Tamam al-Balarri'and Abu
Faras al-Hamdani are full of praise for the holy progeny. The following
couplet of Abu Faras clearly shows how the poets of that age felt at
that time.

"Religion has been shattered to pieces. Truth has be come the victim of
oppression and the share of the descendants of the Prophet of God has
been usurped."

Du'bil says: "I have been courting death for forty years, but no one
has yet accepted to be the killer." Du'bil railed at Harun ar-Rashid,
al-Ma'mun and al-Mu'tasim, and yet composed a great many famous
panegyrics in praise of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam Musa al-Kazim
(a.s.) and Imam ar-Rida (a.s.) in the most colourful verse.

We must ask whether the Shi'as endangered their lives in vain? Did they
give up their ease and comfort without any rhyme or reason? When we
examine the causes and motives for their sacrifices, we find that it was
only the truthfulness of the descendants of the Prophet (s.a.w.) which
made them despise the sky-high golden palaces and attracted their
attention towards the miracle of the Quran.

We could pursue this discussion further but the aim of the introduction
was merely to outline the origin and rise of Shi'ism. We hope nothing
has been left ambiguous despite the brevity of this account. We can only
emphasize that Shi'ism was started by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) himself,
and its spread and propagation is a historical fact. We may observe the
series of causes and motives, connected in a regular sequence, which
gave rise to the separation of Shi'a Islam from the Islam of the rest of
the community.

