Part 2 :the Fundamentals of the Religion
========================================

Before we deal with the roots and the articles of faith in detail, we
may divide our study of the Shi'a religion according to five
principles:

1. Knowledge of God.
2. Identification of His Prophet
3. How to worship.
4. Doing good actions and refraining from bad ones.
5. Belief in ma'ad (the Day of Judgement), and punishment and reward

There are two parts to religion - theoretical and practical - or, more
precisely, belief or faith in God and the unseen, and daily action based
on this belief.

Tawhid (monotheism), Prophethood and ma'ad (the Day of Judgement) are
the three basic arkan (pillars) of Islam. If anyone denies one of the
arkan, he is neither a Muslim nor a believer (u'min); if he does believe
in them he will be counted among the Muslims according to God Almighty
(refer to the following words which have been taken from the Quranic
text: "He who believes in God, His Prophet and the Day of Judgement"),
and shall be entitled to all the rights of the Muslims. According to the
holy verse the Muslim is the "one who believes in God, His Prophet and
also performs good actions"; the "iman" (faith) of a Muslim refers to
"belief in his heart, verbal acknowledgment and performance of
fundamental acts".

One may add another "rukn" (pillar) to these three, which is the
obligatory acts on which the entire Islamic way of life depends. These
obligatory acts are of five kinds: (1) salat (prayers), (2) fasting, (3)
zakat (generally speaking, the Islamic system of taxation), (4) hajj and
(5) jihad (strivin or exerting oneself (even to the ex tent of fighting)
for Islam).

We may explain the difference between Islam and iman as a matter-of
degree. This difference is based on the words of God Almighty in the
surah "al-Hujurat", "The Arabs say: 'We have iman!' Say (to them, O
Muhammad): 'You do not have iman; but say "we have accepted Islam
(aslamna: lit. we have submitted)", for iman has not yet entered your
hearts.'" For further elucidation, He says in another verse: "Verily,
the believers (mu'minin) are those who accepted faith in God and His
Prophet and never after that entertained any doubt; also they performed
jihad with their life and wealth in the way of God - they alone are the
true believers." "Iman" thus means the combination of testifying one's
belief, and of acting in accordance with it. These are the basic beliefs
of all the Muslim. The Shi'as have another "rukn" thus bringing the
total to five principles. This fifth pillar is faith in the imamate.

According to the Shi'a point of view, the Imamate, like Prophethood, is
divine vicegerency. Just as it is God Almighty Who chose one from
amongst His servants for the rank of Prophethood or Messengership, in
the same way it is God Who chooses the Imams. God Almighty Himself
commanded His Prophet to announce the Imamate (spiritual leadership) of
the selected person before his death.

The Prophet, according to divine command, chose a leader for mankind to
protect and complete the religious code. The only difference between a
Prophet and an Imam is that the Prophet receives "wahy" (revelation)
from God, while the Imam, through a special blessing, receives commands
from the prophet. So the prophet is the messenger of God and the Imam is
the messenger of the Prophet.

The Imamate comprises twelve perfect persons, and every Imam appoints
his successor by a specific indication (nass). Like all Prophets, the
Imams are also infallible; there is no possibility of their committing
any sin. The infallibility of the Imam is clearly proved from what God
Almighty says in the Holy Quran: "Verily, I make you an Imam for
mankind. He (Abraham) said: "And of my offspring?" He said: "My covenant
does not reach to the unjust."

Moreover, an Imam is superior to all men in all matters of knowledge
and character, since the very purpose of the Imamate is that humanity
may be exalted to the highest stage and may be adorned with knowledge
and good actions through the imitation of the Imam. What has been said
in the Holy Quran about Prophethood (that the Prophets have been sent to
people as His signs, to teach them the Book and Wisdom), is equally
applicable to an Imam too, because an imperfect person cannot make
mother person perfect. What can someone give to another, when he does
not possess anything himself? A misguided man cannot guide another man.
Judged accordingly, an Imam is a little below the Prophet, but over
every human being.

Anyone who believes in the Imam is called, according to the Shi'a
terminology, a "mu'min" (a man of faith and trust) in the special sense.
Anyone who acknowledges the four fundamentals, which are the centre of
faith of all the Muslims, is called a "Muslim" and a "mu'min" in a
general sense; as has been said earlier, all Islamic laws apply to him:
the protection of his life, property, respect and honour is obligatory.
By only refusing to acknowledge the Imamate, a person cannot be excluded
from the Islamic fold. Of course, on the Day of Judgement, and in the
stages of nearness to God and "karamat" (miraculous signs), the Shi'a
faith will reveal its excellence over the Islam of the majority.

All Muslims are equal in the world and are brothers, but in the next
world there will certainly be a difference of ranks. People will be
accorded positions according to their performance and intention. The
final decision is in God's hands in these matters, and it is therefore
better for us not to involve ourselves.

We have explained that that which distinguishes the Shi'a from the
Sunni Muslims is their belief in the Imamate of the Twelve Imams, and it
is for this reason that this sect is called "Imamiyah". It should be
noted that all Shi'as are not Imamiyah, because the word Shi'a applies
to the Zaydiyah, the Isma'iliyah, the Waqifiyah and the Fathiyah as
well. These are sects which are counted as Muslim. But a more careful
study of other sects will show that there are many which are totally
excluded from Islam, but which, nevertheless, are sometimes still called
Shi'a as, for instance, the Khitabiyah, who are an example of the
hundred or more sects which cannot be regarded as Muslim.

At the present time, however, the word of Shi'a specifically refers to
the Imamiyah sect; which is the biggest body of Muslims in the world of
Islam after the Sunnis.

In Islamic learning, faith in the twelve imams is not anything new; it
is referred to in all reliable and authentic books by Muslim authors.
The Imams Muslim and al-Bukhari narrated traditions concerning the
twelve Imams in their Sahihs in different ways. A few of them are given
here:

1. Jabir ibn Samrah says, "One day when I went to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) along with my father, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: 'The
universe shall not come to an end until all the twelve caliphs have
appeared.' After this the Prophet (s.a.w.) said something silently,
which I could not hear. I asked my father what the Prophet of Islam
(s.a.w.) had said. He said: "The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) says that all of
them shall be from the Quraysh."

2. Another tradition says: "So long as there are the twelve
authorities, the Muslims will continue to exist."

3. Again: "So long as there are the twelve caliphs, the grandeur and
majesty of Islam shall live on.

4. God knows who these twelve caliphs are. The Holy Prophet's statement
that "after me the caliphate shall remain for thirty years, then it will
become the object of deceit and fraud" is well known to all Muslims both
Shi'a and Sunni.

We do not want to enter into discussion and arguments concerning this
topic. If anyone seeks a complete proof of the existence of the twelve
Imams, he can study the thousands of volumes devoted to this subject.

**The Fundamental Beliefs**

From the Shi'a point of view, the religion is divided into two
sections: knowledge and practice. That is, matters concerning the
intellect, and matters relating to the human body. Those matters which
concern knowledge or wisdom, are called "Usul ad-din" (fundamentals of
religion) and they are five: (1) tawhid (monotheism), (2) nubuwah
(Prophethood), (3) the Imamate (Vicegerency), (4) 'adl (Justice) and (5)
ma'ad (the Day of Judgement). We shall explain each topic separately.

**Tawhid (monotheism):**

According to the Imamiyah faith, every sane thinking person has a moral
duty to know his Creator. He should believe in His Oneness and Divinity,
and should ascribe no partner to Him in His Actions. He should also
believe that creation, sustenance, life and death are governed by Him
alone. He is the All-pervading, and if somebody ascribes sustenance,
creation, or the giving of life and death to anyone else except God, he
will be considered an unbeliever (kafir), someone who ascribes partners
to God in His work (mushrik) and will be excluded from the Islamic
fold.

Similarly, in obedience and worship of God sincerity is necessary. That
is, if somebody worships anything else other than God Almighty, or
adores someone or something else, or considers worship of something
other than Him as a means of nearness to Him, he also, according to the
Imamiyah faith, shall be regarded as an unbeliever.

Worship of anyone except God, the One without any partner, is not
lawful. Obedience to anybody except God the Almighty, the Holy Prophets,
and the Holy Imams is also not permissible.

Obedience to the Prophets and the Imams is indirectly obedience to God,
because they are the ones who proclaim of the divine command; but to
obey them with the idea that it is worship of God is unlawful and purely
a satanic deceit. To seek blessings from these revered persons, to make
them a means of intervention between ourselves and God, and also to
offer certain prayers at their graves is lawful because this is worship
of God and not worship of them. This is quite an obvious difference.
According to the Holy words of God the Almighty, "in houses which God
has permitted to be raised to honour, for the celebration in them of his
name", it is lawful to offer prayers to God in these sacred places. This
is the faith of "tawhid" of the Imamiyah sect, which is unanimously
supported by all our 'ulama'.

The subject of the monotheism has been divided into several types:
"tawhid ad-hdhat" (the Essence of the one God), "tawhid as-siffat" (the
Attributes of the One God), "tawhid al-af'al" (the Actions of the One
God). For the sake of brevity we will not dwell on this topic.


