Prophethood
===========

Imamiyah Shi'as believe that all the Prophets were appointed by God;
all of them were sent by Him and they are all His exalted servants.
Hadrat Muhammad al-Mustafa (s.a.w.) is both the "Seal of the Prophets"
(the final prophet) and the Chief of all the Prophets. He was perfectly
infallible, free from sin and deviation. All his life the Holy Prophet
acted according to the will of God Almighty; God enabled him to travel
from Masjid al-Haram to Masjid al-Aqsa, from where he went bodily to
al-'Arsh and al-Kursi (the throne and the footstool) and even beyond the
"hujub" (the veils) and the "suradiq" (the highest point beyond the
heaven of heavens); he finally came to within two bow spans or less of
the presence of God.

It is the firm faith of the Imamiyah Shi'as that whoever claims
prophethood or revelation after Hadrat Muhammad al-Mustafa (s.a.w.) is
an unbeliever and liable to be put to death.

The Quran which today is in the hands of the Muslims is the same text
of guidance and religious commands which God the Almighty revealed as a
miracle. There has been no addition to, or subtraction from, it. Muslims
believe in "tahrif" (changes in the original) ,are wrong, because it
violates the Quranic declaration: "We have revealed the Book and We are
its Protector". All the 'ulama' (religious scholars) are unanimous on
this point, and if there is any tradition against it, it is unauthentic;
any tradition which has come down to us through imperfect chains of
transmission cannot be relied upon as source of knowledge and cannot
thus be acted upon.

**The Imamate**

It is the question of the Imamate which distinguishes the Shi'a sect
from all other sects; it is the basic and fundamental difference which
separates this school from other schools of thought. Other differences
are not fundamental; they are "furu'i" (that is they are concerned with
the details of the code of writing and action). Such differences of
secondary importance are present between the views of the Imams
(religious heads) of the majority community of the Muslims. For
instance, a large number of the Hanafi laws do not correspond with the
laws of Shafi'is- According to the Imamiyah sect, the Imamate is the
rank of the Perfect Man; like prophethood it is sustained by Almighty
God for the guidance of the people. The Shi'as believe that Almighty God
ordered His Prophet (s.a.w.) to appoint 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) as his
successor, so that after the end of Prophethood the mission of spreading
Islam might be continued. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) knew that this
appointment would be looked at with displeasure by others. Many of them
would think that it was due merely to brotherly love or undue regard for
his son-in-law.

It is quite obvious that from the beginning of the Islamic era until
the present age the Muslims have in general not truly followed the Holy
Prophet's guidance. The All powerful declared in very clear words: "Oh
Prophet, deliver immediately what you have been commanded to from your
Lord and if you do it not, then (it will be as in you have not delivered
His message (at all)". Accordingly after his last hajj the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) gathered the people at "Ghadir al-Khum" and addressed them
thus: "Am I not better than every believer present here?" Then all of
them said with one voice: "Certainly, O Prophet of God. You are superior
to all of us."

After this testimony of allegiance the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said:
"Whoever has accepted me as his master, then 'Ali is his master . . . "
Moreover, on various other occasions, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) clearly
explained the reality of the Imamate, sometimes by implication and
sometimes quite openly. The Prophet thus performed his duty and God 's
command was carried out. As soon as the Holy Prophet had breathed his
last breath some Muslims presumptuously tried to hide the reality of the
Imamate. They misconstrued the open declaration, and through their
personal interpretation began to make changes in the religious commands.
The result is well known as we have seen.

However 'Ali (a.s.) and his group, which comprised high-ranking sahaba
(companions) kept aloof from this selfish struggle for power and refused
to offer allegiance.

Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) remained silent for some time; out of
consideration for Islamic unity, but when Mu'awiyah tried to bring the
Islamic rule and authority under his subjugation and started destructive
activities, Amir al-Mu'minin set himself against him; supporting a man
like Mu'awiyah and tolerating his wrong policies would have been a
deadly poison for Islam, and it was the foremost duty of Hadrat, Ali
(a.s.) to protect the divine religion.

The Imamiyah believe that spiritually they are with 'Ali (a.s.) and are
his followers; anyone who takes 'Ali as a friend, we too are friends of
that person, and of whoever takes 'Ali (a.s.) as an enemy, we also are
his enemy. This faith is based on the Holy Prophet's words: "Oh God, be
a friend of the one who loves 'Ali (a.s.) and be an enemy of the one who
is an enemy of 'Ali (a.s.)."

The Imamiyah Shi'as believe that Almighty God never leaves the world
without a Prophet or an Imam whether this "proof of God" is apparent or
hidden. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), through an explicit ordinance, made
'Ali al-Murtada (a.s.) his successor. 'Ali (a.s.) made al-Hasan (a.s.)
his successor, and Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) made his brother Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) his successor. In this way this chain continued until the
eleventh Imam. The Eleventh spiritual guide Imam al-Hasan al-' Askari
(a.s.) was succeeded by his son the twelfth Imam, the Imam of the Age,
the Awaited One (a.s.), vicegerent of God. This belief is not an
innovation of the Shi'as, rather it is a divine practice, which started
with Adam (a.s.) and continued until the last Prophet (s.a.w.).

There are innumerable books written by eminent 'ulama' on this topic.
We give below the names of some 'ulama' of early centuries who have
written on the topic of "wasiyah" (succession).

1). Hisham ibn al-Hakam.
2). Husayn ibn Sa'id
3). 'Ali ibn Miskini
4). 'Aliibn al-Mughirah
5). 'Aliibn Husayn ibn Fadl.
6). Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'id
7). Ahmad ibn Muhammad Khalid al-Barqi, the author of "al-Mahasin".
8). The great historian 'Abdu 'l-'Aziz ibn Yahya al-Judi.

Most of these writers belong to the first and second centuries, but the
number of writings from authors of the third century hijri is also
large:

1). Yahya ibn Mustafad.
2). Muhammad ibn Ahmad as-Sabuni
3). 'Ali ibn Ra'ab
4). Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Farukh
5). The well known historian, Ali ibn al-Husayn alMas'udi, the author
of "Muruj adh-Dhahab".
6). Shaykh at-Ta'ifah Muhammad ibn al-Hasan at-Tusi
7). Muhammad ibn, Ali ash-Shalmaghani
8). Musa ibn al-Hasan ibn, Amir

Books written after the fourth century can hardly be counted.

al-Mas'udi wrote in his famous book "Ithbatu 'l-wasiyah". "Every
prophet had twelve successors". The writer also gave the names of all of
them, and wrote brief life-sketches of each; at the end of the work he
writes in more detail about the twelve Imams.

The Shi'as have been the target of attack from both Muslim and
non-Muslim groups concerning the existence of the twelfth Imam. We
should thus like to explain the reality of this belief in a few words.
Those who object think that the Shi'as believe in a baseless and
ridiculous thing.

When we examine the view-point of these critics however we find that it
is based on two rather naive doubts; the first being "How can a person
naturally live for more than a thousand years?" and the second, "What
advantage is gained from his disappearance?" or "What is the use of a
hidden Imam whose existence and non-existence are both equal?" As to the
first doubt, we should like to draw the reader's attention to the
prophet Nuh's age. According to clear Qur'anic statements the prophet
Nuh lived for nine hundred and fifty years, calling the people to God
among his nation; according to the opinion stated by the 'ulama' his age
was at least one thousand six hundred years, and a number of other
scholars have gone so far as to say that he lived to be three thousand
years old. The scholars of hadith of the majority community also
acknowledge the longevity of other persons besides Nuh (a.s.). The great
scholar an-Nuwi in his book "Tahdhibu 'l-Asma"' writes: "Though there is
a difference of opinion among the 'ulama' about the age and the
Prophethood of Hadrat Khidr (a.s.), the majority of scholars admit that
Khidr is still present with us. The Sufis, moreover, unanimously declare
that he is still alive, and innumerable stories about his meetings with
people, and about what was said at these meetings, are quite
well-known."

Shaykh Abu 'Umar ibn Salah writes in his "Fatawa": "The majority of the
'ulama' decided that Hadrat Khidr is alive, but some of the scholars of
hadith do not accept it." I seem to recall that in another work Shaykh
Abu 'Umar wrote (and az-Zamakhshari also has written this in his Rabi'u
'l-abrar) that the Muslims are unanimous in their belief that four
prophets (a.s.) are still alive among us. Two of them are in the sky,
that is 'Isa (a.s.) and Idris (a.s.), and two are on the earth and these
are Khidr and Ilyas. Hadrat Khidr was born in the time of Ibrahim
Khalilu 'llah (a.s.). Thus we have clear proof of the existence of
persons who lived for hundreds of years. 'Allamah as-Sayyid al-Murtada
has written in his "Imali" about persons who have lived to a great age
and as-Shaykh as-Saduq has given an even a longer list in his "Kamal
ad-Din". Even in the present age we find some people who have lived for
a hundred and thirty years, and some for even longer.

Logically we may pose the question: "If someone is capable of living to
an abnormal age, say a hundred and thirty, then is it possible that in
extraordinary conditions a man may live to be a thousand?" At the most
you can call it something super-normal. Moreover, is super-normality in
the case of Prophets and the "awliyah" (those near to God) a
particularly strange thing?

If one turns over the pages of the old volumes of "Majallatu
'l-Muqtatif", you will find that they are full of articles written by
western scholars who have scientifically proved that man can
theoretically attain eternal life in this world. Some western thinkers
even say. "If Ibn Muljim's sword had not struck 'Ali ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.), he would have lived forever. We are justified in this
supposition because the Holy Imam was endowed with such qualities of
excellence and healthy liying." Much could be added on this topic but
the scope of this book does not allow further discussion.

Concerning the second objection, we might ask whether it is fitting
that the Muslim nation should know every detail of divine will and
intention. Is it necessary to know all the secrets of the world and of
the religious commands?

Before demanding such knowledge we must carefully think whether under
the screen of some outwardly incomprehensible divine command there is
also hidden some other secret. For example, a stone, in itself, neither
benefits nor harms man. Nevertheless, we kiss the Hajaru 'l-Aswad (the
black stone in the Ka'bah). What is the wisdom hidden behind that, we
may ask.

The "maghrib" prayers are offered in three rak'ahs (units); the "isha''
prayers are performed in four units. The morning prayers consist of only
two units. What expediency is there in this difference of units?

Rather we must realise that there are a large number of matters of
which neither archangel nor prophet has any knowledge; concerning the
knowledge of the last hour, God, the Almighty says: "Verily God alone
has knowledge of the Hour, the Day of Judgement and when it will rain."
A part from this, there are many other things which have been kept
secret from us and their justification is unknown; we may refer, for
example, to "ismu 'l-'azam" (the Greatest Name), "laylatu 'l-qadr" (the
time for the acceptance of Invocation). We would like to make clear by
the above examples that one need not be amazed at those divine matters
whose wisdom is not apparent. Rather, we should recognise that an order
or action exists, and act accordingly as believing Muslims.

If something is proved by the authentic statements of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and his infallible successors, we must accept it. There is no
other option: to enter into an argument about the nature of wisdom and
man's obligation to find a reason for everything would be in vain. As
far as possible we have deliberately not provided arguments and proofs
in this small booklet; there are already large volumes in which these
points have been discussed in detail; likewise we examine the "Qa'im
Al-Muhammad", the presently existing descendant of Muhammad (s.a.w.).
There are a great number of authentic traditions concerning the "qiyam"
of al-Mahdi (the rising of the twelfth Imam) in books of knowledge of
both sects.

Though we acknowledge the fact that God knows better the wisdom about
the occultation of Imam al-Mahdi, we would nevertheless point out that a
number of rational proofs have already been given in reply to some Shi'a
questionners. The decisive fact to bear in mind is that in every age the
existence of an Imam is necessary; the world cannot remain without a
divinely appointed guide; his very existence is a blessing for mankind,
and his authority over us is also a blessing. The question of the wisdom
hidden in this action of God's is thus invalid (a blessing cannot be
rationalised) and acknowledgment of the "ghaybah" (occultation) is a
necessary duty of every obedient Muslim.

**'Adl (Justice)**

God the Almighty is not unjust to anybody, nor does He commit any
action which could be considered bad by man's primordial sense- This is
what is known as'adl (justice). Justice is one of the attributes of
Almighty God , existence of which is necessary. It is essential, like
all the other attributes of Oneness. The Ash'arites differ greatly in
their beliefs from the Imamiyah and the Mu'tazilah (the Imamiyah and the
Mu'tazilah are both called "'Adliyah") The reason for this opposition is
that the Ash'arites reject "goodness and badness" as rational concepts,
and affirm rather that "goodness" is that which is called "good" by
religion, and "badness" that which the code of religion calls "bad".
They regard knowledge of the Creator and recognition of the prophets as
being outside the scope of the intellect; they accept miracles according
to the dictates of religion, and they completely discard the dictates of
wisdom. Consequently they are in perplexity.

The '"Adliyah" (that is, the Imamiyah and the Mu'tazilah) maintain that
Islam is in accordance with reason.

Reason considers some actions good and some actions bad, and it is
reason too which considers a bad act to be impossible for God the
Almighty. He is All-wise and a bad action would be contrary to the
dictates of His wisdom.

To chastise an obedient person is unjust, and injustice is a bad
action; reason assures us that the Creator of the world could not
unjustly chastise obedient Muslims as this would be a bad action.

The Imamiyah sect have paid special attention to the problem of 'adl
and have included this attribute among the fundamentals of religion. (It
is worthy of note here that the Ash'arites do not themselves deny
justice; their faith in this respect is that whatever God the Almighty
does cannot affect justice and goodness; they are of the view that
wisdom is so insignificant that it cannot decide as to whether one thing
is appropriate for God and another thing inappropriate.) The Imamiyah
have clearly demonstrated that the best criterion for testing goodness
and badness is wisdom. It is through this means that we have come to the
conclusion that the All-perfect Being (God) must have all good
attributes and be free from all imperfections.

On the basis of this view of goodness and badness, and faith in the
justice of God, certain other beliefs have formed: the notion of "lutf"
(God's all-permeating benevolence and blessing), and the belief that it
is the duty of a Muslim to thank God, Who has given him everything. The
notions of "jabr" and "iktiyar" (the coercion of man by God and the
freedom of man to act as he wishes respectively) are closely connected
to the ideas of goodness and badness.

Absolute destiny and freewill have always been a major subject of
discussion in every philosophy or religion. The Ash'arites believed in
"jabr", and the Mu'tazilah and the Imamiyah held and still hold the view
that every man is free and independent: he can do everything
voluntarily, and perform all his actions with his own will; Like the
existence of self, the faculty of volition is also a gift from God. The
Creator of the universe created people and gave them freedom of action;
absolute authority is God's alone, but in his day-to-day speech and
actions man is quite independent. God, the Almighty, neither forces
anyone to some action, nor restrains him from doing it; the sons of Adam
do as they please. It is for the same reason that the intellect demands
that a crime be punished and a good act rewarded or praised.

If we do not follow this basic rule, reward and punishment, the sending
of the prophets, the revelation of the Books, and the promise of Gehenna
or Paradise in the hereafter becomes meaningless.

There is, unfortunately, no further room for discussion within the
restricted framework of this book. We would refer the reader to part I
of our book "ad-Din wa 'l-Islam".

In short the Imamiyah religion believes that God is "adil" (just) and
that man is independent and free to act Ma'ad (the Day of Judgement)

Like all Muslims, the Shi'as believe that Almighty God will bring all
people to life again for accountability, punishment and reward on the
Day of Judgement. Ma'ad involves the appearance of every person before
his Lord in exactly the same human bodily form he had while on earth. It
is not necessary to know in what way the return will be effected;
suffice it to say that whatever has been stated about final requital and
accountability in the Book of God and the authentic traditions is a part
of our faith, namely, belief in hell or paradise, comfort or pain in
"al-barzakh" (i.e. purgatory), "al-mizan" (the balance), "'as-sirat"
(the path), "'al-a'raf" ("the heights", a place situated between
paradise and hell), and "kitabu 'l-a'mal" (the record of deeds) which
will show all the deeds one has done in one's life. The Shi'as therefore
finally believe that every one shall be entitled to receive punishment
or reward according to his deeds. Good actions shall be rewarded and bad
actions shall entail punishment: God says in the glorious Qur'an:
"Whoever does an atoms weight of goodness will see it on the last day,
and whoever does an atom's weight of bad will see it on the last day."

