Part 3 :the Shi'ah - the Divine Code of Living
==============================================

The Imamiyah Shi'as believe that an ordinance or order of the Islamic
code exists for every matter of life. The Divine Law has not even
ignored the "diyat" (conciliation money) for injury of a very minor
nature. There is no action of a "mukallaf" (a sane, adult person) which
does not come under the scope of the following definitions: "wajib"
(compulsory); "haram" (unlawful); mustahabb (desirable); makruh
(undesirable) and mubah (lawful). Whether it is a matter of mutual
transactions, trade, marriage or a promise and a pledge, the religious
code will certainly guide us as to whether it is right or wrong.

The personality of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was the fountainhead of
all divine orders. God the Almighty conveyed these orders to the last
Prophet (s.a.w.) through "wahy" (revelation through Jibril) or "ilham"
(divine inspiration). The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) communicated them to the
people according to the circumstances prevailing, particularly to those
companions who had been close to him at all times, so that they might
carry on the mission of preaching throughout the whole world. There were
many ordinances however which could not be taught, because the time for
them was not opportune, or because there was no need for them during the
time of the Prophet (it is also possible that they could not be
promulgated for some particular reason known only to God). Hence some
orders were known while some remained secret. The Holy Prophet entrusted
these secret ordinances to his (divinely appointed) vicegerents. Later
every "wasi" (vicegerent) communicated them to his successor, so that,
according to the need of the hour and the spirit of the time, they might
be made public.

The Holy Prophet taught as much as he thought proper for the situation
and as much as the companions could understand according to their
intellect. The recipients of this teaching were blessed according to
their own capacity. It also happened that one companion received a
positive order concerning a certain matter, and others heard a negative
order in a matter resembling the former. The result was that the act was
one but orders were (seemingly) two.

We must ask what the cause of this difference was. The reality of the
situation was such that each matter was slightly different from the
other: each had a particular distinguishing aspect. Those present who
reported what happened at the scene, either did not pay attention to
this or that peculiarity, or, if they did recognise it, did not mention
this or that particular aspect. Because of inaccurate description of the
circumstances, traditions may appear to contradict each other, but in
reality they each apply to different circumstances. This inaccuracy
caused difficulties in recognising the exact meaning of an instruction
given to us by the Prophet. Accordingly, the companions who had the
honour of close companionship with the Prophet supported "ijtihad". That
is they realised the necessity for a thorough investigation of the text
of the hadith and the situation in which it occurred. The different
aspects of the hadith were probed, since the apparent meaning of the
tradition is often different from the real aim of the codifier. It has
been pointed out earlier, that these difference were largely due to
faulty copying or shortcomings on the part of the reporters.

Those companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) who were just and
trustworthy and who were also reporters of traditions sometimes
reproduced the statement of the Prophet (s.a.w.) in exactly the same
words in which they had heard it, while sometimes, in place of the text
of the tradition, they would state the order or commandment which was
inferred from the tradition in question. In the first instance their
position is that of a reporter or traditionalist, and in the second they
have the position of learned scholars who declare their opinion about
the meaning of the hadiths; the latter are also called "mujtihids".

All Muslims who do not have this ability and so therefore follow the
opinion of the mujtahid, are called "muqallid". The act of acting on the
verdicts of a mujtahid is called "taqlid".

After a thorough examination of this matter we find that during the
time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), the door of ijtihad was open and the
companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) themselves acted upon it; of course
at that time ijtihad was not so strong as it is today, because the
people could ask the Prophet (s.a.w.) directly about any matter they
were not sure of.

As time passed, however, and relations between the Arabs and non-Arabs
increased, there were difficulties in understanding the correct meanings
of the Arabic language. The number of traditions and reports became
larger.

Among them were very many doubtful and fabricated traditions. At this
stage it was not easy to test the validity of the religious orders.
Accordingly "ijtihad" grew stronger and the modes of analysis of hadith
were refined: scholars began to distinguish between correct and the
faulty statements. The principle of preference was put into practice
after a thorough investigation of two conflicting hadiths. Among the
Imamiyah sect this blessing still exists.

We may observe, moreover, that all people are from one of two groups
according to whether they have knowledge or not. Those without knowledge
have to seek the help of the other group in all matters of which they
are ignorant. Similarly in the religious world there are also two
classes: the learned mujtahid and the ignorant muqallid.

As a matter of principle, the people of the second class should turn to
the people of the first class in order to learn what they themselves do
not know. Like all other Muslims the Shi'a believe that all religious
orders are based upon the "kitab" (Qur'an), and the "sunnah" (the
sayings, practise or approval of the Prophet, and, in Shi'ite Islam, the
Imams). They add to these "aql" (intellectual reasoning) and "ijma"
(consensus of opinion). The Imamiyah sect do not agree with others in
the following matters.

Firstly, the Shi'as never act upon "qiyas" (arrival at decisions
through analogy and reasoned supposition) because their Imams have on
many occasions said that if supposition is allowed in religious matters
the entire structure of religion will be dashed to the ground. We would
have stated in detail the evils of such a method had not the aim of this
book been merely to outline the fundamentals of Shi'a beliefs.

Secondly, if a tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) comes through the
Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.) it is reliable, otherwise it is unacceptable. The
unauthentic traditions, reported by persons like Abu Hurayrah, Samrah
ibn Jundub, Marwan ibn Hakam, 'Imran ibn Hattan al-Kharji and 'Amr ibn
al-'As for example, have no value in our eyes. Even the Sunni 'ulama'
have strongly condemned these reporters, and have revealed the selfish
or political motives for their reporting false hadiths.

Thirdly, as we have seen, the door of "ijtihad" is still open and shall
remain open forever. Among the majority community, however, the doors of
ijtihad are locked. When and on what basis this practice started cannot
perhaps be adequately answered even by their 'ulama' themselves.

Besides these three matters, all other differences pertain to the
articles of practice.

One who, by reasoning and logic, gains the power of drawing conclusions
and making inferences can be said to have reached the rank of being able
to do ijtihad; the mujtahid however should possess certain other
qualities if we are to accept what he says about the divine code to be
followed. The most important quality is that he possess a sense of
"adalah'' (justice). "Adalah'' means that quality of the inner spirit
with which a man can abstain from carnal desires and can develop a
command over the correct performance of compulsory acts. In other words
it is the state of fear of God which always permeates the just man's
mind. It is of several degrees, the highest being the degree of "ismah"
(infallibility) which is a condition for the Imamate.

Besides this there are necessary or obvious matters (those matters
which pertain to sure knowledge in which there is neither "taqlid" nor
"ijtihad", for instance the compulsion to "sawm" (fasting) and "salat"
(prayers).

Similarly the fundamentals of religion are also beyond the sphere of
"taqlid", because they are matters for personal investigation on the
part of every adult person: this search to determine for oneself the
truth and reality of the fundamentals of Islam depends on the
corresponding sagacity, understanding and cognition of each individual
and cannot be left to the opinion of others. All other matters
concerning the articles of practice come under the scope of "ijtihad"
and "taqlid". indeed every action of man is encompassed by this code of
religion. Hence to know the corresponding law for each action is very
necessary. There are only two ways of arriving at this knowledge: taqlid
or ijtihad. It should be remembered that it is incumbent on each Muslim
to make use of one of these two ways; if not, he will have to suffer
punishment on the Day of Judgement. We may describe a Muslim's actions
in the following way:

a) Some actions are concerned with God and His servants. These are
called "ibadat" (acts of service or slavery). Their correctness depends
upon one's making the intention of coming closer to God. "Ibadat" may be
either physical, like "salat" (prayer), "sawm" (fasting) and "hajj"
(making the pilgrimage to Makkah), or financial like "khums" (a giving
of one-fifth of certain commodities: e.g. booty of war, treasure-trove,
wealth from mineral desposits), "zakat", "kaffarat" (fines or
penalties).

b) Some actions pertain to the individual and his relations with
society. They are of two kinds: involving agreement between two persons
(such as mutual transactions and marriage), and others involving the
decision of just one party (for instance "talaq" (divorce) and "itq"
(the setting free of a slave).

c) Some actions are purely individual and personal; for example,
eating, drinking and the clothes one chooses to wear.

