Fiqh (jurisprudence)
====================

Fiqh deals with all the orders and commandments which govern the
previously mentioned actions. The most important acts of 'ibadat are six
in number: two are purely physical ("salat" and "sawm"), two are purely
"financial" ("khums" and "zakat"), and two are common to each category
("hajj" and "jihad"). God, the Almighty, says:

"You should perform jihad with your wealth and yourselves." (jahidu bi
amwalikum wa anfusikum). Finally, "kaffarat" (penalties) are special
kinds of punishments for particular crimes.

**1. Salat (prayer)**

Like all other Muslims, the Shi'as too regard "salat" as one of the
pillars of religion. This prayer is a means of bringing God's servant
near to Him. If one does not perform the prayer, the relation between
God and His servant is broken. That is why the traditions of Ahlu
'l-bayt (a.s.) say that not offering the prayer even once or twice is
the distinguishing mark between infidelity and Islam.

According to the religious code "salat" has great importance. No other
act of worship can bear comparison with it. The Imamiyah sect
unanimously believe that anyone who does not perform "salat" is a great
sinner: moreover he has no place in Islamic society. He is neither
credible nor trustworthy- One is even permitted to criticize him behind
his back. There are very strict orders about "salat"; five kinds of
"salat" are compulsory;

1. The five daily prayers.
2. The "salatu 'l-jum'ah" (the Friday prayers)
3. "Salatu 'l-ayat" (on the occasion of a solar or lunar eclipse, an
earthquake, or any frightening natural event).
4. "Salatu 'l-'idayn" (the salat of 'idu 'l-fitr and 'idu'l-azhar).
5. "Salatu Ka'bah).

In addition, an adult person may make "salat" compulsory for himself by
making a promise or taking an oath to perform a certain number of
prayers or by accepting a reward for performing prayers under certain
conditions. Besides these, all other kinds of salat are "nawafil"
(supererogatory prayers). The most important "nawafil" am those attached
to the five daily prayers, which are twice the number of units of the
compulsory prayers (that is thirty four units). The total number of
units of both "nawafil" and compulsory prayers is thus fifty one.

Here we remember an interesting incident which Raghib al-Isfahani wrote
about in his distinguished book "al-Muhadirat". We learn that during the
days of Ahmad ibn 'Abdu 'l-'Aziz there was a man named Kanani in
Isfahan. Ahmad was learning the correct way to do the prayers and the
basic Shi'a beliefs from Kawani. one day Ahmad's mother happened to see
them during a lesson and she said to Kanani: "Oh master, you have made
my son a Rafidi! (one of the Rafidah - i.e. a particularly zealous
Shi'a). Kanani immediately retorted: "Foolish woman! The Rafidah perform
fifty one units of prayer daily, and your son does not perform even one
unit out of the fifty one. How can he be one of the Rafidah?"

The "nawafil" of the month of Ramadan are of great blessing and
significance. Their number is one thousand. Our Sunni brothers also
perform these prayers, but in congregation (jama'ah), and they are known
among them as "tarawih" from the Shi'a point of view these prayers are
not permissible in congregation (jama'ah), because only the Friday
prayer is a compulsory congregational prayer. For details one can refer
to the tens of thousands books which contain elaborate and explicit
descriptions of the correct way to perform the various compulsory or
recommended prayers, and the numerous recitations and invocations which
are especially associated with each prayer.

According to the religious code correct "salat" depends upon three
things. Firstly, there are certain conditions which have be to be
fulfilled before the actual performance of the prayers, although they
are not included in the salat itself; these conditions are so important
that salat becomes absolutely void if they are not attended to. They are
six in number. (1) 'Taharah' (one must be in state of ritual purity);
(2) Time (each compulsory prayer, and most ofthe recommended prayers,
are to be performed. "at a particular time); (3) Qiblah (that is one
should face the'Ka'bah); (4) Covering (dress); (5) Intention (one must
make the intention to perform the prayer according to that particular
prayer); (6) Place (it must be lawfully occupied; and the place for
prostration must be pure and clean).

Secondly, the constituent parts of salat are of two kinds: they are
either considered to be a fundamental part of the prayer and thus
absolutely compulsory, or not. There are four compulsory actions. (1)
Takbiratu 'lihram (that is the initial "allahu akbar"); (2) qiyam
(standing to perform the prayer); (3) ruku' (bending for ward) and
finally sujud (prostration on the ground). Likewise there are four
conditions which are compulsory but do not make the salat void if, for
example, one unintentionally does not fulfill them: (1) qira'ah (the
reading of Surah al-Hamd and one other complete surah); (2) dhikr,
tashahud and the final salam. One must be Still and in a state of
remembrance throughout the prayer. Adhan and iqamah before the start of
the prayer are both strongly desirable (indeed almost compulsory).

The following invalidate the prayer: anything which breaks one's state
of wudu', turning one's back on the qiblah, and excessive movement. Any
other action (which is not a fundamental part of the prayer) such as
talking, laughing, weeping, looking to the right or left, eating or
drinking invalidate the prayer if done intentionally.

To purify oneself, ready for any act of 'ibadat (such as prayer), one
must make either wudu' (the minor purification) or ghusl (the major
purification). In case of absence of water, or for some other reason
like illness, unbearable cold, shortness of time, when it is not
possible to do either of these two acts of purification, their
substitute is "tayammum" (cf. the Qur'an which indicates this method of
purification: fa tayammamu sa'idan tayyiban - so perform tayammum on
pure earth - Surah al-Ma'idah). The scholars of jurisprudence and the
lexicographers give various meanings for the word "sa'id". Some of them
say it only means dust, and some say. that it means all kinds of pound
(including sand, fragments of rocks, stones, and mineral substances). We
have limited our ascription of salat to fundamentals: more detailed
studies may be found in numerous other works.

**2. Sawm (Fasting)**

According to the Shi'a faith, sawm (plural siyam), fasting, is a pillar
of the Islamic code. There are four kinds of siyam: wajib (compulsory),
mustahabb (recommended), haram (forbidden) or makruh (undesirable). The
fasts made incumbent by the shari'ah (code of religion) are those of the
Holy month of Ramadan. Other fasts become incumbent for some specific
reason, for instance "sawm kaffarah" (the penalty fast), "badal"(in lieu
of sacrificing an animal), in lieu of someone else, "nadr" (as a vow, or
oath). The fasts of the months of Rajab and Sha'ban are desirable as
well as other fasts too numerous to mention in this brief work. Fasting
on the two 'id days and "ayyam at-tashiq" (the three days after hajj) is
forbidden; to fast on the days of 'Ashurah and 'Arafat are undesirable
(according to many the 'Ashurah day fast is strictly forbidden).

Details concerning the conditions and actual performance of a certain
fast, as well as the courtesies (adab) and recitations associated with
each, may be found in the large number of books on this topic. The
Shi'as are extremely particular about the Ramadan fasts: many of them
would rather die of thirst or hunger than not undertake it.

**3. Zakat (Taxation)**

We may consider salat and sawm as two acts of worship ('ibadat) whose
immediate basis is physical rather than spiritual. Zakat is of an
entirely different nature. According to the Shi'as, after salat in rank
comes "zakat" (taxation); indeed from some of the traditions of the Holy
Imams (a.s.) it is understood that if somebody does not give "zakat" his
salat also is invalid Like all other Muslims the Imamiyah consider
"zakat" compulsory on nine things: Animals - camels, cows, goats;
Grains - wheat, barley, dates, raisins; Money - gold, silver coins.

Besides these, zakat on other things, such as all kinds of merchandise,
horses and crops is desirable. The precise conditions and regulations
can be found in the appropriate books of jurisprudence. It is
interesting to note that all the rules are in basic conformity with
those of the "fiqh" of the four Sunni schools of thought, Hanafi,
Shafi'i, Maliki and Hanbali. Among those entitled to receive zakat are
the poor and the needy, according to God the Almighty's command in Surah
at-Tawbah: innama 's-sadiqatu li 'lfuqara' wa 'l-masakin.

Zakatu 'l-fitrah (poor-tax on the day or 'idu 'l-fitr) is compulsory
for every adult and sane person who can financially support himself and
his wife and children and other members of the household dependent on
bun. Its quantity is one "sa'" (approximately 3 kilos) of wheat, barley,
or dates on behalf of every individual.

The nature of zakat is basically the same; whether from the point of
Shi'a or Sunni fiqh.

**4. Khums**

"Khums" which is another kind of tax, is compulsory on five things: the
booty taken from an enemy in war; the pearls and minerals drawn from the
sea; hidden treasures mineral substances extracted from the land; and
lawfully gained money which has been mixed with unlawful money, or
profits gained from business, or land transferred to a "dhimmi" (a
Christian or a Jew, living within the Muslim nation) from a Muslim.

The obligation of "khums" is based on the command of Almighty God :
"Know that the one fifth of what you get as booty is the share of God,
the Prophet (s.a.w.). the relations, the orphans, the beggars and the
wayfarers" (Surah Anal). Moreover, we believe that "khums" is a right
which God the Almighty particularly reserved for the descendants of
Muhammad (s.a.w.). Since charity is unlawful for the children of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) (they can not receive zakat), "khums" is a kind of
compensation from the bounty of God the Almighty.

"Khums" is divided into six parts: three are for God, the Prophet
(s.a.w.) and his kith and kin; and the other three parts must be paid to
the holy Imam, when he is present. However, "khums" should be handed
over to the representative of the Imam, that is the "just mujtahid",
when the former is in occultation, The Imam is to use these funds to
protect the religion of Islam and to complete the development plans of
the Muslim nations. This is the real purpose for which it is to be used;
it must be stressed that Sayyid Muhammad Alusi wrote in a rather
flippant manner in his commentary on the Qur'an when he said: "In these
days the money accumulated from "khums" should be placed in the
cellar."

This, in fact, refers to a fictitious story current among certain of
our Sunni brothers, which relates that the Shi'as say that their Imam
disappeared in a cellar; we need hardly point out that occultation of
the Imam had not the slightest connection with the aforementioned
cellar.

The Ithna Ashari Shi'as go to visit the cellar at Samarrah, because it
was the place where the Holy Imam used to offer "tahajjud" (mustahab
night prayers). Also that was the place where the father and the
grandfather of the Holy Imam used to offer prayers to God, the
Almighty.

The remaining three parts of "khums", as we have said, are the right of
the poor people of the Hashimi family (that is the family of the
Prophet).

Such were the commandments of "khums" which have been followed from the
time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) until now. After the death of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.), the Muslim rulers suppressed this right to "khums" of
the Al Hashim (the progeny of the Prophet) and instead collected the
money into the baytu 'l-mal in order that they themse1ves could control
its use. This family, who had no right to "zakat", were now also
deprived of "khums".

It seems that Imam Shafi'i himself, in his book entitled "Am", pointed
out that the descendents of the Prophet (s.a.w.), for whom "khums" was
set aside in place of charity, can neither be given anything out of the
prescribed charities, nor may they take it, and if the giver of charity
knowingly gives it to them he will have to forego his heavenly reward.
Moreover, he adds: "if they have been deprived of the right of "khums"
it does not mean that charity and other such things which are unlawful
for them will become lawful." Indeed, since the people in power did away
with this "right" altogether the books of jurisprudence of the majority
community are quite silent upon this topic and not surprisingly Imam
Shafi'i has omitted to mention this topic in his books on "fiqh".

In all Shi'a books of "fiqh", "khums" has been given a special chapter
just like "zakat". (we must admit however that the learned scholar Hafiz
Abu 'Ubayd al-Qasim ibn Salam (died 224 A.H.), in his great work "Kitab
al-amwal", dealt with all the problems of "khums", including the ways in
which it should be spent, in a special chapter. Most of the points he
discussed are in perfect consonance with Shi'a beliefs (vide pages
303-349).

**5. Hajj**

According to the Shi'a faith, 'hajj' (the pilgrimage to Makkah) is one
of the pillars of Islam. One who abstains from performing this duty when
he is able must die the death of a Jew or a Christian as a punishment
for his failing. Anyone who refuses to obey this divine command has come
close to the threshold of being a "kafir". God refers to such a person
in Sural Al 'Imran: "wa man kafara fa in allaha ghani un 'an al
'alamin - anyone who commits "kufr" should know that God is independent
of all the worlds."

Hajj is a kind of financial and physical "jihad". Indeed hajj should be
called the true jihad, and jihad should be called the true hajj. If we
ponder over their relationship a little carefully this hidden meaning
and basic harmony between the two will become quite apparent.

Hajj becomes obligatory for a Muslim under the following conditions: he
should have reached the age of puberty and be sane of mind; moreover he
should have sufficient financial means, be in good health and the route
leading to Makkah should be open and safe for travel. Should these
conditions be fulfilled, hajj becomes immediately "wajib" (compulsory),
but once performed, a person need never go again in his lifetime. Hajj
is of various kinds:

(1) "Hajj afrad". The basis of this is the holy verse: "For the sake of
God, hajj is compulsory for those who can reach there" (Al 'Imran:
97).

(2) "Hajj Qur'an". It is mentioned in the verse: "Complete hajj and
"umrah for the sake of God" (Al Baqarah: 196).

(3) "Hajj tamatu'". This hajj is mentioned in the following verse:
"Whoever wishes to continue the 'umrah to hajj should offer the
sacrifice which, he can afford" (Al Baqarah: 190).

Each of the above has been the subject of much research. The decisions
of the 'ulama' concerning the various conditions for each kind of hajj
are recorded in the books of jurisprudence.

After going through a large number of books of the Sunni 'ulama' we
have come to the conclusion that in this matter most of their laws are
similar to those of ours; of course, there are some differences to be
found, but they are not many.

The Shi'as give great importance to hajj and are very particular about
the performance of this obligation. Even during the days when they had
to journey amongst people who were thirsting for their blood and enemies
of their honour and respect, they were unmindful of all the dangers. So
devoted were they, and so anxious to reach Makkah, that they arrived in
hundreds of thousands to make the "tawwaf" of the Ka'bah ("tawwaf" is
the special circumambulation of the hajj). Fears for their life and
property did not lower their spirits. The feeling of the obligatory
nature of this pillar of Islam continued to move their steps forward.
Moreover they often performed hajj at enormous expense. It is regretful
that, in spite of this obvious obedience to God's orders, it is still
said that the Shi'as seek the destruction of Islam!

**6. Jihad**

Jihad is the foundation stone of the magnificent building of Islam. In
its absence the religion of God would neither have been the cause of
mercy for the world, nor would it have proved a source of blessing to
mankind.

For jihad means fighting against oppression and oppressors, and
sacrificing one's life and wealth in the way of God. for the
preservation of peace and tranquility.

In the Shi'a religion it is of two kinds: "Jihad al-akbar" (the greater
jihad) and "Jihad al-asghar" (the lesser jihad).

To face that internal enemy called the "nafs" (self), and to fight
against its harmful qualities, such as ignorance, cowardice, oppression,
tyranny, envy and pride, is the "jihad al-akbar". It was the Prophet of
God himself who declared: "your greatest enemy is the self and it is to
be found right in your own body." Jihad al-asghar means subduing anyone
who is opposed to justice and equity, peace and humanity, and religion
and reality.

**7. Amr Bi 'l-ma 'Ruf and Nahy 'ani 'l-munkar**

(The enjoining of good and the prevention of evil)

This is one of the most important of the compulsory acts prescribed by
religion and the basis of the Muslim's moral duties; moreover, it is the
most effective means of demonstrating the truth and reality of Islam and
is a successful weapon against infidelity and paganism.

Any nation which ignores this holy law is doomed to ruin; indeed it
will become the haven of oppressors and cheats.

It is for this reason that the Prophet (s.a.w.), who taught the divine
code of religion, and our infallible Imams (a.s.), who have preserved
and protected it, have laid great stress on this matter; they have, on
numerous occasions explained in detail the benefits accruing from its
execution and have warned against the horrible consequences of
neglecting it.

Today we are seeing with our own eyes the truth of these statements: we
have totally abandoned the "enjoining of good and the prevention of
evil". We can only pray that the situation does not become so degenerate
that what is ma'ruf comes to be regarded as munkar, and what is munkar
as ma'aruf. "Verily we are God's and verily to Him shall we return!" We
pray to God to protect us from these who call to the enjoining of good
deeds but themselves do not heed the call. God the Almighty curses the
wicked scholar, and wicked preachers and guides!

Such prayers are called the "mother of prayers" (meaning the best
prayers); we have been able to make only cursory references, but one can
research further on this topic in numerous books written by 'ulama'
belonging to the period ranging from the first century A.H. till the
present time. Countless fine works of research are still available
despite the attempt in past centuries to destroy any trace of them.

**8. Mu'amalat (Mutual Dealings)**

In mutual dealings there must be two individuals or two parties (the
one has something to offer and the other accepts). Proposal and
acceptance is a necessary condition.

Mu'amalat are of two kinds: in the first the dealings are purely
financial (for instance, buying and selling, contract and pledging, or
loans and gifts), but in the second, property and wealth are only of
secondary importance, and the real aim of the deal between the two
parties is the management of domestic life, the numbers of the Muslims
and the preservation of the human race: a contract of marriage often
involves money, but this is not an essential part of it.

