8. (a) the Marriage Agreement
=============================

Marriage is of two kinds: (1) for life; (2) temporary. As the name
implies, temporary marriage (also blown as mut'ah) means that it is for
a fixed period of time which is agreed upon, before completing the
marriage agreement.

So far as the first kind of marriage is concerned, all Muslims are
unanimous in accepting it. As regards the second kind, only the Shi'ah
consider it lawful. The latter base their acceptance on the following
verse of the Holy Qur'an: "famastamtatum bihi minhunna fa'tu hunna
ujurahunna - and as such of them with whom you had mut'ah, give them
their dowries as a fixed reward." (Surah an-Nisa': 24) This problem has
been a topic of discussion since the time Of 'sahaba" (companions of the
Prophet (s.a.w.) up to the present time. In view of the importance of
this matter it would seem appropriate to clarify some of its points.

No-one who has spent some time in the study of religious laws can deny
the validity of mut'ah. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) himself made it
lawful. During the life of the Prophet (s.a.w.), many distinguished
'sahaba' put it into practice. Moreover, after the demise of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.), the noble 'sahaba' continued to take advantage of this
law. 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas, Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansari, ibn Mas'ud,
and Ubay ibn Ka'ab, who were men of exalted rank and eminence, all
insisted on the lawfulness of mut'ah and would recite the verse in this
way: "Famastamtatum bihi min hunna ilaajalin musamman" (And as such of
them with whom you had mut'ah for specified term). We should not however
think that these companions considered that there was any defect in the
Qur'an, since they were well-versed in its interpretation, they merely
wanted to make a commentary on this verse so that its meaning might be
clearer. Since these distinguished persons had remained devoted to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) throughout his mission, they had had the
opportunity to understand the interpretation of the Qur'an directly from
the tongue of the Prophet himself (s.a.w.). They therefore had no
hesitation in disclosing the true meaning of this verse according to
what they had learnt from the Prophet (s.a.w.).

We should add however that the tradition which ibn Jarir mentions in
his large work of Qur'anic commentary shows that the part "Ila ajalin
musamman" (for a specified term) was actually an original portion of the
verse, as revealed by God. Ibn Jarir quotes Abu Nasirah as saying: "When
I read this verse before ibn 'Abbas he said: 'Say 'ila ajalin musamman'.
I said that I did not read like that. Upon this ibn 'Abbas said three
times 'By God! This verse was revealed in this very way.'"

It is obvious that such an exalted personality as ibn 'Abbas would
never have wilfully changed the text of the Qur'an. If this tradition is
correct, the meaning of this eminent Companion must surely have been
that God the Almighty had revealed its interpretation in this way.

According to all the 'ulama' this temporary marriage was allowed and
practiced by the closest companions of the Prophet.

Those who reject the lawfulness of mut'ah insist that God revealed
further commands to his Prophet which revoked the former law. The
various hadith which are concerned with this revocation have conflicting
meanings and cannot be relied upon. For the revocation of an express
ordinance an express proof is necessary: some Sunnis claim that
revocation took place through the sunnah, that is, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), after declaring it lawful, made it lawful. Some of them say
however that it was through the Book of God that a change in the law of
mut'ah was imposed upon the people. There is even conflicting views
within the latter group : one party considering the "verse of divorce"
as the relevant verse concerning the revocation, and the other the
"verse of inheritance".

Furthermore most of the opponents of mut'ah think that the following
verse proves its abrogation "Illa ala azwajuhum aw ma malakat
aymanuhum". The verse gives two causes for the lawfulness of marriage,
either the woman is one's wife or she is one's slave-girl (kaniz), and
as Sayyid al-Alusi (a Sunni scholar) writes: "The Shi'ahs cannot regard
the "Mumtu'ah" (woman taken in mut'ah) as 'kaniz', a slave-girl (who is
bound by laws other than those which affect a free woman), and they
cannot call her the wife either, because she does not possess the
conditions of wife-hood, that is 'mirath' (inheritance), 'iddah'
(waiting period); the right to sustenance and maintenance on the part of
husband, and divorce."

If we examine al-Alusi claim we find it to be completely without
foundation. Contrary to what he says, the wife in a temporary marriage
does have certain of the rights of wife-hood. One of these concerns
inheritance. The wife of a temporary marriage may receive the
inheritance (unconditionally according to some Shi'a 'ulama', and
according to others, on condition that the right to inheritance is
stipulated at time of marriage contract). Moreover if al-Alusi is
claiming that inheritance is an obligatory feature of non temporary
marriage, then he is not speaking in accordance with the law. according
to the Islamic code there are many occasions where the law of
inheritance become invalid: a wife, who for example, is an unbeliever or
a murderess does not get inheritance. Likewise a woman who is married to
a sick man who dies before he has sexual intercourse with her is
deprived of the inheritance. On the contrary if somebody divorces his
wife during a time of illness, and subsequently dies, even if her 'iddah
is over she is entitled to receive inheritance one year after the death
of her husband.

Again, the Shi'ah believe in the lawfulness of mut'ah and regard 'iddah
after such a marriage as compulsory. Subsistence for the wife (nafagah)
is another subject of dispute. The Shi'a believe that this too cannot be
regarded as a primary right of wife-hood. One may look for example at
the case of the women who refuses to have sexual intercourse with her
husband in spite of her being a wife; no faqih would consider
subsistence as one of her rights.

There is no divorce in temporary marriage: after spending the Weed time
together the two parties may separate. We should point out to those who
still deny the Iawfulness of temporary marriage that the abrogation of
mut'ah is impossible because the relevant verse is in the Surah
anal-Mu'minin and al-Mi'raj, both of which were revealed in Makkah.

Moreover, even some distinguished Sunni 'ulama' say that the Qur'anic
verse concerning mut'ah was not revoked. az-Zamakhshari, in his
commentary al-Kashshaf, reports, on the authority of ibn 'Abbas, that
the verse concerning mut'ah is one of the irrevocable ones. Other
'ulama' have reported that Hakam ibn 'Ayniyah, when asked whether the
verse of mut'ah had been revoked, said that it had not.

At first the majority community of the Muslims acknowledged the
lawfulness of mut'ah, but later they began claiming its revocation; we
have tried to show the weakness of their claims. Sometimes as we have
seen they tried to prove abrogation of the verse by another verse, and
sometimes, as we shall see, they attempted to prove the abrogation of
the verse through a tradition : they rely upon the tradition in the
'sahihs of al-Bukhari and Muslim which relate that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) made mut'ah unlawful either during the Conquest of Makkah, or
the Conquest of Khaybar, or the Battle of Awtas. These hadith are the
subject of considerable dispute. It is even reported on the authority of
Qadi Ayad that some 'ulama' say that the mut'ah was made lawful a second
time after a first abrogation, then subsequently made unlawful for the
second time. Moreover it is recorded in some books that mut'ah was
revoked on the occasion of hajjat al-wida'. (that is the last hajj) in
the 10th year of the hijrah. Other books show that this was not so and
that it was revoked during the battle of Tabuk in the 9th year of the
hijrah. Some writers claim that mut'ah was abrogated during the battle
of Hunayn in the month of Shawwal in the 8th year of the hijrah; it is
also claimed by some that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) made mut'ah lawful
on the occasion of the Conquest of Makkah, but declared it to be
unlawful only a short time later in the very place he was supposed to
have declared it lawful.

Most of the Sunni 'ulama' are of the opinion that the abrogation of
mut'ah.

We must stress that the Qur'anic Verse concernin mut'ah is not called
into question by anyone who examines the validity of these so-called
hadith. Moreover the hadith reported by the Sunni (ulama) are so full of
conflicting reports that their falsehood is self-evident.

It is reported in the Sahih of al-Bukhari that Abu Raja' quotes 'Imran
ibn Hasin as saying that the verse concerning mut'ah is present in the
Qur'an and "we acted upon it in the life time of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.); neither did Allah make it unlawful in the Holy Qur'an, nor did
the Prophet (s.a.w.) prohibit it during his life time. The prohibition
of mut'ah was an arbitrary act of one man. and it is said that this man
was the Calip 'Umar." It is also reported in the Sahih of Muslim on the
authority of Atta' that "one day Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansari came to
perform 'umrah and people asked him various questions. We went to visit
him at his house. When he was asked about mut'ah, Jabir said: 'Yes we
practiced mut'ah in the days of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and also in the
days of Abu Bakr and 'Umar.'"

Muslim gives another report and that is from Jabir also. He says:
"During the days of the Prophet (s.a.w.) we used to practice mut'ah
while giving a handful of dates or a handful of baked flour as a dowry."
Muslim also reports in his Sahih that Abu Nudrah said that he was
sitting with Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-An-Sari when another man came in and
said that there was a difference of opinion about the two mut'ahs
(namely the mut'ah of temporary marriage, and the kind of haj called
hajj tamattu'a) between Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn Zubayr. Jabir said: "While
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was present we used to act upon both of them,
but later 'Umar prohibited both of them, so we could not do them again."
Indeed they could not do it again because Hadrat 'Umar would have a man
stoned to death if he was caught practising mut'ah.

The fact is that if the Chapter relevant to marriage in Muslim's Sahih
is carefully studied, we will find such contradictory statements that we
can only wonder at their source. There are claims of abrogation in one
place, while in another place proofs of non-abrogation are given. As an
example of such hadith we may quote Jihni who says: "On the occasion of
the conquest of Makkah, the Prophet (s.a.w.) himself ordered that we
should be permitted to perform mut'ah, but we had still not left that
place when the Prophet (s.a.w.) forbade us to do it."

Thus abrogation is sometimes attributed to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.),
and sometimes to Hadrat 'Umar. Moreover they say that mut'ah was current
during the time of the Prophet, and during the period of the first
Caliphate.

They also say that Hadrat 'Ali (a.s.) forbade Ibn 'Abbas on various
occasions to talk about mut'ah, and so the latter subsequently changed
his opinion about it. In a refutation of this we may cite the report
that says that once Ibn Zubayr stood up in Makkah and said: "There are
some people here who have been deprived of foresight just, as God has
deprived them of their eye-sight: such persons are those who claim that
mut'ah is lawful." (Here the reference was to Ibn 'Abbas, who had become
blind.) At this, Ibn 'Abbas uttered loudly. "Why? I swear that mut'ah
was practiced up to the time of 'Ali (a.s.)." This clearly shows that
Ibn 'Abbas never changed his opinion, and that even during Ibn Zubayr's
caliphate he stood by his belief.

Rather surprisingly, the prohibitory order has even been attributed to
Hadrat Amir al-mu'minin (a.s.), though it was characteristic of all the
Imams (a.s.) that they had declared mut'ah wedlock to be lawful. Imam
'Ali's statement that if 'Umar had not forbidden mut'ah there would have
been only a few unfortunate men who committed fornication has become
proverbial at-Tabari has reported this tradition in his "tafsir" also.
In this connection Imam Ja'afar as-Sadiq is reliably understood to have
said: "I do not do taqiyah (to deliberately conceal one's beliefs or
opinions under certain conditions) in the matter of three things:

mut'ahtu 'l-hajj, mut'atu 'n-nisa', and al-mash 'ala 'l-khafayn." (The
latter item refers to the Sunni practice of wiping over the shoes in
place of washing the feet when performing wudu'.) According to the
principles of jurisprudence the conflicting reports of the Sunni
commentators have been analyzed and proved to be full of false hadith.
The lawfulness of mut'ah has been proved, and just as it was lawful at
the time of the Prophet so it is today It was Hadrat 'Umar who
prohibited mut'ah during his rule; his prohibition was based on personal
social considerations of the day, but it had nothing to do with
religion. He is reported to have said, "During the days of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) two mut'ahs were permissible, but I now make them unlawful, and
will punish those who disobey my order." What is worth noting is this
that the second Caliph did not attribute the order of unlawfulness or
abrogation of mut'ah to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), but made himself
responsible for it. He, too, was responsible for the matter of
punishment. We can only repeat what we have tried to demonstrate with
the above example: that mut'ah, the Qur'anic ordinance concerning its
legality, the Sunnah (practice) of the Prophet (s.a.w.), the practice of
his Companions, its being practised during the rule of Abu Bakr and in
the early period of 'Umar's own Caliphate, are all verifiable realities
which are above all argument and discussion. The books of history and
traditions bear witness to the fact that during the age of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) the high-ranking companions and respected members of the
Quraysh all practised mut'ah; indeed many of the noble Muslims of that
time were sons of temporary marriages.

Raghib al-Isfahani, the celebrated Sunni scholar, has reported that a
Sunni scholar Yahya ibn Aktham, asked one of the important nobles of
Basrah whom he followed about the justification for mut'ah. The noble
siad "'Umar ibn Khattab." "How is this," asked Yahya, "he was the sworn
enemy of mut'ah." The man said: "Yes, it has been proved that once
Hadrat 'Umar announced from the pulpit: "Oh people! God and His Prophet
made two mut'ahs lawful, but I now declare them unlawful. Also I will
punish those who disobey me.' We accept his statement but we do not
accept the validity of his prohibition." A similar hadith has been
related by 'Abdullah ibn 'Umar; it is shorter and less harsh than the
former: "During the age of the Prophet (s.a.w.) there were two mut'ahs,
and I now make them unlawful." Some have argued that 'Umar did not want
to alter the command of Allah but only to make a law which was suitable
for the society of the time.

At this stage it would be useful to recall a great work by a renowned
scholar of the 6th century A.H., Muhammad ibn Idris al-Hilli, namely the
"sara'ir", in which the author writes: "Temporary marriage within the
Islamic code of religion is lawful. Muslims believe that its lawfulness
is proved according to the Book of God and also according to the Sunnah.
However some people have claimed that it had been revoked, but the
veracity of this requires proof. Moreover 'aql (the faculty of reason
which allows us to understand the workings of God in his creation) tells
us that every useful act about which we have no fear that it will give
us any loss in this world or the next is permissible. This condition
applies to mut'ah. We must, through our reason, acknowledge its
lawfulness. Now, if somebody asks what is the proof, given the
conflicting opinions concerning its legality, that it would not cause us
loss in the next world, the answer is that the onus of proof lies on the
person who pleads the possibility of its being harmful. It is beyond
doubt that mut'ah was permissible during the days of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), and that it was only later that they began talking of its
unlawfulness and revocation. Thus until revocation can be proved we have
no right to deny its lawfulness.

"When we examine the hadith which relate that the Prophet did make
mut'ah unlawful, we find that these traditions all have weak chains of
transmission and do not qualify as sources of certainty, nor do they
provide a justification for action on the part of the Muslim.

"Let us examine again the relevant verse in the Qur'an. It occurs after
the passage concerning the women who are mahram (one is not allowed to
marry them for reasons of consanguinity, etc.) "

And lawful for you are all (women) besides those mentioned', so that
you may seek them by means of your wealth, taking (them) into marriage,
and not committing fornication; and those with whom you concluded mut'ah
give them their dowries as a fixed reward, and it shall not be a sin on
you in whatever you mutually agree (to vary) after the fixed reward"
(Surah an-Nisa'). In this holy verse the disputable work is
"istamta'tum" which has two meanings - either to take pleasure in and
profit from, or to make the agreement for mut'ah according to the
Islamic code - the first is the literal meaning and the second is
according to its meaning within the Islamic code. According to the
principles of 'fiqh', if a word in the Qur'an has two meanings - one
literal and the other used specifically in the language of the
"shari'ah" then the latter meaning must be accepted and the literal
meaning should not be relied upon. That is why for example the words
"salat", "zakat", "sawm" and "hajj" are all to be understood according
to the precise meaning of the Islamic shari'ah (code), and not according
to the literal meaning to be found in the dictionary.

We have already made it dear that a well-known group of the companions
believed in the lawfulness of mut'ah and that Amir al-mu'minin himself
openly declared its lawfulness; 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas used to enter into
polemical discussion with ibn Zubayr on this topic and these discussions
became so widely known that they were not only talked of by the common
people but the poets of that time also gave vent to their reactions in
their verses. Also 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, Mujahid, Ata'i, Jabir ibn
'Abdullah al-Ansari, Salmah ibn al-Akwa', Abu Sa'id Khudri, Mughirah ibn
Sha'hab, Sa'id ibn Jabir and Ibn Jarih also gave the verdict that mut'ah
was lawful. All these men are esteemed and trustworthy men of knowledge;
they arrived at their decision through careful examination of the
matter.

We have so far thrown light on this topic from only a religious or
historical point of view. Now let us assess it from the ethical and
social point of view. Islam is a great blessing and mercy for the world.
The message of Islam is like a divine song which is diffused from heaven
over the world of man, and which gave and still gives the answer to
those who seek to understand the reason for man's existence on earth.
Our revealed religion suits every age, meets the needs of all men in
every age in this world, and guarantees for them prosperity both
spiritual and material. Islam was revealed by God not to make man's life
harder but on the contrary, to fill it with mercy, meaning and order.
That is why Islam is the most perfect religion and the last code of
religion before the end of the world; this divine law adorns human
culture and civilization with perfection; no other man-made institutions
or laws are needed.

Let us now examine one activity which every individual is obliged to
undertake at some time in his life, namely, travel. We find that the
Islamic code indicates precisely the code of conduct to be expected from
the Muslim who is travelling, whether for trade, for war or on the hajj
or 'umrah, for example.

It hardly needs to be pointed out that God, the All-Wise, has endowed
man with sexual desire for the preservation of the human race. And it
also goes without saying that a traveller is unable to fulfill the
requirements of a permanent marriage.

Under these conditions, what should this traveller do who has been away
from his home for a long time?

How should be behave especially when he happens to be young and subject
to strong sexual urges.

There are only two alternatives possible if we do not allow mut'ah; he
should either control his passion or must indulge in unlawful
relationships. It should be stated that excessive control and
suppressing of sexual desires sometimes causes serious physical and
mental illness. Sterility is also another possible consequence of such
self-control. Such practice is patiently against the dictates of wisdom,
and God says in the Quran, "God wishes ease for you and does not wish
for you discomfort."

May God save us from sexual mal-practices. Most parts of the world are
suffering its consequences today.

I swear to God that if the Muslims act in compliance with the religious
laws, this universe, according to the divine promise, will become
complete mercy for them, and man will live in harmony and prosperty.

Mut'ah is thus a welcome and necessary law of the Islamic religion. If
the Muslims acted in accordance with the conditions for lawful mut'ah
(the making of an agreement between the two parties stipulating the time
limit and dowry, and the 'iddah, for example), and take advantage of
this divine blessing, evil-doing would to a great extent be eradicated,
the honour of man and woman would be saved, the Muslim community would
grow in number, the world would be rid of illegitimate children and
moral values would be strengthened. The pronouncement of the exalted man
of the community, 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas cannot be over-praised. Ibn Athir
relates that he says, "Mut'ah was a blessing with which God the Almighty
endowed the ummah of Muhammad (peace and the blessings of God be upon
him and his descendents) and, had it not been prohibited, no-one, except
the truly perverted ones, would have committed adultry (see the
"Nahayah" of Ibn Athir and the "Fa'iq" of az-Zamakhshari). The effects
of his exalted teacher and guardian, Amir al-mu'minin are reflected in
this statement of Ibn Abbas. The fact is that the Islamic world is
rejecting this divine mercy and as a result has plunged itself into
shameless immorality.

