Wife's Property
===============

The Jewish tradition regarding the husband’s role towards his wife stems
from the conception that he owns her as he owns his slave.[^1]

This conception has been the reason behind the double standard in the
laws of adultery and behind the husband’s ability to annul his wife’s
vows. This conception has also been responsible for denying the wife any
control over her property or her earnings. As soon as a Jewish woman got
married, she completely lost any control over her property and earnings
to her husband. Jewish Rabbis asserted the husband’s right to his wife’s
property as a corollary of his possession of her: “Since one has come
into the possession of the woman does it not follow that he should come
into the possession of her property too?”, and “Since he has acquired
the woman should he not acquire also her property?”[^2]

Thus, marriage caused the richest woman to become practically penniless.
The Talmud describes the financial situation of a wife as follows:

*“How can a woman have anything; whatever is hers belongs to her
husband? What is his is his and what is hers is also his... Her
earnings, and what she may find in the streets, are also his. The
household articles, even the crumbs of bread on the table, are his.
Should she invite a guest to her house and feed him, she would be
stealing from her husband...”*  
*(San. 71a, Git. 62a)*

The fact of the matter is that the property of a Jewish female was meant
to attract suitors. A Jewish family would assign their daughter a share
of her father’s estate to be used as a dowry in case of marriage. It was
this dowry that made Jewish daughters an unwelcomed burden to their
fathers. The father had to raise his daughter for years and then prepare
for her marriage by providing a large dowry. Thus, a girl in a Jewish
family was a liability and no asset.[^3]

This liability explains why the birth of a daughter was not celebrated
with joy in the old Jewish society (see the “Shameful Daughters”
section). The dowry was the wedding gift presented to the groom under
terms of tenancy. The husband would act as the practical owner of the
dowry but he could not sell it. The bride would lose any control over
the dowry at the moment of marriage. Moreover, she was expected to work
after marriage and all her earnings had to go to her husband in return
for her maintenance which was his obligation. She could regain her
property only in two cases: divorce or her husband’s death. Should she
die first, he would inherit her property. In the case of the husband’s
death, the wife could regain her pre-marital property but she was not
entitled to inherit any share in her deceased husband’s own property. It
has to be added that the groom also had to present a marriage gift to
his bride, yet again he was the practical owner of this gift as long as
they were married.[^4]

Christianity, until recently, has followed the same Jewish tradition.
Both religious and civil authorities in the Christian Roman Empire
(after Constantine) required a property agreement as a condition for
recognizing the marriage. Families offered their daughters increasing
dowries and, as a result, men tended to marry earlier while families
postponed their daughters’ marriages until later than had been
customary.[^5]

Under Canon law, a wife was entitled to restitution of her dowry if the
marriage was annulled unless she was guilty of adultery. In this case,
she forfeited her right to the dowry which remained in her husband’s
hands.[^6]

Under Canon and civil law a married woman in Christian Europe and
America had lost her property rights until late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. For example, women’s rights under English law were
compiled and published in 1632. These ‘rights’ included: “That which the
husband hath is his own. That which the wife hath is the husband’s.”[^7]

The wife not only lost her property upon marriage, she lost her
personality as well. No act of her was of legal value. Her husband could
repudiate any sale or gift made by her as being of no binding legal
value. The person with whom she had any contract was held as a criminal
for participating in a fraud. Moreover, she could not sue or be sued in
her own name, nor could she sue her own husband.[^8]

A married woman was practically treated as an infant in the eyes of the
law. The wife simply belonged to her husband and therefore she lost her
property, her legal personality, and her family name.[^9]

Islam, since the seventh century C.E., has granted married women the
independent personality which the Judaeo-Christian West had deprived
them until very recently. In Islam, the bride and her family are under
no obligation whatsoever to present a gift to the groom. The girl in a
Muslim family is no liability.

A woman is so dignified by Islam that she does not need to present gifts
in order to attract potential husbands. It is the groom who must present
the bride with a marriage gift. This gift is considered her property and
neither the groom nor the bride’s family have any share in or control
over it. In some Muslim societies today, a marriage gift of a hundred
thousand dollars in diamonds is not unusual.[^10]

The bride retains her marriage gifts even if she is later divorced. The
husband is not allowed any share in his wife’s property except what she
offers him with her free consent.[^11]  
 The Qur’an has stated its position on this issue quite clearly:

***“And give the women (on marriage) their dower as a free gift; but if
they, of their own good pleasure, remit any part of it to you, take it
and enjoy it with right good cheer.”(4:4)***

The wife’s property and earnings are under her full control and for her
use alone since her, and the children’s, maintenance is her husband’s
responsibility.[^12]

No matter how rich the wife might be, she is not obliged to act as a
co-provider for the family unless she herself voluntarily chooses to do
so. Spouses do inherit from one another. Moreover, a married woman in
Islam retains her independent legal personality and her family
name.[^13]

An American judge once commented on the rights of Muslim women saying:
“A Muslim girl may marry ten times, but her individuality is not
absorbed by that of her various husbands. She is a solar planet with a
name and legal personality of her own.”[^14]

The three religions share an unshakeable belief in the importance of
marriage and family life. They also agree on the leadership of the
husband over the family. Nevertheless, blatant differences do exist
among the three religions with respect to the limits of this leadership.
The Judaeo-Christian tradition, unlike Islam, virtually extends the
leadership of the husband into ownership of his wife.

[^1]: Louis M. Epstein, The Jewish Marriage Contract (New York: Arno
Press, 1973) p. 149.

[^2]: Swidler, op. cit., p. 142.

[^3]: Epstein, op. cit., pp. 164-165.

[^4]: Ibid., pp. 112-113. See also Priesand, op. cit., p. 15.

[^5]: James A. Brundage, Law, Sex, and Christian Society in Medieval
Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) p. 88.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 480.

[^7]: R. Thompson, Women in Stuart England and America (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974) p. 162.

[^8]: Mary Murray, The Law of the Father (London: Routledge, 1995) p.
67.

[^9]: Gage, op. cit., p. 143.

[^10]: For example, see Jeffrey Lang, Struggling to Surrender,
(Beltsville, MD: Amana Publications, 1994) p. 167.

[^11]: Elsayyed Sabiq, Fiqh al Sunnah (Cairo: Darul Fatah lile’lam
Al-Arabi, 11th edition, 1994), vol. 2, pp. 218-229.

[^12]: Abdel-Haleem Abu Shuqqa, Tahreer al Mar’aa fi Asr al Risala
(Kuwait: Dar al Qalam, 1990) pp. 109-112.

[^13]: Leila Badawi, “Islam”, in Jean Holm and John Bowker, ed., Women
in Religion (London: Pinter Publishers, 1994) p. 102.

[^14]: Amir H. Siddiqi, Studies in Islamic History (Karachi: Jamiyatul
Falah Publications, 3rd edition, 1967) p. 138.


