Divorce
=======

The three religions have remarkable differences in their attitudes
towards divorce. Christianity abhors divorce altogether. The New
Testament unequivocally advocates the indissolubility of marriage. It is
attributed to Jesus to have said,

*“But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for marital
unfaithfulness, causes her to become adulteress, and anyone who marries
the divorced woman commits adultery.”(Matthew 5:32)*

This uncompromising ideal is, without a doubt, unrealistic. It assumes a
state of moral perfection that human societies have never achieved. When
a couple realizes that their married life is beyond repair, a ban on
divorce will not do them any good. Forcing ill-mated couples to remain
together against their wills is neither effective nor reasonable. No
wonder the whole Christian world has been obliged to sanction divorce.

Judaism, on the other hand, allows divorce even without any cause. The
Old Testament gives the husband the right to divorce his wife even if he
just dislikes her:

*“If a man marries a woman who becomes displeasing to him because he
finds something indecent about her, and he writes her a certificate of
divorce, gives it to her and sends her from his house, and if after she
leaves his house she becomes the wife of another man, and her second
husband dislikes her and writes her a certificate of divorce, gives it
to her and sends her from his house, or if he dies, then her first
husband, who divorced her, is not allowed to marry her again after she
has been defiled.”(Deut. 24:1-4)*

The above verses have caused considerable debate among Jewish scholars
because of their disagreement over the interpretation of the words
“displeasing”, “indecency”, and “dislikes” mentioned in the verses. The
Talmud records their different opinions:

*“The school of Shammai held that a man should not divorce his wife
unless he has found her guilty of some sexual misconduct, while the
school of Hillel say he may divorce her even if she has merely spoiled a
dish for him. Rabbi Akiba says he may divorce her even if he simply
finds another woman more beautiful than she.”(Gittin 90 a-b)*

The New Testament follows the Shammaites opinion while Jewish law has
followed the opinion of the Hillelites and R. Akiba[^1]. Since the
Hillelites view prevailed, it became the unbroken tradition of Jewish
law to give the husband freedom to divorce his wife without any cause at
all. The Old Testament not only gives the husband the right to divorce
his “displeasing” wife, it considers divorcing a “bad wife” an
obligation:

*“A bad wife brings humiliation, downcast looks, and a wounded heart.
Slack of hand and weak of knee is the man whose wife fails to make him
happy. Woman is the origin of sin, and it is through her that we all
die. Do not leave a leaky cistern to drip or allow a bad wife to say
what she likes. If she does not accept your control, divorce her and
send her away.”(Ecclesiasticus 25:25)*

The Talmud has recorded several specific actions by wives which obliged
their husbands to divorce them:

*“If she ate in the street, if she drank greedily in the street, if she
suckled in the street, in every case Rabbi Meir says that she must leave
her husband”(Git. 89a)*

The Talmud has also made it mandatory to divorce a barren wife (who bore
no children in a period of ten years):

*“Our Rabbis taught: If a man took a wife and lived with her for ten
years and she bore no child, he shall divorce her” (Yeb. 64a)*

Wives, on the other hand, cannot initiate divorce under Jewish law. A
Jewish wife, however, could claim the right to a divorce before a Jewish
court provided that a strong reason exists. Very few grounds are
provided for the wife to make a claim for a divorce. These grounds
include: A husband with physical defects or skin disease, a husband not
fulfilling his conjugal responsibilities, *etc*. The Court might support
the wife’s claim to a divorce but it cannot dissolve the marriage.

Only the husband can dissolve the marriage by giving his wife a bill of
divorce. The Court could scourge, fine, imprison, and excommunicate him
to force him to deliver the necessary bill of divorce to his wife.
However, if the husband is stubborn enough, he can refuse to grant his
wife a divorce and keep her tied to him indefinitely. Worse still, he
can desert her without granting her a divorce and leave her unmarried
and undivorced. He can marry another woman or even live with any single
woman out of wedlock and have children from her (these children are
considered legitimate under Jewish law).

The deserted wife, on the other hand, cannot marry any other man since
she is still legally married and she cannot live with any other man
because she will be considered an adulteress and her children from this
union will be illegitimate for ten generations. A woman in such a
position is called an agunah (chained woman).[^2]

In the United States today there are approximately 1000 to 1500 Jewish
women who are agunot (plural for agunah), while in Israel their number
might be as high as 16000. Husbands may extort thousands of dollars from
their trapped wives in exchange for a Jewish divorce.[^3]

Islam occupies the middle ground between Christianity and Judaism with
respect to divorce. Marriage in Islam is a sanctified bond that should
not be broken except for compelling reasons. Couples are instructed to
pursue all possible remedies whenever their marriages are in danger.
Divorce is not to be resorted to except when there is no other way out.
In a nutshell, Islam recognizes divorce, yet it discourages it by all
means.

Let us focus on the recognition side first. Islam does recognize the
right of both partners to end their matrimonial relationship. Islam
gives the husband the right for Talaq (divorce). Moreover, Islam, unlike
Judaism, grants the wife the right to dissolve the marriage through what
is known as Khula’.[^4]

If the husband dissolves the marriage by divorcing his wife, he cannot
retrieve any of the marriage gifts he has given her. The Qur’an
explicitly prohibits the divorcing husbands from taking back their
marriage gifts no matter how expensive or valuable these gifts might be:

***“But if you decide to take one wife in place of another, even if you
had given the latter a whole treasure for dower, take not the least bit
of it back; would you take it by slander and a manifest wrong?”(4:20)***

In the case of the wife choosing to end the marriage, she may return the
marriage gifts to her husband. Returning the marriage gifts in this case
is a fair compensation for the husband who is keen to keep his wife
while she chooses to leave him. The Qur’an has instructed Muslim men not
to take back any of the gifts they have given to their wives except in
the case of the wife choosing to dissolve the marriage:

***“It is not lawful for you (Men) to take back any of your gifts except
when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits
ordained by Allah. There is no blame on either of them if she gives
something for her freedom. These are the limits ordained by Allah so do
not transgress them.” (2:229)***

Let us now focus our attention on how Islam discourages divorce. The
Prophet of Islam told the believers that:

*“Among all the permitted acts, divorce is the most hateful to God” (Abu
Dawood)*

A Muslim man should not divorce his wife just because he dislikes her.
The Qur’an instructs Muslim men to be kind to their wives even in cases
of lukewarm emotions or feelings of dislike:

***“Live with them (your wives) on a footing of kindness and equity. If
you dislike them it may be that you dislike something in which Allah has
placed a great deal of good.”(4:19)***

The Prophet has also emphasized that the best Muslims are those who are
best to their wives:

*“The believers who show the most perfect faith are those who have the
best character and the best of you are those who are best to their
wives.”(Tirmidhi)*

However, Islam is a practical religion and it does recognize that there
are circumstances in which a marriage comes to the verge of collapsing.
In such cases, a mere advice of kindness or self restraint is no viable
solution. So, what to do in order to save a marriage in these cases?

The Qur’an offers some practical advice for the spouse (husband or wife)
whose partner (wife or husband) is the wrongdoer. For the husband whose
wife’s ill-conduct is threatening the marriage, the Qur’an gives four
types of advice as detailed in the following verses:

***“As to those women on whose part you fear disloyalty and
ill-conduct,***

(1) ***Admonish them,***

(2) ***refuse to share their beds,***

(3) ***beat them; but if they return to obedience seek not against them
means of annoyance: For Allah is Most High, Great.***

(4) ***If you fear a break between them, appoint two arbiters, one from
his family and the other from hers; If they wish for peace, Allah will
cause their reconciliation.”***

***(4:34-35)***

The first three are to be tried first. If they fail, then the help of
the families concerned should be sought. It has to be noted, in the
light of the above verses, that beating the rebellious wife is a
temporary measure that is resorted to as third in line in cases of
extreme necessity in hopes that it might remedy the wrongdoing of the
wife.[^5]

If it does, the husband is not allowed by any means to continue any
annoyance to the wife as explicitly mentioned in the verse. If it does
not, the husband is still not allowed to use this measure any longer and
the final avenue of the family-assisted reconciliation has to be
explored.

Prophet Muhammad (S) has instructed Muslim husbands that they should not
have recourse to these measures except in extreme cases such as open
lewdness committed by the wife.

It has to be noted that the Talmud sanctions wife beating as
chastisement for the purpose of discipline.[^6]

The husband is not restricted to the extreme cases such as those of open
lewdness. He is allowed to beat his wife even if she just refuses to do
her house work. Moreover, he is not limited only to the use of light
punishment. He is permitted to break his wife’s stubbornness by the lash
or by starving her.[^7]

For the wife whose husband’s ill-conduct is the cause for the marriage’s
near collapse, the Qur’an offers the following advice:

***“If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband’s part, there is
no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between
themselves; and such settlement is best.” (4:128)***

[^1]: Epstein, op. cit., p. 196

[^2]: Swidler, op. cit., pp. 162-163.

[^3]: The Toronto Star, Apr. 8, 1995.

[^4]: Sabiq, op. cit., pp. 318-329. See also Muhammad al Ghazali, Qadaya
al Mar’aa bin al Taqaleed al Rakida wal Wafida (Cairo: Dar al Shorooq,
4th edition, 1992) pp. 178-180.

[^5]: There is a strict limit to this. Refer to books of jurisprudence
for further details.

[^6]: Epstein, op. cit., p. 219.

[^7]: Ibid, pp 156-157.


