Mothers
=======

The Old Testament in several places commands kind and considerate
treatment of the parents and condemns those who dishonor them. For
example,

*“If anyone curses his father or mother, he must be put to death.”(Lev.
20:9)*

And

*“A wise man brings joy to his father but a foolish man despises his
mother.”(Proverbs 15:20).*

Although honoring the father alone is mentioned in some places, e.g.

*“A wise man heeds his father’s instruction.”(Proverbs 13:1)*

The mother alone is never mentioned. Moreover, there is no special
emphasis on treating the mother kindly as a sign of appreciation of her
great suffering in childbearing and suckling. Besides, mothers do not
inherit at all from their children while fathers do.[^1]

It is difficult to speak of the New Testament as a scripture that calls
for honoring the mother. On the contrary, one gets the impression that
the New Testament considers kind treatment of mothers as an impediment
on the way to God. According to the New Testament, one cannot become a
good Christian worthy of becoming a disciple of Christ unless he hates
his mother. It is attributed to Jesus to have said:  
*“If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his
wife and children, his brothers and sisters -- yes, even his own life --
he cannot be my disciple.”(Luke 14:26)*

Furthermore, the New Testament depicts a picture of Jesus as indifferent
to, or even disrespectful of, his own mother. For example, when she had
come looking for him while he was preaching to a crowd, he did not care
to go out to see her:

*“Then Jesus’ mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent
someone to call him. A crowd was sitting around him and they told him,
‘Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.’ ‘Who are my
mother and my brothers?’ he asked. Then he looked at those seated in a
circle around him and said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers! Whoever
does God’s will is my brother and sister and mother.’”(Mark 3:31-35)*

One might argue that Jesus was trying to teach his audience an important
lesson that religious ties are no less important than family ties.
However, he could have taught his listeners the same lesson without
showing such absolute indifference to his mother. The same disrespectful
attitude is depicted when he refused to endorse a statement made by a
member of his audience blessing his mother’s role in giving birth to him
and nursing him:

*“As Jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out,
‘Blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you.’ He replied,
‘Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it.’” (Luke
11:27-28)*

If a mother with the stature of the Virgin Mary had been treated with
such discourtesy, as depicted in the New Testament, by a son of the
stature of Jesus Christ, then how should an average Christian mother be
treated by her average Christian sons?

In Islam, the honor, respect, and esteem attached to motherhood is
unparalleled. The Qur’an places the importance of kindness to parents as
second only to worshipping God Almighty:

***“Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, And that you be
kind to parents. Whether one or both of them attain old age in your
life, Say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel them, but address
them in terms of honor. And out of kindness, lower to them the wing of
humility, and say: ‘My Lord! Bestow on them Your Mercy as they cherished
me in childhood.’” (17:23-24)***

The Qur’an in several other places puts special emphasis on the mother’s
great role in giving birth and nursing:

***“And We have enjoined on man to be good to his parents: In travail
upon travail did his mother bear him and in two years was his weaning.
Show gratitude to Me and to your parents.” (31:14)***

The very special place of mothers in Islam has been eloquently described
by Prophet Muhammad (S):

“A man asked the Prophet: ‘Whom should I honor most?’ The Prophet
replied: ‘Your mother’. ‘And who comes next?’ asked the man. The Prophet
replied: ‘Your mother’. ‘And who comes next?’ asked the man. The Prophet
replied: ‘Your mother!’. ‘And who comes next?’ asked the man. The
Prophet replied: ‘Your father’” (Bukhari and Muslim).

Among the few precepts of Islam which Muslims still faithfully observe
to the present day is the considerate treatment of mothers. The honor
that Muslim mothers receive from their sons and daughters is exemplary.
The intensely warm relations between Muslim mothers and their children
and the deep respect with which Muslim men approach their mothers
usually amaze Westerners.[^2]

**Female Inheritance**

One of the most important differences between the Qur’an and the Bible
is their attitude towards female inheritance of the property of a
deceased relative. The Biblical attitude has been succinctly described
by Rabbi Epstein:

“The continuous and unbroken tradition since the Biblical days gives the
female members of the household, wife and daughters, no right of
succession to the family estate. In the more primitive scheme of
succession, the female members of the family were considered part of the
estate and as remote from the legal personality of an heir as the slave.
Whereas by Mosaic enactment the daughters were admitted to succession in
the event of no male issue remained, the wife was not recognized as heir
even in such conditions.”[^3]

Why were the female members of the family considered part of the family
estate? Rabbi Epstein has the answer: “They are owned --before marriage,
by the father; after marriage, by the husband.”[^4]

The Biblical rules of inheritance are outlined in Numbers 27:1-11. A
wife is given no share in her husband’s estate, while he is her first
heir, even before her sons. A daughter can inherit only if no male heirs
exist. A mother is not an heir at all while the father is. Widows and
daughters, in case male children remained, were at the mercy of the male
heirs for provision. That is why widows and orphan girls were among the
most destitute members of the Jewish society.

Christianity has followed suit for a long time. Both the ecclesiastical
and civil laws of Christendom barred daughters from sharing with their
brothers their patrimony. Besides, wives were deprived of any
inheritance rights. These iniquitous laws survived till late in the last
century.[^5]

Among the pagan Arabs before Islam, inheritance rights were confined
exclusively to the male relatives. The Qur’an abolished all these unjust
customs and gave all the female relatives inheritance shares:

***“From what is left by parents and those nearest related there is a
share for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or
large --a determinate share.”(4:7)***

Muslim mothers, wives, daughters, and sisters had received inheritance
rights thirteen hundred years before Europe recognized that these rights
even existed. The division of inheritance is a vast subject with an
enormous amount of details (4:7,11,12,176).

The general rule is that the female share is half the male’s except the
cases in which the mother receives equal share to that of the father.
This general rule if taken in isolation from other legislations
concerning men and women may seem unfair. In order to understand the
rationale behind this rule, one must take into account the fact that the
financial obligations of men in Islam far exceed those of women (see the
“Wife’s property” section).

A bridegroom must provide his bride with a marriage gift. This gift
becomes her exclusive property and remains so even if she is later
divorced. The bride is under no obligation to present any gifts to her
groom. Moreover, the Muslim husband is charged with the maintenance of
his wife and children. The wife, on the other hand, is not obliged to
help him in this regard. Her property and earnings are for her use alone
except what she may voluntarily offer her husband. Besides, one has to
realize that Islam vehemently advocates family life. It strongly
encourages youth to get married, discourages divorce, and does not
regard celibacy as a virtue.

Therefore, in a truly Islamic society, family life is the norm and
single life is the rare exception. That is, almost all marriage-aged
women and men are married in an Islamic society. In light of these
facts, one would appreciate that Muslim men, in general, have greater
financial burdens than Muslim women and thus inheritance rules are meant
to offset this imbalance so that the society lives free of all gender or
class wars. After a simple comparison between the financial rights and
duties of Muslim women, one British Muslim woman has concluded that
Islam has treated women not only fairly but generously.[^6]

[^1]: Epstein, op. cit., p. 122

[^2]: Armstrong, op. cit., p. 8.

[^3]: Epstein, op. cit., p. 175.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 121.

[^5]: Gage, op. cit., p. 142.

[^6]: B. Aisha Lemu and Fatima Heeren, Woman in Islam (London: Islamic
Foundation, 1978) p. 23.


