Plight of Widows
================

Because of the fact that the Old Testament recognized no inheritance
rights to them, widows were among the most vulnerable of the Jewish
population. The male relatives who inherited all of a woman’s deceased
husband’s estate were to provide for her from that estate. However,
widows had no way to ensure this provision was carried out, and lived on
the mercy of others. Therefore, widows were among the lowest classes in
ancient Israel and widowhood was considered a symbol of great
degradation (Isaiah 54:4).

But the plight of a widow in the Biblical tradition extended even beyond
her exclusion from her husband’s property. According to Genesis 38, a
childless widow must marry her husband’s brother, even if he is already
married, so that he can produce offspring for his dead brother, thus
ensuring his brother’s name will not die out.

*“Then Judah said to Onan, ‘Lie with your brother’s wife and fulfill
your duty to her as a brother-in-law to produce offspring for your
brother.’”(Genesis 38:8)*

The widow’s consent to this marriage is not required. The widow is
treated as part of her deceased husband’s property whose main function
is to ensure her husband’s posterity. This Biblical law is still
practiced in today’s Israel.[^1]

A childless widow in Israel is bequeathed to her husband’s brother. If
the brother is too young to marry, she has to wait until he comes of
age. Should the deceased husband’s brother refuse to marry her, she is
set free and can then marry any man of her choice. It is not an uncommon
phenomenon in Israel that widows are subjected to blackmail by their
brothers-in-law in order to gain their freedom.

The pagan Arabs before Islam had similar practices. A widow was
considered a part of her husband’s property to be inherited by his male
heirs and she was, usually, given in marriage to the deceased man’s
eldest son from another wife. The Qur’an scathingly attacked and
abolished this degrading custom:

*“And marry not women whom your fathers married--Except what is past--
it was shameful, odious, and abominable custom indeed.”(4:22)*

Widows and divorced women were so looked down upon in the Biblical
tradition that the high priest could not marry a widow, a divorced
woman, or a prostitute:

*“The woman he (the high priest) marries must be a virgin. He must not
marry a widow, a divorced woman, or a woman defiled by prostitution, but
only a virgin from his own people, so he will not defile his offspring
among his people.”(Lev. 21:13-15)*

In Israel today, a descendant of the Cohen caste (the high priests of
the days of the Temple) cannot marry a divorcee, a widow, or a
prostitute.[^2]

In the Jewish legislation, a woman who has been widowed three times with
all the three husbands dying of natural causes is considered ‘fatal’ and
forbidden to marry again.[^3]

The Qur’an, on the other hand, recognizes neither castes nor fatal
persons. Widows and divorcees have the freedom to marry whomever they
choose. There is no stigma attached to divorce or widowhood in the
Qur’an:

***“When you divorce women and they fulfil their terms [three
menstruation periods] either take them back on equitable terms or set
them free on equitable terms; but do not take them back to injure them
or to take undue advantage, if anyone does that, he wrongs his own soul.
Do not treat Allah’s signs as a jest.”(2:231)***

***“If any of you die and leave widows behind, they shall wait four
months and ten days. When they have fulfilled their term, there is no
blame on you if they dispose of themselves in a just manner.”(2:234)***

***“Those of you who die and leave widows should bequeath for their
widows a year’s maintenance and residence. But if they [the widows]
leave (the residence) there is no blame on you for what they justly do
with themselves.”(2:240)***

[^1]: Hazleton, op. cit., pp. 45-46.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 49.


