Polygamy
========

Let us now tackle the important question of polygamy. Polygamy is a very
ancient practice found in many human societies. The Bible did not
condemn polygamy. To the contrary, the Old Testament and Rabbinic
writings frequently attest to the legality of polygamy. King Solomon is
said to have had 700 wives and 300 concubines (1 Kings 11:3)

Also, King David is said to have had many wives and concubines (2 Samuel
5:13). The Old Testament does have some injunctions on how to distribute
the property of a man among his sons from different wives (Deut. 22:7).
The only restriction on polygamy is a ban on taking a wife’s sister as a
rival wife (Lev. 18:18). The Talmud advises a maximum of four wives.[^1]

European Jews continued to practice polygamy until the sixteenth
century. Oriental Jews regularly practiced polygamy until they arrived
in Israel where it is forbidden under civil law. However, under
religious law which overrides civil law in such cases, it is
permissible.[^2]

What about the New Testament? According to Father Eugene Hillman in his
insightful book, ‘Polygamy Reconsidered’, “Nowhere in the New Testament
is there any explicit commandment that marriage should be monogamous or
any explicit commandment forbidding polygamy.”[^3]

Moreover, Jesus has not spoken against polygamy though it was practiced
by the Jews of his society. Father Hillman stresses the fact that the
Church in Rome banned polygamy in order to conform to the Greco-Roman
culture (which prescribed only one legal wife while tolerating
concubinage and prostitution). He cited St. Augustine, “Now indeed in
our time, and in keeping with Roman custom, it is no longer allowed to
take another wife.”[^4]

African churches and African Christians often remind their European
brothers that the Church’s ban on polygamy is a cultural tradition and
not an authentic Christian injunction.  
 The Qur’an, too, allowed polygamy, but not without restrictions:

***“If you fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with the
orphans, marry women of your choice, two or three or four; but if you
fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with them, then only
one.”(4:3)***

The Qur’an, contrary to the Bible, limited the maximum number of wives
to four under the strict condition of treating the wives equally and
justly. It should not be understood that the Qur’an is exhorting the
believers to practice polygamy, or that polygamy is considered as an
ideal. In other words, the Qur’an has “tolerated” or “allowed” polygamy
and no more but, why? Why is polygamy permissible?

The answer is simple: there are places and times in which there are
compelling social and moral reasons for polygamy. As the above Qur’anic
verse indicates, the issue of polygamy in Islam cannot be understood
apart from community obligations towards orphans and widows. Islam as a
universal religion suitable for all places and all times could not
ignore these compelling obligations.

In most human societies, females outnumber males. In the U.S. there are,
at least, eight million more women than men. In a country like Guinea
there are 122 females for every 100 males. In Tanzania, there are 95.1
males per 100 females[^5].

What should a society do towards such unbalanced sex ratios? There are
various solutions, some might suggest celibacy, and others would prefer
female infanticide (which does happen in some societies in the world
today!)

Others may think the only outlet is that the society should tolerate all
manners of sexual permissiveness: prostitution, sex out of wedlock,
homosexuality, *etc*. For other societies, like most African societies
today, the most honorable outlet is to allow polygamous marriage as a
culturally accepted and socially respected institution. The point that
is often misunderstood in the West is that women in other cultures do
not necessarily look at polygamy as a sign of women’s degradation. For
example, many young African brides, whether Christians or Muslims or
otherwise, would prefer to marry a married man who has already proved
himself to be a responsible husband. Many African wives urge their
husbands to get a second wife so that they do not feel lonely.[^6]

A survey of over six thousand women, ranging in age from 15 to 59,
conducted in the second largest city in Nigeria showed that 60 percent
of these women would be pleased if their husbands took another wife.
Only 23 percent expressed anger at the idea of sharing with another
wife. Seventy-six percent of the women in a survey conducted in Kenya
viewed polygamy positively. In a survey undertaken in rural Kenya, 25
out of 27 women considered polygamy to be better than monogamy. These
women felt polygamy can be a happy and beneficial experience if the
co-wives cooperate with each other.[^7]

Polygamy in most African societies is such a respectable institution
that some Protestant churches are becoming more tolerant of it. A bishop
of the Anglican Church in Kenya declared that, “Although monogamy may be
ideal for the expression of love between husband and wife, the church
should consider that in certain cultures polygyny is socially acceptable
and that the belief that polygyny is contrary to Christianity is no
longer tenable.”[^8]

After a careful study of African polygamy, Reverend David Gitari of the
Anglican Church has concluded that polygamy, as ideally practiced, is
more Christian than divorce and remarriage as far as the abandoned wives
and children are concerned.[^9]

I personally know of some highly educated African wives who, despite
having lived in the West for many years, do not have any objections
against polygamy. One of them, who lives in the U.S., solemnly exhorts
her husband to get a second wife to help her in raising the kids.

The problem of the unbalanced sex ratios becomes truly problematic at
times of war. Native American Indian tribes used to suffer highly
unbalanced sex ratios after wartime losses. Women in these tribes, who
in fact enjoyed a fairly high status, accepted polygamy as the best
protection against indulgence in indecent activities. European settlers,
without offering any other alternative, condemned this Indian polygamy
as ‘uncivilised’.[^10]

After the Second World War, there were 7,300,000 more women than men in
Germany (3.3 million of them were widows). There were 100 men aged 20 to
30 for every 167 women in that age group.[^11]

Many of these women needed a man not only as a companion but also as a
provider for the household in a time of unprecedented misery and
hardship. The soldiers of the victorious Allied Armies exploited these
women’s vulnerability. Many young girls and widows had liaisons with
members of the occupying forces. Many American and British soldiers paid
for their pleasures in cigarettes, chocolate, and bread. Children were
overjoyed at the gifts these strangers brought. A 10 year old boy on
hearing of such gifts from other children wished from all his heart for
an ‘Englishman’ for his mother so that she need not go hungry any
longer.[^12]

We have to ask our own conscience at this point: What is more dignifying
to a woman? - An accepted and respected second wife as in the native
Indians’ approach, or a virtual prostitute as in the ‘civilised’ Allies
approach? In other words, what is more dignifying to a woman - the
Qur’anic prescription or the theology based on the culture of the Roman
Empire?

It is interesting to note that in an international youth conference held
in Munich in 1948 the problem of the highly unbalanced sex ratio in
Germany was discussed. When it became clear that no solution could be
agreed upon, some participants suggested polygamy. The initial reaction
of the gathering was a mixture of shock and disgust. However, after a
careful study of the proposal, the participants agreed that it was the
only possible solution. Consequently, polygamy was included among the
conference final recommendations.[^13]

The world today possesses more weapons of mass destruction than ever
before and the European churches might, sooner or later, be obliged to
accept polygamy as the only way out. Father Hillman has thoughtfully
recognized this fact, “It is quite conceivable that these genocidal
techniques (nuclear, biological, chemical) could produce so drastic an
imbalance among the sexes that plural marriage would become a necessary
means of survival....Then contrary to previous custom and law, an
overriding natural and moral inclination might arise in favour of
polygamy. In such a situation, theologians and church leaders would
quickly produce weighty reasons and biblical texts to justify a new
conception of marriage.”[^14]

To the present day, polygamy continues to be a viable solution to some
of the social ills of modern societies. The communal obligations that
the Qur’an mentions in association with the permission of polygamy are
more visible at present in some Western societies than in Africa. For
example, In the United States today, there is a severe gender crisis in
the black community. One out of every twenty young black males may die
before reaching the age of 21. For those between 20 and 35 years of age,
homicide is the leading cause of death.[^15]

Besides, many young black males are unemployed, in jail, or on
dope.[^16]

As a result, one in four black women, at age 40, has never married, as
compared with one in ten white women.[^17]

Moreover, many young black females become single mothers before the age
of 20 and find themselves in need of providers. The end result of these
tragic circumstances is that an increasing number of black women are
engaged in what is called ‘man-sharing’.[^18]

That is, many of these hapless single black women are involved in
affairs with married men. The wives are often unaware of the fact that
other women are ‘sharing’ their husbands with them. Some observers of
the crisis of man-sharing in the African American community strongly
recommend consensual polygamy as a temporary answer to the shortage of
black males until more comprehensive reforms in the American society at
large are undertaken.[^19]

By consensual polygamy they mean a polygamy that is sanctioned by the
community and to which all the parties involved have agreed, as opposed
to the usually secret man-sharing which is detrimental both to the wife
and to the community in general. The problem of man-sharing in the
African American community was the topic of a panel discussion held at
Temple University in Philadelphia on January 27, 1993.[^20]

Some of the speakers recommended polygamy as one potential remedy for
the crisis. They also suggested that polygamy should not be banned by
law, particularly in a society that tolerates prostitution and
mistresses. The comment of one woman from the audience that African
Americans needed to learn from Africa where polygamy was responsibly
practiced elicited enthusiastic applause.

Philip Kilbride, an American anthropologist of Roman Catholic heritage,
in his provocative book, ‘Plural marriage for our time’, proposes
polygamy as a solution to some of the ills of the American society at
large. He argues that plural marriage may serve as a potential
alternative for divorce in many cases in order to obviate the damaging
impact of divorce on many children. He maintains that many divorces are
caused by the rampant extramarital affairs in the American society.

According to Kilbride, ending an extramarital affair in a polygamous
marriage, rather than in a divorce, is better for the children,
“Children would be better served if family augmentation rather than only
separation and dissolution were seen as options.” Moreover, he suggests
that other groups will also benefit from plural marriage such as:
elderly women who face a chronic shortage of men and the African
Americans who are involved in man-sharing.[^21]

In 1987, a poll conducted by the student newspaper at the University of
California at Berkeley asked the students whether they agreed that men
should be allowed by law to have more than one wife in response to a
perceived shortage of male marriage candidates in California. Almost all
of the students polled approved of the idea. One female student even
stated that a polygamous marriage would fulfil her emotional and
physical needs while giving her greater freedom than a monogamous
union.[^22]

In fact, this same argument is also used by the few remaining
fundamentalist Mormon women who still practice polygamy in the U.S. They
believe that polygamy is an ideal way for a woman to have both a career
and children since the wives help each other care for the children.[^23]

It has to be added that polygamy in Islam is a matter of mutual consent.
No one can force a woman to marry a married man. Besides, the wife has
the right to stipulate that her husband must not marry any other woman
as a second wife.[^24]

The Bible, on the other hand, sometimes resorts to forcible polygamy. A
childless widow must marry her husband’s brother, even if he is already
married (see the “Plight of Widows” section), regardless of her consent
(Genesis 38:8-10).

It should be noted that in many Muslim societies today the practice of
polygamy is rare since the gap between the numbers of both sexes is not
huge. One can, safely, say that the rate of polygamous marriages in the
Muslim world is much less than the rate of extramarital affairs in the
West. In other words, men in the Muslim world today are far more
strictly monogamous than men in the Western world.

Billy Graham, the eminent Christian evangelist has recognized this fact:
“Christianity cannot compromise on the question of polygamy. If
present-day Christianity cannot do so, it is to its own detriment. Islam
has permitted polygamy as a solution to social ills and has allowed a
certain degree of latitude to human nature but only within the strictly
defined framework of the law. Christian countries make a great show of
monogamy, but actually they practice polygamy. No one is unaware of the
part mistresses play in Western society. In this respect Islam is a
fundamentally honest religion, and permits a Muslim to marry a second
wife if he must, but strictly forbids all clandestine amatory
associations in order to safeguard the moral probity of the
community.”[^25]

It is of interest to note that many, non-Muslim as well as Muslim,
countries in the world today have outlawed polygamy. Taking a second
wife, even with the free consent of the first wife, is a violation of
the law. On the other hand, cheating on the wife, without her knowledge
or consent, is perfectly legitimate as far as the law is concerned! What
is the legal wisdom behind such a contradiction? Is the law designed to
reward deception and punish honesty? It is one of the unfathomable
paradoxes of our modern ‘civilised’ world.

[^1]: Swidler, op. cit., pp. 144-148.

[^2]: Hazleton, op. cit., pp 44-45.

[^3]: Eugene Hillman, Polygamy Reconsidered: African Plural Marriage and
the Christian Churches (New York: Orbis Books, 1975) p. 140.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 17.

[^5]: Ibid., pp. 88-93.

[^6]: Ibid., pp. 92-97.

[^7]: Philip L. Kilbride, Plural Marriage For Our Times (Westport,
Conn.: Bergin & Garvey, 1994) pp. 108-109.

[^8]: The Weekly Review, Aug. 1, 1987.

[^9]: Kilbride, op. cit., p. 126.

[^10]: John D’Emilio and Estelle B. Freedman, Intimate Matters: A
history of Sexuality in America (New York: Harper & Row Publishers,
1988) p. 87.

[^11]: Ute Frevert, Women in German History: from Bourgeois Emancipation
to Sexual Liberation (New York: Berg Publishers, 1988) pp. 263-264.

[^12]: Ibid., pp. 257-258.

[^13]: Sabiq, op. cit., p. 191.

[^14]: Hillman, op. cit., p. 12.

[^15]: Nathan Hare and Julie Hare, ed., Crisis in Black Sexual Politics
(San Francisco: Black Think Tank, 1989) p. 25.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 26.

[^17]: Kilbride, op. cit., p. 94.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 95.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 95.

[^20]: Ibid., pp. 95-99.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 118.

[^22]: Lang, op. cit., p. 172.

[^23]: Kilbride, op. cit., pp. 72-73.

[^24]: Sabiq, op. cit., pp. 187-188.

[^25]: Abdul Rahman Doi, Woman in Shari’ah (London: Ta-Ha Publishers,
1994) p. 76.


