Epilogue
========

The one question all the non-Muslims, who had read an earlier version of
this study, had in common was: do Muslim women in the Muslim world today
receive this noble treatment described here? The answer, unfortunately,
is: No. Since this question is inevitable in any discussion concerning
the status of women in Islam, we have to elaborate on the answer in
order to provide the reader with the complete picture.

It has to be made clear first that the vast differences among Muslim
societies make most generalizations too simplistic. There is a wide
spectrum of attitudes towards women in the Muslim world today. These
attitudes differ from one society to another and within each individual
society. Nevertheless, certain general trends are discernible. Almost
all Muslim societies have, to one degree or another, deviated from the
ideals of Islam with respect to the status of women. These deviations
have, for the most part, been in one of two opposite directions. The
first direction is more conservative, restrictive, and
traditions-oriented, while the second is more liberal and
Western-oriented.

The societies that have digressed in the first direction treat women
according to the customs and traditions inherited from their forebears.
These traditions usually deprive women of many rights granted to them by
Islam. Besides, women are treated according to standards far different
from those applied to men.

This discrimination pervades the life of any female: she is received
with less joy at birth than a boy; she is less likely to go to school;
she might be deprived any share of her family’s inheritance; she is
under continuous surveillance in order not to behave immodestly while
her brother’s immodest acts are tolerated; she might even be killed for
committing what her male family members usually boast of doing; she has
very little say in family affairs or community interests; she might not
have full control over her property and her marriage gifts; and finally
as a mother she herself would prefer to produce boys so that she can
attain a higher status in her community.

On the other hand, there are Muslim societies (or certain classes within
some societies) that have been swept over by the Western culture and way
of life. These societies often imitate unthinkingly whatever they
receive from the West and usually end up adopting the worst fruits of
Western civilization. In these societies, a typical “modern” woman’s top
priority in life is to enhance her physical beauty.

Therefore, she is often obsessed with her body’s shape, size, and
weight. She tends to care more about her body than her mind and more
about her charms than her intellect. Her ability to charm, attract, and
excite is more valued in the society than her educational achievements,
intellectual pursuits, and social work. One is not expected to find a
copy of the Qur’an in her purse since it is full of cosmetics that
accompany her wherever she goes. Her spirituality has no room in a
society preoccupied with her attractiveness. Therefore, she would spend
her life striving more to realize her femininity than to fulfil her
humanity.

Why did Muslim societies deviate from the ideals of Islam? There is no
easy answer. A penetrating explanation of the reasons why Muslims have
not adhered to the Qur’anic guidance with respect to women would be
beyond the scope of this study. It has to be made clear, however, that
Muslim societies have deviated from the Islamic precepts concerning so
many aspects of their lives for so long.

There is a wide gap between what Muslims are supposed to believe in and
what they actually practice. This gap is not a recent phenomenon. It has
been there for centuries and has been widening day after day. This ever
widening gap has had disastrous consequences on the Muslim world
manifested in almost all aspects of life: political tyranny and
fragmentation, economic backwardness, social injustice, scientific
bankruptcy, intellectual stagnation, *etc*.

The non-Islamic status of women in the Muslim world today is merely a
symptom of a deeper malady. Any reform in the current status of Muslim
women is not expected to be fruitful if not accompanied with more
comprehensive reforms of the Muslim societies’ whole way of life. The
Muslim world is in need for a renaissance that will bring it closer to
the ideals of Islam and not further from them. To sum up, the notion
that the poor status of Muslim women today is because of Islam is an
utter misconception. The problems of Muslims in general are not due to
too much attachment to Islam, they are the culmination of a long and
deep detachment from it.

It has, also, to be re-emphasized that the purpose behind this
comparative study is not, by any means, to defame Judaism or
Christianity. The position of women in the Judaeo-Christian tradition
might seem frightening by our late twentieth century standards.
Nevertheless, it has to be viewed within the proper historical context.
In other words, any objective assessment of the position of women in the
Judaeo-Christian tradition has to take into account the historical
circumstances in which this tradition developed.

There can be no doubt that the views of the Rabbis and the Church
Fathers regarding women were influenced by the prevalent attitudes
towards women in their societies. The Bible itself was written by
different authors at different times. These authors could not have been
impervious to the values and the way of life of the people around them.
For example, the adultery laws of the Old Testament are so biased
against women that they defy rational explanation by our mentality.
However, if we consider the fact that the early Jewish tribes were
obsessed with their genetic homogeneity and extremely eager to define
themselves apart from the surrounding tribes and that only sexual
misconduct by the married females of the tribes could threaten these
cherished aspirations, we should then be able to understand, but not
necessarily sympathize with, the reasons for this bias.

Also, the diatribes of the Church Fathers against women should not be
detached from the context of the misogynist Greco-Roman culture in which
they lived. It would be unfair to evaluate the Judaeo-Christian legacy
without giving any consideration to the relevant historical context.

In fact, a proper understanding of the Judaeo-Christian historical
context is also crucial for understanding the significance of the
contributions of Islam to world history and human civilization. The
Judaeo-Christian tradition had been influenced and shaped by the
environments, conditions, and cultures in which it had existed. By the
seventh century C.E., this influence had distorted the original divine
message revealed to Moses and Jesus beyond recognition. The poor status
of women in the Judaeo-Christian world by the seventh century is just
one case in point. Therefore, there was a great need for a new divine
message that would guide humanity back to the straight path. The Qur’an
described the mission of the new Messenger as a release for Jews and
Christians from the heavy burdens that had been upon them:

***“Those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they
find mentioned in their own Scriptures--In the Law and the Gospel-- For
he commands them what is just and forbids them what is evil; he allows
them as lawful what is good and prohibits them from what is bad; He
releases them from their heavy burdens and from the yokes that are upon
them.”(7:157)***

Therefore, Islam should not be viewed as a rival tradition to Judaism or
Christianity. It has to be regarded as the consummation, completion, and
perfection of the divine messages that had been revealed before it.

At the end of this study, I would like to offer the following advice to
the global Muslim community. So many Muslim women have been denied their
basic Islamic rights for so long. The mistakes of the past have to be
corrected. To do that is not a favor, it is a duty incumbent upon all
Muslims.  
 The worldwide Muslim community have to issue a charter of Muslim
women’s rights based on the instructions of the Qur’an and the teachings
of the Prophet of Islam. This charter must give Muslim women all the
rights endowed to them by their Creator. Then, all the necessary means
have to be developed in order to ensure the proper implementation of the
charter. This charter is long overdue, but it is better late than never.
If Muslims worldwide will not guarantee the full Islamic rights of their
mothers, wives, sisters, and daughters, who else will?

Furthermore, we must have the courage to confront our past and reject
outright the traditions and customs of our forefathers whenever they
contravene the precepts of Islam. Did the Qur’an not severely criticize
the pagan Arabs for blindly following the traditions of their ancestors?
On the other hand, we have to develop a critical attitude towards
whatever we receive from the West or from any other culture. Interaction
with and learning from other cultures is an invaluable experience. The
Qur’an has succinctly considered this interaction as one of the purposes
of creation:

***“O mankind We created you from a single pair of a male and a female,
and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know each
other.”(49:13)***

It goes without saying, however, that blind imitation of others is a
sure sign of an utter lack of self-esteem.

It is to the non-Muslim reader, Jewish, Christian, or otherwise, that
these final words are dedicated. It is bewildering why the religion that
had revolutionized the status of women is being singled out and
denigrated as so repressive of women. This perception about Islam is one
of the most widespread myths in our world today.

This myth is being perpetuated by a ceaseless barrage of sensational
books, articles, media images, and Hollywood movies. The inevitable
outcome of these incessant misleading images has been total
misunderstanding and fear of anything related to Islam. This negative
portrayal of Islam in the world media has to end if we are to live in a
world free from all traces of discrimination, prejudice, and
misunderstanding.

Non-Muslims ought to realize the existence of a wide gap between
Muslims’ beliefs and practices and the simple fact that the actions of
Muslims do not necessarily represent Islam. To label the status of women
in the Muslim world today as “Islamic” is as far from the truth as
labelling the position of women in the West today as “Judaeo-Christian”.
With this understanding in mind, Muslims and non-Muslims should start a
process of communication and dialogue in order to remove all
misconceptions, suspicions, and fears. A peaceful future for the human
family necessitates such a dialogue.

Islam should be viewed as a religion that had immensely improved the
status of women and had granted them many rights that the modern world
has recognized only this century. Islam still has so much to offer
today’s woman: dignity, respect, and protection in all aspects and all
stages of her life from birth until death in addition to the
recognition, the balance, and means for the fulfilment of all her
spiritual, intellectual, physical, and emotional needs.

No wonder most of those who choose to become Muslims in a country like
Britain are women. In the U.S. women converts to Islam outnumber male
converts 4 to 1.[^1]

Islam has so much to offer our world which is in great need of moral
guidance and leadership. Ambassador Herman Eilts, in a testimony in
front of the committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of
Representatives of the United States Congress on June 24th, 1985, said,

“The Muslim community of the globe today is in the neighbourhood of one
billion. That is an impressive figure. But what to me is equally
impressive is that Islam today is the fastest growing monotheistic
religion. This is something we have to take into account. Something is
right about Islam. It is attracting a good many people.”

Yes, something is right about Islam and it is time to find that out. I
hope this study is a step on this direction.

[^1]: The Times, Nov. 18, 1993.


