Eve's Fault?
============

The three religions agree on one basic fact: Both women and men are
created by God, The Creator of the whole universe.

However, disagreement starts soon after the creation of the first man,
Adam, and the first woman, Eve. The Judaeo-Christian conception of the
creation of Adam and Eve is narrated in detail in Genesis. (2:4-24)

God prohibited both of them from eating the fruits of the forbidden
tree. The serpent seduced Eve to eat from it and Eve, in turn, seduced
Adam to eat with her.

When God rebuked Adam for what he did, he put all the blame on Eve,

*"The woman you put here with me -- she gave me some fruit from the tree
and I ate it."* (Genesis, 3: 12)

Consequently, God said to Eve:

*"I will greatly increase your pains in childbearing; with pain you will
give birth to children. Your desire will be for your husband and he will
rule over you."* (Genesis, 3: 16)

To Adam He said:

*"Because you listened to your wife and ate from the tree of which I
forbidden you to eat, “Cursed is the ground because of you; through
painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life..."* (Genesis,
3: 17)

The Islamic conception of the first creation is found in several places
in the Qur’an, for example:

***"O Adam! Dwell with your wife in the Garden and enjoy as you wish but
approach not this tree or you run into harm and transgression. Then
Satan whispered to them in order to reveal to them their shame that was
hidden from them and he said: 'Your Lord only forbade you this tree lest
you become angels or such beings as live forever.'***

***And he swore to them both that he was their sincere adviser. So by
deceit he brought them to their fall: when they tasted the tree their
shame became manifest to them and they began to sew together the leaves
of the Garden over their bodies.***

***And their Lord called unto them: 'Did I not forbid you that tree and
tell you that Satan was your avowed enemy?' They said: 'Our Lord we have
wronged our own souls and if You forgive us not and bestow not upon us
Your Mercy, we shall certainly be lost.'"(7:19-23)***

A careful look into the two accounts of the story of the Creation
reveals some essential differences.

The Qur’an, contrary to the Bible, places equal blame on both Adam and
Eve for their mistake. Nowhere in the Qur’an can one find even the
slightest hint that Eve tempted Adam to eat from the tree or even that
she had eaten before him. Eve in the Qur’an is no temptress, no seducer,
and no deceiver. Moreover, Eve is not to be blamed for the pains of
childbearing. God, according to the Qur’an, punishes no one for
another's faults. Both Adam and Eve committed a sin[^1] and then asked
God for forgiveness and He forgave them both.

[^1]: Shi’ah Muslims do not subscribe to the belief that Adam and Eve
committed a ‘sin’. They argue that Adam was a prophet and prophets do
not sin. Furthermore Adam eating from the tree was before he was sent to
the earth {where the ‘Permissible & Forbidden’ (halal & haram) and
‘Obedience & Disobedience’ are applicable and possible}. For more
information see http://www.al-islam.org/shiism/ (Chapter 7).


