Adultery
========

Adultery is considered a sin in all religions.

The Bible decrees the death sentence for both the adulterer and the
adulteress:

*“If a man commits adultery with his neighbour's wife, both the
adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death.”* (Lev. 20:10)

Islam also equally punishes both the adulterer and the adulteress:

***“(As for) the fornicatress and the fornicator, flog each of them,
(giving) a hundred stripes, and let not pity for them detain you in the
matter of obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day,
and let a party of believers witness their chastisement.”(24:2)***

However, the Qur’anic definition of adultery is very different from the
Biblical definition. Adultery, according to the Qur’an, is the
involvement of a married man or a married woman in an extramarital
affair. The Bible only considers the extramarital affair of a married
woman as adultery.

*"If a man is found sleeping with another man's wife, both the man who
slept with her and the woman must die. You must purge the evil from
Israel"* (Deuteronomy 22:22)

*"If a man commits adultery with another man's wife both the adulterer
and the adulteress must be put to death."* (Leviticus 20:10)

*“To keep you from your neighbour's wife, from the smooth tongue of the
adulteress. Lust not in your heart after her beauty, let her not
captivate you with her glance! For the price of a loose woman may be
scarcely a loaf of bread, But if she is married, she is a trap for your
precious life. Can a man take fire to his bosom, and his garments not
burned? Or can a man walk on live coals, and his feet not be scorched?
So with him who goes in to his neighbour's wife-- none who touches her
shall go unpunished.”* (Proverbs, 6:24-:29)

According to the Biblical definition, if a married man sleeps with an
unmarried woman, this is not considered a crime at all. The married man
who has extramarital affairs with unmarried women is not an adulterer
and the unmarried women involved with him are not adulteresses. The
crime of adultery is committed only when a man, whether married or
single, sleeps with a married woman. In this case the man is considered
adulterer, even if he is not married, and the woman is considered
adulteress. In short, adultery is any illicit sexual intercourse
involving a married woman. The extramarital affair of a married man is
not per se a crime in the Bible.

Why is the dual moral standard? According to Encyclopaedia Judaica, the
wife was considered to be the husband's possession and adultery
constituted a violation of the husband's exclusive right to her; the
wife as the husband's possession had no such right to him.[^1]

That is, if a man had sexual intercourse with a married woman, he would
be violating the property of another man and, thus, he should be
punished. To the present day in Israel, if a married man indulges in an
extramarital affair with an unmarried woman, his children by that woman
are considered legitimate. But, if a married woman has an affair with
another man, whether married or not married, her children by that man
are not only illegitimate but they are considered bastards and are
forbidden to marry any other Jews except converts and other bastards.
This ban is handed down to the children's descendants for ten
generations until the taint of adultery is presumably weakened.[^2]

The Qur’an, on the other hand, never considers any woman to be the
possession of any man. The Qur’an eloquently describes the relationship
between the spouses by saying:

***“And among His signs is that He created for you mates from among
yourselves, that you may dwell in tranquillity with them and He has put
love and mercy between your hearts: verily in that are signs for those
who reflect." (30:21)***

This is the Qur’anic conception of marriage: love, mercy, and
tranquillity, not possession and double standards.

[^1]: Jeffrey H. Togay, “Adultery”, Encyclopaedia Judaica, Vol. II, col.
313. Also see Judith Laskow, Standing Again at Sinai: Judaism from a
Feminist Perspective (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1990) pp.
170-177.

[^2]: Swidler, op. cit. p. 141.


