Chapter 2: Shi’ite commentators (Mufassirin) and their commentaries (Tafsirs)
=============================================================================

The Sacred Text has been subject to interpretations (*tafsir)*,
hermeneutics (*ta’wil)* and mystical exegesis throughout Islamic
history. The Shi’ite understanding of the Qur’an is founded on the
doctrinal belief that the Shi’ite Imams possess the hidden, esoteric
(*batin*) knowledge of the verses of the Qur’an.

2-1 The principles of Shi’i tafsir and the relation between the Imams and the Qur’an
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tafsir* means “interpretation” in general but not always of the Qur’an.
“The most significant usage of the word is its reference to the branch
of Islamic learning concerned with the Qur’an.

A *tafsir* of the Qur’an is a work which provides an interpretation of
the Arabic text of the scripture. In most cases, a work entitled
*tafsir* will follow the text of the Qur’an from the beginning to the
end and will provide an interpretation (*tafsir)* of segments of the
text (word-by-word, phrase-by- phrase or verse-by-verse) as a running
commentary.

The major exceptions to this fundamental characteristic are to be found
in the formative and the contemporary periods of Islam. In the formative
period, one finds works of *tafsir,* which cover only isolated segments
of the text, and in the contemporary period, thematic *tafasir*
(*mawdu’i)* have become quite popular.

Different *mufassirun* have different concerns and goals and this is
reflected in the relative weight they put upon elements such as history,
grammar, law, theology...”[^1] The commentaries of the Qur’an are useful
for deciphering the message of the Qur’an. Many people who read the
Sacred Book receive no more from it than the literal message.

It is in the commentaries, based on the clarification afforded by the
*hadith* and written by those who are qualified in the true sense, that
man comes to understand explicitly and in more extended form what is
contained often implicitly and in a contracted form in the Qur’an.[^2]

### a) The principles of Shi’i tafsir

• The exoteric and esoteric aspects of the Qur’an

Among the principles of the Shi’i *tafsir* is that the Qur’an has an
outer dimension (*zahir)* and an inner dimension (*batin)* and the
simple surface text of a verse unfolds multiple meanings and exemplifies
a feature to be found throughout the Qur’an.[^3]

Indeed the Qur’an is meant for men and women of any level of intellect
and from any social background, and “since the expounding of subtle
knowledge is not without danger of misinterpretation, the Qur’an directs
its teachings primarily at the level of the common man.

The Qur’an reveals itself in a way suitable for different levels of
comprehension so that each benefits according to his own capacity.” Also
certain verses contain metaphors which indicate divine gnosis far beyond
the common man’s understanding but which nevertheless become
comprehensible through their metaphorical form.[^4]

These exoteric and esoteric aspects of the Qur’an have also been
identified with the principles of *tafsir* and *ta’wil* respectively,
*Tafsir* being the explanation of the external aspect and the literal
exegesis of the Qur’an using different fields like Arabic grammar,
poetry, linguistic, jurisprudence or history as references to elucidate
the difficulties of the literal text, and *Ta’wil* signifying “to take
back or reconduct something to its origin and archetype (*asl*)”.[^5]

The basis in any case remains the corpus of teachings and *hadith* of
the Imams who expounded the rules of the plurality of meanings in the
Qur’an.[^6] In other words, *Ta’wil* or symbolic and hermeneutic
interpretation enables penetration into the inner meaning of the Sacred
Text, which in fact entails a reaching back to its Origin.

The idea of penetrating into the inner meaning of things can be seen
everywhere in Islam. But it is particularly in the case of the Qur’an
that *ta’wil* is applied, especially by the Sufis and the
Shi’as[^7].[^8]

There is considerable disagreement as to the meaning of *ta’wil*, and it
is possible to count more than ten different views. Tabatabai explains
that *ta’wil* is not in opposition to the actual text but is used to
extend the idea expressed to include a further meaning.[^9]

Also, sufficient deliberation upon the Qur’anic verses and the *hadith*
of the Imams will show that the Qur’an never uses enigmatic methods of
explanation. “What has been rightly called *ta’wil* or hermeneutic
interpretation of the Holy Qur’an is not concerned with certain truths
and realities that transcend the comprehension of the common run of
men”.

In fact, “the whole of the Qur’an possesses the sense of *ta’wil*, of
esoteric meaning, which cannot be comprehended directly through human
thought alone.” Only the Prophet and the pure among the saints can
contemplate these meanings in this world. “On the Day of Resurrection,
the *ta’wil* of the Qur’an will be revealed to everyone.”[^10]

• The abrogating (*nasikh)* and the abrogated *(mansukh)* verses

Abrogating verses are those which are applicable and relevant at all
times and abrogated verses are not relevant and have already been
fulfilled.[^11]

• The explicit (*muhkam)* and the implicit *(mutashabih)* verses

The verse 7 in the *sura* 3 of the Qur’an divides the Qur’an into two
parts: the explicit and the implicit, the clear and the allegorical, or
the *muhkam* and the *mutashabih.* The verses, which are explicit and
immediate in their message, are incapable of being misinterpreted.

The implicit verses are not of this nature, but seem to express a
meaning containing a further truer meaning whose interpretation is known
only to God. This view is accepted by both the Sunnite and the Shi’ite
scholars; however, the Shi’ites believe that the Prophet and the Imams
of his family also understood the hidden meanings and maintain that the
ordinary man must seek knowledge of the implicit verses from them (the
Prophet and his family).[^12]

Tabatabai relates from the Imams that each verse, even if its meaning is
not apparent or explicit, can be explained by reference to other verses.
Thus, the real meaning of the implicit verses can be found in relation
to the explicit verses and the assertion that no means exist for
understanding the implicit verses is fallacious.

He also reports a prophetic *hadith* (reported by al-‘Amili, in *al-Durr
al-Manthur*, vol.2, p.8): “In truth, the Qur’an was not revealed so that
one part may contradict the other, but rather was revealed so that one
part may verify the other. You understand what you can of it, then, act
accordingly; and that which is unclear for you, simply believe in
it.”[^13]

### b) The Imams and the Ahl al-Bayt in relation to the Qur’an

The Shi’ites have agreed that God revealed to Muhammad both the Qur’an
and its exegesis and appointed him as the teacher of the Book,[^14]
while the Prophet appointed his progeny to carry on this work after him.
In two places of the Qur’an, (33:33) and (56: 77-79), God has confirmed
the Prophet's declaration that his progeny held real knowledge of the
Book.[^15]

In a long and well-known tradition (*hadith al-Thaqalayn)* related by
both Shi’i and Sunni traditionists, the Qur’an is presented as the
‘greater weight’ (*al-thaqal al-akbar)* and the Imams as the ‘lesser
weight’ (*al-thaqal al-asghar).*

In the presence of many of his Companions, the Prophet declared: “I am
soon about to be received..... I am telling you before I am taken up
that I shall leave with you, as representatives after me, the Book of my
Lord, and my progeny, the people of my household, the *ahl al-bayt* that
the All-Gracious, All-Knowing, told me that they shall not be separated
until they meet me on the day of Resurrection..... Do not precede them,
for you would go astray, and do not fall behind them, for you would
perish. Do not teach them, for they are of greater knowledge than
you.”[^16]

Numerous traditions in several chapters describe the knowledge of the
Imams, especially in the *hadith* collection of Kulayni. The Shi’ites
consider the Imams as associates of the Qur’an. The Prophet and Imams
are distinguished by the inheritance of divine knowledge and they alone
know the full meaning of the Qur’an, since it was to them that it was
primarily addressed and through them to the rest of humankind.

Also they possess all the revealed Books of the previous Prophets and
knew their *tafsir* and *ta’wil* despite the number of languages in
which they were written. Thus, the Imams have a unique relation to the
Qur’an that gives Shi’i *tafsir* its unique character.

It is also believed that the Qur’an, which Ali wrote down from the
dictation of Muhammad with its true exegesis (*ta’wil*), was passed down
from one Imam to the next and is now with the hidden Imam who will
disclose it and judge by it when he returns as the expected
*Mahdi.*[^17]

2-2 The historical development and method of Shi’i tafsir
---------------------------------------------------------

The interpretation of the Qur’an (*tafsir)* began right at the time of
its revelation and is one of the earliest activities in Islamic
sciences. The first exegetes among the Companions of the Prophet were
Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar, Ubay ibn Ka’b and others.[^18] People
used to ask the Prophet all sorts of questions as to the meaning of
certain statements in the verses and the Prophet undertook the teaching
and explanation of the Qur’an.

The Prophet’s answers were stored up in the memory of his Companions.
After the Prophet's death, a group of his Companions were occupied with
the science of commentary and its transmission. Just as they had heard
the Prophet explaining the meaning of the verses, they would transmit it
orally to other trustworthy persons.[^19]

Exegesis in those days was confined to the explanation of literary
aspects of the verse, the background of its revelation, and occasionally
interpretation of one verse with the help of another. Sometimes a few of
the Prophet's traditions were narrated.

Followers of these first Companions (*Tabi’un*), who lived in the first
two centuries of *hijra,* used the same exegetic style*.* However, they
relied more on traditions, and even Jewish sayings and dictums to
explain the verses containing details of the previous nations present in
Genesis[^20] because the *tafsir* transmission from the Prophet through
the Companions and the *Tabi’un* did not cover all the verses in the
Qur’an.

Some scholars relied on their knowledge of the language and historical
facts of the Prophet's epoch.[^21] During the time of the Companions and
the *Tabi’un*, the science of *tafsir* was part of the *hadith* and
there was hardly any difference between *mufassirun* and *muhaddithun*
(traditionists or narrators of *hadith*) until the complete separation
of the two in the early third century,[^22] when exegesis became an
independent, autonomous science.[^23]

The activity of *tafsir* during the first two centuries is reflected by
the *tafsir* of Ibn Jarir al-Tabari. His collections are said to have
contained materials from various earlier works and his work is evidence
of the general recognition of *tafsir* in early third century AH. It was
the first attempt to comment on the whole of the Qur’an verse by
verse.[^24]

During the second century A.H., Muslim society split into four groups:
the theologians, the philosophers, the Sufis, and the people of
tradition. This divergence showed itself later in exegesis of the
Qur’an.[^25] Indeed, after Tabari, the development of *tafsir* came to
be associated with different fields of knowledge, doctrines and thought,
and scholars attempted to make their field of knowledge a basis for
their commentary in order to support their views from the Qur’an.

Scholars working in the field of philosophy considered philosophy a
basis for their commentaries while scholars in the legal field employ
the *tafsir* to project the doctrine of their particular school of
thought, and so on.[^26]

For Tabatabai, all these ways of exegesis are defective because they
superimpose their conclusions on the Qur’anic meanings, making the
Qur’an conform with their ideas. Thus, explanation turns into
adaptation.[^27] Tabatabai stated that the only correct method of
exegesis is that the exegete explains the verse with the help of other
relevant verses, meditating on them together. The Prophet and the Imams
descended from his progeny always used this method for explaining the
Qur’an.[^28]

Similarly Mutahhari explains that the Qur’an constitutes a coherent
unified structure and some verses need to be explained with the help of
other verses in order to prevent any misunderstanding about certain
problems. If a solitary verse is studied without placing it in its
proper context, it will give a different meaning from when it is
compared with other verses dealing with a similar subject.[^29]

Also, while Sunni commentators in the early period of *tafsir* relied
primarily on prophetic traditions and those of the Companions and their
successors, the Shi’ite commentators, in studying a verse of the Qur’an,
viewed the explanation given by the Prophet as proof of the meaning of
the verse, and did not accept the sayings of the Companions or their
followers as indisputable proof that the tradition came from the
Prophet.

The Shi’ite commentators only recognized as valid an unbroken chain of
narration from the Prophet through members of his family. Accordingly,
in using and transmitting the verses concerning Qur’anic commentary,
they restricted themselves to the use of traditions transmitted by the
Prophet and by the Imams belonging to the Prophet’s family.[^30]

The first generation of Shi’ite commentators and authorities on *tafsir*
were disciples of the Imams and others close to the disciples, who
learned the traditions directly from the Prophet and the Imams of the
Prophet’s family.

Among them were such scholars as Zurarah ibn A’yun and Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Ma’ruf ibn Kharbudh and Jarir, who were Companions of the fifth
and sixth Imams, or Abu Hamzah al- Thumali (a special Companion of the
fourth and fifth Imams)[^31]. Their traditions have been preserved in
the works of the second generation of commentators and compilers of
commentaries. These were consecutively:

• Furat Ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, who lived during the Imamate of the ninth
Imam, Muhammad al-Jawad, and might have lived until the first years of
the tenth century A.D. He was one of the foremost authorities in Shi’ite
traditions and one of the teachers of the famous traditionist al-Qummi.

• Muhammad al-‘Ayyashi, a contemporary of Furat Ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, was
a Sunni scholar who accepted Shi’ism, and became a great Shi’a scholar.

• Ali Ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi (d. 307 AH/919-20 AD), who related traditions
received from his father who had, in turn, learned them from many of the
Imams' disciples.

• Muhammad al-Nu’mani, who survived into the tenth century AD.
Al-Nu’mani (d.360 AH/971 AD) was one of al-Kulayni's students. He left
an important tafsir that he related on the authority of the sixth Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq. These two generations represent the pre-classical
period of Shi’ite tafsir.[^32] They avoided any kind of ijtihad or
passing of judgement. The Imams were indeed living among Muslims and
availabl for questioning for a period of almost three hundred years.

The third generation of Shi’ite commentators extended over a very long
period, well into the sixteenth century AD. They included: al-Sharif
al-Radhiy (d.405 AH/1015 AD) and his well-known brother al-Sayyed
al-Murtadha (d.436 AH/1044 AD); Abu Ja’far al-Tusi (d.460AH/1067AD) who
was a student of al-Murtadha and whose commentary, *al-Tybian fi tafsir
al Qur’an,* represents an important approach in Shi’i *tafsir;* and his
disciple Abu al-Fadl Ibn al-Hasan Ibn al-Fadl al-Tabarsi (d.548 AH/1153
AD).

They represent what may be considered as the classical period of Shi’i
*tafsir.* These commentators took a broad approach to *tafsir* using
Shi’i as well as Sunni traditions and also rejected Shi’i popular claims
regarding the inauthenticity of the ‘Uthmanic recension of the
Qur’an.[^33]

Included, too, were later commentators such as al-Maybudi al-Gunabadi
(sixth century A.H) and his gnostic commentary, Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi
(d.1050 AH/1640 AD), Hashim al-Bahrani (d.1107 AH/1695 AD) who composed
*al- Burhan*, ‘Abd Ali al-Huwayzi (d.1112 AH/1700 AD) who composed the
*Nur al-Thaqalayn,* and Mulla Muhsin Fayd al- Kashani (d.1191 AH/1777
AD) who compiled the work known as *al-Safi.*[^34]

Other works of Shi’ite gnostics, such as the 8th AH/14th AD century
figure Haydar Amuli, were also included.

The Qur’anic commentaries of Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi, known as Mulla
Sadra “are the most important by an Islamic philosopher or theosopher
(*hakim)* and also the most voluminous by a representative of the
Islamic philosophical tradition” until Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i
(d.1983) wrote the *tafsir al-Mizan.* “In the same way that Mulla
Sadra’s “Transcendent Theosophy” marks the synthesis of the various
schools of gnosis, theosophy, philosophy and theology within a Shi’ite
intellectual climate, his Qur’anic commentaries mark the meeting point
of four different traditions of Qur’anic commentary before him, the
Sufi, the Shi’ite, the theological and the philosophical.”[^35]

The final stage of the development of Shi’i *tafsir* is the contemporary
one. Among modern works, the most important are *al-Mizan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an* by Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i, *al-Bayan fi tafsir al-Qur’an*
by al-Sayyed Abul- Qasim al-Khui, and *Tafsir-e Nemune* by Nasser
Makarem Shirazi, this last being oriented more towards youth readership.

2-3 Three mufassirin
--------------------

### a) Shaykh Tabarsi

Shaykh Abu Ali Fadl al-Tabarsi was a Shi’ite theologian who produced a
*tafsir* of the Qur’an which enjoys wide acceptance, even among non
Shi’ite scholars. Al-Dhahabi describes Shaykh Tabarsi as a moderate
Shi’i scholar, who does not indulge in exaggeration and refrains from
cursing any of the Companions.[^36]

Very little has been written about him and his works by modern scholars
and nothing at all by Western scholars, and even the *Encyclopaedia of
Islam* is silent on his account. Musa O. A. Abdul seems to be the only
author who has dedicated a book in English to Shaykh Tabarsi and his
commentary.

Shaykh Tabarsi was born in 468 AH/1075 AD in Iran during the Seljuq
period. He lived for many years in Mashad where he engaged himself in
public teaching until the year 523 AH/1128-29 AD and wrote many valuable
works concerned with the propagation and defense of the Shi’ite
doctrine, the Imams, their qualities and sayings, theology, ethics,
grammar, etc.

He then moved to Sabzawar where, at an advanced age, he wrote his famous
commentary on the Qur’an *Majma’ al-Bayan li ‘ulum al-Qur’an.* He noted
in the preface to *Majma’ al-Bayan* that he began writing the book when
he was over sixty.

He also produced two other minor *tafsir* works: *al-Kafi al- shafi* and
*Jawami al-Jami.* In Sabzawar, he devoted twenty- five years to teaching
and writing and died there in the year 548 AH/1153 AD.

Shaykh Tabarsi’s fame both as a scholar and as a theologian rests on his
*tafsir* works, the major one of which is *Majma’ al- Bayan li-‘ulum
al-Qur’an.* In the preface to this work, Shaykh Tabarsi gives the
reasons for his writing it and for his choice of title. He also
describes the methodology used in the commentaries on every verse.

At the time of the work’s preparation, there were already some *tafsir*
works in circulation, written by both Sunnite and Shi’ite scholars. The
*Jami’ al-Bayan* by Tabari and *al-Tibyan* by al-Tusi had impressed him
most. Shaykh Tabarsi combined these two titles, both having the same
meaning, and entitled his own *tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan.*

The *tafsir* was completed in 534 AH/1139 AD but was not published for
the first time until 1268 AH/1851 AD. Tabarsi divides his commentary on
every passage into five sections: introductory discourse, reading guide,
language discourse, revelation and circumstances surrounding it, and
meaning. He employs *ta’wil* in many cases to deduce the inner or
implied meaning of a verse.

When a passage relates to a theological, jurisprudential or
philosophical issue, Tabarsi gives the views of all sides and then gives
his own judgement and standpoint when it differs from that of his school
of thought. Indeed, the originality of Tabarsi’s commentary is that he
gives his readers an opportunity to see the varying opinions on
different issues mentioned in the Qur’an. He then discusses these views
and declares his own stand.

Al-Dhahabi says that his *tafsir,* apart from what it contains of his
Shi’ite and Mu’tazilite views, indicates the deep penetration of its
author into different branches of knowledge. He draws upon the
statements from his predecessors among the *mufassirin* and declares his
choice among them.[^37] His *tafsir* has a wide coverage of historical
facts, of the statements and opinions of philologists, traditionists,
commentators and poets.

There is also a good coverage of the various schools of thought. It
contains many philological studies and references to ancient poetry.
This *tafsir* is a compendium of all sciences connected with the studies
of Islam and to which specialists from any field of Islamic sciences can
refer.

Shaykh Tabarsi’s affiliation to Shi’i school of thought can be traced in
his commentaries but he has also shown on many issues that he is an
independent thinker and sometimes holds different conclusions from that
of the Shi’ites.

This commentary is unanimously accepted by Muslim scholars, Sunnite and
Shi’ite, and some scholars consider it as a leading work on tafsir even
up to the present day due to the richness and variety of its contents.
It is one of the very few works which have enjoyed such wide acceptance.

Shaykh Tabarsi has shown interest in many theological issues in his
commentary, such as the issue concerning the *Imamate* of Ali ibn Abi
Talib, the practice of *taqiyyah* (dissimulation of one’s faith), the
infallibility of the Imams, God’s Justice etc. He also discusses the
issue of the *Mahdi*, his advent at the End of Time, the purpose of his
coming and his rule.

### b) Banu Amin

Banu-ye mujtahedeh sayyedeh Nusrat Begum Amin al- Tujjar Isfahani,[^38]
known as Banu Amin, was born in 1256 Sh/1877 AD in Isfahan and is said
to be descended from Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib through both her parents.
She first went to school at five and started to learn Arabic language
and literature at twelve because of her early interest in Islamic
studies.

At fifteen, she married her cousin, Haj seyyed Muhammad Amin al-Tujjar,
who was a famous businessman in Isfahan. Banu Amin had nine children but
eight of them died very young from diseases like diphtheria, smallpox,
typhoid fever, pneumonia or through miscarriage.

A few years after her wedding, at the age of twenty, she started to
study Islamic sciences, such as *Fiqh, Usul, tafsir, hadith* and
*hikma,* with a private teacher, Ayatollah Mir Muhammad Najaf Abadi, who
tutored her at home.

She was a strong follower of Molla Sadra Shirazi’s philosophy and was
qualified to gain a profound understanding of Molla Sadra's *Kitab
al-Asfar al-arba’a al-‘aqliya* (*The Book of the Four Journeys),* her
favourite subject of study.

Among Islamic works, after the *Asfar,* she was much interested in
compilations of traditions (*hadith)* and *tafsir,* particularly the
*tafsir* work *Majma’ al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi. She later followed
Shaykh Tabarsi’s method in her own *tafsir (Makhzan al-‘Irfan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an)* of the Qur’an. She was, and still is, the first woman
*Mufassir* (commentator) of the entire Qur’an.

The originality of her *tafsir* was based on the fact that it was a
mixture of exoteric interpretation of the Qur’an and spiritual teachings
of a gnostic journey and pilgrimage (*sayr-o- suluk-e ‘irfani).* Banu
Amin is said to be the founder of this new method of interpretation.

After having spent twenty years of her life studying Islamic sciences,
at the age of forty she produced her first work, *Arba’in Hashemiya
(Forty Hashemi Traditions).* This work reached the *howza al-‘ilmiyah*
(traditional religious education centre) of Najaf in Iraq, and was
warmly approved by the *‘Ulama.* Banu Amin thus became famous for the
first time among the *‘ulama* and reached the degree of *Ijtihad.*

Indeed after several written examinations from the greatest ‘*ulama* of
Najaf in Islamic sciences such as *fiqh* (jurisprudence), *hadith*
(traditions), or Qur’an, she was given permission of *Ijtihad* (the
application of reason to the solution of legal issues) and *Istenbat-e
ahkam-e shar’i* (deduction of the main rules of conduct). She was then
the only *mujtahedeh* of her time*.*

After that, Banu Amin devoted herself to writing, teaching and doing
research in the field of the Islamic sciences. Her works, with a brief
description, are as follows in chronological order:

1. *Arba’in Hashemiya (Forty Hashemi traditions)* in Arabic:

According to *‘ulama* custom, whenever a religious scholar collected
forty authentic and documented *hadith* and was able to teach *Usul* and
*Ahkam* to believers through these *hadith*, he then earned the
permission of *Ijtihad.*
Banu Amin was the first woman to collect and provide a commentary on
forty *hadith* in the field of *Tawhid* and other attributes of God,
*Akhlaq, Ahkam,* with the expression of philosophy, mysticism and
jurisprudence. She published them under the title of *Arba’in
Hashemiya*.

2. *Makhzan al-laali fi Manaqeb Mawla al- Mawali*:

This work is dedicated to Ali ibn Abi Talib and his virtues.

3. *Seyr-o-suluk dar ravesh-e awliyah va tariq-e seyr-e So’ada:*

This work explains the method and stages of the gnostic in his spiritual
ascent toward God.

4. *Ma’ad ya akharin seyr-e bashar (The resurrection or the last journey
of the Human):*

This work is about life after death.

5. *Ravesh-e khushbakhti va towsiye be kh‚haran-e imani (The road to
happiness and recommendation to the sisters in Faith)*

6. *Akhlaq va rahe Sa’adat (Ethics and the way to* *happiness)*:

This work is Banu Amin's translation, with notes and commentary, of the
work of Shaykh Ahmad ibn Maskuyeh, *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq wa Tat-hir
al-A’raq*.

7. *Makhzan al-ëIrfan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an (A wealth* *of Gnosis in the
Interpretation of the Qur’an)*:

This tafsir consists of fifteen volumes.

8. *Jami’ al-Shatat* in Arabic:

This work is a collection of all the examination questions of the
*ëulama* and Banu Amin's replies after becoming *mujtahedeh.*

9. *Al-Nafahat al-Rahmaniyah fi al-waridat al- qalbiyah* in Arabic:

This work concerns Banu Amin’s personal spiritual and mystical
experience, her visions and dreams.

Her works cover a large part of the Islamic sciences such as Fiqh
(jurisprudence), Usul (fundamentals of religion), Falsafe (philosophy),
Hikma (wisdom), ‘Irfan (Gnosticism), Hadith (Prophetic traditions,)
Tafsir (interpretation) and Akhlaq (ethics).

Apart from her intellectual activities, Banu Amin also founded a high
school for girls (*Dabiristan-e Amin)* and a religious education centre
(*Maktab-e Fatemeh*).

A great number of *‘ulama* used to visit Banu Amin for the purpose of
discussing scientific and spiritual subjects. They came from Isfahan,
Tehran, Qum, and Najaf, and included Allama 'Abd al-Husayn Amini (*Kitab
al-ghadir),* Ayatollah Haeri Shirazi, Ayatollah Safavi Qummi, Allama
Tabataba’i (*al-Mizan),* etc*.* Banu Amin died in Isfahan on June 16,
1983 (1362 Sh/1403 AH).

### c) Allama Tabatabai

Allama Sayyed Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i was one of the great masters of
the traditional sciences in Iran during this century. He was born in
1321 AH/1904 AD into a distinguished family of scholars in Tabriz where
he also undertook his earliest religious studies.

He pursued more advanced studies in Najaf and then returned to Tabriz in
1353 AH/1934 AD. In 1945, following the Soviet Occupation of Azerbaijan,
he migrated to Qum where he settled until his death in 1402 AH/1981 AD.

From this centre of religious learning, his knowledge began to spread
throughout Iran and even beyond. He soon became recognized as one of the
major intellectual figures of Shi’ism.

He was an extremely prolific author in addition to teaching throughout
the week. He wrote a profusion of books and articles of major
intellectual import. His fame rests on his various works, the most
significant being his great exegesis of the Qur’an *al-Mizan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an.*

He wrote several major philosophical works, such as *Usul-e Falasafah va
Ravesh-e Rialism (The Fundamentals of Philosophy and the Doctrine of
Realism)* in five volumes, a comparative study of Islamic philosophy and
various modern schools of thought, especially Marxism.

He edited the *Asfar* of Sadr al-Din al- Shirazi with his own
commentary, and a selection of commentaries on other masters antecedent
to Shirazi, these last collected in seven volumes. Later he composed two
masterly summaries of Islamic philosophy: the *Bidayat al- Hikam* and
the *Nihayat al-Hikam.*

Meanwhile, Allama Tabataba’i continued to work on his Qur’anic
commentary, *Tafsir al-Mizan,* which he finally completed in his
mid-seventies. This monumental commentary consisting of more than twenty
volumes (written in Arabic and translated into Persian) is one of the
most important Qur’anic commentaries of this century and bears witness
to its author’s mastery in the domain of the Qur’anic sciences.

This commentary, based on the principle of having one part of the Qur’an
interpret other parts (*al-Qur’an yufassiru ba’duhu ba’dan)*, is a
*summa* of Islamic religious thought, in which the sciences of the
Qur’an, theology, philosophy, gnosis, sacred history and the social
teachings of Islam, are all brought together. He describes the method he
adopted in the preface to his *tafsir* of the Qur’an.

Allama Tabataba’i was not only an outstanding scholar but also a person
of great spiritual realization who lived constantly in the remembrance
of God. Allama Tabataba’i was, at one and the same time, one of the
greatest Qur’anic commentators, a leading contemporary Islamic
philosopher in the tradition of Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi and Mulla Sadra,
and a gnostic who was at home in both the metaphysical works of Ibn
‘Arabi and the inebriating poetry of Rumi and Hafiz.

[^1]: A. Rippin, “Tafsir”, EIH, p.83-84

[^2]: H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities in Islam, p.58

[^3]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p.29

[^4]: Ibid, p.31-32

[^5]: H. Corbin, En Islam Iranien, vol.1, p.212

[^6]: Ibid, vol.1, p.214

[^7]: H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities in Islam, p.58-59

[^8]: In the tafsir of the Qur'an, the Sunni have mainly depended on the
apparent meaning of the Qur'anic verses, whereas the Shia have depended
on the apparent meaning and the inner meaning of the verses understood
from other verses (for the Qur'anic verses explain each other) and from
the traditions of the Prophet (s.a) and the infallible Imams (a.s) that
explained the qur'an. But as for the Sufis, they have depended on their
personal understanding of the Qur'an, and therefore, most of their
tafsirs (interpretations) are not accepted by other Muslims, especially
the Shia.

[^9]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p.41

[^10]: Tabataba’i in H. Nasr, Shi'ism: Doctrines, Thought, and
Spirituality, p.24

[^11]: M. Ayoub, “The speaking Qur’an and the Silent Qur’an”, p.189

[^12]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p. 33-34

[^13]: Ibid, p. 36

[^14]: Qur’an : 62 :2

[^15]: Tabataba’i, al-Mizan, p.12

[^16]: Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Bab 7, vol.23, p.108

[^17]: Majlisi, Kitab Fadl al-Qur’an, Bab al-Nawadir, vol. 6 , p.474

[^18]: Tabataba’i, al-Mizan, p.3

[^19]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p.47

[^20]: Al-Mizan, p.4

[^21]: M. Abdul, The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary, p.47

[^22]: Ahmad Amin, Duha al-Islam, II, p.140

[^23]: Ibid, p.137

[^24]: M. Abdul, The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary, p. 52-53

[^25]: Al-Mizan, p.5

[^26]: M. Abdul, The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary, p.55

[^27]: Tabataba’i, al-Mizan, p.9

[^28]: Ibid, p.12

[^29]: Mutahhari, in H. Nasr, Shi'ism : Doctrines, Thought, and
Spirituality, p. 27

[^30]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p.50

[^31]: Ibid, p.50

[^32]: M. Ayoub, “The speaking Qur’an and the Silent Qur’an”, p. 184

[^33]: M. Ayoub, “The speaking Qur’an and the Silent Qur’an”, p. 185

[^34]: Tabataba’i, The Qur’an in Islam, p.51

[^35]: H. Nasr, “The Quranic Commentaries of Mulla Sadra”, p.45

[^36]: Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahabi, al-Tafsir wal-Mufassirun, II, P.142

[^37]: Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahabi, al-Tafsir wal-Mufassirun, II, P.104

[^38]: I made a summary of these three works for the life of Banu Amin:
1- Tayyebi N., Banu-ye Irani, 2- Khalili, Marjan Amu : Kuwkab-e durri,
3- Bidhandi, Naser Baqiri, Banu-ye Nemune


