Conclusion
==========

In this study, we have seen that the idea of *Mahdawiyyah* (Mahdism) in
Islam, in both Sunnite and Shi’ite creeds, is particularly strong,
although this idea did not originate solely within the Islamic faith.
Indeed, Islam only confirms the period of waiting and the belief in a
Saviour at the End of Time in terms of the world religions.

As for the Shi’ites, they believe that this Saviour, who is also awaited
by non-Muslims, is exclusively the twelfth Imam who is presently in
Occultation. For these Muslims, the earth could not even last a day
without the Occult presence of the Imam.

Also, the idea of Messianism is stronger in Shi’ism than in any other
religion and has its place in day-to-day life, the greatest act of
worship for Shi'ites being to wait for the Mahdi’s reappearance and to
be prepared at any time to help him.

The subject of our study was to explore the presence of the *Mahdi* in
the Qur’an according to Shi’ite commentators. In order to assess these
Shi’ite scholars’ opinion concerning the idea of Messianism in the
Qur’an, we have studied two *tafsir* works that according to us are the
most representative and widely accepted among the Shi’ite works, and
that are also praised by Sunnite scholars, especially the work of Shaykh
Tabarsi, representing the classical works, and Allama Tabataba’i,
representing more modern thought.

We also studied the *tafsir* work of Banu Amin as a modern work, because
we found it interesting and important to introduce her to the Western
world as the first woman in Islam to have written the entire *tafsir* of
the Qur’an.

Their methods:

Concerning the method used in her commentary, Banu Amin follows
Tabarsi's method in general terms. She first explains the words and
grammar of the verse, then reports on the points of view of several
commentators. It is possible to assert that her *tafsir* is a summary of
the *Majma*, at least in the verses studied in this research.

Of course, a reliable comparison between the two works in their entirety
can only be done by studying the gnostic verses, since Banu Amin’s is
known as a gnostic *tafsir* given that she is considered to be a
disciple of Molla Sadra, however research such as this would need to be
tackled as a separate study.

Concerning the *Mahdi*, Banu Amin follows Tabarsi as other Shi’ite and
Sunnite *mufassirin* have done. However, she does not follow him in all
the nine verses he interprets as referring to the *Mahdi*.

Indeed, she interprets four verses in common with Tabarsi in this
respect while also discussing the *Mahdi* in the Qur’an 61: 9, and in
the Qur’an 97: 5. Another difference between Banu Amin's work and that
of the two other authors is the absence of Sunnite references in her
*tafsir*. This may be the reason why her *tafsir* is less voluminous.

Tabataba’i makes the most use of the Sunnite references and being a
modern *mufassir,* his independent view and non- imitation of the
opinions of the classical *mufassirin,* plus the fact that his
commentary is based on the principle of having one part of the Qur’an
interpreting other parts, has earned him a major position among the
Shi’ite commentators, as is the case for Tabarsi. Indeed, Tabataba’i, as
we see in his debates, relies more on his own understanding of the
verses than the others do.

If we compare the way the verses are interpreted, we get the following
results:

In the Qur’an 21: 105, the *Majma’,* after having reported from other
commentators that the verse concerns the *Mahdi* that he did not reject,
reports the view of someone who denies the *Mahdi*, arguing his case
through a demonstration of the weakness of the hadith while affirming
that the *Mahdi's* appearance is certain and that the traditions
concerning the *Mahdi* are *mutawatir*.

Banu Amin interprets the Qur’an 21:105 as concerning the *Mahdi*. As for
Tabataba’i, where most of the Shi’ite *mufassirin* have followed the
classical works, saying that according to this verse [21:105] the
Companions of the *Mahdi* will inherit the earth, the author of
*al-Mizan* (Tabataba’i) disagrees with this interpretation, stating that
it carries a general meaning, although the belief in the *Mahdi* itself
is certain and has been reported in *mutawatir* traditions by the
Shi’ites and the Sunnites, and there is no need to interpret this verse
as referring to the *Mahdi*.

In the Qur’an 24: 55, Tabarsi and Banu Amin share the same method of
interpretation, both interpreting the verse explicitly as referring to
the *Mahdi*. However, Tabataba’i, after having mentioned the views of
other *mufassirin*, offers a broader interpretation of this verse and
does not attribute it exclusively to the *Mahdi*.

In the *tafsir* of the Qur’an 2: 3, Tabarsi reports different opinions
concerning the verse; one of them mentions the occultation of the
*Mahdi*. His style of relating this seems to imply that he also believes
in this interpretation. Banu Amin attributes this verse to the hereafter
and all that we cannot perceive through our senses, but also to the
occultation of the *Mahdi* that she explains in more weighty terms.

Tabataba’i gives a broad meaning to the verse, implicitly suggesting
that the *Mahdi* may be one among many other meanings embedded within
the verse.

In the *tafsir* of the Qur’an 34:51, the three authors report traditions
from different sources concerning the rise of the Sufyani and his being
swallowed up by the earth in Bayda at the time of the *Mahdi*. They thus
agree that the verse concerns one of the signs of the time of the
*Mahdi*.

Concerning the Qur’an 4:159, *Majma’* discusses the faith of the People
of the Book in ëIsa, suggesting that it concerns the time of the
*Mahdi's* reappearance. *Al-Mizan* offers the same *tafsir* as *Majma’*.
The author of *Makhzan* does not mention the *Mahdi* in her *tafsir*.

In the Qur’an 8: 39, Tabarsi and Tabataba’i confirm that the verse
refers to the time of the *Mahdi*, and that the people of the time of
the *Mahdi* will understand the *ta’wil* of this verse. Banu Amin does
not offer an interpretation of this verse.

For the Qur’an 9: 33, Tabarsi sees the verse as a prediction of the
Qur’an and interprets it as concerning the time of the reappearance of
the *Mahdi*. Tabataba’i interprets it without doubt as the rise of the
*al-Qa’im* and reports this *tafsir* from several commentators. The
*Makhzan al-ëIrfan* offers no interpretation for this verse.

For the Qur’an 11: 8, *Majma’* considers the verse as referring to the
*Mahdi* and his Companions while *al-Mizan* confirms *Majma's tafsir*
and those of other *mufassirin*. The *Makhzan* offers no interpretation
concerning the *Mahdi*.

For the Qur’an 41: 53, *al-Mizan* reports two *tafsirs* concerning this
verse and considers one of the two as concerning the *Mahdi* according
to references gleaned from other commentators. The *Majma’* and the
*Makhzan* have no *tafsir* for this verse.

In the Qur’an 48: 28, Tabarsi reports two interpretations for the verse,
one of them concerning the time of the *Mahdi's* reappearance.
*Al-Mizan* and *Makhzan* offer no *tafsir* concerning the verse.

The Qur’an 97: 5, and the Qur’an 61: 9, are only interpreted by Banu
Amin as concerning the *Mahdi*. Neither *al-Mizan* nor *Majma*’ offer an
interpretation concerning the *Mahdi*.

What we can understand from the verses reported as implicitly concerning
the Mahdi and their interpretation by three Shi’ite commentators is the
future supremacy of Islam over the world and good tidings from God to
the Muslims of the future Universal Reign of Islam. There are diverging
opinions among the commentators concerning the above-mentioned victory
of Islam over all the religions.

Some say that this victory can be understood in intellectual and
rational terms, and that it has already occurred since Islam is the most
logical and rational religion practised in the world today.[^1]

But most of them agree, as do the authors studied here, that a more
correct interpretation would encompass a victory on all fronts, meaning
that the day will come when Islam will be victorious over all the
religions of the world, not only intellectually and spiritually, but
also politically through the constitution of a new world government, and
belief in the predictions of these verses and that such important and
universal events can only be realised at the time of the *Mahdi*.

These commentators give as an argument for their opinion that these
verses are unconditional and general, and that there is no reason to
limit their meaning by affirming that the victory will be limited to a
particular region demarcated at the time of the Prophet or at some time
afterwards, or to a particular intellectual standpoint.

Moreover, they argue that the verses concerning the victory of Islam on
a worldwide scale at the time of the *Mahdi* have been interpreted by
numerous traditions explicitly announcing the appearance of the *Mahdi*
who will enable Islam to triumph throughout the world. Apart from those
reported by the Imams, the *Mahdi* traditions are also reported by a
number of the Prophet’s Companions; for example, ‘Othman ibn ‘Affan, Ali
ibn Abi Talib (first Imam for the Shi’ites, but also considered as a
Caliph and Companion by the Sunnites), Talha ibn ‘Ubaydillah,
‘Abdurrahman ibn ‘Awf, ‘Abdullah ibn Harith, Abu Hurayrah, Jaber ibn
‘Abdullah, Abu Umamah, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Omar, Anas ibn Malek and others,
also Umm Salama or ‘Aisha (the Prophet’s wife).

These traditions concerning the rise of the Mahdi are accepted by most
Muslim scholars because of the multiplicity of their sources allowing a
certain certitude (*tawatur)*, although a limited number of them[^2]
doubt their Prophetic origin, objecting that the content of such
traditions is not rationally acceptable, even as *mutawatir* traditions.

[^1]: N. Makarem Shirazi: Tafsir-e Nemune, Vol 7, p.359

[^2]: like Ibn Khaldun or Ahmad Amin


