Were the Polices of Al-'imam Al-hasan (as) and Al-'imam Al-husayn (as) Different?
=================================================================================

Although these two great leaders are, according to the explicit
statement of the Holy Prophet (SA), rightful Imams, their policies
apparently seem different. Some have even said that the difference of
opinions of these two brothers was so great that one of them, having 40
000 combatants, accepted the peace offer, while the other, with only 40
friends and companions (other than his relatives) fought the enemy and
lost all of them including his suckling child for this cause.

However, close investigation proves the contrary, as we see that
al-'Imam al- Hasan (AS) lived for about nine and a half years during the
reign of Mu'awiyah and did not oppose him overtly. After the martyrdom
of his brother, al-'Imam al- Husayn (AS) also lived for about nine and a
half years during the reign of Mu'awiyah and never thought of rising in
rebellion against him and did not challenge him.

Hence, the main cause of this superficial difference in the policies of
the two Imams (AS) lies in the difference of opinion between Mu'awiyah
and Yazid, rather than the difference of opinion of these two great
Imams (AS).

The policy of Mu'awiyah was not based on lack of discipline and
restraint and he did not deride the religious precepts by its overt
opposition. Mu'awiyah called himself a "companion" of the Holy Prophet
(SA) and the "writer of Revelation". Through his sister (who was the
wife of the Holy Prophet (SA) and who was Umm al-Mu'minin (the mother of
the believers), Mu'awivah was called "Khal al-Mu'minin" (the maternal
uncle of the believers) and was greatly favoured by the Second Caliph in
whom the common people had total confidence and special attachment.

Furthermore, Mu'awiyah, in a majority of cases, had appointed the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (SA) who were respected and honoured by
the people (such as Abu Hurayrah,' Amr al-'As, Samrah, Yusr, Al-Mughirah
ibn Shu'bah, and others) as governors of provinces and had put them in
charge of the key positions of the country. These governors used to work
for the favourable opinions of the people towards Mu'awiyah. Many
ahadith were fabricated and narrated among the people regarding the
virtues and the religious immunity of the Companions of the Holy Prophet
(SA) and that they were not questionable for whatever they did.

Thus whatever Mu'awiyah did, if corrigible and justifiable at all, it
was rectified and justified by these authorities; otherwise, by giving a
great deal of hush-money, he prevented his opponents from complaining.
Where these means and methods did not work, thousands of innocent people
comprising of Shi'ahs (friends) of 'Ali (AS), other Muslims, and even a
great number of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (SA) were killed by
these collaborators, partisans, and "companions" of Mu'awiyah.

Mu'awiyah pretended to be right in whatever he did and accomplished
everything with a special patience and forbearance. With a particular
gentleness and flexibility, he attracted the kindness and obedience of
people. Sometimes, he even heard the curse of people on him and sensed
their enmity, but he responded with cheerfulness and forgiveness and
thus pursued his policy in this way.

Apparently, he paid respect to al-'Imam al-Hasan (AS) and al-'Imam
al-Husayn (AS) and sent them valuable gifts and souvenirs. On the other
hand, he publicly announced that whoever narrates a hadith concerning
the virtues of the Ahl al- Bayt (AS), will have no security of life,
reputation, and property; but whoever narrates a hadith concerning the
virtues. Prophet (SA) will receive a of the Companions of the Holy
reward.

He gave orders to the orators and preachers to curse al-'Imam 'Ali (AS)
from pulpits used for addressing Muslims. By the order of Mu'awiyah, his
hirelings killed the supporters of al-'Imam 'Ali (AS) wherever they
could find them. They went along in this matter to such an extent that
they killed a large number of people who were the enemies of al-'Imam
'Ali (AS), accusing them of having friendship with the Imam (AS).

It becomes clear from the above description that the rise of al-'Imam
al-Hasan (AS) would only have ended to the detriment of Islam and would
have had no effect other than the martyrdom of the Imam (AS) and his
supporters. And even it was not unlikely that, in this case, Mu'awiyah
might have got killed al-'Imam al- Hasan (AS) through the friends and
relatives of the Imam (AS) and then, in order to pacify public opinion,
Mu'awivah would have rent (torn) his shirt and mourned for the Imam (AS)
and, in seeking vengeance (for this bloodshed), he would have tried to
take his revenge by killing the Shi'ahs, as he later did while dealing
with the case of 'Uthman.

But the political trend of Yazid had no resemblance with that of his
father. He was a self-admiring and indisciplined youth. He had no logic:
other than force. He gave no importance to public opinion.

During his short-term rule, Yazid at once revealed the damages which
were secretly inflicted on Islam. In the first year of his rule, Yazid
put the family of the Holy Prophet (SA) to the edge of the sword. In the
second year of his rule, he ruined the city of Madinah and allowed his
troops to transgress upon the honour, life, and property of the people
for three days.

In the third year of his rule, he destroyed Ka'bah.

Owing to the above reasons, the movement of al-'Imam al-Husayn (AS) was
imprinted on the minds of the people and its effect grew more profoundly
and publicly day by day. In the beginning, this movement manifested
itself in the form of bloody revolutions. Finally, it attracted a great
number of Muslims as the supporters of truth and reality and as the
supporters of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) of the Holy Prophet (SA).

It was because of this reason that Mu'awiyah, in his will to Yazid, had
strongly recommended that Yazid should leave al-'Imam al-Husayn (AS)
alone and not bother him; but would the drunkenness and self-admiration
of Yazid permit him to differentiate between his benefit and his loss?


**AL-'IMAM 'ALI AL-SAJJAD (AS)**

The policy of al-'Imam 'Ali al-Sajjad (AS), during his Imamate, is
divided into two different parts which correspond as a whole to the
general policies of other Imams (AS), for the Imam (AS) was in the
company of his great father in the tragic event of Karbala and took part
in the movement of al-'Imam al-Husayn (AS). After the martyrdom of his
father, when the Imam (AS) was taken captive and was taken to Kufah from
Karbala and from Kufah to Damascus, he never used taqiyyah and asserted
the truth and reality without any fear. Whenever the occasions suited,
he informed the individuals and the public of the rightfulness of the
Members of the Household of the Holy Prophet (SA) and their glories and
virtues through his lectures and statements. He brought the innocence of
his great father and the cruel and oppressive atrocities of the Umayyads
to the surface and aroused the outburst of the feelings and sentiments
of the people.

But Imam (AS) returned to Madinah after he was released from captivity
and the atmosphere of self-sacrifice turned itself into the atmosphere
of tranquillity. He sat in the seclusion of his house, closed the door
on strangers, and engaged in worshipping Allah. He began to train and
educate the individuals who were the followers of truth and reality.
During the 35 years of his residence there, the Imam (AS), directly and
indirectly, educated a great number of people and imprinted the Islamic
culture on their hearts.

Only the prayers that the Imam (AS) had indited in his divine tone and
through which he silently prayed to Allah form a complete set of the
sublime Islamic learnings and sciences. These prayers have been compiled
in a form of book which is popularly known as "Al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyyah" (meaning a book of al-'Imam al-Sajjad).

**AL-'IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS)**

During the Imamate of al-'Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS), the way was
somewhat paved for the dissemination of Islamic sciences. Owing to the
oppression of Umayyads, the ahadith regarding Islamic jurisprudence by
the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) were lost. Although thousands Of ahadith are
required for Islamic precepts, nevertheless, not even more than 500
ahadith of the Holy Prophet (SA) had remained, that too, from among
those which were narrated by the Companions of the Holy Prophet (SA).

In short, during that period, because of the very tragic event of
Karbala and as a result of the 35 years of efforts of al-'Imam al-Sajjad
(AS), a great number of Muslims [supporters of Ahl al-Bayt (AS)] emerged
but they had no Islamic jurisprudence based on the ahadith of the Ahl
al-Bayt (AS ).

Since the government of the Umayyads was weakened due to internal
differences and the self-indulgence and inefficiency of government
authorities and because the signs of weakness had grown in its
governmental structure, the Fifth Imam (AS) took advantage of this
opportunity and began to disseminate the sciences of the Ahl al-Bayt
(AS) and the Islamic jurisprudence and provided the society with many
scholars of his school of thought.

**AL-'IMAM JA'FAR AL-SADIQ (AS)**

During the time of the 6th Imam (AS) the conditions were more apt and
the circumstances were more favourable for the dissemination of Islamic
sciences, because, on the one hand, as a result of the propagation of
the ahadith of al- 'Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) and owing to the
tablighat by those who were educated in his school, the people had
realized their need for Islamic sciences and the Islamic knowledge of
the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) and were more thirsty for obtaining the ahadith.

On the other hand, the government of the Umayyads was overthrown and
the government, of the Abbasids had not yet been firmly established
when, in order to fulfil their intentions and to undermine the
government of the Umayyads, the Abbasids used the tyranny against the
Ahl al-Bayt (AS) and the blood of the martyrs of Karbala as a pretence
and thus tried to be apparently good to the Ahl al-Bayt (AS).

The Imam (AS) embarked on teaching and disseminating different branches
of knowledge. Scientists, 'ulama' and scholars rushed to the Imam's (AS)
house from every direction and were welcomed by the Imam (AS). They
asked many questions concerning various branches of Islamic sciences,
the Islamic ethics and life-history of the prophets, the history of
Ummahs, the wisdom, the tabligh, etc and received the answers
accordingly.

The Imam (AS) held discussions with people from different strata and
held debates with various peoples and sects. He educated students in
different Islamic sciences. Hundreds of books were compiled which
recorded the ahadith and scientific lectures of the Imam (AS) which are
known as "fundamentals".

By taking advantage of this brief period, which came handy in the
suffocating atmosphere of those days, al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS)
educated and trained thousands of learned scholars. As his memorial, the
Imam (AS) left many precious treasures of sciences and education in the
field of Islamic culture. The number of scholars who had benefited from
the Imam's (AS) vast knowledge and wisdom exceeded 4 000.

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (AS) had ordered his students to write down his
lessons and to preserve their books and writings. He stated: "A time
will come when a chaos will prevail and many of these works will be
destroyed. Then you will be in need of these books and writings and
these books will serve as the only scientific and Islamic references of
Muslims". For this reason, the students of the Imam (AS) used to bring
with them pen and inkpot and put down whatever they heard in his
class.

Other than his necessary rest, the Imam (AS) taught the people secretly
and publicly round-the-clock and made the treasury of his infinite
knowledge available to all.

In short, his sublime remarks and valuable guidances removed ignorance
and illiteracy and re-established the true Islam of the Holy Prophet
(SA). Thus, he is known as the founder of "Shi'i Islamic jurisprudence".
Shi'ah religion was later called as the "Ja'fari Jurisprudence" after
his name.

**AL-'IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS)**

Having overthrown the Umayyads and having taken the position of
khilafah in hand, the Abbasids turned to Sane Fatimah and tried to
annihilate the Members of the Household of the Holy Prophet (SA) with
all their might. They beheaded a group, buried another alive, and placed
yet another group of people under the foundations and in the walls of
the buildings. They set the house of the 6th Imam (AS) on fire and
summoned the Imam (AS) to Iraq several times. In this way, the taqiyyah
was more intensely practised during the last days of the life of the 6th
Imam (AS). Since the Imam was under strict surveillance, he did not meet
anyone except a few particular Shi'ahs. Finally, al-'Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq (AS) was poisoned and martyred by al-Mansur, the Second Caliph
of the Abbasids. Thus, during the 'Imamah of the 7th Imam, al-'Imam Musa
al-Kazim (AS), the oppression of the antagonists became more severe and
intensified day by day.

In spite of an environment of intense taqiyyah, the 7th Imam (AS) began
to disseminate the Islamic knowledge and ma de a large number of ahadith
available to the Shi'ahs. It can be said that the ahadith pertaining to
Islamic jurisprudence by al-'Imam Musa al-Kazim (AS) stand third in
number after those by the 5th and the 6th Imams (AS). Owing to
prevailing conditions of intense taqiyyah, in most of the ahadith
related by the Imam (AS), he has been referred to by the narrators as
"an 'alim" or as "a righteous worshipper of Allah", or the like without
an explicit mention of his name.

The Imam (AS) was the contemporary of four Abbasid khulafa' al-Mansur,
al-Hadi, al-Mahdi, and Harun, and was always the target of their
oppression. Finally, under the order of Harun, he was imprisoned and was
transferred from one prison to another for years. At last, al-'Imam Musa
al-Kazim (AS) was poisoned as well as martyred in the prison.

**AL-IMAM 'ALI AL-RIDA (AS)**

A consideration on the circumstances during that time makes it clear
for every clear-sighted person that no matter how much the contemporary
khulafa' and opponents of the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) tried to torture and
tyrannize the Imams (AS) of Guidance and made the life difficult for
their Shi'ahs, the number of the followers of Islam increased day by day
and their faith in Islam became stauncher. The Institution of khilafah
was a wicked and filthy system in their views.

And this matter was an internal conviction which constantly kept the
khulafa' contemporary with the Imams (AS), in agony; and in fact
rendered those khulafa' helpless and despicable.

After killing his brother al-Amin and becoming the khalifah, al-Ma'mun,
the 7th 'Abbasid caliph, who was also the contemporary of al-'Imam
al-Rida (AS), decided to relieve himself of this internal distress and
constant anxiety and put an end to Shi'ah faith by some means other than
coercion and oppression.

The policy which al-Ma'mun adopted in order to carry out this plan was
to offer his succession to al-'Imam al-Rida (AS) in order to defame the
Imam (AS) in the eyes of the Shi'ahs by accusing him of entering the
corrupt system of khilafah and to wash away people's minds the faith in
the eminence and the immaculateness of the Imam (AS). In this way, he
thought, no distinction would be left out for the position of Imamah
which is the basis of Shi'i faith and the very foundation of this
religion would be automatically collapsed.

The implementation of this policy would also bring another success,
that is, it would stop the successive movements of Banu Fatimah which
were pursued to overthrow the khilafah of the Abbasids; because when the
Banu Fatimah would see the transfer of khilafah to themselves, they
would naturally refrain from carrying out bloody uprisings. Certainly,
after this plan was implemented, the killing of al-'Imam al-Rida (AS)
would not be a difficult task for al-Ma'mun.

Al-Ma'mun, primarily, invited the Imam (AS) to take over the khilafah
and after that he invited him to accept the succession. After
al-Ma'mun's accentuation, insistence, and finally threat, the Imam (AS)
accepted the succession conditionally, provided that he would have
nothing to do with dismissals, appointments, and interference in high
positions and matters.

In such a situation, the Imam (AS) embarked on guiding the people and
held discussions with men of different faiths and religions as far as he
could. He also gave valuable statements and explanations concerning the
Islamic sciences and the facts of religion (al-Ma'mun was also
excessively interested in religious discussions.) The speeches delivered
by al-'Imam al-Rida (AS) on the principles of Islamic knowledge and
sciences are equal in number to those delivered by the Amir al-Mu'minin
'Ali (AS) and exceed the number of speeches delivered by all the other
Imams (AS) in these fields.

One of the blessings of the Imam (AS) was that he was presented with a
large number of ahadith by Shi'ahs, which had reached them through the
Imam's reverend fathers (AS), and among these under the direction of the
Imam (AS) some of the "ahadith" which were forged and fabricated by
wicked people, were identified and eliminated.

When the Imam (AS) travelled from Madinah to Marw as the "successor of
the khalifah" he aroused an amazing enthusiasm among the people all
through his journey, particularly in Iran. The people rushed from
everywhere to meet him, eagerly surrounded him, and learned the
teachings and precepts of Islam.

By the unprecedented and surprising attention that the people paid to
the Imam (AS), al-Ma'mun found out that his policy was erroneous. In
order to make reparation for his political failure, al-Ma'mun poisoned
and martyred al-'Imam al-Rida (AS). Afterwards, the old policy of the
khulafa' towards the Ahl al-Bayt (AS) and their Shi'ah followers was
again pursued.

AL-'IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-TAQI (AS),
AL-'IMAM 'ALI AL-NAQI (AS),'AND
AL-'IMAM AL-HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS)

The environment in which these three honourable Imams (AS) lived was
identical. After the martyrdom of al-'Imam al-Rida (AS), al-Ma'mun
summoned al-'Imam Muhammad al-Taqi. (AS), who was the only son of
al-'Imam al-Rida (AS) to Baghdah and treated him kindly and
affectionately and allowed his daughter to marry the Imam (AS) and kept
the Imam (AS) in his own house with full honour.

Although this conduct seemed friendly, but, through this policy,
al-Ma'mun had actually placed the Imam (AS) under his strict control in
all respects. Similar circumstances and living conditions continued for
al-'Imam 'Ali al-Naqi (AS) and al-'Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (AS) in
Samarra', which was the capital of khilafah during their Imamah; they
were in fact in prison.

The period of Imamah of these three reverend Imams (AS) is fifty-seven
years altogether. The number of Shi'ahs, who were residing in Iran,
Iraq, and Syria at the time, was considerably large and had reached
hundreds of thousands, among whom there were thousands of scholars of
Hadith. In spite of this, the ahadith related from these three Imams
(AS) are very few. Also, the lifetime of these three Imams (AS) was
short. The ninth Imam (AS), the tenth Imam (AS), and the eleventh Imam
(AS) were martyred when they were twenty-five, forty, and twenty-seven
years, respectively. All these points serve as a clear evidence that the
control, surveillance, and sabotage of the antagonists was very strict
during their period and that these great Imams (AS) were unable to
perform their duties freely. Nevertheless, valuable ahadith have reached
us from these three great Imams (AS) on the Usul al-Din (the fundamental
principles of Islam for believing in) and the Furu' al-Din (the
secondary principles of Islam for actions).

**IMAM AL-'ASR, MUHAMMAD AL-MAHDI AL-MAW'UD (AS)**

During the time of al-'Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (AS), the institution
of the khilafah had decided to kill the successor of the Imam (AS) by
all the ways and means possible in an effort to put an end to the
subject of Imamah and consequently to Shi'ah faith. In addition to other
aspects, al-Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (AS) was also under surveillance
from this point of view.

It was for this reason that the birth of al-'Imam al-Mahdi (AS) was
kept secret. Until he became six, till his honourable father was alive,
al-'Imam al-Mahdi (AS) was kept out of sight and no one could see him
other than a few devoted and trustworthy Shi'ahs.

After the martyrdom of his father, al-'Imam al-Mahdi (AS) had
al-Ghaybat al-Sughra (the Short Occultation of al-'Imam Muhammad
al-Ma'hdi [AS]) by the order of Allah and answered the questions of the
Shi'ahs and resolved their problems through Al-Nuwwab al-Arba'ah (the
Four Deputies of Imam al-'Asr (AS) who had successively attained the
eminent position of being the Imam's (AS) Deputy.

The Imam (AS) then had al-Ghaybat al-Kubra (the Great Occultation of
al-'Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi [AS]) until the time when he will appear by
the order of Allah to administer justice in the whole world after it
gets overwhelmed with injustice and oppression.

A large number of ahadith of the Holy Prophet (SA) and the Imams (AS)
have. been related by both Sunnis and Shi'ahs regarding al-'Imam
al-Mahdi (AS) and the characteristics of his absence and appearance.
Also, a great number of Shi'ah dignitaries had met the Imam (AS) during
the lifetime of his honourable father and had seen his unique
personality and had received the good tidings of his Imamah from his
honourable father.

Furthermore, in the sections on Nubuwwah and Imamah we have arrived at
this conclusion that the human world could never exist without the
religion of Allah and an Imam who is the supporter and guardian of the
religion of Allah.

**THE MORAL CONCLUSION DERIVED FROM THE POLICY OF THE LEADERS OF
RELIGION**

In sum up, it becomes evident from the history of the prophets of Allah
and the religious leaders that they were realists and followers of truth
and used to invite the human world towards realism and adherence to
truth. They did not refrain from any self-sacrifice and self-indulgence
in this regard.

In other words, they tried that both individuals and human society be
brought up and developed as ought to be. They also wanted to see the
people adorned by a series of correct thoughts and beliefs without being
governed by ignorance or a series of superstitious thoughts. They wanted
to see the people accustomed to the especial human disposition without
blemishing human purity with an animalistic disposition and by thinking
of nothing but devouring one another and filling their belly like beasts
and grazing animals. They intended to make men apply the treasure of
humanity to their lives in order to gain prosperity in favour of
humanity.

Thus, they were the people who did not look for their own prosperity
alone, rather they recognized no other duty for the cause of the
prosperity of the society and for the world of humanity.

They saw their own welfare and prosperity (the man does not want
anything other than this) in being benevolent to others and wanted other
people to be so as well; that is, they wanted everybody to like for all
whatever they liked for themselves and not to desire for others whatever
they did not desire for themselves.

It was due to this realism and adherence to truth that these great men
found out the significance of this general human duty (benevolence) and
other minor duties which are its ramifications and were endowed with the
epithets of self-denial and self-sacrifice. For this very reason, they
did not hesitate to offer their lives and properties for the cause of
truth. They cut the root of any attributes which resulted malevolence.
They did not have stinginess for the lives and properties of others.
They were disgusted with egotism and stinginess. They did not tell lies,
nor did they slander other people. They did not transgress upon the
honour and prestige of others.

The explanation of these epithets and their impact should be studied in
more detail in the section on "Ethics".


