Imamah
======

A government organization established in a country to handle public
affairs cannot operate by itself. Unless a group of competent and
experienced individuals endeavor to maintain and run it, it will not
survive and will not provide the people with its services.

The same applies to any other organization established in human
societies such as cultural and various economic organizations. These
organizations will always be dependent upon competent and honest
managers; otherwise, they will be liquidated and wound up in a short
period. This is a clear fact that can be perceived by a simple
deliberation. Many experiences and experiments also substantiate its
veracity.

Surely, the organization of the religion of Islam, which could be called
the world's largest organization, follows the same principle. It depends
upon guardians and directors for its survival and continuity. It always
looks for competent individuals to provide the people with Islamic
teachings and laws, to carry out its exact provisions in the Islamic
society, and to allow no negligence and procrastination in the
observance and safeguarding of Islam.

The guardianship of religious matters and the Islamic society is called
*"Imamah"*. The guardian and leader is known as the "Imam". Shi'ahs
believe that, after the demise of the Holy Prophet (S), the Imam must be
appointed by the Almighty Allah to act as a custodian and guardian of
the sciences and commandments of Islam and to lead the people onto the
right path.

Whoever truly investigates and conducts a thorough study and research on
Islamic teachings and fairly uses his judgment will find out that
*Imamah* is one of the unquestionable principles of the holy religion of
Islam and that the Almighty Allah stipulates this matter in Qur'anic
*Ayat* introducing the organization of His religion.

The Logic for Imamah
--------------------

As clarified in the discussion of *Nubuwwah*, the kindness, favor and
care of the Creator of the world which He has towards the world of
existence calls for His leading every creature towards a specific goal
(which is the attainment of ideal perfection).

For instance, a fruit- bearing tree is led towards development, blossom,
and bearing fruit. Its course of life differs from that of a bird.
Similarly, every bird lives in its own special way and pursues its own
specific goal. In this manner, every creature is led only towards
reaching its specified goal and pursuing the right path and nothing
else. Obviously, man is also one of the creatures of Allah and is bound
by the same principle of guidance.

It also became clear that since the ideal perfection and prosperity of
man is gained through his own choice and free will, the Divine guidance
of man, in particular, should be achieved by way of invitation,
propagation, and communication of religion and its rules and regulations
through the prophets, so that men could not have any plea against this
system of the Almighty Allah.

***"(We sent) messengers as the givers of good news and as warners, so
that people should not have a plea against Allah after the (coming of)
messengers...(4:165)."***

This holy Ayah leads to the same logic that necessitated the appointment
of prophets and the establishment of the system of religious invitation.
After the demise of the Holy Prophet (S), who guarded the religion and
led the people with his *'Ismah*, it is necessary for the Almighty Allah
to assign someone similar to him in *'Ismah* and ideal attributes
(except *wahy* and *Nubuwwah*) as a substitute to preserve the Islamic
sciences and commandments without any deviation and lead the people.
Otherwise, the program of general guidance will be disrupted and people
would have a plea against the system of guidance of Allah.

The Imam is Indispensable
-------------------------

Due to its error and mistake, men's wisdom cannot enable them to do
without the *anbiya'* of Allah. In like manner, the existence of Islamic
*'ulama'* among the *Ummah* and their religious propagation are not
sufficient to make people independent of Imams. As clarified earlier,
the question is not whether people follow the religion or not, rather
the point under discussion is that the religion of Allah must reach the
people untouched and without any change, alteration, or mutilation.

It is certain that the *'ulama'* of *Ummah* are not infallible and
immune from error and sin, no matter how virtuous and pious they are. It
is not impossible that Islamic sciences and laws be ruined and changed
by them although it might be unintentionally. The best evidence for this
matter is the existence of various sects and discrepancies which have
crept into Islam.

Therefore, in any case, the existence of the Imam is necessary to
safeguard the real Islamic sciences and laws of the religion of Allah,
so that people could benefit from his guidance whenever they find the
ability to receive it.

The Holy Prophet's (S) Statement about Wilayah
----------------------------------------------

Describing the Holy Prophet (S), the Almighty Allah states:

***"Certainly a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves,
grievous to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous
respecting you, to the mu'minin (he is) compassionate, merciful
(9:128)."***

It can never be believed that the Holy Prophet (S), who, according to
the explicit wording of the Holy Book, Qur'an was the most compassionate
and merciful of all to his *ummah*, would remain silent all his life and
overlook about mentioning one of the divine orders which is undoubtedly
of highest importance and topmost priority for the Islamic society and
which is demanded by wisdom and commonsense.

The Holy Prophet (S) knew better than anyone else that the organized and
enormous institution of Islam was not a matter of ten or twenty years to
be supervised by himself. He was aware that Islam is a universal and
eternal organization that must direct the human world forever. Thus, the
Holy Prophet (S) predicting the situation of thousands of years after
his demise and issued the necessary orders accordingly.

The Holy Prophet (S) was fully aware that Islam is a social organization
and that no social organization can exist and survive even for an hour
without a guardian and ruler. Therefore, the presence of a guardian is
necessary to preserve the Islamic sciences and laws of religion, to
manage the affairs of the society, and to lead and guide the people
towards happiness in this world and the Hereafter. Thus, how could it be
conceived that the Holy Prophet (S) would overlook the situation after
his departure and would show no interest towards it?

As a habit, the Holy Prophet (S) used to appoint someone to manage the
affairs of people in his absence whenever he left Madinah even for a few
days to take part in battles or to perform *Hajj*. Similarly, he also
used to appoint governors for cities conquered by the Muslims and used
to assign commanders for every division and group that he dispatched to
the battlefield.

Sometimes, the Holy Prophet (S) even said: "Your commander is such and
such a person. If he is killed, then such and such will be his successor
and if he is also killed, so and so will act as the commander."

With this policy that the Prophet (S) followed, how can it be believed
that the Holy Prophet (S) might not have designated anyone as his
successor at the time of his death?

In short, by looking deeply into the sublime aims of Islam and the holy
objective of its dignified bearer, one will undoubtedly acknowledge that
the matter of *Imamah* and *wilayah* has been resolved and made clear
for the Muslims.

Appointment of a Successor by The Holy Prophet (S)
--------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) did not content himself with only general remarks
concerning *Imamah* and *wilayah* of the affairs of Muslims after his
demise, rather he explicitly explained the subject of *Imamah*, along
with *Tawhid* and *Nubuwwah*, from the very beginning of his call and
announced the *wilayah*and *Imamah* of 'Ali (as) for the affairs of the
religion and the world as well as for all the affairs of the Muslims.

According to a *hadith* narrated by Sunni and Shiah on the first day of
his call to the people to Islam *'ulama'*, the Holy Prophet (S) invited
his relatives to gather publicly for a meeting. At this meeting, he
explicitly substantiated and established the ministry, *wilayah*, and
succession of the Leader of the Faithful, 'Ali (as).

In the last days of his life, too, in Ghadir Khumm, the Holy Prophet (S)
lifted 'Ali (as), holding his hand, among the gathering of one hundred
and twenty thousand Muslims and stated: "Anyone for whom I am the
guardian and leader, this 'Ali (as) is his guardian and leader as well."

Furthermore, the Holy Prophet (S) has specified the number, the names,
and all the characteristics of Imams and leaders who will be succeeding
him.

In a well-known *hadith* narrated by Shi'ah and Sunni *'ulama'*, the
Holy Prophet (S) has stated: "There are twelve Imams, all of whom are
from the Quraysh." According to the famous *hadith*, the Holy Prophet
(S) said to Jabir al-Ansari: "There are twelve Imams." Then he mentioned
their names one by one and told Jabir: "You will meet the fifth Imam.
Say my *salam*(greetings) to him."

Besides, the Holy Prophet (S) h as specifically appointed the Leader of
the Faithful, 'Ali (as), as his successor. *Hadrat* 'Ali (as) has also
nominated the next Imam as his successor. In the like manner, each Imam
has appointed the next Imam to serve as his successor.

The 'Ismah of Imam
------------------

From what has already been discussed, it became clear that like the
Prophet (S), the Imam must be immune from error and sin; otherwise, the
religious call will remain defective and the divine guidance will become
ineffective.

The Moral Virtues of Imam
-------------------------

The Imam must be endowed with moral virtues such as boldness, bravery,
chastity, generosity, and justice, because whosoever is *ma'sum* and
free from sin will strictly follow and practice religious laws and since
the possession of praiseworthy ethics is essential for religion, the
Imam must surpass all the other people in moral virtues, for it makes no
sense for a man to lead those who are better and superior than him in
virtues. Surely, Allah's justice is not in conformity with such an idea.

The Knowledge of Imam
---------------------

Since an Imam is the guardian of religion and the leader of the
inhabitants of the world, he must have a thorough knowledge of all
matters concerning this world and the Hereafter, namely, the matters
related to man's prosperity. Since having an ignorant person as a leader
is not rationally permissible and is meaningless from the viewpoint of
general divine guidance.

The Fourteen Ma'sumin
---------------------

The Holy Prophet (S), his honorable daughter, Fatimah al-Zahra' (as),
and the twelve infallible Imams are called the "Fourteen *Ma'sumin*. The
first five from among the fourteen *Ma'sumin*, namely, the Holy Prophet
(S), 'Ali (as), Fatimah (as), al-Imam al-Hasan (as) and al-Imam
al-Husayn (as) are called *"Ahlal-'Aba"* and *"Ashab al-Kisa'"* (the
family and companions gathered under the sheet of cloth). They are
called *Ashab al-Kisa'* because one day the Holy Prophet (S) covered
himself with a sheet of cloth, gathered these four members under it, and
prayed to Allah.

The Almighty Allah revealed the following Qur'anic verse of *taharah* in
their honour:

***"Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O Ahl
al-Bayt, and to keep you tahir - a (thorough) taharah (33:33)".***

The Guiding Imams (as)
----------------------

The guiding Imams (as) who are the successors of the Holy Prophet (S)
and the leaders of people of the world and the Islam are twelve in
number.

The Names of The Infallible Imams (as)
--------------------------------------

1. Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) (Amir al-Mu'minin)

2. Al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) (Al-Mujtaba)

3. Al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) (Sayyid al-Shuhada')

4. Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) (al-Sajjad)

5. Al-'Imam Muhammad (as) (Al-Baqir)

6. Al-'Imam Ja'far (as) (Al-Sadiq)

7. Al-'Imam Musa (as) (Al-Kazim)

8. Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) (Al-Ridha’)

9. Al-'Imam Muhammad (as) (Al-Taqi)

10. Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) (Al-Naqi)

11. Al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) (Al-'Askari)

12. Al-'Imam Muhammad (as) (Al-Mahdi), al-Hujjat ibn al-Hasan).


