Ma'ad (resurrection)
====================

Ma'ad is one of the three pillars of the holy religion of Islam and one
of the essentials of this pure religion. Every man (without any
exception) can tell the difference between good and evil deeds with his
Allah-granted nature and considers "benevolence" (although he may not
practise it) to be 'decent and essential act to perform and "evil deeds"
(although he may be performing these) to be indecent and an act to
essentially avoid. Undoubtedly, goodness and badness, benevolence and
malevolence are from the viewpoint of the results and rewards which
these two qualities possess. Likewise, there is no doubt that not even a
single day exists in this world when the rewards and retribution of good
and bad deeds of benefactors and malefactors do not reach them; for we
clearly observe that many benefactors spend their lives in extreme
bitterness and misery, whereas many malefactors who are fully involved
in committing crimes and misdemeanours, with their wicked behaviour and
disgraceful character, spend their lives with happiness and
prosperity.

For this reason, if in the future and in a world other than this world,
no day had been fixed when good and bad deeds would be judged and
appropriate recompense would be given, such an attention and care (that
benevolence is good and essential and malevolence is bad and to be
avoided) would not have been placed in the nature of man.

It should not be imagined that the reward of benevolence, which the man
considers good is this that it establishes order in the society and
people gain prosperity in their lives and that consequently the
benevolent person himself receives a portion of the benefits of his
benevolence. In the like manner, it should also not be imagined that a
malevolent person, with his indecent conduct and behaviour, disrupts the
order of the society and thus he himself finally gets entangled with its
unpleasant effects.

Although this kind of thinking is to some extent applicable to
disorganised and inefficient individuals; it does not apply to those
people who have reached the peak of power and whose happiness and
success are not at all influenced by the order and disorder of the
society, on the contrary when disturbance and corruption prevail in the
society and when the living conditions of the people become gloomy,
these individuals get happier and more successful, thus there re mains
no reason for the nature of such people to consider benevolence as good
and malevolence as bad.

In like manner, although these people are prosperous in their short
lives, it should not be imagined that their names will be disgraceful
and will bear the dislike of the public forever because of their wicked
acts.

This is because the manifestation of their disgraceful names and the
unpleasant judgement of the posterity about them occur at a time when
these people have passed away and have no impact on their lives full of
happiness, pleasure, and enjoyment. On this account, there will be no
reason for man to consider benevolence as good and to acquire it or to
consider malevolence as bad and to refrain from it and tend towards the
above-mentioned belief. Had there not been the Ma'ad, it would be a
superstitious belief.

Therefore, through this pure and firm belief that the Creator of the
world has placed in our nature, we should understand that the Almighty
Allah will resurrect everyone after death and will look into their
deeds. The Almighty Allah will give a good reward and an everlasting
blessing to the benefactors for their deeds and will punish the
malefactors for their deeds. And this day is called the Yawm al-Qiyamah
(Day of Judgement).

**MA'AD, RELIGIONS AND FAITHS**

All religions and faiths, which call men to the worship of the Almighty
Allah and enjoin human beings to do good deeds and prohibit them from
bad deeds, express belief in Ma'ad and in the life Hereafter. They have
no doubt that benevolence is worthy only when it is followed by a good
reward and since this reward is not seen in this world, inevitably it
will be given to man in another life in the world Hereafter.

Besides, signs and vestiges, that are observed in the most ancient
tombs discovered by the archaelogists, indicate that the early human
beings believed in the other life in the world Hereafter and according
to their beliefs they used to perform certain formalities and provide
things so that the dead may have comforts in the Hereafter.

**MA'AD AS IN THE QUR'AN**

The Holy Qur'an, through hundreds of Ayat reminds the people of the
Ma'ad and negates any doubt regarding it. In many instances, the Qur'an
reminds the people of Allah's absolute might in order to augment the
knowledge of people and to eliminate the unlikelihood of the creation of
primary things. The Holy Qur'an states:

"Does not man see that We have created him from the sperm? Then lo! he
is an open disputant. And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets
his own creation. Says he: Who will give life to the bones when they are
rotten? Say: He will give life to them Who brought them into existence
at first, and He is Cognizant of all creation (36:77-79)."

And sometimes the Holy Qur'an draws the attention of people to Ma'ad
and entrance into spring after the winter death and reminds men of the
power of Allah, as it states:

"And among His signs is this, that you see the earth still, but when We
send down on it the water, it stirs and swells: most surely He Who gives
it life is the Giver of life to the dead; surely He has power over all
things (41:39)." And sometimes, by using logical reasoning, the Holy
Qur'an awakens man's Allah-given nature to admit this reality, as it
states:

"And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them in vain; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve; then woe to
those who disbelieve on account of the Fire. Shall We treat those who
believe and do good like the mischief-makers on the earth? Or shall We
make those who guard (against evil) like the wicked (38:27-28)?"

(This is because those who do good and the wicked will not receive
their entire reward and recompense in this world. If ro other world
(Hereafter) existed in which each of these groups received their rewards
and punishments in accordance with their behaviours and deeds, then both
groups would be equal in front of Allah and this is inconsistent with
the Divine Justice.)

**FROM DEATH TO THE YAWM AL-QIYAMAH [THAT WHICH DIES IS THE BODY NOT
THE RUH (SOUL, SELF, OR PERSONALITY)]**

From the viewpoint of Islam, man is a creature made of body and soul
(body and ruh). The body of man is one of the materialistic compositions
and is subject to laws, i.e., it has volume and weight, lives at a
specific time and place, and becomes influenced by cold and heat and the
like. Gradually, man's body gets old and worn out and finally gets
destroyed in the same manner as it had come into existence some day by
the will of the Almighty Allah.

But man's self is not materialistic and has none of the above-mentioned
characteristics, rather the epithets of knowledge, perception, thought,
will power, and other spiritual qualities such as affection, rancour,
happiness, anguish, fear, hope, and the like are attributed to it. As
the self or soul does not possess the above-mentioned materialistic
characteristics, spiritual epithets are also far away from these
characteristics; rather the heart, the brain, and all the parts of the
body submit to the spirit and spiritual qualities in their own
innumerable activities and none of the parts of the body can be
specified as a centre of command.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And certainly We created man of an extract of clay, then We made him a
sperm in a firm resting-place, then We made the sperm a clot, then We
made the clot a lump of flesh, then We made (in) the lump of flesh
bones, then We covered the bones with flesh, then We caused it to grow
into another creation...(23:12-14)."

**THE MEANING OF DEATH FROMTHE VIEWPOINT OF ISLAM**

The meaning of death from the viewpoint of Islam is not that man
becomes naught and vanishes, rather it means that the soul or self of
man which is immortal cuts its attachment and relationship from the body
and consequently, the body perishes while the soul continues its life
without the body.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And they say: 'What! when we have become lost in the earth, shall we
then certainly be in a new creation?' Nay! they are disbelievers in the
meeting of their Lord. Say: 'The angel of death who is given charge of
you shall cause you to die...' (32:10-11)." The Holy Prophet (SA)
states: "You shall not be perished, but you shall be transferred from .
one house to another".

**THE WORLD OF BARZAKH (INTERVAL BETWEEN DEATH AND MA'AD)**

Islam believes that man remains alive in a special manner after death.
He enjoys blessing and happiness if he is a benefactor and he will be
punished if he is a malefactor. He will present himself for public
reckoning on the Day of Judgement. The interval between the death of a
man and the Ma'ad is called "Barzakh".


The Almighty Allah states:

"...And before them is Barzakh until the day they are raised (23:100)."
The Almighty Allah also states: "And reckon not those who are killed in
Allah's way as dead: nay, they are alive (and) are provided sustenance
from their Lord (3:169)."


**ETHIC**

All these innumerable means of living, that are now available to man
and that we endeavour to acquire and use them day and night, were not
available to man from the beginning of his life on the earth. They have,
gradually, been brought into existence by man's efforts and have been
utilized.

But in any case, from the primitive man to the civilized man of today,
human beings have never ceased working and striving and through their
Allah-given nature, they have tried to provide better means of living.
This is because if a man loses his energy and the internal and external
organs of h is body such as his eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, and also
if his brain, heart, lungs, and liver fail to function properly, he will
be nothing but a dead person.

For this reason, man works not only out of necessity, but also because
he is a human being, he displays various activities. Since by his
commonsense he realizes that he should arrange for the happiness and
prosperity of his life in any way possible, he engages in work and
effort and moves in the direction of his demands. Therefore, living in
any environment and in any manner, religious or non-religious, legal or
despotic, urban or nomadic, man feels the necessity of a series of
duties and obligations for himself (those things which are indispensable
for living). If these duties and obligations are carried out, the
reasonable desires of man will be fulfilled and he will lead a happy,
comfortable, and prosperous life.

Certainly, the value of these duties and obligations, which are the
only means of prosperity, is the humanity itself. We cannot perceive
anything more precious and valuable than the humanity and which cannot
be exchanged with any other commodity.

Therefore, 'dutifulness' and its implementation are the most important
practical matters that man confronts in his life, for its value is
exactly the same as that of man himself. Whoever refrains from
performing his indisputable duties, or sometimes neglects them, he
proportionately lapses in morality from the eminent position of humanity
and naturally accepts his humility and worthlessness. With every
violation of his human duty, such an individual inflicts blows after
blows on the body of his society and indeed on his own body as well.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

"Most surely man is in loss, except those who believe and do good and
enjoin on each other truth, and enjoin on each other patience
(103:2-3)." The Almighty Allah also states:

"Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what the
hands of men have wrought... (30:41)."

**DIFFERENCE OF OPINION IN THE IDENTIFICATION AND SPECIFICATION OF
DUTIES**

The importance attached to the identification of duties and their
implementation are indisputable obligations in the world of humanity.
Never can a human being possessing human nature be found who would deny
this reality. Since human duties have an absolute relationship with man'
s prosperity and life and because the religion differs with
non-religious isms and practices as far as views regarding man's life
are concerned, naturally religious duties will differ from the du ties
of other non-religious isms and practices.

Religion believes that man has an infinite and endless life which does
not terminate with death. The capital of pure and true beliefs,
praiseworthy ethics, and good deeds that man has acquired in this world
prior to his death, serves as the great investment for his infinite life
in the Hereafter.

Therefore, in obligations and duties that religion has formulated for
the individuals and the society, the life in the everlasting Hereafter
is also taken into consideration.

Religion establishes its provisions in the sphere of theism and the
worship and servitude of Allah, the obvious consequence of which will
become manifest on the Day of Resurrection.

Non-religious isms and practices (whatever these may be) only take the
short and transient life of this world into consideration and formulate
duties through which man can benefit more from his materialistic life
and material profits which are common between him and other animals.

Indeed with a reasoning which originates from feelings and sentiments
of grazing animals and beasts, they draw up an animal life for man. They
pay no attention to man's realism and his everlasting life full with
intellectualities. Therefore, the sublime human ethics (as definite
experience indicates) gradually disappear from non-religious communities
and the moral decadence of their members becomes clearer and more
manifest day by day.

Some people argue that the base of religion is following and also the
unquestionable acceptance of a series of duties and regulations;
whereas, social policies can be justified by the current logic.

Those who have said so neglect the fact that the rules and regulations
which are implemented in the society must be carried out indisputably.
No one has ever heard or seen the people of a country following the
prevalent laws after argument and scientific discourse or be exempted
and free from following the laws whose philosophy they do not
understand. Th us, in this respect, the religious and non-religious
practices do not differ.

Indeed, through a study of the natural and social conditions of a
country and on inquisitiveness in its general policies, one can find out
the philosophy behind the generalities of the laws of that country and
some of their details (not all).

This also holds true in the case of religious laws. By means of realism
and inquisitiveness about creation and man's natural requirements, one
can discover the generalities of the laws of religion which is an innate
policy and some of their details. The Holy Qur'an and many ahadith call
the people to reasoning, reflection, and pondering and in some precepts
refer to the brief expedience behind the commandments. There are many
ahadith available to us from the Holy Prophet (SA) and the Ahl al-Bayt
(AS) which state the reasons behind the precepts.

**DUTIFULNESS**

As mentioned in the beginning of this book, the holy religion of Islam
is a general and permanent programme that has been descended to the last
Prophet, Muhammad (SA), from the Almighty Allah for human life in this
world and the Hereafter to be carried out in the human society so as to
pull the ship of humanity out of the whirlpool of ignorance and
tribulation and carry it to the coast of salvation.

Since religion is a programme of life, it has inevitably specified
duties for man on things which are linked to his life and asks him to
carry them out.

In general, our life is connected to:

(1) The Almighty Allah Who has created us. Our moral obligation towards
His blessings is greater than any other duty and our dutifulness towards
His Holy Presence is more obligatory than any other obligation.

(2) Ourselves.

(3) Our fellow creatures with whom we are obliged to live and perform
our duties and tasks with their cooperation and assistance. Thus,
according to the order, we have three general duties: duty towards
Allah, duty towards ourselves, and duty towards others.

(1) THE DUTY OF MAN TOWARDS ALLAH (COGNIZANCE OF ALLAH)

Our duty towards the Almighty Allah is the most important duty of all
and we must perform it with a pure heart and a sincere intention. It is
the first and foremost duty of man to know his Creator. Since the
Almighty Allah is the source of existence of every creature and the
originator of every existing phenomenon, the cognizance and knowledge of
His pure Entity also illuminates every realistic person. Being
inattentive to this moral reality is total ignorance, lack of insight,
and irresponsibility. Whoever pays no attention to cognizance of Allah,
he consequently puts out the light of his own conscience and thus will
have no way of attaining the real human happiness.

As we see, those who refrain from cognizance of Allah and pay no heed
to this reality in their lives are completely away from the human
spiritualities and have no logic other than the logic of grazing animals
and beasts.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

"Therefore turn aside from him who turns his back upon Our reminder and
does not desire anything but this world's life. That is their goal of
knowledge... (53:29-30)."

Certainly, it should be pinpointed that the cognizance of Allah is
necessary and natural for man who is a realistic being endowed with the
instinct of reasoning, for man, with his Allah-given commonsense,
notices the signs of the Presence of Allah and His Knowledge and Might
wherever he looks in the world of creation. Thus, the cognizance of
Allah does not mean that man should bring it into existence fox himself,
rather it means that the man should not disregard this obvious reality
which cannot be covered by any curtain, giving a positive response to
his conscience which invites him to Allah and eliminating any doubt from
his mind by following this philosophy.

**THE WORSHIP OF ALLAH**

After cognizance of Allah, our second duty is the worship of Allah.
This is because, while recognizing the truth, this reality becomes clear
that happiness and prosperity, which are our only objectives, will be
attained by implementing and executing the programme which the Almighty
Allah has Specified for our lives and has communicated to us through His
messengers. Therefore, obeying Allah's orders and serving him are the
only duties of man compared to which other duties seem insignificant and
trivial.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but
Him...(17:23)."

The Almighty Allah also states:

"Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaytan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you should serve Me;
this is the right way (36:60-61)."

Thus it is our duty to recognize the status of our servitude and needs
and to keep in mind the infinite Grandeur and Greatness of Allah. We
must consider that Allah knows and sees our deeds in every respect and
we must obey His commands. It is our obligation not to serve any but
Allah and not to obey anyone else except the Holy Prophet (SA) and the
A'immat al-Huda (infallible Imams of Guidance) whom we are commanded to
obey by the order of Allah.

The Almighty Allah states:

"O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in
authority from among you...(4:59)."

Surely, due to the obedience of Allah and the authorities of religion,
we should actually maintain a great respect for anything attributed to
Allah. We must respect the holy name of Allah and the names of the
leaders of religion. We must endeavour for the honour of the Divine Book
(the Holy Qur'an), the honoured Ka'bah, and the holy mosques and the
holy shrines of the leaders of religion, as the Almighty Allah states:
"...and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely is (the
outcome) of the piety of hearts (22:32)."


