(2) the Duty of Man Towards Himself
===================================

No matter what policy or course of action man pursues in his life,
indeed he looks after nothing but his happiness and prosperity. The
recognition of the happiness of something is of minor importance with
regard to-the recognition of the thing itself; that is, unless we know
ourselves, we will not know our actual needs whose fulfilment provides
us with happiness. Therefore, the most essential duty of man is to know
himself so as to perceive his happiness and prosperity and endeavour to
fulfil his needs by the means that are at his disposal. He must not
waste away his valuable life which is his only treasure.

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "whoever knows himself knows his Allah".
And Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali (AS), states: "whoever knows himself, attains
the highest position of knowledge."

After knowing himself, man realizes that his greatest duty is to value
highly the essence of his humanity and not to trample upon such a
valuable treasure. He also finds that he must strive for his physical
and mental health so as to attain a prosperous and delightful eternal
life. Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali (AS) states: "Carnal desires will be low
and insignificant to whoever respects himself."

The entity of man is comprised of two things: self or personality and
body. It is man's responsibility to try to keep both these essential
parts, i.e., the self or soul and body healthy and stable. He is duty
bound to endeavour for the health of his soul and body in accordance
with the adequate and precise orders given on both of them by the holy
religion of Islam.

**PHYSICAL HEALTH**

Abstaining from Harmful Things: Through a series of rules and
regulations, the holy religion of Islam has adequately safeguarded the
physical health such as enjoining people not to eat corpse, blood, flesh
of some animals, and poisonous food; prohibiting them from drinking
alcoholic beverages and polluted water; over eating; causing harm to the
body; and other directives which are beyond the scope of this chapter.

Keeping Clean: Cleanliness is one of the most important principles of
health. For this reason, great importance has been attached to this
principle in the holy Shari'ah of Islam. The importance given by Islam
to cleanliness cannot be found in any other religion. The Holy Prophet
(SA) has stated: "Cleanliness is a part and parcel of Islamic faith" and
this, by itself, is the greatest praise for cleanliness. Repeated
recommendations have reached us from the leaders of Islam in regard to
taking bath. Al-'Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (AS) states: "Taking a bath every
other day makes man healthy and stout."

Al-'Imam 'Ali (AS) states: "Bathroom is a very good place since it
removes the dirtiness of man." In addition to giving general orders
concerning cleanliness and neatness, Islam enjoins in particular for
each and every cleanliness; for instance, it orders the people to pare
the nails of their hands and feet, to shave arid remove the excess hair
on their bodies and heads, to wash their hands before and after meals,
to comb their hair, to gargle with water and inhale water, to sweep
their homes, and to keep clean the roads, house doors, ground under the
trees, etc.

Beside these orders, Islam has specified certain actions which are
linked with permanent taharah and neatness such as for reciting salat
and having sawm, removing the najasahs (impurities) from the body and
the clothes, performing several times everyday the wudu' before reciting
the salawat, and performing various ghusls. (taking bath according to
the specified Islamic manner). From the fact that water should reach the
surface of the body during wudu' before salat and ghusl and that the
body should not be dirty and greasy, it becomes clear that the
cleanliness of the body is implicitly essential.

The Neatness of Clothes: The Surat al-Muddaththir is one of the suwar
which was revealed to the Holy Prophet (SA) in the early stages of his
prophetic mission. In the fourth verse of this surah, Allah orders the
people for taharah of their clothes:

"And do taharah of your garments (74:4)."

The taharah of garments is wajib for salat according to specific
Islamic jurisprudential order, but, in general, taharah from
uncleanliness and dirtiness is always recommended. Many recommendations
have reached us from each of the Fourteen Ma'sumin (AS) in this regard.
The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "Whoever puts on clothes should clean them
as well." Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali (AS) states: "Washing garments relieves
one from grief and anxiety and neat clothes are a means for acceptance
of his salat."

It has been narrated from al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) and al-'Imam
Musa al-Kazim (AS) that possessing ten or twenty shirts and changing
them is not extravagance.

In addition to the cleanliness and taharah of garments and body, a
Muslim must also be well-dressed and must meet the people with the best
possible appearance and looks. Al-'Imam 'Ali (AS) states: "Put on
beautiful clothes and dress yourself up, for Allah is good and likes the
good things, but these should be religiously lawful." Then, al-'Imam
'Ali (AS) reads the following verse: "Say: Who has prohibited the
embellishment of Allah which He has brought forth for His servants and
the good provisions...(7:32)?"

Gargling with Water and Brushing the Teeth: Being a channel for food,
the mouth of man gets contaminated due to eating food. Food particles
remain in the roots of the teeth, on the tongue, and in all other parts
of the mouth thus rendering the mouth contaminated and malodorous.
Sometimes, as a result of fermentations and chemical actions and
reactions that take place in food particles , poisonous matters are
formed which get mixed with the food and then enter the stomach.
Moreover, the breath of such a person in a gathering pollutes the air
and annoys other people.

Therefore, the holy religion of Islam has ordered the Muslims to brush
their teeth everyday (especially before each wudu') gargle their mouth
with pure water, and clean their mouth from contamination.

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "If it were not for the fear of hardship
and indigence, I would have made brushing the teeth wajib upon Muslims."
Elsewhere, the Holy Prophet (SA) states: "Jibril always recommended
brushing the teeth to an extent that I even imagined it would become
incumbent upon the Muslims later on."

Breathing: Breathing is one of the essential needs of man in his life.
Quite often, the current of air surrounding man's residential area is
not without dust and dirt. Surely, breathing such an air is harmful for
the respiratory system. To protect against this harm, the Compassionate
Allah has provided hair inside man's nose. This hair prevents the
entrance of dust and dirt into the lungs. Nevertheless, sometimes the
hair of the nose cannot fully perform its function because of the
accumulation of dirt and dust in the nose. For this reason, Islam has
issued orders for Muslims to inhale water several times a day while
having wudu' so as to protect the health of their respiratory system by
inhaling clean water through their nostrils.

**MENTAL HEALTH**

Moral Refinement: With his Allah-given conscience, man perceives the
value of praiseworthy ethics and realises its significance from the
individual and social viewpoints. Thus, there is no one in the human
society who does not praise good ethics and who does not respect those
who are endowed with praiseworthy ethics. The value that man attaches
for praiseworthy ethics needs no further explanation and the elaborate
orders of Islam on ethics are thoroughly clear for everybody.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And the soul and Him Who made it pure, then He inspired it to
understand what is right and wrong for it; he will indeed be successful
who purifies it, and he will indeed fail who corrupts it (91:7-10)."
While interpreting this verse, al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) has stated:
"The Almighty Allah has revealed to man the things which are good for
him and must be put into effect and the things which are bad for him and
must be avoided."

**RECEIVING EDUCATION AND KNOWLEDGE**

One of the praiseworthy intellectual attributes is to have knowledge.
The virtue and superiority of a knowledgeable man over an ignorant
person is absolutely clear.

Wisdom and knowledge distinguish a man from other animals. Other
animals, with their particular characteristics, are endowed with
invariable instincts in accordance with which they meet the needs of
their lives. There is no scope for elevation and progress in the lives
of animals and they cannot open up new gates to themselves and to
others. It is only man who augments his existing knowledge with new
knowledge through his wisdom and attains a new value and splendour for
his materialistic and spiritual life by discovering the laws of nature
and metaphysics. It is only man who takes a deep look into the past
periods and lays the foundation for his own future and the future of
others.

More than all the new and old social systems of all religions and
faiths, Islam encourages the people to acquire knowledge and learning.
In order to establish a fundamental culture and civilization, Islam has
made receiving the education as wajib upon every Muslim man and woman.
Many orders have been handed down to us from the Holy Prophet (SA) and
religious leaders in this regard. The Holy Prophet (SA) states:
"Education is wajib upon every Muslim." In this hadith, knowledge is
described in an absolute form and includes all branches of science.
There is no exception even as far as women and men are concerned. Thus,
the acquisition of knowledge and learning in Islam is not intended to
apply only to a particular nature or type. On the contrary, the duty of
acquiring knowledge is universal and all-embracing.

The Holy Prophet (SA) also states: "Seek knowledge from the cradle to
the grave." Every religious precept has a specific time and for all of
them maturity is a necessary condition: i.e., the person, for whom the
religious principles are applicable, must have reached maturity. The
religious precepts are not wajib upon a person unless he has reached
maturity. Some of the religious wajibat are no longer applicable during
old age and at the time of weakness, but acquiring knowledge and
learning is wajib for man since his birth until his death. In other
words, acquiring knowledge is wajib at all the stages of man's life. On
the basis of this principle, a Muslim should acquire knowledge all
through his life and should add to his knowledge day by day. This
hadith, too, has extended and generalized the time of this wajib
obligation.

The Holy Prophet (SA) also states: "Go for seeking knowledge even if it
may be in China (i.e., far away)." Another hadith states: "Knowledge is
the most valuable thing that the believer has lost. He should go after
it, even if he finds it in China (the farthest points in the world)."
According to this commandment, every Muslim is obliged to acquire
knowledge even if long journeys are required for this purpose. Finally,
he should endeavour to find at any cost what he has lost.

The Holy Prophet (SA) also said in another hadih: "knowledge is what a
believer has lost. He must get it back from wherever he finds." However,
in acquiring knowledge, the only condition is that it should be
appropriate and beneficial to the societies.

Islam highly recommends man to know the secrets of creation and to
think about the heavens, the earth, the human nature, the history of
nations and peoples, and the works of former generations (philosophy,
mathematics, natural sciences, etc). Also, learning moral and religious
matters (ethics and Islamic laws) and different kinds of arts which
shape man's life are highly encouraged and stressed by Islam. Indeed,
the importance of knowledge is so great from the viewpoint of the Holy
Prophet (SA) that in the Battle of Badr when the Muslims took a group of
the unbelievers as captives, the Holy Prophet (SA) ordered every captive
to be released by paying exorbitant sums of money. Only a group of the
captives, who were literate, became exempt from paying such money
provided that each of them teaches ten Muslim youths to read and
write.

Thus for the first time, adult schools (adult classes) were established
in the world and this great honour was ascribed to the Muslims in the
history of the world. Interestingly enough, once for all in the history
of man, teaching knowledge was accepted instead of war-spoils by the
order of the Holy Prophet (SA). Neither before nor after that had anyone
in the world witnessed a victorious commander accept the teaching of
children instead of ransom and war-spoils.

The Holy Prophet (SA) went to those adult classes in person and took
with him those who knew reading and writing. He asked them to test the
children to find out how much progress they had made in their lessons
and practice. The Holy Prophet (SA) used to encourage more any child who
was found more diligent in learning.

Even one of the historians writes:

"A woman named "Al-Shifa'," who had learned reading and writing during
the "period of ignorance," used to go to the house of the Holy Prophet
(SA) and teach the wives of the Holy Prophet (SA) how to read and write.
For this reason, she was appreciated, encouraged, and rewarded by the
Holy Prophet (SA)."

**THE VALUE AND IMPORTANCE OF A STUDENT FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF ISLAM**

The importance of endeavour in attaining any objective equals the
objective itself. Since every man, with his Allah given nature,
considers the importance of knowledge in the human world higher than
anything else, the value of one who seeks knowledge will be the highest
of all. Since the religion of Islam is established on the basis of man's
nature, it undoubtedly attaches the highest value to students. The Holy
Prophet (SA) stated: "He who is engaged in acquiring knowledge is loved
by Allah."

Although jihad (Islamic war) is one of the pillars of Islam and if the
Holy Prophet (SA) or any of the infallible Imams (AS) issues the order
for war, all Muslims must take part in it, those who are engaged in
learning Islamic sciences and theology are exempt from this duty. At all
times, a sufficient number of Muslims must engage themselves in studying
at Islamic education centres. The Almighty Allah states:

"And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth all
together; why should not then a section from every group from among them
go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious (9:122)?"

**THE IMPORTANCE OF A TEACHER AND AN INSTRUCTOR**

The teacher is a warm and luminous centre who gets strength from the
light of knowledge in order to eradicate ignorance and illiteracy in the
whole world. It is the teacher who makes the blind-hearted and the
ignorants clear-sighted and wise and takes them, with the assistance of
the luminous torch of knowledge and education, to the holy valley and
the heaven of prosperity.

For this reason, respect for teachers is essential and obedience
towards them is obligatory in the religion of Islam. Teachers are
considered the holiest and the most exalted individuals in the human
society. Regarding the great and deserving status of teachers, it
suffices to say that Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali (AS) states: "He who taught
me a word has indeed made me his slave."

These wise words are very valuable in paying respect to the status of
teachers.

Also, Amir al-Mu'minin states: "The people are divided into three
groups: the first group consists of the 'ulama' of Islam; the second one
consists of those who acquire knowledge for the salvation of themselves
and others; and the third one consists of those who lack knowledge and
wisdom. These (people constituting the third group) people are like
flies that sit on the head and face of animals and fly in different
directions with the blow of each wind (or fly in any direction from
which they smell bad odour of filth)".

**PAYING RESPECT TO THE LEARNED MEN**

While describing about the high status and value of knowledge and the
dignity of the learned men, the Holy Qur'an states: "...Allah will exalt
those of you who believe, and those who are given knowledge, in high
degrees...(58:11)." The value of scholars is so great to the Prophet
(SA) of Islam that he stated: "The death of a tribe is easier and less
detrimental than the death of a scholar." Similarly, the Almighty Allah
also states in another verse:

"...Are those who know and those who do not know alike? Only the men of
understanding are mindful (39:9)." Thus the alim (Islamic scholar) and
the ignorant are never alike. A learned and wise man has obvious
superiority over anyone who lacks knowledge. The conclusion drawn from
this Qur'anic verse indicates that in the view of the Qur'an the term
'knowledge' does not exclusively apply to Islamic knowledge, rather it
covers anything which gives man insight and enlightenment and helps him
in his worldly and heavenly affairs.

Regarding the superiority of scholars over the worshippers of Allah and
the devout people, the following has been related from al-'Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (AS): "A scholar who puts his knowledge into use is superior to
seventy thousand worshippers and has preference over them." The Prophet
(SA) of Islam believes that the status of personality of a man is
determined by his knowledge. The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "The most
learned man is one who adds to his own knowledge by deriving benefit
from the knowledge of others. The value of man is determined by his
knowledge. Thus, the more knowledgeable a man is, the more valuable he
is, and also the less knowledgeable a man is, the less valuable he
is."

**THE DUTIES OF TEACHERS AND STUDENTS**

The Holy Qur'an considers knowledge and learning as man's true life,
because in the absence of knowledge, man would not have been different
from an inanimate object and a deceased person. Therefore, a student
should consider his teacher as a focus of life from whom he gradually
receives details of his actual life. For this reason, he should owe his
life to the teacher and should not fall short of respecting him. He must
not show stubbornness in receiving lessons from the teacher even if they
are accompanied with harshness. The student must respect his teacher in
his presence or absence and during his lifetime and after his death.

Similarly, the teacher should also feel responsible for the life of his
students. He must not be tired nor he must take rest as long as he has
not led his students to the status of live and honourable men. The
teacher should not get disappointed if at times the students do not
exercise proper care to receiving his teachings. He must encourage and
reward his students if they progress in their education. The teacher
must never depress the morale of his students by his words and deeds.

**TWO IMPORTANT MASTERPIECES IN THE TEACHINGS OF ISLAM**

Each of the social policies that is current in various human societies
contains a series of secrets. If these secrets become manifest to the
people, the status of the leaders of the society and their carnal
desires will be jeopardized. For this reason, they always hide some
realities from the public. The reason behind this is that most of the
matters are the creations of their minds. Since these are against reason
and the interest of the community and the individuals, they are afraid
that they would face a flood of objections and the jeopardy of their
interests if these secrets are discovered. For this reason, Christian
churches and the intellectual and spiritual centres of other religions
do not allow the people to think freely, rather they reserve the right
of changing and explaining the religious teachings and the contents of
religious books for themselves. They say that it is the duty of the
people to accept whatever they say indisputably and without any
discussion and inquisitiveness. It is this very policy that h us marred
many religious policies. The existing policy of Christianity is a
veracious proof for this statement.

But since Islam has confidence in its rightfulness, unlike all other
religious and non-religious policies, it sees no ambiguity or lack of
clarity in its path.

(1) Islam does not conceal any rightful matter, nor does it allow its
followers to keep any rightful matters as secrets. This is because the
laws of this pure religion are formulated according to the laws of
nature and creation, thus none of its truths and realities can be
denied. Concealing realities is one of the major sins. In His words, the
Almighty Allah has cursed those who conceal the truth, where He states:
"Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed after We made it clear in the Book for men, these it is whom
Allah shall curse and those who curse shall curse them (too) (2:159)."

(2) Islam has ordered its followers to think freely about the realities
and the teachings and to stop moving along whenever they see the
slightest ambiguity; so that their clear faiths may always remain intact
from the harm of the darkness of any doubts and uncertainties. Islam
also orders the people to try to remove any doubts and uncertainties in
a just and truth-seeking manner and strive to solve them freely if they
are faced with them. The Almighty Allah states:

"And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge...(17:36)."

**ABSTAINING FROM FREE THINKING AND EXPRESSION OF TRUTH**

The perception of the realities through thinking and reflection and
their recognition are the most valuable virtues of man, the only feature
of his superiority over other animals, and the basis of his dignity and
honour. The feeling of love for humanity and the instinct of realism
will never allow man to be deprived of the freedom of thought by the
imposition of imitative thinking. Neither will they allow wisdom to be
led astray by concealing the realities, so that divine thinking would
cease. This fact, however, should not be neglected that when man is
unable to understand a reality or when, due to stubbornness and
persistence of the other side, there is no hope for the establishment of
reality and its expression will cause a loss to man's property, life,
and, reputation, the instinct of realism and the love for humanity judge
on the contrary. In order to respect the reality and to safeguard man
from the danger of aberration and other dangers to his property, life,
and honour, the instinct of realism and humanity call for the
concealment of realities.

Through many ahadith, the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (AS) have seriously
prohibited the people from thinking on some of the realities which are
beyond the level of understanding of man.

The Almighty Allah authorizes the concealment of reality in the case of
taqiyyah (dissimulation) in two instances (Holy Qur'an, Surah 3, Ayah 28
and Surah 16, Ayah 106).

**CONCLUSION**

In several cases, Islam considers the concealment of truths and
realities not only harmless but also necessary:

(1) Taqiyyah is applied where there is no hope for the establishment of
truth and when the expression of the truth will cause danger to one's
property, life, and honour.

(2) When truth is not intelligible for someone and its expression may
lead him astray or may cause disdain and insult towards the truth.

(3) When due to the lack of capability free thinking reveals the truth
in an untrue way and leads to aberration.

**IJTIHAD (DEDUCTION OF COMMANDMENTS BASED ON ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALS) AND
TAQLID (FOLLOWING A MUJTAHID IN PRACTISING ISLAMIC LAWS)**

The requirements of man in his environment and the measures that he
must take to arrange them are so great that a common man cannot
enumerate them let alone specializing in all of them and obtaining
enough knowledge concerning them.

On the other hand, since man performs his tasks by means of thinking
and will power, he should have sufficient information when he wants to
take a decision. He will be unable to take decisions if he lacks
sufficient information. He must either be fully qualified himself to
take any course of action or he must ask someone who is endowed with
qualifications and so perform his duties according to his instructions.
For instance, we instinctively refer to a doctor for the treatment of
our ailments, to a civil engineer for the plan of a building, to a mason
for masonry work, and to a carpenter for making doors and windows.

Thus we always spend our lives by means of taqlid or following others
even for insignificant matters.

Whoever says: "I do not follow another person in my life", either he
does not understand the meaning of his words or is affected by a mental
sickness. Islam, which has based its religious laws on the human nature,
has also adopted the same policy.

Islam orders its followers to learn the religious teachings and
precepts. The source of these teachings is nothing but the Divine Book,
i.e., Qur'an and the ahadith of the Holy Prophet (SA) and the infallible
Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (AS). It is obvious that obtaining all religious
teachings from the Qur'an and the ahadith is not an easy task. Such a
task is not possible for all Muslims and only a limited number of people
can accomplish this task.

Therefore, this religious order naturally takes the form that a group
of Muslims, who are not able to acquire the teachings and precepts
through reasoning, should refer to those who have obtained the Islamic
commandments through proofs and reasoning, and should then perform their
duties.

A scholar who obtains Islamic commandments through proofs and reasoning
is called "mujtahid" and his endeavour in this regard is called
"ijtihad" One who refers to the mujtahid is called "muqallid" (one who
follows a mujtahid's instructions for performing his deeds) and his
referring to the mujtahid is called taqlid (following a mujtahid in
practising Islamic laws).

Surely, it should be known that taqlid holds true in worships,
transactions, and other practical rules of Islam, but in regard to Usul
al-Din (the fundamental principles of Islam) which are matters of
belief, one can never have confidence in the views of others and cannot
content himself with following them. This is because in the case of the
fundamental principles of Islam, faith and belief are desirable and not
action. We can never consider the faith of others to be our own.

It cannot be said that Allah is One because our fathers or scholars say
so or that the Hereafter is true since all Muslims believe in it.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon every Muslim to know the Usul al-Din of
his religion through reasoning and proof even if it may be a very simple
one.


