The General Life-Style of the Ahl Al-Bayt (as)
==============================================

The other members of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) are the perfect examples of
the education and training of the Holy Prophet (S). Their characters and
life-style resemble the character of the Holy Prophet (S).

Certainly, during 250 years, beginning from the 11th year of *Hijrah*
(the year of Holy Prophet's [S] demise) until the year 260 AH (when
al-'Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi's [as] *Ghaybat al-Kubra*, i.e., Great
Occultation started), in their associations with people, the infallible
guides, the Imams faced various situations showing their style of living
in different forms.

They, however, never gave up the main objective of the Holy Prophet's
(S) policy which consisted of safeguarding the *Usul al-Din* (the
fundamental principles of Islam for believing in) and the *Furu' al-Din*
(the secondary principles of Islam for action on) from undergoing
changes and transformations, and the education of people, as far as
possible.

Within 23 years since his call and invitation to Islam, the Holy Prophet
(S) passed three phases of his life. He secretly called the people to
Islam in the first three years of his al-*Bi'that* *al-Nabawiyyah*. He,
then overtly invited the people to Islam in the next ten years. However,
he and his followers lived under the severe tortures and persecution of
the society and enjoyed no freedom of action that could make a tangible
reform in the society.

The Holy Prophet (S) spent the remaining ten years (after the *Hijrah*)
in an atmosphere in which the revival of truth and reality was the main
goal and in which the holy Islam gained striking achievements day by
day, thus opening up a new gate of knowledge and perfection to the
people at every moment.

It is certainly obvious that these three different environments demanded
different expediencies and would display the character and life-style of
the Holy Prophet (S), who had no other objective but to revive the truth
and reality, in various forms.

The different environments, in which the guiding Imams (as) lived, were
not unlike the pre-*Hijrah* period of the Holy Prophet's (S) call.
Sometimes, like the first three years of the prophetic mission, it was
impossible even to highlight the truth and thus the Imams (as) performed
their duties with utmost care, as was the case at the time of the fourth
Imam (as) and the latter part of the time of the sixth Imam (as) who had
similar expediencies.

Sometimes, like the ten years prior to *Hijrah*, when the Holy Prophet
(S) overtly called the people to Islam in Makkah and when he and his
followers were unable to resist the pressure of the unbelievers, the
Imams (as) also proceeded to educate the people with the teachings of
religion and the propagation of religious precepts. The influential men
of the time, however, left no stone unturned in torturing and
persecuting them and created new problems everyday.

Indeed, an environment resembling the Holy Prophet's (S) post-Hijrah
milieu to some extent was the one in which *Amir* *al-Mu'minin*
(Commander of the Mu'minin), 'Ali (as), ruled as a caliph for five
years, the one in which Hadrat Fatimah (as) and al-Imam al-Hasan (as)
lived for a small period, and the one in which al-,Imam al-Husayn (as)
and his disciples lived for a short duration. In all these environments,
the truth and reality were openly manifested, thus clearly reflecting
the image of the general condition prevailing during the Holy Prophet's
(S) time.

In short, except in what has been mentioned, the infallible Imams could
not oppose the tyrant and usurper rulers and commanders of the time
basically and openly. Therefore, they were obliged to have *taqiyyah*
(concealing one's true beliefs when life is in danger) and to give no
excuse to the rulers of the time to bother them. Nevertheless, their
enemies left no stone unturned to put off the lights of their guidance
and nullify their efforts.

The Root Cause of the Differences of The Imams (as) with Contemporary Governments
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Various governments, which came into being in the Islamic society after
the Holy Prophet (S), under the name of Islam were all in serious
disagreement with the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as). This irreconcilable antagonism
served as a root which never dried.

Although the Holy Prophet (S) had mentioned about the virtues and
excellent qualities of his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as), the most important of
which were the honor of knowing the teachings of the Holy Qur'an and
distinguishing between *halal* (Islamically permissible) and *haram*
(Islamically prohibited) matters and even though it was incumbent upon
the *Ummah* to respect and honor the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as), the *Ummah*, in
spite of this recommendation and emphasis, did not discharge their
obligations in this connection.

When the Holy Prophet (S) openly invited people to Islam, on the very
first day he mentioned about his relatives, embracing Islam and
nominated 'Ali (as) as his successor. He manifestly specified 'Ali's
(as) succession in Ghadir Khumm and elsewhere during the last days of
his life. In spite of this fact, the people designated others as
successors of the Holy Prophet (S) after his death thus denying the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (as) of their indisputable rights. As a result, the governments
of the time always considered the *Ahl al-Bayt*(as) as dangerous rivals
and were frightened of them. These governments exploited various
possibilities to annihilate the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as).

The governments of the time considered a deep discrepancy between
the*Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and the so-called Islamic governments
indispensable. The *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) believed that Islamic governments
must observe, preserve, and enforce the divine precepts of Islam. As
seen in their endeavours, however, the so-called Islamic governments
that came to power after the Holy Prophet (S) did not completely observe
the enforcement of the precepts of Islam and the adherence to the
*sirah* (life-style) of the Holy Prophet (S).

On several occasions, the Almighty Allah enjoins the Holy Prophet (S)
and the Islamic *Ummah* not to make any changes or transformations in
the divine precepts and warns them of showing the slightest tendency
against any one of the Islamic precepts and orders. On the basis of
these unchangeable and immutable orders, the Holy Prophet (S) adopted a
life-style through which he displayed no difference in the
implementation of Islamic laws as far as time, place, and people were
concerned.

Observing the divine precepts was incumbent upon everybody and even upon
the Holy Prophet (S) and was obligatory on the part of everyone. The
Islamic laws were steadfast and effective in all circumstances.

As a result of this equality and justice, all types of preferences among
the people disappeared. The Holy Prophet (S), who by Allah's order was
the ruler and commander and whose obedience was obligatory, did not have
the slightest privilege over others in the internal and external affairs
of his life. He did not avail himself of any luxury, maintained no
protocol and formalities commensurate to his position as a ruler, and
did not boast of his greatness and position. He showed no magnanimity or
reverence. He could not be distinguished from the rest of the people
through any outward appearance.

No group from the various strata of people sought superiority over
others only by relying on their own discriminative preferences. Men and
women, the rich and the poor, the strong and the weak, the urban and the
rural, the slaves and the free men, and the black and the white all were
equally ranked and no one was under obligation to perform actions beyond
his religious duty. Everyone was immune against paying homage to the
powerful people of the society or to be belittled by the influence and
oppression of the oppressors.

With a little consideration, it will be clear (particularly after we
have had long experiments after the death of the Holy Prophet [S]) that
the sole objective of the Holy Prophet's immaculate character was the
just and equitable implementation of the divine orders of Islam among
the people and the immunity and preservation of these laws against
changes and transformations. But the "Islamic governments" did not
conform their conduct to that of the Holy Prophet (S) and entirely
changed h is course of action. As a result:

(1) Shortly, class distinctions appeared in the "Islamic society" in the
worst form. The people were divided into two groups, the strong and the
weak. The life, property, and reputation of one group were subjected to
destruction through the whims and desires of another group.

(2) The so-called "Islamic government" gradually changed Islamic laws.
Sometimes, under the pretext of safeguarding an Islamic society and
sometimes under the pretext of saving the government and its policy,
these "Islamic governments" refrained from compliance with Islamic
commandments and implementation of Islamic laws and provisions. This
mode of working expanded day by day to such an extent that the so-called
Islamic governments felt no responsibility towards the observance and
implementation of Islamic laws. It is quite obvious to know as to what
would be the status of Islamic laws and general provisions which have no
proper executive power for implementation.

In Short, the "Islamic governments", during the lives of *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as), brought about changes in the precepts and laws of Islam as per the
"expediency of the time". It was due to these changes that their
conducts were contrary to that of the Holy Prophet (S). But according to
the Qur'anic directives, the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) considered the precepts
of the conduct of the Holy Prophet (S) indispensable.

Due to these differences and contradictions, the contemporary powerful
governments did not refrain from crushing the *Ahl* *al-Bayt* (as). They
embarked on using every possible means to extinguish the light of their
guidance.

Although the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) continuously faced many problems and
encountered stubborn and sinister enemies, they continued their
invitation of Islam to people and the work of Islamic *tabligh*
(communication) in accordance with their divine duty, they did not leave
any stone unturned for education of the righteous individuals.

To appreciate this matter, one must refer to history and notice the
large population of Shi'ahs during the five-year *Khilafah* (caliphate)
period of the *Amir al-Mu'minin*, 'Ali (as). Certainly, this population
had come up during the 25 years of, Ali's (as) seclusion. Also, there
was similar gathering of a large number of Shi'ahs at the house of
Al-Imam al-Baqir (as). They were those who were quietly educated by
Al-Imam al-Sajjad (as). Furthermore, hundreds of thousands of Shi'ahs
following the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and faithful to Al-Imam al-Ridha’ (as)
were the truth seekers whom Al-Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (as) had guided even
from the dark comers of the prisons.

Finally, because of the continuous training and education by the *Ahl
al-Bayt*(as), the Shi'ahs, who were an insignificant number at the time
of the death of the Holy Prophet (S), sharply increased to an amazing
number during the last period of the infallible Imams (as).

An Exceptional Point in the Policy of the Ahl al-Bayt (as)
----------------------------------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) of the Holy Prophet (S)
spent their lives under tyranny and accusation. They performed their
assigned duties in the atmosphere of *taqiyyah* and under the most
difficult conditions. Only four members among the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as),
for brief periods, could exceptionally have an opportunity to work
independently without restraint and *taqiyyah*. We will briefly discuss
the biographies of the members (other than the Prophet (S) whose
life-sketch has been already given) of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) here.

Al-'Imam 'Ali (as)
------------------

Amir al-Mu'minin Hadrat 'Ali (as) is the first perfect example of the
education and training of the Holy Prophet (S).

'Ali (as) was educated by the Holy Prophet (S) from the period of his
infancy. 'Ali (as) was always with the Holy Prophet (S) like a shadow
until the last moment of the Prophet's life. Like a butterfly which
sacrifices its life for the candle, 'Ali (as) also was with the Holy
Prophet (S). 'Ali (as) parted with the Holy Prophet (S) when he took the
sacred body of the Prophet (S) in his arms and buried him.

'Ali (as) was endowed with a worldwide personality. One may dare say
that the discussions and deliberations about this important personality
have not been made to such an extent about any other important
personality of the world. Shi'ah, Sunni, Muslim, and non-Muslim scholars
and writers have written more than one thousand books regarding his
personality.

With all the innumerable discussions and inquisitiveness made by friends
and foes about 'Ali (as), no one has been able to find any weaknesses in
his faith. Nor has anyone been able to find any weak point in his
bravery, piety, knowledge, justice, and other praiseworthy ethics,
because he recognized and possessed nothing but virtue and perfection.

According to history, from among all rulers who have come to power since
the demise of the Holy Prophet (S) until the present time, 'Ali (as) is
the only person who fully complied with the *sirah* of the Holy Prophet
(S) and who never deviated from the policies of the Prophet (S) in the
period of his rule over the Islamic society. 'Ali (as) implemented the
laws and religious precepts of Islam without any misinterpretation or
distortion just as they were executed in the lifetime of the Holy
Prophet (S).

In the case of "the 6-member council" for the selection of the
*khalifah*(caliph) which had a meeting according to the order of the
second *khalifah*after lengthy discussions the uncertainty regarding
*khilafah* emerged between 'Ali (as) and 'Uthman. The "council"
conditionally offered the position of *khilafah* to 'Ali (as) provided
that he would deal with the people in the same manner as the first and
second *khalifahs* did. Imam 'Ali (as) rejected the offer and said: "I
will not transgress the limits of my knowledge." Then the "council"
offered the *khilafah* with the same condition to 'Uthman. He accepted
the offer and became the *khalifah*, although he adopted a different
*sirah* afterwards.

No one from among the Companions of the Holy Prophet (S) could be a
match to 'Ali (as) insofar as self-sacrifices, self-devotion,
self-dedication, etc for the cause of the truth were concerned. It
cannot be denied that in the absence of this devoted harbinger of Islam,
unbelievers and polytheists would have easily extinguished the light of
the *Nubuwwah* in the night of *Hijrah* and afterwards in any one of the
battles of Badr, 'Uhud, Khandaq, Khaybar, and Hunayn and would have
resulted in the fall of the banner of the truth.

Upon first entrance into the social environment, 'Ali (as) had a very
simple life. During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S), after the
Prophet's demise, and even during his own glorious *khilafah* period, he
lived like the poor and in the most humble condition. He had no
superiority over the needy insofar as food, clothing, and housing were
concerned and used to: "The ruler of a society should live in such a way
so as to be the source of consolation for the needy and the distressed
and not the cause of their regret and disappointment." Although the
ruler of the entire Islamic State, he had only seven hundred dirhams on
the day of his martyrdom with which he wanted to hire a servant for his
house.

'Ali (as) used to work to meet the needs of life. Particularly he was
interested in agriculture and spent his time in planting trees and
digging water canals. Whatever he earned in this manner or through the
war-booty, he distributed among the needy. He endowed the properties
which he had cultivated for the needy or distributed among them the
money received as sale proceeds of such properties. Once, during the
period of his own *khilafah*, 'Ali (as) ordered to those concerned to
bring the revenues of his endowments to him and then spend them. When
these revenues were collected, the amount reached 24 000 gold dinars.

'Ali (as) always defeated his rivals in all the battles in which he took
part. He never refrained from combating an enemy. 'Ali (as) said: "If
the entire Arabia rises up in opposition and combat against me, I will
not lose my courage and I will not fear anything."

With such bravery and valor, for which the history of the brave men of
the world has not found any equal, 'Ali (as) was extremely
compassionate, kind, generous, and magnanimous. In the battles, he never
killed women, children, and the weak. 'Ali (as) did not take anyone as a
captive and did not pursue those who ran away. In the Battle of Siffin,
the army of Mu'awiyah took a lead, occupied the canal of Euphrates, and
banned the water on 'Ali (as). Later, after a bloody battle, 'Ali (as)
occupied the water canal. Then he issued orders allowing the enemy to
take water.

In the period of his *khilafah*, 'Ali (as) welcomed everyone without
having chamberlains and doorkeepers, walked on foot. all alone, and
walked in the alleys and the bazaars. He ordered the people to fear
Allah and guard against evil and protected them against injustice of one
another. 'Ali (as) helped the poverty-stricken people and widows kindly
and humbly and kept the shelter less orphans in his own house,
personally providing their requirements and educating them.

'Ali (as) had a special regard for knowledge and learning and gave
particular attention towards promotion of knowledge and education and
used to say: "There is no suffering like ignorance." While 'Ali (as) was
arraying his troops in the bloody Battle of Jamal, an Arab went forward
and asked him the meaning of *Tawhid*. The people rushed toward the Arab
from every direction and confronted him by saying that such a moment is
not an appropriate time for asking such questions and for discussion.
'Ali (as) asked them to disperse away from the Arab and said: "We are
fighting the people in order to revive such truths." Then, while
arraying the troops, 'Ali (as) called forth the Arab and clarified the
matter for him with an eloquent statement.

Another similar case symbolizing the religious discipline and amazing
divine power of 'Ali (as) has been narrated in the course of the Battle
of Siffin. While the two armies, like two roaring seas, were
intermingling and fighting and much blood was gushing out from every
direction, 'Ali (as) came to one of his soldiers and demanded a glass of
water for drinking.

The soldier filled a wooden bowl with water and offered it to 'All (as).
'Ali (as) noticed a crack in the bowl and said: "Drinking water in such
a bowl is *makruh* (undesirable -though not unlawful but refraining from
it is preferable in Islam)".

The soldier said: "This is not a time to be so meticulous about these
things in such a situation when we are under the shower of arrows and
the flashes of thousands of swords". In short, the answer he got from
'Ali (as) was: "We are fighting for the enforcement of such Islamic
precepts and insofar as the rules are concerned there is nothing large
or small".

After the Holy Prophet (S), 'Ali (as) was the first person who talked
about scientific realities by the philosophical mode of thinking, that
is, he talked with independent logic. He also coined many scientific
terms. In order to safeguard the Holy Qur'an from error and mutilations,
'Ali (as) formulated and arranged the rules of Arabic grammar.

Scientific intricacies, divine knowledge, ethical, social, and political
matters, and even mathematics that are made available to us by means of
the lectures, letters, and other eloquent remarks of 'Ali (as) are
amazing.

Lectures, letters, aphorisms, and the short remarks available as a
memorial of 'Ali (as) all testify that from among Muslims, 'Ali (as) is
most familiar with the sublime aims of the Qur'an and has duly perceived
the principal and practical education of Islam. He has proved the
authenticity of the *hadith* of the Holy Prophet (S): "I am the city of
knowledge and 'Ali is the gate of the city". 'Ali (as) has combined this
knowledge with practice.

In short, the prominent personality of 'Ali (as) is beyond description
and his infinite virtues are countless. History has never witnessed a
personality attracting as much the attention and the views of the
scholars and philosophers of the world as he has.

Al-Siddiqah Al-Kubra Fatimah (as)
---------------------------------

*Al-Siddiqah al-Kubra* (the most strictly veracious) Fatimah (as) was
the only beloved and honourable daughter of the Holy Prophet (S) who, as
a result of her wisdom, faith, righteousness, decent attributes, and
praiseworthy ethics, had filled the pure heart of her respectable father
with her affections.

As a result of her wisdom, piety, and worship, Fatimah (as) obtained the
title of *"Sayyidat Nisa' al-'Alamin"* (the head of all the women of the
worlds) from her great father. The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "The
happiness of Fatimah is my happiness and my happiness is the happiness
of Allah. The anger of Fatimah is my anger and my anger is the anger of
Allah."

The Lady of Islam Khadijah al-Kubra, gave birth to Hadrat Fatimah (as)
in the sixth year after *Al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah*. Fatimah (as) married
*Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as) in the second year after the *Hijrah*.
Fatimah (as) passed away three months and odd days after the demise of
her great father.

In her life, she always preferred the pleasure of Allah over her own
happiness. In her family circle, she trained and educated her children.
She divided the household chores between herself and her housemaid. One
day, she engaged in the household chores herself and the other day, the
housemaid was supposed to perform them. Fatimah (as) resolved the
problems of Muslim ladies and worshipped Allah during her leisure time.

She spent her personal property, specially the overflowing income of
Fadak (a few villages nearby Khaybar), for the cause of Allah and kept
no more than what was necessary for herself. Sometimes, she gave her
daily food to the needy and the poor, spending her day with hunger. The
elaborate speech delivered by Fatimah (as) in the Mosque of the Holy
Prophet (S) to the Companions and groups of Muslims, the arguments she
raised with the "first *khalifah*" on the subject of the attachment of
Fadak, and her other remarks which have remained as her memorial, are
all obvious proofs for the magnanimity of her status, her courageous and
brave spirit, and her perseverance.

Hadrat Fatimah (as) is the respectable daughter of the Holy Prophet (S),
the wife of *Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as), and the mother of the eleven
Imams and leaders of Islam. The offspring of the Holy Prophet (S) are
all from her generation.

According to the explicit text of the Holy Qur'an, Fatimah (as) is
endowed with the status of the *'Ismah*.

Al-'Imam Al-Hasan (as) And Al-'Imam Al-Husayn (as)
--------------------------------------------------

These two honorable Imams (as) are brothers and the sons of 'Ali (as)
and Fatimah (as). According to the *ahadith* the Holy Prophet (S) had
deep affections towards these honorable grandsons whom he called his own
sons. The Holy Prophet (S) was not able to endure their slightest pain
and dissatisfaction and used to state: "These two sons of mine are Imams
and leaders, be they rising or sitting". The terms 'rising' and
'sitting' are used ironically and signify taking charge of superficial
*khilafah* and rising to fight with the enemies of Islam and
non-acceptance of superficial *khilafah* and rising against it. He
added. "Hasan and Husayn are the two leaders of the youth of the
Heaven."

On the basis of his honorable father's will, al-Imam al-Hasan (as) was
chosen for *khilafah*. The people also promised their allegiance to him.
He ruled as a *khalifah* in Islamic countries, excluding Syria and
Egypt, which were under the reign of Mu'awiyah, and conducted the
affairs just as his great father did.

In the period of his ruling, al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) mobilized an army to
put an end to the trouble of Mu'awiyah, but he finally discovered that
the hearts of the people were lured by Mu'awiyah and that the leaders of
his own army had correspondence with Mu'awiyah and were waiting for him
to issue an order to kill or arrest the Imam (as) and surrender him to
the enemy. For this reason, the Imam (as) had to agree to the peace
offer.

Al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) entered into peace negotiations with Mu'awiyah
under specific terms, but Mu'awiyah did not keep up his promise and,
after the conclusion of the peace agreement, he went to Iraq and
ascended a pulpit in the presence of the Muslims and said: "I was not
fighting with you for the cause of religion, so that you would recite
*salat* or observe *sawm*; rather I wanted to rule over you and now I
have achieved my goal" Mu'awiyah added: "I disregard all the promises
that I have made to al-Hasan."

After the peace treaty, for nine and a half years, al-Imam al-Hasan (as)
lived under the domination of Mu'awiyah in a gloomy atmosphere and under
the most bitter and unpleasant conditions. The Imam (as) had no life
security even in his own house. Finally, at the instigation of
Mu'awiyah, the Imam (as) was poisoned by his wife (Ja'dah) and became
martyred.

After the martyrdom of al-'Imam al-Hasan (as), his honourable brother,
al-'Imam al-Husayn (as), succeeded him by the order of Allah and
according to the will of his brother al-Imam al-Hasan (as) He began to
guide and lead the people, but the conditions and circumstances were
similar to those existed at the time of al-Imam al-Hasan (as). With his
full control over the situation, Mu'awiyah had seized all the work
potentialities available to al-'Imam al-Husayn (as).

Mu'awiyah died after about nine and a half years and the position of
*khilafah*, which had turned into monarchy, was transferred to his son,
Yazid.

Unlike his father, Yazid was a young man intoxicated with conceit and
displayed interest in revelry, obscene acts, and lack of discipline. As
soon as this proud young man took the rein of the affairs of the Muslims
he ordered the governor of Madinah to ask al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) to
promise his allegiance to Yazid or else send. the Imam's head to him.

When the governor proposed the subject of allegiance to al-'Imam
al-Husayn (as), the Imam (as) asked for some time and left Madinah
overnight for Makkah along with his companions. He sought refuge in the
sanctuary of Allah which is an official haven in Islam. But after
residing in Makkah for a few months, he realized that Yazid would by no
means leave him alone and that he would definitely be killed if he did
not promise his allegiance to Yazid.

On the other hand, during this period, the Imam (as) had received
several thousand letters from Iraq promising their cooperation and
assistance and inviting him to rise against the oppressors of Banu
Umayyah.

By observing the prevailing general conditions and circumstances and the
symptoms al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) realized that his movement would not
have an outward progress. Nevertheless, having denied his allegiance, he
decided to offer his sacrifice and get killed with a decision of his
uprising, al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) left Makkah for Kufah with his
companions in the course of his travel, he encountered the massive
troops of the enemy in Karbala (nearly 70 km away from Kufah).

While travelling, the Imam (as) invited the people to assist him and
informed his companions of his decision to be killed giving them the
option to stay with him or to leave him. Therefore, from the day they
encountered the troops of the enemy, no one had remained with the Imam
(as) other than only a few people who were devoted to him and who were
willing to give their lives for the cause . As a result, they were
easily surrounded by the large number of enemy soldiers. They were even
prevented from having water. In such a situation, al-'Imam al-Husayn
(as) was compelled to choose between offering his allegiance to Yazid
and his martyrdom.

Al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) did not resign himself to his allegiance to
Yazid and became prepared to be killed. A day came when he fought the
enemy from morning to evening along with his companions. In this battle,
he himself, his children, his brothers, his nephews, his cousins, and
his companions, who were totally about 70 people, were martyred. Only
his honorable son, Al-'Imam 'Ali al-Sajjad (as), who was unable to fight
due to serious illness, survived.

After the martyrdom of al-'Imam al-Husayn (as), the enemy troops
plundered his properties, took his family as prisoners, and took them
from Karbala to Kufah and from Kufah to Damascus along with the
decapitated heads of the Martyrs.

In the process of this captivity, al-'Imam 'Ali al-Sajjad (as) in his
sermon delivered at Damascus and also Zaynab al-Kubra, in her addresses
delivered in public gatherings in Kufah, in the court of Ibn Ziyad, the
Governor of Kufah, and in the court of Yazid in Damascus, unveiled the
truth and revealed the oppression and cruelty of Umayyads to the people
of the world.

In any case, this movement of al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) against the
oppression, tyranny and indiscipline - which ended with the bloodshed of
al-'Imam al-Husayn (as), his children, his relatives and his companions
together with looting of his property and imprisonment of his women and
children - is a special event with its important characteristics and
details, which has no parallel in the pages of history of world
movements. It can definitely be said that this event serves as the basis
for the survival of Islam. Had this event not taken place, Umayyads
would have totally wiped off Islam.

Were the Policies of Al-'Imam Al-Hasan (as) and Al-'Imam Al-Husayn (as) Different?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although these two great leaders are, according to the explicit
statement of the Holy Prophet (S), rightful Imams, their policies
apparently seem different. Some have even said that the difference of
opinions of these two brothers was so great that one of them, having 40
000 combatants, accepted the peace offer, while the other, with only 40
friends and companions (other than his relatives) fought the enemy and
lost all of them including his suckling child for this cause.

However, close investigation proves the contrary, as we see that
al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) lived for about nine and a half years during the
reign of Mu'awiyah and did not oppose him overtly. After the martyrdom
of his brother, al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) also lived for about nine and a
half years during the reign of Mu'awiyah and never thought of rising in
rebellion against him and did not challenge him.

Hence, the main cause of this superficial difference in the policies of
the two Imams (as) lies in the difference of opinion between Mu'awiyah
and Yazid, rather than the difference of opinion of these two great
Imams (as). The policy of Mu'awiyah was not based on lack of discipline
and restraint and he did not deride the religious precepts by its overt
opposition.

Mu'awiyah called himself a "companion" of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
"writer of Revelation". Through his sister (who was the wife of the Holy
Prophet (S) and who was *Umm al-Mu'minin* (the mother of the believers),
Mu'awivah was called *"Khal al-Mu'minin"* (the maternal uncle of the
believers) and was greatly favored by the Second Caliph in whom the
common people had total confidence and special attachment.

Furthermore, Mu'awiyah, in a majority of cases, had appointed the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (S) who were respected and honored by the
people (such as Abu Hurayrah,' Amr al-'As, Samrah, Yusr, Al-Mughirah ibn
Shu'bah, and others) as governors of provinces and had put them in
charge of the key positions of the country. These governors used to work
for the favourable opinions of the people towards Mu'awiyah.

Many *ahadith* were fabricated and narrated among the people regarding
the virtues and the religious immunity of the Companions of the Holy
Prophet (S) and that they were not questionable for whatever they did.
Thus whatever Mu'awiyah did, if corrigible and justifiable at all, it
was rectified and justified by these authorities; otherwise, by giving a
great deal of hush-money, he prevented his opponents from complaining.

Where these means and methods did not work, thousands of innocent people
comprising of *Shi'ahs* (friends) of 'Ali (as), other Muslims, and even
a great number of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (S) were killed by
these collaborators, partisans, and "companions" of Mu'awiyah.

Mu'awiyah pretended to be right in whatever he did and accomplished
everything with a special patience and forbearance. With a particular
gentleness and flexibility, he attracted the kindness and obedience of
people. Sometimes, he even heard the curse of people on him and sensed
their enmity, but he responded with cheerfulness and forgiveness and
thus pursued his policy in this way.

Apparently, he paid respect to al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) and al-'Imam
al-Husayn (as) and sent them valuable gifts and souvenirs. On the other
hand, he publicly announced that whoever narrates a *hadith* concerning
the virtues of *the Ahl al-Bayt* (as), will have no security of life,
reputation, and property; but whoever narrates a *hadith* concerning the
virtues. Prophet (S) will receive a of the Companions of the Holy
reward.

He gave orders to the orators and preachers to curse al-'Imam 'Ali (as)
from pulpits used for addressing Muslims. By the order of Mu'awiyah, his
hirelings killed the supporters of al-'Imam 'Ali (as) wherever they
could find them. They went along in this matter to such an extent that
they killed a large number of people who were the enemies of al-'Imam
'Ali (as), accusing them of having friendship with the Imam (as).

It becomes clear from the above description that the rise of al-'Imam
al-Hasan (as) would only have ended to the detriment of Islam and would
have had no effect other than the martyrdom of the Imam (as) and his
supporters. And even it was not unlikely that, in this case, Mu'awiyah
might have got killed al-'Imam al-Hasan (as) through the friends and
relatives of the Imam (as) and then, in order to pacify public opinion,
Mu'awivah would have rent (torn) his shirt and mourned for the Imam (as)
and, in seeking vengeance (for this bloodshed), he would have tried to
take his revenge by killing the Shi'ahs, as he later did while dealing
with the case of 'Uthman.

But the political trend of Yazid had no resemblance with that of his
father. He was a self-admiring and undisciplined youth. He had no logic:
other than force. He gave no importance to public opinion.

During his short-term rule, Yazid at once revealed the damages which
were secretly inflicted on Islam. In the first year of his rule, Yazid
put the family of the Holy Prophet (S) to the edge of the sword. In the
second year of his rule, he ruined the city of Madinah and allowed his
troops to transgress upon the honor, life, and property of the people
for three days. In the third year of his rule, he destroyed Ka'bah.

Owing to the above reasons, the movement of al-'Imam al-Husayn (as) was
imprinted on the minds of the people and its effect grew more profoundly
and publicly day by day. In the beginning, this movement manifested
itself in the form of bloody revolutions. Finally, it attracted a great
number of Muslims as the supporters of truth and reality and as the
supporters of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) of the Holy Prophet (S).

It was because of this reason that Mu'awiyah, in his will to Yazid, had
strongly recommended that Yazid should leave al-'Imam al-Husayn (as)
alone and not bother him; but would the drunkenness and self-admiration
of Yazid permit him to differentiate between his benefit and his loss?

Al-'Imam 'Ali Al-Sajjad (as)
----------------------------

The policy of al-'Imam 'Ali al-Sajjad (as), during his Imamate, is
divided into two different parts which correspond as a whole to the
general policies of other Imams (as), for the Imam (as) was in the
company of his great father in the tragic event of Karbala and took part
in the movement of al-'Imam al-Husayn (as). After the martyrdom of his
father, when the Imam (as) was taken captive and was taken to Kufah from
Karbala and from Kufah to Damascus, he never used *taqiyyah* and
asserted the truth and reality without any fear. Whenever the occasions
suited, he informed the individuals and the public of the rightfulness
of the Members of the Household of the Holy Prophet (S) and their
glories and virtues through his lectures and statements. He brought the
innocence of his great father and the cruel and oppressive atrocities of
the Umayyads to the surface and aroused the outburst of the feelings and
sentiments of the people.

But Imam (as) returned to Madinah after he was released from captivity
and the atmosphere of self-sacrifice turned itself into the atmosphere
of tranquillity. He sat in the seclusion of his house, closed the door
on strangers, and engaged in worshipping Allah. He began to train and
educate the individuals who were the followers of truth and reality.
During the 35 years of his residence there, the Imam (as), directly and
indirectly, educated a great number of people and imprinted the Islamic
culture on their hearts.

Only the prayers that the Imam (as) had indited in his divine tone and
through which he silently prayed to Allah form a complete set of the
sublime Islamic learnings and sciences. These prayers have been compiled
in a form of book which is popularly known as *"Al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyyah"*(meaning a book of al-'Imam al-Sajjad).

Al-'Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as)
-------------------------------

During the Imamate of al-'Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as), the way was
somewhat paved for the dissemination of Islamic sciences. Owing to the
oppression of Umayyads, the *ahadith* regarding Islamic jurisprudence by
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) were lost. Although thousands Of *ahadith* are
required for Islamic precepts, nevertheless, not even more than 500
*ahadith*of the Holy Prophet (S) had remained, that too, from among
those which were narrated by the Companions of the Holy Prophet (S).

In short, during that period, because of the very tragic event of
Karbala and as a result of the 35 years of efforts of al-'Imam al-Sajjad
(as), a great number of Muslims [supporters of *Ahl al-Bayt* (as)]
emerged but they had no Islamic jurisprudence based on the *ahadith* of
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (AS ).

Since the government of the Umayyads was weakened due to internal
differences and the self-indulgence and inefficiency of government
authorities and because the signs of weakness had grown in its
governmental structure, the Fifth Imam (as) took advantage of this
opportunity and began to disseminate the sciences of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as) and the Islamic jurisprudence and provided the society with many
scholars of his school of thought.

Al-'Imam Ja'far Al-Sadiq (as)
-----------------------------

During the time of the 6th Imam (as) the conditions were more apt and
the circumstances were more favourable for the dissemination of Islamic
sciences, because, on the one hand, as a result of the propagation of
the*ahadith* of al-'Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) and owing to the
*tablighat*by those who were educated in his school, the people had
realized their need for Islamic sciences and the Islamic knowledge of
the *Ahl al-Bayt*(as) and were more thirsty for obtaining the *ahadith*.

On the other hand, the government of the Umayyads was overthrown and the
government, of the Abbasids had not yet been firmly established when, in
order to fulfill their intentions and to undermine the government of the
Umayyads, the Abbasids used the tyranny against the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as)
and the blood of the martyrs of Karbala as a pretence and thus tried to
be apparently good to the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as).

The Imam (as) embarked on teaching and disseminating different branches
of knowledge. Scientists, *'ulama'* and scholars rushed to the Imam's
(as) house from every direction and were welcomed by the Imam (as). They
asked many questions concerning various branches of Islamic sciences,
the Islamic ethics and life-history of the prophets, the history of
*Ummahs*, the wisdom, the *tabligh*, etc and received the answers
accordingly.

The Imam (as) held discussions with people from different strata and
held debates with various peoples and sects. He educated students in
different Islamic sciences. Hundreds of books were compiled which
recorded the *ahadith* and scientific lectures of the Imam (as) which
are known as "fundamentals".

By taking advantage of this brief period, which came handy in the
suffocating atmosphere of those days, al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as)
educated and trained thousands of learned scholars. As his memorial, the
Imam (as) left many precious treasures of sciences and education in the
field of Islamic culture. The number of scholars who had benefited from
the Imam's (as) vast knowledge and wisdom exceeded 4 000.

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (as) had ordered his students to write down his
lessons and to preserve their books and writings. He stated: "A time
will come when a chaos will prevail and many of these works will be
destroyed. Then you will be in need of these books and writings and
these books will serve as the only scientific and Islamic references of
Muslims". For this reason, the students of the Imam (as) used to bring
with them pen and inkpot and put down whatever they heard in his class.

Other than his necessary rest, the Imam (as) taught the people secretly
and publicly round-the-clock and made the treasury of his infinite
knowledge available to all.

In short, his sublime remarks and valuable guidances removed ignorance
and illiteracy and re-established the true Islam of the Holy Prophet
(S). Thus, he is known as the founder of "Shi'i Islamic jurisprudence".
Shi'ah religion was later called as the "Ja'fari Jurisprudence" after
his name.

Al-'Imam Musa Al-Kazim (as)
---------------------------

Having overthrown the Umayyads and having taken the position of
*khilafah*in hand, the Abbasids turned to Sane Fatimah and tried to
annihilate the Members of the Household of the Holy Prophet (S) with all
their might. They beheaded a group, buried another alive, and placed yet
another group of people under the foundations and in the walls of the
buildings. They set the house of the 6th Imam (as) on fire and summoned
the Imam (as) to Iraq several times. In this way, the *taqiyyah* was
more intensely practiced during the last days of the life of the 6th
Imam (as).

Since the Imam was under strict surveillance, he did not meet anyone
except a few particular Shi'ahs. Finally, al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as)
was poisoned and martyred by al-Mansur, the Second Caliph of the
Abbasids. Thus, during the*'Imamah* of the 7th Imam, al-'Imam Musa
al-Kazim (as), the oppression of the antagonists became more severe and
intensified day by day.

In spite of an environment of intense *taqiyyah*, the 7th Imam (as)
began to disseminate the Islamic knowledge and ma de a large number of
*ahadith* available to the Shi'ahs. It can be said that the *ahadith*
pertaining to Islamic jurisprudence by al-'Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) stand
third in number after those by the 5th and the 6th Imams (as). Owing to
prevailing conditions of intense *taqiyyah*, in most of the *ahadith*
related by the Imam (as), he has been referred to by the narrators as
"an *'alim*" or as "a righteous worshipper of Allah", or the like
without an explicit mention of his name.

The Imam (as) was the contemporary of four Abbasid *khulafa'* al-Mansur,
al-Hadi, al-Mahdi, and Harun, and was always the target of their
oppression. Finally, under the order of Harun, he was imprisoned and was
transferred from one prison to another for years. At last, al-'Imam Musa
al-Kazim (as) was poisoned as well as martyred in the prison.

Al-Imam 'Ali Al-Ridha’ (as)
---------------------------

A consideration on the circumstances during that time makes it clear for
every clear-sighted person that no matter how much the contemporary
*khulafa'* and opponents of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) tried to torture and
tyrannize the Imams (as) of Guidance and made the life difficult for
their Shi'ahs, the number of the followers of Islam increased day by day
and their faith in Islam became stauncher. The Institution of *khilafah*
was a wicked and filthy system in their views.

And this matter was an internal conviction which constantly kept the
*khulafa'* contemporary with the Imams (as), in agony; and in fact
rendered those *khulafa'* helpless and despicable.

After killing his brother al-Amin and becoming the *khalifah*,
al-Ma'mun, the 7th 'Abbasid caliph, who was also the contemporary of
al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as), decided to relieve himself of this internal
distress and constant anxiety and put an end to Shi'ah faith by some
means other than coercion and oppression.

The policy which al-Ma'mun adopted in order to carry out this plan was
to offer his succession to al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as) in order to defame
the Imam (as) in the eyes of the Shi'ahs by accusing him of entering the
corrupt system of *khilafah* and to wash away people's minds the faith
in the eminence and the immaculateness of the Imam (as). In this way, he
thought, no distinction would be left out for the position of *Imamah*
which is the basis of Shi'i faith and the very foundation of this
religion would be automatically collapsed.

The implementation of this policy would also bring another success, that
is, it would stop the successive movements of *Banu Fatimah* which were
pursued to overthrow the *khilafah* of the Abbasids; because when the
*Banu Fatimah* would see the transfer of *khilafah* to themselves, they
would naturally refrain from carrying out bloody uprisings. Certainly,
after this plan was implemented, the killing of al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as)
would not be a difficult task for al-Ma'mun.

Al-Ma'mun, primarily, invited the Imam (as) to take over the *khilafah*
and after that he invited him to accept the succession. After
al-Ma'mun's accentuation, insistence, and finally threat, the Imam (as)
accepted the succession conditionally, provided that he would have
nothing to do with dismissals, appointments, and interference in high
positions and matters.

In such a situation, the Imam (as) embarked on guiding the people and
held discussions with men of different faiths and religions as far as he
could. He also gave valuable statements and explanations concerning the
Islamic sciences and the facts of religion (al-Ma'mun was also
excessively interested in religious discussions.)

The speeches delivered by al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as) on the principles of
Islamic knowledge and sciences are equal in number to those delivered by
*the Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as) and exceed the number of speeches
delivered by all the other Imams (as) in these fields.

One of the blessings of the Imam (as) was that he was presented with a
large number of *ahadith* by Shi'ahs, which had reached them through the
Imam's reverend fathers (as), and among these under the direction of the
Imam (as) some of the *"ahadith"* which were forged and fabricated by
wicked people, were identified and eliminated.

When the Imam (as) travelled from Madinah to Marw as the "successor of
the *khalifah*" he aroused an amazing enthusiasm among the people all
through his journey, particularly in Iran. The people rushed from
everywhere to meet him, eagerly surrounded him, and learned the
teachings and precepts of Islam.

By the unprecedented and surprising attention that the people paid to
the Imam (as), al-Ma'mun found out that his policy was erroneous. In
order to make reparation for his political failure, al-Ma'mun poisoned
and martyred al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as). Afterwards, the old policy of the
*khulafa'* towards the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and their Shi'ah followers was
again pursued.

Al-'Imam Muhammad Al-Taqi (as), Al-'Imam 'Ali Al-Naqi (as), and Al-'Imam Al-Hasan Al-'Askari (as)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The environment in which these three honorable Imams (as) lived was
identical. After the martyrdom of al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as), al-Ma'mun
summoned al-'Imam Muhammad al-Taqi. (as), who was the only son of
al-'Imam al-Ridha’ (as) to Baghdah and treated him kindly and
affectionately and allowed his daughter to marry the Imam (as) and kept
the Imam (as) in his own house with full honour.

Although this conduct seemed friendly, but, through this policy,
al-Ma'mun had actually placed the Imam (as) under his strict control in
all respects.

Similar circumstances and living conditions continued for al-'Imam 'Ali
al-Naqi (as) and al-'Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (as) in Samarra', which
was the capital of *khilafah* during their *Imamah*; they were in fact
in prison.

The period of *Imamah* of these three reverend Imams (as) is fifty-seven
years altogether. The number of Shi'ahs, who were residing in Iran,
Iraq, and Syria at the time, was considerably large and had reached
hundreds of thousands, among whom there were thousands of scholars of
*Hadith*. In spite of this, the *ahadith* related from these three Imams
(as) are very few. Also, the lifetime of these three Imams (as) was
short.

The ninth Imam (as), the tenth Imam (as), and the eleventh Imam (as)
were martyred when they were twenty-five, forty, and twenty-seven years,
respectively. All these points serve as a clear evidence that the
control, surveillance, and sabotage of the antagonists was very strict
during their period and that these great Imams (as) were unable to
perform their duties freely. Nevertheless, valuable *ahadith* have
reached us from these three great Imams (as) on the *Usul al-Din* (the
fundamental principles of Islam for believing in) and the *Furu' al-Din*
(the secondary principles of Islam for actions).

Imam Al-'Asr, Muhammad Al-Mahdi Al-Maw'ud (as)
----------------------------------------------

During the time of al-'Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (as), the institution of
the *khilafah* had decided to kill the successor of the Imam (as) by all
the ways and means possible in an effort to put an end to the subject of
*Imamah* and consequently to Shi'ah faith. In addition to other aspects,
al-Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (as) was also under surveillance from this
point of view.

It was for this reason that the birth of al-'Imam al-Mahdi (as) was kept
secret. Until he became six, till his honourable father was alive,
al-'Imam al-Mahdi (as) was kept out of sight and no one could see him
other than a few devoted and trustworthy Shi'ahs.

After the martyrdom of his father, al-'Imam al-Mahdi (as) had
*al-Ghaybat al-Sughra* (the Short Occultation of al-'Imam Muhammad
al-Ma'hdi [as]) by the order of Allah and answered the questions of the
Shi'ahs and resolved their problems through *Al-Nuwwab al-Arba'ah* (the
Four Deputies of *Imam al-'Asr* (as) who had successively attained the
eminent position of being the Imam's (as) Deputy.

The Imam (as) then had *al-Ghaybat al-Kubra* (the Great Occultation of
al-'Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi [as]) until the time when he will appear by
the order of Allah to administer justice in the whole world after it
gets overwhelmed with injustice and oppression.

A large number of *ahadith* of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams (as)
have. been related by both Sunnis and Shi'ahs regarding al-'Imam
al-Mahdi (as) and the characteristics of his absence and appearance.
Also, a great number of Shi'ah dignitaries had met the Imam (as) during
the lifetime of his honorable father and had seen his unique personality
and had received the good tidings of his *Imamah* from his honorable
father.

Furthermore, in the sections on *Nubuwwah* and *Imamah* we have arrived
at this conclusion that the human world could never exist without the
religion of Allah and an Imam who is the supporter and guardian of the
religion of Allah.

The Moral Conclusion Derived From the Policy of the Leaders of Religion
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

In sum up, it becomes evident from the history of the prophets of Allah
and the religious leaders that they were realists and followers of truth
and used to invite the human world towards realism and adherence to
truth. They did not refrain from any self-sacrifice and self-indulgence
in this regard.

In other words, they tried that both individuals and human society be
brought up and developed as ought to be. They also wanted to see the
people adorned by a series of correct thoughts and beliefs without being
governed by ignorance or a series of superstitious thoughts.

They wanted to see the people accustomed to the especial human
disposition without blemishing human purity with an animalistic
disposition and by thinking of nothing but devouring one another and
filling their belly like beasts and grazing animals. They intended to
make men apply the treasure of humanity to their lives in order to gain
prosperity in favor of humanity.

Thus, they were the people who did not look for their own prosperity
alone, rather they recognized no other duty for the cause of the
prosperity of the society and for the world of humanity.

They saw their own welfare and prosperity (the man does not want
anything other than this) in being benevolent to others and wanted other
people to be so as well; that is, they wanted everybody to like for all
whatever they liked for themselves and not to desire for others whatever
they did not desire for themselves.

It was due to this realism and adherence to truth that these great men
found out the significance of this general human duty (benevolence) and
other minor duties which are its ramifications and were endowed with the
epithets of self-denial and self-sacrifice.

For this very reason, they did not hesitate to offer their lives and
properties for the cause of truth. They cut the root of any attributes
which resulted malevolence. They did not have stinginess for the lives
and properties of others. They were disgusted with egotism and
stinginess. They did not tell lies, nor did they slander other people.
They did not transgress upon the honor and prestige of others.

The explanation of these epithets and their impact should be studied in
more detail in the section on "Ethics".


