(3) the Duty of Man Towards Others
==================================

These duties can be described as follows:

**THE DUTY OF MAN TOWARDS HIS PARENTS**

Parents are the means of the creation of a child and the imparters of
his initial education and training; therefore, the holy religion of
Islam has placed a great deal of emphasis on children's obeying to them
and on their respect to an extent that the Almighty Allah has commanded
the people to be kind and generous to their parents right after
mentioning Tawhid (the Oneness of Allah) and states:

"And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him and
has commanded goodness to your parents...(17:23)." In ahadith
enumerating mortal sins, misconduct towards parents ranks second to
shirk (polytheism). The Almighty Allah states:

"...If either or both of them reach old age with you, say not to them
(so much as) "ugh" nor chide them, and speak to them generous words. And
make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion, and say: 'O
my Lord! have compassion on them, similar to what they had on me when
they brought me up (when I was) little' (17:23-24)."

How well did an old woman say to her child when she saw him powerful
and bulky.

If you recalled your childhood
When you were helpless in my arms,
You would not treat me unkindly today
As you are a brave man and I am an old woman.

In the holy religion of Islam, obedience of the parents is wajib except
in the case when they order the children to give up one of the wajib
deeds of religion or perform a religiously haram act. It has been proven
by experience that those who tease their parents do not remain happy and
prosperous in their lives and consequently they will not attain
salvation.

**THE RIGHTS OF PARENTS**

In a family circle, the relationship of parents to their children is
like that of the roots of a tree to its branches because the continuity
and survival of the branches of the tree depend upon its roots. Parents
are also the founders of the children's life. Since the human society is
comprised of the two categories, i.e., parents and children, parents are
the main roots of the human society.

Besides being an utmost ingratitude and cowardice, misbehaviour towards
the parents and annoying them also cause the decadence of humanity and
the annihilation of the society. This is because the disrespect of
children towards their parents will be reflected by the parents in the
form of unkindliness and disfavour towards them. On the other hand, if
the children look towards their parents with disrespect and lowliness,
they cannot expect anything better from their own children and will not
depend upon the help of their children when they reach the age of
debility and infirmity. Thus they naturally become disappointed to form
a family, as is the case with many of the young people of the present
age.

Generalization of this kind of thinking will definitely obstruct the
path of regeneration and reproduction, because a wise man will never
devote his valuable life to nurture a young tree from whose fruits he
will not benefit, under whose shadow he will not sit, and that looking
towards it will render him no benefit but grief and anguish. We might
assume that the governments can encourage the people to set up families
by giving them various rewards and incentives and thus eliminate the
problems of regeneration and reproduction; but it should be noted that
the social methods and customs that are devoid of natural backing (like
parent-children affection) cannot last.

Besides this fact, not benefiting from one of the natural instincts
will inevitably deprive man of a series of pure spiritual pleasures.

**THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN ON PARENTS**

The works that a man must perform for someone who is the beneficiary
are called huquq (rights) and the works that a person must perform are
called duties, orders, and obligations. For instance, it is the duty of
an employer to pay the wages of his employee and it is the right of the
employee to receive it after performing a task for him. If the employer
does not pay the wages, the employee can demand it and defend his
right.

Since man is created in such a manner that his life is not everlasting
in this world and because willingly or not he dies after some time,
Allah has established the method of reproduction, has provided people
with the means of reproduction, and has directed man's inner feelings
towards it in order to safeguard the mankind from total annihilation.

It is because of this overall mobilization that man naturally considers
his child to be an inherent part of himself and assumes his child's
survival to be that of his own. For this very reason, man goes through
all kinds of endeavours and makes efforts for the comfort and happiness
of his children and endures various hardships, for he considers the
annihilation of his child or his child's personality to be his own
annihilation or the annihilation of his own personality.

Indeed, man obeys the order of the world of creation which demands the
survival of mankind. Thus it is the duty of parents to implement the
order enjoined by conscience and religious laws with regard to their
children and to bring them up very well, so that they may grow into
decent human beings. Parents are also duty bound to consider rightful
for their children those things that they consider rightful for
themselves from the viewpoint of humanity. Some of the duties of parents
are as given below.

(1) Parents must establish and make firm the foundation of praiseworthy
ethics and decent attributes in the natures of their children from the
very first day that they begin to understand words and signs. They must
not frighten their children with superstitious subjects as much as they
can. They must prevent them from committing evil and unchaste acts. The
parents, too, must avoid lying, ill-speaking, and using bad language and
obscene words in front of the children. The parents should perform
decent deeds, so that the children might be brought up as chaste and
magnanimous people. Parents must endeavour and show motivation and
justice, so as to transfer to their children the love for justice and
humanity through the law of "the transfer of ethics" in order to keep
their children away from oppression, meanness, and selfish ness.

(2) Parents should patronize their children for their eating, sleeping,
and other requirements for living until they attain the age of
discernment. They must have consideration for the physical health of
their children so that they may have a healthy body and a strong mind
and temper ready to be educated and trained.

(3) Parents should put their children under the care of a teacher from
the time they get aptitude for education (usually from seventh year of
their age). Parents should make every effort to place their children.
under the care of a decent teacher, so that they may get good and
desirable impressions from what they hear and so that such a teacher
would become the source of inspiration and cause the refinement of their
spirit, the purification of their soul, and the cultivation of their
ethics.

(4) Parents should take their children along with them to gatherings in
order to familiarize them with social customs and praiseworthy etiquette
when their age calls for participation in social gatherings or family
visits.

**RESPECT FOR THE ELDERS**

It is also required to respect the elders, as the Holy Prophet (SA)
states: "The glorification and respect for the elders is the
glorification and respect for Allah."

**MAN'S DUTY TOWARDS HIS RELATIVES**

The paternal and maternal relatives, who have a consanguineous and near
relationship, are the natural means for the formation of the society.
Due to the similarity of blood and cells, man becomes part of a family.
For the sake of this unity and natural relationship, Islam orders its
followers to observe the kinship bonds with kindness. Strong
recommendations have been made in the Qur'an and the ahadith of
religious leaders in this respect. The Almighty Allah states:

"...And be careful of (your duty to) Allah, by Whom you demand one of
another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship; surely Allah
ever watches over you (4:1)." The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "I enjoin my
Ummah (people) to observe the kinship bonds with kindness. Even if the
relatives are separated from one another by a year-long distance, they
should not disconnect the kinship bonds of their relationship."

**MAN'S DUTY TOWARDS HIS NEIGHBOURS**

Since neighbours very often come in contact with one another due to the
proximity of their residential area and naturally - as they constitute a
larger family, the good behaviour and the misbehaviour of one of them
will have more effect on other neighbours than that of all others.

He, who spends the night with clamour in his house, does not annoy
anyone residing in the remote corner of the city, but he disturbs his
neighbour's peace. A wealthy man who spends his life in feasting and
drinking in his beautiful palace is far away from the sight of the poor,
but he burns the heart of his indigent neighbour living in a clay-hut.
Surely, a day will come when this wealthy man will duly be punished. For
this reason, taking care of the neighbours has been highly emphasized in
the holy religion of Islam.

The Holy Prophet (SA) stated: "Jibril recommended to me about the
neighbours to such an extent that I thought the Almighty Allah would
appoint one's neighbour as one of his heirs." He also stated: "whoever
believes in Allah and in Ma'ad, never does injustice to his neighbour,
lends him money if he asks for it, and shares his grief and happiness.
One should not annoy his neighbour even if he is an unbeliever."

He also states: "He, who hurts his neighbour, will not smell the
fragrance of Paradise and he, who disregards the rights of his
neighbour, is not my follower. Whoever has had enough to eat and does
not help his neighbour after knowing that he is hungry, is not a
Muslim."

**MAN'S DUTY TOWARDS THE INFERIOR AND THE POOR**

There is no doubt that the establishment of a society is to fulfil the
needs of the individuals. The most important duty of the members of any
society is to help the helpless and the weak and to eliminate in some
way the needs of those who are unable to eliminate these by themselves.
It has been thoroughly clarified nowadays that the carelessness of the
rich towards the difficulties of the poor is the greatest danger that
can destroy a society and that the rich will be the first victim of this
danger.

Taking this danger into consideration, fourteen centuries ago, Islam
ordered the rich to distribute a portion of their wealth among the poor
and the helpless annually. If the said amount is sufficient to eliminate
the needs of the poor, it is recommended that the rich donate as much as
they can for the cause of Allah so as to improve the living conditions
of the poor.

The Almighty Allah states:

"By no means shall you attain to righteousness until you spend
(benevevolently) out of what you love... (3:92)." The ahadith on the
subject of serving the humanity are innumerable. The Holy Prophet (SA)
stated: "The best of men is one who is more beneficial for the people."
He also stated: "In Ma'ad, a person who has taken greater steps towards
charitable acts for the servants of Allah will be placed in a higher
status before the Almighty Allah."

Help friends at the time of calamity so that you may have favours of
Allah. Somehow you will someday reap the seeds of goodness that you sow
today.

**MAN'S DUTY TOWARDS THE SOCIETY**

As we know, human beings work with joint effort. They take advantage of
each others' endeavours to eliminate the needs of their life. The
society established by these individuals is similar to a "great man" and
each individual is like an organ of this great man's body.

Each organ of the body performs its own specific function and makes up
for its own weaknesses by benefiting from the functions of other organs;
that is, in its sphere of activity, each organ provides its interests
while providing the interests of other organs and continues its life in
the light of the life of other organs. If some organs acted selfishly
and were of no use to other organs; for example, if while the hands or
feet were functioning, the eyes did not cooperate with them or if the
mouth only contented itself with chewing and enjoying the food without
swallowing it to satisfy the needs of the stomach, man would die and, as
a result, the same self-centred and self-seeking organ would also die.

The duty of the members of a society is exactly like the duty of the
organs of a body, i.e., man must look for his interests within the
framework of the interests of the society. He must consider what
benefits the society would derive from his efforts so that by his
efforts all are benefited and he also gets benefited. He must defend the
rights of others so that his own rights would not be violated. This is a
fact which we realize with our Allah-given nature. The holy religion of
Islam, which is established on the basis of nature and creation, does
not have the commandments and views other than these on this matter.

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "A Muslim is one from whose hand and
tongue Muslims are safe."

He further states: "Muslims are brothers and are like a single-hand,
single-heart, and single-direction against aliens." He also states:
"Whoever does not care about the affairs of the Muslims is not a
Muslim."

For the Battle of Tabuk when the Holy Prophet (SA) set out with the
army of Islam for the frontier of Rome, three Muslims did not
participate in the battle. After the return of the army of Islam, when
these three persons welcomed and greeted the Holy Prophet (SA), the
Prophet (SA) turned his face and did not answer their greetings. In the
like manner, the Muslims also turned their faces from these three men.
No one, in Madinah, not even their wives, talked to them. Consequently,
they became helpless and sought refuge in the mountains of Madinah and
engaged themselves in repentance and contrition until Allah accepted
their repentance after several days and then they returned to the
city.

**JUSTICE**

In the Qur'an and the ahadith of the religious leaders, justice is of
two kinds: individual and social. Both are highly regarded by the holy
religion of Islam.

**INDIVIDUAL JUSTICE**

The individual justice means that the man should abstain from
falsehood, backbiting, and other major sins. He should not insist on
committing other sins. He who is endowed with this quality is called
'Adil (just). According to the Islamic regulations, if such a man has
educational ability as well, he can take charge of judicial and
governmental positions, or he can become a religious authority or
maintain other social positions. But the one who is deprived of this
religious personality cannot enjoy these privileges even though he may
be a scholar.

SOCIAL JUSTICE

Social justice means that man should not trespass upon the rights of
others. He should consider all the people equal by the divine laws. He
should not exceed justice in implementing religious laws. He must not be
influenced by feelings and sentiments. He must not deviate from the
right path. The Almighty Allah states:

"Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice...(16:90)."

Again He states:

"...And that when you judge between people you judge with
justice...(4:58)." Orders have been issued in many Qur'anic verses and
ahadith to consider justice in words and deeds. In several cases, the
Almighty Allah has explicitly cursed the oppressors.

**TYRANNY AND OPPRESSION**

The Almighty Allah has repeatedly mentioned about tyranny in His Divine
Book and has reproached this indecent quality which is a characteristic
of the beasts (in two-thirds of the number of Surahs of the Holy Qur'an,
which are 114, there is a discussion on tyranny). There is no one who
has not felt the badness and unfairness of tyranny by his own nature or
who more or less does not know what painful calamities have come upon
human society, what bloodsheds have taken place, and what a large number
of houses have been demolished due to tyranny and oppression.

It has been proven by experience that the palace of tyranny will not
last long no matter how strong it may be and sooner or later, it will
collapse on the heads of the oppressors. The Almighty Allah states:
"...Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people (6:144)." Religious
authorities have also stated: "Monarchy and kingdom will last with
blasphemy, but these will not stabilise with tyranny and oppression."

**SOCIABILITY**

Being bound to live in a society, man has no escape from the company of
people. Undoubtedly, man associates with other people to protect his own
social status, to further h is material and spiritual advancement day by
day, and to solve the difficulties of his life better and with greater
ease.

Thus he must behave with other people in such a way so as to attain
endearment, to augment his social honour day by day, and to add to the
number of his friends. If people see unfriendliness or bitterness in the
behaviour of others, their hearts will be filled with abomination and
anguish. Finally, a day will come when everyone will escape from the
company of such a person and he will be hated and disfavoured by others.
He must then live all alone and as a stranger in his native land. This
is one of the most bitter and most unpleasant examples of man's
misfortune. This is what the holy religion of Islam has enjoined its
followers to have good social behaviour and has prescribed the best
etiquettes and instructions in this respect. For example, Islam has
ordered Muslims to greet when they meet one another and has considered
the person who greets first to be superior to the other.

The Holy Prophet (SA) took the lead in greeting others. He even greeted
women and children. If someone greeted the Holy Prophet (SA), he would
in turn greet him better.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
(greeting) than it or return it...(4:86)." Allah has also stated that
man should show humbleness and modesty in his association with people
and should respect others commensurate with their social status.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And the servants of the Beneficent Allah are they who walk on the
earth in humbleness...(25:63)." The point that should be mentioned is
that humbleness and modesty do not mean that man should degrade himself
before the people and thus hurt his personality, rather these mean that
man should not show off his superiorities and honours to the people and
should not associate with himself other extraordinary privileges. One
must not consider the people degraded and insignificant. Similarly,
respect to the people does not mean that one should respect others to an
extent bordering on flattery and buttering, rather it means that one
must value everyone according to his religious and social status. One
should respect the dignitaries commensurate with their rank and status.
One must also respect the others according to their observation of human
qualities.

Again paying respect to people does not mean that m an should keep mum
and overlook the indecent acts of people. Neither it means that man
should associate with the people in a gathering in which all act against
human prestige or carry out an action against religious principles. It
doesn't mean that man should go with the stream for the fear of
defamation either, for the people should, in fact, be respected on the
basis of their human dignity and their religious and moral values, not
because of their physique and stature. If a man loses his human dignity
and religious value, there will be no reason for his being respected by
the others.

The Holy Prophet (SA) stated: "One should not commit a sin before Allah
for the sake of obeying others."

**TEASING PEOPLE AND MISCHIEVOUSNESS**

These two attributes are closely linked together, for teasing people
means annoying them and inflicting pain on them either by means of the
tongue, such as cursing and using words which annoy others, or by means
of the hands, such as performing an action to make the people unhappy.
Mischievousness means doing things to cause evil for the people. At any
rate, these two attributes are at the opposite pole of the dreams of
comfort of life and peace of mind, for the sake of which, man has
established the society. Therefore, the religion of Islam, which gives
the top priority to the interests of the society, has forbidden the
people to tease others and to make mischief, as the Almighty Allah
states:

"And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the believing
women without their having earned (it), they are guilty indeed of a
false accusation and a manifest sin (33:58)." The Holy Prophet (SA)
states: "Whoever bothers a Muslim, has bothered me and bothering me is
bothering Allah. Such a person has been cursed in the Tawrat, the Injil,
and the Qur'an." He also states: "One, who casts an angry glance on a
Muslim and frightens him, will be frightened by Allah on the Day of
Judgement."

**ASSOCIATION WITH THE GOOD PEOPLE**

Although man associates with a large number of people, he is obliged to
associate with some people more than others due to the exigency of his
life. These are the people who are called "friends."

Surely, the main cause for this friendship and relationship is a kind
of similarity in ethics, manners, profession, and the like which exist
between the two persons or among a group of individuals. Since
companionship gradually transfers the habits and character of one of the
two companions to the other, a man must choose the company of good
people, for in this case, the decent ethics of his friends will be
transferred to him and he will benefit from their taintless and
benevolent friendship and cooperation. He will also be enthusiastic in
the continuation of their friendship. Furthermore, he will improve his
own social value and dignity among the people.

Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (AS) states: "Your best friend is the one who
leads you to do good deeds." He also states: "Man is evaluated on the
basis of the friends he chooses." First let me know with whom you have
associated, so that I can describe your identity. It is the value of
your acquaintances, that determines the value and worth of your life.

**COMPANIONSHIP WITH THE BAD PEOPLE**

Companionship with the bad people and the evil-doers is the source of
all sorts of wretchedness and misfortune. To clarify this matter, it
suffices to say that if we ask the criminals and the evil-doers such as
thieves and bandits the cause of their aberration and deviation, they
will undoubtedly reply that the companionship and association with bad
people have put them in such a situation. From among a thousand wicked
and defiled people, not even one can be found who has chosen an indecent
course of action deliberately.

Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (AS), states: "Shun the companionship of bad
people, for a bad friend makes you similar to himself. Unless he
succeeds in this respect, he will not accept you as a friend." 'Ali (AS)
also states: "Avoid the friendship of an evildoer, for he will sell you
for a trivial thing." Associate less with bad people, for you will be
distressed; since human nature is apt to acquire habits,

**TRUTHFULNESS**

The relationship of human beings with one another, which is the basis
of human society, is established through speaking. Thus true words that
reveal a concealed reality to man are one of the essential bases of the
society. Great advantages, which are always necessary for a society, are
acquired by means of telling the truth.

The advantages of truthfulness can be summarized in a few sentences as
follows:

(1) A truthful person is trusted by his fellow-men and relieves them of
determining the truthfulness of his remarks.

(2) A veracious person is honoured by his conscience and is relieved of
the pain of falsehood.

(3) A truthful person keeps his promise. He will not be disloyal to
what he is entrusted with, for truthfulness in action is not different
from truthfulness in words.

(4) Many differences of opinion and disputes will be eliminated as a
result of truthfulness, for the main reason for most quarrels is the
denial of truth and reality by either or both parties.

(5) As a result of truthfulness, a large part of moral imperfections
and violations of laws and provisions is eliminated automatically,
because most people lie in a bid to cover these kinds of deeds and
actions.

Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (AS) states: "A true Muslim is one who prefers
truthfulness, although it may be to his detriment, over falsehood from
which he may benefit; and gets internal satisfaction as a result of this
preference."

**THE DISADVANTAGES OF FALSEHOOD**

From the aforementioned statements, the disadvantages of falsehood also
become clear. A liar is the wicked enemy of human society. He endeavours
to ruin the society by his falsehood which is a big crime. This is
because falsehood resembles narcotics which kill the intelligence and
commonsense of the society and hide the reality. Falsehood is also
similar to alcoholic beverages which intoxicate the people and render
them unable to distinguish between good and bad.

Therefore, Islam considers falsehood as one of the mortal sins and does
not believe in any religious stature of a liar. The Holy Prophet (SA)
has stated: "Three groups of people are munafiqin even if they recite
salat and observe sawm. They are the liars, those who do not keep their
promise, and those who are disloyal to what they are entrusted with."
Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (AS) also states: "Man derives pleasure from his
faith when he gives up falsehood; even he should give up his lying which
may be for fun sake."

Falsehood has not only been introduced as a sin and an indecent deed in
Islam, but its indecency and unfairness is also clearly perceived by
commonsense. The prevalence of this indecent deed in the society will
soon shatter the confidence of the people towards one another which is
the only basis in their social relationship. By the disruption of such a
relationship, the people will, in effect, live in isolation because of
having utmost anxiety from one another although they may apparently seem
to be living in a knitted society.

Man always deals with external matters in his life. He keeps himself
alive through his activities and by bringing about changes in matters
and thus fulfils his desires. This creature who works by commonsense and
will power has based his vast and extensive life on knowledge. His work
is directly related to the knowledge available to him. He constantly
adjusts his learnings and performs his external activities
accordingly.

Therefore, receiving true information is essential for man and is of
prime importance. If the correct outside news are not revealed to man,
for instance, if he sees the ditch as a road and the road as a ditch, or
if he sees the distant as the nearby and the nearby as the distant, or
if he receives the news in an untrue way, he will not be able to
continue his living. Thus it becomes clear that falsehood is a serious
threat to social life and a liar is a person without any personality and
dignity. He is the enemy of the society and his remarks are considered
invalid and unreliable by the people. He himself is cursed by Allah.

**BACKBITING AND LIBEL**

Slandering others and backbiting them, if true, are called backbiting,
and if wrong, are called libel and sometimes calumny. Surely, the
Almighty Allah has not created man (except the prophets and the Imams)
free from sins. As a result of his shortcomings, man is fallible and all
people live behind the curtain with which the Almighty Allah has covered
their deeds by His Divine Wisdom. If this divine covering is lifted from
over the defects and shortcomings of the people, they will be repugnant
from one another and will avoid the company of each other, thus leading
to the destruction of the foundation of their society. Therefore, the
Almighty Allah has declared backbiting as haram, so that everyone may
live in peace from backbiting by one another and the outwardly
appearance of the environment of their lives would seem adorned until
gradually the same outward beauty corrects the internal obscenity.

The Almighty Allah states:

"...Nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat
the flesh of his dead brother?....(49:12)." The sin and obscenity of
libel is definitely greater than backbiting and the wise are thoroughly
aware of its obscenity. In His words, the Almighty Allah has made the
badness and obscenity of libel quite clear and states:

"Only they forge the lie who do not believe...(16:105)."

**DAMAGING THE PRESTIGE OF PEOPLE**

Damaging one's chastity is a mortal sin in Islam and, in different
cases, severe punishments such as whipping, killing, and stoning to
death have been laid down for it. Allowing the commitment of this
indecent deed, although it may have been agreed upon by both the
parties, will shake the foundation of families which is of prime
importance in Islam and will cease the proceeding of the precepts of
inheritance and the like. Finally, it makes parent-child affection and
relationship invalid and leads to the disappearance of the true
guarantee of society which is the natural result of reproduction.

**SELF-RESPECT AND HONESTY**

The world of creation, that has created man sociable and in need of
cooperation, has prepared him in such a way as to be able to manage his
own affairs in the society with his own capability and to handle his
living from what he gains in his life.

With consideration of what has already been discussed above, there
remains no doubt that the attribute of self-respect means that man
should take advantage of Allah-given powers in his life and should
utilise them for attaining his goals. He must not rely upon the powers
of others and this, indeed, is one of the natural and praiseworthy
qualities of man. Self-respect is like a barrier which protects man from
an inferior life and from many unjust acts and indecent deeds. Whoever
is not endowed with self-respect and fixes his eyes on others, would
easily sell his will power and personality to others and would offer
whatever he is asked for, even if it may be his natural freedom,
prestige, honour, and dignity.

Most crimes such as murder, banditry, theft, pickpocketing, the crime
of lying, flattery, disloyalty to one's country, reliance on foreigners,
and the like are the evil consequences of greed and reliance upon
others. But whoever wears the crown of honour of self-respect, does not
submit himself to any splendour but the splendour of the Almighty Allah,
does not yield to any authority and pomp, and always defends what he
considers to be true. self-respect is the best means by which one can
acquire the attribute of honesty and safeguard it.

**BENEVOLENCE AND HELPING THE NEEDY**

It is certain that in any society, the poor and the helpless deserve
help. It is the duty of the rich to help the poor and not to trample
upon this certain right. The holy religion of Islam has also set out
strict rules concerning the observation of this right. It holds the rich
responsible to help the weak and the poor.

In the Holy Qur'an, the Almighty Allah has introduced Himself as
Benevolent, Beneficent, and Merciful. Allah has encouraged His servants
to attain these praiseworthy attributes to the extent that He states:
"Allah is with benefactors;" and He also states: "Whatever you spend in
the way of Allah is to your own advantage." Elsewhere, He states:
"Whatever you spend in the way of Allah will be returned unto you and
you will not sustain a loss."

Study and investigation into the social conditions and also in the
advantages of benevolence clarify the context of these verses, for,
indeed, all forces of the society work for every individual. In a
society where a group of helpless people fail to make efforts due to
insolvency, the acquisition of income diminishes proportionately and its
evil consequences embrace all people. In such a society, a time will
come when the rich become the poorest of all. But if the rich help the
poor with their benevolence and generosity, they will gain the following
outstanding results:

(1) By this action, they gain the affection of others and captivate the
hearts of a group of people.

(2) They gain a great deal of respect with an insignificant amount of
money.

(3) They attain people's support, because people take sides with the
benefactors.

(4) They are safe from the danger of the accumulation of the vengeance
and anger of the poor which harm the good and the bad together. (5) The
trivial money that they spend in the way of Allah will increase in
amount and return unto them as a result of proper running of the
economy. There are innumerable Qur'anic verses and ahadith regarding the
attribute of spending in the way of Allah and also in regard to the
encouragement and persuasion for this noble deed.

**COOPERATION**

Benevolence and beneficence, mentioned earlier, are one of the various
branches of cooperation which forms the basis of human society, for the
society exists when all individuals help one another by means of which
all may enjoy good and sound living conditions and will meet their
requirements of life. It should not be imagined that the holy religion
of Islam has demanded benevolence only in financial matters, rather it
is one of the aims of Islam and also one of the demands of man's
conscience to offer all kinds of help to every helpless, although he may
not be in need of money.

To teach an illiterate, to help a blind, to guide a misled, to assist
an oppressed person, and... are all the true acts of benevolence and
beneficence and a part of the cooperation whose credibility we have
approved and confirmed on the very first day of the establishment of the
society. It is self-evident that if man fails to perform a part of minor
tasks, he will not perform principal tasks and if he disregards the
insignificant minor duties, he will refuse to undertake general and
important obligations.

**ARRANGING CHARITIES AND RELIEFS**

Benevolence is praiseworthy when it renders good results. Of course,
the more general and lasting the results, the more praiseworthy and
better would be the benevolence. The treatment of a patient is an act of
benevolence and beneficence, but construction and management of a
hospital which treats hundreds of patients daily cannot be compared with
this act. Teaching a student is praiseworthy, but it can never reach the
value of setting up an institution which turns out hundreds of
graduating scholars annually. This is why general donations, public
charities and reliefs are the acts of highest benevolence and
beneficence.

In Islamic terminology, this public charity is interpreted as "standing
charity". The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "Two things provide man with
honour: a righteous child and standing charity." According to the Holy
Book and the ahadith, as long as the standing charity exists the
Almighty Allah considers its benefactions for the one who has
established this charity.

SELF-SACRIFICE There is no doubt that, in the human conscience, the
genuine life and honest living are of equal importance. A life without
honour and devoid of man's prosperity is not a life indeed, rather it is
a death much bitter and more unpleasant than natural death. A man who
maintains value for his honour and prosperity should escape from such a
mean life resembling death. In whatever environment a man lives and to
whatever policies he may be inclined, he will understand with his
Allah-given nature that death for the cause of sanctification is
prosperity itself although this matter is clearer in the logic of
religion than in any other logic and is far away from supposition and
superstition. This is because whoever defends his religious society and
gives his life for this cause, is aware that he has not deprived himself
of any privileges and that he will get a sweeter, more valuable, and
everlasting life in return for giving his sweet and short-span life for
the cause of Allah. Truly, his prosperity is immortal.

The Almighty Allah states in His words:

"And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead,. nay, they
are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord (3:169)." But in
non-religious societies which consider human life confined to the
short-span life of this world only, it can never be said that man will
be again alive in the Hereafter or will attain happiness and prosperity,
except that it is inculcated upon the people, through suppositions and
superstitions, that if a man is, for example, killed for the cause of
his country or for national sanctities, his name will be entered in the
list of the devoted and self-sacrificing persons of the nation and will
be inscribed in gold in the history book and thus he will remain alive
forever.

The praise and sanctification for martyrdom and getting killed in the
way of Allah have not been made in Islam so much for any other good
deed.

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "There is always a good deed surpassing
other good deeds. But no good deed can surpass martyrdom." Muslims of
the early period of Islam asked forgiveness from the Holy Prophet (SA)
and, as a result of the prayers of the Holy Prophet (SA), they attained
the elevated rank of martyrdom. They never used to cry for those who
were martyred, knowing that the martyrs were alive and not dead.

**GENEROSITY AND DONATION OF MONEY**

The role that wealth plays in regulation of life needs no explanation.
Many people consider life the same as wealth and do not believe in any
virtue and honour for man except property and wealth. They direct all
their activities towards accumulating and saving money. As a result of
this fascination and greed, they get entangled in stinginess. Such
people deprive others and sometimes degrade themselves further and
submit to meanness and miserliness, thus depriving themselves of
enjoying their own wealth as well. Neither they enjoy themselves nor
they give money to others. They only enjoy accumulating money.

Those who are entangled with the indecent attribute of miserliness
(certainly, those who are involved in stinginess are even meaner than
them) lose their human nature and become destitute in their lives
because: (1) They only look for their own happiness, prosperity, and
comfort and believe in individual life, although human nature advocates
social life for us and the individual life, led in any manner, is doomed
to destruction.

(2) By showing off their authority to others, they attract towards
themselves the poor and the needy due to their humility. Although they d
o not relieve the sufferings of the afflicted, they try to make the
needy pay respect to them. They take the poor as slaves and foster the
spirit of idol-worshipping. Consequently, human courage, bravery,
magnanimity, and pride will be eradicated from the society.

(3) Trampling upon the pure feelings of affection, friendship,
philanthropy, compassion, and benevolence, they promote all kinds of
felony, crime, meanness, and wickedness in the society. This is because
the most powerful natural factor of crime and offence such as
backbiting, incontinence, theft, banditry, murder, and poverty cannot be
found among the needy. These factors are the anger, rancour, and feeling
of revenge which are implanted in the hearts of the afflicted and
distressed by the wealthy people and which are aggravated by the stingy
rich people. That is why a stingy person in a society is, in fact, the
first enemy of that society and is always affected by the anger and
severe punishment of Allah and the hatred of the inhabitants of the
world.

There are many verses in the Holy Qur'an reproaching and blaming the
mean quality of stinginess and greed on the one hand, and on praising
the attribute of generosity, spending in the way of Allah, and helping
the poor and needy on the other. In His words, the Almighty Allah
promises that He will return the property that is donated ten times and,
in some instances, seventy and up to seven hundred times and more to the
donor.

It has also been proved through experience that the wealth of those who
are generous, who help the poor generously, and who cater for the
shortcomings of the human society is increased day by day. Those who
resolve the difficulties of others will not face difficulties
themselves. No one has ever seen any knot in the comb. If they
occasionally face difficulties, all people will sympathize with them.
Whatever help they have extended to others will collectively return unto
them.

Furthermore, like honourable men, they have set their conscience at
peace by doing good deeds and have responded to the Divine call
concerning the wajib and mustahabb obligations. They have used the pure
feelings of humanity through kindness, compassion, philanthropy, and
benevolence and have acquired popularity and an immaculate respect from
the people. Finally, they have gained the satisfaction of the Almighty
Allah and the everlasting prosperity at the lowest cost.


