Ma'ad (Resurrection)
====================

*Ma'ad* is one of the three pillars of the holy religion of Islam and
one of the essentials of this pure religion. Every man (without any
exception) can tell the difference between good and evil deeds with his
Allah-granted nature and considers "benevolence" (although he may not
practice it) to be 'decent and essential act to perform and "evil deeds"
(although he may be performing these) to be indecent and an act to
essentially avoid.

Undoubtedly, goodness and badness, benevolence and malevolence are from
the viewpoint of the results and rewards which these two qualities
possess. Likewise, there is no doubt that not even a single day exists
in this world when the rewards and retribution of good and bad deeds of
benefactors and malefactors do not reach them; for we clearly observe
that many benefactors spend their lives in extreme bitterness and
misery, whereas many malefactors who are fully involved in committing
crimes and misdemeanors, with their wicked behavior and disgraceful
character, spend their lives with happiness and prosperity.

For this reason, if in the future and in a world other than this world,
no day had been fixed when good and bad deeds would be judged and
appropriate recompense would be given, such an attention and care (that
benevolence is good and essential and malevolence is bad and to be
avoided) would not have been placed in the nature of man.

It should not be imagined that the reward of benevolence, which the man
considers good is this that it establishes order in the society and
people gain prosperity in their lives and that consequently the
benevolent person himself receives a portion of the benefits of his
benevolence. In the like manner, it should also not be imagined that a
malevolent person, with his indecent conduct and behavior, disrupts the
order of the society and thus he himself finally gets entangled with its
unpleasant effects.

Although this kind of thinking is to some extent applicable to
disorganized and inefficient individuals; it does not apply to those
people who have reached the peak of power and whose happiness and
success are not at all influenced by the order and disorder of the
society, on the contrary when disturbance and corruption prevail in the
society and when the living conditions of the people become gloomy,
these individuals get happier and more successful, thus there remains no
reason for the nature of such people to consider benevolence as good and
malevolence as bad.

In like manner, although these people are prosperous in their short
lives, it should not be imagined that their names will be disgraceful
and will bear the dislike of the public forever because of their wicked
acts.

This is because the manifestation of their disgraceful names and the
unpleasant judgment of the posterity about them occur at a time when
these people have passed away and have no impact on their lives full of
happiness, pleasure, and enjoyment.

On this account, there will be no reason for man to consider benevolence
as good and to acquire it or to consider malevolence as bad and to
refrain from it and tend towards the above-mentioned belief. Had there
not been the *Ma'ad*, it would be a superstitious belief.

Therefore, through this pure and firm belief that the Creator of the
world has placed in our nature, we should understand that the Almighty
Allah will resurrect everyone after death and will look into their
deeds. The Almighty Allah will give a good reward and an everlasting
blessing to the benefactors for their deeds and will punish the
malefactors for their deeds. And this day is called the *Yawm
al-Qiyamah* (Day of Judgment).

Ma'ad, Religions and Faiths
---------------------------

All religions and faiths, which call men to the worship of the Almighty
Allah and enjoin human beings to do good deeds and prohibit them from
bad deeds, express belief in *Ma'ad* and in the life Hereafter. They
have no doubt that benevolence is worthy only when it is followed by a
good reward and since this reward is not seen in this world, inevitably
it will be given to man in another life in the world Hereafter.

Besides, signs and vestiges, that are observed in the most ancient tombs
discovered by the archaeologists, indicate that the early human beings
believed in the other life in the world Hereafter and according to their
beliefs they used to perform certain formalities and provide things so
that the dead may have comforts in the Hereafter.

Ma'ad as in The Qur'an
----------------------

The Holy Qur'an, through hundreds of *Ayat* reminds the people of the
*Ma'ad* and negates any doubt regarding it. In many instances, the
Qur'an reminds the people of Allah's absolute might in order to augment
the knowledge of people and to eliminate the unlikelihood of the
creation of primary things. The Holy Qur'an states:

***"Does not man see that We have created him from the sperm? Then lo!
he is an open disputant. And he strikes out a likeness for Us and
forgets his own creation. Says he: Who will give life to the bones when
they are rotten? Say: He will give life to them Who brought them into
existence at first, and He is Cognizant of all creation (36:77-79)."***

And sometimes the Holy Qur'an draws the attention of people to *Ma'ad*
and entrance into spring after the winter death and reminds men of the
power of Allah, as it states:

***"And among His signs is this, that you see the earth still, but when
We send down on it the water, it stirs and swells: most surely He Who
gives it life is the Giver of life to the dead; surely He has power over
all things (41:39)."***

And sometimes, by using logical reasoning, the Holy Qur'an awakens man's
Allah-given nature to admit this reality, as it states:

***"And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them in vain; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve; then woe to
those who disbelieve on account of the Fire. Shall We treat those who
believe and do good like the mischief-makers on the earth? Or shall We
make those who guard (against evil) like the wicked (38:27-28)?"***

(This is because those who do good and the wicked will not receive their
entire reward and recompense in this world. If no other world
(Hereafter) existed in which each of these groups received their rewards
and punishments in accordance with their behaviors and deeds, then both
groups would be equal in front of Allah and this is inconsistent with
the Divine Justice.)

From Death to The Yawm Al-Qiyamah
---------------------------------

From the viewpoint of Islam, man is a creature made of body and soul
(body and ruh). The body of man is one of the materialistic compositions
and is subject to laws, i.e., it has volume and weight, lives at a
specific time and place, and becomes influenced by cold and heat and the
like. Gradually, man's body gets old and worn out and finally gets
destroyed in the same manner as it had come into existence some day by
the will of the Almighty Allah.

But man's self is not materialistic and has none of the above-mentioned
characteristics, rather the epithets of knowledge, perception, thought,
will power, and other spiritual qualities such as affection, rancor,
happiness, anguish, fear, hope, and the like are attributed to it. As
the self or soul does not possess the above-mentioned materialistic
characteristics, spiritual epithets are also far away from these
characteristics; rather the heart, the brain, and all the parts of the
body submit to the spirit and spiritual qualities in their own
innumerable activities and none of the parts of the body can be
specified as a centre of command.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And certainly We created man of an extract of clay, then We made him
a sperm in a firm resting-place, then We made the sperm a clot, then We
made the clot a lump of flesh, then We made (in) the lump of flesh
bones, then We covered the bones with flesh, then We caused it to grow
into another creation...(23:12-14)."***

The Meaning of Death from The Viewpoint of Islam
------------------------------------------------

The meaning of death from the viewpoint of Islam is not that man becomes
naught and vanishes, rather it means that the soul or self of man which
is immortal cuts its attachment and relationship from the body and
consequently, the body perishes while the soul continues its life
without the body.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And they say: 'What! when we have become lost in the earth, shall we
then certainly be in a new creation?' Nay! they are disbelievers in the
meeting of their Lord. Say: 'The angel of death who is given charge of
you shall cause you to die*****...' (32:*****10-11)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "You shall not be perished, but you shall
be transferred from . one house to another".

The World of Barzakh
--------------------

Islam believes that man remains alive in a special manner after death.
He enjoys blessing and happiness if he is a benefactor and he will be
punished if he is a malefactor. He will present himself for public
reckoning on the Day of Judgment. The interval between the death of a
man and the *Ma'ad* is called *"Barzakh"*.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"...And before them is Barzakh until the day they are raised
(23:100)."***

The Almighty Allah also states:

***"And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead: nay,
they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord
(3:169)."***


