Ethics
======

All these innumerable means of living, that are now available to man and
that we endeavor to acquire and use them day and night, were not
available to man from the beginning of his life on the earth. They have,
gradually, been brought into existence by man's efforts and have been
utilized.

But in any case, from the primitive man to the civilized man of today,
human beings have never ceased working and striving and through their
Allah-given nature, they have tried to provide better means of living.
This is because if a man loses his energy and the internal and external
organs of h is body such as his eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, and also
if his brain, heart, lungs, and liver fail to function properly, he will
be nothing but a dead person.

For this reason, man works not only out of necessity, but also because
he is a human being, he displays various activities. Since by his
commonsense he realizes that he should arrange for the happiness and
prosperity of his life in any way possible, he engages in work and
effort and moves in the direction of his demands.

Therefore, living in any environment and in any manner, religious or
non-religious, legal or despotic, urban or nomadic, man feels the
necessity of a series of duties and obligations for himself (those
things which are indispensable for living). If these duties and
obligations are carried out, the reasonable desires of man will be
fulfilled and he will lead a happy, comfortable, and prosperous life.

Certainly, the value of these duties and obligations, which are the only
means of prosperity, is the humanity itself. We cannot perceive anything
more precious and valuable than the humanity and which cannot be
exchanged with any other commodity.

Therefore, 'dutifulness' and its implementation are the most important
practical matters that man confronts in his life, for its value is
exactly the same as that of man himself. Whoever refrains from
performing his indisputable duties, or sometimes neglects them, he
proportionately lapses in morality from the eminent position of humanity
and naturally accepts his humility and worthlessness. With every
violation of his human duty, such an individual inflicts blows after
blows on the body of his society and indeed on his own body as well.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Most surely man is in loss, except those who believe and do good and
enjoin on each other truth, and enjoin on each other patience
(103:2-3)."***

The Almighty Allah also states:

***"Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought... (30:41)."***

Difference of Opinion in the Identification and Specification of Duties
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The importance attached to the identification of duties and their
implementations are indisputable obligations in the world of humanity.
Never can a human being possessing human nature be found who would deny
this reality.

Since human duties have an absolute relationship with manâ€™s prosperity
and life and because the religion differs with non-religious isms and
practices as far as views regarding man's life are concerned, naturally
religious duties will differ from the du ties of other non-religious
isms and practices.

Religion believes that man has an infinite and endless life which does
not terminate with death. The capital of pure and true beliefs,
praiseworthy ethics, and good deeds that man has acquired in this world
prior to his death, serves as the great investment for his infinite life
in the Hereafter.

Therefore, in obligations and duties that religion has formulated for
the individuals and the society, the life in the everlasting Hereafter
is also taken into consideration.

Religion establishes its provisions in the sphere of theism and the
worship and servitude of Allah, the obvious consequence of which will
become manifest on the Day of Resurrection.

Non-religious isms and practices (whatever these may be) only take the
short and transient life of this world into consideration and formulate
duties through which man can benefit more from his materialistic life
and material profits which are common between him and other animals.

Indeed with a reasoning which originates from feelings and sentiments of
grazing animals and beasts, they draw up an animal life for man. They
pay no attention to man's realism and his everlasting life full with
intellectualities.

Therefore, the sublime human ethics (as definite experience indicates)
gradually disappear from non-religious communities and the moral
decadence of their members becomes clearer and more manifest day by day.

Some people argue that the base of religion is following and also the
unquestionable acceptance of a series of duties and regulations;
whereas, social policies can be justified by the current logic.

Those who have said so neglect the fact that the rules and regulations
which are implemented in the society must be carried out indisputably.
No one has ever heard or seen the people of a country following the
prevalent laws after argument and scientific discourse or be exempted
and free from following the laws whose philosophy they do not
understand. Thus, in this respect, the religious and non-religious
practices do not differ.

Indeed, through a study of the natural and social conditions of a
country and on inquisitiveness in its general policies, one can find out
the philosophy behind the generalities of the laws of that country and
some of their details (not all).

This also holds true in the case of religious laws. By means of realism
and inquisitiveness about creation and man's natural requirements, one
can discover the generalities of the laws of religion which is an innate
policy and some of their details.

The Holy Qur'an and many *ahadith* call the people to reasoning,
reflection, and pondering and in some precepts refer to the brief
expedience behind the commandments. There are many *ahadith* available
to us from the Holy Prophet (S) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) which state
the reasons behind the precepts.

Dutifulness
-----------

As mentioned in the beginning of this book, the holy religion of Islam
is a general and permanent program that has been descended to the last
Prophet, Muhammad (S), from the Almighty Allah for human life in this
world and the Hereafter to be carried out in the human society so as to
pull the ship of humanity out of the whirlpool of ignorance and
tribulation and carry it to the coast of salvation.

Since religion is a program of life, it has inevitably specified duties
for man on things which are linked to his life and asks him to carry
them out.

In general, our life is connected to:

(1) The Almighty Allah Who has created us. Our moral obligation towards
His blessings is greater than any other duty and our dutifulness towards
His Holy Presence is more obligatory than any other obligation.

(2) Ourselves.

(3) Our fellow creatures with whom we are obliged to live and perform
our duties and tasks with their cooperation and assistance. Thus,
according to the order, we have three general duties: duty towards
Allah, duty towards ourselves, and duty towards others.

### (1) The Duty of Man towards Allah (Cognizance of Allah)

Our duty towards the Almighty Allah is the most important duty of all
and we must perform it with a pure heart and a sincere intention. It is
the first and foremost duty of man to know his Creator. Since the
Almighty Allah is the source of existence of every creature and the
originator of every existing phenomenon, the cognizance and knowledge of
His pure Entity also illuminates every realistic person. Being
inattentive to this moral reality is total ignorance, lack of insight,
and irresponsibility. Whoever pays no attention to cognizance of Allah,
he consequently puts out the light of his own conscience and thus will
have no way of attaining the real human happiness.

As we see, those who refrain from cognizance of Allah and pay no heed to
this reality in their lives are completely away from the human
spiritualities and have no logic other than the logic of grazing animals
and beasts.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Therefore turn aside from him who turns his back upon Our reminder
and does not desire anything but this world's life. That is their goal
of knowledge... (53:29-30)."***

Certainly, it should be pinpointed that the cognizance of Allah is
necessary and natural for man who is a realistic being endowed with the
instinct of reasoning, for man, with his Allah-given commonsense,
notices the signs of the Presence of Allah and His Knowledge and Might
wherever he looks in the world of creation. Thus, the cognizance of
Allah does not mean that man should bring it into existence for himself,
rather it means that the man should not disregard this obvious reality
which cannot be covered by any curtain, giving a positive response to
his conscience which invites him to Allah and eliminating any doubt from
his mind by following this philosophy.

#### The Worship of Allah

After cognizance of Allah, our second duty is the worship of Allah. This
is because, while recognizing the truth, this reality becomes clear that
happiness and prosperity, which are our only objectives, will be
attained by implementing and executing the program which the Almighty
Allah has specified for our lives and has communicated to us through His
messengers. Therefore, obeying Allah's orders and serving him are the
only duties of man compared to which other duties seem insignificant and
trivial.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but
Him...(17:23)."***

The Almighty Allah also states:

***"Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaytan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you should serve Me;
this is the right way (36:60-61)."***

Thus it is our duty to recognize the status of our servitude and needs
and to keep in mind the infinite Grandeur and Greatness of Allah. We
must consider that Allah knows and sees our deeds in every respect and
we must obey His commands. It is our obligation not to serve any but
Allah and not to obey anyone else except the Holy Prophet (S) and the
*A'immat al-Huda* (infallible Imams of Guidance) whom we are commanded
to obey by the order of Allah.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in
authority from among you...(4:59)."***

Surely, due to the obedience of Allah and the authorities of religion,
we should actually maintain a great respect for anything attributed to
Allah. We must respect the holy name of Allah and the names of the
leaders of religion. We must endeavor for the honor of the Divine Book
(the Holy Qur'an), the honored Ka'bah, and the holy mosques and the holy
shrines of the leaders of religion, as the Almighty Allah states:

***"...and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely is (the
outcome) of the piety of hearts (22:32)."***

### (2) The Duty of Man towards Himself

No matter what policy or course of action man pursues in his life,
indeed he looks after nothing but his happiness and prosperity. The
recognition of the happiness of something is of minor importance with
regard to-the recognition of the thing itself; that is, unless we know
ourselves, we will not know our actual needs whose fulfillment provides
us with happiness. Therefore, the most essential duty of man is to know
himself so as to perceive his happiness and prosperity and endeavor to
fulfill his needs by the means that are at his disposal. He must not
waste away his valuable life which is his only treasure.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "whoever knows himself knows his Allah".

And *Amir al-Mu'minin*, 'Ali (as), states: "whoever knows himself,
attains the highest position of knowledge."

After knowing himself, man realizes that his greatest duty is to value
highly the essence of his humanity and not to trample upon such a
valuable treasure. He also finds that he must strive for his physical
and mental health so as to attain a prosperous and delightful eternal
life.

*Amir al-Mu'minin*, 'Ali (as) states: "Carnal desires will be low and
insignificant to whoever respects himself."

The entity of man is comprised of two things: self or personality and
body. It is man's responsibility to try to keep both these essential
parts, i.e., the self or soul and body healthy and stable. He is duty
bound to endeavor for the health of his soul and body in accordance with
the adequate and precise orders given on both of them by the holy
religion of Islam.

#### Physical Health

Abstaining from Harmful Things: Through a series of rules and
regulations, the holy religion of Islam has adequately safeguarded the
physical health such as enjoining people not to eat corpse, blood, flesh
of some animals, and poisonous food; prohibiting them from drinking
alcoholic beverages and polluted water; over eating; causing harm to the
body; and other directives which are beyond the scope of this chapter.

Keeping Clean: Cleanliness is one of the most important principles of
health. For this reason, great importance has been attached to this
principle in the holy *Shari'ah* of Islam. The importance given by Islam
to cleanliness cannot be found in any other religion.

The Holy Prophet (S) has stated: "Cleanliness is a part and parcel of
Islamic faith" and this, by itself, is the greatest praise for
cleanliness.

Repeated recommendations have reached us from the leaders of Islam in
regard to taking bath. Al-'Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (as) states: "Taking a
bath every other day makes man healthy and stout."

Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) states: "Bathroom is a very good place since it
removes the dirtiness of man."

In addition to giving general orders concerning cleanliness and
neatness, Islam enjoins in particular for each and every cleanliness;
for instance, it orders the people to pare the nails of their hands and
feet, to shave arid remove the excess hair on their bodies and heads, to
wash their hands before and after meals, to comb their hair, to gargle
with water and inhale water, to sweep their homes, and to keep clean the
roads, house doors, ground under the trees, etc.

Beside these orders, Islam has specified certain actions which are
linked with permanent *taharah* and neatness such as for reciting
*salat* and having *sawm*, removing the *najasahs* (impurities) from the
body and the clothes, performing several times everyday the *wudhuâ€™*
before reciting the *salawat*, and performing various *ghusls* (taking
bath according to the specified Islamic manner).

From the fact that water should reach the surface of the body during
*wudhuâ€™* before *salat* and *ghusl* and that the body should not be
dirty and greasy, it becomes clear that the cleanliness of the body is
implicitly essential.

The Neatness of Clothes: The *Surat al-Muddaththir* is one of the
*suwar*which was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) in the early stages of
his prophetic mission. In the fourth verse of this *surah*,

Allah orders the people for *taharah* of their clothes:

***"And do taharah of your garments (74:4)."***

The *taharah* of garments is *wajib* for *salat* according to specific
Islamic jurisprudential order, but, in general, *taharah* from
uncleanliness and dirtiness is always recommended. Many recommendations
have reached us from each of the Fourteen *Ma'sumin* (as) in this
regard. The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Whoever puts on clothes should
clean them as well." *Amir al-Mu'minin*, 'Ali (as) states: "Washing
garments relieves one from grief and anxiety and neat clothes are a
means for acceptance of his *salat*."

It has been narrated from al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) and al-'Imam
Musa al-Kazim (as) that possessing ten or twenty shirts and changing
them is not extravagance.

In addition to the cleanliness and *taharah* of garments and body, a
Muslim must also be well-dressed and must meet the people with the best
possible appearance and looks. Al-'Imam 'Ali (as) states: "Put on
beautiful clothes and dress yourself up, for Allah is good and likes the
good things, but these should be religiously lawful." Then, al-'Imam
'Ali (as) reads the following verse:

***"Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah which He has
brought forth for His servants and the good provisions...(7:32)?"***

Gargling with Water and Brushing the Teeth: Being a channel for food,
the mouth of man gets contaminated due to eating food. Food particles
remain in the roots of the teeth, on the tongue, and in all other parts
of the mouth thus rendering the mouth contaminated and malodorous.

Sometimes, as a result of fermentations and chemical actions and
reactions that take place in food particles, poisonous matters are
formed which get mixed with the food and then enter the stomach.
Moreover, the breath of such a person in a gathering pollutes the air
and annoys other people.

Therefore, the holy religion of Islam has ordered the Muslims to brush
their teeth everyday (especially before each *wudhuâ€™*) gargle their
mouth with pure water, and clean their mouth from contamination.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "If it were not for the fear of hardship
and indigence, I would have made brushing the teeth *wajib* upon
Muslims." Elsewhere, the Holy Prophet (S) states: "*Jibril* always
recommended brushing the teeth to an extent that I even imagined it
would become incumbent upon the Muslims later on."

Breathing: Breathing is one of the essential needs of man in his life.
Quite often, the current of air surrounding man's residential area is
not without dust and dirt. Surely, breathing such an air is harmful for
the respiratory system. To protect against this harm, the Compassionate
Allah has provided hair inside man's nose. This hair prevents the
entrance of dust and dirt into the lungs.

Nevertheless, sometimes the hair of the nose cannot fully perform its
function because of the accumulation of dirt and dust in the nose. For
this reason, Islam has issued orders for Muslims to inhale water several
times a day while having *wudhuâ€™* so as to protect the health of their
respiratory system by inhaling clean water through their nostrils.

#### Mental Health

Moral Refinement: With his Allah-given conscience, man perceives the
value of praiseworthy ethics and realizes its significance from the
individual and social viewpoints. Thus, there is no one in the human
society who does not praise good ethics and who does not respect those
who are endowed with praiseworthy ethics.

The value that man attaches for praiseworthy ethics needs no further
explanation and the elaborate orders of Islam on ethics are thoroughly
clear for everybody.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And the soul and Him Who made it pure, then He inspired it to
understand what is right and wrong for it; he will indeed be successful
who purifies it, and he will indeed fail who corrupts it (91:7-10)."***

While interpreting this verse, al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) has stated:
"The Almighty Allah has revealed to man the things which are good for
him and must be put into effect and the things which are bad for him and
must be avoided."

#### Receiving Education and Knowledge

One of the praiseworthy intellectual attributes is to have knowledge.
The virtue and superiority of a knowledgeable man over an ignorant
person is absolutely clear.

Wisdom and knowledge distinguish a man from other animals. Other
animals, with their particular characteristics, are endowed with
invariable instincts in accordance with which they meet the needs of
their lives. There is no scope for elevation and progress in the lives
of animals and they cannot open up new gates to themselves and to
others.

It is only man who augments his existing knowledge with new knowledge
through his wisdom and attains a new value and splendor for his
materialistic and spiritual life by discovering the laws of nature and
metaphysics. It is only man who takes a deep look into the past periods
and lays the foundation for his own future and the future of others.

More than all the new and old social systems of all religions and
faiths, Islam encourages the people to acquire knowledge and learning.
In order to establish a fundamental culture and civilization, Islam has
made receiving the education as *wajib* upon every Muslim man and woman.
Many orders have been handed down to us from the Holy Prophet (S) and
religious leaders in this regard.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Education is *wajib* upon every Muslim."
In this *hadith*, knowledge is described in an absolute form and
includes all branches of science. There is no exception even as far as
women and men are concerned. Thus, the acquisition of knowledge and
learning in Islam is not intended to apply only to a particular nature
or type. On the contrary, the duty of acquiring knowledge is universal
and all-embracing.

The Holy Prophet (S) also states: "Seek knowledge from the cradle to the
grave." Every religious precept has a specific time and for all of them
maturity is a necessary condition: i.e., the person, for whom the
religious principles are applicable, must have reached maturity. The
religious precepts are not *wajib* upon a person unless he has reached
maturity.

Some of the religious *wajibat* are no longer applicable during old age
and at the time of weakness, but acquiring knowledge and learning is
*wajib* for man since his birth until his death. In other words,
acquiring knowledge is *wajib* at all the stages of man's life. On the
basis of this principle, a Muslim should acquire knowledge all through
his life and should add to his knowledge day by day. This *hadith*, too,
has extended and generalized the time of this *wajib* obligation.

The Holy Prophet (S) also states: "Go for seeking knowledge even if it
may be in China (i.e., far away)." Another *hadith* states: "Knowledge
is the most valuable thing that the believer has lost. He should go
after it, even if he finds it in China (the farthest points in the
world)." According to this commandment, every Muslim is obliged to
acquire knowledge even if long journeys are required for this purpose.
Finally, he should endeavor to find at any cost what he has lost.

The Holy Prophet (S) also said in another *hadih*: "knowledge is what a
believer has lost. He must get it back from wherever he finds." However,
in acquiring knowledge, the only condition is that it should be
appropriate and beneficial to the societies.

Islam highly recommends man to know the secrets of creation and to think
about the heavens, the earth, the human nature, the history of nations
and peoples, and the works of former generations (philosophy,
mathematics, natural sciences, etc). Also, learning moral and religious
matters (ethics and Islamic laws) and different kinds of arts which
shape man's life are highly encouraged and stressed by Islam.

Indeed, the importance of knowledge is so great from the viewpoint of
the Holy Prophet (S) that in the Battle of Badr when the Muslims took a
group of the unbelievers as captives, the Holy Prophet (S) ordered every
captive to be released by paying exorbitant sums of money. Only a group
of the captives, who were literate, became exempt from paying such money
provided that each of them teaches ten Muslim youths to read and write.

Thus for the first time, adult schools (adult classes) were established
in the world and this great honor was ascribed to the Muslims in the
history of the world. Interestingly enough, once for all in the history
of man, teaching knowledge was accepted instead of war-spoils by the
order of the Holy Prophet (S). Neither before nor after that had anyone
in the world witnessed a victorious commander except the teaching of
children instead of ransom and war-spoils.

The Holy Prophet (S) went to those adult classes in person and took with
him those who knew reading and writing. He asked them to test the
children to find out how much progress they had made in their lessons
and practice. The Holy Prophet (S) used to encourage more any child who
was found more diligent in learning.

Even one of the historians writes:

"A woman named *"Al-Shifa',"* who had learned reading and writing during
the "period of ignorance," used to go to the house of the Holy Prophet
(S) and teach the wives of the Holy Prophet (S) how to read and write.
For this reason, she was appreciated, encouraged, and rewarded by the
Holy Prophet (S)."

#### The Value and Importance of a Student from the Viewpoint of Islam

The importance of endeavor in attaining any objective equals the
objective itself. Since every man, with his Allah given nature,
considers the importance of knowledge in the human world higher than
anything else, the value of one who seeks knowledge will be the highest
of all. Since the religion of Islam is established on the basis of man's
nature, it undoubtedly attaches the highest value to students. The Holy
Prophet (S) stated: "He who is engaged in acquiring knowledge is loved
by Allah."

Although *jihad* (Islamic war) is one of the pillars of Islam and if the
Holy Prophet (S) or any of the infallible Imams (as) issues the order
for war, all Muslims must take part in it, those who are engaged in
learning Islamic sciences and theology are exempt from this duty. At all
times, a sufficient number of Muslims must engage themselves in studying
at Islamic education centers.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth all
together; why should not then a section from every group from among them
go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious (9:122)?"***

#### The Importance of a Teacher and an Instructor

The teacher is a warm and luminous centre who gets strength from the
light of knowledge in order to eradicate ignorance and illiteracy in the
whole world. It is the teacher who makes the blind-hearted and the
ignorant clear-sighted and wise and takes them, with the assistance of
the luminous torch of knowledge and education, to the holy valley and
the heaven of prosperity.

For this reason, respect for teachers is essential and obedience towards
them is obligatory in the religion of Islam. Teachers are considered the
holiest and the most exalted individuals in the human society. Regarding
the great and deserving status of teachers, it suffices to say that
*Amir al-Mu'minin*, 'Ali (as) states: "He who taught me a word has
indeed made me his slave."

These wise words are very valuable in paying respect to the status of
teachers.

Also, *Amir al-Mu'minin* (as) states: "The people are divided into three
groups: the first group consists of the *'ulama'* of Islam; the second
one consists of those who acquire knowledge for the salvation of
themselves and others; and the third one consists of those who lack
knowledge and wisdom. These (people constituting the third group) people
are like flies that sit on the head and face of animals and fly in
different directions with the blow of each wind (or fly in any direction
from which they smell bad odor of filth)".

#### Paying Respect to the Learned Men

While describing about the high status and value of knowledge and the
dignity of the learned men, the Holy Qur'an states:

***"...Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are
given knowledge, in high degrees...(58:11)."***

The value of scholars is so great to the Prophet (S) of Islam that he
stated: "The death of a tribe is easier and less detrimental than the
death of a scholar." Similarly, the Almighty Allah also states in
another verse:

***"...Are those who know and those who do not know alike? Only the men
of understanding are mindful (39:9)."***

Thus the *alim* (Islamic scholar) and the ignorant are never alike. A
learned and wise man has obvious superiority over anyone who lacks
knowledge. The conclusion drawn from this Qur'anic verse indicates that
in the view of the Qur'an the term 'knowledge' does not exclusively
apply to Islamic knowledge, rather it covers anything which gives man
insight and enlightenment and helps him in his worldly and heavenly
affairs.

Regarding the superiority of scholars over the worshippers of Allah and
the devout people, the following has been related from al-'Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (as): "A scholar who puts his knowledge into use is superior to
seventy thousand worshippers and has preference over them."

The Prophet (S) of Islam believes that the status of personality of a
man is determined by his knowledge. The Holy Prophet (S) states: "The
most learned man is one who adds to his own knowledge by deriving
benefit from the knowledge of others. The value of man is determined by
his knowledge. Thus, the more knowledgeable a man is, the more valuable
he is, and also the less knowledgeable a man is, the less valuable he
is."

#### The Duties of Teachers and Students

The Holy Qur'an considers knowledge and learning as man's true life,
because in the absence of knowledge, man would not have been different
from an inanimate object and a deceased person.

Therefore, a student should consider his teacher as a focus of life from
whom he gradually receives details of his actual life.

For this reason, he should owe his life to the teacher and should not
fall short of respecting him. He must not show stubbornness in receiving
lessons from the teacher even if they are accompanied with harshness.
The student must respect his teacher in his presence or absence and
during his lifetime and after his death.

Similarly, the teacher should also feel responsible for the life of his
students. He must not be tired nor must he take rest as long as he has
not led his students to the status of live and honorable men. The
teacher should not get disappointed if at times the students do not
exercise proper care to receiving his teachings. He must encourage and
reward his students if they progress in their education. The teacher
must never depress the morale of his students by his words and deeds.

#### Two Important Masterpieces in The Teachings Of Islam

Each of the social policies that is current in various human societies
contains a series of secrets. If these secrets become manifest to the
people, the status of the leaders of the society and their carnal
desires will be jeopardized. For this reason, they always hide some
realities from the public. The reason behind this is that most of the
matters are the creations of their minds. Since these are against reason
and the interest of the community and the individuals, they are afraid
that they would face a flood of objections and the jeopardy of their
interests if these secrets are discovered.

For this reason, Christian churches and the intellectual and spiritual
centres of other religions do not allow the people to think freely,
rather they reserve the right of changing and explaining the religious
teachings and the contents of religious books for themselves. They say
that it is the duty of the people to accept whatever they say
indisputably and without any discussion and inquisitiveness. It is this
very policy that h us marred many religious policies. The existing
policy of Christianity is a veracious proof for this statement.

But since Islam has confidence in its rightfulness, unlike all other
religious and non-religious policies, it sees no ambiguity or lack of
clarity in its path.

(1) Islam does not conceal any rightful matter, nor does it allow its
followers to keep any rightful matters as secrets. This is because the
laws of this pure religion are formulated according to the laws of
nature and creation, thus none of its truths and realities can be
denied.

Concealing realities is one of the major sins. In His words, the
Almighty Allah has cursed those who conceal the truth, where He states:

***"Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed after We made it clear in the Book for men, these it is whom
Allah shall curse and those who curse shall curse them (too)
(2:159)."***

(2) Islam has ordered its followers to think freely about the realities
and the teachings and to stop moving along whenever they see the
slightest ambiguity; so that their clear faiths may always remain intact
from the harm of the darkness of any doubts and uncertainties. Islam
also orders the people to try to remove any doubts and uncertainties in
a just and truth-seeking manner and strive to solve them freely if they
are faced with them. The Almighty Allah states:

***"And follow not that of which you have not the
knowledge...(17:36)."***

#### Abstaining from Free Thinking and Expression of Truth

The perception of the realities through thinking and reflection and
their recognition are the most valuable virtues of man, the only feature
of his superiority over other animals, and the basis of his dignity and
honor. The feeling of love for humanity and the instinct of realism will
never allow man to be deprived of the freedom of thought by the
imposition of imitative thinking. Neither will they allow wisdom to be
led astray by concealing the realities, so that divine thinking would
cease.

This fact, however, should not be neglected that when man is unable to
understand a reality or when, due to stubbornness and persistence of the
other side, there is no hope for the establishment of reality and its
expression will cause a loss to man's property, life, and, reputation,
the instinct of realism and the love for humanity judge on the contrary.
In order to respect the reality and to safeguard man from the danger of
aberration and other dangers to his property, life, and honor, the
instinct of realism and humanity call for the concealment of realities.

Through many *ahadith*, the Imams of *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) have seriously
prohibited the people from thinking on some of the realities which are
beyond the level of understanding of man.

The Almighty Allah authorizes the concealment of reality in the case of
*taqiyyah* (dissimulation) in two instances[^1].

#### Conclusion

In several cases, Islam considers the concealment of truths and
realities not only harmless but also necessary:

(1) *Taqiyyah* is applied where there is no hope for the establishment
of truth and when the expression of the truth will cause danger to one's
property, life, and honor.

(2) When truth is not intelligible for someone and its expression may
lead him astray or may cause disdain and insult towards the truth.

(3) When due to the lack of capability free thinking reveals the truth
in an untrue way and leads to aberration.

#### Ijtihad and Taqlid

**Ijtihad (Deduction of Commandments Based On Islamic Fundamentals) And
Taqlid (Following A Mujtahid In Practising Islamic Laws)**

The requirements of man in his environment and the measures that he must
take to arrange them are so great that a common man cannot enumerate
them let alone specializing in all of them and obtaining enough
knowledge concerning them.

On the other hand, since man performs his tasks by means of thinking and
will power, he should have sufficient information when he wants to take
a decision. He will be unable to take decisions if he lacks sufficient
information. He must either be fully qualified himself to take any
course of action or he must ask someone who is endowed with
qualifications and so perform his duties according to his instructions.
For instance, we instinctively refer to a doctor for the treatment of
our ailments, to a civil engineer for the plan of a building, to a mason
for masonry work, and to a carpenter for making doors and windows.

Thus we always spend our lives by means of *taqlid* or following others
even for insignificant matters.

Whoever says: "I do not follow another person in my life", either he
does not understand the meaning of his words or is affected by a mental
sickness. Islam, which has based its religious laws on the human nature,
has also adopted the same policy.

Islam orders its followers to learn the religious teachings and
precepts. The source of these teachings is nothing but the Divine Book,
i.e., Qur'an and the *ahadith* of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
infallible Imams of *Ahl al-Bayt* (as).

It is obvious that obtaining all religious teachings from the Qur'an and
the *ahadith* is not an easy task. Such a task is not possible for all
Muslims and only a limited number of people can accomplish this task.

Therefore, this religious order naturally takes the form that a group of
Muslims, who are not able to acquire the teachings and precepts through
reasoning, should refer to those who have obtained the Islamic
commandments through proofs and reasoning, and should then perform their
duties.

A scholar who obtains Islamic commandments through proofs and reasoning
is called *"mujtahid"* and his endeavour in this regard is called
*"ijtihad"* One who refers to the *mujtahid* is called *"muqallid"* (one
who follows a *mujtahid's* instructions for performing his deeds) and
his referring to the *mujtahid* is called *taqlid* (following a
*mujtahid* in practicing Islamic laws).

Surely, it should be known that *taqlid* holds true in worships,
transactions, and other practical rules of Islam, but in regard to *Usul
al-Din* (the fundamental principles of Islam) which are matters of
belief, one can never have confidence in the views of others and cannot
content himself with following them. This is because in the case of the
fundamental principles of Islam, faith and belief are desirable and not
action. We can never consider the faith of others to be our own.

It cannot be said that Allah is One because our fathers or scholars say
so or that the Hereafter is true since all Muslims believe in it.

Therefore, it is incumbent upon every Muslim to know the *Usul al-Din*
of his religion through reasoning and proof even if it may be a very
simple one.

### (3) The Duty of Man towards Others

These duties can be described as follows:

#### The Duty of Man towards His Parents

Parents are the means of the creation of a child and the imparters of
his initial education and training; therefore, the holy religion of
Islam has placed a great deal of emphasis on children's obeying to them
and on their respect to an extent that the Almighty Allah has commanded
the people to be kind and generous to their parents right after
mentioning *Tawhid* (the Oneness of Allah) and states:

***"And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him
and has commanded goodness to your parents...(17:23)."***

In *ahadith* enumerating mortal sins, misconduct towards parents ranks
second to shirk (polytheism). The Almighty Allah states:

***"...If either or both of them reach old age with you, say not to them
(so much as) "ugh" nor chide them, and speak to them generous words. And
make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion, and say: 'O
my Lord! have compassion on them, similar to what they had on me when
they brought me up (when I was) little' (17:23-24)."***

How well did an old woman say to her child when she saw him powerful and
bulky.If you recalled your childhood when you were helpless in my arm
you would not treat me unkindly today as you are a brave man and I am an
old woman.

In the holy religion of Islam, obedience of the parents is *wajib*
except in the case when they order the children to give up one of the
*wajib* deeds of religion or perform a religiously *haram* act. It has
been proven by experience that those who tease their parents do not
remain happy and prosperous in their lives and consequently they will
not attain salvation.

##### The Rights of Parents

In a family circle, the relationship of parents to their children is
like that of the roots of a tree to its branches because the continuity
and survival of the branches of the tree depend upon its roots. Parents
are also the founders of the children's life. Since the human society is
comprised of the two categories, i.e., parents and children, parents are
the main roots of the human society.

Besides being an utmost ingratitude and cowardice, misbehavior towards
the parents and annoying them also cause the decadence of humanity and
the annihilation of the society. This is because the disrespect of
children towards their parents will be reflected by the parents in the
form of unkindness and disfavor towards them. On the other hand, if the
children look towards their parents with disrespect and lowliness, they
cannot expect anything better from their own children and will not
depend upon the help of their children when they reach the age of
debility and infirmity. Thus they naturally become disappointed to form
a family, as is the case with many of the young people of the present
age.

Generalization of this kind of thinking will definitely obstruct the
path of regeneration and reproduction, because a wise man will never
devote his valuable life to nurture a young tree from whose fruits he
will not benefit, under whose shadow he will not sit, and that looking
towards it will render him no benefit but grief and anguish. We might
assume that the governments can encourage the people to set up families
by giving them various rewards and incentives and thus eliminate the
problems of regeneration and reproduction; but it should be noted that
the social methods and customs that are devoid of natural backing (like
parent-children affection) cannot last.

Besides this fact, not benefiting from one of the natural instincts will
inevitably deprive man of a series of pure spiritual pleasures.

##### The Rights of Children on Parents

The works that a man must perform for someone who is the beneficiary are
called *huquq* (rights) and the works that a person must perform are
called duties, orders, and obligations. For instance, it is the duty of
an employer to pay the wages of his employee and it is the right of the
employee to receive it after performing a task for him. If the employer
does not pay the wages, the employee can demand it and defend his right.

Since man is created in such a manner that his life is not everlasting
in this world and because willingly or not he dies after some time,
Allah has established the method of reproduction, has provided people
with the means of reproduction, and has directed man's inner feelings
towards it in order to safeguard the mankind from total annihilation.

It is because of this overall mobilization that man naturally considers
his child to be an inherent part of himself and assumes his child's
survival to be that of his own. For this very reason, man goes through
all kinds of endeavors and makes efforts for the comfort and happiness
of his children and endures various hardships, for he considers the
annihilation of his child or his child's personality to be his own
annihilation or the annihilation of his own personality.

Indeed, man obeys the order of the world of creation which demands the
survival of mankind. Thus it is the duty of parents to implement the
order enjoined by conscience and religious laws with regard to their
children and to bring them up very well, so that they may grow into
decent human beings. Parents are also duty bound to consider rightful
for their children those things that they consider rightful for
themselves from the viewpoint of humanity. Some of the duties of parents
are as given below.

(1) Parents must establish and make firm the foundation of praiseworthy
ethics and decent attributes in the natures of their children from the
very first day that they begin to understand words and signs. They must
not frighten their children with superstitious subjects as much as they
can. They must prevent them from committing evil and unchaste acts.

The parents, too, must avoid lying, ill-speaking, and using bad language
and obscene words in front of the children. The parents should perform
decent deeds, so that the children might be brought up as chaste and
magnanimous people.

Parents must endeavor and show motivation and justice, so as to transfer
to their children the love for justice and humanity through the law of
"the transfer of ethics" in order to keep their children away from
oppression, meanness, and selfishness.

(2) Parents should patronize their children for their eating, sleeping,
and other requirements for living until they attain the age of
discernment. They must have consideration for the physical health of
their children so that they may have a healthy body and a strong mind
and temper ready to be educated and trained.

(3) Parents should put their children under the care of a teacher from
the time they get aptitude for education (usually from seventh year of
their age). Parents should make every effort to place their children
under the care of a decent teacher, so that they may get good and
desirable impressions from what they hear and so that such a teacher
would become the source of inspiration and cause the refinement of their
spirit, the purification of their soul, and the cultivation of their
ethics.

4) Parents should take their children along with them to gatherings in
order to familiarize them with social customs and praiseworthy etiquette
when their age calls for participation in social gatherings or family
visits.

#### Respect for the Elders

It is also required to respect the elders, as the Holy Prophet (S)
states: "The glorification and respect for the elders is the
glorification and respect for Allah."

#### Man's Duty towards His Relatives

The paternal and maternal relatives, who have a consanguineous and near
relationship, are the natural means for the formation of the society.
Due to the similarity of blood and cells, man becomes part of a family.
For the sake of this unity and natural relationship, Islam orders its
followers to observe the kinship bonds with kindness. Strong
recommendations have been made in the Qur'an and the *ahadith* of
religious leaders in this respect.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"...And be careful of (your duty to) Allah, by Whom you demand one of
another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship; surely Allah
ever watches over you (4:1)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "I enjoin my *Ummah* (people) to observe
the kinship bonds with kindness. Even if the relatives are separated
from one another by a year-long distance, they should not disconnect the
kinship bonds of their relationship."

#### Man's Duty towards His Neighbours

Since neighbors very often come in contact with one another due to the
proximity of their residential area and naturally - as they constitute a
larger family, the good behavior and the misbehavior of one of them will
have more effect on other neighbors than that of all others.

He, who spends the night with clamor in his house, does not annoy anyone
residing in the remote corner of the city, but he disturbs his
neighborâ€™s peace. A wealthy man who spends his life in feasting and
drinking in his beautiful palace is far away from the sight of the poor,
but he burns the heart of his indigent neighbor living in a clay-hut.
Surely, a day will come when this wealthy man will duly be punished. For
this reason, taking care of the neighbors has been highly emphasized in
the holy religion of Islam.

The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "*Jibril* recommended to me about the
neighbors to such an extent that I thought the Almighty Allah would
appoint one's neighbor as one of his heirs." He also stated: "whoever
believes in Allah and in *Ma'ad*, never does injustice to his neighbor,
lends him money if he asks for it, and shares his grief and happiness.
One should not annoy his neighbor even if he is an unbeliever."

He also states: "He, who hurts his neighbor, will not smell the
fragrance of Paradise and he, who disregards the rights of his neighbor,
is not my follower. Whoever has had enough to eat and does not help his
neighbor after knowing that he is hungry, is not a Muslim."

#### Man's Duty towards the Inferior and The Poor

There is no doubt that the establishment of a society is to fulfill the
needs of the individuals. The most important duty of the members of any
society is to help the helpless and the weak and to eliminate in some
way the needs of those who are unable to eliminate these by themselves.

It has been thoroughly clarified nowadays that the carelessness of the
rich towards the difficulties of the poor is the greatest danger that
can destroy a society and that the rich will be the first victim of this
danger.

Taking this danger into consideration, fourteen centuries ago, Islam
ordered the rich to distribute a portion of their wealth among the poor
and the helpless annually. If the said amount is sufficient to eliminate
the needs of the poor, it is recommended that the rich donate as much as
they can for the cause of Allah so as to improve the living conditions
of the poor.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"By no means shall you attain to righteousness until you spend
(benevolently) out of what you love... (3:92)."***

The *ahadith* on the subject of serving the humanity are innumerable.
The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "The best of men is one who is more
beneficial for the people." He also stated: "In *Ma'ad*, a person who
has taken greater steps towards charitable acts for the servants of
Allah will be placed in a higher status before the Almighty Allah."

Help friends at the time of calamity so that you may have favors of
Allah. Somehow you will someday reap the seeds of goodness that you sow
today.

#### Man's Duty towards the Society

As we know, human beings work with joint effort. They take advantage of
each others' endeavors to eliminate the needs of their life. The society
established by these individuals is similar to a "great man" and each
individual is like an organ of this great man's body.

Each organ of the body performs its own specific function and makes up
for its own weaknesses by benefiting from the functions of other organs;
that is, in its sphere of activity, each organ provides its interests
while providing the interests of other organs and continues its life in
the light of the life of other organs.

If some organs acted selfishly and were of no use to other organs; for
example, if while the hands or feet were functioning, the eyes did not
cooperate with them or if the mouth only contented itself with chewing
and enjoying the food without swallowing it to satisfy the needs of the
stomach, man would die and, as a result, the same self-centered and
self-seeking organ would also die.

The duty of the members of a society is exactly like the duty of the
organs of a body, i.e., man must look for his interests within the
framework of the interests of the society. He must consider what
benefits the society would derive from his efforts so that by his
efforts all are benefited and he also gets benefited. He must defend the
rights of others so that his own rights would not be violated.

This is a fact which we realize with our Allah-given nature. The holy
religion of Islam, which is established on the basis of nature and
creation, does not have the commandments and views other than these on
this matter.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "A Muslim is one from whose hand and tongue
Muslims are safe."

He further states: "Muslims are brothers and are like a single-hand,
single-heart, and single-direction against aliens."

He also states: "Whoever does not care about the affairs of the Muslims
is not a Muslim."

For the Battle of Tabuk when the Holy Prophet (S) set out with the army
of Islam for the frontier of Rome, three Muslims did not participate in
the battle. After the return of the army of Islam, when these three
persons welcomed and greeted the Holy Prophet (S), the Prophet (S)
turned his face and did not answer their greetings. In the like manner,
the Muslims also turned their faces from these three men. No one, in
Madinah, not even their wives, talked to them. Consequently, they became
helpless and sought refuge in the mountains of Madinah and engaged
themselves in repentance and contrition until Allah accepted their
repentance after several days and then they returned to the city.

Justice
-------

In the Qur'an and the *ahadith* of the religious leaders, justice is of
two kinds: individual and social. Both are highly regarded by the holy
religion of Islam.

### Individual Justice

The individual justice means that the man should abstain from falsehood,
backbiting, and other major sins. He should not insist on committing
other sins. He who is endowed with this quality is called *'Adil*
(just). According to the Islamic regulations, if such a man has
educational ability as well, he can take charge of judicial and
governmental positions, or he can become a religious authority or
maintain other social positions. But the one who is deprived of this
religious personality cannot enjoy these privileges even though he may
be a scholar.

### Social Justice

Social justice means that man should not trespass upon the rights of
others. He should consider all the people equal by the divine laws. He
should not exceed justice in implementing religious laws. He must not be
influenced by feelings and sentiments. He must not deviate from the
right path. The Almighty Allah states:

***"Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice...(16:90)."***

Again He states:

***"...And that when you judge between people you judge with
justice...(4:58)."***

Orders have been issued in many Qur'anic verses and *ahadith* to
consider justice in words and deeds. In several cases, the Almighty
Allah has explicitly cursed the oppressors.

Tyranny and Oppression
----------------------

The Almighty Allah has repeatedly mentioned about tyranny in His Divine
Book and has reproached this indecent quality which is a characteristic
of the beasts (in two-thirds of the number of *Surahs* of the Holy
Qur'an, which are 114, there is a discussion on tyranny).

There is no one who has not felt the badness and unfairness of tyranny
by his own nature or who more or less does not know what painful
calamities have come upon human society, what bloodsheds have taken
place, and what a large number of houses have been demolished due to
tyranny and oppression.

It has been proven by experience that the palace of tyranny will not
last long no matter how strong it may be and sooner or later, it will
collapse on the heads of the oppressors. The Almighty Allah states:

***"...Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people (6:144)."***

Religious authorities have also stated: "Monarchy and kingdom will last
with blasphemy, but these will not stabilize with tyranny and
oppression."

Sociability
-----------

Being bound to live in a society, man has no escape from the company of
people. Undoubtedly, man associates with other people to protect his own
social status, to further h is material and spiritual advancement day by
day, and to solve the difficulties of his life better and with greater
ease.

Thus he must behave with other people in such a way so as to attain
endearment, to augment his social honor day by day, and to add to the
number of his friends. If people see unfriendliness or bitterness in the
behavior of others, their hearts will be filled with abomination and
anguish.

Finally, a day will come when everyone will escape from the company of
such a person and he will be hated and disfavored by others. He must
then live all alone and as a stranger in his native land. This is one of
the most bitter and most unpleasant examples of man's misfortune.

This is what the holy religion of Islam has enjoined its followers to
have good social behavior and has prescribed the best etiquettes and
instructions in this respect. For example, Islam has ordered Muslims to
greet when they meet one another and has considered the person who
greets first to be superior to the other.

The Holy Prophet (S) took the lead in greeting others. He even greeted
women and children. If someone greeted the Holy Prophet (S), he would in
turn greet him better.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
(greeting) than it or return it...(4:86)."***

Allah has also stated that man should show humbleness and modesty in his
association with people and should respect others commensurate with
their social status.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And the servants of the Beneficent Allah are they who walk on the
earth in humbleness...(25:63)."***

The point that should be mentioned is that humbleness and modesty do not
mean that man should degrade himself before the people and thus hurt his
personality, rather these mean that man should not show off his
superiorities and honors to the people and should not associate with
himself other extraordinary privileges. One must not consider the people
degraded and insignificant.

Similarly, respect to the people does not mean that one should respect
others to an extent bordering on flattery and buttering, rather it means
that one must value everyone according to his religious and social
status. One should respect the dignitaries commensurate with their rank
and status. One must also respect the others according to their
observation of human qualities.

Again paying respect to people does not mean that m an should keep mum
and overlook the indecent acts of people. Neither it means that man
should associate with the people in a gathering in which all act against
human prestige or carry out an action against religious principles.

It doesn't mean that man should go with the stream for the fear of
defamation either, for the people should, in fact, be respected on the
basis of their human dignity and their religious and moral values, not
because of their physique and stature. If a man loses his human dignity
and religious value, there will be no reason for his being respected by
the others.

The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "One should not commit a sin before Allah
for the sake of obeying others."

Teasing People and Mischievousness
----------------------------------

These two attributes are closely linked together, for teasing people
means annoying them and inflicting pain on them either by means of the
tongue, such as cursing and using words which annoy others, or by means
of the hands, such as performing an action to make the people unhappy.
Mischievousness means doing things to cause evil for the people. At any
rate, these two attributes are at the opposite pole of the dreams of
comfort of life and peace of mind, for the sake of which, man has
established the society.

Therefore, the religion of Islam, which gives the top priority to the
interests of the society, has forbidden the people to tease others and
to make mischief, as the Almighty Allah states:

***"And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the
believing women without their having earned (it), they are guilty indeed
of a false accusation and a manifest sin (33:58)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Whoever bothers a Muslim, has bothered me
and bothering me is bothering Allah. Such a person has been cursed in
the *Tawrat*, the *Injil*, and the Qur'an." He also states: "One, who
casts an angry glance on a Muslim and frightens him, will be frightened
by Allah on the Day of Judgment."

Association with the Good People
--------------------------------

Although man associates with a large number of people, he is obliged to
associate with some people more than others due to the exigency of his
life. These are the people who are called "friends."

Surely, the main cause for this friendship and relationship is a kind of
similarity in ethics, manners, profession, and the like which exist
between the two persons or among a group of individuals.

Since companionship gradually transfers the habits and character of one
of the two companions to the other, a man must choose the company of
good people, for in this case, the decent ethics of his friends will be
transferred to him and he will benefit from their taintless and
benevolent friendship and cooperation.

He will also be enthusiastic in the continuation of their friendship.
Furthermore, he will improve his own social value and dignity among the
people.

*Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as) states: "Your best friend is the one who
leads you to do good deeds."

He also states: "Man is evaluated on the basis of the friends he
chooses."

First let me know with whom you have associated, so that I can describe
your identity. It is the value of your acquaintances that determines the
value and worth of your life.

Companionship with the Bad People
---------------------------------

Companionship with the bad people and the evil-doers is the source of
all sorts of wretchedness and misfortune. To clarify this matter, it
suffices to say that if we ask the criminals and the evil-doers such as
thieves and bandits the cause of their aberration and deviation, they
will undoubtedly reply that the companionship and association with bad
people have put them in such a situation. From among a thousand wicked
and defiled people, not even one can be found who has chosen an indecent
course of action deliberately.

*Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as), states: "Shun the companionship of bad
people, for a bad friend makes you similar to himself. Unless he
succeeds in this respect, he will not accept you as a friend."

'Ali (as) also states: "Avoid the friendship of an evildoer, for he will
sell you for a trivial thing."

Associate less with bad people, for you will be distressed; since human
nature is apt to acquire habits,

Truthfulness
------------

The relationship of human beings with one another, which is the basis of
human society, is established through speaking. Thus true words that
reveal a concealed reality to man are one of the essential bases of the
society. Great advantages, which are always necessary for a society, are
acquired by means of telling the truth.

The advantages of truthfulness can be summarized in a few sentences as
follows:

(1) A truthful person is trusted by his fellow-men and relieves them of
determining the truthfulness of his remarks.

(2) A veracious person is honored by his conscience and is relieved of
the pain of falsehood.

(3) A truthful person keeps his promise. He will not be disloyal to what
he is entrusted with, for truthfulness in action is not different from
truthfulness in words.

(4) Many differences of opinion and disputes will be eliminated as a
result of truthfulness, for the main reason for most quarrels is the
denial of truth and reality by either or both parties.

(5) As a result of truthfulness, a large part of moral imperfections and
violations of laws and provisions is eliminated automatically, because
most people lie in a bid to cover these kinds of deeds and actions.

*Amir al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as) states: "A true Muslim is one who prefers
truthfulness, although it may be to his detriment, over falsehood from
which he may benefit; and gets internal satisfaction as a result of this
preference."

The Disadvantages of Falsehood
------------------------------

From the aforementioned statements, the disadvantages of falsehood also
become clear. A liar is the wicked enemy of human society. He endeavors
to ruin the society by his falsehood which is a big crime.

This is because falsehood resembles narcotics which kill the
intelligence and commonsense of the society and hide the reality.
Falsehood is also similar to alcoholic beverages which intoxicate the
people and render them unable to distinguish between good and bad.

Therefore, Islam considers falsehood as one of the mortal sins and does
not believe in any religious stature of a liar.

The Holy Prophet (S) has stated: "Three groups of people are *munafiqin*
even if they recite *salat* and observe *sawm*. They are the liars,
those who do not keep their promise, and those who are disloyal to what
they are entrusted with." *Amir* *al-Mu'minin* 'Ali (as) also states:
"Man derives pleasure from his faith when he gives up falsehood; even he
should give up his lying which may be for fun sake."

Falsehood has not only been introduced as a sin and an indecent deed in
Islam, but its indecency and unfairness is also clearly perceived by
commonsense. The prevalence of this indecent deed in the society will
soon shatter the confidence of the people towards one another which is
the only basis in their social relationship. By the disruption of such a
relationship, the people will, in effect, live in isolation because of
having utmost anxiety from one another although they may apparently seem
to be living in a knitted society.

Man always deals with external matters in his life. He keeps himself
alive through his activities and by bringing about changes in matters
and thus fulfils his desires. This creature who works by commonsense and
will power has based his vast and extensive life on knowledge. His work
is directly related to the knowledge available to him. He constantly
adjusts his learnings and performs his external activities accordingly.

Therefore, receiving true information is essential for man and is of
prime importance. If the correct outside news are not revealed to man,
for instance, if he sees the ditch as a road and the road as a ditch, or
if he sees the distant as the nearby and the nearby as the distant, or
if he receives the news in an untrue way, he will not be able to
continue his living. Thus it becomes clear that falsehood is a serious
threat to social life and a liar is a person without any personality and
dignity. He is the enemy of the society and his remarks are considered
invalid and unreliable by the people. He himself is cursed by Allah.

Backbiting and Libel
--------------------

Slandering others and backbiting them, if true, are called backbiting,
and if wrong, are called libel and sometimes calumny.

Surely, the Almighty Allah has not created man (except the prophets and
the Imams) free from sins. As a result of his shortcomings, man is
fallible and all people live behind the curtain with which the Almighty
Allah has covered their deeds by His Divine Wisdom.

If this divine covering is lifted from over the defects and shortcomings
of the people, they will be repugnant from one another and will avoid
the company of each other, thus leading to the destruction of the
foundation of their society.

Therefore, the Almighty Allah has declared backbiting as *haram*, so
that everyone may live in peace from backbiting by one another and the
outwardly appearance of the environment of their lives would seem
adorned until gradually the same outward beauty corrects the internal
obscenity.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"...Nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat
the flesh of his dead brother?....(49:12)."***

The sin and obscenity of libel is definitely greater than backbiting and
the wise are thoroughly aware of its obscenity. In His words, the
Almighty Allah has made the badness and obscenity of libel quite clear
and states:

***"Only they forge the lie who do not believe...(16:105)."***

Damaging the Prestige of People
-------------------------------

Damaging one's chastity is a mortal sin in Islam and, in different
cases, severe punishments such as whipping, killing, and stoning to
death have been laid down for it.

Allowing the commitment of this indecent deed, although it may have been
agreed upon by both the parties, will shake the foundation of families
which is of prime importance in Islam and will cease the proceeding of
the precepts of inheritance and the like. Finally, it makes parent-child
affection and relationship invalid and leads to the disappearance of the
true guarantee of society which is the natural result of reproduction.

Self-Respect and Honesty
------------------------

The world of creation, that has created man sociable and in need of
cooperation, has prepared him in such a way as to be able to manage his
own affairs in the society with his own capability and to handle his
living from what he gains in his life.

With consideration of what has already been discussed above, there
remains no doubt that the attribute of self-respect means that man
should take advantage of Allah-given powers in his life and should
utilize them for attaining his goals. He must not rely upon the powers
of others and this, indeed, is one of the natural and praiseworthy
qualities of man.

Self-respect is like a barrier which protects man from an inferior life
and from many unjust acts and indecent deeds. Whoever is not endowed
with self-respect and fixes his eyes on others, would easily sell his
will power and personality to others and would offer whatever he is
asked for, even if it may be his natural freedom, prestige, honor, and
dignity.

Most crimes such as murder, banditry, theft, pick pocketing, the crime
of lying, flattery, disloyalty to one's country, reliance on foreigners,
and the like are the evil consequences of greed and reliance upon
others.

But whoever wears the crown of honour of self-respect, does not submit
himself to any splendor but the splendor of the Almighty Allah, does not
yield to any authority and pomp, and always defends what he considers to
be true. Self-respect is the best means by which one can acquire the
attribute of honesty and safeguard it.

Benevolence and Helping the Needy
---------------------------------

It is certain that in any society, the poor and the helpless deserve
help. It is the duty of the rich to help the poor and not to trample
upon this certain right. The holy religion of Islam has also set out
strict rules concerning the observation of this right. It holds the rich
responsible to help the weak and the poor.

In the Holy Qur'an, the Almighty Allah has introduced Himself as
Benevolent, Beneficent, and Merciful. Allah has encouraged His servants
to attain these praiseworthy attributes to the extent that He states:
"Allah is with benefactors;" and He also states: "Whatever you spend in
the way of Allah is to your own advantage." Elsewhere, He states:
"Whatever you spend in the way of Allah will be returned unto you and
you will not sustain a loss."

Study and investigation into the social conditions and also in the
advantages of benevolence clarify the context of these verses, for,
indeed, all forces of the society work for every individual.

In a society where a group of helpless people fail to make efforts due
to insolvency, the acquisition of income diminishes proportionately and
its evil consequences embrace all people. In such a society, a time will
come when the rich become the poorest of all. But if the rich help the
poor with their benevolence and generosity, they will gain the following
outstanding results:

(1) By this action, they gain the affection of others and captivate the
hearts of a group of people.

(2) They gain a great deal of respect with an insignificant amount of
money.

(3) They attain people's support, because people take sides with the
benefactors.

(4) They are safe from the danger of the accumulation of the vengeance
and anger of the poor which harm the good and the bad together.

(5) The trivial money that they spend in the way of Allah will increase
in amount and return unto them as a result of proper running of the
economy.

There are innumerable Qur'anic verses and *ahadith* regarding the
attribute of spending in the way of Allah and also in regard to the
encouragement and persuasion for this noble deed.

Cooperation
-----------

Benevolence and beneficence, mentioned earlier, are one of the various
branches of cooperation which forms the basis of human society, for the
society exists when all individuals help one another by means of which
all may enjoy good and sound living conditions and will meet their
requirements of life.

It should not be imagined that the holy religion of Islam has demanded
benevolence only in financial matters, rather it is one of the aims of
Islam and also one of the demands of man's conscience to offer all kinds
of help to every helpless, although he may not be in need of money.

To teach an illiterate, to help a blind, to guide a misled, to assist an
oppressed person, and... are all the true acts of benevolence and
beneficence and a part of the cooperation whose credibility we have
approved and confirmed on the very first day of the establishment of the
society.

It is self-evident that if man fails to perform a part of minor tasks,
he will not perform principal tasks and if he disregards the
insignificant minor duties, he will refuse to undertake general and
important obligations.

Arranging Charities and Reliefs
-------------------------------

Benevolence is praiseworthy when it renders good results. Of course, the
more general and lasting the results, the more praiseworthy and better
would be the benevolence. The treatment of a patient is an act of
benevolence and beneficence, but construction and management of a
hospital which treats hundreds of patients daily cannot be compared with
this act.

Teaching a student is praiseworthy, but it can never reach the value of
setting up an institution which turns out hundreds of graduating
scholars annually. This is why general donations, public charities and
reliefs are the acts of highest benevolence and beneficence.

In Islamic terminology, this public charity is interpreted as "standing
charity". The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Two things provide man with
honor: a righteous child and standing charity." According to the Holy
Book and the *ahadith*, as long as the standing charity exists the
Almighty Allah considers its benefactions for the one who has
established this charity.

Self-Sacrifice
--------------

There is no doubt that, in the human conscience, the genuine life and
honest living are of equal importance. A life without honor and devoid
of man's prosperity is not a life indeed, rather it is a death much
bitter and more unpleasant than natural death. A man who maintains value
for his honor and prosperity should escape from such a mean life
resembling death.

In whatever environment a man lives and to whatever policies he may be
inclined, he will understand with his Allah-given nature that death for
the cause of sanctification is prosperity itself although this matter is
clearer in the logic of religion than in any other logic and is far away
from supposition and superstition.

This is because whoever defends his religious society and gives his life
for this cause, is aware that he has not deprived himself of any
privileges and that he will get a sweeter, more valuable, and
everlasting life in return for giving his sweet and short-span life for
the cause of Allah. Truly, his prosperity is immortal.

The Almighty Allah states in His words:

***"And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead,. nay,
they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord
(3:169)."***

But in non-religious societies which consider human life confined to the
short-span life of this world only, it can never be said that man will
be again alive in the Hereafter or will attain happiness and prosperity,
except that it is inculcated upon the people, through suppositions and
superstitions, that if a man is, for example, killed for the cause of
his country or for national sanctities, his name will be entered in the
list of the devoted and self-sacrificing persons of the nation and will
be inscribed in gold in the history book and thus he will remain alive
forever.

The praise and sanctification for martyrdom and getting killed in the
way of Allah have not been made in Islam so much for any other good
deed.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "There is always a good deed surpassing
other good deeds. But no good deed can surpass martyrdom." Muslims of
the early period of Islam asked forgiveness from the Holy Prophet (S)
and, as a result of the prayers of the Holy Prophet (S), they attained
the elevated rank of martyrdom. They never used to cry for those who
were martyred, knowing that the martyrs were alive and not dead.

Generosity and Donation of Money
--------------------------------

The role that wealth plays in regulation of life needs no explanation.
Many people consider life the same as wealth and do not believe in any
virtue and honor for man except property and wealth. They direct all
their activities towards accumulating and saving money. As a result of
this fascination and greed, they get entangled in stinginess.

Such people deprive others and sometimes degrade themselves further and
submit to meanness and miserliness, thus depriving themselves of
enjoying their own wealth as well. Neither they enjoy themselves nor do
they give money to others. They only enjoy accumulating money.

Those who are entangled with the indecent attribute of miserliness
(certainly, those who are involved in stinginess are even meaner than
them) lose their human nature and become destitute in their lives
because:

(1) They only look for their own happiness, prosperity, and comfort and
believe in individual life, although human nature advocates social life
for us and the individual life, led in any manner, is doomed to
destruction.

(2) By showing off their authority to others, they attract towards
themselves the poor and the needy due to their humility. Although they d
o not relieve the sufferings of the afflicted, they try to make the
needy pay respect to them. They take the poor as slaves and foster the
spirit of idol-worshipping. Consequently, human courage, bravery,
magnanimity, and pride will be eradicated from the society.

(3) Trampling upon the pure feelings of affection, friendship,
philanthropy, compassion, and benevolence, they promote all kinds of
felony, crime, meanness, and wickedness in the society. This is because
the most powerful natural factor of crime and offence such as
backbiting, incontinence, theft, banditry, murder, and poverty cannot be
found among the needy.

These factors are the anger, rancor, and feeling of revenge which are
implanted in the hearts of the afflicted and distressed by the wealthy
people and which are aggravated by the stingy rich people. That is why a
stingy person in a society is, in fact, the first enemy of that society
and is always affected by the anger and severe punishment of Allah and
the hatred of the inhabitants of the world.

There are many verses in the Holy Qur'an reproaching and blaming the
mean quality of stinginess and greed on the one hand, and on praising
the attribute of generosity, spending in the way of Allah, and helping
the poor and needy on the other.

In His words, the Almighty Allah promises that He will return the
property that is donated ten times and, in some instances, seventy and
up to seven hundred times and more to the donor.

It has also been proved through experience that the wealth of those who
are generous, who help the poor generously, and who cater for the
shortcomings of the human society is increased day by day.

Those who resolve the difficulties of others will not face difficulties
themselves. No one has ever seen any knot in the comb.

If they occasionally face difficulties, all people will sympathize with
them. Whatever help they have extended to others will collectively
return unto them.

Furthermore, like honorable men, they have set their conscience at peace
by doing good deeds and have responded to the Divine call concerning the
*wajib* and *mustahabb* obligations. They have used the pure feelings of
humanity through kindness, compassion, philanthropy, and benevolence and
have acquired popularity and an immaculate respect from the people.
Finally, they have gained the satisfaction of the Almighty Allah and the
everlasting prosperity at the lowest cost.

The Generalities of Jihad
-------------------------

Every creature defends his life as well as his interests. Like others,
every creature is equipped with a defensive power that enables him to
combat with his enemies. With his Allah-given instinct and nature, man
believes that he must defend himself and destroy the enemy who wants to
destroy him and who never gives up his animosity.

He also believes that he should defend his rights if someone
transgresses upon his vital interests and that he should cut off the
hands of the transgressor by any means possible.

This natural phenomenon, which is invariably present in the nature of an
individual, is firm and stable in human societies as well, i.e., an
enemy who threatens the members of a society or its social independence
is condemned to death by that society. This way of thinking has always
been predominant in human societies that individuals and societies can
make any decisions and can act harshly against their dangerous enemies.

Islam is also a social religion established on the basis of *Tawhid*.
Islam considers those who refuse to abide by truth and justice as its
vital enemies and as the ones who disturb the order of humanity. Islam
does not believe in any human value and respect for them.

Since Islam is itself a universal religion and because it has not set
any specific place as its homeland and frontiers for its followers, it
fights with anyone who believes in shirk and who does not accept the
truth and divine laws by clear logic and wise counsel in order to make
him follow truth and justice.

The essence of the laws of Islam on jihad is only this and no more. It
is exactly in accordance with the policies which are usually adopted by
every human society against its vital enemies.

Contrary to the propaganda by the malicious enemies, Islam is not the
"religion of sword", for Islam is not an imperial-plan which knows no
logic but sword and political maneuvers, rather it is a religion whose
founder is Allah Who, in His Divine Words, addresses the people through
logic and reasoning and invites His creatures to a religion which
corresponds to their creation.

A religion whose general initial greeting is *salam* (peace) and whose
universal policy, according to the explicit wording of the Holy Qur'an,
is: ***('''') "...Reconciliation is better ...(4:128)"*** will never be
a religion of sword and oppression.

During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S), when the divine light of
Islam had illuminated the entire Arabian Peninsula and when Muslims were
involved in important battles and severe wars, the casualties of the
Muslims did not reach more than two hundred persons and the casualties
of the unbelievers did not touch the figure of one thousand in number.
(Among these one thousand people, seven hundred belonged to
Banu-Qurayzah, who were killed by the order of the arbitration they had
themselves chosen.). Thus it is quite unfair to call such a religion,
the "religion of sword".

The Instances of War In Islam
-----------------------------

There are a few groups with whom Islam combats:

(1) *Mushrikin*: These are the ones who do not believe in *Tawhid*,
*Nubuwwah*, and *Ma'ad*. This group should primarily be invited to
embrace Islam. The facts of religion must be explained to them clearly
in such a way that no ambiguity and excuse would remain. Then if they
accept these truths, they will be considered as the brothers of other
Muslims and equal to them in profits and losses. But if they refuse to
accept the truth and reality after these are clearly explained to them,
Islam will perform the religious duty of *jihad* against them.

(2) *Ahl al-Kitab*: These are the followers of the Divine Books[^2] who
have a religion and a divine book from the viewpoint of Islam and who
believe in *Tawhid*, *Nubuwwah*, and *Ma'ad*. Islam gives its permission
to these groups to live under its protection by paying *jizyah* (head
tax charged from *Ahl al-Kitab* in lieu of their non-acceptance of
Islam), that is, - by accepting the guardianship of Islam, they must
safeguard their own independence and perform their deeds according to
their own religious regulations.

Their life, honour, and property will be respected like that of all
other Muslims. In lieu of this, they must pay an insignificant sum as
*jizyah* to the Muslim society. They must not, however, make evil
propaganda, help the enemies of Islam, or perform anything else that is
to the detriment of the Muslims.

(3) Those who do injustice and engage in corruption: This group of
people includes those Muslims who engage in armed rebellion against
Islam and the Muslims and embark on the massacre of other Muslims. The
Islamic society combats with such people, so that they may surrender and
give up corruption and revolt.

(4) The enemies of Islam who attack in order to destroy the very
foundation of Islam or to overthrow the Islamic Government: In this
case, it is *wajib* for all Muslims to defend Islam and to deal with
them like *kafir harbi*(unbeliever to be fought against).

If it is deemed advisable in the interests of the Muslims and Islam, the
Islamic society can temporarily enter into a non-aggression treaty with
the enemies of Islam, but it does not have the right to establish
friendly relations with them in a manner that their words and actions
cause evil effects and corrupt the thoughts and deeds of Muslims.

Escaping From Jihad and Defence
-------------------------------

Running away from the battlefield and escaping from the enemy means that
the person who runs away considers his life as more valuable and dearer
than the existence of the society. It is indeed the surrender of
religious sanctities and the life, honor, and property of the society to
an enemy who threatens their lives in all respects.

Therefore, escaping from jihad and defense is a mortal sin. The Almighty
Allah has explicitly promised to put the person who escapes from jihad
in hell as He states:

***"And whoever shall turn his back to them on that day unless he shall
turn aside for the sake of fighting or withdraws to a company - then he,
indeed, becomes deserving of Allah's wrath, and his abode is
hell...(8:16)."***

Defending the Islamic Domain
----------------------------

According to what has been discussed, defending the Islamic society and
the territory of Muslims is one of the most important Islamic
obligations. The Almighty Allah states:

***"And do not speak of those who are killed in Allah's way as dead;
nay, (they are) alive, but you do not perceive (2:154)".***

The story of men who most heartily participated in bloody battles during
early period of the advent of Islam and of martyrs who got weltered in
their pure blood is extremely astonishing as well as exemplary. These
were the ones who established and made firm foundation of this holy
religion with their pure blood and severely injured bodies.

Fighting With the Internal Enemies of The Society
-------------------------------------------------

As according to natural logic, we ought to fight the foreign enemies and
defend the society from damages, we should combat and fight the internal
enemies of the society as well. The internal enemy of the society is one
who breaches the general policies and the rules that are in force and
thus disrupts and deranges the general order of the society. That is why
security forces and various punishments to retribute the offenders are
established in organized societies to safeguard the order and
continuation of affairs.

In addition to setting up the executive power and various punishments,
Islam has made incumbent upon all individuals to carry out the precept
of *al-amr bil-ma'ruf* (enjoining the lawful acts) and *al-nahy 'an
al-munkar* (forbidding the sinful acts), thus making the campaign more
general and more effective.

The main difference between Islam and other social policies is that
other policies have only focused on the reformation of the actions and
deeds of the people, but Islam has paid attention to both actions and
ethics of the people and has fought against corruption in both the
instances.

Sins which have been forbidden by Islam are the actions that have
sinister effects and evil consequences in the society. Nevertheless,
some of these sins directly corrupt the individual or individuals who
commit them and somehow influence the society as local wounds and
organic complications that appear in the human body. Most sins, such as
not reciting *salat* and not observing *sawm*, disturb the status of
worshipping Allah and deny the divine rights and so fall within this
category.

Some of the sins directly threaten the social life and annihilate the
whole structure of the society like diseases which directly affect human
life and disrupt the affairs of man's life. Lying and slandering fall
under this category. According to Islam, the rights of parents,
backbiting, and attacking the honor of the people also fall under the
same category.

Defending the Truth
-------------------

Another defense which is much more profound and enormous than defending
territory is the defense of right which is the only objective of the
holy religion of Islam. The most important aim of this divine policy is
the revival of right and reality and hence this pure religion has been
named as the religion of truth, *i.e*., a religion that belongs to the
truth, involves nothing but the truth, and aims at nothing but the
truth.

While describing about His Book, which contains all the truths, the
Almighty Allah states:

***"...Guiding to the truth and to a right path (46:30)."***

That is why it is incumbent upon every Muslim to follow the truth, tell
the truth, listen to the truth, and defend the truth with his utmost
capacity and in any way possible.

Homicide
--------

Another instance of injustice which is very indecent and reproachable in
the holy religion of Islam is homicide and killing an innocent person.

Homicide is one of the mortal sins. In His words, the Almighty Allah
equals the killing of a human being with massacre of all the human
beings. This is because the killer of one person deals with humanity and
humanity is the same in one person or in one thousand persons.

Infringing Upon The Property of Orphans
---------------------------------------

Just as benevolence towards people is logically and religiously
praiseworthy, malevolence towards Allah's servants is unfair and
blameworthy. Injustice and oppression are strongly prohibited by the
holy religion of Islam in several instances, one of which is the
infringement upon the property of orphans.

Misappropriating the property or money of an orphan is one of the mortal
sins in Islam. It is specified in the Holy Qur'an that whoever
misappropriates an orphan's property eats fire indeed and will soon be
thrown in the blazing fire of hell. According to the statements of the
infallible Imams (as), the main reason for so much emphasis is that if
an aged man (who is not an orphan) is oppressed, he may defend his
rights, but an orphan is unable to do so.

Disappointment for The Blessings of Allah
-----------------------------------------

In Islam, one of the most dangerous sins is being disappointed for
Allah's blessings.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether. surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful (39:53)."***

At another place, the person who despairs of the blessings of Allah is
considered to be an unbeliever. The reason behind this is that if a
person despairs of the blessings and forgiveness of Allah, he will no
longer have any internal stimulant to perform good and praiseworthy
deeds in his life and to refrain from committing *dhanb kabir* (mortal
sin) and *dhanb saghir* (venial sin) and indecent actions, because the
main motivation for the two items mentioned above is "hope for Allah's
blessings" and "deliverance from the punishment of Allah". This
expectation does not exist in such a person. There is no difference
between this person and the one who does not believe in any religion as
far as mental and internal qualities are concerned.

Anger and Wrath
---------------

Anger is a condition that prompts man to take revenge and he gets
internal satisfaction in taking revenge. If a man acts with laxity in
controlling himself, his commonsense will be immediately subdued by
anger and wrath and every indecent and unfair action will seem right to
him to the point that he becomes more rapacious than any beast.

Strict orders have been issued by Islam for preventing the outburst of
anger and severe reproachment has been set against following it. The
Almighty Allah has shown great favors towards those who control their
anger and remain patient when they are angry.

As the Almighty Allah states:

***"...And those who restrain (their) anger and pardon
men...(3:134)."***

In regard to the characteristics of believers, the Almighty Allah
states:

***"... And whenever they are angry they forgive (42:37)."***

Bribery
-------

Receiving money or a gift in return for a judgment or for the
accomplishment of a task which is the duty of the receiver is called
bribery.

Bribery is a mortal sin in Islam. The person who commits this sin is
deprived of many social privileges of religion (justice) and deserves
Allah's punishment. This matter has been specified in the Holy Book and
the *ahadith*.

The Holy Prophet (S) has cursed tile givers, receivers, and the
mediators of bribe.

The sixth infallible Imam (as) also states: "Receiving bribe for
administering justice equals blasphemy to Allah".

Surely, all these reproachments apply to the bribe taken for the
judgment of truth or for administering justice. The sin of the bribe
taken for the judgment contrary to truth and for unjust deeds is far
greater and its retribution is much severer.

Theft
-----

Theft is an unfair and indecent action that threatens the financial
security of the society. It is self-evident that the fundamental source
of human life is the property and wealth which man acquires at the
expense of his life. Man protects h is wealth so that it can be
safeguarded against any infringement by others so that it can
consequently remain as the protection and backing of the society.

Surely, breaking through this protection and disrupting this order mean
ruining man's life which has been spent to acquire such wealth. It
results in disabling men to perform most of their activities and renders
them inefficient.

That is why, in regard to the punishment of this repugnant action which
is considered to be perfidious by the thief's self-conscience as well,
Islam has ordered to cut the thief's hand (four fingers from the right
hand). The Almighty Allah states:

***"And (as for) the man who steals and the woman who steals, cut off
their hands as a punishment for what they have earned. (5:38)."***

Selling Underweight
-------------------

In Islam, selling underweight is a mortal sin. In His words, the
Almighty Allah reproaches and threatens those who commit it and states:

***"Woe to the defrauders....Do not these think that they shall be
raised again, for a mighty day (83:1, 4, 5)."***

Besides doing injustice to the people and stealing their money by way of
theft, a person who sells underweight causes people to lose their
confidence in him and gradually loses his customers and at last his own
money.

The General Penalty of Sins in Islam
------------------------------------

These indecent deeds are called mortal sins in Islam and the Almighty
Allah has clearly promised to punish those who commit these sins.

In addition to establishing severe punishments for some of these sins,
Allah has excluded those who commit these sins (even once) from the
just, i.e., He has taken away from them the honor of being a righteous
member of the human society.

Whoever commits a mortal sin loses his justice and gets deprived of the
privileges that a righteous member of the society can enjoy. He cannot
be in charge of one of the various positions of the Islamic government;
for example, he cannot become *khalifah* or *imam al-jama'ah* (the imam
of congregational *salat*). His testimony to the benefit or detriment of
others is not acceptable. He will remain in this state until he repents
and develops the quality of justice in himself once again by constantly
having *taqwa* (piety).

The Essentiality of Employment and The Importance of Trade And Industry
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Endeavour and work are the base and foundation upon which the world of
creation is established and these are the only guarantee for the
survival of every creature. The Almighty Allah has equipped His
creatures with suitable means with which they derive benefits and avoid
losses.

Man, who is the most astonishing and sophisticated design of creation,
has more requirements than any other creature. Thus he needs more
endeavors with which he could meet his countless requirements and also
maintain the family that he should naturally administer.

That is why Islam, which is a natural and social religion, considers
working and earning as *wajib* for the people.

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "It is *wajib* upon every Muslim man and
woman to earn *halal* money for his or her livelihood and
subsistence[^3] ."

Islam has not attached any importance to those who spend their lives
idly. Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) saw a man whose strength and
capability were surprising, he would ask: "Does he work?" If they said:
"No, he is idle.", the Holy Prophet (S) would state: "To me, he has no
respect.", meaning that an idle youth had no value to the Prophet
(S)[^4].

In Islam, every individual should choose one of the many professions and
industries towards which the Almighty Allah has guided him to choose
according to his own aptitude and interest. He should earn his living in
this way, carry one of the burdens of society on his back, and try to
provide the people with comfort.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for (53:39)."***

In short, Islam has made the strongest recommendations about working and
acquiring sustenance and has not disregarded the importance of economic
activities even in the most critical moments so much so that Al-'Imam
al-Sadiq (A) said to his friend Hisham: "Even during the war, when
soldiers array in line and when the fire of battle is fanned, do not
neglect your economic duty and necessary activities for providing your
subsistence and follow your financial efforts in such difficult
situations[^5] .

Thus idleness due to laziness is strictly forbidden in Islam.

Denouncement of Idleness
------------------------

It is clear from what has been discussed earlier that working and making
effort is a right path that creation has provided for man to attain his
prosperity by following it. Surely, deviation from the path of creation
and nature, no matter how minor it is, will only lead to the detriment
of man. In this case, deviation from a matter upon which the very
foundation of life is established will lead to nothing but misery in
this world and in the *Akhirah*.

This is why the seventh infallible Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) states: "Do
not show sluggishness and tiredness in your work or else you will lose
in this world and in the *Akhirah*."

The Holy Prophet (S) has cursed those who have got used to idleness and
who put the burden of their life on the shoulders of others.

Today, psychological and social experiments have thoroughly clarified
that most social corruptions are generated by idleness. It is idleness
that disrupts the economic and cultural activities of the society and
gives rise to all kinds of moral decadence and superstitions.

Agriculture and Its Advantages
------------------------------

Farming, which is the means for providing food for the society, is one
of the most praiseworthy human professions due to its importance.
Therefore, Islam has laid down great emphasis for choosing this
profession.

The sixth infallible Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) states: "Farmers would
enjoy more respectable positions than others on the Day of *Qiyamah*."

The fifth infallible Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) states: "There is no
job better than farming and there is no benefit better than the benefit
of farming, because benevolent and malevolent grazing animals and birds
benefit from it and pray for the farmer."

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "A Muslim who plants a tree or cultivates a
land from which people, birds, and grazing animals eat will have the
reward of *sadaqah* (charity)."

Muslims are obliged to use their natural energy to the maximum, i.e., to
the point where one of the religious leaders states: "If at the time
when the world is to come to an end and the solar system is to collapse
any one of you has a small plant in hand, he should plant it if he has
enough time to do so[^6] . This means that the idea of the collapse of
the world should not prevent you from performing this noble deed.

'Ali (as) states: "Curse and imprecation of Allah be upon one who has
land and water, i.e., one who has natural resources at his disposal but
does not use his human skill to take advantage of them and consequently
lives in poverty and beggary[^7] ."

Self-Confidence
---------------

It has been repeatedly mentioned under the section on "Beliefs" that the
general planning of Islam is that man should worship none except Allah
and should not pay homage and bow down to anyone but He Who is the
Creator of the world.

All are the creatures of Allah and receive their subsistence from Him.
No one has privileges over others except in respect of those things
which are done for the sake of Allah.

Every Muslim should have self-confidence and should take advantage of
the blessing of independence given to him by the Almighty Allah. Man
must use all the means that Allah has bestowed on him to pass his life.
He should not rely upon others and consider a partner for Allah and
worship a new idol each day.

The servant should realize that he eats his own bread and not of the
master. He should know that he receives the reward of his labor, not the
tip from his master or lord. Every employee should believe that he
receives the wages of his hard work, not the gift and gratuity from his
boss, his office, the government, or the society.

After all, a free man should not rely on and pay homage to any but
Allah; otherwise, internally, he will have the same meanness and
servitude of polytheism that the idol-worshippers have openly.

Finally, it should be noted that self-confidence means that man should
use his intrinsic capability in his life and should not rely on others.
It doesn't mean that he should dissociate from the Almighty Allah and
consider himself to be really effective as the source of all hopes and
desires.

The Disadvantages of Relying On Others
--------------------------------------

Relying on others, that is, living on the support of others, means
giving up human pride, honor, independence, and freedom. It is the
source of all kinds of offences and social misdeeds which originate from
meanness and degradation.

Whoever relies on others and fixes his eyes upon this or that person,
indeed offers his will and commonsense for sale, for he should commit
flattery and should do whatever (right or wrong, decent or indecent)
they demand of him or order him to do.

He should resign himself to any disdain and scorn. He must practice
xenophilism, agree to do any injustice and oppression, and at last
consider all the limits and human laws as naught.

Asking for help in unnecessary cases is *haram* in Islam. Financial
contribution to the needy, which is a part of Islamic provisions, only
applies to those needy people whose earning is less than their expenses
or to those who are disabled.

[^1]: Holy Qur'an,Â SurahÂ 3,Â AyahÂ 28 andÂ SurahÂ 16, Ayah 106

[^2]: the Jews, the Christians, and the Magians

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p 6

[^4]: Al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p 501

[^5]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol. 4, p 101

[^6]: Al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p 501

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p 19


