The Generalities of Jihad
=========================

Every creature defends his life as well as his interests. Like others,
every creature is equipped with a defensive power that enables him to
combat with his enemies. With his Allah-given instinct and nature, man
believes that he must defend himself and destroy the enemy who wants to
destroy him and who never gives up his animosity. He also believes that
he should defend his rights if someone transgresses upon his vital
interests and that he should cut off the hands of the transgressor by
any means possible.

This natural phenomenon, which is invariably present in the nature of
an individual, is firm and stable in human societies as well, i.e., an
enemy who threatens the members of a society or its social independence
is condemned to death by that society. This way of thinking has always
been predominant in human societies that individuals and societies can
make any decisions and can act harshly against their dangerous
enemies.

Islam is also a social religion established on the basis of Tawhid.
Islam considers those who refuse to abide by truth and justice as its
vital enemies and as the ones who disturb the order of humanity. Islam
does not believe in any human value and respect for them. Since Islam is
itself a universal religion and because it has not set any specific
place as its homeland and frontiers for its followers, it fights with
anyone who believes in shirk and who does not accept the truth and
divine laws by clear logic and wise counsel in order to make him follow
truth and justice. The essence of the laws of Islam on jihad is only
this and no more. It is exactly in accordance with the policies which
are usually adopted by every human society against its vital enemies.

Contrary to the propaganda by the malicious enemies, Islam is not the
"religion of sword", for Islam is not an imperial-plan which knows no
logic but sword and political manoeuvres, rather it is a religion whose
founder is Allah Who, in His Divine Words, addresses the people through
logic and reasoning and invites His creatures to a religion which
corresponds to their creation. A religion whose general initial greeting
is salam (peace) and whose universal policy, according to the explicit
wording of the Holy Qur'an, is: ('''') "...Reconciliation is better
...(4:128)" will never be a religion of sword and oppression.

During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (SA), when the divine light of
Islam had illuminated the entire Arabian Peninsula and when Muslims were
involved in important battles and severe wars, the casualties of the
Muslims did not reach more than two hundred persons and the casualties
of the unbelievers did not touch the figure of one thousand in number.
(Among these one thousand people, seven hundred belonged to
Banu-Qurayzah, who were killed by the order of the arbitration they had
themselves chosen.). Thus it is quite unfair to call such a religion,
the "religion of sword".

**THE INSTANCES OF WAR IN ISLAM**

There are a few groups with whom Islam combats:

(1) Mushrikin: These are the ones who do not believe in Tawhid,
Nubuwwah, and Ma'ad. This group should primarily be invited to embrace
Islam. The facts of religion must be explained to them clearly in such a
way that no ambiguity and excuse would remain. Then if they accept these
truths, they will be considered as the brothers of other Muslims and
equal to them in profits and losses. But if they refuse to accept the
truth and reality after these are clearly explained to them, Islam will
perform the religious duty of jihad against them.

(2) Ahl al-Kitab: These are the followers of the Divine Books (the
Jews, the Christians, and the Magians) who have a religion and a divine
book from the viewpoint of Islam and who believe in Tawhid, Nubuwwah,
and Ma'ad. Islam gives its permission to these groups to live under its
protection by paying jizyah (head tax charged from Ahl al-Kitab in lieu
of their non-acceptance of Islam), that is,- by accepting the
guardianship of Islam, they must safeguard their own independence and
perform their deeds according to their own religious regulations. Their
life, honour, and property will be respected like that of all other
Muslims. In lieu of this, they must pay an insignificant sum as jizyah
to the Muslim society. They must not, however, make evil propaganda,
help the enemies of Islam, or perform anything else that is to the
detriment of the Muslims.

(3) Those who do injustice and engage in corruption: This group of
people includes those Muslims who engage in armed rebellion against
Islam and the Muslims and embark on the massacre of other Muslims. The
Islamic society combats with such people, so that they may surrender and
give up corruption and revolt.

(4) The enemies of Islam who attack in order to destroy the very
foundation of Islam or to overthrow the Islamic Government: In this
case, it is wajib for all Muslims to defend Islam and to deal with them
like kafir harbi (unbeliever to be fought against).

If it is deemed advisable in the interests of the Muslims and Islam,
the Islamic society can temporarily enter into a non-aggression treaty
with the enemies of Islam, but it does not have the right to establish
friendly relations with them in a manner that their words and actions
cause evil effects and corrupt the thoughts and deeds of Muslims.

**ESCAPING FROM JIHAD AND DEFENCE**

Running away from the battlefield and escaping from the enemy means
that the person who runs away considers his life as more valuable and
dearer than the existence of the society. It is indeed the surrender of
religious sanctities and the life, honour, and property of the society
to an enemy who threatens their lives in all respects. Therefore,
escaping from jihad and defence is a mortal sin. The Almighty Allah has
explicitly promised to put the person who escapes from jihad in hell as
He states:

"And whoever shall turn his back to them on that day unless he shall
turn aside for the sake of fighting or withdraws to a company - then he,
indeed, becomes deserving of Allah's wrath, and his abode is
hell...(8:16)."

**DEFENDING THE ISLAMIC DOMAIN**

According to what has been discussed, defending the Islamic society and
the territory of Muslims is one of the most important Islamic
obligations. The Almighty Allah states: "And do not speak of those who
are killed in Allah's way as dead; nay, (they are) alive, but you do not
perceive (2:154)". The story of men who most heartily participated in
bloody battles during early period of the advent of Islam and of martyrs
who got weltered in their pure blood is extremely astonishing as well as
exemplary. These were the ones who established and made firm foundation
of this holy religion with their pure blood and severely injured
bodies.

**FIGHTING WITH THE INTERNAL ENEMIES OF THE SOCIETY**

As according to natural logic, we ought to fight the foreign enemies
and defend the society from damages, we should combat and fight the
internal enemies of the society as well. The internal enemy of the
society is one who breaches the general policies and the rules that are
in force and thus disrupts and deranges the general order of the
society. That is why security forces and various punishments to
retribute the offenders are established in organized societies to
safeguard the order and continuation of affairs.

In addition to setting up the executive power and various punishments,
Islam has made incumbent upon all individuals to carry out the precept
of al-amr bil-ma'ruf (enjoining the lawful acts) and al-nahy 'an
al-munkar (forbidding the sinful acts), thus making the campaign more
general and more effective. The main difference between Islam and other
social policies is that other policies have only focused on the
reformation of the actions and deeds of the people, but Islam has paid
attention to both actions and ethics of the people and has fought
against corruption in both the instances.

Sins which have been forbidden by Islam are the actions that have
sinister effects and evil consequences in the society. Nevertheless,
some of these sins directly corrupt the individual or individuals who
commit them and somehow influence the society as local wounds and
organic complications that appear in the human body. Most sins, such as
not reciting salat and not observing sawm, disturb the status of
worshipping Allah and deny the divine rights and so fall within this
category.

Some of the sins directly threaten the social life and annihilate the
whole structure of the society like diseases which directly affect human
life and disrupt the affairs of man's life. Lying and slandering fall
under this category. According to Islam, the rights of parents,
backbiting, and attacking the honour of the people also fall under the
same category.

**DEFENDING THE TRUTH**

Another defence which is much more profound and enormous than defending
territory is the defence of right which is the only objective of the
holy religion of Islam. The most important aim of this divine policy is
the revival of right and reality and hence this pure religion has been
named as the religion of truth, i.e., a religion that belongs to the
truth, involves nothing but the truth, and aims at nothing but the
truth. While describing about His Book, which contains all the truths,
the Almighty Allah states: "...Guiding to the truth and to a right path
(46:30)."

That is why it is incumbent upon every Muslim to follow the truth, tell
the truth, listen to the truth, and defend the truth with his utmost
capacity . and in any way possible.

**HOMICIDE**

Another instance of injustice which is very indecent and reproachable
in the holy religion of Islam is homicide and killing an innocent
person. Homicide is one of the mortal sins. In His words, the Almighty
Allah equals the killing of a human being with massacre of all the human
beings. This is because the killer of one person deals with humanity and
humanity is the same in one person or in one thousand persons.

**INFRINGING UPON THE PROPERTY OF ORPHANS**

Just as benevolence towards people is logically and religiously
praiseworthy, malevolence towards Allah's servants is unfair and
blameworthy. Injustice and oppression are strongly prohibited by the
holy religion of Islam in several instances, one of which is the
infringement upon the property of orphans.

Misappropriating the property or money of an orphan is one of the
mortal sins in Islam. It is specified in the Holy Qur'an that whoever
misappropriates an orphan's property eats fire indeed and will soon be
thrown in the blazing fire of hell. According to the statements of the
infallible Imams (AS), the main reason for so much emphasis is that if
an aged man (who is not an orphan) is oppressed, he may defend his
rights, but an orphan is unable to do so.

**DISAPPOINTMENT FOR THE BLESSINGS OF ALLAH**

In Islam, one of the most dangerous sins is being disappointed for
Allah's blessings. The Almighty Allah states:

"Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether. surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful (39:53)." At
another place, the person who despairs of the blessings of Allah is
considered to be an unbeliever. The reason behind this is that if a
person despairs of the blessings and forgiveness of Allah, he will no
longer have any internal stimulant to perform good and praiseworthy
deeds in his life and to refrain from committing dhanb kabir (mortal
sin) and dhanb saghir (venial sin) and indecent actions, because the
main motivation for the two items mentioned above is "hope for Allah's
blessings" and "deliverance from the punishment of Allah". This
expectation does not exist in such a person. There is no difference
between this person and the one who does not believe in any religion as
far as mental and internal qualities are concerned.

**ANGER AND WRATH**

Anger is a condition that prompts man to take revenge and he gets
internal satisfaction in taking revenge. If a man acts with laxity in
controlling himself, his commonsense will be immediately subdued by
anger and wrath and every indecent and unfair action will seem right to
him to the point that he becomes more rapacious than any beast. Strict
orders have been issued by Islam for preventing the outburst of anger
and severe reproachment has been set against following it. The Almighty
Allah has shown great favours towards those who control their anger and
remain patient when they are angry.
As the Almighty Allah states: "...And those who restrain (their) anger
and pardon men...(3:134)." In regard to the characteristics of
believers, the Almighty Allah states: "... And whenever they are angry
they forgive (42:37)."

**BRIBERY**

Receiving money or a gift in return for a judgement or for the
accomplishment of a task which is the duty of the receiver is called
bribery. Bribery is a mortal sin in Islam. The person who commits this
sin is deprived of many social privileges of religion (justice) and
deserves Allah's punishment. This matter has been specified in the Holy
Book and the ahadith. The Holy Prophet (SA) has cursed tile givers,
receivers, and the mediators of bribe.

The sixth infallible Imam (AS) also states: "Receiving bribe for
administering justice equals blasphemy to Allah". Surely, all these
reproachments apply to the bribe taken for the judgement of truth or for
administering justice. The sin of the bribe taken for the judgement
contrary to truth and for unjust deeds is far greater and its
retribution is much severer.

**THEFT**

Theft is an unfair and indecent action that threatens the financial
security of the society. It is self-evident that the fundamental source
of human life is the property. and wealth which man acquires at the
expense of his life. Man protects h is wealth so that it can be safe.
guarded against any infringement by others so that it can consequently
remain as the protection and backing of the society. Surely, breaking
through this protection and disrupting this order mean ruining man's
life which has been spent to acquire such wealth. It results in
disabling men to perform most of their activities and renders them
inefficient.

That is why, in regard to the punishment of this repugnant action which
is considered to be perfidious by the thief's self-conscience as well,
Islam has ordered to cut the thief's hand (four fingers from the right
hand). The Almighty Allah states: "And (as for) the man who steals and
the woman who steals, cut off their hands as a punishment for what they
have earned ..(5:38)."

**SELLING UNDERWEIGHT**

In Islam, selling underweight is a mortal sin. In His words, the
Almighty Allah reproaches and threatens those who commit it and states:
"Woe to the defrauders....Do not these think that they shall be raised
again, for a mighty day (83:1, 4,5)." Besides doing injustice to the
people and stealing their money by way of theft, a person who sells
underweight causes people to lose their confidence in him and gradually
loses his customers and at last his own money.
**THE GENERAL PENALTY OF SINS IN ISLAM**


These indecent deeds are called mortal sins in Islam and the Almighty
Allah has clearly promised to punish those who commit these sins. In
addition to establishing severe punishments for some of these sins,
Allah has excluded those who commit these sins (even once) from the
just, i.e., He has taken away from them the honour of being a righteous
member of the human society.

Whoever commits a mortal sin loses his justice and gets deprived of the
privileges that a righteous member of the society can enjoy. He cannot
be in charge of one of the various positions of the Islamic government;
for example, he cannot become khalifah or imam al-jama'ah (the imam of
congregational salat). His testimony to the benefit or detriment of
others is not acceptable. He will remain in this state until he repents
and develops the quality of justice in himself once again by constantly
having taqwa (piety).

**THE ESSENTIALITY OF EMPLOYMENT AND THE IMPORTANCE OF TRADE AND
INDUSTRY**

Endeavour and work are the base and foundation upon which the world of
creation is established and these are the only guarantee for the
survival of every creature. The Almighty Allah has equipped His
creatures with suitable means with which they derive benefits and avoid
losses. Man, who is the most astonishing and sophisticated design of
creation, has more requirements than any other creature. Thus he needs
more endeavours with which he could meet his countless requirements and
also maintain the family that he should naturally administer. That is
why Islam, which is a natural and social religion, considers working and
earning as wajib for the people.

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "It is wajib upon every Muslim man and
woman to earn halal money for his or her livelihood and subsistence
(Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p 6)."

Islam has not attached any importance to those who spend their lives
idly. Whenever the Holy Prophet (SA) saw a man whose strength and
capability were surprising, he would ask: "Does he work?" If they said:
"No, he is idle.", the Holy Prophet (SA) would state: "To me, he has no
respect.", meaning that an idle youth had no value to the Prophet (SA)
[Al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p 501.].

In Islam, every individual should choose one of the many professions
and industries towards which the Almighty Allah has guided him to choose
according to his own aptitude and interest. He should earn his living in
this way, carry one of the burdens of society on his back, and try to
provide the people with comfort.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for (53:39)."

In short, Islam has made the strongest recommendations about working
and acquiring sustenance and has not disregarded the importance of
economic activities even in the most critical moments so much so that
Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) said to his friend Hisham: "Even during the war,
when soldiers array in line and when the fire of battle is fanned, do
not neglect your economic duty and necessary activities for providing
your subsistence and follow your financial efforts in such difficult
situations (Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol. 4, p 101.). Thus idleness due to
laziness is strictly forbidden in Islam.

**DENOUNCEMENT OF IDLENESS**

It is clear from what has been discussed earlier that working and
making effort is a right path that creation has provided for man to
attain his prosperity by following it. Surely, deviation from the path
of creation and nature, no matter how minor it is, will only lead to the
detriment of man. In this case, deviation from a matter upon which the
very foundation of life is established will lead to nothing but misery
in this world and in the Akhirah.

This is why the seventh infallible Imam Musa al-Kazim (AS) states: "Do
not show sluggishness and tiredness in your work or else you will lose
in this world and in the Akhirah." The Holy Prophet (SA) has cursed
those who have got used to idleness and who put the burden of their life
on the shoulders of others. Today, psychological and social experiments
have thoroughly clarified that most social corruptions are generated by
idleness. It is idleness that disrupts the economic and cultural
activities of the society and gives rise to all kinds of moral decadence
and superstitions.


**AGRICULTURE AND ITS ADVANTAGES**

Farming, which is the means for providing food for the society, is one
of the most praiseworthy human professions due to its importance.
Therefore, Islam has laid down great emphasis for choosing this
profession. The sixth infallible Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) states:
"Farmers would enjoy more respectable positions than others on the Day
of Qiyamah." The fifth infallible Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) states:
"There is no job better than farming and there is no benefit better than
the benefit of farming, because benevolents and malevolents grazing
animals and birds benefit from it and pray for the farmer."

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "A Muslim who plants a tree or cultivates
a land from which people, birds, and grazing animals eat will have the
reward of sadaqah (charity)."

Muslims are obliged to use their natural energy to the maximum, i.e.,
to the point where one of the religious leaders states: "If at the time
when the world is to come to an end and the solar system is to collapse
any one of you has a small plant in hand, he should plant it if he has
enough time to do so (Al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p 501). This means that the
idea of the collapse of the world should not prevent you from performing
this noble deed.

'Ali (AS) states: "Curse and imprecation of Allah be upon one who has
land and water, i.e., one who has natural resources at his disposal but
does not use his human skill to take advantage of them and consequently
lives in poverty and beggary (Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p 19)."

**SELF-CONFIDENCE**

It has been repeatedly mentioned under the section on "Beliefs" that
the general planning of Islam is that man should worship none except
Allah and should not pay homage and bow down to anyone but He Who is the
Creator of the world. All are the creatures of Allah and receive their
subsistence from Him. No one has privileges over others except in
respect of those things which are done for the sake of Allah.

Every Muslim should have self-confidence and should take advantage of
the blessing of independence given to him by the Almighty Allah. Man
must use all the means that Allah has bestowed on him to pass his life.
He should not rely upon others and consider a partner for Allah and
worship a new idol each day. The servant should realize that he eats his
own bread and not of the master. He should know that he receives the
reward of his labour, not the tip from his master or lord. Every
employee should believe that he receives the wages of his hard work, not
the gift and gratuity from his boss, his office, the government, or the
society. After all, a free man should not rely on and pay homage to any
but Allah; otherwise, internally, he will have the same meanness and
servitude of polytheism that the idol-worshippers have openly.

Finally, it should be noted that self-confidence means that man should
use his intrinsic capability in his life and should not rely on others.
It doesn't mean that he should dissociate from the Almighty Allah and
consider himself to be really effective as the source of all hopes and
desires.

**THE DISADVANTAGES OF RELYING ON OTHERS**

Relying on others, that is, living on the support of others, means
giving up human pride, honour, independence, and freedom. It is the
source of all kinds of offences and social misdeeds which originate from
meanness and degradation. Whoever relies on others and fixes his . eyes
upon this or that person, indeed offers his will and commonsense for
sale, for he should commit flattery and should do whatever (right or
wrong, decent or indecent) they demand of him or order him to do. He
should resign himself to any disdain and scorn. He must practise
xenophilism, agree to do any injustice and oppression, and at last
consider all the limits and human laws as naught.

Asking for help in unnecessary cases is haram in Islam. Financial
contribution to the needy, which is a part of Islamic provisions, only
applies to those needy people whose earning is less than their expenses
or to those who are disabled.


