Commandments
============

As mentioned in the beginning of this book, the precepts and teachings
of Islam are divided into three parts: beliefs, ethics, and
commandments. After knowing Allah, we must perform actions such as
reciting *salat* and observing *sawm* which are the signs of the worship
and obedience to Allah. Now, we would explain the precepts of *salat*
which would be followed by the precepts of *sawm*.

Reciting Salat
--------------

The Almighty Allah states:

***"What has brought you into Hell? They shall say: 'We were not of
those who recited salat' (74:42-43)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Prayer is the pillar of faith. If it is
accepted by Allah, the other worships will also be accepted and if it is
not accepted, the other worships will not be accepted either." Just like
a man who removes dirt and uncleanliness from his body by washing
himself five times a day in a river, he will also purify himself from
sins by reciting *salat* five times a day.

Surely, it should be known that the one, who recites *salat* but
attaches no significance to it, is like the one who does not recite
*salat*.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

***"So woe to the ones who recite salat but unmindful of their salawat
(107:4-5)."***

One day, the Holy Prophet (S) entered the mosque and saw that a man was
reciting *salat* but without performing proper *ruku'* (a part of the
*salat* in which one bows down, genuflexion) and *sujud* (the acts of
prostration in the *salat* or worship to Allah). The Holy Prophet (S)
stated: "If this man dies in this condition, he will not die as a
Muslim."

Thus a man should recite *salat* with humility and respect. He should
realize to whom he is talking while reciting salat. He should perform
*ruku'*, *sujud*, and all other actions correctly in order to be
benefited by best results of reciting *salat*.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

***"...Surely the salat keeps (one) away from indecency and evil...
(29:45)."***

Surely, this is true, for the rules of reciting *salat* are such that,
if observed, the person who recites *salat* will never be tempted to
evil acts.

For example, one of the rules of reciting *salat* is that the place
where one recites *salat* and the clothes with which one recites *salat*
should not be usurped or unlawful. His *salat* is not accepted even if a
single thread of his clothes is usurped. One, who shuns *haram* things
to such an extent, will never use *haram* wealth and property at all and
will never deny the rights of others.

Also the *salat* will be accepted provided that man keeps himself away
from avarice, jealousy, and other indecent and bad qualities. It is
certain that the source of all indecencies is these bad qualities. If
one who recites *salat* keeps himself away from these qualities, he will
definitely be free from all indecencies and evil acts.

If some people perform indecent deeds even though they recite *salat*,
it is because they do not exactly follow the necessary rules of reciting
*salat*. As a result, *salawat* are not accepted and they do not enjoy
the excellent advantages of reciting *salat*.

The holy religion of Islam has attached such an importance to *salat*
that it has made it *wajib* for every Muslim under all the
circumstances, even at the point of death. If one cannot recite *Surat
al-Hamd* and the other *surah*, and other *dhikr* (words for remembering
Allah) of *salat*, he should pass these through his heart. If he is
unable to recite *salat* in a standing posture, he should recite *salat*
in a sitting position. If he is unable to recite *salat* even in sitting
position, he should do so in lying down. In any case, under no
circumstances a man is exempted from reciting *salat*.

If one who wants to recite *salat* cannot face the *Qiblah* (facing
towards Ka'bah while reciting*salat*) in the state of war, for the fear
of the enemy, or in emergency cases, he can recite *salat* without
facing the *Qiblah* and he should recite *salat* in whatever condition
or direction he is.

Wajib Salaat
------------

There are six *wajib salaat*:

(i) *Al-salat al-yawmiyyah* (the daily prayers);

(ii) *Salat al-ayat* (the prayer of the signs of Allah's creation);

(iii) *Salat al-mayyit* (the prayer for the dead person);

(iv) *Salat* of *wajib tawaf* (the ritual prayer of circumambulation
around the Ka'bah);

(v) *Qada'* (settling the salawat which had not been performed in time)
*Salawat* of the father which become *wajib* on the eldest son upon the
death of the father; and

(vi) *Salawat* which become *wajib* upon a person due to: *ijarah*
(receipt of money by him for their recitation), *nadhr* (vow), *qasam*
(oath), and *'ahd* (promise).

Prerequisites of Salat
----------------------

Reciting salat, i.e. standing before Allah, expressing servitude to Him,
and worshipping Him, requires certain prerequisites. *Salat* is not
valid unless these prerequisites are met. These essential requirements
are: (i) *taharah* (specified Islamic way of purification), (ii) time,
(iii) dress, (iv) place, and (v)*Qiblah*.

These prerequisites have been explained in detail here.

### (1) Taharah

One who recites *salat* should be *tahir*; that is, he should recite
*salat* as per the requirements, *viz*: by having *wudhu’* (statutory
ablution according to Islamic *Shari'ah*) before *salat*, or by *wajib*
*ghusl* (taking bath according to the Islamic *Shari'ah*) or by
*tayammum* (statutory Islamic ablution with soil, sand, etc) and also
his body and dress should not be polluted with *najasah*.

#### Najis Substances

There are several substances which are *najis* (inherently impure). They
are as follows:

First and Second: The urine and faeces (The outlet of urination must be
made *tahir* only by water, but the outlet of faeces can be washed with
water or cleaned with three pieces of stone and the like provided the
faeces have not exceeded the outlet of defecation; otherwise, it will
not be cleaned by anything other than water.

It should be reminded that if faeces are not cleaned by three pieces of
stone, more pieces of stone can be used to clean the outlet thoroughly)
of animals whose meat is *haram* for eating and whose blood gushes out,
meaning the animals whose blood will gush out if their blood vessels are
cut, such as cats, foxes, rabbits, etc. If the flesh of chicken or birds
or animals has become *haram* for eating due to their eating faeces,
then the urine and faeces of such birds or animals are also *najis*.

Third: The carcass of an animal whose blood gushes out (if its blood
vessels are cut) whether its flesh is *halal* or *haram* for eating. But
some parts of the carcass, such as its wool, hair, and nails which are
soulless, are *tahir*.

Fourth: The blood of an animal whose blood gushes out (if its blood
vessels are cut) whether its meat is *halal* or *haram* for eating.

Fifth and Sixth: All parts of the body of wild dogs and pigs, even their
hair, are *najis*.

Seventh: Wine and anything which intoxicates a man and is basically in
liquid form.

Eighth: Beer.

#### Mutahhirat (Purifiers)

Anything which purifies (and makes *tahir*) *najis* substances is called
a*mutahhir* (purifier which purifies a *najis*). *Mutahhirat* are as
follows:

(i) *Water* is a *mutahhir* which makes *tahir* all *najis* substances
provided that the water is *mutlaq* (pure). Thus *mudaf* (mixed) water,
such as the juice of watermelon and rose-water are not *mutahhirat* and
do not make*tahir* the *najasah*. *Wudhu’* and *ghusl* with *mudaf*
water are not valid either (There are two kinds of water: *kurr* and
*qail* (small quantity, i.e., less than*kurr*). *Kurr* water is a
certain quantity of water which can make *tahir* any*najis* object as
long as its colour, taste, and smell have not been altered.

It is 128 *manns* of Tabriz (*Mann* is a unit of weight of approximately
3 kg.) minus 20 *mithqal* (unit of weight of about 4.6 g) and is equal
to 384 kg.*Kurr* water will not become *najis* if a *najis* object
reaches it. *Qalil* water, i.e., less than *kurr* is the water which
becomes *najis* if a *najis* object reaches it. Its *taharah* is
dependent upon its connection to the flowing water or rain or the
addition of *kurr* water to it.).

(ii) *Ground*: It makes *tahir* the sole of the shoes and the sole of
the feet.

(iii) *Sun*: The *najis* ground and strawmats will become *tahir* by the
direct rays of the sun.

(iv) *Istihalah* (The transformation or a chemical change of the state
of an object): In this chemical process, the very commodity of the
*najis* object transforms and becomes *tahir*, for example, a dog that
falls in a salt lake and transforms into salt.

(v) *Blood transfusion*: It means the transfusion of a man's blood or
the blood of an animal whose blood gushes out, into the body of an
animal whose blood does not gush out, such as the transfusion of man's
blood into the body of a mosquito, fly, etc.

(vi) The removal of the very *najasah* from the outer parts of an animal
and the inner parts of a man, for example, if the back of an animal or
the nostril of a man becomes *najis* with blood, it will be *tahir*
after blood is removed, and there is no need for flowing water over it.

(vii) *Following*: It means that a *najis* becomes *tahir* as a result
of becoming the *najis* the *tahir*, for example, if a *kafir* becomes
Muslim, his child will also become *tahir* as a result of following him.

(viii) *Diminishment*, *i.e., loss of two-thirds of volume of
grape-juice: If the grape-juice* is boiled, it becomes *najis*. However,
if it loses two-thirds of its volume as a result of boiling, the
remainder becomes *tahir*.

#### Wudhu’ and Its Precepts

It is *mustahabb* for a man to brush his teeth and rinse his mouth with
.clean water before performing *wudhu’*. . It is also *mustahabb* for a
man to inhale*tahir* water up his nostrils.

#### The Instructions For Wudhu’

In performing *wudhu’*, the face must be rinsed first by taking water in
the hand and wiping it over the face beginning from the place of growing
hair of head (forehead) downward to the chin. Next, the right elbow
should be rinsed by taking water in the left hand and wiping it from the
elbow downward to the fingertips.

This procedure should also be exactly performed for the left elbow using
the right hand. Then for mash (anointing), the front portion of the head
must be anointed. Then the right foot followed by the left foot must be
anointed from the toe-tips to the upper part of both feet with the
fingers. The following should be observed while performing *wudhu’*.

(1) The parts of body related to *wudhu’* must be *tahir* while
performing *wudu*,

(2) The water for *wudhu’* must be *tahir*, *mutlaq* and *mubah*
(permissible).

(3) *Niyyah* (intention), i.e., *wudhu’* must be performed for the
pleasure of Allah; and hence if someone performs *wudhu’* with an
intention of cooling and comforting himself or for any other purpose,
his *wudhu’* will not be right.

(4) *Tartib* (the order as prescribed by Islamic *Shari'ah*), that is,
*wudhu’* must be performed in the prescribed order. The face must be
washed first, next the right hand which should he followed by washing of
the left hand. The head and the feet should be anointed afterwards.

(5) *Muwalat* (performing the parts of an Islamic act in succession
without undue delay): It means that *wudhu’* must be performed in
succession without undue delay. One should not allow a time gap while
washing or anointing the subsequent part to the extent that the previous
part gets dried up. However, if *wudhu’* is performed consecutively but
the moisture gets dried up due to hot weather, the high temperature of
the body, and the like, the *wudhu’* will be valid.

**Note:** While performing mash, it is not necessary to anoint the
scalp; rather it is also correct to anoint the hair of the front portion
of the head. But if the hair of other parts of the head gather in the
front portion of the head, then these should be pushed back. If the hair
in the front portion of the head is very long, i.e., if combed, these
reach up to the face, then the root of the hair must be anointed or the
hair should be parted and the scalp must be anointed.

#### Mubtilat of the Wudhu’

The things or acts which make the *wudhu’* invalid are called the
*mubtilat* (things or acts through which, the *salat*, the *sawm*, the
*wudhu’*, etc become invalid). There are eight items which render the
*wudhu’* invalid:

(i) Urination;

(ii) Defecation;

(iii) Wind or flatus (wind in the stomach or intestines) this is when
flatus comes out from the usual outlet or from an outlet that is changed
due to illness and surgery;

(iv) Unconsciousness;

(v) Drunkenness;

(vi) Falling asleep when the eyes cannot see and the ears cannot hear;
however, if the eyes are unable to see, but the ears can hear, the
*wudhu’* will not be *batil*(invalid);

(vii) Insanity; and

(viii) *Janabah* (major ritual impurity or *al-hadath al-akbar* caused
by the sexual intercourse, or the like) resulting from sexual
intercourse or by seminal ejaculation and other things for which one
should perform ghusl. Also, *istihadah* (menstrual bleeding), whenever
noticed by women, makes the *wudhu’ batil*.

#### The Ghusl

The *ghusl* can be performed in two ways: *ghusl tartibi* (performing
*ghusl*by washing the body part by part as specified in Islamic
*Shari'ah*) and *ghusl irtimasi* (performing *ghusl* by the immersion of
the whole body in water).

The *ghusl tartibi* should be performed in the prescribed order, i.e.,
the head and the neck should be washed with water first, then the right
side of the body, and finally the left side of the body.

For the *ghusl irtimasi*, one should completely immerse h is body into
the water at once.

There are two types of *ghusl*: *wajib* and *mustahabb*.

The *mustahabb ghusul* are numerous in Islamic *Shari'ah* but the *wajib
ghusul* are seven:

(i) *Ghusl al-janabah*;

(ii) *Ghusl almayyit* (bathing the dead body);

(iii) *Ghusl mass al-mayyit* (performing *ghusl* due to touching of the
dead body), i.e., if one touches a dead body after it has become cold
and before its *ghusl al-mayyit*, he must perform *ghusl mass
al-mayyit*.

(iv) Performing *ghusl* for the fulfilment of a *nadhr*, *'ahd*, or
*qasam*;

(v) *Ghusl al-hayd*; (performing*ghusl* after menstruation);

(vi) *Ghusl al-nifas* (performing *ghusl* after puerperal period); and

(vii) *Ghusl al-istihadah*. The first four *ghusul* are *wajib* both for
men and women and the last three are *wajib* for only women.

While one is in the state of *janabah*, the following acts are *haram*
for him:

(i) Touching the writing of the Holy Qur'an, the name of Allah, and the
names of the Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (as);

(ii) Entering al-Masjid al-Haram and the Masjid al-Nabi in Madinah;

(iii) Staying in other mosques and leaving something in them; and

(iv) Reciting any one of the four *suwar* of the Holy Qur'an which
require *wajib* *sajdah, viz, the suwar of al-Najm, Iqra' Alif-Lam-Mim
Tanzil,* and *Ha-Mim Tanzil*.

For the other precepts on *janabah, hayd, nifas* and *istihadah* one
should refer to *al-Risalah al-'Amaliyyah.*

**Note:** Like in the case of *wudhu’, niyyah* is also required while
performing *ghusl*. The body should be *tahir* before performing *ghusl*
and there should be no obstacle for the water to reach the whole body.

#### The Tayammum

If a person is unable to perform *wudhu’* or *ghusl* for reciting
*salat* and the like due to the lack of time, illness, or
non-availability of water and the like, he should perform *tayammum*
(statutory Islamic ablution with soil, sand, etc).

#### Procedures for Tayammum

There are four obligatory factors in doing *tayammum*:

(i) *Niyyah*;

(ii) Simultaneous striking both palms on soil or on something upon which
*tayammum* is valid;

(iii) Drawing both palms on the whole forehead starting from the
hairline to the eyebrows and the top of the nose. It is better to draw
the hands over the eyebrows as well.

(iv) Then drawing the left palm on the entire back of the right hand
(from wrist to fingertips). Next, drawing the right palm on the entire
back of the left hand: This much is sufficient when *tayammum* is
performed instead of *wudhu’* However, if the *tayammum* is being
performed instead of *ghusl*, one should strike both palms on the soil,
etc once again and draw the palms on the back of the hands, as mentioned
above.

#### The Precepts Pertaining to Tayammum

(i) The *tayammum* should be performed on *tahir* soil. If soil is not
available, the *tayammum* may be performed on sand or pebbles. In the
absence of pebbles, it can be performed on stones. In the case of the
non-availability of all of these, the *tayammum* can be performed on
dust accumulated at a place.

(ii) The *tayammum* is not valid on lime and other minerals.

(iii) If water is sold at a high price and in case one can afford to buy
it, he is not permitted to perform *tayammum*, rather he must purchase
the water and perform *wudhu’* and *ghusl*.

### (2) Time

The next prerequisite for reciting *salat* is the time. The *salawat*
must be recited in a sequence. *Salat al- Zuhr* (noon prayer) and *Salat
al-’Asr (*afternoon prayer) each has a specific and common time. The
specific time for *Salat al-Zuhr* is from beginning of *zuhr* (If a
piece of wood or a similar object is erected on a flat ground, its
shadow is cast towards the west when the sun begins to shine in the
morning. The more the sun rises up, the smaller this shadow becomes.

The shadow becomes the smallest at *zuhr* or noon. As the *zuhr* passes,
the shadow changes its direction and tends towards the east. The more
the sun moves towards the west, the longer the shadow gets.

Thus, when the shadow reaches the smallest length and begins to get
longer again, it indicates the *zuhr*. But it should be remembered that
in some cities, like Makkah, the shadow disappears entirely at noon. In
cities like this the time at which the shadow reappears indicates the
*zuhr*.) or noon until the time required to recite *Salat al-Zuhr*.

If a person recites the *Salat al-'Asr* even inadvertently at this time,
it will be invalid. The specific time for the *Salat al-'Asr* is the
time before the evening just enough to recite the *Salat al-'Asr*. If a
person has not recited the *Salat al-Zuhr* until then, his *Salat
al-Zuhr* has become *qada'*

And he should recite the *Salat al-'Asr*. Between the specific time of
the*Salat al-Zuhr* and the specific time of the *Salat* *al-'Asr'* is
the common time for reciting the both. If one inadvertently recites the
*Salat al-'Asr'* before the*Salat al-Zuhr* during this entire common
time, his *salat* is valid. And he should recite the *Salat al-Zuhr*
afterwards.

The *Salat al-Maghrib* (evening prayer) and *Salat al-'Isha'* (night
prayer) each has a specific and common time. The specific time for
*Salat al-Maghrib* (The *maghrib* is approximately 15 minutes after the
sunset. It is signified by the disappearance of the redness which
appears in the east after the sunset.) is from the evening until the
time required for reciting the *Salat al-Maghrib*.

The specific time for *Salat al-'Isha'* is the time before the midnight
(The midnight, from Islamic point of view, is eleven hours and fifteen
minutes after *zuhr*.) just enough to recite the *Salat al-'Isha'*. If a
person has not recited the *Salat al-Maghrib* up to this time, he should
first recite the *Salat al-'Isha'* and then the *Salat al-Maghrib*.

Between the specific time of the *Salat al-Maghrib* and the specific
time of the *Salat al-'Isha'* is the common time for reciting the both.
If during this common time, one inadvertently recites the *Salat*
*al-'Isha'* before the *Salat al-Maghrib*, his *salat* is valid and he
should recite the *Salat al-Maghrib*afterwards.

The time for the *Salat al-Subh* (Morning Prayer) is from the beginning
of true aurora or the first light of dawn (At dawn, whiteness in the sky
moves upward from the east which is called the first or false aurora.
When the whiteness is spread, it is the true aurora and the time for the
*Adhan* (call) for the *Salat al-Subh*, and the beginning of the time of
the *Salat al-Subh*.) Till just before sunrise.

### (3) Dress

The third prerequisite for reciting the *salat* is the dress of the
person who recites *salat*. The dress should meet the following
conditions:

(i) The dress should be *mubah*. It should be owned by the person
reciting the *salat*. If it does not belong to him, its owner should be
willing to let him recite *salat* with it.

(ii) It should not be *najis*.

(iii) It should not be made of the skin of carcass, irrespective of the
carcass belonging to the animals whose meat is *halal* or *haram* to
eat.

(iv) It should not be made of the wool, hair, and the fluff of an animal
whose meat is *haram* to eat, but it is possible to recite *salat* with
a fur dress.

(v) The dress of a male person who recites *salat* should not be made of
silk and gold threads. He must also not wear ornaments or dress made of
gold or silk while reciting the *salat*. Putting on silken dress and
using ornaments made of gold are *haram* for men even while not reciting
the *salat*.

### (4) Place

A few conditions apply to the place where one recites *salat*:

(i) It must be *mubah*., i.e., it should not be usurped.

(ii) The place for reciting *salat* should be stationary. If one is
compelled to recite *salat* in moving vehicles, such as automobiles or
ships, he may do so provided he attempts to pray towards the *Qiblah*.
If the direction of the vehicle changes during the *salat*, one must
change his direction also accordingly so that he always faces the
*Qiblah*.

(iii) If the place where one recites the *salat* is *najis*, it should
not be so wet that the moisture permeates to his dress and body. But if
the place where one puts his forehead on is *najis*, the *salat* is
*batil* even though the place may be dry.

(iv) The place where one puts his forehead on should not be more than
four closed fingers lower or higher than where one puts his knees and
toes at the time of performing *sujud*.

### (5) Qiblah

The Ka'bah, located in the holy city of Makkah, is the *Qiblah* of the
Muslims and anyone who recites *salat* must always face the *Qiblah*.
But if a person, who is far away from it, stands or sits in such a way
that it is said he is reciting *salat* in the direction of *Qiblah*, his
*salat* is valid. Similarly, other acts such as slaughtering of animals
must be done while facing the *Qiblah*.

If it is not possible for a man to recite *salat* even in a sitting
posture, he should lie down on his right side such that the front
section of his body faces the *Qiblah*. If this is also not possible, he
should lie down on his left side such that again the front section of
his body faces the *Qiblah*. If this is not possible either, he should
lie down on his back such that the soles of his feet face the *Qiblah*.

If one who wants to recite *salat* is unable to discover the direction
of *Qiblah*after a thorough investigation, he must go by the opinion
which he has from the altars of the Muslims, or their graves, or other
means available to him.

Mandatory Acts While Reciting The Salat
---------------------------------------

The following eleven acts are mandatory while one recites *salat*:

(i) *Niyyah*; (ii) *Takbirat al-ihram* (the first *takbir*, i.e.,
*Allahu Akbar* -Allah is Great - said at the beginning of the *salat*
just after the *niyyah*,); (iii)*qiyam* (the standing erect while
reciting the *salat*; (iv) *qira'ah* (the recitation in the *salat*),
(v) *ruku'* (vi) *sujud*; (vii) *tashahhud* (testifying for *Tawhid* of
Allah and prophethood of Prophet Muhammad (S)]; (viii) *salam*;
(ix)*tartib*. i.e., recitation of *salat* in accordance with the
prescribed sequence without changing the order of performance; (x)
*tuma'ninah*; i.e., recitation of *salat* with quietude and repose; and
(xi) *muwalat*, i.e., reciting all parts of *salat* in succession
without undue delay.

Five out of the eleven items mentioned above are called the *rukns*
(basic parts) of the *salat*. Deliberate or inadvertent additions or
deletions of the*rukns* will render the *salat* *"batil"* But the rest
of the above-mentioned items are not *rukns*. It means that the addition
or deletion of these items (other than *rukns*) will not render the
*salat* *"batil"* unless they are done intentionally.

The Rukns of The Salat
----------------------

The *rukns* of the *salat* consist of the following: (1) *niyyah*, (ii)
*takbirat* *al-ihram*, (iii) *qiyam*, i.e., standing erect while saying
*takbirat* *al-ihram* and also the *qiyam* just before the *ruku'*, and
(iv) *ruku'*, and (v) the two *sujud*.

(i) **Niyyah:** *Niyyah* means that the sole purpose of the person who
recites*salat* is to seek *qurbah* (pleasure of Allah) to Allah and to
comply with His commands. It is not necessary to pass the *niyyah*
through the heart or, for example, to mention: "I recite four *raka'at*
(sections of *salat*) of *Salat* *al-Zuhr* with the intention of seeking
pleasure of Allah."

(ii) **Takbirat** **Al-Ihram:** The *salat* begins right after *Adhan*
(the specified wordings called out at *salat* time) and *Iqamah* (the
specified wordings, almost similar to the *Adhan* and recited after it,
before commencing the*salat*), with *niyyah* and saying *Allahu Akbar*.
Since at this point of time, several acts such as eating, drinking,
laughing, and turning the back to*Qiblah* become *haram*, this *takbir*
(saying *"Allahu Akbar"* i.e., Allah is Great) is called *"takbirat
al-ihram".* It is *mustahabb* to raise both the hands while saying
*takbirat al-ihram*. By this action, we take the Greatness of Allah into
consideration and consider other than Allah insignificant and pay no
attention to them.

(iii) **Qiyam:** The *qiyam* while saying *takbirat al-ihram* and also
the *qiyam*just before the *ruku'* is one of the *rukns* of the *salat*;
but the *qiyam* or standing erect while reciting the *Surat al-Hamd* and
the other *surah* and the*qiyam* after *ruku'* are not the *rukns*.
Thus, if one forgets to perform *ruku'*and remembers it before reaching
ground for performing *sujud*, he should stand erect and then perform
*ruku'*. If he performs *ruku'* in a bent position, his *salat* is
*batil* because he did not have *qiyam* as is required just before
performing *ruku*'.

(iv) **Ruku':** After the *qira'ah*, one should bend his body in such a
way that his palms reach his knees. This action is called *ruku'*. While
in *ruku'*, one who recites *salat*, must say once: *"Subhana
Rabbiyal-'Azimi wa bihamdih*(all glory and praise is for my Lord, the
Mighty)", or he must say thrice:*"Subhanallah* (all glory is due to
Allah)". After the completion of ruku', one must always stand erect
before performing sujud.

(v) **Sujud:** Performing sujud means that one should lay his forehead,
palms, knees, and the tips of his toes on the ground. He should then say
once:*"Subhana Rabbiyal-A'la* *wa bihamdih* (all glory and praise is for
my Lord, the Most High)';, or he must say thrice: *"Subhanallah* (all
glory is due to Allah)". After completing the first *sajdah*, he must
sit before performing the second *sajdah* and repeating the previous
recitation.

The forehead must be laid on the ground or on something growing from the
ground. *Sujud* is not *ja'iz* (permissible) on foodstuffs, clothing
materials, and minerals.

### Tashahhud and Salam

If the *salat* consists of two raka’at one should stand up after
performing two *sujud* and should recite the *Surat al-Hamd* and the
other *surah*. One must then perform *qunut* [After the recitation of
the *Surat al-Hamd* and the other *surah* in the second *rak'ah* of the
*salat*, one holds his palms before his face and recites any *dhikr* and
supplication that he wishes.

For example, he may say: *"Rabbana atina fiddunya hasanah wa
fil-Akhirati hasanah waqina 'adhabannar* (O our Lord grant us goodness
in this world and the Hereafter and save us from the torment of the
Fire)."] and recite *tashahhud* [The following should be recited in
*tashahhud*: *"Ashhadu an la ilaha illalah, wahdahu la sharika lah, wa
ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'abduhu wa rasuluh, allahumma salli 'ala
Muhammadin wa ali Muhammad* (I bear witness that there is no god except
Allah; He is One, for Whom there is no partner; I bear witness that
surely Muhammad (S) is His servant and His Prophet; O Allah shower Your
blessings on Muhammad (S) and his progeny.)"]

And *salam* [The following should be said in *salam*:*"Assalamu 'alayka
ayyuhan-Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh; assalamu 'alayna wa 'ala
'Ibadillahissalihin; assalamu 'alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh*
(May peace be upon you, O Prophet (S), and mercy and blessings of Allah.
May peace be upon us and on all servants of Allah who guard against
evil. May peace be upon you all together with mercy and blessings of
Allah.)"]

After *ruku'* and both the *sujud*. If the *salat*is of three *raka'at*,
one should stand up after reciting *tashahhud* and must recite the
*Surat al-Hamd* only or must say: *"Subhanallahi walhamdu lillahi wa la
ilaha illallahu wallahu akbar* (All glory and praise to Allah, and there
is no god but Allah, and Allah is Great.)" three times, perform*ruku'*
and two *sujud* and recite *tashahhud* and *salam*. If the *salat*
consists of four *raka'at*, one must perform the fourth *rak'ah* like
the third *rak'ah* and recite *tashahhud* and *salam*.

Salat Al-Ayat
-------------

The *Salat al-Ayat* (the *salat* of Allah's creation or signs) becomes
*wajib*under any one of the four following conditions: (i) solar
eclipse; (ii) lunar eclipse, although it may be partially eclipsed and
even though it may not create fear among the people; (iii) earthquake,
although it may not create fear for anyone: (iv) thunder, lightning. Red
and black winds or storms, and the like which create 'fear among most
people.

### The Procedure for Reciting The Salat Al-Ayat

The *Salatal-Ayat* consists of two *raka'at* There are five *ruku'* in
each*rak'ah*. The procedure for reciting *Salat al-Ayat* is as follows.
After *nuyyah*and saying *takbirat alihram*, one should recite the
*Surat al-Hamd* and another complete *surah*. He must then perform
*ruku'*. Standing erect at this point, he should once again recite the
*Surat al-Hamd* and another *surah*and perform *ruku'*. This procedure
should be repeated five times. After the completion of the fifth
*ruku'*, he should stand erect and then perform two*sujud*. At this
point, the first *rak'ah* is completed. He should then stand erect and
perform the second *rak'ah* exactly as the first one. The *Salat
al-Ayat* is completed after the recitation of *tashahhud* and *salam*.

In the *Salat al-Ayat*, after the *niyyah, takbirat al-ihram*, and
reciting the*Surat al-Hamd*, it is possible for the one who is reciting
the *salat* to divide the Ayahs of a *surah* into five parts and read
one Ayah or more before performing *ruku'*. He should then stand up and
recite the second part of the partially read *surah* without reciting
the *Surat al-Hammd.* Then he should perform *ruku'*. He should exactly
follow this procedure until the fifth *ruku'*and he must complete the
*surah* by then. Afterwards, he must perform *ruku'*and two *sujud*. The
second *rak'ah* of the *salat* is performed exactly in the same manner
as the first one.

The Salat of A Traveller
------------------------

A traveller must recite two *raka'at* instead of his four *rak'ah
sala*wat under the following six conditions:

(i) His journey must cover not less than eight *farsakhs* (each
*farsakh* is of about 5.6 kilometres). Alternatively, if his going
covers four *farsakhs* and his returning equals to four *farsakhs*.

(ii) He must have the intention to travel eight *farsakhs* prior to the
start of his journey.

(iii) He must not change his mind in the course of his travel.

(iv) His journey should not be undertaken with an intention of
committing a sin.

(v) He must not be a traveller by profession. Thus, a person whose
profession requires travelling (like a driver) must recite his *salat*
completely. However, if he stays in his house for ten days, for his
three journeys, he must recite his 4-*rak'ah* *salawat* as *qasr*
(reciting two *raka'at* instead of 4-*rak'ah salawat*).

(vi) When he reaches the limit of the *tarakhkhus* (seeing off), i.e.,
he reaches a distance, from his hometown or from a place where he has
intended to stay for ten days, from where he can neither see the walls
of the city nor hear the *Adhan* of the city.

Salat Al-Jama'ah (Congregational Prayer)
----------------------------------------

It is *mustahabb* for all Muslims to recite *al-salat alyawmiyyah* in
the form of *salat al-jama'ah*. The *thawab* (Allah's reward) for *salat
al-jama'ah* is several thousand times more than the *thawab* for the
*salat* recited individually.

### Conditions Concerning Salat Al-Jama'ah

(i) *Imam al-jama'ah* (the leader or *imam* of congregational *salat*)
must be a *mukallaf* (the one who reached the age of maturity and thus
became responsible for performing the Islamic duties) believer, just,
and born legitimately. He must recite the *salat* correctly. If the
*ma'mum* (the follower who follows the *imam* in *salat al-jama'ah*) is
a man, the *imam* of the *salat al-jama'ah* must also be a man.

(ii) There should be no curtain, barriers, or obstacles between the
*imam* and his *ma'mum*, so that the *ma'mum* is unable to see the
*imam*. But if the*ma'mum* is a woman, a curtain and the like are
permissible.

(iii) The place where the *imam* stands must not be higher than that of
his*ma'mum*, but there is no objection if the place is slightly higher
(about the height of four fingers or less) than that of the *ma'mum*.

(iv) The *ma'mum* must stand behind the *imam* or in his row (most of
the*'ulama'* prefer that *ma'mum* should stand behind the *imam*).

### The Precepts Concerning Salat Al-Jama'ah

(i) The Ma'mum Must Recite All Parts Of The Salat Himself, Except The
Surat Al-Hamd And Another Surah After It. But If His First And Second
Raka'atcorrespond To The Third And Fourth Raka'at Of The Imam's Salat,
He Must Recite The Suratal-Hamd And Another Surah As Well. If As A
Result Of Reading The Other Surah, He Feels That He Would Not Catch Up
With The Imam In Ruku', He Should Only Read The Surat Al-Hamd And
Perform The Ruku' With Theimam Simultaneously. If He Fails To Do So, He
Should Complete His Salatindividually.

(ii) The *ma'mum* must perform *ruku', sujud*, and other parts of
*salat*simultaneously with the *imam* or shortly after the *imam*, but
he must certainly say *takbirat al-ihram* and recite *salam* only after
the *imam* has done so.

(iii) If one commences *iqtida'* or follows the *imam* while he is in
the state of*ruku'* and catches up with the *imam* in *ruku'*, his
*salat* is correct and is counted as one *rak'ah* of *salat*.

The Sawm (Fasting)
------------------

The *sawm* is one of the *Furu' al-Din* (the duties to be performed
according to Islamic *Shari'ah*) of the holy religion of Islam. It is
*wajib* upon every*mukallaf* to have *sawm* in the month of Ramadhan. In
order to obey the command of Allah, from the time of *Salatal-Fajr* to
the time of *Salat al-Maghrib* one must refrain from *muftirat* (certain
acts which break or invalidate the *sawm*) which make the *sawm batil*.

In Islam, much importance has been attached to *sawm*. Islam maintains a
great deal of value for this holy act. The reward and recompense of
*sawm* is so vital in Islam that the Almighty Allah without His prior
specifying the*thawab* and the recompense of *sawm*, ascribes its reward
to Himself.

The Holy Prophet (S) said that Allah stated:

"The *sawm* is for Me and I will give reward for it."

With its specific characteristics, the *sawm* plays an exceptionally
effective role in the liberation of man from the servitude of ambitions,
carnal desires, voluptuousness as well as in the purification of the
soul from involvement in sinful acts.

The Holy Prophet (S) told Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansari: "O Jabir, this
is the month of Ramadhan and the one who has *sawm* during the day and
stays awake at night to commune with Allah, abstains from eating *haram*
food, and guards against evils and using abusive language, gets out of
sins as he leaves the month of Ramadhan behind."

Jabir said: "O Prophet (S) of Allah, what a good news is it!" The Holy
Prophet (S) stated: "O Jabir, how demanding and exacting are the
conditions for the *sawm*!"

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (as) has stated: "The *sawm* serves as a strong shield
against the fire of the Hell."

### Ramadhan, The Month of Allah

In Islamic *ahadith* many praiseworthy and interesting names such as
"the auspicious month" and "the best period for the recital of Qur'an"
have been mentioned for the month of Ramadhan. But the name "the month
of Allah" is the most outstanding name and the most beautiful title
which has been used for the month of Ramadhan.

In spite of the fact that every month is "Allah's month", this month is
specifically called "the month of Allah" due to its great importance.
Thus this name has in itself endowed this month with a special
superiority and a specific spirituality. In this month, the greatest
Divine Book (the Holy Qur'an) has been revealed.

With the advent of the holy month of Ramadhan, Allah bestows His
servants with His blessings. A special enlightenment and serenity
generate in the spirit of man. For the worshipping of Allah, the
purification of the soul, and moral reformation, a special preparedness
becomes manifest in those who have *sawm*.

On the last Friday of the month of *Sha'ban*, the Holy Prophet (S)
stated the following concerning the magnificence and value of "the month
of Allah".

"O people, the month of Allah, along with its blessings and salvation,
has revealed itself to you. It is a month which is regarded as the best
of all the months by Allah. Its days, nights, and hours are the best of
all. It is a month in which you are invited to be the guest of Allah and
are entitled to His favour and generosity."

"In this month, your breathing will have the *thawab* of *tasbih*
saying*"Subhanallah"* (Glory be to Allah) and *dhikr* and your sleeping
will have the *thawab* of the worship of Allah."

"If you resort to Allah in this month and worship Him, Allah will grant
your prayers. Therefore, with all your truthfulness and sincerity and
with a pure heart pray to Allah to grant you His Divine dispensations
for having *sawm*and reciting the Holy Qur'an, for one who remains
deprived of the forgiveness and blessings of Allah in this bountiful and
blessed month is indeed unfortunate."

### The Sawm Leads To Taqwa

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

***"O you who believe! the sawm is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may have taqwa (2:183)."***

Islam enjoins its followers to have *sawm* for a complete month (during
the month of Ramadhan). By having *sawm* for one month, Muslims prepare
themselves for the state of *taqwa* in its entirety, because when a man
refrains from satisfying his natural physical desires, he can very well
abstain from satisfying his carnal desires.

In order to attain such a degree of perfection, Islam surely does not
consider only abstaining from eating and drinking to be sufficient for
the *sawm*, rather it orders a person who has *sawm* to abstain from
whatever causes indulgence in evils and the commitment of sins or leads
him to satanic temptations and indulgence in his unruly carnal desires.

### Muftirat Which Render the Sawm Batil

Several *muftirat* (certain acts which invalidate the *sawm*) render the
*sawm batil*. These include the following:

(i) Eating and drinking, although these things may not be usual drinks
or eatables such as soil or the gum of trees.

(ii) The sexual intercourse renders the *sawm batil*.

(iii) Masturbation, that is, engagement in any sexual activity which
leads to seminal ejaculation.

(iv) Ascribing a lie to Allah, the Holy Prophet (S), and the successors
of the Holy Prophet (S).

(v) Allowing thick dust to reach one's throat.

(vi) Immersing the head entirely in water.

(vii) Remaining in the state of *janabah*, *hayd* and *nifas* up to the
*Adhan* for*Salat al-Subh*.

(viii) Application of an enema with a liquid substance.

(ix) Vomiting, provided that it is done deliberately.

For further information, reference should be made to *al-risalat
al-'amaliyyah* (Islamic treatises written by *mujtahidin* for use by
their*muqallidin* for performing Islamic duties).

The Bay' (Selling)
------------------

What is *bay'*? The *bay'* (selling) means the sale and exchange of a
property with another property in a way that the owner, who is ,called
"the seller" of the merchandise transfers the ownership of his property
to the other party in exchange for money, and the other party called
"the buyer" pays the money to the seller in exchange for the
merchandise.

As is evident, the *bay'* is considered as one of the *'uqud*
(contracts) and requires two parties (the seller and the buyer) for
implementation. Thus those, who enter into the *'uqud*, must fulfil the
general conditions of the*'uqud* such as maturity, wisdom, *niyyah*, and
authority.

### The Irrevocability Of Bay'

The *bay'* is an irrevocable *'aqd*, i.e., it cannot be revoked by
either of the contracting parties (seller or buyer) after the conclusion
of the contract.

In view of the fact that sometimes the seller or the buyer is cheated
due to his negligence or default and sustains a considerable loss and
because in such instances the irrevocability of the contract is against
the public interest, Islamic laws have enjoined the following two
commands to take care of this sedition:

(i) *Faskh al-'aqd* (cancellation of contract): When one of the parties
of the contract changes his decision and requests the revocation of the
transaction, it is *mustahabb* for the other party to accept his request
for the cancellation of the contract.

(ii) *Khiyar al-'aqd* (option for the contract). It is a special option
or a right which the dealer can exercise to cancel the contract.

The important *khiyarat* (options) are as follows:

(i) *Khiyar al-majlis* (option during the meeting): Both parties reserve
the right to cancel the transaction before they disperse.

(ii) *Khiyar al-ghabn* (option in the case of cheating): It means that
when one of the parties to the contract is cheated and has suffered a
loss in the transaction, for example, if the merchandise is sold at
lower than its actual price or purchased at higher than its actual
price, in this case the one who has been cheated has an option to cancel
the contract.

(iii) *Khiyar al-'ayb* (option in the case of defect): If after the
completion of the transaction, the buyer finds out that the merchandise
is defective, he can either cancel the transaction or demand the
difference in price (difference in price of defect less and of defective
merchandise).

(iv) *Khiyar al-hayawan* (option in the case of animals): With respect
to the option in the case of animals such as sheep and horses, the buyer
has the option to cancel the contract within three days.

(v) *Khiyar al-shart*: (option of condition): If the seller or the buyer
or both have agreed upon certain terms and conditions in their
transaction, they can revoke the transaction if the previously
stipulated terms have been violated.

### The Bay’ on Cash, On Credit, And On Advance Payment

The *bay'* is of four kinds depending on the payment of money and the
delivery of the goods:

(i) The *bay'* on cash: If the commodity and its price in money is
exchanged right after the contract for transaction is finalized, it is
called the *bay'* on cash.

(ii) The *bay'* on credit: In the credit transaction, the commodity is
delivered to the buyer at the time of transaction, but the payment of
the price of the commodity is deferred by the buyer.

(iii) The *bay'* on advance payment: In this type of transaction, unlike
the second type, the money is paid in cash by the buyer, but the
delivery of the commodity by the seller is postponed.

(iv) The *bay'* on deferred payment and delivery. Unlike the *bay'* on
cash, in this type of transaction, both the delivery of the commodity by
the seller and the payment of money by the buyer are deferred to a later
time.

The first three kinds of bay' are correct, but the fourth kind of *bay'*
is *batil*.

Confession
----------

The importance of confession: The role of confession in re-establishing
people's rights which are being trampled upon and are not being taken
care of in a society is self-evident, because an action - which is taken
by the judicial organizations after a great deal of efforts and pains,
collecting evidence, calling the people to witness as well as after
depending on guess and conjectures - can be substituted by confession in
the easiest and most clear way with only a few words.

In Islam, the confession has a great importance from a personal point of
view as well, because it originates from an instinct which Islam has
perfectly endeavored to revive and employ and that is the human instinct
of admiring the right which is exactly the opposite of sensuality.

In His words, the Almighty Allah addresses those who believe in Islam:

***"O you who believe! be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness for
Allah's sake, though it may be against your own selves or (your) parents
or near relatives...(4:135)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) states: "Tell the truth, though it may be against
your own interests."

The meaning and conditions of confession: In Islamic terms, the
confession is a statement that substantiates the rights of others on the
confessor, for example, one who confesses might say: "I owe one thousand
Rials to such and such a person."

The confessor must be mature and sane. He should confess out of his own
free will. Thus the confessions of a child, an insane person, an
intoxicated person, an unconscious person, a person who is asleep, and
the one who is forced to confess are not correct and valid.

Eatables and Drinkables
-----------------------

In the holy religion of Islam, anything which could be eaten and drunk
is known as *"halal"* except a few of them, some of which are mentioned
in the Holy Qur'an and some others in the *ahadith* of the Holy Prophet
(S).

The exceptional cases of *haram* eatables and drinkables are limited to
two types: animate or animals and inanimate or soulless.

### First Type: Animals

Animals are of three types: aquatic animals, land animals, and birds:

Aquatic animals: From among animals living in water only aquatic birds
and fish with scales are *halal* to eat. The other aquatic animals such
as eel, dogfish, tortoise, seal, porpoise, and the like are *haram* to
eat.

Land animals: These animals are classified into two groups: domestic and
wild.

The meat of domestic animals such as sheep, goat, cow, and camel is
*halal*for eating. The meat of horses, mules, and donkeys is also
*halal*, but eating their meat is *makruh*. A part from these, other
domestic animals' meat such as of dogs and cats is *haram*.

Among wild animals, cows, rams, wild goats, zebra, and dear are *halal*;
however, the remaining wild animals that are beasts or that have talons
such as lion, leopard, wolf, fox, jackal, and rabbits are *haram* to
eat.

Birds: The meat of the birds that have maws and gizzards or that flap
their wings while flying but do not have talons such as hens, pigeons or
doves, turtledove, and francolin are *halal* to eat, but the meat of the
rest of the birds is *haram* for eating. Some special species of locusts
or grasshoppers are lawful (for further detail, one should refer to
*al-risalat al-'amaliyyah.*).

**Note:** The *halal* meat of the above-mentioned animals and birds
depends upon their *tadhkiyah* (slaughtering animals according to
Islamic *Shari'ah*), i.e., they should be slaughtered according to the
Islamic method as explained in *al-risalat al-'amaliyyah.*

### Second Type: Inanimate Objects

There are two kinds of soulless or inanimate objects: solids and
liquids.

#### (1) Solids

(a) The carcass: The carcass of any animal, whether its meat is *halal*
or*haram*, is *haram* for eating. Also *najis* objects such as the
excreta of animals whose meat is *haram* to eat, as well as those
eatables which have become *najis* through contact with *najis* objects,
are *haram* to eat.

(b) Soil

(c) Fatal poisons

(d) Objects which are repugnant to man such as the excreta of animals
whose meat is *halal* to eat, their nasal mucus, and anything found in
their intestines are *haram*. Similarly, fifteen parts and organs of
animals, whose meat is *halal* to eat, are *haram* for eating (for
further details, one may refer to *al-risalat al-'amaliyyah*).

#### (2) Liquids

(a) Any type of intoxicating drink is *haram* for drinking, even in a
small quantity.

(b) The milk of animals, whose meats are *haram* to eat, such as of
pigs, cats, and dogs is *haram* to drink.

(c) The blood of any animal whose blood gushes out (when its blood
vessel is cut.).

(d) *Najis* liquids such as the urine and semen of any animal whose
blood gushes out (when its blood vessel is cut).

(e) Liquids in which one of the *najis* things is mixed.

**Note:** The *haram* eatables and drinkables are *haram* when there is
no*idtirar* (emergency or compulsion). In cases of *idtirar* (such as
the health conditions of a person who will die of hunger if he does not
eat *haram* food, or one who is afraid of illness or its aggravation, or
one who, due to the intensity of his weakness, would fall behind his
fellow-travellers and would die), one is authorized to have *haram*
eatables and drinkables only as much as is necessary to remove his
*idtirar*. This does not hold good in the case of a person who leaves
his country for the purpose of robbery or rebellion against the Islamic
government and faces an *idtirar* in the course of his journey.

### Important Note

Personal hygiene is one of the primary duties of man. Every individual
can easily realize its importance with his Allah-granted commonsense.

The effects of various kinds of eatables and drinkables in maintaining
personal health are very clear and evident. Furthermore, these have
noteworthy effects on the morale and ethics of man, as well as in his
social associations. There is no doubt at all that the mental conditions
of a drunken person are not like those of a sober one and that their
social behaviours are not identical. Or for example, if someone becomes
accustomed to eating and drinking disgusting things, he will naturally
produce an effect on his personal and social life and this effect is
intolerable for common men.

Therefore, with his Allah-granted nature, man realizes that he must
observe certain limitations in eating food. He should not eat each
eatable or drink each drinkable. The Almighty Allah Who, according to
His explicit wording in the Holy Qur'an, has created everything that is
on the earth for man, Who Himself is not in need of man and the means of
his life, and Who is All-Knowing and All-Seeing than others concerning
the good and the bad of His creatures has declared some of the eatables
and drinkables *halal* and some others *haram* for the benefit and
prosperity of man.

Al-'Imam 'Ali al-Ridha’ (as) has stated: "Allah has not declared any
eatable or drinkable *halal*, unless it is to the benefit and for the
welfare of man, neither has He declared any *haram*, unless it is the
source of man's detriment, death, and corruption."

The philosophy behind forbidding some of these *haram* eatables and
drinkables is quite clear for those who have a pure understanding. The
detriment caused by. Some of them and the reason for their being
*haram*have been gradually revealed to us through scientific
investigations. Regarding *haram* eatables and drinkables whose
philosophy for being *haram* has not yet become available to us, it
cannot be said that these philosophies will never become clear to us.

Even if their philosophies do not become clear to us, it cannot be said
that they are actually devoid of any wisdom and expediency. But since
these policies originate from the Holy Presence of an Infinite
Knowledge, it can positively be said that these contain the best and
most effective wisdom and expediency, even though we may fall short of
understanding them due to our narrowmindedness and the limitations of
our scientific means and equipment.

The Ghasb (Usurpation)
----------------------

Taking the property of another person and owning it without any
legitimate reason of possession and forcibly occupying the property of
another person in order to benefit from its profits without the
intention of legally claiming it as one's own property is called *ghasb*
(usurpation) according to Islamic *Shari'ah*.

Thus, the *ghasb* means exercising control over the property of others
without having any legitimate means of control such as *bay'*, rent, or
permission.

It becomes quite clear that the *ghasb* is an indecent act which
violates the very principle of ownership. .lust as the principle of
ownership plays an effective role in t he establishment and survival of
the society, the *ghasb* ruins and brings the society to a standstill.

Possession of a property and ownership will become invalid if the
influential people of a society decide to gain control over the produce
and output of the labor of the weak and the subordinates. Thus the idea
of the transgression of the influential people over the personal rights
of the helpless people would become predominant in the society.
Consequently, in this situation, the subordinates and the weak will
embark on any kind of submission, dishonor, and disrespect in order to
benefit from the output of their efforts and endeavors. Thus the human
society will be converted into a market in which the slaves are bought
and sold and the laws and policies of the society will become entirely
invalid and will be replaced by coercion and oppression.

This is why Islam has formulated strict policies for the usurper and
considers usurpation a mortal sin.

According to the explicit wording of the Holy Qur'an and *ahadith*, any
kind of sins other than *shirk* may be forgiven by Allah and any kind of
sins including *shirk* may be forgiven after *tawbah* (repentance), but
whoever has a record of usurpation and infringement upon the rights of
the people, will never have any hope for salvation from being called to
account by Allah and from the remuneration of his deed without being
forgiven by the persons who possessed these properties and rights.

### Some of The Precepts Concerning Ghasb

(i) It is *wajib* for the usurper to immediately give back the usurped
property to its original owner. If the owner is not alive, the usurper
must deliver the usurped property to his heirs, even if doing so may be
a heavy loss for the usurper. For instance, if one forcibly seizes the
stones or pieces of iron belonging to someone else and uses them in the
foundation of a building worth hundreds of thousand times more than the
stones and the iron, he should excavate the foundation and pull out the
usurped stones and iron to give them back to the original owner, unless
the owner agrees to accept the price of the commodity. As another
example, if one usurps ten *manns* (each *mann* is of three kilograms)
of wheat and mixes it with ten *kharvars* (each *kharvar* consists of
one hundred *manns*) of barley, he should pick out all the wheat from
the barley and return it to its original owner, unless he accepts to
take the price of wheat.

(ii) If any defect develops in the usurped property, the usurper must
not only return it to its owner exactly as it was on his usurpation, but
he must also indemnify for its losses.

(iii) If the usurped property is lost, the usurper must pay its price to
the rightful owner.

(iv) If the usurper squanders a part of the profits of the usurped
property without using it himself, he will be responsible for the said
profit. For instance, if a person who usurps the rental car of another
person and puts it out of commission for a few days, he would be
responsible for the loss incurred.

If the usurper gains profit from the usurped property, for example, if
he nourishes a usurped sheep with good fodder, so that it becomes fat,
he will have no rightful claims over the profit rendered by the sale of
the sheep. If the benefits accruing from the usurped property are
separable, for instance, cultivating a usurped land, one should give the
usurped property along with its rent back to the original owner of the
land, but the crop belongs to the usurper.

The Shuf'ah (Preemption)
------------------------

If two persons own a house or another landed property as a *musha'*
(joint ownership) and one of the partners decides to sell his share to a
third party, the other partner has the right to buy his partner's share
by the same contract agreed upon and exactly at the same price set for
the third party. This right is called the right of *shuf'ah*
(preemption).

It is quite clear that the right of *shuf'ah* has been devised in Islam
to adjust and to stabilize partnerships and to eliminate losses and
other mischief resulting from partnership of properties, for in many
cases, the possession of the property by the new partner inflicts losses
on the partner having the right of *shuf'ah* or serves as the source of
a series of conflicts and disagreements due to differences of opinion or
it may be that freedom of ownership may have benefits for the one who
has the right of *shuf'ah* without causing any loss for the partner who
wants to sell his share. The right of *shuf'ah* holds good for lands,
houses, gardens, and other immovable properties, but it does not apply
to movable properties.

Re-Cultivation of Barren Lands
------------------------------

The term applies to the cultivation of a land which is not used (Whether
it has never been cultivated before or it has been cultivated at a time,
or it has become demolished and entirely fruitless due to the departure
of its inhabitants or it may have become a meadow or bamboo-field.). In
any case, the re-cultivation or development of barren lands is
considered as one of the good deeds in Islam. In addition to serving as
a means of ownership, the re-cultivation of barren lands will also lead
to *thawab*.

It is related from the Holy Prophet (S): "He who cultivates a barren
land is entitled to the ownership of that land." Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (as)
is quoted as saying: "Any group of people who develop and cultivate a
land will have the preference and that land will belong to them."

In Islam, barren lands belong to Allah, the Prophet (S) and the Imams
(as) (i.e., they belong to the Islamic government) and are considered
as*anfal* (spoils).

Waste lands and barren lands can be cultivated and owned under the
following specific conditions. From among the people who cultivate a
land, whoever takes the lead will have the priority of ownership. The
conditions are as follows:

(i) Permission from the Imam (as) or his deputy.

(ii) The land must not have been fenced with stones, or demarcated, or
the like by anyone else in advance.

(iii) The land must not be within the limits of the property of others,
such as the borders of rivers, the soil under the wells, and the
boundaries of plantations.

(iv) The land must not be a free land, such as demolished mosques and
endowments, or it must not be designed for the use of all Muslims, such
as streets and roads.

**Note:** The development and cultivation of lands is based on a general
understanding. Thus if the general understanding admits that a certain
person has developed such and such a land, then that person's ownership
will be established. Certainly, the development of a land varies
according to various objectives, for instance, in agriculture, the
development of a land is made by ploughing and grooving it and in the
case of construction, it is done by constructing walls around the land.

(v) It is permissible for everybody to derive a benefit from the open
mines - which require no excavation and exploitation - to the extent
which meets their personal needs. If benefiting from such mines requires
excavation, drilling, exploitation, and other technical operations that
are required for the excavation of gold mines, copper mines, and the
like, the person who has taken pains in embarking on the excavation and
exploitation of the mine will have the right of ownership.

(vi) Large rivers are jointly owned by the Muslims. In the utilization
of streams and the water of snowfalls and rain, pouring down from
mountains, whoever is closer and nearer to them will have priority over
others.

Luqtah (Picked Up Article)
--------------------------

Any article which is found and whose owner is not known is called
*luqtah* (picked up article).

(i) Any item which has been found and whose owner is not known and whose
price is less than the price of one *mithqal* of silver, can be kept and
possessed by the one who finds it. If the picked up item is worth more
than one *mithqal* of silver in value, it should not be picked up. In
case it is picked up, the finder should search for its owner through the
normal channels for one year. If the owner is found, he should give the
item to him but if the owner is not found, the finder should give the
item to the poor on behalf of its owner as *sadaqah*.

(ii) If an item is found in ruined places having no inhabitants or if it
is found in caves, or in barren lands having no owner, it will belong to
the finder.

But if it is found in a landed property, the finder should make
enquiries from the land's former owners. The found item should be given
to the former owners upon their presentation of some sort of
identification to indicate that they had hidden it there; otherwise, the
item will belong to the finder.

(iii) If an animal is found whose owner is not known, it will be treated
as*luqtah*.

(iv) If a baby is found whose guardian is not known, it would be *wajib
kifa'I* (an obligatory duty of all Muslims but it suffices when
performed by someone) for every Muslim to pick up and bring it up.

(v) If a stolen item is entrusted to a person, it will be considered as
*luqtah* and it should be restored to its original owner, but it cannot
be returned to the thief.


