The Sawm
========

The sawm is one of the Furu' al-Din (the duties to be performed
according to Islamic Shari'ah) of the holy religion of Islam. It is
wajib upon every mukallaf to have sawm in the month of Ramadan. In order
to obey the command of Allah, from the time of Salat al-Fajr to the time
of Salat al-Maghrib one must refrain from muftirat (certain acts which
break or invalidate the sawm) which make the sawm batil. In Islam, much
importance has been attached to sawm. Islam maintains a great deal of
value for this holy act. The reward and recompense of sawm is so vital
in Islam that the Almighty Allah without His prior specifying the thawab
and the recompense of sawm, ascribes its reward to Himself.

The Holy Prophet ('SA) said that Allah stated:

"The sawm is for Me and I will give reward for it." With its specific
characteristics, the sawm plays an exceptionally effective role in the
liberation of man from the servitude of ambitions, carnal desires,
voluptuousness as well as in the purification of the soul from
involvement in sinful acts. The Holy Prophet (SA) told Jabir ibn
'Abdillah al-Ansari: "O Jabir, this is the month of Ramadan and the one
who has sawm during the day and stays awake at night to commune with
Allah, abstains from eating haram food, and guards against evils and
using abusive language, gets out of sins as he leaves the month of
Ramadan behind."

Jabir said: "O Prophet (SA) of Allah, what a good news is it!" The Holy
Prophet (SA) stated: "O Jabir, how demanding and exacting are the
conditions for the sawm!" Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (AS) has stated: "The sawm
serves as a strong shield against the fire of the Hell."

RAMADAN - THE MONTH OF ALLAH

In Islamic ahadith many praiseworthy and interesting names such as "the
auspicious month" and "the best period for the recital of Qur'an" have
been mentioned for the month of Ramadan. But the name "the month of
Allah" is the most outstanding name and the most beautiful title which
has been used for the month of Ramadan.

In spite of the fact that every month is "Allah's month", this month is
specifically called "the month of Allah" due to its great importance.
Thus this name has in itself endowed this month with a special
superiority and a specific spirituality. In this month, the greatest
Divine Book (the Holy Qur'an) has been revealed.

With the advent of the holy month of Ramadan, Allah bestows His
servants with His blessings. A special enlightenment and serenity
generate in the spirit of man. For the worshipping of Allah, the
purification of the soul, and moral reformation, a special preparedness
becomes manifest in those who have sawm. On the last . Friday of the
month of Sha'ban, the Holy Prophet (SA) stated the following concerning
the magnificence and value of "the month of Allah".

"O people, the month of Allah, along with its blessings and salvation,
has revealed itself to you. It is a month which is regarded as the best
of all the months by Allah. Its days, nights, and hours are the best of
all. It is a month in which you are invited to be the guest of Allah and
are entitled to His favour and generosity."

"In this month, your breathing will have the thawab of tasbih saying
"Subhanallah" (Glory be to Allah) and dhikr and your sleeping will have
the thawab of the worship of Allah." "If you resort to Allah in this
month and worship Him, Allah will grant your prayers. Therefore, with
all your truthfulness and sincerity and with a pure heart pray to Allah
to grant you His Divine dispensations for having sawm and reciting the
Holy Qur'an, for one who remains deprived of the forgiveness and
blessings of Allah in this bountiful and blessed month is indeed
unfortunate."

THE SAWM LEADS TO TAQWA

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

"O you who believe! the sawm is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may have taqwa (2:183)."
Islam enjoins its followers to have sawm for a complete month (during
the month of Ramadan). By having sawm for one month, Muslims prepare
themselves for the state of taqwa in its entirety, because when a man
refrains from satisfying his natural physical desires, he can very well
abstain from satisfying his carnal desires.

In order to attain such a degree of perfection, Islam surely does not
consider only abstaining from eating and drinking to be sufficient for
the sawm, rather it orders a person who has sawm to abstain from
whatever causes indulgence in evils and the commitment of sins or leads
him to satanic temptations and indulgence in his unruly carnal
desires.

MUFTIRAT WHICH RENDER THE SAWM BATIL

Several muftirat (certain acts which invalidate the sawm) render the
sawm batil. These include the following:

(i) Eating and drinking, although these things may not be usual drinks
or eatables such as soil or the gum of trees.

(ii) The sexual intercourse renders the sawm batil.

(iii) Masturbation, that is, engagement in any sexual activity which
leads to seminal ejaculation.

(iv) Ascribing a lie to Allah, the Holy Prophet (SA), and the
successors of the Holy Prophet (SA).

(v) Allowing thick dust to reach one's throat.

(vi) Immersing the head entirely in water.

(vii) Remaining in the state of janabah, hayd and nifas up to the Adhan
for Salat al-Subh.

(viii) Application of an enema with a liquid substance.

(ix) Vomiting, provided that it is done deliberately.

For further information, reference should be made to al-risalat
al-'amaliyyah (Islamic treatises written by mujtahidin for use by their
muqallidin for performing Islamic duties).

THE BAY' (SELLING)

What is bay'? The bay' (selling) means the sale and exchange of a
property with another property in a way that the owner, who is ,called
"the seller" of the merchandise transfers the ownership of his property
to the other party in exchange for money, and the other party called
"the buyer" pays the money to the seller in exchange for the
merchandise.

As is evident, the bay' is considered as one of the 'uqud (contracts)
and requires two parties (the seller and the buyer) for implementation.
Thus those, who enter into the 'uqud, must fulfil the general conditions
of the 'uqud such as maturity, wisdom, niyyah, and authority.

THE IRREVOCABILITY OF BAY'

The bay' is an irrevocable 'aqd, i.e., it cannot be revoked by either
of the contracting parties (seller or buyer) after the conclusion of the
contract.

In view of the fact that sometimes the seller or the buyer is cheated
due to his negligence or default and sustains a considerable loss and
because in such instances the irrevocability of the contract is against
the public interest, Islamic laws have enjoined the following two
commands to take care of this sedition:

(i) Faskh al-'aqd (cancellation of contract): When one of the parties
of the contract changes his decision and requests the revocation of the
transaction, it is mustahabb for the other party to accept his request
for the cancellation of the contract.

(ii) Khiyar al-'aqd (option for the contract). It is a special option
or a right which the dealer can exercise to cancel the contract.

The important khiyarat (options) are as follows:

(i) Khiyar al-majlis (option during the meeting): Both parties reserve
the right to cancel the transaction before they disperse. (ii) Khiyar
al-ghabn (option in the case of cheating): It means that when one of the
parties to the contract is cheated and has suffered a loss in the
transaction, for example, if the merchandise is sold at lower than its
actual price or purchased at higher than its actual price, in this case
the one who has been cheated has an option to cancel the contract.

(iii) Khiyar al-'ayb (option in the case of defect): If after the
completion of the transaction, the buyer finds out that the merchandise
is defective, he can either cancel the transaction or demand the
difference in price (difference in price of defectless and of defective
merchandise). (iv) Khiyar al-hayawan (option in the case of animals):
With respect to the option in the case of animals such as sheep and
horses, the buyer has the option to cancel the contract within three
days.

(v) Khiyar al-shart: (option of condition): If the seller or the buyer
or both have agreed upon certain terms and conditions in their
transaction, they can revoke the transaction if the previously
stipulated terms have been violated.

THE BAY ON CASH, ON CREDIT, AND ON ADVANCE PAYMENT

The bay' is of four kinds depending on the payment of money and the
delivery of the goods: (i) The bay' on cash: If the commodity and its
price in money is exchanged right after the contract for transaction is
finalized, it is called the bay' on cash.

(ii) The bay' on credit: In the credit transaction, the commodity is
delivered to the buyer at the time of transaction, but the payment of
the price of the commodity is deferred by the buyer.

(iii) The bay' on advance payment: In this type of transaction, unlike
the second type, the money is paid in cash by the buyer, but the
delivery of the commodity by the seller is postponed.

(iv) The bay' on deferred payment and delivery. Unlike the bay' on
cash, in this type of transaction, both the delivery of the commodity by
the seller and the payment of money by the buyer are deferred to a later
time.

The first three kinds of bay' are correct, but the fourth kind of bay'
is batil.

CONFESSION

The importance of confession: The role of confession in re-establishing
people's rights which are being trampled upon and are not being taken
care of in a society is self-evident, because an action - which is taken
by the judicial organizations after a great deal of efforts and pains,
collecting evidence, calling the people to witness as well as after
depending on guess and conjectures - can be substituted by confession in
the easiest and most clear way with only a few words.

In Islam, the confession has a great importance from a personal point
of view as well, because it originates from an instinct which Islam has
perfectly endeavoured to revive and employ and that is the human
instinct of admiring the right which is exactly the opposite of
sensuality.

In His words, the Almighty Allah addresses those who believe in
Islam:

"O you who believe! be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness for
Allah's sake, though it may be against your own selves or (your) parents
or near relatives...(4:135)."

The Holy Prophet (SA) states: "Tell the truth, though it may be against
your own interests." The meaning and conditions of confession: In
Islamic terms, the confession is a statement that substantiates the
rights of others on the confessor, for example, one who confesses might
say: "I owe one thousand Rials to such and such a person."

The confessor must be mature and sane. He should confess out of his own
free will. Thus the confessions of a child, an insane person, an
intoxicated person, an unconscious person, a person who is asleep, and
the one who is forced to confess are not correct and valid.

EATABLES AND DRINKABLES

In the holy religion of Islam, anything which could be eaten and drunk
is known as "halal" except a few of them, some of which are mentioned in
the Holy Qur'an and some others in the ahadith of the Holy Prophet (SA).
The exceptional cases of haram eatables and drinkables are limited to
two types: animate or animals and inanimate or soulless.

FIRST TYPE: ANIMALS

Animals are of three types: aquatic animals, land animals, and birds:
Aquatic animals: From among animals living in water only aquatic birds
and fish with scales are halal to eat. The other aquatic animals such as
eel, dogfish, tortoise, seal, porpoise, and the like are haram to eat.

Land animals: These animals are classified into two groups: domestic
and wild. The meat of domestic animals such as sheep, goat, cow, and
camel is halal for eating. The meat of horses, mules, and donkeys is
also halal, but eating their meat is makruh. A part from these, other
domestic animals' meat such as of dogs and cats is haram. Among wild
animals, cows, rams, wild goats, zebra, and dear are halal; however, the
remaining wild animals that are beasts or that have talons such as lion,
leopard, wolf, fox, jackal, and rabbits are haram to eat.

Birds: The meat of the birds that have maws and gizzards or that flap
their wings while flying but do not have talons such as hens, pigeons or
doves, turtledove, and francolin are halal to eat, but the meat of the
rest of the birds is haram for eating. Some special species of locusts
or grasshoppers are lawful (for further detail, one should refer to
al-risalat al-'amaliyyah.). Note: The halal meat of the above-mentioned
animals and birds depends upon their tadhkiyah (slaughtering animals
according to Islamic Shari'ah), i.e., they should be slaughtered
according to the Islamic method as explained in al-risalat
al-'amaliyyah.

SECOND TYPE: INANIMATE OBJECTS

There are two kinds of soulless or inanimate objects: solids and
liquids.

(i) Solids

(a) The carcass: The carcass of any animal, whether its meat is halal
or haram, is haram for eating. Also najis objects such as the excreta of
animals whose meat is haram to eat, as well as those eatables which have
become najis through contact with najis objects, are haram to eat.

(b) Soil

(c) Fatal poisons

(d) objects which are repugnant to man such as the excreta of animals
whose meat is halal to eat, their nasal mucus, and anything found in
their intestines are haram. Similarly, fifteen parts and organs of
animals, whose meat is halal to eat, are haram for eating (for further
details, one may refer to al-risalat al-'amaliyyah).

(ii) Liquids

(a) Any type of intoxicating drink is haram for drinking, even in a
small quantity.

(b) The milk of animals, whose meats are haram to eat, such as of pigs,
cats, and dogs is haram to drink.

(c) The blood of any animal whose blood gushes out (when its blood
vessel is cut.).

(d) Najis liquids such as the urine and semen of any animal whose blood
gushes out (when its blood vessel is cut).

(e) Liquids in which one of the najis things is mixed.

Note: The haram eatables and drinkables are haram when there is no
idtirar (emergency or compulsion). In cases of idtirar (such as the
health conditions of a person who will die of hunger if he does not eat
haram food, or one who is afraid of illness or its aggravation, or one
who, due to the intensity of his weakness, would fall behind his
fellow-travellers and would die), one is authorized to have haram
eatables and drinkables only as much as is necessary to remove his
idtirar. This does not hold good in the case of a person who leaves his
country for the purpose of robbery or rebellion against the Islamic
government and faces an idtirar in the course of his journey.

IMPORTANT NOTE

Personal hygiene is one of the primary duties of man. Every individual
can easily realize its importance with his Allah-granted commonsense.

The effects of various kinds of eatables and drinkables in maintaining
personal health are very clear and evident. Furthermore, these have
noteworthy effects on the morale and ethics of man, as well as in his
social associations. There is no doubt at all that the mental conditions
of a drunken person are not like those of a sober one and that their
social behaviours are not identical. Or for example, if someone becomes
accustomed to eating and drinking disgusting things, he will naturally
produce an effect on his personal and social life and this effect is
intolerable for common men.

Therefore, with his Allah-granted nature, man realizes that he must
observe certain limitations in eating food. He should not eat each
eatable or drink each drinkable. The Almighty Allah Who, according to
His explicit wording in the Holy Qur'an, has created everything that is
on the earth for man, Who Himself is not in need of man and the means of
his life, and Who is All-Knowing and All-Seeing than others concerning
the good and the bad of His creatures has declared some of the eatables
and drinkables halal and some others haram for the benefit and
prosperity of man.

Al-'Imam 'Ali al-Rida (AS) has stated: "Allah has not declared any
eatable or drinkable halal, unless it is to the benefit and for the
welfare of man, neither has He declared any haram, unless it is the
source of man's detriment, death, and corruption."

The philosophy behind forbidding some of these haram eatables and
drinkables is quite clear for those who have a pure understanding. The
detriment caused by. some of them and the reason for their being haram
have been gradually revealed to us through scientific investigations.
Regarding haram eatables and drinkables whose philosophy for being haram
has not yet become available to us, it cannot be said that these
philosophies will never become clear to us. Even if their philosophies
do not become clear to us, it cannot be said that they are actually
devoid of any wisdom and expediency. But since these policies originate
from the Holy Presence of an Infinite Knowledge, it can positively be
said that these contain the best and most effective wisdom and
expediency, even though we may fall short of understanding them due to
our narrowmindedness and the limitations of our scientific means and
equipment.

THE GHASB (USURPATION)

Taking the property of another person and owning it without any
legitimate reason of possession and forcibly occupying the property of
another person in order to benefit from its profits without the
intention of legally claiming it as one's own property is called ghasb
(usurpation) according to Islamic Shari'ah.

Thus, the ghasb means exercising control over the property of others
without having any legitimate means of control such as bay', rent, or
permission.

It becomes quite clear that the ghasb is an indecent act which violates
the very principle of ownership. .lust as the principle of ownership
plays an effective role in t he establishment and survival of the
society, the ghasb ruins and brings the society to a standstill.

Possession of a property and ownership will become invalid if the
influential people of a society decide to gain control over the produce
and output of the labour of the weak and the subordinates. Thus the idea
of the transgression of the influential people over the personal rights
of the helpless people would become predominant in the society.
Consequently, in this situation, the subordinates and the weak will
embark on any kind of submission, dishonour, and disrespect in order to
benefit from the output of their efforts and endeavours. Thus the human
society will be converted into a market in which the slaves are brought
and sold and the laws and policies of the society will become entirely
invalid and will be replaced by coercion and oppression.

This is why Islam has formulated strict policies for the usurper and
considers usurpation a mortal sin. According to the explicit wording of
the Holy Qur'an and ahadith, any kind of sins other than shirk may be
forgiven by Allah and any kind of sins including shirk may be forgiven
after tawbah (repentance), but whoever has a record of usurpation and
infringement upon the rights of the people, will never have any hope for
salvation from being called to account by Allah and from the
remuneration of his deed without being forgiven by the persons who
possessed these properties and rights.

SOME OF THE PRECEPTS CONCERNING GHASB

(i) It is wajib for the usurper to immediately give back the usurped
property to its original owner. If the owner is not alive, the usurper
must deliver the usurped property to his heirs, even if doing so may be
a heavy loss for the usurper. For instance, if one forcibly seizes the
stones or pieces of iron belonging to someone else and uses them in the
foundation of a building worth hundreds of thousand times more than the
stones and the iron, he should excavate the foundation and pull out the
usurped stones and iron to give them back to the original owner, unless
the owner agrees to accept the price of the commodity. As another
example, if one usurps ten manns (each mann is of three kilogrammes) of
wheat and mixes it with ten kharvars (each kharvar consists of one
hundred manns) of barley, he should pick out all the wheat from the
barley and return it to its original owner, unless he accepts to take
the price of wheat.

(ii) If any defect develops in the usurped property, the usurper must
not only return it to its owner exactly as it was on his usurpation, but
he must also indemnify for its losses.

(iii) If the usurped property is lost, the usurper must pay its price
to the rightful owner.

(iv) If the usurper squanders a part of the profits of the usurped
property without using it himself, he will be responsible for the said
profit. For instance, if a person who usurps the rental car of another
person and puts it out of commission for a few days, he would be
responsible for the loss incurred.

If the usurper gains profit from the usurped property, for example, if
he nourishes a usurped sheep with good fodder, so that it becomes fat,
he will have no rightful claims over the profit rendered by the sale of
the sheep. If the benefits accruing from the usurped property are
separable, for instance, cultivating a usurped land, one should give the
usurped property along with its rent back to the original owner of the
land, but the crop belongs to the usurper.

THE SHUF'AH (PREEMPTION)

If two persons own a house or another landed property as a musha'
(joint ownership) and one of the partners decides to sell his share to a
third party, the other partner has the right to buy his partner's share
by the same contract agreed upon and exactly at the same price set for
the third party. This right is called the right of shuf'ah
(preemption).

It is quite clear that the right of shuf'ah has been devised in Islam
to adjust and to stabilize partnerships and to eliminate losses and
other mischiefs resulting from partnership of properties, for in many
cases, the possession of the property by the new partner inflicts losses
on the partner having the right of shuf'ah or serves as the source of a
series of conflicts and disagreements due to differences of opinion or
it may be that freedom of ownership may have benefits for the one who
has the right of shuf'ah without causing any loss for the partner who
wants to sell his share. The right of shuf'ah holds good for lands,
houses, gardens, and other immovable properties, but it does not apply
to movable properties.

RE-CULTIVATION OF BARREN LANDS

The term applies to the cultivation of a land which is not used
(Whether it has never been cultivated before or it has been cultivated
at a time, or it has become demolished and entirely fruitless due to the
departure of its inhabitants or it may have become a meadow or a
bamboo-field.). In any case, the re-cultivation or development of barren
lands is considered as one of the good deeds in Islam. In addition to
serving as a means of ownership, the re-cultivation of barren lands will
also lead to thawab.

It is related from the Holy Prophet (SA): "He who cultivates a barren
land is entitled to the ownership of that land." Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (AS)
is quoted as saying: "Any group of people who develop and cultivate a
land will have the preference and that land will belong to them." In
Islam, barren lands belong to Allah, the Prophet (SA) and the Imams (AS)
(i.e., they belong to the Islamic government) and are considered as
anfal (spoils).

Waste lands and barren lands can be cultivated and owned under the
following specific conditions. From among the people who cultivate a
land, whoever takes the lead will have the priority of ownership. The
conditions are as follows:

(i) Permission from the Imam (AS) or his deputy.

(ii) The land must not have been fenced with stones, or demarcated, or
the like by anyone else in advance.

(iii) The land must not be within the limits of the property of others,
such as the borders of rivers, the soil under the wells, and the
boundaries of plantations.

(iv) The land must not be a free land, such as demolished mosques and
endowments, or it must not be designed for the use of all Muslims, such
as streets and roads.

Note: The development and cultivation of lands is based on a general
understanding. Thus if the general understanding admits that a certain
person has developed such and such a land, then that person's ownership
will be established. Certainly, the development of a land varies
according to various objectives, for instance, in agriculture, the
development of a land is made by ploughing and grooving it and in the
case of construction, it is done by constructing walls around the
land.

(v) It is permissible for everybody to derive a benefit from the open
mines - which require no excavation and exploitation - to the extent
which meets their personal needs. If benefiting from such mines requires
excavation, drilling, exploitation, and other technical operations that
are required for the excavation of gold mines, copper mines, and the
like, the person who has taken pains in embarking on the excavation and
exploitation of the mine will have the right of ownership.

(vi) Large rivers are jointly owned by the Muslims. In the utilization
of streams and the water of snowfalls and rain, pouring down from
mountains, whoever is closer and nearer to them will have priority over
others.

LUQTAH (PICKED UP ARTICLE)

Any article which is found and whose owner is not known is called
luqtah (picked up article).

(i) Any item which has been found and whose owner is not known and
whose price is less than the price of one mithqal of silver, can be kept
and possessed by the one who finds it. If the picked up item is worth
more than one mithqal of silver in value, it should not be picked up. In
case it is picked up, the finder should search for its owner through the
normal channels for one year. If the owner is found, he should give the
item to him but if the owner is not found, the finder should give the
item to the poor on behalf of its owner as sadaqah.

(ii) If an item is found in ruined places having no inhabitants or if
it is found in caves, or in barren lands having no owner, it will belong
to the finder.

But if it is found in a landed property, the finder should make
enquiries from the land's former owners. The found item should be given
to the former owners upon their presentation of some sort of
identification to indicate that they had hidden it there; otherwise, the
item will belong to the finder.

(iii) If an animal is found whose owner is not known, it will be
treated as luqtah.

(iv) If a baby is found whose guardian is not known, it would be wajib
kifa'i (an obligatory duty of all Muslims but it suffices when performed
by someone) for every Muslim to pick up and bring it up.

(v) If a stolen item is entrusted to a person, it will be considered as
luqtah and it should be restored to its original owner, but it cannot be
returned to the thief.


