Glossary of Non-english Terms
=============================

Adhan the specified wordings called out at salat times, the call for
salat

'adil just

'ahd promise

Ahl al-Bayt (AS) Prophet Muhammad (SA), Hadrat Fatimah (AS) and the
Twelve infallible Imams (AS) Ahl al-Kitab the followers of the Divine
Books (the Jews, the Christians and the Magians) Akhirah the world
Hereafter

'alim (pl. 'ulama') Islamic scholar Amin may Allah it be so

Amir al-Mu'minin Commander of the Believers, al-'Imam 'Ali (AS) al-amr
bil-ma'ruf enjoining the lawful acts

anbiya' (pl. of Nabi) prophets anfal spoils

ansar helpers, friends

'aqd (pl. 'uqud) contract 'asr afternoon

Ayah (pl. Ayat) Qur'anic verse Banu Hashim family of Hashim

Al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah appointment of prophethood batil invalid,
incorrect

bay' selling

dhanb kabir mortal sin dhanb saghir venial sin

dhikr words for remembering Allah.

farsakh a measure of distance of about 5.6 km faskh al- 'aqd
cancellation of contract fiqh Islamic jurisprudence

Fir'awn Pharaoh

Furu' al-Din the duties to be performed according to Islamic Shari'ah.
ghadir pond

ghasb usurpation

Al-Ghaybat al-Kubra the Great Occultation of al-'Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi
(AS) Al-Ghaybat al-sughra the Short Occultation of al-'Imam Muhammad
al-Mahdi (AS) ghusl (pl. ghusul) taking bath according to the Islamic
Shari'ah

ghusl irtimasi performing ghusl by the immersion of the whole body in
water ghusl mass al-mayyit performing ghusl due to touching of the dead
body ghusl al-mayyit bathing the dead body

ghusl tartibi performing ghusl by washing the body part by part as
specified in Islamic Shari'ah hadath condition requiring ghusl or wudu'
al-hadath al-akbar condition requiring ghusl

al-hadath al-asghar condition requiring wudu' hadith ( pl. ahadith)
Tradition

Al-Hajar al-'Aswad the Black Stone hajj pilgrimage to Makkah,
obligatory once in lifetime for Muslims who can afford hajj (pl. hujjaj)
pilgrims who perform hajj halal Islamically permissible

haram sacred premises haram Islamically prohibited Harun Aaron

hawari (pl. hawariyyun) disciple hayd menstruation

Hijjatul-Wada' the last hajj performed by Prophet Muhammad (SA) Hijrah
migration of Prophet Muhammad (SA) from Makkah to Madinah Hud (AS)
Prophet Heber (AS)

Ibrahim (AS) Prophet Abraham (AS) idtirar compulsion, emergency, driven
by necessity ijarah receipt of money for reciting salawat and performing
siyam.

ijtihad endeavouring for the deduction of commandments based on Islamic
fundamentals Imam (AS) (pl. A'immah) infallible successor of Prophet
Muhammad (SA) Imamah succession of Prophet Muhammad (SA) by Twelve
Infallible. Imams (AS) Imam al-'Asr (AS) the 12th Infallible Imam of the
present time, Muhammad al-Mahdi (AS) Imam al-Huda (AS) (pl. A'mmat
al-Huda [AS]) the Infallible Imam of Guidance imam al-jama'ah the imam
of congregational salat Injl The Bible

Iqamah the specified wordings, almost similar to the Adhan and recited
after it, before commencing the salat iqtida' following

'Isa (AS) Jesus Christ 'isha' night

Ishaq (AS) Prophet Isaac (AS) 'ismah infallibility Isma'il (AS) Prophet
Ishmael (AS)

Isra'il (AS) Prophet Israel (AS) istihadah menstrual bleeding

istihalah transformation or a chemical change of the state of an object
ja'iz permissible janabah major ritual impurity or al-hadath al-akbar
caused by the sexual intercourse, or the like Jibril Gabriel

jihad Islamic war jizyah head tax charged from Ahl al-Kitab in lieu of
their non-acceptance of Islam

kafir (pl. kafirin) unbeliever kafir harbi unbeliever to be fought
against khalifah (pl. khulafa') caliph khilafah caliphate

khiyar (pl. khiyarat) option, right khiyar al-'aqd option for the
contract khiyar al-'ayb option in the case of defect khiyar al-ghabn
option in the case of cheating

khiyar al-hayawan option in the case of animals khiyar al-majlis option
during the meeting khiyar al-shart option of condition kubra the great

kurr water weighing about 384 kg which does not become najis if najasah
reaches it luqtah picked up article Ma'ad Resurrection

Madinat al-Rasul The city of the Prophet (SA), Madinah maghrib evening
makruh undesirable - though not unlawful but refraining from it is
preferable ma'mum the follower who follows the imam in salat al-jama'ah
manasik rituals

mann a measure of weight of about 3 kg Maryam Mary mash anointing

Al-Masjid al-Haram Ka'bah ma'sum ( pl. ma'sumin ) infallible mithqal a
measure of weight of about 4.6 g mubah permissible, allowable
Al-Mubahalah cursing

mubtil (pl. mubtilat) things or acts through which the salat, the sawm,
the wudu', etc become invalid mudaf mixed

muftir (pl. muftirat) certain act which breaks or invalidates the sawm
muhajir (pl. muhajirin) immigrant

mujtahid one who is capable of deduction of command that is based on
Islamic Shari'ah mukallaf the one who reached the age of maturity and
thus became responsible for performing the Islamic duties munafiq (pl.
munafiqin) hypocrites muqallid (pl. muqallidin) one who follows a
mujtahid's instructions for performing his deeds Musa (AS) Prophet Moses
(AS)

musha' joint ownership, held in common mushrik (pl. mushrikin)
polytheists mustahabb recommended, desirable mutahhir (pl. mutahhirat)
purifier which purifies a najis

mutlaq pure muwalat performing the parts of an Islamic act in
succession without undue delay nadhr vow

al-nahy'an al-munkar forbidding the sinful acts najasah impurity as per
the Islamic laws Al-Najashi King Negus of Ethiopia najis inherently
impure

nifas puerperal period niyyah intention, decision Nubuwwah prophethood
Nuh (AS) Prophet Noah (AS) Al-Nuwwab al-Arba'ah the Four Deputies of
Imam al-'Asr (AS)

qada' settling the salawat or the siyam which had not been performed in
time, not performed but due qalil little in quantity less than kurr
qasam oath

qasr reciting two raka'at instead of 4-rak'ah salawat Qiyamah The Last
Day Qaysar Caesar

Qiblah facing towards Ka'bah while reciting salat qira'ah the
recitation in the salat qisas Islamic reprisal

qiyam the standing erect while reciting the salat qunut supplication
during salat in a specific manner qurbah seeking Allah's pleasure

rak'ah (pl. raka'at) a section of salat al-Risalah al-'A maliyyah
Islamic treatise written by a mujtahid for use by his muqallidin for
performing Islamic duties ruh soul, self, personality

Ruhulqudus Gabriel, Jibril rukn (pl. arkan) a basic part of the salat
ruku' a part of the salat in which one bows down, genuflexion sadaqah
charity

salam greetings, peace, saying "as-salamu 'alaykum" sajdah (pl.
sajdahs) the act of prostration in the salat or worship to Allah salat
(pl. salawat) prayer

Salat al-Ayat the salat of Allah's creation or signs.

salat al-jama'ah the congregational prayer salat al-mayyit the prayer
for the dead person

salat al-tawaf al-wajib the prayer of circumambulation around Ka'bah
al-salat al-yawmiyyah the daily prayers Salih (AS) Prophet Salih sent to
the tribe of Thamud sawm statutory Islamic obligation of fasting sawm
al-wisal continuous fasting

Sayyidat Nisa' al-'Alamin the epithet of Fatimah (AS), the daughter of
Prophet Muhammad (SA) meaning the head of all the women of the worlds
Shari'ah Divine Islamic Law shaytan satan Shi'i Shi'ite shirk
polytheism

Shu'ayb (AS) Prophet Jethro (AS) shuf'ah preemption

Al-Siddiqah al-Kubra the epithet of Fatimah (AS), the daughter of
Prophet Muhammad (SA) meaning the most strictly veracious sirah
Life-style, conduct, character subh morning

surah (pl. suwar) Qur'anic chapter tabligh (pl. tablighat)
communication, propagation, dissemination tadhkiyah slaughtering animal
according to Islamic Shari'ah taharah purity, specified Islamic way of
purification tahir pure as per Islamic Shari'ah

takbir saying "Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is Great" takbirat al-ihram
the first takbir (saying Allahu Akbar) said at the beginning of the
salat just after the niyyah taqiyyah concealing one's true beliefs when
life is in danger taqlid following a mujtahid in practising Islamic laws
taqwa piety, guarding against evil

tarakhkhus the limit of the tarakhkhus (seeing off) is a distance at
which neither the walls of the town are visible nor Adhan is heard
tartib the order or sequence as prescribed by Islamic Shari'ah tasbih to
say "subhanallah, i.e., Glory be to Allah" as a dhikr

tashahhud testifying for Tawhid of Allah and prophethood of Prophet
Muhammad (SA) tawbah repentance

Tawhid Oneness of Allah, monotheism Tawrat The Old Testament tayammum
statutory Islamic ablution with soil, sand, etc thawab Allah's reward,
spiritual reward

Ulul 'Azm Anbiya' arch-prophets Ummah Islamic people, Islamic nation
Ummi unschooled (by human beings), untaught Usul al-Din the fundamental
principles of Islam wahy divine revelation

wajib (pl. wajibat) obligatory, incumbent

wajib kifa'i an obligatory duty of all Muslims but it suffices when
performed by someone wilayah Islamic jurisprudential guardianship wudu'
statutory ablution according to the Islamic Shari'ah zuhr noon


