Is It Necessary For Man To Follow a Religion?
=============================================

The foremost question that comes up here is "what is the relation of
men's lives with religion and piety?" Is it not possible for a human
society to continue its humanitarian existence without religion and
faith in Allah? Is it not that a religious person is one who proves
Allah's existence and performs specific acts for His satisfaction?

It is possible that in the society, according to the laws enacted by
human beings, the duty of each member of the society determines the
benefit and the loss. In this case, the laws of men replace religious
laws and there will be no need for religion. But with little attention
and deliberation on Islamic commandments and regulations, the opposite
of this is proved, for Islam has not been concerned only with praying to
and praising Allah,

rather it has enacted comprehensive instructions and specific
regulations for all individual and social positions of man. Islam has
considered the vast world of humanity in an astonishing manner and has
enacted suitable regulations in accordance with man's individual and
social actions and otherwise.

Finally, Islam has provided and guaranteed the happiness and prosperity
of the members of social community in every respect and to the maximum
extent possible. Every just person acknowledges that the laws sprang
from man's limited thoughts and knowledge cannot equal those of
religion. This power of the Almighty Allah has described the religion of
Islam in the Holy Quran. As examples, we will cite few verses here:

"Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam, and those to whom the
Book had been given did not show opposition but after knowledge had come
to them, out of envy among themselves: and whoever disbelieves in the
communications of Allah then surely Allah is quick in reckoning
(3:19)."

The religion towards which all prophets have invited people consists of
theism and submission to Allah's orders. Though the religious scholars
specified right through wrong, they did not accept what was rightful due
to their prejudice and animosity. Each scholar adopted a specific course
of action; as a result, different religions came into existence on
earth. In fact, this category of people did not believe in the Divine
verses. Allah will soon retribute their deeds.

"And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him. and in the Hereafter he shall be one of the losers
(3:85)."

"O you who believe! enter into submission one and all, and do not
follow the footsteps of Shaytan (satan); surely he is your open enemy
(2:208)." "And fulfil the covenant of Allah when you have made a
covenant, and do not break the oaths after making them fast, and you
have indeed made Allah a surety for you; surely Allah knows what you do
(16:91)."

The purpose of this verse is to indicate that any Muslim who makes a
promise to Allah or to people must keep it and must not breach it.

"Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation, and
have debates with them in the best manner; surely your Lord best knows
those who go astray from His path, and He knows best those who follow
the right way (16:125)."

This refers to the fact that to promote religion, a Muslim must
converse with people according to their understanding and in a way that
is beneficial to them. However, if he fails to guide a person through
logic and advice then he must debate in the best manner, which is one of
the means of proving something, to guide him towards truth.

"And when the Qur'an is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you (7:204)."

"O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Prophet and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Prophet, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day; this
is better and very good in the end (4:59)."

This verse means that in an Islamic society, disputes can only be
settled by the Qur'an and the ahadith of the Prophet (SA). Every
difference must be settled by these two factors. If a Muslim settles
differences by the logic of reason, this is due to the fact that the
Qur'an has accepted the rule of logic.

"Thus, it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal with them gently,
and had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust (3:159)."

Good behaviour, benevolence, and taking counsel in the affairs result
in fellowship and kindness. Members of the society must respect their
leader to be influenced by him. Allah orders the honourable leader of
the Muslims to be benevolent and to take counsel. But since it is
possible that people may make mistakes in their decisions, Allah orders
the leader to be independent in his decision after taking counsel and to
have trust in Allah, because no one can oppose Allah's will.

In like manner, the Almighty Allah introduces Judaism and Christianity
with their Divine books of Tawrat (Old Testament) and the Injil (Bible)
and their social precepts and provisions as:

"And how do they make you a judge and they have the Tawrat wherein is
Allah's judgement. .. Surely We revealed Tawrat in which was guidance
and light; with it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah)
judged (matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of divine
knowledge and the doctors... And We sent after them in their footsteps
'Isa (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary)... and We gave him the Injil in which
was guidance and light, and verifying what was before it of Tawrat...
And the followers of the Injil should have judged by what Allah revealed
in it... And We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, verifying
what is before it of the Book and a guardian over it, therefore judge
between them by what Allah has revealed ...(5:43 - 48)."

Tawrat and Injil which are now in the hands of the Jews and Christians
emphasize this point, because the Tawrat contains many legal and
judicial provisions and apparently the Injil confirms and certifies the
religious laws of Tawrat.


**CONCLUSION**

From the aforementioned statement, it becomes evident that religion as
viewed by the Qur'an is the same as the method of living from which man
cannot escape. The difference between religion and a social law is that
religion is descended by the Almighty Allah, whereas social laws spring
from people's minds. In other words, religion unites man's social life
with his worship and obedience of the Almighty Allah, while no attempt
at such unity is made by social laws.


**The Advantages Of Religion**

It was revealed that religion has a profound effect in reforming the
individual and the society. It is also the only means of obtaining bliss
and prosperity.

A society which does not abide by religion loses its realign and
intellectualism and spends its precious life in aberration, externalism,
and negligence. Such a society ignores wisdom, and like animals, becomes
narrow-minded and foolish. This society becomes involved in immorality
and misbehaviour, thus forfeiting all its humanitarian privileges. Such
a society will not reach its everlasting prosperity and rather, it will
experience the inauspicious outcomes and the unpleasant effects of its
deviations and m is demeanours. Sooner or later, such a society will
suffer from the evil consequences of its negligence and will realize
that the only way towards prosperity is religion and belief in Allah.
Finally, this society will regret its actions.

The Almighty Allah states:

"He will indeed be successful who purifies it, and he will indeed fail
who corrupts it (91:9 -10)."

It is necessary to understand that the application of religious
instructions ensures the happiness and salvation of the individual and
the society, otherwise only nomination does not help. Since it is only
the reality itself that counts and not the claim for reality.

Whoever claims to be a Muslim, and with his gloomy heart, inferior
character, and awkward behaviour expects to meet the angel of happiness,
resembles a patient who expects to recover without having treatment as
per the prescription. Obviously with such an idea, he will not attain
his goal.

The Almighty Allah states:

"Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Chris tians
and the Sabians\*, whoever believes in Allah and the Last day and does
good, they shall have reward from their Lord...(2:62)."

It might be assumed that, according to this verse, those who have faith
in Allah and the Day of Judgement and who perform good deeds will be
saved even if they do not believe in all or some prophets. But it must
be realized that in Surat al-Nisa' Ayat (verses) 150 and 151, Allah
considers those who disbelieve in all or some of the prophets as kafirin
(unbelievers). In this respect, He states:

"Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His apostles and (those who)
desire to make a distinction between Allah and His apostles and say: 'We
believe in some and disbelieve in others'; and desire to take a course
between (this and) that. These it is that are truly unbelievers, and We
have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement
(4:150-151)."

As a result, whoever believes in all the prophets and performs good
deeds will avail of his faith.

\* Sabians are those who converted from Magian to Jewish religion.


**HUMAN CIVILIZATION**

If we study the means and factors which led to the development of human
societies in the past, this truth becomes evident to us that in his
life, man only demands and pursues his own prosperity and happiness. Of
course, this happiness would not be possible without the total provision
of all means of existence.

On the other hand, with his understanding, gifted by Allah, man
realizes that he can never attain and prepare all his needs on his own,
so as to provide the means of his ideal welfare and prosperity, because
he realizes that he cannot solve the problems of life and reach
perfection by himself. As a result, he necessarily submits himself to a
social life to supply his needs and considers cooperation with others as
the easiest means towards achieving his goal.

He engages in acquiring the means of his livelihood collectively. That
is to say, each person undertakes to provide some of the means and makes
them available. Then, all individuals gather the outcome of their
activities. Proportionate with his activity and social status, each
individual takes a share and uses it to manage his life.

In this way, he will work hand in hand with his fellowmen to ensure his
welfare. This is to say that they all endeavour for one another and pile
up the outcomes of their activities. Then each member of the society
gathers the product of his activity in accordance with his position and
the extent of his endeavour.

**THE NEED FOR REGULATIONS IN THE SOCIETY**

As the results of the activities of individuals are linked with one
another and since everyone wants to benefit from them, forcibly,
inconvenience and conflict of interests are indispensable elements of
this contact and constant relation. It is needless to say that material
benefits are normally the source of all kinds of differences,
animosities, and loss of sincerity. In order to maintain sincerity among
people, society requires a series of regulations, the observance of
which prevents disturbance and chaos.

It is self-evident that if no laws and regulations for the management
of the society exist, there will be a chaos in which human society
cannot survive even for a single day.

Certainly, these rules vary from one society to another based on the
extent of civilization or savagery of tribes and nations, and the level
of understanding of societies and their governments. In neither case is
a society free from the need of a series of traditions and regulations
which are at least respected by most of its members. In the history of
mankind, never has a society evolved without possessing common rites,
traditions, and regulations.

**MAN IS NOT FREE AGAINST REGULATIONS**

As man performs all his actions with his own free will and choice, he
feels a sort of freedom of action for himself. By considering this
freedom of action as "absolute", that is, "unconditional", he wants
total freedom and escapes from any restriction. For this reason, man
suffers from any prohibition and deprivation inflicted on himself.
Finally, he feels compelled and senses failure whenever a restriction is
imposed on him. Therefore, no matter how small the number of social
regulations are, they are against man's freedom-seeking nature because
they limit him to some extent.

On the other hand, he finds that if he disagrees to forfeit a part of
his freedom by abiding by the laws for the sake of the protection of
society and its order, a chaos will result that will suddenly annihilate
all his freedom and peace. This is just as if he seizes a morsel from
others when others will undoubtedly seize morsels from him. In like
manner, if he oppresses others, they will oppress him as well.
Therefore, in order to maintain some freedom for himself, he dispenses
with a part of his freedom and inevitably respects social regulations.

**WEAK POINT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF REGULATIONS**

As mentioned before, there is a kind of conflict and incompatibility
between man's freedom-seeking nature and social regulations. That is,
laws are like chains that are linked to man's feet and he constantly
tries to break them and set himself free from captivity. This is the
greatest danger which always threatens social regulations and shakes its
foundations.

In this regard, alongside practical regulations and duties, there are
always other regulations intended to punish offenders which frighten and
prevent them from opposition, and to encourage people to abide by the
laws by making them confident of receiving rewards and prizes. It cannot
be denied that the subject matter (i.e., fear of punishment and
eagerness for receiving rewards) aids the enforcement of laws to some
extent, but it cannot fully prevent violations and safeguard the
influence and domination of laws. This is because penal codes, like
other laws, are vulnerable to violation and are constantly threatened by
the freedom-seeking nature of man, because those who have full power and
capability can overtly oppose them without fear and fright, or they can
force judicial and executive organizations to act according to their
desire, by using their influence.

And those who do not have adequate influence and power can take
advantage of the negligence or weakness of the authorities to fulfil
their oppositions covertly. They can attain their ends through bribery,
mediation, or by way of friendship and relationship with the influential
sector to disrupt the working order of the society and to paralyse it.

The best evidence for this subject is that every day we observe
thousands of these types of oppositions and violations against laws in
various human societies.


**THE ORIGINAL SOURCE OF THE WEAKNESS OF LAWS**

We must now find out where the original source of danger lies and how
to subdue the unyielding and freedom seeking nature of man in order to
prevent his opposition to the law.

The source of this danger, which is the main cause for penetration of
corruption in a society and which cannot even be prevented by
regulations, is that the ordinary social methods which have brought the
laws into existence consider the material aspects of individuals and
ignore their spiritualities and instincts. They only aim at providing
harmony, maintaining order, and balancing the actions of people in such
a way that will not result in discord and conflict. Social laws demand
adherence of their articles and tend to control the actions of people.
Such laws ignore men's innate attributes and innermost feelings which
instigate their actions and which are the internal enemies of
regulations.

Whenever the freedom-seeking nature of man and hundreds of other
instincts (such as selfishness, voluptuousness, which are the main
causes of corruption) are ignored, there will be chaos and disturbance
and the scope of differences will become wider day by day. Since all
laws are always threatened by the attack and invasion of powerful rebels
and the night-time attacks of ingenious robbers springing from these
instincts; therefore, they fall short of preventing corruption and
differences.

**THE ADVANTAGE OF RELIGION OVER OTHER LAWS**

The latest social method for the protection of laws is to establish
penal codes and appoint officials to enforce them. But as mentioned
earlier, penal laws and officials cannot restrain the mutinous nature
and other rebellious instincts of man and fail to enforce social
regulations.

In addition to appointing officials to maintain control and formulating
regulations to castigate violators and rebels as established by human
laws, religion has other powerful means at its disposal whereby it can
defeat and annihilate any antagonistic force.

(1) As a result of uniting social life and the worship of the Almighty
Allah, religion has initiated a divine responsibility for man in all his
individual and social acts and holds man responsible in all his
endeavours and hesitations.

Since Sublime Allah has full control over man by His infinite might and
knowledge he is thoroughly aware of any thought that man nurtures in his
mind and any secret in man's heart; and nothing is hidden to Him.

In addition to appointing an external police, religion puts man under
the care of his conscience which never neglects its duty. Man cannot
escape from the rewards and retribution of conscience.

The Almighty Allah states:

" ... And Allah comprehends what they do (8:47)."
"... And He is with you wherever you are ,.. (57:4)."
"... And your Lord will most surely pay back to all their deeds in full
...(11:111)."
"... Surely Allah ever watches over you (4:1)."

If we compare the conditions of a man who is governed by laws with one
who lives under the jurisdiction of religion, the advantage and
superiority of religion will become quite evident. A society, whose
members are all religious and perform their religious du ties and know
that Allah observes their action in every respect, is protected from the
malevolence of its members towards one another. Thus, the general public
who live in such an environment are safeguarded against the actions and
statements of others. They even have security in their thinking, whereas
this purport does not exist in the laws of the universe. Religion has
also prohibited man from mistrust.

"O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy... (49:12)."

Man feels quite comfortable in a religious environment. He will spend a
lifetime in utmost joy and comfort and will attain everlasting
welfare.

But in a society governed only by human laws, man refrains from
unlawful acts when he sees the police watching his actions; otherwise,
he may commit any offence.

(2) Under the guidance of religion, every religious person discovers
the fact that his life is not limited to a life of short duration in
this ephemeral world, rather there is an infinite and endless life ahead
of him which does not terminate by death. He realizes that the only way
to attain everlasting prosperity and eternal comfort is to follow
religious laws descended by the Almighty Allah through His prophets. He
knows that religious laws are descended by the Wise, Powerful, and
Knowledgeable Allah who controls man's inward and outward behaviour and.
who examines man's overt and covert activities. It is, therefore,
impossible for man to conceal an act so as to undermine Allah's
commands.

(3) According to his religious beliefs, every pious man knows that
performing religious orders is, in fact, the obedience to Allah. Even if
by so doing he does not get any rewards from the standpoint of
servitude, he will receive a good remuneration by the favour and grace
of Allah. Thus by observing religious commandments, he voluntarily makes
a dealing and transaction, because he forfeits a part of his freedom
willingly and, in return, gains the satisfaction of Compassionate Allah
and receives an excellent reward.

By following religious rules and provisions, a, religious man quite
happily engages in dealings. The more he loses his freedom, the more he
receives benefits. He sells a merchandise and replaces it with a better
one. But one who is not committed to religion considers the observation
of laws and provisions a loss for himself. His freedom-seeking nature
suffers from the loss of a part of his freedom and seeks an opportunity
to set himself free from captivity in order to regain his freedom.

Be it known that religion differs from laws in other respects as well.
Religious people willingly avoid committing sins, but the followers of
laws only avoid committing crimes because of fear. Religion controls the
entire body of pious men, whereas laws only dominate the hands and feet.
Religion commands openly and secretly, but laws can only command
publicly. Not only is religion a guardian preventing blameworthy acts,
but also it is a teacher and educator teaching virtue and perfection.
Laws, however, have no other function but to serve as police.

If we assume the benefit of other laws to be one u nit, then the
advantage of religion is more than a thousand units. Thus, those who try
to uproot religion by adhering to other laws resemble people who cut
their legs by their hands and then replace them with wooden legs.

Thus, from the aforementioned statements, it becomes evident that
religion is the best and most exalted way that can organize human
society and persuade people to observe social laws more than any other
method.


