Religion
========

Religion refers to the beliefs and a series of practical and moral
instructions that the prophets have related on behalf of Allah to guide
and lead human beings.

Believing in these tenets and performing these instructions result in
man's prosperity and happiness in this world and in the world Hereafter.

So if we abide by religion and follow the orders of Allah and the
Prophet (S), we will become prosperous not only in this short life, but
also in the everlasting and endless world Hereafter.

We are aware that a happy and prosperous person is one who has a true
objective in his life and who does not live in misdeed and aberration.
He possesses a good and praiseworthy demeanor and performs good deeds
and has a confident, strong, and peaceful heart in this turbulent world.

The religion of Allah directs us towards this happiness and prosperity.
Without religion, there would be no prosperity and bliss. Religious
tenets are like secret police in the heart of man and always accompany
him. They keep man away from moral wickedness and force him to be
virtuous.

Belief is the strongest and most solid refuge in which man never
confronts fear and anguish in the ups and downs of life. The worshippers
of Allah never lose their courage in any circumstances and never feel
disdain and inferior, for they see themselves connected to the infinite
might of the Creator of the world and under all circumstances, they
remember Allah and seek refuge with Allah; they possess a confident,
strong, and peaceful heart.

Religion commands us to have a praiseworthy behavior and to perform good
and decent deeds as far as we can.

Therefore, religion is divided into three parts:

(1) Beliefs;

(2) Ethics;

(3) Commandments.

This brief account should be elaborated to be acceptable to the
honorable readers.

1. Beliefs
----------

If we use our commonsense and conscience, we realize that this world of
existence with its wonderful order could not be created by itself and
this astonishing order of the world of creation could not be achieved
without an organizer.

Undoubtedly, there is a Creator Who has created this vast and
magnificent world with His infinite capability and knowledge and who has
established the world of creation with exact order by the invariable and
unchangeable rules that He has set up throughout the world of existence.
Nothing has been created uselessly and extravagantly. No creature falls
outside the purview of the laws of Allah that govern the world.

Can it be believed that such a compassionate Allah with all the grace
and blessings that He has toward His creatures would leave man, the
masterpiece creation on his own? And that He would leave human beings to
man's wisdom which is mostly victim of carnal desires and is, as a
result, faced with aberration and misery? The reply to this question is
self-evident.

Consequently, Allah must send instructions to human beings by prophets -
who are free from any kind of sin and error - to lead men to happiness
and prosperity by following them.

We realize that in this world, the signs and valuable benefits of
adherence to religious principles do not become completely evident.
Neither the righteous are rewarded, nor the criminals and oppressors are
punished for their deeds.

From this, we understand that another world must exist where people's
deeds are closely investigated, so that if one has done a charitable
act, he would be rewarded or if he has committed an indecent deed, he
would be castigated. Religion encourages people with these tenets and
other rightful beliefs, which will later be thoroughly discussed in this
book, and warns them of paganism and ignorance.

2. Ethics
---------

Religion decrees that we adopt praiseworthy qualities in life, have a
good nature, and accomplish ourselves with good and commendable
attributes. We must be conscientious, benevolent, philanthropic, kind,
faithful, good-natured, pleasing to meet, and just.

We must defend our own rights. We must not transgress our own limits and
rights and should not encroach upon the property, reputation, and lives
of people. In search of knowledge and civility, we must not spare any
effort for self-sacrifice and self-denial whatsoever. Finally, we must
have equality and moderation in all affairs of life.

3. Commandments
---------------

Religion decrees that we perform acts that are beneficial to ourselves
and to our society during our life and refrain from acts that cause
corruption and immorality. It also teaches us to engage in reciting
*salat* (prayers), observing *sawm* (fasting), and performing similar
other duties which are signs of servitude and obedience towards Allah.

These are the laws and instructions the religion offers and invites us
to perform. As it is evident, some of them are doctrinal, others
ethical, and some others practical. As mentioned before, acceptance and
performance of these principles is the only means of happiness and
prosperity, for we are aware that man should be nothing but realistic
and should live with good ethics and praiseworthy deeds.

Is It Necessary For Man To Follow A Religion?
---------------------------------------------

The foremost question that comes up here is "what is the relation of
men's lives with religion and piety?" Is it not possible for a human
society to continue its humanitarian existence without religion and
faith in Allah? Is it not that a religious person is one who proves
Allah's existence and performs specific acts for His satisfaction?

It is possible that in the society, according to the laws enacted by
human beings, the duty of each member of the society determines the
benefit and the loss. In this case, the laws of men replace religious
laws and there will be no need for religion.

But with little attention and deliberation on Islamic commandments and
regulations, the opposite of this is proved, for Islam has not been
concerned only with praying to and praising Allah, rather it has enacted
comprehensive instructions and specific regulations for all individual
and social positions of man. Islam has considered the vast world of
humanity in an astonishing manner and has enacted suitable regulations
in accordance with man's individual and social actions and otherwise.

Finally, Islam has provided and guaranteed the happiness and prosperity
of the members of social community in every respect and to the maximum
extent possible. Every just person acknowledges that the laws sprang
from man's limited thoughts and knowledge cannot equal those of
religion. This power of the Almighty Allah has described the religion of
Islam in the Holy Quran. As examples, we will cite few verses here:

***"Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam, and those to whom
the Book had been given did not show opposition but after knowledge had
come to them, out of envy among themselves: and whoever disbelieves in
the communications of Allah then surely Allah is quick in reckoning
(3:19)."***

The religion towards which all prophets have invited people consists of
theism and submission to Allah's orders. Though the religious scholars
specified right through wrong, they did not accept what was rightful due
to their prejudice and animosity. Each scholar adopted a specific course
of action; as a result, different religions came into existence on
earth. In fact, this category of people did not believe in the Divine
verses. Allah will soon retribute their deeds.

***"And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him. and in the Hereafter he shall be one of the losers
(3:85)."***

***"O you who believe! enter into submission one and all, and do not
follow the footsteps of Shaytan (satan); surely he is your open enemy
(2:208)."***

***"And fulfil the covenant of Allah when you have made a covenant, and
do not break the oaths after making them fast, and you have indeed made
Allah a surety for you; surely Allah knows what you do (16:91)."***

The purpose of this verse is to indicate that any Muslim who makes a
promise to Allah or to people must keep it and must not breach it.

***"Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation, and
have debates with them in the best manner; surely your Lord best knows
those who go astray from His path, and He knows best those who follow
the right way (16:125)."***

This refers to the fact that to promote religion, a Muslim must converse
with people according to their understanding and in a way that is
beneficial to them. However, if he fails to guide a person through logic
and advice then he must debate in the best manner, which is one of the
means of proving something, to guide him towards truth.

***"And when the Qur'an is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you (7:204)."***

***"O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Prophet and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Prophet, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day; this
is better and very good in the end (4:59)."***

This verse means that in an Islamic society, disputes can only be
settled by the Qur'an and the ahadith of the Prophet (S). Every
difference must be settled by these two factors. If a Muslim settles
differences by the logic of reason, this is due to the fact that the
Qur'an has accepted the rule of logic.

***"Thus, it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal with them gently,
and had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust (3:159)."***

Good behavior, benevolence, and taking counsel in the affairs result in
fellowship and kindness. Members of the society must respect their
leader to be influenced by him. Allah orders the honorable leader of the
Muslims to be benevolent and to take counsel. But since it is possible
that people may make mistakes in their decisions, Allah orders the
leader to be independent in his decision after taking counsel and to
have trust in Allah, because no one can oppose Allah's will.

In like manner, the Almighty Allah introduces Judaism and Christianity
with their Divine books of *Tawrat* (Old Testament) and the *Injil*
(Bible) and their social precepts and provisions as:

***"And how do they make you a judge and they have the Tawrat wherein is
Allah's judgement. .. Surely We revealed Tawrat in which was guidance
and light; with it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah)
judged (matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of divine
knowledge and the doctors...***

***And We sent after them in their footsteps 'Isa (Jesus), son of Maryam
(Mary)... and We gave him the Injil in which was guidance and light, and
verifying what was before it of Tawrat...***

***And the followers of the Injil should have judged by what Allah
revealed in it... And We have revealed to you the Book with the truth,
verifying what is before it of the Book and a guardian over it,
therefore judge between them by what Allah has revealed ...(5:43 -
48)."***

*Tawrat* and *Injil* which are now in the hands of the Jews and
Christians emphasize this point, because the *Tawrat* contains many
legal and judicial provisions and apparently the *Injil* confirms and
certifies the religious laws of *Tawrat*.

### Conclusion

From the aforementioned statement, it becomes evident that religion as
viewed by the Qur'an is the same as the method of living from which man
cannot escape. The difference between religion and a social law is that
religion is descended by the Almighty Allah, whereas social laws spring
from people's minds. In other words, religion unites man's social life
with his worship and obedience of the Almighty Allah, while no attempt
at such unity is made by social laws.

The Advantages of Religion
--------------------------

It was revealed that religion has a profound effect in reforming the
individual and the society. It is also the only means of obtaining bliss
and prosperity.

A society which does not abide by religion loses its realignment and
intellectualism and spends its precious life in aberration, externalism,
and negligence. Such a society ignores wisdom, and like animals, becomes
narrow-minded and foolish.

This society becomes involved in immorality and misbehavior, thus
forfeiting all its humanitarian privileges. Such a society will not
reach its everlasting prosperity and rather, it will experience the
inauspicious outcomes and the unpleasant effects of its deviations and m
is demeanors.

Sooner or later, such a society will suffer from the evil consequences
of its negligence and will realize that the only way towards prosperity
is religion and belief in Allah. Finally, this society will regret its
actions.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"He will indeed be successful who purifies it, and he will indeed
fail who corrupts it (91:9 -10)."***

It is necessary to understand that the application of religious
instructions ensures the happiness and salvation of the individual and
the society, otherwise only nomination does not help. Since it is only
the reality itself that counts and not the claim for reality.

Whoever claims to be a Muslim, and with his gloomy heart, inferior
character, and awkward behavior expects to meet the angel of happiness,
resembles a patient who expects to recover without having treatment as
per the prescription. Obviously with such an idea, he will not attain
his goal. The Almighty Allah states:

***"Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians
and the Sabians***[^1], ***whoever believes in Allah and the Last day
and does good, they shall have reward from their Lord...(2:62)."***

It might be assumed that, according to this verse, those who have faith
in Allah and the Day of Judgment and who perform good deeds will be
saved even if they do not believe in all or some prophets. But it must
be realized that in *Surat al-Nisa' Ayat* (verses) 150 and 151, Allah
considers those who disbelieve in all or some of the prophets as
*kafirin* (unbelievers). In this respect, He states:

***"Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His apostles and (those
who) desire to make a distinction between Allah and His apostles and
say: 'We believe in some and disbelieve in others'; and desire to take a
course between (this and) that. These it is that are truly unbelievers,
and We have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement
(4:150-151)."***

As a result, whoever believes in all the prophets and performs good
deeds will avail of his faith.

Human Civilization
------------------

If we study the means and factors which led to the development of human
societies in the past, this truth becomes evident to us that in his
life, man only demands and pursues his own prosperity and happiness. Of
course, this happiness would not be possible without the total provision
of all means of existence.

On the other hand, with his understanding, gifted by Allah, man realizes
that he can never attain and prepare all his needs on his own, so as to
provide the means of his ideal welfare and prosperity, because he
realizes that he cannot solve the problems of life and reach perfection
by himself.

As a result, he necessarily submits himself to a social life to supply
his needs and considers cooperation with others as the easiest means
towards achieving his goal. He engages in acquiring the means of his
livelihood collectively.

That is to say, each person undertakes to provide some of the means and
makes them available. Then, all individuals gather the outcome of their
activities. Proportionate with his activity and social status, each
individual takes a share and uses it to manage his life.

In this way, he will work hand in hand with his fellowmen to ensure his
welfare. This is to say that they all endeavor for one another and pile
up the outcomes of their activities. Then each member of the society
gathers the product of his activity in accordance with his position and
the extent of his endeavor.

The Need for Regulations in the Society
---------------------------------------

As the results of the activities of individuals are linked with one
another and since everyone wants to benefit from them, forcibly,
inconvenience and conflict of interests are indispensable elements of
this contact and constant relation.

It is needless to say that material benefits are normally the source of
all kinds of differences, animosities, and loss of sincerity. In order
to maintain sincerity among people, society requires a series of
regulations, the observance of which prevents disturbance and chaos.

It is self-evident that if no laws and regulations for the management of
the society exist, there will be a chaos in which human society cannot
survive even for a single day.

Certainly, these rules vary from one society to another based on the
extent of civilization or savagery of tribes and nations, and the level
of understanding of societies and their governments. In neither case is
a society free from the need of a series of traditions and regulations
which are at least respected by most of its members. In the history of
mankind, never has a society evolved without possessing common rites,
traditions, and regulations.

### Man is Not Free Against Regulations

As man performs all his actions with his own free will and choice, he
feels a sort of freedom of action for himself. By considering this
freedom of action as "absolute", that is, "unconditional", he wants
total freedom and escape from any restriction.

For this reason, man suffers from any prohibition and deprivation
inflicted on himself. Finally, he feels compelled and senses failure
whenever a restriction is imposed on him. Therefore, no matter how small
the number of social regulations, they are against man's freedom-seeking
nature because they limit him to some extent.

On the other hand, he finds that if he disagrees to forfeit a part of
his freedom by abiding by the laws for the sake of the protection of
society and its order, a chaos will result that will suddenly annihilate
all his freedom and peace. This is just as if he seizes a morsel from
others when others will undoubtedly seize morsels from him. In like
manner, if he oppresses others, they will oppress him as well.

Therefore, in order to maintain some freedom for himself, he dispenses
with a part of his freedom and inevitably respects social regulations.

### Weak Point in the Implementation of Regulations

As mentioned before, there is a kind of conflict and incompatibility
between man's freedom-seeking nature and social regulations. That is,
laws are like chains that are linked to man's feet and he constantly
tries to break them and set himself free from captivity. This is the
greatest danger which always threatens social regulations and shakes its
foundations.

In this regard, alongside practical regulations and duties, there are
always other regulations intended to punish offenders which frighten and
prevent them from opposition, and to encourage people to abide by the
laws by making them confident of receiving rewards and prizes. It cannot
be denied that the subject matter (i.e., fear of punishment and
eagerness for receiving rewards) aids the enforcement of laws to some
extent, but it cannot fully prevent violations and safeguard the
influence and domination of laws.

This is because penal codes, like other laws, are vulnerable to
violation and are constantly threatened by the freedom-seeking nature of
man, because those who have full power and capability can overtly oppose
them without fear and fright, or they can force judicial and executive
organizations to act according to their desire, by using their
influence.

And those who do not have adequate influence and power can take
advantage of the negligence or weakness of the authorities to fulfill
their oppositions covertly. They can attain their ends through bribery,
mediation, or by way of friendship and relationship with the influential
sector to disrupt the working order of the society and to paralyze it.

The best evidence for this subject is that every day we observe
thousands of these types of oppositions and violations against laws in
various human societies.

### The Original Source of the Weakness of Laws

We must now find out where the original source of danger lies and how to
subdue the unyielding and freedom seeking nature of man in order to
prevent his opposition to the law.

The source of this danger, which is the main cause for penetration of
corruption in a society and which cannot even be prevented by
regulations, is that the ordinary social methods which have brought the
laws into existence consider the material aspects of individuals and
ignore their spiritualities and instincts.

They only aim at providing harmony, maintaining order, and balancing the
actions of people in such a way that will not result in discord and
conflict. Social laws demand adherence of their articles and tend to
control the actions of people. Such laws ignore men's innate attributes
and innermost feelings which instigate their actions and which are the
internal enemies of regulations.

Whenever the freedom-seeking nature of man and hundreds of other
instincts (such as selfishness, voluptuousness, which are the main
causes of corruption) are ignored, there will be chaos and disturbance
and the scope of differences will become wider day by day.

Since all laws are always threatened by the attack and invasion of
powerful rebels and the night-time attacks of ingenious robbers
springing from these instincts; therefore, they fall short of preventing
corruption and differences.

The Advantage of Religion Over Other Laws
-----------------------------------------

The latest social method for the protection of laws is to establish
penal codes and appoint officials to enforce them. But as mentioned
earlier, penal laws and officials cannot restrain the mutinous nature
and other rebellious instincts of man and fail to enforce social
regulations.

In addition to appointing officials to maintain control and formulating
regulations to castigate violators and rebels as established by human
laws, religion has other powerful means at its disposal whereby it can
defeat and annihilate any antagonistic force.

(1) As a result of uniting social life and the worship of the Almighty
Allah, religion has initiated a divine responsibility for man in all his
individual and social acts and holds man responsible in all his
endeavours and hesitations.

Since Sublime Allah has full control over man by His infinite might and
knowledge he is thoroughly aware of any thought that man nurtures in his
mind and any secret in man's heart; and nothing is hidden to Him.

In addition to appointing an external police, religion puts man under
the care of his conscience which never neglects its duty. Man cannot
escape from the rewards and retribution of conscience.

The Almighty Allah states:

***" ... And Allah comprehends what they do (8:47)."***

***"... And He is with you wherever you are... (57:4)."***

***"... And your Lord will most surely pay back to all their deeds in
full ...(11:111)."***

***"... Surely Allah ever watches over you (4:1)."***

If we compare the conditions of a man who is governed by laws with one
who lives under the jurisdiction of religion, the advantage and
superiority of religion will become quite evident.

A society, whose members are all religious and perform their religious
du ties and know that Allah observes their action in every respect, is
protected from the malevolence of its members towards one another.

Thus, the general public who live in such an environment are safeguarded
against the actions and statements of others. They even have security in
their thinking, whereas this purport does not exist in the laws of the
universe. Religion has also prohibited man from mistrust.

***"O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy... (49:12)."***

Man feels quite comfortable in a religious environment. He will spend a
lifetime in utmost joy and comfort and will attain everlasting welfare.

But in a society governed only by human laws, man refrains from unlawful
acts when he sees the police watching his actions; otherwise, he may
commit any offence.

(2) Under the guidance of religion, every religious person discovers the
fact that his life is not limited to a life of short duration in this
ephemeral world, rather there is an infinite and endless life ahead of
him which does not terminate by death.

He realizes that the only way to attain everlasting prosperity and
eternal comfort is to follow religious laws descended by the Almighty
Allah through His prophets. He knows that religious laws are descended
by the Wise, Powerful, and Knowledgeable Allah who controls man's inward
and outward behaviour and. who examines man's overt and covert
activities. It is, therefore, impossible for man to conceal an act so as
to undermine Allah's commands.

(3) According to his religious beliefs, every pious man knows that
performing religious orders is, in fact, the obedience to Allah. Even if
by so doing he does not get any rewards from the standpoint of
servitude, he will receive a good remuneration by the favour and grace
of Allah.

Thus by observing religious commandments, he voluntarily makes a dealing
and transaction, because he forfeits a part of his freedom willingly
and, in return, gains the satisfaction of Compassionate Allah and
receives an excellent reward.

By following religious rules and provisions, a, religious man quite
happily engages in dealings. The more he loses his freedom, the more he
receives benefits. He sells a merchandise and replaces it with a better
one. But one who is not committed to religion considers the observation
of laws and provisions a loss for himself. His freedom-seeking nature
suffers from the loss of a part of his freedom and seeks an opportunity
to set himself free from captivity in order to regain his freedom.

Be it known that religion differs from laws in other respects as well.
Religious people willingly avoid committing sins, but the followers of
laws only avoid committing crimes because of fear. Religion controls the
entire body of pious men, whereas laws only dominate the hands and feet.
Religion commands openly and secretly, but laws can only command
publicly. Not only is religion a guardian preventing blameworthy acts,
but also it is a teacher and educator teaching virtue and perfection.
Laws, however, have no other function but to serve as police.

If we assume the benefit of other laws to be one u nit, then the
advantage of religion is more than a thousand units. Thus, those who try
to uproot religion by adhering to other laws resemble people who cut
their legs by their hands and then replace them with wooden legs.

Thus, from the aforementioned statements, it becomes evident that
religion is the best and most exalted way that can organize human
society and persuade people to observe social laws more than any other
method.

### Seeking a Remedy by Others

The underdeveloped countries of the world that have thought of their
progress and improvement in the last century, despite the fact that they
have accepted a social government, but as they have disregarded the
weaknesses of laws and have not benefited from the power of religion,
they have led a gloomy life and their environment has become a model of
savagery.

On the other hand, the progressive and intelligent people of the world
who have discovered the weaknesses of laws have sought a remedy to save
them from absolute failure and have thus taken another course of action.

These people organize the method of their education in such a way that
individuals, willingly or not, will be brought up by a series of proper
ethics, so that upon entrance into the field of activity, they will
consider the laws sacred and inviolable.

This kind of education results in the regular progress of laws and, as a
result, guarantees the prosperity of the society to a considerable
extent and saves the laws from failure.

It should be realized that there are two modes of thinking by which a
society educates itself.

(1) Thoughts and beliefs such as philanthropy, benevolence, and
compassion towards subordinates which are based upon realism and are
undoubtedly adopted from divine religions.

Since antiquity, before progressive societies evolved, religion invited
people towards this mode of thinking. Consequently, the prosperity and
welfare experienced in progressive societies due to these thoughts are
considered as the blessings of religion.

(2) Useless and unreal thoughts and beliefs that have no value except in
the realm of superstition such as inculcating people with the belief
that if they suffer or get killed to save their country, their names
will be imprinted in history with golden words.

Although these superstitious thoughts render practical results and may
influence an individual to make sacrifice in the battlefield and to
destroy a large number of the enemies, their disadvantages overshadow
their advantages.

This way of thinking makes man superstitious and disrupts his instincts
of realism, because for those who disbelieve in Allah and the Day of
Judgment who consider death as inexistence and annihilation, the
everlasting life and prosperity after death has no meaning whatsoever.

Due to his nature and temperament granted by Allah, man seeks a
religion. This is because, in the course of life, he constantly
struggles to provide prosperity for himself and uses all possible means
to meet his requirements. He always seeks effective causes which are
undefeatable. On the other hand, there are no causes in the world with
permanent and undefeatable effects.

The fact that man, on the basis of his nature, demands an undefeatable
cause and seeks an indestructible refuge to which he can connect his
life and find peace of mind for his prosperity is demanded by religion.
It is only the Almighty Allah whose will can never be overcome and
subdued. Allah is free from pretext and shortcomings. The way of life
that is connected to Allah is only the religion of Islam and nothing
else.

Therefore, it can be said that man's instinctive yearning is one of the
best reasons that substantiate the threefold fundamentals of religion:

• *Tawhid* (monotheism),

• *Nubuwwah* (prophethood)

• and *Ma'ad* (resurrection),

because man's instinctive perception which is an inherent part of his
particular framework never makes a mistake. For example, man never
mistakes the meaning of friendship for that of animosity. Nor does he
mistake the feeling of thirst in his own natural perception for being
quenched.

It is true that man sometimes desires to have feathers in order to fly
as a bird or to be in the sky like a star, but he, wholeheartedly and
earnestly, seeks a real support for his happiness, an absolute comfort,
or a completely humanitarian life.

As long as a man lives, he will never give up this idea. If an
undefeatable cause (Allah) did not exist in the world of existence, man
would not have thought of it with his immaculate nature. If an absolute
and unparalleled peace and tranquility (which is the peace and
tranquility of the world Hereafter) did not exist and if the religious
policy (sent to us through prophetic mission) was not legitimate, then
this desire would not have been engraved on man's mind.

A Summary of the History of Religions
-------------------------------------

In conducting a brief investigation on the origination of religions, the
most confident approach that can be depended upon from a religious point
of view is the Holy Qur'an, because it is free from errors, mistakes,
prejudice, and spitefulness. The Holy Qur'an states this briefly by
saying:

***"Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam...(3:19)."***

The divine religion, which is the very religion of Islam, has
accompanied man from the first day that he came into existence. As
stipulated by the Holy Qur'an, the present generation of man originates
from one man and one woman. In the Holy Qur'an, the man has been called
Adam.

He was a prophet to whom divine *wahy* (divine revelations) had been
descended. Adam's religion was. very simple and included a few general
regulations such as the people should remember Allah and should be kind
to each other and specifically to their parents and should keep aloof
from corruption, murder, and evil acts.

After Adam and his wife, their children spent their lives with extreme
simplicity and without differences of opinion. As the number of people
increased, they gradually gathered together and formed a community life.
In this manner, they learned how to live and came closer to
civilization.

As the number of people proliferated little by little, they divided
themselves into different tribes, in each of which there were noblemen
whom the people respected. Even after the demise of these nobles, the
people made their statues and paid tribute to them. It was exactly at
this time that idolatry became prevalent, and as it is cited by
religious leaders, idolatry originated in this way.

The history of idolatry confirms this matter as well. Little by little,
as a result of the unjust behavior of the mighty towards the weak,
differences of opinion sprang up. These disagreements and accidental
differences of opinion resulted in various forms of conflicts in life.

The generation of these conflicts that led to man's deviation from the
path of prosperity towards misery and destruction was the reason that
Compassionate Allah assigned prophets and sent a Divine Book that
settled man's differences. As the Almighty Allah states:

***"(All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised prophets as
bearers of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book
with truth, that it might judge between people in that which they
differed... (2:213)."***

The Religion of Islam
---------------------

The holy religion of Islam is the last divine religion, and for this
reason it is the most perfect of them all. With the advent of this
religion, the former religions were abolished, for by having a perfect
religion, there is no need for an imperfect one.

The religion of Islam was sent down to man through our Honorable
Prophet, Muhammad (S). This door of salvation and prosperity was opened
to mankind at a time when human societies had passed through the periods
of immaturity and mental incapacity and had become prepared to gain
their ideal perfection and acquired the capability to gain knowledge in
divine and sublime matters along with their application.

Therefore, Islam has introduced facts and teachings suitable to the
understanding of a realistic man as well as praiseworthy ethics that
distinguish men, has provided instructions that reform individual and
social aspects of man's life, and has also recommended the observance of
these factors.

For this reason, the religion of Islam is a universal and eternal
religion. It consists of a series of religious tenets and practical and
moral provisions, the application of which ensures man's welfare and
happiness in this world and the *Akhirah* (the world Hereafter). The
regulations of Islam are such as to bring about the best conditions of
life and the most progressive human transcendence for individuals and
societies observing them.

Islam grants its excellent advantages to all people and societies
equally. Adults and children, the wise and the ignorant, men and women,
the white and the black, easterners and westerners can, without
exception, enjoy the benefits and advantages of this holy religion to
attain their needs in the best and the most perfect manner possible.

This is due to the fact that Islam has established its teachings and
regulations on the basis of creation and has considered man's needs and
tries to settle them. The nature and structure of all men are identical
even if they belong to different races and generations. It is evident
that human society, from east to west, is regarded as a typical family,
that is to say, the members of society are all human.

The adults and children, men and women, the wise and the ignorant, the
white and the black, are members of this family. They all share the same
principles and foundations of human characteristics. The needs of
various individuals and different races are the same. Posterities are
also descendants of this very family and will definitely inherit their
requirements.

Consequently, Islam is the religion which fulfils the actual and natural
needs of man. Islam is adequate for everyone and will survive for ever.

Thus, the Almighty Allah calls Islam a human nature-inspired religion
and invites people to keep human nature alive. Theologians have stated
that Islam is an easy religion which does not treat man with severity.

### The Importance that Islam Attributes to Man's Comfort

Just as religion possesses an excellent position in regard to other
social policies, Islam, too, enjoys an excellent position among other
religions. Thus, Islam is more advantageous than other policies for
human societies. This fact is clarified by comparing Islam with other
religions and social policies.

Comparison of Islam with Other Religions
----------------------------------------

Among all religions, Islam is the only one that is entirely social. The
teachings of Islam are not similar to those of the present-day
Christianity which only takes into consideration people's happiness in
the world Hereafter and ignores their worldly happiness.

The teachings of Islam are neither like the present religion of Judaism
that only endeavors to educate a particular nation. The teachings of
Islam, unlike the instructions set forth by Magus and some other
religions, have not focused on only a few limited subjects relating to
ethics and actions.

Islam has considered education and prosperity necessary for this world
and the world Hereafter for everybody and forever at any time and place.
Evidently, except Islam, there is no other means for reforming societies
and providing the people with happiness in this world and the world
Hereafter.

First, since the global relations are getting closer and stronger day by
day, the reformation of one society or nation from among all human
societies will be fruitless and, in fact, it resembles the purification
of a drop of water in a contaminated large pool or a river.

Second, only the rectification of a particular society at the expense of
neglecting other societies is contrary to the fact of seeking
reformation. All ideas and thoughts about the creation of the world and
man that may be reflected in man's mind, all ethics that can be
implanted in the souls of people and all actions and endeavors that may
appear in man's environment have been examined in the teachings of
Islam.

However, in Islam, realistic thoughts, on top of which is the Oneness of
the Almighty Allah, have been selected and considered as the basis and
foundation of religion.

In the ethics of Islam, that which is in fact approved by sound judgment
has been chosen and based on the principle of monotheism.

Then, on the basis and principle of ethics, a series of provisions and
practical laws that examine the details of man's life have been
explained and, as a result, individual and social duties of black and
white, urban and nomadic, man and woman, young and old, servant and
master, king and the subject, rich and poor, have been clarified under
ordinary or exceptional circumstances.

***"... Of a good word (being) like a good tree, the root of which is
firm and the branches of which are in heaven (14:24)."***

Anyone, who enquires into the basic principles of intuitive knowledge
and ethical teachings of Islam and Islamic jurisprudence, will find them
like a boundless sea which renders the wisdom helpless for comprehending
and thought for reaching its depth.

Nevertheless, every part of Islam is linked with other parts and all
parts constitute an organized unit of theism and human fostering,
revealed by the Almighty Allah to His honorable Prophet.

Comparison of Islam with Other Social Systems
---------------------------------------------

By careful examination of the policies of the developed societies of the
world, we realize that although the scientific and industrial
development of these societies has dazzled man's wisdom, even though
their power and strength has reached the moon and Mars, and in spite of
the fact that the illuminating institutions of their countries have
astonished man, these advanced policies, with their praiseworthy
progress, have opened up the gates of misery to the world of humanity.

They have also devastated the world twice in less than a quarter of a
century and have annihilated millions of innocent people. At present,
too, the third world war, which carries the message of man's
annihilation, threatens the inhabitants of the earth.

From the first day of their development, these very policies have put
other nations under the yoke of servitude by the name of philanthropy
and freedom. They have tied down the four huge continents of the world
with colonization and have surrendered them unconditionally to Europe,
thus providing the small minority of Europe with absolute ruling over
the property, life, and dignity of millions of innocent people.

It cannot be denied that the advanced countries enjoy the material
pleasures and blessings of their milieu and have attained most of their
humanitarian goals such as social justice and cultural and industrial
progress, but they have been entangled with misery and wretchedness, the
most important of which are international conflicts and universal
bloodshed. They also expose the world to more sinister and bitter
calamities than before.

It is self-evident that all these are the bitter and sweet fruits of the
tree of civilization and the direct results of the way of living of
these nations and societies that are superficially on the path of
progress.

But it must be realized that the sweet fruits, from which man and
society have benefited, originated from a series of praiseworthy ethics
such as truthfulness, honesty, conscientiousness, benevolence, and
self-sacrifice of these nations and not of their laws only. This is
because although the same laws exist in undeveloped nations of Asia and
Africa, their misery and humility augments day by day.

The bitter fruits of this tree, however, which have unpleasantly given
their acrid flavor to man and have caused misery and wretchedness and
have led the advanced nations, like others, to total destruction,
originate from indecent behaviors such as greed, injustice, atrocity,
selfishness, vanity, and stubbornness.

If we consider the instructions of the holy religion of Islam, we come
to the realization that Islam orders the performance of the first part
of these attributes and prohibits the second part. As a whole, Islam has
invited man to perform any righteous and correct act suitable to man's
interests and has placed this policy as the basis of its education.

On the other hand, Islam warns man of committing any unrighteous and
incorrect act which disrupt man's tranquility (although it may benefit a
particular nation or people).

From what has been expressed, the following conclusion can be drawn:

(1) The policies set forth by Islam are more praiseworthy and beneficial
for man than any other social policy.

***"...That is the right religion, but most people do not know
(30:30)."***

(2) The clear points and sweet fruits of the present civilized world are
entirely due to the blessings of the immaculate religion of Islam and
the living examples of its holy principles and tenets and living signs
that have fallen into the hands of westerners.

Centuries before the signs of western civilization appeared, Islam had
invited people to follow the same ethics by the application of which
westerners outpaced us.

Before his martyrdom, the Leader of the Faithful, 'Ali (as), stated to
the people: "Do not act in such a way that others may outpace you in
practicing the decrees of the Qur'an."

(3) According to the instructions of Islam, ethics must be considered as
man's essential objective and the cornerstone of laws. Disregarding
decent ethics and establishing laws only to meet the materialistic
interests of people will only focus their attention on materialism and
will deprive them of spiritualism which is the only mark of distinction
of man over animals. It will replace spiritualism with brutality, as in
wolves and tigers, and with docility as in cows and sheep.

Therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) stated:

"My main objective is the moral education of people."

[^1]: Sabians are those who converted from Magian to Jewish religion.


