Seeking a Remedy By Others
==========================

The underdeveloped countries of the world that have thought of their
progress and improvement in the last century, despite the fact that they
have accepted a social government, but as they have disregarded the
weaknesses of laws and have not benefited from the power of religion,
they have led a gloomy life and their environment has become a model of
savagery.

On the other hand, the progressive and intelligent people of the world
who have discovered the weaknesses of laws have sought a remedy to save
them from absolute failure and have thus taken another course of
action.

These people organize the method of their education in such a way that
individuals, willingly or not, will be brought up by a series of proper
ethics, so that upon entrance into the field of activity, they will
consider the laws sacred and inviolable. This kind of education results
in the regular progress of laws and, as a result, guarantees the
prosperity of the society to a considerable extent and saves the laws
from failure.

It should be realized that there are two modes of thinking by which a
society educates itself.

(1) Thoughts and beliefs such as philanthropy, benevolence, and
compassion towards subordinates which are based upon realism and are
undoubtedly adopted from divine religions. From antiquity, before
progressive societies evolved, religion invited people towards this mode
of thinking. Consequently, the prosperity and welfare experienced in
progressive societies due to these thoughts are considered as the
blessings of religion.

(2) Useless and unreal thoughts and beliefs that have no value except
in the realm of superstition such as inculcating people with the belief
that if they suffer or get killed to save their country, their names
will be imprinted in history with golden words.

Although these superstitious thoughts render practical results and may
influence an individual to make sacrifice in the battlefield and to
destroy a large number of the enemies, their disadvantages overshadow
their advantages. This way of thinking makes man superstitious and
disrupts his instincts of realism, because for those who disbelieve in
Allah and the Day of Judgement who consider death as inexistence and
annihilation, the everlasting life and prosperity after death has no
meaning whatsoever.

Due to his Allah-granted nature and temperament, man seeks a religion.
This is because, in the course of life, he constantly struggles to
provide prosperity for himself and uses all possible means to meet his
requirements. He always seeks effective causes which are undefeatable.
On the other hand, there are no causes in the world with permanent and
undefeatable effects.

The fact that man, on the basis of his nature, demands an undefeatable
cause and seeks an indestructible refuge to which he can connect his
life and find peace of mind for his prosperity is demanded by religion.
It is only the Almighty Allah whose will can never be overcome and
subdued. Allah is free from pretext and shortcomings. The way of life
that is connected to Allah is only the religion of Islam and nothing
else.

Therefore, it can be said that man's instinctive yearning is one of the
best reasons. that substantiate the threefold fundamentals of religion
(i.e., Tawhid (monotheism), Nubuwwah (prophethood) and Ma'ad
(resurrection), because man's instinctive perception which is an
inherent part of his particular framework never makes a mistake. For
example, man never mistakes the meaning of friendship for that of
animosity. Nor does he mistake the feeling of thirst in his own natural
perception for being quenched.

It is true that man sometimes desires to have feathers in order to fly
as a bird or to be in the sky like a star, but he, wholeheartedly and
earnestly, seeks a real support for his happiness, an absolute comfort,
or a completely humanitarian life. As long as man lives, he will never
give up this idea. If an undefeatable cause (Allah) did not exist in the
world of existence, man would not have thought of it with his immaculate
nature. If an absolute and unparalleled peace and tranquillity (which is
the peace and tranquillity of the world Hereafter) did not exist and if
the religious policy (sent to us through prophetic mission) was not
legitimate, then this desire would not have been engraved on man's
mind.


**A Resume Of The History Of Religions**

In conducting a brief investigation on the origination of religions,
the most confident approach that can be depended upon from a religious
point of view is the Holy Qur'an, because it is free from errors,
mistakes, prejudice, and spitefulness. The Holy Qur'an states this
briefly by saying: "Surely the (true) religion with Allah is
Islam...(3:19)."

The divine religion, which is the very religion of Islam has
accompanied man from the first day that he came into existence. As
stipulated by the Holy Qur'an, the present generation of man originates
from one man and one woman. In the Holy Qur'an, the man has been called
Adam. He was a prophet to whom divine wahy (divine revelations) had been
descended. Adam's religion was. very simple and included a few general
regulations such as the people should remember Allah and should be kind
to each other and specifically to their parents and should keep aloof
from corruption, murder, and evil acts.

After Adam and his wife, their children spent their lives with extreme
simplicity and without differences of opinion. As the number of people
increased, they gradually gathered together and formed a community life.
In this manner, they learned how to live and came closer to
civilization. As the number of people proliferated little by little,
they divided themselves into different tribes, in each of which there
were noblemen whom the people respected.

Even after the demise of these nobles, the people made their statues
and paid tribute to them. It was exactly at this time that idolatry
became prevalent, and as it is cited by religious leaders, idolatry
originated in this way. The history of idolatry confirms this matter as
well. Little by little, as a result of the unjust behaviour of the
mighty towards the weak, differences of opinion sprang up. These
disagreements and accidental differences of opinion resulted in various
forms of conflicts in life.

The generation of these conflicts that led to man's deviation from the
path of prosperity towards misery and destruction was the reason that
Compassionate Allah assigned prophets and sent a Divine Book that
settled man's differences. As the Almighty Allah states:

"(All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised prophets as bearers
of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book with
truth, that it might judge between people in that which they differed...
(2:213)."


**THE RELIGION OF ISLAM**

The holy religion of Islam is the last divine religion, and for this
reason it is the most perfect of them all. With the advent of this
religion, the former religions were abolished, for by having a perfect
religion, there is no need for an imperfect one.

The religion of Islam was sent down to man through our Honourable
Prophet, Muhammad (SA). This door of salvation and prosperity was opened
to mankind at a time when human societies had passed through the periods
of immaturity and mental incapacity and had become prepared to gain
their ideal perfection and acquired the capability to gain knowledge in
divine and sublime matters along with their application.

Therefore, Islam has introduced facts and teachings suitable to the
understanding of a realistic man as well as praiseworthy ethics that
distinguish men, has provided instructions that reform individual and
social aspects of man's life, and has also recommended the observance of
these factors.

For this reason, the religion of Islam is a universal and eternal
religion. It consists of a series of religious tenets and practical and
moral provisions, the application of which, ensures man's welfare and
happiness in this world and the Akhirah (the world Hereafter). The
regulations of Islam are such as to bring about the best conditions of
life and the most progressive human transcendency for individuals and
societies observing them.

Islam grants its excellent advantages to all people and societies
equally. Adults and children, the wise and the ignorant, men and women,
the white and the black, easterners and westerners can, without
exception, enjoy the benefits and advantages of this holy religion to
attain their needs in the best and the most perfect manner possible.
This is due to the fact that Islam has established its teachings and
regulations on the basis of creation and has considered man's needs and
tries to settle them.

The nature and structure of all men are identical even if they belong
to different races and generations. It is evident that human society,
from east to west, is regarded as a typical family, that is to say, the
members of society are all human. The adults and children, men and
women, the wise and the ignorant, the white and the black,... are
members of this family. They all share the same principles and
foundations of human characteristics. The needs of various individuals
and different races are the same. Posterities are also descendants of
this very family and will definitely inherit their requirements.

Consequently, Islam is the religion which fulfils the actual and
natural needs of man. Islam is adequate for everyone and will survive
for ever.

Thus, the Almighty Allah calls Islam a human nature-inspired religion
and invites people to keep human nature alive. Theologians have stated
that Islam is an easy religion which does not treat man with severity.


**THE IMPORTANCE ISLAM ATTACHES TO MAN'S COMFORT**

Just as religion possesses an excellent position in regard to other
social policies, Islam, too, enjoys an excellent position among other
religions. Thus, Islam is more advantageous than other policies for
human societies. This fact is clarified by comparing Islam with other
religions and social policies.

**COMPARISON OF ISLAM WITH OTHER RELIGIONS**

Among all religions, Islam is the only one that is entirely social. The
teachings of Islam are not similar to those of the present-day
Christianity which only takes into consideration people's happiness in
the world Hereafter and ignores their worldly happiness. The teachings
of Islam are neither like the present religion of Judaism that only
endeavours to educate a particular nation. The teachings of Islam,
unlike the instructions set forth by Magus and some other religions,
have not focussed on only a few limited subjects relating to ethics and
actions.

Islam has considered education and prosperity necessary for this world
and the world Hereafter for everybody and for ever at any time and
place. Evidently, except Islam, there is no other means for reforming
societies and providing the people with happiness in this world and the
world Hereafter.

First, since the global relations are getting closer and stronger day
by day, the reformation of one society or nation from among all human
societies will be fruitless and, in fact, it resembles the purification
of a drop of water in a contaminated large pool or a river. Second, only
the rectification of a particular society at the expense of neglecting
other societies is contrary to the fact of seeking reformation. All
ideas and thoughts about the creation of the world and man that may be
reflected in man's mind, all ethics that can be implanted in the souls
of people, and all actions and endeavours that may appear in man's
environment have been examined in the teachings of Islam.

However, in Islam , realistic thoughts, on top of which is the Oneness
of the Almighty Allah, have been selected and considered as the basis
and foundation of religion.

In the ethics of Islam, that which is in fact approved by sound
judgement has been chosen and based on the principle of monotheism.
Then, on the basis and principle of ethics, a series of provisions and
practical laws that examine the details of man's life have been
explained and, as a result, individual and social duties of black and
white, urban and nomadic, man and woman, young and old, servant and
master, king and the subject, rich and poor, have been clarified under
ordinary or exceptional circumstances.

"... Of a good word (being) like a good tree, the root of which is firm
and the branches of which are in heaven (14:24)."

Anyone, who enquires into the basic principles of intuitive knowledge
and ethical teachings of Islam and Islamic jurisprudence, will find them
like a boundless sea which renders the wisdom helpless for comprehending
and thought for reaching its depth. Nevertheless, every part of Islam is
linked with other parts and all parts constitute an organized unit of
theism and human fostering, revealed by the Almighty Allah to His
honourable Prophet.


**Comparison Of Islam With Other Social System**

By careful examination of the policies of the developed societies of
the world, we realize that although the scientific and industrial
development of these societies has dazzled man's wisdom, even though
their power and strength has reached the moon and Mars, and in spite of
the fact that the illuminating institutions of their countries have
astonished man, these advanced policies, with their praiseworthy
progress, have opened up the gates of misery to the world of humanity.
They have also devastated the world twice in less than a quarter of a
century and have annihilated millions of innocent people. At present,
too, the third world war, which carries the message of man's
annihilation, threatens the inhabitants of the earth.

From the first day of their development, these very policies have put
other nations under the yoke of servitude by the name of philanthropy
and freedom. They have tied down the four huge continents of the world
with colonization and have surrendered them unconditionally to Europe,
thus providing the small minority of Europe with absolute ruling over
the property, life, and dignity of millions of innocent people.

It cannot be denied that the advanced countries enjoy the material
pleasures and blessings of their milieu and have attained most of their
humanitarian goals such as social justice and cultural and industrial
progress, but they have been entangled with misery and wretchedness, the
most important of which are international conflicts and universal
bloodshed. They also expose the world to more sinister and bitter
calamities than before.

It is self-evident that all these are the bitter and sweet fruits of
the tree of civilization and the direct results of the way of living of
these nations and societies that are superficially on the path of
progress.

But it must be realized that the sweet fruits, from which man and
society have benefited, originated from a series of praiseworthy ethics
such as truthfulness, honesty, conscientiousness, benevolence, and
self-sacrifice of these nations and not of their laws only. This is
because although the same laws exist in undeveloped nations of Asia and
Africa, their misery and humility augments day by day.

The bitter fruits of this tree, however, which have unpleasantly given
their acrid flavour to man and have caused misery and wretchedness and
have led the advanced nations, like others, to total destruction,
originate from indecent behaviours such as greed, injustice, atrocity,
selfishness, vanity, and stubbornness.

If we consider the instructions of the holy religion of Islam, we come
to the realization that Islam orders the performance of the first part
of these attributes and prohibits the second part. As a whole, Islam has
invited man to perform any righteous and correct act suitable to man's
interests and has placed this policy as the basis of its education. On
the other hand, Islam warns man of committing any unrighteous and
incorrect act which disrupt man's tranquillity (although it may benefit
a particular nation or people).

From what has been expressed, the following conclusion can be drawn:

(1) The policies set forth by Islam are more praiseworthy and
beneficial for man than any other social policy.

"...That is the right religion, but most people do not know (30:30)."

(2) The clear points and sweet fruits of the present civilized world
are entirely due to the blessings of the immaculate religion of Islam
and the living examples of its holy principles and tenets and living
signs that have fallen into the hands of westerners. Centuries before
the signs of western civilization appeared, Islam had invited people to
follow the same ethics by the application of which westerners outpaced
us.

Before his martyrdom, the Leader of the Faithful, 'Ali (AS), stated to
the people: "Do not act in such a way that others may outpace you in
practising the decrees of the Qur'an."

(3) According to the instructions of Islam, ethics must be considered
as man's essential objective and the cornerstone of laws. Disregarding
decent ethics and establishing laws only to meet the materialistic
interests of people will only focus their attention on materialism and
will deprive them of spiritualism which is the only mark of distinction
of man over animals. It will replace spiritualism with brutality, as in
wolves and tigers, and with docility as in cows and sheep. Therefore,
the Holy Prophet (SA) stated:

"My main objective is the moral education of people."


