Beliefs : Discussion Concerning Origin of Creation Is Natural
=============================================================

With his Allah-given instinct, man searches for the reasons and causes
leading to the appearance of any phenomenon or occurrence that he sees.
He never thinks it probable that they have come into existence
automatically and without any cause, i.e., accidentally. A driver whose
car stops functioning gets off to check where he suspects it is impaired
in order to find the cause for the halt. He never believes that the car,
with its complete readiness to move, would stop without any reason. When
he wants to get the car going, he uses the facilities that are installed
in the car and never relies on chances.

If man becomes hungry, he thinks of bread. When thirsty, he searches
for water. If he feels cold, he feels the necessity of clothes or, for
instance, fire and is never satisfied by relying on chances. One who
wants to construct a building naturally engages in finding building
materials, masons, and labourers. He does not have the slightest hope
that his project would be implemented automatically.

Mountains, forests, and vast seas have existed on earth alongside human
beings as long as they have been on earth. They have always seen the
sun, the moon, and the bright stars with their orderly and permanent
movements in the sky.

In spite of all this, the scientists of the world have constantly
discussed the reasons and causes for the existence of these wonderful
creatures and phenomena with tireless exploration. They never say that
they have seen these in the same condition from the beginning of their
lives and so they have developed automatically.

This inquisitive instinct and discussion on causes and means compels
man to pry into the appearance of the world of creation and its
astonishing system. Man wonders whether this vast world which is, in
fact, a great phenomenon and which has related and harmonious
components, has evolved automatically or it has originated due to other
causes.

Does an infinite might and knowledge govern this astonishing system
which operates according to established and unexceptional rules all over
the world and which leads everything to its particular goal and
destination, or it has come into existence by an accident and a
chance?

**AFFIRMATION OF THE CREATOR**

When man uses his realistic instincts, he finds many evidences for the
existence of the Maker and Creator of the world in every nook and corner
of the world of creation. With his realistic instinct, man realizes that
creatures, that are blessed with existence, that willingly or
unwillingly tread a specific path, and that after a while give their
places to others, have not themselves given the blessing of life. The
orderly way that the creatures traverse has not been created by
themselves. They do not have the least contribution in creation and
organization of the path of their own existence.

This is because man has not adopted and chosen humanity and human
characteristics, rather he has been created and has been endowed with
human traits. In like manner, the realistic nature of man never accepts
that all objects have evolved automatically by an accident and the
system in their existence is perfunctory and without purpose, although
man's conscience would not accept such an occurrence even in a few
bricks neatly piled up. Therefore,

man's realistic instinct declares that the world of existence
undoubtedly has a basis which is the origin of existence and the creator
and preserver of the world. This infinite existence and origin of
knowledge and might is Allah from whom the system of existence emanates.
The Almighty Allah states:

"...He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it (to its
goal) (20:50)."

**THEISM AND PEOPLES**

In the present era, the majority of people on earth are religious and
believe in Allah Who has created the world and worship Him.

Ancient man also had the conditions of modern man. So long as history
shows, the majority of men were pious and believed in the existence of
Allah. Although differences of opinion existed among theistic and pious
societies and each tribe described the origin of creation with
particular epithets, they unanimously agreed on the essence of the
subject. Not only Islam, but also other religions such as Christianity,
Judaism, Maganism, and Buddhism are of the same opinion and belief about
this matter. Those who deny the existence of the Creator do not have
convincing proof and would never have one for their denial. In fact,
they say they have no reason for Allah's existence, rather than saying
they have proof for His non-existence.

A materialistic man says: "I do not know" and does not say "He does not
exist." In other words, a materialistic person is doubtful and does not
deny.

The Almighty Allah states:

"And they say: There is nothing but our life in this world; we live and
die and nothing destroys us but time, and they have no knowledge of
that. they only conjecture (45:24)."

Even in the most ancient works discovered from primitive men, signs of
religion and theism can be found. There are evidences that primitive men
believed in metaphysics.

Even in the relatively new continents such as America an d Australia
and the far off islands of the old continent discovered in recent
centuries, the natives were theist. They proved an origin for the world
of creation by juxtaposing their views, although the history has never
found their relation with the ancient world.

Reflection in this subject that belief in Allah has always existed in
man elucidates that theism is innate in man. With his Allah-given
nature, man proves the existence of Allah for the creation of the world.
The Holy Qur'an points out to this congenital characteristic of man:
"And if you should ask them who created them, they would certainly say:
Allah ... (43:87)."

Qur'an also states:

"And if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly say: Allah ... (31:25)."


**THE EFFECT OF THIS INQUISITIVENESS IN MAN'S LIFE**

If man positively answers questions about the Creator of the world and
the Founder of its system which become manifest for him on the basis of
his truth-seeking nature, he will prove an eternal origin for the
creation of the world and the continuity of its wonderful system. He
will also connect everything to His invincible determination which
depends on Allah's infinite power and knowledge.

Consequently, man will find a kind of warmth and hopefulness in him. In
the course of the difficulties and obstacles of his life and problems
that preclude his seeking a remedy, he would never feel completely
disappointed. This is because he knows that any means and causes, no
matter how powerful, are controlled by the Almighty Allah and everything
is under Allah's command.

Such a person never submits to means and causes. Even when he sees
everything to his advantage, he does not become proud and selfish, so as
to forget his position and that of the world. This is due to the fact
that he is cognizant that superficial means and causes do not operate on
their own and proceed according to the order of the Almighty Allah.
Finally, such a person conceives that in the world of existence, he must
not pay homage to none but Allah; he must not fully acquiesce to any
orders except Allah's commands.

He who replies negatively to the aforementioned questions, however, is
devoid of this hopefulness, realism, magnanimity, and congenital
intrepidity.

Thus we see that the role of suicide increases daily among nations
dominated by materialism. Those whose sole attachment is to tangible
means and causes become disappointed by the slightest inconvenience and
commit suicide. On the other hand, people endowed with the blessing of
theism never lose their faith even on the verge of death. They are
confident and hopeful of Allah's might and blessings.

In the last hours of his life, when the swords of enemy aimed at him
from every direction, Imam Husayn (AS) stated: "The only factor which
alleviates this affliction is Allah's incessant observation of my
endeavours." In several verses, the Holy Qur'an stipulates this truth:

"Surely those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah, then they continue on the
right way, they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve' (46:13)."
"Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest
(13:28)."


**Theism From The Viewpoint Of Quran**

A suckling who touches his m other's breasts by his hands, sucks the
breasts to get milk. In fact, he wants milk, and if he takes something
by his hands, in order to eat it, he will direct it to his mouth. His
main objective is eating and if he finds that he has made a mistake,
because what he has taken is not edible, he discards it. In like manner,
man seeks truth in whatever course of action he takes. Whenever he finds
that he has erred and has done wrong, he suffers and regrets the futile
hardship he endured for an erroneous action. Finally, man always
abstains from mistake and error and tries to get to the reality as much
as he can.

This sheds light on the fact that man is by nature and instinct a
realist; i.e., willingly or unwillingly, he always seeks the reality and
follows truth. Man has not learned this instinctive disposition from
anyone and anywhere. If at times, man shows obstinacy and refuses to
accept the truth, it is because he has been entangled with mistake and
error without finding truth and piety. If he had found them, he would
not have followed the path of error.

Sometimes, too, man suffers from a psychological ailment due to carnal
desires. This converts the sweet taste of truth into bitterness. Then
although he is acquainted with the truth he does not follow it. Even
though he admits the rightfulness of truth and confesses the necessity
of abiding by it, he refrains from submission. This is similar to
recurrent events in which due to addiction to harmful things, man
suppresses his human instinct (which is removal of danger and an escape
from loss) and embarks on an action that is detrimental (like those
addicted to tobacco, alcohol, narcotics).

The Holy Qur'an invites man towards realism and adherence of truth.
Qur'an insists on this matter and, in various ways, asks different
people to keep their realistic instinct and adherence with truth
alive.

The Almighty Allah states:

"...And what is thereafter the truth but error...(10:32)." Allah also
states:

"Most surely man is in loss, except those who believe and do good and
enjoin on each other truth and enjoin on each other patience
(103:2-3)."

Clearly, all these enjoinments by Allah show that if man does not keep
his realistic instinct alive and if he does not strive to follow truth
and reality, he would not be satisfied with his prosperity and happiness
and would follow any lustful and pleasant expressions and endeavours.
Consequently, he would be tied down by absurd thoughts and
superstitions. Then, like a quadruped animal that has lost its way
(which is man's asset), he will be the victim of his carnal desires and
unrestrainedness due to his ignorance.

The Almighty Allah states:

"Have you seen him who takes his low desires for his god? Will you then
be a protector over him? Or do you think that most of them do hear or
understand? They are nothing but as cattle. nay, they are straying
farther off from the path (25:43-44)."

In brief the Almighty Allah says: How do you feel about people who
worship their carnal desires? Do you think you can improve and educate
these people. Do you think they listen and understand? They are more
deviated than cattle. However, once their real human instinct revives
and the spirit of following the truth starts functioning, the facts
would be illuminating for them one after the other and whatever truth
and fact become clear for them, they would accept readily. Everyday,
they would take a fresh step in the path of bliss and prosperity.


**QUR'AN'S TEACHINGS ABOUT THE CREATOR OF THE WORLD**

**THE EXISTENCE OF THE CREATOR**

"... Is there doubt about Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth
... (14:10)?"

Explanation: In daylight, everything is visible. We can see ourselves,
others, houses, city, desert, mountains, jungle, and sea. But when the
darkness of night prevails, all these bright and evident things lose
their brightness. Then we realize that this brightness did not belong to
them, rather it was due to the sun which illuminated them by a kind of
contact. The sun is bright and, with its reflection, makes the earth and
all that is on it bright and visible. If these objects had a brightness
of their own, they would never lose it.

Human beings and other living beings perceive objects by their eyes,
ears, and senses. They em bark on activities by their hands, feet, and
other internal and external organs. After a while, however, they lose
their senses and motions and no longer show any movement or activity and
apparently die.

By witnessing this scene, we come to the conclusion that the intellect,
determination, and movement of these living beings are not due to their
posture and figure, rather they spring from their soul and psyche. When
their soul goes out they lose their livelihood and activity.

For example, if seeing and hearing were done only by the eyes and ears,
these activities would continue so long as these two organs existed, but
this is not the case at all.

In like manner, if the undoubted existence and genesis of the vast
world of existence, of which we are a part and can never doubt its
existence, sprang from and belonged to itself, it would never lose them.
In spite of this, we see that the components of the world lose their
existence vitality one after another and are incessantly in the state of
change and transformation. They replace one condition by another and
assume another shape.

For this reason, one must decisively judge that the existence and
genesis of all living things originate from something else which is
their Creator and Generator. As soon as the Creator cuts off relation of
creation with something, that object plunges into annihilation and
obliteration and becomes invisible.

That Infinite Existence, which is the support of the world of creation
and the Preserver of people, is Allah. There is no annihilation and
obliteration for Allah; otherwise, like all other living beings, His
existence would not have been from itself and would have been dependent
on others.

**Quran and Tawhid**

If with a pure nature and peaceful heart, man glances at the world of
existence, he will see proofs and signs for the pure existence of the
Creator in its nooks and corners. He will find evidences from every
place to back up this truth. In this world, everything that man faces is
either a phenomenon created by Allah or possesses a characteristic
endowed by Allah or is a system that runs and governs everything by
Allah's command. Man is one such being and his entire body attests this
fact. Neither does man's existence belong to himself nor are the traits
that he manifests based on his will.

Man has neither devised the plan of life that he takes up from the
beginning of his life, nor can he consider this system based on chance
and accident and, therefore, cut off. Man cannot attribute his existence
and the system of his existence to the environment in which he came into
being. This is because the existence of the above-mentioned environment
and the system that governs it are not made by that environment and have
not evolved by chance and accident.

Thus man has no choice but to prove an origin for the world of
creation. This origin creates and fosters things. It gives life to every
being and leads it in the path of survival to its specific perfection by
a particular system.

When man sees that the creation of objects is related and a unified
system exists in the world, he is forced to accept that the source of
creation and manager of its system is no one except Allah.

The Holy Qur'an states:

"If there had been in them any gods except Allah, they would both have
certainly been in a state of disorder... (21:22)."

Explanation: If many gods governed the world and, as idolaters say,
different gods ran various parts of the world, then the earth, heavens,
seas, and jungles would each have a god for its own. As a result of the
differences among such gods, various systems would be established in the
world, so that inevitably the world would face corruption and
annihilation. However, we see that all components of the world have
complete relation and harmony with one another and comprise a system.
Thus, it must be said that there is no partner for the Providence and
Creator of the world.

Some might assume that since the supposed gods are wise and aware that
their differences lead the world toward annihilation and corruption,
they never differ with each other. But this is a depraved assumption
because Allah, Who governs the world of existence or a part of it and
Whose activity and motion are for the system of creation, performs no
mental activity like us.

From the first day that our eyes open upon the world of creation and
view the system at work in it, we acquire mental impressions from this
system. These constitute our knowledge. Then as we work to provide our
basic needs, we coordinate our action with our mental impressions to
make it correspond to the prevalent system of creation. For example, we
eat to satisfy our hunger. To quench our thirst, we drink water. To be
relieved from cold and heat, we wear suitable clothes, because we
realize that these exigencies are satisfied by such means in the world
order.

Thus our action (in this view) in contingent upon and subsequent to our
thoughts and our thoughts depend upon and are subsequent to the world
order. Therefore, our actions are two stages subsequent to the world
order. But for Allah Who governs the world or a part of it, the external
world order is an action. It is not rational to believe that His actions
occur due to premeditations on the system.


**THE ALMIGHTY ALLAH POSSESSES ALL ATTRIBUTES OF PERFECTION**

What is perfection? A house is perfect when it provides for all the
needs of a family's living such as enough rooms to serve as a living
room, a guesthouse, a kitchen for making food, a bathroom, and other
rooms. If it lacks these utilities, it is proportionately deficient.

**WHY DOESN'T MAN ACCEPT THIS TRUTH AT TIMES?**

This fact is evident for man without the least speculation and there is
no doubt in it, but that at times man becomes so entangled with the
conflicts of life that he uses all the power of his wisdom for vital
struggles. He spends all his time probing life, therefore, he has no
time to spend on these kinds of thoughts. As a result, he becomes
heedless of this fact or enchanted by nature's charming outward
appearances and indulges in voluptuousness and pleasure. Since adherence
to these facts precludes materialistic unrestrainedness, such a man
naturally refuses to accept this fact and its like and is intolerant of
it.

The Holy Qur'an has paid greater attention, in different ways, and has
presented evidences for the creation of the creatures and the system
prevalent and dominant among them. This is because most people,
especially those who are infatuated by nature's charming appearances and
who find prosperity in voluptuousness and worldly pleasures, are unable
to think philosophically and to investigate subtle logical theories due
to their fondness of material and perceptible things.

In any case, man is a part of the world of creation and is not free
from want of its other components and the general and particular systems
that govern it. He can consider the world of creation and the system
prevalent in it at any time to find out the existence of the Creator and
Lord of the world.

The Almighty Allah states:

"Most surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the
believers. And in your (own) creation and in what He spreads abroad of
animals there are signs for a people that are sure, and (in) the
variation of the night and the day, and (in) what Allah sends down of
sustenance from the cloud, then gives life thereby to the earth after
its death, and (in) the changing of the winds, there are signs for a
people who understand (45:3-5)."

Explanation: In the Holy Qur'an, many verses invite people to think
about the creation of the heavens, the sun, the moon, the stars, the
earth, mountains, seas, plants, animals, and human beings. The Qur'an
also mentions the astonishing system that governs each of these kinds.
Truly, the mechanism of creation and the system that leads different
activities of the world towards the goals of creation and the causes for
existence are very astonishing and wonderful.

The seed of wheat or the kernel of almond, planted on the earth,
respectively turn into a clustered shrub or a fruit-bearing tree. From
the moment they are planted deeply in the heart of the earth, they rip
up, produce green tips, and strike their white roots into the heart of
the earth. To attain their final goal, vast and enormous systems, whose
magnitude and vastness astound the intellect, begin to operate. The
stars in the skies, the bright sun,

the luminous moon, and the earth all with their rotation, movement, and
potential power along with the mysterious powers in the seed or kernel,
the four seasons of the year, the atmospheric conditions, the clouds,
rains, winds, and days and nights all contribute to the growing of a
seed into a shrub of wheat. Like nurses, these factors foster this new
phenomenon and turn it from one hand to another until it reaches the
last stage of its growth and development.

Likewise, the coming into existence of a human infant is much more
complex than the bud of a plant or other phenomena, because it is the
product of millions or rather billions of years of complex and
systematic activity of the mechanism of creation. Man's daily life, in
addition to external connections with the world of creation, springs
from an astonishing system within his being which has amused the
perceptive minds of the scientists of the world engaged for many
centuries in observation of its outward things. Each day another layer
is removed from its secrets, but still their knowledge about the unknown
is rather insignificant.

If a human being possesses what is needful in the system of being of a
normal man, he is perfect. But if he lacks one of them, for instance, if
he does not have a hand, foot, or an eye, he is deficient in that
respect.

From what has been said, the attribute of perfection is that which
meets some of the needs of existence and obviates deficiency. For
example, the epithet of knowledge obviates the darkness of ignorance and
elucidates what is known to the scholar. Also power enables a powerful
person to attain his ends and satisfy his demands and makes him
competent to do so. Other epithets are life, comprehension, etc.

Our conscience judges that the Creator of the world (He, from whom the
existence of the world and creatures originate and who meets any need
that could be conceived and grants every blessing and perfection)
possesses all attributes of perfection, because from a realistic point
of view, it can never be assumed that anyone possessing an attribute can
prevent others from having it.

The Almighty Allah names all attributes of His perfection and declares
Himself Immaculate and Pure from any fault and deficiency: "And your
Lord is the Self-sufficient One, the Lord of Mercy... (6:133)."

Allah states:

"Allah-there is no god but He; His are the very best names (20:8)."
(Allah is Living, Wise, Clear-sighted, Hearing, Mighty, Creator, and
Free from want.) Thus the Almighty Allah possesses all epithets of
perfection and His Holy Presence is Pure and Immaculate. Because if He
had deficiency, He would be dependent in that respect and a superior god
would have to provide His needs.

"...Glory be to Him and exalted be He above what they associate (with
Him) (30:40)."

**THE POWER AND KNOWLEDGE OF ALLAH**

Observation of the interconnected components of this magnificent world,
its astonishing usual revolution, its dazzling minute and interrelated
systems which are at work here and there, as a result of which various
phenomena move in an utmost orderly manner towards a specific goal and a
particular destination, informs any wise man that the existence and
survival of the world of existence and all that is associated with it
originate from an Immortal One and Power. This Immortal One has created
the world and all its inhabitants with His Boundless Might and Infinite
Knowledge. Having placed His creatures in the cradle of nurturing, He
leads them to an ideal perfection by His blessing. He has an immortal
life and is Omnipotent and Omniscient.

The Almighty Allah states:

"His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and
causes death; and He has power over all things. He is the First and the
Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the Knower of hidden things, and
He is Cognizant of all things (57:2-3)."

Allah also states:

"...And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is
between them; He creates what He pleases; and Allah has power over all
things (5:17)."

Explanation: When we say that such and such a person has the ability to
purchase a car, we mean that he has whatever is needed (enough money) to
do so. If we say that such and such a person is able to lift a weight of
about 60 kilogrammes, we mean that he has the strength to lift a weight
of 60 kilogrammes.

On the whole, possessing capability and power over some matter is
contingent upon the availability of its requirements. Since the
requirements of any phenomenon in the world of existence can be met
through the Divine power of the Almighty Allah, it can be said that He
is Mighty and Powerful over all things and His Holy Existence is the
main source of existence.

He also states:

"Does He not know who He created...(67:14)?" That is to say, since in
his creation and existence, each creature relies upon the Infinite
Entity of the Almighty Allah there can never be any barrier and
isolation between that creature and Allah. Nor can that creature be
concealed from Him because He is Knowledgeable and Aware of ins and outs
of everything.

**JUSTICE**

The Almighty Allah is Just and Righteous, for justice is one of the
attributes of perfection. Allah possesses all attributes of perfection.
He, in His words, has repeatedly praised justice and has reproached
injustice and cruelty. He commands people to do justice and prohibits
them from injustice. How would it be possible for Allah to possess
attributes that He considers indecent or to lack whatever He considers
good and decent?

The Almighty Allah states:

"Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of a
particle...(4:40)."

He also states:

"...And your Lord does not deal unjustly with any one (18:49)."

Allah states:

"...And Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants (40:31)."

He also states:

"Whatever benefit comes to you (O man !), it is from Allah, and
whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from yourself..(4:79)."

Allah also states:

"Who made good everything that He has created...(32:7)."

Thus, any phenomenon, in itself, has been created in an extremely
proper manner. Any hideousness, injustice, deficiencies, or shortcomings
that are seen in some creatures can only be experienced by way of
comparison and in relationship with other beings. F or example, snakes
and scorpions are evil and unjust in their relation to man. When
compared with flowers, thorns are not so beautiful, but they are all, in
their own right, wonderful and thoroughly beautiful creatures.

Indeed the Almighty Allah declares some of man's voluntary deeds
religiously bad and evil and orders man to refrain from doing them. They
include sins such as polytheism, disobedience of parents, killing the
innocent, drinking alcoholic beverages, gambling, and any other acts
which are against religious obligations.

These kinds of actions, which are called sins, are evil acts and are
not attributed to Allah because they bear the title of opposition to and
rejection of obligation (title of negation). If these acts are willingly
performed by religiously obligated people, then they will be attributed
to these people, thus making them responsible and subject to
punishment.

**BLESSING**

When we see an enfeebled needy, we try to meet his demands to the best
of our ability. We help a desperately poverty-stricken man or take a
blind man's hand in our own and lead him to his destination. We consider
these acts as compassion and blessing and thus regard them as
praiseworthy deeds.

Actions performed by the Capable and Independent Allah can be nothing
but blessings. By granting His innumerable graces, He lets everyone
enjoy them. Without being dependent upon anyone else, Allah provides
part of the needs of the creatures. Allah states:

"...And if you count Allah's favours, you will not be able to number
them...(14:34)."

He also states:

"...My mercy encompasses all things...(7:156)."

**OTHER ATTRIBUTES OF PERFECTION**

"And Your Lord is the Self-sufficient one, the Lord of
mercy...(6:133)."

Explanation: Any goodness and beauty existing in the world and any
attribute of perfection that can be conceived are favours that the
Almighty Allah has bestowed upon His creatures, and through this means
satisfied one of the needs of creation. Certainly, if He lacked that
perfection, He would be unable to grant favours to others and would have
a share in the needs of people. Thus, Allah possesses all attributes of
perfection and is endowed with all attributes of perfection, such as,
life, knowledge, might, etc, without having received a single aspect of
perfection from others and without asking them for help. Attributes of
imperfection and causes for need and indigence, such as weakness,
ignorance, death, difficulty, etc, will not find a way to His Holy
Presence.


