Nubuwah (prophethood)
=====================

While independent in every respect, the Almighty Allah, with His
immense power, has created the world of existence and its various
creatures, allowing them to enjoy His countless blessings.

From the first day of creation till the last day of existence, man and
other creatures are fostered by Allah. They are each led toward a known
and determined goal with a particular order and system. They proceed
towards their ends while being exposed to His noteworthy blessings.

If we study and deliberate upon our lifetime, namely the period of
infancy, childhood, youth, and old age, our conscience will testify
Allah's complete favours to us. When we become more aware of this
matter, our wisdom will undoubtedly judge that the Creator of the world
is more compassionate to His creatures than anyone else is. Due to this
compassion and favour, Allah always considers their interests and never
consents to the corruption and defect of their affairs without wisdom
and expediency. Mankind is one of the creatures of Allah. We know that
man's interest and prosperity depend upon his being realistic and
benevolent; that is to say, he must possess true beliefs, praiseworthy
ethics, and good deeds.

One may say that with his Allah-granted wisdom, man can distinguish
between good and bad and can recognize a well from a path.

It should be known, however, that wisdom alone cannot resolve this
difficulty and lead man to realism and benevolence. All these indecent
characteristics and unjust actions witnessed in the human society are
committed by those who possess wisdom and discernment, however, as a
result of selfishness, profit-seeking, and voluptuousness, their wisdom
has been overcome by their sentiments and they have succumbed to their
carnal desires, leading them astray. Therefore, the Almighty Allah must
lead and invite us to prosperity through some other ways and through
means which can never be overcome by carnal desires and which never make
blunders or mistakes in their guidance. This path is nothing but the
path of Nubuwwah.

**THE LOGIC IN NUBUWWAH**

From what. we have discussed about monotheism, it becomes evident that
since Allah creates everything, its fostering also depends upon Him. In
other words, the Almighty Allah is the organizer and leader of the
movement of any worldly creature or phenomenon that from the very
beginning of existence endeavours for its survival, strives to remove
its imperfections, eliminates its needs and shortcomings one after
another, makes itself independent and self-sufficient as much as
possible, and moves in an orderly manner in its path of survival and
existence.

A definite conclusion can be drawn from this concept. That is to say,
any one of the various kinds of phenomena of the world has a specific
evolutionary process for its survival which is done by its special
endeavours. In other words, in the path of their survival, worldly
creatures of each particular group have a series of specific functions
assigned to them by Allah. As the Holy Qur'an, with reference to this
fact, states:

"...Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(to its goal) (20:50)."

This order applies to all components of creation without any exception.
It includes the stars, the earth, their components, compositions that
generate primary phenomena, plants, and animals.

Man's condition is the same as others, in this universal guidance, but
there is a difference between him and others.

**THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MAN AND OTHER CREATURES**

The earth has supposedly been created millions of years ago. It employs
all its hidden forces and endeavours in the environment of its existence
to the extent permitted by opposing forces. It displays the signs of its
entity in the field of its rotation and transitional movement, thus
maintaining its survival. Unless faced with a stronger opposing force,
it will continue this activity and will not fall short of carrying out
any of its functions.

For example, from the time an almond tree takes root from a seed until
it becomes a fully grown tree, it assumes duties, such as nourishing,
developing, etc (in other words, it performs these duties to pursue the
course of its existence.) It will never refrain from carrying them out
unless it is precluded by a stronger opposing force. This process also
applies to any other phenomenon. But mankind performs his particular
activities voluntarily and his actions originate from his thoughts and
determination. Many a time, man refrains from a task which is entirely
to his interests and which is not hindered by any opposing force and
undertakes a task which is entirely disadvantageous to him knowingly and
intentionally. Sometimes, he abstains from drinking antidote and
sometimes he drinks a cup of poison and kills himself.

It is certainly clear that the divine universal guidance will not be
compulsory for a creature born with free will. That is to say, the
prophets conveyed the message of the Almighty Allah on good and bad and
prosperity and wretchedness to the people and warned believers of
Allah's chastisement, but the believers have always been free to adopt
any one of them. It is true that, in general, man perceives his good and
bad and advantage and disadvantage through his wisdom, but that very
wisdom often loses its keenness, follows carnal desires, and makes
error. Therefore, in addition to the medium of wisdom, divine guidance
should positively be achieved through a different medium, which is
entirely inviolable to sin and error. In other words, in addition to the
medium of wisdom, the Almighty Allah confirms His orders by another
medium.

This medium is the same medium of prophethood by which the Almighty
Allah reveals His orders to one of His servants through wahy leading
mankind to prosperity. Allah appoints him to communicate His orders to
the people and to oblige them to follow the orders through hope,
despair, encouragement, and threat.

The Almighty Allah states:

"Surely We have revealed to you as We revealed to Nuh (Noah), and the
prophets after him...(4:163)." "(We sent) messengers as the bearers of
good news and as warners, so that people should not have a plea against
Allah after the (coming of) messengers...(4:165)."

**ATTRIBUTES OF PROPHET**

From what was discussed, it becomes clear that the Almighty Allah, with
His divine teachings, must have provided some of His servants with
intuitive knowledge and laws that guarantee man's prosperity and must
have sent them to lead the people. A person who possesses divine
messages is called a "nabi (prophet)" and messenger of Allah and the
entire set of messages from Allah which he has brought to the people are
called "religion".

It has also become clear that a prophet:

(1) Must be free and immuned from error. In order to communicate what
has been revealed to him to the people without error and mistake, he
should be immuned from forgetfulness and other mental weaknesses;
otherwise, divine guidance will not attain its goal and the general
guidance rule will forfeit its applicability and lose its power to
influence people.

(2) Must be inviolable to error and sin both in deeds and speech,
because sinfulness has no effect in propagation. People do not esteem
the speech of a person whose manner and speech are at odds. They even
take his deeds for his mendacity and imposture by saying if he meant
what he said, he would act accordingly.

By bringing these two aspects together in one phrase, we can say that a
prophet must be inviolable to errors and sins to render preaching and
propagation effective. In His words, the Almighty Allah, too, refers to
this point and states:

"The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any,
except to him whom He chooses as a messenger. for surely He makes a
guard to march before him and after him, so that He may know that they
have truly delivered the messages of their Lord...(72:26-28)."

(3) Must possess moral virtues such as chastity, courage, justice, etc,
for these are considered as praiseworthy qualities. Anyone who is immune
to any sins and follows religion in a perfect manner will never be
blemished by moral vices.

**PROPHETS AMONG PEOPLE**

History indicates that there were prophets among people who responded
to the call of Allah; however, the details of their life is not so
clear. Only the details of life of Prophet Muhammad (SA) is devoid of
ambiguity. The Holy Qur'an, which is the divine book given to Prophet
(SA), contains sublime religious aims, has clarified the call of the
prophets in the past and has described their goals and objectives.

The Holy Qur'an stipulates that many prophets have been, assigned by
Allah to lead the people, all of whom consistently invited the people to
monotheism and the true religion. As Allah states:

"And We did not send before you any messenger but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me, therefore worship Me (21:25)."


**ULUL'AZM ANBIYA' (ARCH-PROPHETS) AND ALL OTHER PROPHETS**

There were five prophets who had divine books and independent
teachings. They are referred to as Nuh (Noah) (AS), Ibrahim (Abraham)
(AS), Musa (Moses) (AS), 'Isa (Jesus) (AS), and Muhammad (SA) in the
following verse: "He has made plain to you of the religion what He
enjoined upon Nuh and that which We have revealed to you, and that which
We enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and 'Isa that keep to obedience and be
not divided therein... (42:13)."

These five prophets, who have books and divine religious laws, are
called the Ulul'azm Anbiya' (arch-prophets). The messengers of Allah,
however, were not limited to these five prophets, rather each ummah
(people) had a messenger. Many prophets were sent by Allah to lead the
people, of whom only the names of less than twenty have been mentioned
in the Holy Qur'an.

The Almighty Allah states:

"... There are some of them that We have mentioned to you and there are
others whom We have not mentioned to you...(40:78)."

He also states:

"And every ummah had a messenger...(10:47)."

Allah states:

"...And (there is) a guide for every people (13:7)."

Yes, prophets, who came after each of the Ulul'azm Anbiya' invited
people to follow the divine religious laws of the same prophets. Thus,
prophetic mission and the call continued until Allah appointed the
Prophet Muhammad (SA) ibn Abdillah to bring the previous prophetic
missions to perfection and to communicate the latest orders and the most
complete divine religious laws. His divine book became the last book and
consequently, the religion of Prophet Muhammad (SA) will remain valid
until Qiyamah (Resurrection) and his religious laws will remain
everlasting.

**(1) PROPHET NUH (AS)**

Nuh (AS) (prophet Noah) was the first prophet appointed to prophetic
mission and sent towards mankind as bearer of divine religious laws and
a divine book by Allah, the Merciful.

Nuh (AS) invited the people of those days to monotheism and belief in
the Oneness of Allah and asked them to refrain from polytheism and
idolatry. As evident from his stories in the Holy Qur'an, Nuh (AS)
seriously struggled to settle class distinctions and to eradicate
injustice and cruelty. He notified the people of his teachings by way of
reasoning which was something new to the people of those days.

After a long period of suffering with ignorant, stubborn, and unruly
people, Nuh (AS) guided only a small group of people. Thus, by means of
Nuh's (AS) Deluge, the Almighty Allah annihilated unbelievers and
cleansed the earth of their defiled entity. Nuh (AS) and a group of his
followers who were saved laid the cornerstone of a religious society
over again.

This Holy Prophet (SA) is the founder of the religious laws of
monotheism and the first divine representative who struggled against
cruelty, injustice, and rebellion. Owing to his valuable services
rendered to the divine religion, he is allotted a praise and greeting by
Allah, a praise which will remain alive and perpetual as long as mankind
exists.

"Peace and salutation to Nuh among the nations (37:79)."

**(2) PROPHET IBRAHIM (AS)**

A long time elapsed after Nuh. (AS). Although many prophets, such as
Hud, Salih, and others also led the people towards Allah and
righteousness, the polytheism and idolatry flourished day by day and
finally became universal. By His sublime wisdom, the Almighty Allah
appointed Ibrahim (AS) (prophet Abraham) as a prophet.

Ibrahim (AS) was a perfect example of a man with innate disposition who
searched for truth with his pure and immaculate nature. He found out the
oneness of Allah and struggled against polytheism and injustice all his
life.

As revealed by the Holy Qur'an and confirmed by the ahadith of the
Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (Members of the Household of the Prophet Muhammad
[SA]), Ibrahim (AS) spent his childhood in a cave away from the clamours
of people and the tumultuous urban life. He only saw his mother who
carried food and water for him from time to time.

One day he came out of his cave and followed his mother to town and
paid a visit to his uncle, Adhar, but everything seemed new and
interesting to him. Amidst thousands of bewilderments and wonders and
with utmost impatience and calmness, his immaculate nature focussed on
the creation of things that he saw, trying to find out the secret of
their existence and the cause of their creation. He saw idols which
Adhar and others carved and worshipped. Ibrahim (AS) asked about their
identity, but the explanation he got about their divinity was not
convincing. He saw a group of people who worshipped venus, others who
worshipped the moon, and yet another group who worshipped the sun. Their
divinity was unbelievable to Ibrahim (AS) because each one of them set
after a few hours.

After these incidents, Ibrahim (AS), fearlessly, announced his
worshipping of the Almighty Allah and his disgust of polytheism and
idolatry. He thought of nothing but struggle against idolatry and
polytheism. He struggled against id ol-worshippers tirelessly and
relentlessly and invited them towards monotheism.

Finally, he found a way to the idol-temple and broke the idols. Because
of this deed, which people regarded as the greatest crime, Ibrahim (AS)
was put to trial. After completion of the formalities, Ibrahim (AS) was
thrown into the fire, but Allah saved him and he came out of the fire
unharmed. After a while, Ibrahim (AS) emigrated from his original
birthplace, Babylon, to Syria and Palestine and continued his invitation
of monotheism there.

In the last days of his life, he was blessed with two children: Ishaq
(AS) (Prophet Isaac), the father of Isra'il (AS) and Isma'il (AS)
(Prophet Ishmael), the father of 'Arab Mudar. By the order of Allah,
Isma'il (AS), in infancy, and his mother were taken to Hijaz by Ibrahim
(AS). They settled around Mount Tuhamah in an arid and barren land
without inhabitants. In this manner, Ibrahim (AS) invited the nomadic
Arabs to monotheism. Then he built Ka'bah and described the rites of
Hajj (pilgrimage to Makkah) which remained prevalent among the Arabs
until the advent of Islam and the call of Prophet Muhammad (SA).

Ibrahim (AS) was endowed with the innate religion. According to the
explicit wording of the Holy Qur'an, he had a divine book. He was the
first person to call the divine religion as "Islam" and it's followers
as "Muslims". Indeed, the religions of the world advocating monotheism,
such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam terminate at Ibrahim (AS),
because Musa (AS), 'Isa (AS), and Prophet Muhammad (SA), the leaders of
the aforementioned three religions, were all the descendants of Ibrahim
(AS) and had followed his path of call and invitation to monotheism.

**(3) PROPHET MUSA (AS)**

Musa (AS) (Prophet Moses) ibn 'Imran is the third of the Ulul'azm
Anbiya' and is bestowed with a book and shari'ah (divine religious
laws). He was a descendant of Isra'il (AS) or Y'aqub (AS) (Prophet
Jacob).

Musa (AS) had a tumultuous life. He was born at a time when the
Israelites were living in Egypt among Gipsies in a state of abjectness
and servitude and when their sons were beheaded by the order of Fir'awn
(Pharaoh\*).

The mother of Musa (AS), according to the order given to her while
asleep, placed Musa (AS), in a wooden box and left him in the Nile
River. The water carried the box directly to the castle of Fir'awn.

By the order of Fir'awn, the box was picked up. When they opened it,
they found a baby inside. Because of the insistence of the queen,
Fir'awn dispensed with killing the child. Since they did not have a son,
they adopted him as their own son and put him under the care of a nurse
(who was incidentally his own mother)

Up to the early stages of his youth, Musa (AS) lived in the palace of
Fir'awn. Then, after an accidental murder, fearing Fir'awn, he ran away
from Egypt. He went to Madyan and met Prophet Shu'ayb (Jethro) (AS). He
married one of Shu'ayb's daughters and grazed his sheep for a few years.
After a few years, he reminisced his birthplace, took his wife with him,
and set out for Egypt, carrying his belongings along. On his way, when
he reached Mount Sinai at night, he was assigned to prophetic mission by
the Almighty Allah. He was chosen by Allah to invite Fir'awn to the
religion of Tawhid, to liberate the Israelites from the yoke of the
Gipsies, and to designate his brother, Harun (Aaron), as his minister.
But after he announced his mission and communicated the divine message,
Fir'awn who was an idol-worshipper and who had also introduced himself
to the people of Egypt as one of the gods, did not accept Musa's (AS)
prophetic mission and refused to grant freedom to the Israelites.

Although for many years Musa (AS) invited people to tawhid and showed
many miracles, Fir'awn and his people showed no reaction other than
toughness and moroseness. Finally, by the order of Allah, Musa (AS)
emigrated the Israelites and went from Egypt to Sinai desert at night.
When they reached the Red sea, Fir'awn, too, came to know and chased
them with his army.

Through a miracle, Musa (AS) split the water of the sea and crossed it
along with his people, but Fir'awn and his army were drowned. After this
event, Allah revealed the Tawrat to Musa (AS) and established the
Shari'ah of Musa (AS) among the Israelites.

\* In Egypt, kings were called "Pharaohs".

**(4) PROPHET 'ISA (AS)**

Prophet 'Isa (AS) is the fourth of the Ulul'azm Anbiya' bestowed with a
book and shari'ah. The circumstances of his birth were unusual. His
mother, Maryam, a pious virgin, was worshipping Allah (in Jerusalem)
when Ruhulqudus or Jibril (Gabriel) descended from heavens, gave her the
good tidings of 'Isa's (AS) birth; and by Jibril's breathing on her
sleeves, Maryam became pregnant with 'Isa (AS).

After his birth, 'Isa (AS) began to speak in the cradle in defence of
his m other against unfair calumnies attributed to her. He also informed
the people about his Nubuwwah and divine book (Injil). Later, in his
youth, he proceeded to invite the people and revived the shari'ah of
Musa (AS) with minor modifications. He sent missionaries from among his
hawaris (disciples) to the surrounding places. After his call was spread
among the people, the Jews (his ummah) embarked on killing him, but
Allah saved him, and the Jews caught someone else in his place and
crucified him.

It should be pointed out here that the Almighty Allah, in the Holy
Qur'an, confirms a divine book called the "Injil" for 'Isa (AS), which
was revealed to him. It is different from the Gospels written after 'Isa
(AS) about his life and call. Among them, four Gospels compiled by Luke,
Mark, Matthew, and John are formally recognized by Christians.

**(5) PROPHET MUHAMMAD (SA) IBN 'ABDILLAH**

The biography of our Holy Prophet Muhammad (SA) ibn Abdillah is clearer
than those of all prophets preceding him, because as a result of the
lapse of time and historical changes, their books, shari'ahs, and even
their personalities have been distorted and their biographies have
become ambiguous.

In fact, there are no clear documents other than those imparted to us
through the divine book of Islam, viz, Qur'an and the speeches and
statements of Prophet Muhammad (SA) and the Ahl al-Bayt (AS). But there
is a clear history on the life of Prophet Muhammad (SA) which describes
the characteristics of his life adequately.

The Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam is the last prophet appointed by the
Almighty Allah to lead the people of the world. Fourteen centuries ago,
mankind lived in such a condition that nothing was left of Tawhid except
nominally and when people had completely deviated from Tawhid and
theism. Human manners and justice had died away in their society. Holy
Ka'bah had turned into an idol-temple and the religion of Ibrahim (AS)
had converted into idolatry.

Arabs led a tribal life and even a few of their cities in Hijaz and
Yemen and elsewhere were governed in the same tribal manner. The Arabs
lived in the meanest and most backward conditions. Instead of culture
and civilization, they indulged in unchastity, sensuality, alcoholism,
and gambling. They buried their daughters alive. Most people subsisted
by Way of theft, banditry, murder, and plundering each other's
belongings, livestock, and cattle. Cruelty and bloodshed were regarded
as the greatest honours.

In such an environment, the compassionate Allah appointed Prophet
Muhammad (SA) to reform and lead the people of the world. Allah revealed
the Holy Qur'an to him, consisting of divine education, theism, the ways
of implementation of justice, and beneficial advice. Allah commissioned
him to invite people toward humanity and adherence to the truth using
that divine authentic Book, Qur'an.

Prophet Muhammad (SA) was born in the city of Makkah in 570 AD (53
years before Hijrah) in the noblest and most honourable Arab family.

Muhammad's (SA) father died before he was born. He lost h is mother
when he was six years old. After two years, his grandfather (Abdul
Muttalib), who was his guardian, died. Then the Prophet (SA) was put
under the guardianship of his kind uncle, Abu Talib (the father of the
Leader of the Faithful, 'Ali [AS]).

Abu Talib held him den just like one of his own children. Until a few
months before Hijrah, he always did his best for the protection and
support of Muhammad (SA) and he was never negligent.

The Arabs of Makkah, like other Arabs, indulged in breeding sheep and
camels. They sometimes used to trade with neighbouring countries,
especially with Syria. They were illiterate people who made no effort to
educate their children.

Like all his people, the Prophet (SA), too, had not learnt to read and
write, but from the beginning of his life, he was privileged by having a
series of praiseworthy attributes. He never worshipped idols, lied, and
committed theft and treachery. He guarded against evil, disrespectful,
and indecent actions and was wise and efficient. Therefore, he gained
considerable popularity among the people within a short period and
became known as "Muhammad al-Amin" meaning "Muhammad the trustworthy".
The Arabs often entrusted him with their belongings and talked about his
honesty and efficiency.

When he was about twenty years old, a wealthy lady of Makkah, Khadijah
al-Kubra, designated him as her representative in commercial trade. As a
result of his truthfulness, honesty, wisdom, and efficiency, she earned
a great deal of profit. She was naturally attracted by the personality
and magnanimity of the Holy Prophet (SA) more than ever and finally
proposed to him for marriage. Afterwards also for years, she continued
commercial works with her husband.

Being considered as one of the people, the Holy Prophet (SA) had an
ordinary association with people until the age of forty. Of course, he
differed from them in that he had a praiseworthy and decent behaviour
and guarded against indecent deeds and conducts which had spoiled
others. He did not possess cruelty, hard-heartedness, and status
consciousness, thus had earned the respect and confidence of people. It
was such that when the Arabs were reconstructing the House of Ka'bah, a
quarrel and dispute arose among the tribes on the erection of Al-Hajar
al-Aswad (the Black Stone). The people unanimously chose the Holy
Prophet (SA) as an arbitrator.

He then ordered the people to spread a cloak to place Al-Hajar al-Aswad
within. The nobles of the tribes lifted the sides of the cloak and the
Holy Prophet (SA) installed the Al-Hajar al-Aswad in its place, thus
bringing the conflict of the people to an end without any massacre and
bloodshed.

Before his Al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah (appointment for prophethood),
although the Holy Prophet (SA) worshipped Allah and refrained from
idol-worshipping, the people did not bother about him because he did not
explicitly struggle against the superstitious beliefs of idolatry. The
same applied to those belonging to other religions such as Jews and
christians, who lived respectfully among the Arabs without being
bothered by them.


