Qur'an's Teachings about The Creator Of The World
=================================================

The Existence of The Creator
----------------------------

***"... Is there doubt about Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the
earth ... (14:10)?"***

Explanation: In daylight, everything is visible. We can see ourselves,
others, houses, city, desert, mountains, jungle, and sea. But when the
darkness of night prevails, all these bright and evident things lose
their brightness. Then we realize that this brightness did not belong to
them, rather it was due to the sun which illuminated them by a kind of
contact. The sun is bright and, with its reflection, makes the earth and
all that is on it bright and visible. If these objects had a brightness
of their own, they would never lose it.

Human beings and other living beings perceive objects by their eyes,
ears, and senses. They embark on activities by their hands, feet, and
other internal and external organs. After a while, however, they lose
their senses and motions and no longer show any movement or activity and
apparently die.

By witnessing this scene, we come to the conclusion that the intellect,
determination, and movement of these living beings are not due to their
posture and figure, rather they spring from their soul and psyche. When
their soul goes out they lose their livelihood and activity.

For example, if seeing and hearing were done only by the eyes and ears,
these activities would continue so long as these two organs existed, but
this is not the case at all.

In like manner, if the undoubted existence and genesis of the vast world
of existence, of which we are a part and can never doubt its existence,
sprang from and belonged to itself, it would never lose them. In spite
of this, we see that the components of the world lose their existence
vitality one after another and are incessantly in the state of change
and transformation. They replace one condition by another and assume
another shape.

For this reason, one must decisively judge that the existence and
genesis of all living things originate from something else which is
their Creator and Generator. As soon as the Creator cuts off relation of
creation with something, that object plunges into annihilation and
obliteration and becomes invisible.

That Infinite Existence, which is the support of the world of creation
and the Preserver of people, is Allah.

There is no annihilation and obliteration for Allah; otherwise, like all
other living beings, His existence would not have been from itself and
would have been dependent on others.

Qur'an and Tawhid
-----------------

If with a pure nature and peaceful heart, man glances at the world of
existence, he will see proofs and signs for the pure existence of the
Creator in its nooks and corners. He will find evidences from every
place to back up this truth. In this world, everything that man faces is
either a phenomenon created by Allah or possesses a characteristic
endowed by Allah or is a system that runs and governs everything by
Allah's command.

Man is one such being and his entire body attests this fact. Neither
does man's existence belong to himself nor are the traits that he
manifests based on his will. Man has neither devised the plan of life
that he takes up from the beginning of his life, nor can he consider
this system based on chance and accident and, therefore, cut off.

Man cannot attribute his existence and the system of his existence to
the environment in which he came into being. This is because the
existence of the above-mentioned environment and the system that governs
it are not made by that environment and have not evolved by chance and
accident.

Thus man has no choice but to prove an origin for the world of creation.
This origin creates and fosters things. It gives life to every being and
leads it in the path of survival to its specific perfection by a
particular system.

When man sees that the creation of objects is related and a unified
system exists in the world, he is forced to accept that the source of
creation and manager of its system is no one except Allah.

The Holy Qur'an states:

***"If there had been in them any gods except Allah, they would both
have certainly been in a state of disorder... (21:22)."***

Explanation: If many gods governed the world and, as idolaters say,
different gods ran various parts of the world, then the earth, heavens,
seas, and jungles would each have a god for its own. As a result of the
differences among such gods, various systems would be established in the
world, so that inevitably the world would face corruption and
annihilation.

However, we see that all components of the world have complete relation
and harmony with one another and comprise a system. Thus, it must be
said that there is no partner for the Providence and Creator of the
world.

Some might assume that since the supposed gods are wise and aware that
their differences lead the world toward annihilation and corruption,
they never differ with each other. But this is a depraved assumption
because Allah, Who governs the world of existence or a part of it and
Whose activity and motion are for the system of creation, performs no
mental activity like us.

From the first day that our eyes open upon the world of creation and
view the system at work in it, we acquire mental impressions from this
system. These constitute our knowledge. Then as we work to provide our
basic needs, we coordinate our action with our mental impressions to
make it correspond to the prevalent system of creation. For example, we
eat to satisfy our hunger. To quench our thirst, we drink water. To be
relieved from cold and heat, we wear suitable clothes, because we
realize that these exigencies are satisfied by such means in the world
order.

Thus our action (in this view) in contingent upon and subsequent to our
thoughts and our thoughts depend upon and are subsequent to the world
order. Therefore, our actions are two stages subsequent to the world
order. But for Allah Who governs the world or a part of it, the external
world order is an action. It is not rational to believe that His actions
occur due to premeditations on the system.

The Almighty Allah Possesses All Attributes of Perfection
---------------------------------------------------------

What is perfection? A house is perfect when it provides for all the
needs of a family's living such as enough rooms to serve as a living
room, a guesthouse, a kitchen for making food, a bathroom, and other
rooms. If it lacks these utilities, it is proportionately deficient.

Why Doesn't Man Accept This Truth At Times?
-------------------------------------------

This fact is evident for man without the least speculation and there is
no doubt in it, but that at times man becomes so entangled with the
conflicts of life that he uses all the power of his wisdom for vital
struggles. He spends all his time probing life, therefore, he has no
time to spend on these kinds of thoughts.

As a result, he becomes heedless of this fact or enchanted by nature's
charming outward appearances and indulges in voluptuousness and
pleasure. Since adherence to these facts precludes materialistic
unrestrainedness, such a man naturally refuses to accept this fact and
itâ€™s like and is intolerant of it.

The Holy Qur'an has paid greater attention, in different ways, and has
presented evidences for the creation of the creatures and the system
prevalent and dominant among them. This is because most people,
especially those who are infatuated by nature's charming appearances and
who find prosperity in voluptuousness and worldly pleasures, are unable
to think philosophically and to investigate subtle logical theories due
to their fondness of material and perceptible things.

In any case, man is a part of the world of creation and is not free from
want of its other components and the general and particular systems that
govern it. He can consider the world of creation and the system
prevalent in it at any time to find out the existence of the Creator and
Lord of the world.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"Most surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the
believers. And in your (own) creation and in what He spreads abroad of
animals there are signs for a people that are sure, and (in) the
variation of the night and the day, and (in) what Allah sends down of
sustenance from the cloud, then gives life thereby to the earth after
its death, and (in) the changing of the winds, there are signs for a
people who understand (45:3-5)."***

Explanation: In the Holy Qur'an, many verses invite people to think
about the creation of the heavens, the sun, the moon, the stars, the
earth, mountains, seas, plants, animals, and human beings. The Qur'an
also mentions the astonishing system that governs each of these kinds.
Truly, the mechanism of creation and the system that leads different
activities of the world towards the goals of creation and the causes for
existence are very astonishing and wonderful.

The seed of wheat or the kernel of almond, planted on the earth,
respectively turn into a clustered shrub or a fruit-bearing tree. From
the moment they are planted deeply in the heart of the earth, they rip
up, produce green tips, and strike their white roots into the heart of
the earth. To attain their final goal, vast and enormous systems, whose
magnitude and vastness astound the intellect, begin to operate.

The stars in the skies, the bright sun, the luminous moon, and the earth
all with their rotation, movement, and potential power along with the
mysterious powers in the seed or kernel, the four seasons of the year,
the atmospheric conditions, the clouds, rains, winds, and days and
nights all contribute to the growing of a seed into a shrub of wheat.
Like nurses, these factors foster this new phenomenon and turn it from
one hand to another until it reaches the last stage of its growth and
development.

Likewise, the coming into existence of a human infant is much more
complex than the bud of a plant or other phenomena, because it is the
product of millions or rather billions of years of complex and
systematic activity of the mechanism of creation.

Man's daily life, in addition to external connections with the world of
creation, springs from an astonishing system within his being which has
amused the perceptive minds of the scientists of the world engaged for
many centuries in observation of its outward things. Each day another
layer is removed from its secrets, but still their knowledge about the
unknown is rather insignificant.

If a human being possesses what is needful in the system of being of a
normal man, he is perfect. But if he lacks one of them, for instance, if
he does not have a hand, foot, or an eye, he is deficient in that
respect.

From what has been said, the attribute of perfection is that which meets
some of the needs of existence and obviates deficiency. For example, the
epithet of knowledge obviates the darkness of ignorance and elucidates
what is known to the scholar. Also power enables a powerful person to
attain his ends and satisfy his demands and makes him competent to do
so. Other epithets are life, comprehension, etc.

Our conscience judges that the Creator of the world (He, from whom the
existence of the world and creatures originate and who meets any need
that could be conceived and grants every blessing and perfection)
possesses all attributes of perfection, because from a realistic point
of view, it can never be assumed that anyone possessing an attribute can
prevent others from having it.

The Almighty Allah names all attributes of His perfection and declares
Himself Immaculate and Pure from any fault and deficiency:

***"And your Lord is the Self-sufficient One, the Lord of Mercy...
(6:133)."***

Allah states:

***"Allah-there is no god but He; His are the very best names
(20:8)."***

(Allah is Living, Wise, Clear-sighted, Hearing, Mighty, Creator, and
Free from want.) Thus the Almighty Allah possesses all epithets of
perfection and His Holy Presence is Pure and Immaculate. Because if He
had deficiency, He would be dependent in that respect and a superior god
would have to provide His needs.

***"...Glory be to Him and exalted be He above what they associate (with
Him) (30:40)."***

The Power and Knowledge of Allah
--------------------------------

Observation of the interconnected components of this magnificent world,
itâ€™s astonishing usual revolution, its dazzling minute and interrelated
systems which are at work here and there, as a result of which various
phenomena move in an utmost orderly manner towards a specific goal and a
particular destination, informs any wise man that the existence and
survival of the world of existence and all that is associated with it
originate from an Immortal One and Power.

This Immortal One has created the world and all its inhabitants with His
Boundless Might and Infinite Knowledge. Having placed His creatures in
the cradle of nurturing, He leads them to an ideal perfection by His
blessing. He has an immortal life and is Omnipotent and Omniscient.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and
causes death; and He has power over all things. He is the First and the
Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the Knower of hidden things, and
He is Cognizant of all things (57:2-3)."***

Allah also states:

***"...And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what
is between them; He creates what He pleases; and Allah has power over
all things (5:17)."***

Explanation: When we say that such and such a person has the ability to
purchase a car, we mean that he has whatever is needed (enough money) to
do so. If we say that such and such a person is able to lift a weight of
about 60 kilograms, we mean that he has the strength to lift a weight of
60 kilograms.

On the whole, possessing capability and power over some matter is
contingent upon the availability of its requirements. Since the
requirements of any phenomenon in the world of existence can be met
through the Divine power of the Almighty Allah, it can be said that He
is Mighty and Powerful over all things and His Holy Existence is the
main source of existence.

He also states:

***"Does He not know who He created...(67:14)?"***

That is to say, since in his creation and existence, each creature
relies upon the Infinite Entity of the Almighty Allah there can never be
any barrier and isolation between that creature and Allah. Nor can that
creature be concealed from Him because He is Knowledgeable and Aware of
ins and outs of everything.

Justice
-------

The Almighty Allah is Just and Righteous, for justice is one of the
attributes of perfection. Allah possesses all attributes of perfection.
He, in His words, has repeatedly praised justice and has reproached
injustice and cruelty. He commands people to do justice and prohibits
them from injustice. How would it be possible for Allah to possess
attributes that He considers indecent or to lack whatever He considers
good and decent?

The Almighty Allah states:

***"Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of a
particle...(4:40)."***

He also states:

***"...And your Lord does not deal unjustly with any one (18:49)."***

Allah states:

***"...And Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants
(40:31)."***

He also states:

***"Whatever benefit comes to you (O man !), it is from Allah, and
whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from yourself..(4:79)."***

Allah also states:

***"Who made good everything that He has created...(32:7)."***

Thus, any phenomenon, in itself, has been created in an extremely proper
manner. Any hideousness, injustice, deficiencies, or shortcomings that
are seen in some creatures can only be experienced by way of comparison
and in relationship with other beings. F or example, snakes and
scorpions are evil and unjust in their relation to man. When compared
with flowers, thorns are not so beautiful, but they are all, in their
own right, wonderful and thoroughly beautiful creatures.

Indeed the Almighty Allah declares some of man's voluntary deeds
religiously bad and evil and orders man to refrain from doing them. They
include sins such as polytheism, disobedience of parents, killing the
innocent, drinking alcoholic beverages, gambling, and any other acts
which are against religious obligations.

These kinds of actions, which are called sins, are evil acts and are not
attributed to Allah because they bear the title of opposition to and
rejection of obligation (title of negation). If these acts are willingly
performed by religiously obligated people, then they will be attributed
to these people, thus making them responsible and subject to punishment.

Blessing
--------

When we see an enfeebled needy, we try to meet his demands to the best
of our ability. We help a desperately poverty-stricken man or take a
blind man's hand in our own and lead him to his destination. We consider
these acts as compassion and blessing and thus regard them as
praiseworthy deeds.

Actions performed by the Capable and Independent Allah can be nothing
but blessings. By granting His innumerable graces, He lets everyone
enjoy them. Without being dependent upon anyone else, Allah provides
part of the needs of the creatures. Allah states:

***"...And if you count Allah's favors, you will not be able to number
them...(14:34)."***

He also states:

***"...My mercy encompasses all things...(7:156)."***

Other Attributes of Perfection
------------------------------

***"And Your Lord is the Self-sufficient one, the Lord of
mercy...(6:133)."***

Explanation: Any goodness and beauty existing in the world and any
attribute of perfection that can be conceived are favors that the
Almighty Allah has bestowed upon His creatures, and through this means
satisfied one of the needs of creation. Certainly, if He lacked that
perfection, He would be unable to grant favors to others and would have
a share in the needs of people.

Thus, Allah possesses all attributes of perfection and is endowed with
all attributes of perfection, such as, life, knowledge, might, etc,
without having received a single aspect of perfection from others and
without asking them for help. Attributes of imperfection and causes for
need and indigence, such as weakness, ignorance, death, difficulty, etc,
will not find a way to His Holy Presence.


