Nubuwwah (Prophethood)
======================

While independent in every respect, the Almighty Allah, with His immense
power, has created the world of existence and its various creatures,
allowing them to enjoy His countless blessings.

From the first day of creation till the last day of existence, man and
other creatures are fostered by Allah. They are each led toward a known
and determined goal with a particular order and system. They proceed
towards their ends while being exposed to His noteworthy blessings.

If we study and deliberate upon our lifetime, namely the period of
infancy, childhood, youth, and old age, our conscience will testify
Allah's complete favors to us. When we become more aware of this matter,
our wisdom will undoubtedly judge that the Creator of the world is more
compassionate to His creatures than anyone else is.

Due to this compassion and favor, Allah always considers their interests
and never consents to the corruption and defect of their affairs without
wisdom and expediency. Mankind is one of the creatures of Allah. We know
that man's interest and prosperity depend upon his being realistic and
benevolent; that is to say, he must possess true beliefs, praiseworthy
ethics, and good deeds.

One may say that with his Allah-granted wisdom, man can distinguish
between good and bad and can recognize a well from a path.

It should be known, however, that wisdom alone cannot resolve this
difficulty and lead man to realism and benevolence. All these indecent
characteristics and unjust actions witnessed in the human society are
committed by those who possess wisdom and discernment, however, as a
result of selfishness, profit-seeking, and voluptuousness, their wisdom
has been overcome by their sentiments and they have succumbed to their
carnal desires, leading them astray.

Therefore, the Almighty Allah must lead and invite us to prosperity
through some other ways and through means which can never be overcome by
carnal desires and which never make blunders or mistakes in their
guidance. This path is nothing but the path of *Nubuwwah*.

The logic in Nubuwwah
---------------------

From what we have discussed about monotheism, it becomes evident that
since Allah creates everything, its fostering also depends upon Him. In
other words, the Almighty Allah is the organizer and leader of the
movement of any worldly creature or phenomenon that from the very
beginning of existence endeavors for its survival, strives to remove its
imperfections, eliminates its needs and shortcomings one after another,
makes itself independent and self-sufficient as much as possible, and
moves in an orderly manner in its path of survival and existence.

A definite conclusion can be drawn from this concept. That is to say,
any one of the various kinds of phenomena of the world has a specific
evolutionary process for its survival which is done by its special
endeavors. In other words, in the path of their survival, worldly
creatures of each particular group have a series of specific functions
assigned to them by Allah. As the Holy Qur'an, with reference to this
fact, states:

***"...Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided
it (to its goal) (20:50)."***

This order applies to all components of creation without any exception.
It includes the stars, the earth, their components, compositions that
generate primary phenomena, plants, and animals.

Man's condition is the same as others, in this universal guidance, but
there is a difference between him and others.

The Difference between Man and Other Creatures
----------------------------------------------

The earth has supposedly been created millions of years ago. It employs
all its hidden forces and endeavors in the environment of its existence
to the extent permitted by opposing forces. It displays the signs of its
entity in the field of its rotation and transitional movement, thus
maintaining its survival. Unless faced with a stronger opposing force,
it will continue this activity and will not fall short of carrying out
any of its functions.

For example, from the time an almond tree takes root from a seed until
it becomes a fully grown tree, it assumes duties, such as nourishing,
developing, etc (in other words, it performs these duties to pursue the
course of its existence.) It will never refrain from carrying them out
unless it is precluded by a stronger opposing force.

This process also applies to any other phenomenon. But mankind performs
his particular activities voluntarily and his actions originate from his
thoughts and determination. Many a time, man refrains from a task which
is entirely to his interests and which is not hindered by any opposing
force and undertakes a task which is entirely disadvantageous to him
knowingly and intentionally. Sometimes, he abstains from drinking
antidote and sometimes he drinks a cup of poison and kills himself.

It is certainly clear that the divine universal guidance will not be
compulsory for a creature born with free will. That is to say, the
prophets conveyed the message of the Almighty Allah on good and bad and
prosperity and wretchedness to the people and warned believers of
Allah's chastisement, but the believers have always been free to adopt
any one of them.

It is true that, in general, man perceives his good and bad and
advantage and disadvantage through his wisdom, but that very wisdom
often loses its keenness, follows carnal desires, and makes error.
Therefore, in addition to the medium of wisdom, divine guidance should
positively be achieved through a different medium, which is entirely
inviolable to sin and error. In other words, in addition to the medium
of wisdom, the Almighty Allah confirms His orders by another medium.

This medium is the same medium of prophethood by which the Almighty
Allah reveals His orders to one of His servants through *wahy* leading
mankind to prosperity. Allah appoints him to communicate His orders to
the people and to oblige them to follow the orders through hope,
despair, encouragement, and threat.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"Surely We have revealed to you as We revealed to Nuh (Noah), and the
prophets after him...(4:163)." "(We sent) messengers as the bearers of
good news and as warners, so that people should not have a plea against
Allah after the (coming of) messengers...(4:165)."***

Attributes of a Prophet
-----------------------

From what was discussed, it becomes clear that the Almighty Allah, with
His divine teachings, must have provided some of His servants with
intuitive knowledge and laws that guarantee man's prosperity and must
have sent them to lead the people.

A person who possesses divine messages is called a "*nabi* (prophet)"
and messenger of Allah and the entire set of messages from Allah which
he has brought to the people are called "religion".

It has also become clear that a prophet:

(1) Must be free and immune from error. In order to communicate what has
been revealed to him to the people without error and mistake, he should
be immune from forgetfulness and other mental weaknesses; otherwise,
divine guidance will not attain its goal and the general guidance rule
will forfeit its applicability and lose its power to influence people.

(2) Must be inviolable to error and sin both in deeds and speech,
because sinfulness has no effect in propagation. People do not esteem
the speech of a person whose manner and speech are at odds. They even
take his deeds for his mendacity and imposture by saying if he meant
what he said, he would act accordingly.

By bringing these two aspects together in one phrase, we can say that a
prophet must be inviolable to errors and sins to render preaching and
propagation effective. In His words, the Almighty Allah, too, refers to
this point and states:

***"The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any,
except to him whom He chooses as a messenger. for surely He makes a
guard to march before him and after him, so that He may know that they
have truly delivered the messages of their Lord...(72:26-28)."***

(3) Must possess moral virtues such as chastity, courage, justice, etc,
for these are considered as praiseworthy qualities. Anyone who is immune
to any sins and follows religion in a perfect manner will never be
blemished by moral vices.

Prophets among People
---------------------

History indicates that there were prophets among people who responded to
the call of Allah; however, the details of their life are not so clear.
Only the details of life of Prophet Muhammad (S) are devoid of
ambiguity. The Holy Qur'an, which is the divine book given to Prophet
(S), contains sublime religious aims, has clarified the call of the
prophets in the past and has described their goals and objectives.

The Holy Qur'an stipulates that many prophets have been, assigned by
Allah to lead the people, all of whom consistently invited the people to
monotheism and the true religion. As Allah states:

***"And We did not send before you any messenger but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me, therefore worship Me (21:25)."***


