The Incident of Monk Buhayra
============================

While the Holy Prophet (SA) lived with his uncle, Abu Talib, and while
he had not yet reached adolescence, Abu Talib set out for Damascus on
business and also took the Holy Prophet (SA) along.

It was a massive caravan and a great number of people travelled along
with a huge quantity of merchandise until they arrived in Syria and
entered the city of Busra. In the vicinity of a monastery, they pitched
a tent and took rest. A monk, whose title was "Buhayra", came out of the
monastery and invited them to a feast. Everybody accepted Buhayra's
invitation and entered the monastery. Leaving his nephew, Muhammad (SA)
with his belongings, Abu Talib also attended the feast along with
others.

Buhayra asked: "Is everybody present?" Abu Talib replied, "Everybody is
here except a youth who is the youngest of all." Buhayra said: "Bring
him along as well!" Abu Talib called on the Holy Prophet (SA) who was
standing under an olive tree and came to the monk.

Buhayra cast a deep glance at the Holy Prophet (SA) and said: "come a
little bit closer, I have something to tell you." Then, he took the Holy
Prophet (SA) aside. Abu Talib also went near them.

Buhayra told the Holy Prophet: "I am going to ask you a question and,
by swearing on Lat and 'Uzza, would you answer me" (Lat and 'uzza were
the names of two idols worshipped by the people of Makkah).

The Holy Prophet (SA) stated: "These two idols are the most hated ones
to me". Buhayra said: "By swearing on Allah, would you tell the truth".
The Holy Prophet said: "I always speak the truth and I have never told a
lie; you ask your question".

Buhayra asked: "What do you like the most"?

The Holy Prophet (SA) answered: "Loneliness".

Buhayra asked: "What do you look the most at and what do you like to
look at"?

The Holy Prophet said: "The sky and the stars within it".

Buhayra asked: "What do you think of"?

The Holy Prophet (SA) remained silent, but Buhayra carefully glanced at
his forehead.

Buhayra asked: "When do you sleep and with what thoughts"?

The Holy Prophet stated: "When I fix my eyes upon the sky, I see the
stars and I find them in my lap and myself above them".

Buhayra asked: "Do you see dream also"?

He stated: "Whatever I see in dream, the same I see while I am
awake."

Buhayra asked: "What do you dream of, as an example"?

The Holy Prophet (SA) kept quiet, Buhayra also kept quiet.

After a while, Buhayra asked: "May I take a look at the centre of your
shoulders"?

The Holy Prophet (SA), while standing still, stated: "Come and see."

Buhayra stood up, came closer, and pulled the dress of the Holy Prophet
(SA) off his shoulders. A mole appeared. Buhayra took a look and said in
a murmuring voice: "He is the very person".

Abu Talib asked: "Which one? What do you mean"?

Buhayra said: "Tell me, what is your relationship with this youth"?

Since Abu Talib loved the Holy Prophet (SA) as one of his own children,
he said: "He is my son".

Buhayra said: "No, the father of this youth must have died".

"How do you know"? said Abu Talib; "That is true, this youth is my
nephew".

Buhayra told Abu Talib "Listen, this youth will have a very bright and
astonishing future. If others see what I have seen and recognize him,
they will kill him. Hide and protect him from the enemies".

Abu Talib said: "Tell me, who is he"?

Buhayra replied: "His eyes bear the signs of the eyes of a prominent
prophet and a clear mark of prophethood is on his back".


**THE STORY OF MONK NESTORIUS**

After a few years, the Holy Prophet, acting as a representative, set
out for Damascus once again along with the merchandise belonging to
Khadijah al-Kubra. Khadijah sent her servant, Masirah, along with the
Holy Prophet (SA) and advised him to fully obey his orders. In this
trip, too, when they arrived in Syria, they landed under a tree in the
vicinity of the city of Busra. There was a monastery belonging to a monk
called "Nestorius" who was acquainted with Masirah.

Nestorius asked Masirah: "Who is the man resting underneath that
tree"?

Masirah replied: "He is a person from the family of Quraysh".

The monk said: "under this tree, no one but a prophet from among the
prophets of Allah has lodged or can lodge".

He added: "Is there redness in his eyes".

Masirah said: "Yes, his eyes are always like this".

The monk said: "That's it. He is the last prophet of the prophets of
Allah. I wish I could find out the day when he will invite the
people."


**GOOD TIDINGS GIVEN BY THE JEWS OF MADINAH**

Many Jewish tribes, having read about the attributes and location of
the Holy Prophet (SA) in their books, had left their homeland for Hijaz
and taken abode in Madinah and its suburbs, waiting for the advent of
the Holy Prophet (SA), the Ummi (unschooled). As they were a group of
wealthy and rich people, the Arabs used to disturb them from time to
time and robbed them of their belongings.

Complaining against the injustice of the Arabs, the Jews told them that
they would tolerate their cruelty and robbery until the migration of the
Ummi prophet from Makkah to Madinah. They said that on that day, they
would have their faith in him and would take vengeance on them. One of
the main factors that led to the rapid belief of the people of Madinah
in the Holy Prophet (SA) was the memory they had about these news.
Finally, they acknowledged their faith, but the Jews refrained from
believing in him due to their strong communalism and prejudice.

**QUR'AN'S REFERENCE TO PROPHETIC TIDINGS**

In His words the Almighty Allah refers to these good tidings in many
instances. Regarding the faith of a group of people endowed with a book,
the Qur'an states:

"Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet, the Ummi, whom they find written
down with them in the Tawrat and the Injl, (who) enjoins them good and
forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them the good things and makes
unlawful to them impure things, and removes from them their burden and
the shackles which were upon them...(7:157)."

Again, He states:

"And when there came to them a Book from Allah verifying that which
they already had, and aforetime they were seeking victory against those
who disbelieved - yet when there came to them that (Book) which they had
recognized, they disbelieved in it...(2:89)."

**FROM AL-BI'THAT AL-NABAWIYYAH TO THE HIJRAH**

In the gloomy atmosphere of the Arabian Peninsula that can literally be
called "the swamp of misery" and the centre of corruption and in a world
full of cruelty and injustice, the Almighty Allah appointed His Prophet
(SA) as a blessing for the people of the world and ordered him to invite
the people to Tawhid and worshipping the One Allah. He also ordered him
to call people to justice, righteousness, and strengthening their social
relations. Allah also ordered him to rise in observance of truth and
follow the path of the followers of righteousness and to lay the
foundation of man's prosperity on the basis of faith, piety,
cooperation, and self-sacrifice.

Initially, the Holy Prophet (SA) was charged with the responsibility of
inviting the people. Since the environment was full of obstinacy,
ruthlessness, and injustice, the Prophet (SA) talked his mission over
only with people who were more or less susceptible to conversion. Thus a
limited number of people believed in him and (according to narrations)
the first man was 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS), the son of his uncle and
educated by the Prophet (SA) himself, and the first woman was his wife
Khadijah al-Kubra (AS).

Then, Muhammad (SA) was commissioned to invite his close relatives and
companions (who were about forty people) to his house and described his
divine mission. Then, by the order of Allah, the Holy Prophet (SA)
proceeded to an overt and public invitation, thus bringing forward the
luminous torch of divine guidance from within the house to the arena of
the world.

The reaction of the Arabs, especially the people of Makkah, was very
severe against this invitation specifically after it was publicized.
Unbelievers and polytheists responded negatively, savagely, and in a
cruel way to this immaculate and pure invitation without using any
proper logic whatsoever.

Sometimes, they called the Holy Prophet (SA) a soothsayer and magician,
while at times they called him lunatic and poet and used to make fun of
him. Whenever he wanted to invite the people to the newly-grown religion
of Islam or wanted to worship Allah, the people used to make noise and
disrupt his actions. They threw garbage and thorns on his head and used
to beat and abuse him. Sometimes, they stoned him, while at times, they
tried to allure him by giving enticing and sweet promises such as of
wealth and leadership, so that through these means they could shake up
his resolution and determination. But the Holy Prophet (SA) displayed no
weakness and withdrawal. Sometimes, he regretted and became sad because
of the ignorance and stubbornness of his people. In this regard,
Qur'anic verses were frequently revealed by which the Almighty Allah
expressed His consolation to him and ordered him to be patient and
forbearing. Sometimes, verses were revealed to prohibit the Holy Prophet
(SA) from showing the least willingness to the remarks of the people or
from displaying any weakness and leniency.

Those who believed in the Holy Prophet (SA) were severely tortured and
punished by the kafirin. In many instances, they died under torture.
Sometimes, the matter became so serious that they were tortured to the
extreme and then they sought the permission of the Holy Prophet (SA) to
start a bloody movement and finalize their destinies. The Holy Prophet
(SA) said: "I do not have an order from the Almighty Allah in this
respect. You must wait". A group of people took their belongings with
them and left their homeland due to the heavy pressure on them.

After a while, things became much harder on the Muslims due to the
extreme torture. The Holy Prophet (SA) allowed his disciples to migrate
to Ethiopia to be relieved of the torture and harassment of their people
for a while. This group of people, led by Ja'far ibn Abi Talib, the
brother of 'Ali (AS) (Ja'far was one of the most trusted friends of the
Holy Prophet [SA]), migrated to Ethiopia along with their families.

After being informed of the Hijrah of the Muslims, the Kafirin of
Makkah sent two of their experienced men, along with a large number of
gifts and souvenirs, to the king of Ethiopia, requesting the extradition
of the immigrants of Makkah. Bu t with a speech delivered in the
presence of the king of Ethiopia, Ja'far ibn Abi Talib explained the
entirely illuminating personality of the Holy Prophet (SA) and the
sublime principles of Islam for the king, the Christian priests, and top
authorities present at the time. He also cited several Qur'anic verses
of Surah (Chapter) Maryam.

The immaculate statements of Ja'far ibn Abi Talib were so attractive
that the king and the audience started shedding tears. Thus the king
rejected the request of the people of Makkah and declined all gifts and
souvenirs sent to him. The king issued instructions to provide all means
of convenience, peace, and comfort for the immigrant Muslims in every
respect.

After this event, the Kafirin of Makkah decided to break their
relations with Banu Hashim (family of Hashim) who were the relatives of
the Holy Prophet (SA) and his followers. They also decided to totally
stop all relations, discourse, and transactions with them. In this
respect, they wrote a special agreement, got it signed by everyone, and
left it in Ka'bah.

Banu Hashim, accompanied by the Holy Prophet (SA), had to inevitably
leave Makkah and take refuge in a valley known as "Shi'b Abi Talib" and
lived there almost in utmost hardship and hunger. In this period, no one
dared to come out of the Shi'b. During the days, they had to endure the
burning heat and in the nights, they were faced with the wailing of
women and children.

After three years, as a result of the obliteration of the agreement and
because of the denouncement by the tribes settled around, the
unbelievers dispensed with their agreement and Banu Hashim came out of
their refuge.

But at that time, Abu Talib, who was the lone supporter of the Holy
Prophet (SA), and also Khadijah al-Kubra, the kind wife of the Holy
Prophet (SA), died. As a result, things became much harder for the Holy
Prophet (SA) and he was unable to appear in public or reveal his
identity to anyone, or stay in a specific place. Altogether, he had no
life-security.

**A TRIP TO TA'IF**

The year in which the Holy Prophet (SA) and Banu Hashim came out of the
Shi'b Abi Talib, was l3th year after al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah. The Holy
Prophet (SA) made a short trip to Ta'if (a city about 100 kilometres
from Makkah) at that time and invited the people of Ta'if to embrace
Islam. But the ignorant people of Ta'if attacked him from every place,
abused and stoned him, and at last drove him out of the city.

The Holy Prophet (SA) returned to Makkah from Ta'if and remained there
for a while. But since he had no security of his life, he did not appear
among the people. Since the circumstances were favourable to exterminate
the Holy Prophet (SA), the elders of Makkah assembled in Darun-Nadwah,
which was like a consultative assembly and hatched up the final plot in
a secret session to exterminate him once and for all. The plot was
designed to select one man from each Arab tribe. The selected men were
then to rush into the house of the Holy Prophet (SA) collectively and
kill him. The purpose of selecting one representative from each tribe
was to prevent the relatives of the Holy Prophet (SA) from rising in
revenge and from fighting with all those tribes who would direct the
murder. Also the participation of one person from Banu Hashim would also
keep the mouths of Banu Hashim shut regarding this matter.

This decision was finalized. About forty people from various tribes
were nominated to kill the Holy Prophet (SA). They surrounded his house
at night, so as to enter it at dawn in order to carry out their plot,
but the divine will was above the determination of these people and
thwarted their plans. The Almighty Allah sent His revelation to the Holy
Prophet (SA), informed him of their intention, and ordered him to come
out of Makkah at night itself and set out for Madinah.

The Holy Prophet (SA) informed 'Ali (AS) of the current situation,
ordered him to sleep in his place, and gave him his last wills. He left
the house at night and seeing Abu Bakr along the way, he took him also
along and set out for Madinah.

Some of the dignitaries of Madinah had already met the Holy Prophet
(SA) in Makkah and had expressed their faith prior to his Hijrah. They
had also made an agreement to support and vindicate the Holy Prophet
(SA), if he came to Madinah, just as they would defend their own life
and honour.


**THE HIJRAH OF THE HOLY PROPHET (SA)TO MADINAH**

The Holy Prophet (SA) reached a cave in Mount Thawr near Makkah and hid
there for three days. After three days, he left the cave and continued
his journey until he reached Madinah where he was welcomed by the people
of Madinah.

On the other side, the infidels of Makkah who had surrounded the house
of the Holy Prophet (SA) at night, dashed inside at dawn, and went to
his bed with their swords pulled out. They unexpectedly found 'Ali (AS)
sleeping in the bed of the Holy Prophet (SA). As soon as they found out
that the Holy Prophet (SA) had left Makkah, they began searching for him
around Makkah, but after a thorough search they returned with a great
disappointment.

The Holy Prophet (SA) stayed in Madinah where the people most willingly
converted to Islam and wholeheartedly supported him. The city of Madinah
turned into an Islamic city. Until then, this city was called "Yathrib",
but after this occurrence, it assumed the name of "Madinat al-Rasul"
(the City of Prophet) and became the first Islamic city. Of course,
although munafiqin (hypocrites), the Arab minorities of Madinah who
formed about one-third of the city's population, being scared of the
majority, pretended to be Muslims.

The sun of Islam began shining in the clear sky of Madinah and began
shedding its light. In the first place, the state of conflict which had
existed for many years between the two main tribes of Aws and Khazraj
turned into peace and compromise. The believers of Madinah encircled
like butterflies around the candle of prophetic mission. Gradually, the
tribes in the territory of Madinah embraced Islam and the divine
precepts descended one after the other and were implemented. Everyday
one of the roots of corruption and indecent behaviour was eradicated and
replaced by piety and justice. Gradually, the followers of Islam, who
had remained in Makkah after the Holy Prophet's (SA) Hijrah and were
under the harassment and severe torture by the unbelievers, left their
homes and fled to Madinah where they were received with warm hospitality
by their religious brethren.

Muslims who had remained in Makkah gradually migrated and gathered in
Madinah. These people were called muhajirin (immigrants) and the
believers in the city of Madinah were called "Ansar"(helpers).

There were many tribes of Jews in Madinah, its suburbs, Khaybar, and
Fadak whose information and scholars constantly notified the Arabs of
Madinah of the good tidings of the Holy Prophet's (SA) mission. But when
these tribes were invited to Islam after the Hijrah, they did not accept
this invitation and turned away from Islam. Finally, a non-aggression
treaty was signed between the Jews and Muslims with specific terms.

The rapid advancement of Islam seriously annoyed the unbelievers of
Makkah and increased their wrath and animosity towards the Holy Prophet
(SA) and the followers of Islam. They were after a pretext to disrupt
the unity of the followers of Islam. On the other hand, the followers of
Islam, too, especially the Muhajirin of Makkah who were quite unhappy
with the unbelievers, expected a divine permission to punish the cruel
unbelievers for their evil deeds and to liberate their women, innocent
children, and helpless old people living under persecution and torture
in Makkah.

**THE BATTLE OF BADR**

The first battle between the Muslims and the unbelievers of Makkah took
place at Badr (a valley between Makkah and Madinah) in the second year
of the Hijrah. In this battle, the number of fully equipped unbelievers
was about one thousand. The Muslims were about one-third of them and
lacked all necessary war equipment, but divine dispensation afforded the
Muslims a bright victory and defeated the unbelievers in the worst
possible way.

Suffering heavy casualties and many captives and losing their entire
stock of equipment in this battle, the mushrikin (polytheists) ran away
to Makkah. It is said that in this battle, seventy unbelievers were
killed, out of which almost half of them were killed by the sword of
'Ali (AS). Also seventy people from the unbelievers were taken as
captives.

**THE BATTLE OF UHUD**

In the third year of Hijrah, the unbelievers of Makkah, led by Abu
Sufyan again rushed towards Madinah with three thousand men (and
according to one narration with five thousand men). They confronted the
Muslims at Uhud outside Madinah. In this battle, the Holy Prophet (SA).
arrayed seven hundred Muslims to face the enemy. In the beginning of the
battle, the Muslims had the upper hand again, but after a few hours due
to the mistake of some Muslims, the army of Islam was defeated. At this
time, the unbelievers attacked from all sides and the Muslims suddenly
found themselves surrounded on all sides by the swords of unbelievers.

In this battle, the Muslims sustained heavy losses. Hamzah, the uncle
of the Holy Prophet (SA), along with seventy other disciples of the Holy
Prophet (SA) who were mostly Ansar were martyred. The forehead of the
Holy Prophet (SA) was wounded and one of his front teeth broke. One of
the unbelievers who inflicted a blow on the Holy Prophet's (SA) shoulder
shouted: "I killed Muhammad". Hearing this, the army of Islam dispersed.
Only 'Ali (AS), along with a few men, remained steadfastly near the Holy
Prophet (SA). All these were killed but 'Ali (AS) resisted the enemy
until the end of the battle and defended the Holy Prophet (SA).

On the last day, those who had fled away from the army of Islam
gathered around the Holy Prophet (SA) once more and prepared for battle.
But the army of Abu Sufyan, however, considered only that much success
as enough, stopped fighting, and set out for Madinah.

After travelling a few kilometres, the army of the unbelievers
seriously regretted why they had not pursued the battle to final victory
and why they had not taken Muslims' women and children as captives, and
plundered their properties. They even got busy with consultation to
attack Madinah once again, but received the information that the
information that the army of Islam was following them to continue the
battle. Having received this information, the unbelievers became
intimidated, gave up the idea of returning to Madinah, and hastily set
out for Makkah.

Surely what they had heard was true, because the Holy Prophet (SA), by
the order of Allah, had mobilized an army from the injured who were led
by 'Ali (AS) to follow the enemy.

Although the Muslims sustained heavy casualties in this battle, in
fact, it finished to the advantage of Islam and Muslims. The Muslims
drew a more important conclusion out of this battle and experienced the
inauspicious consequence of violating the order of the Holy Prophet
(SA). Having given up the battle, both the confronting sides promised to
fight another battle in Badr next year at the same time. The Holy
Prophet (SA), with a group of his disciples, went to Badr on time, but
the unbelievers refrained from coming.

After this battle, the Muslims became very well prepared and made
advancement on all sides in the peninsula except in the region of Makkah
and Ta'if.

**THE BATTLE OF KHANDAQ**

This was the third battle declared by the Arab unbelievers against the
Holy Prophet (SA). It was also the last battle under the leadership of
the people of Makkah. It was a very severe battle in which the
unbelievershad fully equipped themselves with their forces and powers.
In the history, this battle is known as the "Battle of Ahzab" and
"Khandaq".

After the battle of Uhud, the leaders of Makkah, led by Abu Sufyan,
decided to inflict the final blow upon the Holy Prophet (SA) to put off
the light of Islam for good. To this end, they instigated the Arab
tribes and asked for their cooperation and assistance. In spite of the
non-aggression treaty signed by the Jews and Muslims, the Jewish people
also had secretly involved themselves with the plot and violated the
treaty and signed a cooperation agreement with the unbelievers.

Thus, in the fifth year of Hijrah, a fully mobilized army comprising of
Quraysh, various Arab tribes, and Jewish people rushed to Madinah
totally equipped.

Having come to know of the intention of the enemy beforehand, the Holy
Prophet (SA) consulted his disciples over the matter. After a long
discussion, they dug a trench all around the city of Madinah according
to the proposal of Salman al-Farisi who was an intimate Companion of the
Holy Prophet (SA). They then got fortified within the city. After
reaching Madinah, the army of the enemy found no way to enter the city.
They inevitably besieged the city and started the battle in that
position. The siege and battle continued for sometime.


It was in this battle only that ' Amr ibn 'Abdwudd, a most renowned
equestrian and a most famous brave man of Arabia, was killed by the
powerful hands of 'Ali (AS). Finally, as a result of wind, cold, the
fatigue of the Arab idolaters from the extended duration of the siege,
and the difference and separation between the Jews and Arabs, the siege
got broken without any result; thus the army of the unbelievers
dispersed from around Madinah.

**BATTLE WITH THE JEWS - THE BATTLE OF KHAYBAR**

After the Battle of Khandaq, originally provoked by the Jews who
cooperated with the Arab unbelievers and who had openly breached their
treaty with Muslims, the Holy Prophet (SA) proceeded to punish the
Jewish tribes in Madinah by the order of Allah. He fought several
battles, all of which ended in the victory and triumph of Muslims. The
most important of these battles was the Battle of Khaybar. The Jews of
Khaybar had several fortifications in hand and a considerable number of
belligerents with adequate equipment at their disposal.

In this battle, 'Ali (AS) killed Marhab of Khaybar, the well-known hero
of the Jews, and dispersed the Jewish army. Afterwards, he rushed to the
Fort of Khaybar, unhinged its door, and entered the fort along with the
army of Islam. He then hoisted the banner of victory on its top. With
these very battles which ended in the fifth year of Hijrah, the problem
of the Jews of Hijaz came to an end.

**INVITING THE RULERS AND KINGS TO ISLAM**

The Holy Prophet (SA) settled in Madinah. Gradually, a great number of
the Muslims of Makkah, who were under the torture by the unbelievers,
relinquished their homes and belongings and migrated to Madinah. Ansar
also kept their promise and received them wholeheartedly.

The Holy Prophet (SA) constructed Masjid al-Nabi at Madinah. Other
mosques were also built. Missionaries of Islam were sent to the
outskirts and treaties were signed with Jewish tribes of Madinah and its
suburbs and also with some Arab tribes. Thus Islam began to flourish
with its enormous luminosity.

In the 6th year of the Hijrah, the Holy Prophet (SA) sent letters to
the rulers and kings such as the King of Iran, Qaysar (Caesar) of Rome,
Khedive of Egypt, and Al-Najashi (Negus) of Ethiopia and invited them to
embrace Islam.

After some time, the unbelievers of Makkah breached the treaty and, as
a result of this, the Holy Prophet (SA) decided to conquer Makkah. In
the 8th year of the Hijrah, the Holy Prophet (SA) rushed to Makkah with
ten thousand soldiers and conquered Makkah without any fighting and
bloodshed. He also toppled and broke many idols placed in Ka'bah. People
of Makkah accepted Islam. The Holy Prophet (SA) summoned all the leaders
of Makkah, who had in the last 20 years shown their animosity and
behaved inhumanely with him and his followers, and pardoned them all
with utmost magnanimity and without showing the slightest harshness and
moroseness.

**THE BATTLE OF HUNAYN**

After the conquest of Makkah, the Holy Prophet (SA) proceeded to clear
out the suburbs of the city and fought numerous battles with the Arab
idol-worshippers, one of which was the Battle of Hunayn.

The Battle of Hunayn was one of the most important battles of the Holy
Prophet (SA). It took place in the valley of Hunayn against the tribe of
Hawazin. The army of Islam, with twelve thousand soldiers, arrayed in
front of the army of Hawazin which was equipped with a few thousand men.
A heavy battle took place between them.

In the beginning of the battle, Hawazin severely defeated the Muslims,
so much so that everybody ran away, except Ali (AS) who was carrying the
banner of Islam and a few others, who fought in front of the Holy
Prophet (SA). But after a few hours, initially the Ansar and then other
Muslims returned to their bases and defeated the enemy after a very
heavy fighting. In this battle, five thousand enemies were taken as
captives by the Muslims, but all of them were released by the Muslims at
the request of the Holy Prophet (SA). The Holy Prophet (SA) bought the
share of the dissatisfied Muslims by paying them money and released
their captives.

**THE BATTLE OF TABUK**

In the 9th year of Hijrah, the Holy Prophet (SA) despatched an army to
Tabuk (located at the borders of Hijaz and Damascus) to fight a battle
with Rome, because the rumors had spread that the Qaysar of Rome was
preparing an army comprised of Romans and Arabs in that area. The Battle
of Mu'tah was previously fought there with Rome, leading to the
martyrdom of the commanders of the army of Islam such as Ja'far ibn Abi
Talib, Zayd ibn Harithah, and 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah.

The Holy Prophet (SA), with an army of thirty thousand soldiers,
proceeded towards Tabuk, but the people gathering there had dispersed
before the arrival of the army of Islam. The Holy Prophet (SA) stayed in
Tabuk for three days, cleared out that territory, and then returned to
Madinah.

**OTHER BATTLES**

Within ten years of his stay in Madinah, the Holy Prophet (SA) fought
almost eighty major and minor battles other than those previously
mentioned. The Holy Prophet (SA) personally participated in almost
one-fourth of the number of these battles.

In the battles in which he participated, unlike other commanders who
remained in shelters and only issued the orders for attacks and killing,
the Holy Prophet (SA) himself took part in the battlefield along with
other soldiers, but no occasion arose for him to embark upon killing
anyone.


