Ulul'azm Anbiya' (Arch-Prophets) and All Other Prophets
=======================================================

There were five prophets who had divine books and independent teachings.
They are referred to as *Nuh* (Noah) (as), *Ibrahim* (Abraham) (as),
*Musa*(Moses) (as), *'Isa* (Jesus) (as), and Muhammad (S) in the
following verse:

***"He has made plain to you of the religion what He enjoined upon Nuh
and that which We have revealed to you, and that which We enjoined upon
Ibrahim and Musa and 'Isa that keep to obedience and be not divided
therein... (42:13)."***

These five prophets, who have books and divine religious laws, are
called the *Ulul'azm* *Anbiya'* (arch-prophets). The messengers of
Allah, however, were not limited to these five prophets, rather each
*ummah* (people) had a messenger. Many prophets were sent by Allah to
lead the people, of whom only the names of less than twenty have been
mentioned in the Holy Qur'an.

The Almighty Allah states:

***"... There are some of them that We have mentioned to you and there
are others whom We have not mentioned to you...(40:78)."***

He also states:

***"And every ummah had a messenger...(10:47)."***

Allah states:

***"...And (there is) a guide for every people (13:7)."***

Yes, prophets, who came after each of the *Ulul'azm Anbiya'* invited
people to follow the divine religious laws of the same prophets. Thus,
prophetic mission and the call continued until Allah appointed the
Prophet Muhammad (S) ibn Abdillah to bring the previous prophetic
missions to perfection and to communicate the latest orders and the most
complete divine religious laws. His divine book became the last book and
consequently, the religion of Prophet Muhammad (S) will remain valid
until Qiyamah (Resurrection) and his religious laws will remain
everlasting.

(1) Prophet Nuh (as)
--------------------

Nuh (as) (Prophet Noah) was the first prophet appointed to prophetic
mission and sent towards mankind as bearer of divine religious laws and
a divine book by Allah, the Merciful.

Nuh (as) invited the people of those days to monotheism and belief in
the Oneness of Allah and asked them to refrain from polytheism and
idolatry. As evident from his stories in the Holy Qur'an, *Nuh* (as)
seriously struggled to settle class distinctions and to eradicate
injustice and cruelty. He notified the people of his teachings by way of
reasoning which was something new to the people of those days.

After a long period of suffering with ignorant, stubborn, and unruly
people, *Nuh* (as) guided only a small group of people. Thus, by means
of *Nuh's*(as) Deluge, the Almighty Allah annihilated unbelievers and
cleansed the earth of their defiled entity. *Nuh* (as) and a group of
his followers who were saved laid the cornerstone of a religious society
over again.

This Holy Prophet (S) is the founder of the religious laws of monotheism
and the first divine representative who struggled against cruelty,
injustice, and rebellion. Owing to his valuable services rendered to the
divine religion, he is allotted a praise and greeting by Allah, a praise
which will remain alive and perpetual as long as mankind exists.

***"Peace and salutation to Nuh among the nations (37:79)."***

(2) Prophet Ibrahim (as)
------------------------

A long time elapsed after Nuh. (as). Although many prophets, such as
Hud, Salih, and others also led the people towards Allah and
righteousness, the polytheism and idolatry flourished day by day and
finally became universal. By His sublime wisdom, the Almighty Allah
appointed Ibrahim (as) (Prophet Abraham) as a prophet.

Ibrahim (as) was a perfect example of a man with innate disposition who
searched for truth with his pure and immaculate nature. He found out the
oneness of Allah and struggled against polytheism and injustice all his
life.

As revealed by the Holy Qur'an and confirmed by the *ahadith* of the
Imams of *Ahl al-Bayt* (Members of the Household of the Prophet Muhammad
[SA]), Ibrahim (as) spent his childhood in a cave away from the clamours
of people and the tumultuous urban life. He only saw his mother who
carried food and water for him from time to time.

One day he came out of his cave and followed his mother to town and paid
a visit to his uncle, Adhar, but everything seemed new and interesting
to him. Amidst thousands of bewilderments and wonders and with utmost
impatience and calmness, his immaculate nature focused on the creation
of things that he saw, trying to find out the secret of their existence
and the cause of their creation. He saw idols which Adhar and others
carved and worshipped. Ibrahim (as) asked about their identity, but the
explanation he got about their divinity was not convincing. He saw a
group of people who worshipped Venus, others who worshipped the moon,
and yet another group who worshipped the sun. Their divinity was
unbelievable to Ibrahim (as) because each one of them set after a few
hours.

After these incidents, Ibrahim (as), fearlessly, announced his
worshipping of the Almighty Allah and his disgust of polytheism and
idolatry. He thought of nothing but struggle against idolatry and
polytheism. He struggled against idol-worshippers tirelessly and
relentlessly and invited them towards monotheism.

Finally, he found a way to the idol-temple and broke the idols. Because
of this deed, which people regarded as the greatest crime, Ibrahim (as)
was put to trial. After completion of the formalities, Ibrahim (as) was
thrown into the fire, but Allah saved him and he came out of the fire
unharmed.

After a while, Ibrahim (as) emigrated from his original birthplace,
Babylon, to Syria and Palestine and continued his invitation of
monotheism there.

In the last days of his life, he was blessed with two children: Ishaq
(as) (Prophet Isaac), the father of *Isra'il* (as) and *Isma'il* (as)
(Prophet Ishmael), the father of 'Arab Mudar. By the order of Allah,
*Isma'il* (as), in infancy, and his mother were taken to Hijaz by
*Ibrahim* (as). They settled around Mount Tuhamah in an arid and barren
land without inhabitants. In this manner, *Ibrahim* (as) invited the
nomadic Arabs to monotheism. Then he built Ka'bah and described the
rites of *Hajj* (pilgrimage to Makkah) which remained prevalent among
the Arabs until the advent of Islam and the call of Prophet Muhammad
(S).

Ibrahim (as) was endowed with the innate religion. According to the
explicit wording of the Holy Qur'an, he had a divine book. He was the
first person to call the divine religion as "Islam" and it's followers
as "Muslims". Indeed, the religions of the world advocating monotheism,
such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam terminate at Ibrahim (as),
because Musa (as), 'Isa (as), and Prophet Muhammad (S), the leaders of
the aforementioned three religions, were all the descendants of Ibrahim
(as) and had followed his path of call and invitation to monotheism.

(3) Prophet Musa (as)
---------------------

Musa (as) (Prophet Moses) ibn 'Imran is the third of the *Ulul'azm
Anbiya'*and is bestowed with a book and *shari'ah* (divine religious
laws). He was a descendant of *Isra'il* (as) or *Y'aqub* (as) (Prophet
Jacob).

Musa (as) had a tumultuous life. He was born at a time when the
Israelites were living in Egypt among Gipsies in a state of abjectness
and servitude and when their sons were beheaded by the order of
*Fir'awn* (Pharaoh[^1]).

The mother of Musa (as), according to the order given to her while
asleep, placed Musa (as), in a wooden box and left him in the Nile
River. The water carried the box directly to the castle of *Fir'awn*.

By the order of *Fir'awn*, the box was picked up. When they opened it,
they found a baby inside.

Because of the insistence of the queen, *Fir'awn* dispensed with killing
the child. Since they did not have a son, they adopted him as their own
son and put him under the care of a nurse (who was incidentally his own
mother)

Up to the early stages of his youth, Musa (as) lived in the palace of
*Fir'awn*. Then, after an accidental murder, fearing *Fir'awn*, he ran
away from Egypt. He went to Madyan and met Prophet *Shu'ayb* (Jethro)
(as). He married one of *Shu'ayb's* daughters and grazed his sheep for a
few years. After a few years, he reminisced about his birthplace, took
his wife with him, and set out for Egypt, carrying his belongings along.

On his way, when he reached Mount Sinai at night, he was assigned to
prophetic mission by the Almighty Allah. He was chosen by Allah to
invite *Fir'awn* to the religion of *Tawhid*, to liberate the Israelites
from the yoke of the Gipsies, and to designate his brother, Harun
(Aaron), as his minister. But after he announced his mission and
communicated the divine message, *Fir'awn* who was an idol-worshipper
and who had also introduced himself to the people of Egypt as one of the
gods, did not accept Musa's (as) prophetic mission and refused to grant
freedom to the Israelites.

Although for many years Musa (as) invited people to *tawhid* and showed
many miracles, *Fir'awn* and his people showed no reaction other than
toughness and moroseness. Finally, by the order of Allah, Musa (as)
emigrated the Israelites and went from Egypt to Sinai desert at night.
When they reached the Red sea, *Fir'awn*, too, came to know and chased
them with his army.

Through a miracle, Musa (as) split the water of the sea and crossed it
along with his people, but *Fir'awn* and his army were drowned. After
this event, Allah revealed the *Tawrat* to Musa (as) and established the
*Shari'ah* of Musa (as) among the Israelites.

(4) Prophet 'Isa (as)
---------------------

Prophet 'Isa (as) is the fourth of the *Ulul'azm Anbiya'* bestowed with
a book and *shari'ah*. The circumstances of his birth were unusual. His
mother,*Maryam*, a pious virgin, was worshipping Allah (in Jerusalem)
when*Ruhulqudus* or *Jibril* (Gabriel) descended from heavens, gave her
the good tidings of 'Isa's (as) birth; and by *Jibril's* breathing on
her sleeves, *Maryam*became pregnant with 'Isa (as).

After his birth, 'Isa (as) began to speak in the cradle in defence of
his m other against unfair calumnies attributed to her. He also informed
the people about his *Nubuwwah* and divine book (*Injil*). Later, in his
youth, he proceeded to invite the people and revived the *shari'ah* of
Musa (as) with minor modifications. He sent missionaries from among his
*hawaris*(disciples) to the surrounding places. After his call was
spread among the people, the Jews (his *ummah*) embarked on killing him,
but Allah saved him, and the Jews caught someone else in his place and
crucified him.

It should be pointed out here that the Almighty Allah, in the Holy
Qur'an, confirms a divine book called the *"Injil"* for 'Isa (as), which
was revealed to him. It is different from the Gospels written after
*'Isa* (as) about his life and call. Among them, four Gospels compiled
by Luke, Mark, Matthew, and John are formally recognized by Christians.

[^1]: In Egypt, kings were called "Pharaohs".


