Prophet Muhammad Ibn 'Abdillah (S)
==================================

The biography of our Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) ibn Abdillah is clearer
than those of all prophets preceding him, because as a result of the
lapse of time and historical changes, their books, *shari'ahs*, and even
their personalities have been distorted and their biographies have
become ambiguous.

In fact, there are no clear documents other than those imparted to us
through the divine book of Islam, *viz*, *Qur'an* and the speeches and
statements of Prophet Muhammad (S) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as). But there
is a clear history on the life of Prophet Muhammad (S) which describes
the characteristics of his life adequately.

The Holy Prophet (S) of Islam is the last prophet appointed by the
Almighty Allah to lead the people of the world.

Fourteen centuries ago, mankind lived in such a condition that nothing
was left of *Tawhid* except nominally and when people had completely
deviated from *Tawhid* and theism. Human manners and justice had died
away in their society. Holy Ka'bah had turned into an idol-temple and
the religion of Ibrahim (as) had converted into idolatry.

Arabs led a tribal life and even a few of their cities in Hijaz and
Yemen and elsewhere were governed in the same tribal manner. The Arabs
lived in the meanest and most backward conditions. Instead of culture
and civilization, they indulged in unchastity, sensuality, alcoholism,
and gambling. They buried their daughters alive. Most people subsisted
by Way of theft, banditry, murder, and plundering each other's
belongings, livestock, and cattle. Cruelty and bloodshed were regarded
as the greatest honors.

In such an environment, the compassionate Allah appointed Prophet
Muhammad (S) to reform and lead the people of the world. Allah revealed
the Holy Qur'an to him, consisting of divine education, theism, the ways
of implementation of justice, and beneficial advice. Allah commissioned
him to invite people toward humanity and adherence to the truth using
that divine authentic Book, Qur'an.

Prophet Muhammad (S) was born in the city of Makkah in 570 AD (53 years
before *Hijrah*) in the noblest and most honourable Arab family.

Muhammad's (S) father died before he was born. He lost h is mother when
he was six years old. After two years, his grandfather (Abdul Muttalib),
who was his guardian, died. Then the Prophet (S) was put under the
guardianship of his kind uncle, Abu Talib (the father of the Leader of
the Faithful, 'Ali [as]).

Abu Talib held him den just like one of his own children. Until a few
months before *Hijrah*, he always did his best for the protection and
support of Muhammad (S) and he was never negligent.

The Arabs of Makkah, like other Arabs, indulged in breeding sheep and
camels. They sometimes used to trade with neighboring countries,
especially with Syria. They were illiterate people who made no effort to
educate their children.

Like all his people, the Prophet (S), too, had not learnt to read and
write, but from the beginning of his life, he was privileged by having a
series of praiseworthy attributes. He never worshipped idols, lied, and
committed theft and treachery. He guarded against evil, disrespectful,
and indecent actions and was wise and efficient. Therefore, he gained
considerable popularity among the people within a short period and
became known as "Muhammad al-Amin" meaning "Muhammad the trustworthy".

The Arabs often entrusted him with their belongings and talked about his
honesty and efficiency. When he was about twenty years old, a wealthy
lady of Makkah, Khadijah al-Kubra, designated him as her representative
in commercial trade. As a result of his truthfulness, honesty, wisdom,
and efficiency, she earned a great deal of profit. She was naturally
attracted by the personality and magnanimity of the Holy Prophet (S)
more than ever and finally proposed to him for marriage. Afterwards also
for years, she continued commercial works with her husband.

Being considered as one of the people, the Holy Prophet (S) had an
ordinary association with people until the age of forty. Of course, he
differed from them in that he had a praiseworthy and decent behavior and
guarded against indecent deeds and conducts which had spoiled others. He
did not possess cruelty, hard-heartedness, and status consciousness,
thus had earned the respect and confidence of people.

It was such that when the Arabs were reconstructing the House of Ka'bah,
a quarrel and dispute arose among the tribes on the erection of
*Al-Hajar al-Aswad* (the Black Stone). The people unanimously chose the
Holy Prophet (S) as an arbitrator. He then ordered the people to spread
a cloak to place *Al-Hajar al-Aswad*within. The nobles of the tribes
lifted the sides of the cloak and the Holy Prophet (S) installed the
*Al-Hajar al-Aswad* in its place, thus bringing the conflict of the
people to an end without any massacre and bloodshed.

Before his *Al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah* (appointment for prophethood),
although the Holy Prophet (S) worshipped Allah and refrained from
idol-worshipping, the people did not bother about him because he did not
explicitly struggle against the superstitious beliefs of idolatry. The
same applied to those belonging to other religions such as Jews and
Christians, who lived respectfully among the Arabs without being
bothered by them.

The Incident of Monk Buhayra
----------------------------

While the Holy Prophet (S) lived with his uncle, Abu Talib, and while he
had not yet reached adolescence, Abu Talib set out for Damascus on
business and also took the Holy Prophet (S) along.

It was a massive caravan and a great number of people travelled along
with a huge quantity of merchandise until they arrived in Syria and
entered the city of Busra. In the vicinity of a monastery, they pitched
a tent and took rest. A monk, whose title was "Buhayra", came out of the
monastery and invited them to a feast. Everybody accepted Buhayra's
invitation and entered the monastery. Leaving his nephew, Muhammad (S)
with his belongings, Abu Talib also attended the feast along with
others.

Buhayra asked: "Is everybody present?" Abu Talib replied, "Everybody is
here except a youth who is the youngest of all." Buhayra said: "Bring
him along as well!" Abu Talib called on the Holy Prophet (S) who was
standing under an olive tree and came to the monk.

Buhayra cast a deep glance at the Holy Prophet (S) and said: "come a
little bit closer, I have something to tell you." Then, he took the Holy
Prophet (S) aside. Abu Talib also went near them.

Buhayra told the Holy Prophet: "I am going to ask you a question and, by
swearing on *Lat* and *'Uzza*, would you answer me" (*Lat* and *'uzza*
were the names of two idols worshipped by the people of Makkah).

The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "These two idols are the most hated ones to
me".

Buhayra said: "By swearing on Allah, would you tell the truth". The Holy
Prophet said: "I always speak the truth and I have never told a lie; you
ask your question".

Buhayra asked: "What do you like the most"?

The Holy Prophet (S) answered: "Loneliness".

Buhayra asked: "What do you look the most at and what do you like to
look at"?

The Holy Prophet said: "The sky and the stars within it".

Buhayra asked: "What do you think of"?

The Holy Prophet (S) remained silent, but Buhayra carefully glanced at
his forehead.

Buhayra asked: "When do you sleep and with what thoughts"?

The Holy Prophet stated: "When I fix my eyes upon the sky, I see the
stars and I find them in my lap and myself above them".

Buhayra asked: "Do you see dream also"?

He stated: "Whatever I see in dream, the same I see while I am awake."

Buhayra asked: "What do you dream of, as an example"?

The Holy Prophet (S) kept quiet, Buhayra also kept quiet.

After a while, Buhayra asked: "May I take a look at the centre of your
shoulders"?

The Holy Prophet (S), while standing still, stated: "Come and see."

Buhayra stood up, came closer, and pulled the dress of the Holy Prophet
(S) off his shoulders. A mole appeared. Buhayra took a look and said in
a murmuring voice: "He is the very person".

Abu Talib asked: "Which one? What do you mean"?

Buhayra said: "Tell me, what is your relationship with this youth"?

Since Abu Talib loved the Holy Prophet (S) as one of his own children,
he said: "He is my son".

Buhayra said: "No, the father of this youth must have died".

"How do you know"? said Abu Talib; "That is true, this youth is my
nephew".

Buhayra told Abu Talib "Listen, this youth will have a very bright and
astonishing future. If others see what I have seen and recognize him,
they will kill him. Hide and protect him from the enemies".

Abu Talib said: "Tell me, who is he"?

Buhayra replied: "His eyes bear the signs of the eyes of a prominent
prophet and a clear mark of prophethood is on his back".

The Story of Monk Nestorius
---------------------------

After a few years, the Holy Prophet, acting as a representative, set out
for Damascus once again along with the merchandise belonging to Khadijah
al-Kubra. Khadijah sent her servant, Masirah, along with the Holy
Prophet (S) and advised him to fully obey his orders. In this trip, too,
when they arrived in Syria, they landed under a tree in the vicinity of
the city of Busra. There was a monastery belonging to a monk called
"Nestorius" who was acquainted with Masirah.

Nestorius asked Masirah: "Who is the man resting underneath that tree"?

Masirah replied: "He is a person from the family of Quraysh".

The monk said: "under this tree, no one but a prophet from among the
prophets of Allah has lodged or can lodge".

He added: "Is there redness in his eyes".

Masirah said: "Yes, his eyes are always like this".

The monk said: "That's it. He is the last prophet of the prophets of
Allah. I wish I could find out the day when he will invite the people."

Good Tidings Given By The Jews Of Madinah
-----------------------------------------

Many Jewish tribes, having read about the attributes and location of the
Holy Prophet (S) in their books, had left their homeland for Hijaz and
taken abode in Madinah and its suburbs, waiting for the advent of the
Holy Prophet (S), the *Ummi* (unschooled). As they were a group of
wealthy and rich people, the Arabs used to disturb them from time to
time and robbed them of their belongings.

Complaining against the injustice of the Arabs, the Jews told them that
they would tolerate their cruelty and robbery until the migration of the
*Ummi* prophet from Makkah to Madinah. They said that on that day, they
would have their faith in him and would take vengeance on them. One of
the main factors that led to the rapid belief of the people of Madinah
in the Holy Prophet (S) was the memory they had about these news.
Finally, they acknowledged their faith, but the Jews refrained from
believing in him due to their strong communalism and prejudice.

Qur'an's Reference to Prophetic Tidings
---------------------------------------

In His words the Almighty Allah refers to these good tidings in many
instances. Regarding the faith of a group of people endowed with a book,
the Qur'an states:

***"Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet, the Ummi, whom they find
written down with them in the Tawrat and the Injl, (who) enjoins them
good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them the good things and
makes unlawful to them impure things, and removes from them their burden
and the shackles which were upon them...(7:157)."***

Again, He states:

***"And when there came to them a Book from Allah verifying that which
they already had, and aforetime they were seeking victory against those
who disbelieved - yet when there came to them that (Book) which they had
recognized, they disbelieved in it...(2:89)."***

From Al-Bi'that Al-Nabawiyyah to The Hijrah
-------------------------------------------

In the gloomy atmosphere of the Arabian Peninsula that can literally be
called "the swamp of misery" and the centre of corruption and in a world
full of cruelty and injustice, the Almighty Allah appointed His Prophet
(S) as a blessing for the people of the world and ordered him to invite
the people to *Tawhid* and worshipping the One Allah.

He also ordered him to call people to justice, righteousness, and
strengthening their social relations. Allah also ordered him to rise in
observance of truth and follow the path of the followers of
righteousness and to lay the foundation of man's prosperity on the basis
of faith, piety, cooperation, and self-sacrifice.

Initially, the Holy Prophet (S) was charged with the responsibility of
inviting the people. Since the environment was full of obstinacy,
ruthlessness, and injustice, the Prophet (S) talked his mission over
only with people who were more or less susceptible to conversion. Thus a
limited number of people believed in him and (according to narrations)
the first man was 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), the son of his uncle and
educated by the Prophet (S) himself, and the first woman was his wife
Khadijah al-Kubra (as).

Then, Muhammad (S) was commissioned to invite his close relatives and
companions (who were about forty people) to his house and described his
divine mission. Then, by the order of Allah, the Holy Prophet (S)
proceeded to an overt and public invitation, thus bringing forward the
luminous torch of divine guidance from within the house to the arena of
the world.

The reaction of the Arabs, especially the people of Makkah, was very
severe against this invitation specifically after it was publicized.
Unbelievers and polytheists responded negatively, savagely, and in a
cruel way to this immaculate and pure invitation without using any
proper logic whatsoever.

Sometimes, they called the Holy Prophet (S) a soothsayer and magician,
while at times they called him lunatic and poet and used to make fun of
him. Whenever he wanted to invite the people to the newly-grown religion
of Islam or wanted to worship Allah, the people used to make noise and
disrupt his actions.

They threw garbage and thorns on his head and used to beat and abuse
him. Sometimes, they stoned him, while at times they tried to allure him
by giving enticing and sweet promises such as of wealth and leadership,
so that through these means they could shake up his resolution and
determination. But the Holy Prophet (S) displayed no weakness and
withdrawal. Sometimes, he regretted and became sad because of the
ignorance and stubbornness of his people.

In this regard, Qur'anic verses were frequently revealed by which the
Almighty Allah expressed His consolation to him and ordered him to be
patient and forbearing. Sometimes, verses were revealed to prohibit the
Holy Prophet (S) from showing the least willingness to the remarks of
the people or from displaying any weakness and leniency.

Those who believed in the Holy Prophet (S) were severely tortured and
punished by the *kafirin*. In many instances, they died under torture.
Sometimes, the matter became so serious that they were tortured to the
extreme and then they sought the permission of the Holy Prophet (S) to
start a bloody movement and finalize their destinies. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: "I do not have an order from the Almighty Allah in this
respect. You must wait". A group of people took their belongings with
them and left their homeland due to the heavy pressure on them.

After a while, things became much harder on the Muslims due to the
extreme torture. The Holy Prophet (S) allowed his disciples to migrate
to Ethiopia to be relieved of the torture and harassment of their people
for a while. This group of people, led by Ja'far ibn Abi Talib, the
brother of 'Ali (as) (Ja'far was one of the most trusted friends of the
Holy Prophet [SA]), migrated to Ethiopia along with their families.

After being informed of the *Hijrah* of the Muslims, the *Kafirin* of
Makkah sent two of their experienced men, along with a large number of
gifts and souvenirs, to the king of Ethiopia, requesting the extradition
of the immigrants of Makkah. Bu t with a speech delivered in the
presence of the king of Ethiopia, Ja'far ibn Abi Talib explained the
entirely illuminating personality of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
sublime principles of Islam for the king, the Christian priests, and top
authorities present at the time. He also cited several Qur'anic verses
of *Surah* (Chapter) Maryam.

The immaculate statements of Ja'far ibn Abi Talib were so attractive
that the king and the audience started shedding tears. Thus the king
rejected the request of the people of Makkah and declined all gifts and
souvenirs sent to him. The king issued instructions to provide all means
of convenience, peace, and comfort for the immigrant Muslims in every
respect.

After this event, the *Kafirin* of Makkah decided to break their
relations with *Banu Hashim* (family of Hashim) who were the relatives
of the Holy Prophet (S) and his followers. They also decided to totally
stop all relations, discourse, and transactions with them. In this
respect, they wrote a special agreement, got it signed by everyone, and
left it in Ka'bah.

*Banu Hashim*, accompanied by the Holy Prophet (S), had to inevitably
leave Makkah and take refuge in a valley known as *"Shi'b Abi Talib"*
and lived there almost in utmost hardship and hunger. In this period, no
one dared to come out of the *Shi'b*. During the days, they had to
endure the burning heat and in the nights, they were faced with the
wailing of women and children.

After three years, as a result of the obliteration of the agreement and
because of the denouncement by the tribes settled around, the
unbelievers dispensed with their agreement and *Banu Hashim* came out of
their refuge.

But at that time, Abu Talib, who was the lone supporter of the Holy
Prophet (S), and also Khadijah al-Kubra, the kind wife of the Holy
Prophet (S), died. As a result, things became much harder for the Holy
Prophet (S) and he was unable to appear in public or reveal his identity
to anyone, or stay in a specific place. Altogether, he had no
life-security.

A Trip to Ta'if
---------------

The year in which the Holy Prophet (S) and Banu Hashim came out of the
*Shi'b* *Abi Talib*, was l3th year after *al-Bi'that al-Nabawiyyah*. The
Holy Prophet (S) made a short trip to Ta'if (a city about 100 kilometers
from Makkah) at that time and invited the people of Ta'if to embrace
Islam. But the ignorant people of Ta'if attacked him from every place,
abused and stoned him, and at last drove him out of the city.

The Holy Prophet (S) returned to Makkah from Ta'if and remained there
for a while. But since he had no security of his life, he did not appear
among the people. Since the circumstances were favorable to exterminate
the Holy Prophet (S), the elders of Makkah assembled in Darun-Nadwah,
which was like a consultative assembly and hatched up the final plot in
a secret session to exterminate him once and for all.

The plot was designed to select one man from each Arab tribe. The
selected men were then to rush into the house of the Holy Prophet (S)
collectively and kill him. The purpose of selecting one representative
from each tribe was to prevent the relatives of the Holy Prophet (S)
from rising in revenge and from fighting with all those tribes who would
direct the murder. Also the participation of one person from Banu Hashim
would also keep the mouths of Banu Hashim shut regarding this matter.

This decision was finalized. About forty people from various tribes were
nominated to kill the Holy Prophet (S). They surrounded his house at
night, so as to enter it at dawn in order to carry out their plot, but
the divine will was above the determination of these people and thwarted
their plans. The Almighty Allah sent His revelation to the Holy Prophet
(S), informed him of their intention, and ordered him to come out of
Makkah at night itself and set out for Madinah.

The Holy Prophet (S) informed 'Ali (as) of the current situation,
ordered him to sleep in his place, and gave him his last wills. He left
the house at night and seeing Abu Bakr along the way, he took him also
along and set out for Madinah.

Some of the dignitaries of Madinah had already met the Holy Prophet (S)
in Makkah and had expressed their faith prior to his *Hijrah*. They had
also made an agreement to support and vindicate the Holy Prophet (S), if
he came to Madinah, just as they would defend their own life and honor.

The Hijrah of the Holy Prophet (S) To Madinah
---------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) reached a cave in Mount Thawr near Makkah and hid
there for three days. After three days, he left the cave and continued
his journey until he reached Madinah where he was welcomed by the people
of Madinah.

On the other side, the infidels of Makkah who had surrounded the house
of the Holy Prophet (S) at night, dashed inside at dawn, and went to his
bed with their swords pulled out. They unexpectedly found 'Ali (as)
sleeping in the bed of the Holy Prophet (S). As soon as they found out
that the Holy Prophet (S) had left Makkah, they began searching for him
around Makkah, but after a thorough search they returned with a great
disappointment.

The Holy Prophet (S) stayed in Madinah where the people most willingly
converted to Islam and wholeheartedly supported him. The city of Madinah
turned into an Islamic city. Until then, this city was called "Yathrib",
but after this occurrence, it assumed the name of "Madinat al-Rasul"
(the City of Prophet) and became the first Islamic city. Of course,
although *munafiqin* (hypocrites), the Arab minorities of Madinah who
formed about one-third of the city's population, being scared of the
majority, pretended to be Muslims.

The sun of Islam began shining in the clear sky of Madinah and began
shedding its light. In the first place, the state of conflict which had
existed for many years between the two main tribes of *Aws* and
*Khazraj* turned into peace and compromise. The believers of Madinah
encircled like butterflies around the candle of prophetic mission.
Gradually, the tribes in the territory of Madinah embraced Islam and the
divine precepts descended one after the other and were implemented.

Everyday one of the roots of corruption and indecent behavior was
eradicated and replaced by piety and justice. Gradually, the followers
of Islam, who had remained in Makkah after the Holy Prophet's (S)
*Hijrah* and were under the harassment and severe torture by the
unbelievers, left their homes and fled to Madinah where they were
received with warm hospitality by their religious brethren.

Muslims who had remained in Makkah gradually migrated and gathered in
Madinah. These people were called muhajirin (immigrants) and the
believers in the city of Madinah were called *"Ansar"*(helpers).

There were many tribes of Jews in Madinah, its suburbs, Khaybar, and
Fadak whose information and scholars constantly notified the Arabs of
Madinah of the good tidings of the Holy Prophet's (S) mission. But when
these tribes were invited to Islam after the *Hijrah*, they did not
accept this invitation and turned away from Islam. Finally, a
non-aggression treaty was signed between the Jews and Muslims with
specific terms.

The rapid advancement of Islam seriously annoyed the unbelievers of
Makkah and increased their wrath and animosity towards the Holy Prophet
(S) and the followers of Islam. They were after a pretext to disrupt the
unity of the followers of Islam. On the other hand, the followers of
Islam, too, especially the *Muhajirin* of Makkah who were quite unhappy
with the unbelievers, expected a divine permission to punish the cruel
unbelievers for their evil deeds and to liberate their women, innocent
children, and helpless old people living under persecution and torture
in Makkah.

The Battle of Badr
------------------

The first battle between the Muslims and the unbelievers of Makkah took
place at Badr (a valley between Makkah and Madinah) in the second year
of the *Hijrah*. In this battle, the number of fully equipped
unbelievers was about one thousand. The Muslims were about one-third of
them and lacked all necessary war equipment, but divine dispensation
afforded the Muslims a bright victory and defeated the unbelievers in
the worst possible way.

Suffering heavy casualties and many captives and losing their entire
stock of equipment in this battle, the *mushrikin* (polytheists) ran
away to Makkah. It is said that in this battle, seventy unbelievers were
killed, out of which almost half of them were killed by the sword of
'Ali (as). Also seventy people from the unbelievers were taken as
captives.

The Battle of Uhud
------------------

In the third year of *Hijrah*, the unbelievers of Makkah, led by Abu
Sufyan again rushed towards Madinah with three thousand men (and
according to one narration with five thousand men). They confronted the
Muslims at Uhud outside Madinah. In this battle, the Holy Prophet (S)
arrayed seven hundred Muslims to face the enemy. In the beginning of the
battle, the Muslims had the upper hand again, but after a few hours due
to the mistake of some Muslims, the army of Islam was defeated. At this
time, the unbelievers attacked from all sides and the Muslims suddenly
found themselves surrounded on all sides by the swords of unbelievers.

In this battle, the Muslims sustained heavy losses. Hamzah, the uncle of
the Holy Prophet (S), along with seventy other disciples of the Holy
Prophet (S) who were mostly Ansar were martyred. The forehead of the
Holy Prophet (S) was wounded and one of his front teeth broke.

One of the unbelievers who inflicted a blow on the Holy Prophet's (S)
shoulder shouted: "I killed Muhammad". Hearing this, the army of Islam
dispersed. Only 'Ali (as), along with a few men, remained steadfastly
near the Holy Prophet (S). All these were killed but 'Ali (as) resisted
the enemy until the end of the battle and defended the Holy Prophet (S).

On the last day, those who had fled away from the army of Islam gathered
around the Holy Prophet (S) once more and prepared for battle. But the
army of Abu Sufyan, however, considered only that much success as
enough, stopped fighting, and set out for Madinah.

After travelling a few kilometers, the army of the unbelievers seriously
regretted why they had not pursued the battle to final victory and why
they had not taken Muslims' women and children as captives, and
plundered their properties.

They even got busy with consultation to attack Madinah once again, but
received the information that the information that the army of Islam was
following them to continue the battle. Having received this information,
the unbelievers became intimidated, gave up the idea of returning to
Madinah, and hastily set out for Makkah.

Surely what they had heard was true, because the Holy Prophet (S), by
the order of Allah, had mobilized an army from the injured who were led
by 'Ali (as) to follow the enemy.

Although the Muslims sustained heavy casualties in this battle, in fact,
it finished to the advantage of Islam and Muslims. The Muslims drew a
more important conclusion out of this battle and experienced the
inauspicious consequence of violating the order of the Holy Prophet (S).
Having given up the battle, both the confronting sides promised to fight
another battle in Badr next year at the same time. The Holy Prophet (S),
with a group of his disciples, went to Badr on time, but the unbelievers
refrained from coming.

After this battle, the Muslims became very well prepared and made
advancement on all sides in the peninsula except in the region of Makkah
and Ta'if.

The Battle of Khandaq
---------------------

This was the third battle declared by the Arab unbelievers against the
Holy Prophet (S). It was also the last battle under the leadership of
the people of Makkah. It was a very severe battle in which the
unbelievers had fully equipped themselves with their forces and powers.
In the history, this battle is known as the "Battle of Ahzab" and
"Khandaq".

After the battle of Uhud, the leaders of Makkah, led by Abu Sufyan,
decided to inflict the final blow upon the Holy Prophet (S) to put off
the light of Islam for good. To this end, they instigated the Arab
tribes and asked for their cooperation and assistance.

In spite of the non-aggression treaty signed by the Jews and Muslims,
the Jewish people also had secretly involved themselves with the plot
and violated the treaty and signed a cooperation agreement with the
unbelievers.

Thus, in the fifth year of *Hijrah*, a fully mobilized army comprising
of Quraysh, various Arab tribes, and Jewish people rushed to Madinah
totally equipped.

Having come to know of the intention of the enemy beforehand, the Holy
Prophet (S) consulted his disciples over the matter. After a long
discussion, they dug a trench all around the city of Madinah according
to the proposal of Salman al-Farisi who was an intimate Companion of the
Holy Prophet (S). They then got fortified within the city. After
reaching Madinah, the army of the enemy found no way to enter the city.
They inevitably besieged the city and started the battle in that
position. The siege and battle continued for sometime.

It was in this battle only that ' Amr ibn 'Abdwudd, a most renowned
equestrian and a most famous brave man of Arabia, was killed by the
powerful hands of 'Ali (as). Finally, as a result of wind, cold, the
fatigue of the Arab idolaters from the extended duration of the siege,
and the difference and separation between the Jews and Arabs, the siege
got broken without any result; thus the army of the unbelievers
dispersed from around Madinah.

Battle with The Jews, The Battle Of Khaybar
-------------------------------------------

After the Battle of Khandaq, originally provoked by the Jews who
cooperated with the Arab unbelievers and who had openly breached their
treaty with Muslims, the Holy Prophet (S) proceeded to punish the Jewish
tribes in Madinah by the order of Allah. He fought several battles, all
of which ended in the victory and triumph of Muslims. The most important
of these battles was the Battle of Khaybar. The Jews of Khaybar had
several fortifications in hand and a considerable number of belligerents
with adequate equipment at their disposal.

In this battle, 'Ali (as) killed Marhab of Khaybar, the well-known hero
of the Jews, and dispersed the Jewish army. Afterwards, he rushed to the
Fort of Khaybar, unhinged its door, and entered the fort along with the
army of Islam. He then hoisted the banner of victory on its top. With
these very battles which ended in the fifth year of *Hijrah*, the
problem of the Jews of Hijaz came to an end.

Inviting The Rulers And Kings To Islam
--------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) settled in Madinah. Gradually, a great number of
the Muslims of Makkah, who were under the torture by the unbelievers,
relinquished their homes and belongings and migrated to Madinah. Ansar
also kept their promise and received them wholeheartedly.

The Holy Prophet (S) constructed *Masjid al-Nabi* at Madinah. Other
mosques were also built. Missionaries of Islam were sent to the
outskirts and treaties were signed with Jewish tribes of Madinah and its
suburbs and also with some Arab tribes. Thus Islam began to flourish
with its enormous luminosity.

In the 6th year of the *Hijrah*, the Holy Prophet (S) sent letters to
the rulers and kings such as the King of Iran, Qaysar (Caesar) of Rome,
Khedive of Egypt, and Al-Najashi (Negus) of Ethiopia and invited them to
embrace Islam.

After some time, the unbelievers of Makkah breached the treaty and, as a
result of this, the Holy Prophet (S) decided to conquer Makkah. In the
8th year of the *Hijrah*, the Holy Prophet (S) rushed to Makkah with ten
thousand soldiers and conquered Makkah without any fighting and
bloodshed. He also toppled and broke many idols placed in Ka'bah.

People of Makkah accepted Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) summoned all the
leaders of Makkah, who had in the last 20 years shown their animosity
and behaved inhumanely with him and his followers, and pardoned them all
with utmost magnanimity and without showing the slightest harshness and
moroseness.

The Battle of Hunayn
--------------------

After the conquest of Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) proceeded to clear
out the suburbs of the city and fought numerous battles with the Arab
idol-worshippers, one of which was the Battle of Hunayn.

The Battle of Hunayn was one of the most important battles of the Holy
Prophet (S). It took place in the valley of Hunayn against the tribe of
Hawazin. The army of Islam, with twelve thousand soldiers, arrayed in
front of the army of Hawazin which was equipped with a few thousand men.
A heavy battle took place between them.

In the beginning of the battle, Hawazin severely defeated the Muslims,
so much so that everybody ran away, except Ali (as) who was carrying the
banner of Islam and a few others, who fought in front of the Holy
Prophet (S). But after a few hours, initially the Ansar and then other
Muslims returned to their bases and defeated the enemy after a very
heavy fighting. In this battle, five thousand enemies were taken as
captives by the Muslims, but all of them were released by the Muslims at
the request of the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) bought the
share of the dissatisfied Muslims by paying them money and releasing
their captives.

The Battle of Tabuk
-------------------

In the 9th year of Hijrah, the Holy Prophet (S) dispatched an army to
Tabuk (located at the borders of *Hijaz* and Damascus) to fight a battle
with Rome, because the rumors had spread that the Qaysar of Rome was
preparing an army comprised of Romans and Arabs in that area. The Battle
of Mu'tah was previously fought there with Rome, leading to the
martyrdom of the commanders of the army of Islam such as Ja'far ibn Abi
Talib, Zayd ibn Harithah, and 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah.

The Holy Prophet (S), with an army of thirty thousand soldiers,
proceeded towards Tabuk, but the people gathering there had dispersed
before the arrival of the army of Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) stayed in
Tabuk for three days, cleared out that territory, and then returned to
Madinah.

Other Battles
-------------

Within ten years of his stay in Madinah, the Holy Prophet (S) fought
almost eighty major and minor battles other than those previously
mentioned. The Holy Prophet (S) personally participated in almost
one-fourth of the number of these battles.

In the battles in which he participated, unlike other commanders who
remained in shelters and only issued the orders for attacks and killing,
the Holy Prophet (S) himself took part in the battlefield along with
other soldiers, but no occasion arose for him to embark upon killing
anyone.

Ghadir Khumm and the Issue of Succession
----------------------------------------

Makkah was the last city whose conquest led to the absolute domination
of Islam over the Arabian Peninsula. It has the *Haram* (Sacred
premises) of Allah and the site of Ka'bah. This city fell in the hands
of the army of Islam in the 8th year of *Hijrah*. Shortly afterwards,
the city of Ta'if was also conquered.

In the 10th year of *Hijrah*, the Holy Prophet (S) set out for Makkah to
perform the *Hijjatul Wada'* (last *Hajj*). After performing the *Hajj*
manasik (rituals) and giving necessary instructions to the people, the
Holy Prophet (S) headed for Madinah. In the course of his journey, he
ordered to stop the caravan at a place called *"Ghadir* (Pond) *Khumm."*

Among one hundred and twenty thousand *Hujjaj* (pilgrims) who had
gathered for *Hajj* from all parts of the Arabian Peninsula, the Holy
Prophet (S) took 'Ali's hand in his own, lifted him up, and announced
his *Imamah* (succession of Prophet Muhammad [SA]).

By this action, the matter of succession, which controls the affairs of
the Muslims, guards the Book and *ahadih*, and protects the divine
instructions and laws, was resolved. Thus the order given by Allah in
the following *Ayah* was executed:

***"O Messenger! deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His
message;...(5:67)"***

Shortly, after returning to Madinah, the Holy Prophet (S) passed away.

The Settlement of The Holy Prophet (S) In Madinah And The Advancement Of Islam
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The invitation of the Holy Prophet (S) to Islam was widely extended in
Madinah and it had embraced every home, association, district, and
quarter. The people embraced Islam in groups and multitudes in such a
way that the people in Makkah, Madinah, and all the tribes in the
surrounding areas submitted to Islam. During the ten years of the Holy
Prophet's (S) stay in Madinah, absolute domination of Islam established
in the entire Arabian Peninsula.

In these ten years, the Holy Prophet (S) was preoccupied with carrying
out his mission and never took rest.

He received *wahy* and taught the people the sublime teachings of Islam
concerning education, ethics, and laws revealed to him by the Almighty
Allah. The Holy Prophet (S) gave people the necessary advice, answered
their questions, discussed and debated with the opponents and scholars
of various nations especially those of the Jews, and managed the affairs
of the country, thus enabling the people to administer lives.

In spite of all these preoccupations, the Holy Prophet (S) devoted a
considerable part of his time for worshipping Allah. He observed *Sawm*
on many days of the year, that is to say, he observed *Sawm* almost
continuously during the three consecutive months of Rajab, Sha'ban, and
Ramadhan and also observed *Sawm* for about a month on different
occasions during the year.

Sometimes, the Holy Prophet (S) observed the *Sawmul Wisal* (continuous
fasting) which was one of his special characteristics, i.e., he did not
take anything for several consecutive days and nights. He used to spend
some of his time in the management of household affairs and necessities
of life. Also, at times, he spent his time to earn his subsistence.

The Almighty Allah has briefly mentioned the events of these ten years
in His words:

***"They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse
(61:8)"***

Allah is the One who has sent His messenger with divine guidance and
true religion to the people to make His religion dominant over all other
religions and faiths, even if this is unpleasant for the polytheists.

As it is evident, this divine promise had been well realized during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S) and after his passing away to the
present day when more than one billion Muslims live all over the world.

He also states:

***"You are the best of the ummahs (peoples) raised up for (the benefit
of) men; you enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in
Allah ... (3:100)"***


