A Glance at The Intellectual and Spiritual Personality of The Holy Prophet (S)
==============================================================================

According to authentic historical documents, the Holy Prophet (S) was
brought up in an atmosphere which was the meanest environment for living
and was the centre of ignorance, corruption, and moral vices. In such an
environment and without academic education, the Holy Prophet (S) spent
the period of his infancy and youth.

Although the Holy Prophet (S) never worshipped an idol and was never
involved with inhumane demeanors; nevertheless, he was among such
people, and his ordinary life did not indicate such an eventful future;
indeed it was unbelievable on the part of a poor, unschooled, and
inexperienced orphan.

The Holy Prophet (S) spent some time in this way until during one night,
while worshipping Allah with usual peace of mind and freedom from
worldly affairs, he suddenly gained a different personality.

His quiet inner personality converted into a divine one. The Holy
Prophet (S) regarded the thoughts and beliefs of thousands of years of
human societies as superstitious. With his realistic views, he
considered the customs and rites of the inhabitants of the world as
cruel and unjust. He linked the past and the future of the world and
fully recognized the path of man's prosperity. His observations and
vision changed totally.

He did not see or hear anything except the truth and reality. He began
to speak of divine and heavenly words, wisdom, and guidance. His natural
state of mind which was occupied with reforming daily routines in a poor
atmosphere of trade and transaction grew stronger and, so he embarked on
reforming the world and its inhabitants and subverting the thousands of
years old organization of human aberration and cruelty.

He rose to revive the truth and reality all by himself and challenged
the terrifying and intense opposing forces of the world as if they were
nothing. He talked about divine teachings and derived all the realities
of existence from the Oneness of the Creator of the world.

The Holy Prophet (S) described the sublime human ethics in the best
possible manner and comprehended and clarified their relationships. He
first believed what he said to anyone else. Also, he first carried out
whatever he asked the people to do.

The religious laws and precepts brought forth by him consist of a series
of worships and services which beautifully express the servitude of man
towards the grandeur and power of the Almighty Allah. He brought other
laws such as legal and penal laws which are completely interrelated and
which are established on the basis of monotheism and respect for the
sublime human ethics.

The set of laws brought by the Holy Prophet (S) on worships and
transactions is so comprehensive that it deals with every aspect of
individual and social life that can be conceived of in the world of
humanity, as well as various needs and requirements resulting from the
lapse of time and issues instructions to fulfill them.

The Holy Prophet (S) considered the laws of his religion as universal
and everlasting, i.e. he believed that his religion is capable of
eliminating the worldly and heavenly needs of all human societies
forever. He thought that the people must adopt the same stance in order
to secure their prosperity.

He frequently stated: "The religion that I have brought guarantees our
worldly and heavenly prosperity and happiness."

Surely, the Holy Prophet's (S) statement was not in vain and groundless,
rather he arrived at this conclusion after studying the creation and
foreseeing the future of the human world. In other words, firstly, after
he recognized the complete harmony and coordination between his laws and
the physical and mental creation of man and secondly, after he generally
considered the changes that would take place in the future and the harms
that would be done to the Muslim society, he passed a judgment on the
durability and perpetuity of his religious precepts.

The prophecies of the Holy Prophet (S), that have reached us through
authentic documents, have described the general circumstances and
conditions after his passing away up to the remote future.

The Prophet (S) performed all these tasks in a period of twenty three
years, out of which, he spent thirteen years under severe torture and
harassment of the unbelievers of Makkah. He spent the remaining ten
years in battles, campaigns, and external struggles against overt
enemies; in domestic campaign against the *munafiqin* and
trouble-makers; and the management of the affairs of the Muslims, the
reformation of their beliefs, ethics, and deeds, and thousands of other
involvements.

The Holy Prophet (S) achieved so much due to his firm resolution in
pursuit of truth and its revival. His realistic views were only directed
to truth. He did not follow what was contrary to truth even if it was in
his own interest or in the interest of the public. He accepted
wholeheartedly what was true and never refused it. On the other hand, he
refused whatever was false and never accepted it.

The Spiritual Personality of The Holy Prophet (S) was Extraordinary
-------------------------------------------------------------------

If we impartially consider the subject already covered we will have no
doubt that the appearance of such a personality in those conditions and
circumstances was nothing but an extraordinary occurrence and miracle
and had no reason other than the special support by Allah.

Therefore, the Almighty Allah repeatedly mentions in Qur'an about the
earlier unschooledness, orphanage, and poverty of the Holy Prophet (S).
The Almighty Allah states:

***"Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter? And find you
unable to see and show the way? And find you in want and make you to be
free from want? (93:6-8)."***

Allah also states:

***"And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe
one with your right hand...(29:48)."***

Again the Almighty Allah states:

***"And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a chapter like it...(2:23)."***

The Character of The Holy Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------

The only basis and principle upon which the Holy Prophet (S) laid the
foundation of his religion is the principle of *Tawhid* which he
recognized as the source of the prosperity for the people of the world.

According to the principle of *Tawhid* only Allah is the Creator of the
world and worthy of being worshipped. We must not bow down and pay
homage to anyone except the Almighty Allah.

Thus the principle that must be practiced in human societies is for all
to act like brothers and be equal with one another and not to regard
anyone as their unconditional sovereign except Allah.

As the Almighty Allah states:

***"Say: O followers of the Book! come to an equitable proposition
between us and you that we shall not serve any but Allah and (that) we
shall not associate aught with Him, and (that) some of us shall not take
others for lords besides Allah... (3:64)."***

The Holy Prophet (S) pursued no objective other than the propagation of
the religion of *Tawhid*. He invited the people to *Tawhid* by the best
morality, the most cheerful disposition, and. the most convincing
reasoning and proof. He also advised his friends to follow the same
principle accordingly. As the Almighty Allah issued His order upon him:

***"Say: 'This is my way I call to Allah, 1 and those who follow me
being certain...(12:108)."***

On the basis of his character, the Holy Prophet (S) regarded all people
as brothers and equal to one another. He never showed prejudice in
carrying out the divine precepts and penance. He did not discriminate
between his acquaintance and the stranger, the weak and the strong, the
rich and the poor, the man and the woman, the black and the white.

He provided the people with their rights on the basis of the precepts
and laws of religion and states: "Even if my daughter Fatimah, who is
the most beloved of all people for me, commits a theft, I will cut off
her hand."

No one had the right of domineering, commanding, and oppressing others.
The people enjoyed the utmost freedom outside the domain of the law
(certainly freedom against law bears no meaning not only in Islam but
also in any other social order).

This freedom and social justice is stated by the Almighty Allah in
introducing His Holy Prophet (S).

***"Those who follow the Messenger Prophet, the Ummi, whom they find
written down with them in the Tawrat and the Injl, (who) enjoins them
good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them the good things and
makes unlawful to them impure things, and removes from them their burden
and the shackles which were upon them; so (as for) those who believe in
him and honour him and help him, and follow the light which has been
sent down with him, these it is that are successful. Say: 'O people!
Surely I am the Messenger of Allah to you all'..(7:157-158)."***

This is why the Holy Prophet (S) desired no privileges for himself in
his life. One could never tell that the Holy Prophet (S) differentiated
from other people someone having a former acquaintance with him. The
Holy Prophet (S) managed the chores of the house, welcomed everyone in
person, and listened to those who turned to him out of need.

He did not sit in the position and seat of honor. He did not have any
means of riding and official protocol for moving from one place to
another. If he earned some money, he would give to the needy over and
above his necessary expenses.

At times, he gave even his least available money to the needy and lived
with hunger. He always lived like the needy and associated with them. He
did not display the slightest procrastination in granting the rights of
the people, but he used the maximum connivance and condonation for his
personal rights.

When the dignitaries of Quraysh were brought before him after the
conquest of Makkah, he did not display the slightest harshness and
pardoned them all, although they had treated him most cruelly before the
*Hijrah* and had even provocated sedition after the *Hijrah*.

In his humane ethics and virtues, the Holy Prophet (S) was conspicuously
recognized among friends and foes. He was matchless in sociability,
cheerfulness, forbearance, modesty, soberness, and dignity. As the Holy
Qur'an has praised his munificent conduct by a statement:

***"And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality
(68:4)."***

He took the lead in greeting those whom he met, even women, children,
and subordinates. One of his friends asked his permission to bow down,
i.e., to prostrate in front of him. The Holy Prophet (S) stated: "What
do you mean? These are the customs of Caesar and Casra. And I am for
prophecy and servitude".

Ever since he was appointed to a mission by Allah to propagate the
religion and to guide and lead the people, the Holy Prophet (S) did not
neglect his duty for a moment and did not refrain from his untiring
efforts. Thirteen years before the *Hijrah*, when he was in Makkah
although he faced unbearable difficulties caused by the Arab
polytheists, the Holy Prophet (S) was constantly engaged in the worship
of Allah and the propagation of the religion of Allah.

During the ten years after *Hijrah*, the Holy Prophet (S) conveyed the
teachings of religion and the laws of Islam with its amazing enormity to
the people, despite the ever-increasing troubles made by the enemies of
religion and the hindrances caused by the Jews and *munafiqin*
pretending to be Muslims. The Holy Prophet (S) also fought more than
eighty battles with the enemies of Islam.

In addition to handling the affairs of the Islamic society which at that
time included the whole Arabian Peninsula, the Holy Prophet (S)
personally looked into the complaints and minor requirements of people
without a doorkeeper and chamberlain attending on him.

With regard to the bravery and courage of the Holy Prophet (S), it
suffices to say that with his rightful invitation, he rose all alone
against the world of that time which ruled the people with nothing other
than coercion and injustice. All the tortures and sufferings inflicted
on him by the oppressors never produced weakness and disappointment in
him. He never retreated in any battle.

The Holy Prophet (S) kept himself very clean and neat. He considered
cleanliness and neatness as a sign of faith. "Cleanliness is a part of
the belief."

In addition to the cleanliness and neatness of his clothes and body, the
Holy Prophet (S) was well-dressed and well-behaved also. Whenever he
wanted to leave the house, he would set out in the best outward
appearance. He particularly liked to use perfumes.

He never changed his disposition in the course of his life. His life
came to an end with the same modesty and humbleness. Although he had
such a valuable position, he never gave preference to himself to
demonstrate his social value.

During his lifetime, the Holy Prophet (S) never insulted anyone and
never used empty remarks. He never laughed boisterously and never
performed disrespectful and worthless deeds. He was highly interested in
thinking and reflection.

He listened to the remarks of every afflicted person and the complaints
of every protestor and then replied. He never interrupted the speech of
others and never marred the freedom of thought; however, he clarified
their mistakes and eased their discomfort.

The Holy Prophet (S) was very kind and tenderhearted and was always
saddened by sufferings; nevertheless, he did not waver in punishing the
criminals and the wicked and did not discriminate between the
individuals in carrying out the divine laws.

Once a Jew and a Muslim were accused of a theft in the house of one of
the*Ansar*. In this connection, a great crowd of *Ansar* went to the
Holy Prophet (S) and insisted that the Jew be punished for the sake of
the prestige of the Muslims, specifically the *Ansar* and keeping in
view the overt enmity of the Jews. Since the Holy Prophet (S) discovered
the truth contrary to what they had demanded, he openly supported the
Jew and punished that Muslim man.

Amidst the throes of the Battle of Badr, when the Holy Prophet (S) was
personally organizing the arrays of the division, he saw a fighter
standing a little bit ahead of the others. The Holy Prophet (S) pressed
his stick at the belly of the man to move him back a little and get him
in line with others.

The fighter said, "O, Messenger of Allah! I swear by Allah that my
stomach is hurt and I should go for *qisas* (Islamic reprisal)". Giving
the stick to the man, the Holy Prophet (S) pushed his dress aside from
his stomach and said, "Go for *qisas*". The man ran towards the Holy
Prophet (S), kissed his stomach, and said, "I know that I will be killed
today and I wanted to touch your holy body". Then he attacked the enemy
and stroke with his sword until he was martyred.

The Holy Prophet (S) always patronized the weak and the oppressed and
urged his friends to inform him of the exigency of the needy and of the
complaints of the weak and not to procrastinate in this regard.

It is related that the Holy Prophet's (S) last words were a
recommendation to the people regarding the slaves and women, after which
he ceased speaking and passed away.

Peace be upon him and his holy family.

The Holy Prophet's (S) Last Will To the Muslims
-----------------------------------------------

The world of humanity, like other components of the world of existence,
is subjected to change and transformation. The intense differences seen
in the structure of human beings have generated various tastes, as a
result of which people vary in the quickness and dullness of perception
and comprehension and in the retention and forgetfulness of thoughts.

Thus beliefs, customs and traditions which govern a society will be
subject to change and distortion in the shortest time and will be
eliminated, unless they have a stable root and trustworthy and reliable
guardians. By observation and experience, this matter will be thoroughly
clear to us.

To safeguard against this danger, the Holy Prophet (S) introduced a
strong and steady document and qualified guardians for his universal and
everlasting religion and recommended the Divine Book (Holy Qur'an) and
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as).

Thus all Islamic sects, as concatenation, have related that the Holy
Prophet (S) had repeatedly stated: "I entrust you with two valuable
things, one of which is the Holy Book (Qur'an) and the other my *Ahl
al-Bayt*. These two will never be dissociated from each other and you
will not be led astray as long as you will remain associated with them".


