A Rational Discussion of the Revelation Statement
=================================================

**Belief in God:**

Islam does not require faith without being logically convinced. In this
section, the con- sistency and the rational positivity of the doctrine
will be shown.

Existence of God and His Characteristics: There are four ways to prove
the existence of the Creator:

**a. Personal Experience**

There are some events which we encounter in our lives that cannot be
explained except by the existence of God. Many people en- counter
incidents which convince them of the existence of God.

It must be admitted that this type of conviction is applicable on a
small scale and hardly considered by others who are not related to that
particular event. But its importance cannot be discarded, specially if
we are to use probability measures.

**b. Religion**

Many good people have appeared through- out history and preached belief
in God. Those people are called prophets. Prophets must have unique
qualities such as wisdom, piety, truth- fulness, trustworthiness, etc.

These qualities must be known to people before they are sent as
prophets. All prophets claimed to have some extraordinary communication
with God. It is established that their intentions and works were
consistent and support their claims.

**c. Philosophy (The first cause, argument)**

Considering the "Law of cause and effect," take matter in general. It
certainly needs a cause for its existence now. This argument might be
objected to by saying that its cause needs a cause, and that will end up
in an infinite series.

However, this objection can be countered by proving that the chain of
causes must terminate in an ultimate cause. This ulti- mate cause should
be self-sustained and requires no cause for its existence. In other
words, there should be a cause different in nature and essence from
those in the chain.

Now, let the cause of the existence of matter be A and its effect be B
and so on. Thus a chain (A, B, C, D, E, F, . . . .) is formed. If A
disappears then matter disappears. Similarly the existence of D is
necessary for the existence of A and so on.

Now take an arbitrary link in the chain say N; however, the status of N
in the series is subjected to three possibilities: i) Must not exist.
ii) May exist. iii) Must exist.

The first and second assumptions require the non-existence of matter as
explained above. Hence, we are left with the last assumption.

The circle argument can be disproved also. The circle of causes implies
a series A, B, C, D, . . . . then back to A, B.... etc., going round in
a circle. Take any pair in the circle, say A and D. There are three
possibilities: i) A exists before D. ii) D exists before A. iii) A and D
exist simultaneously.

If A exists before D then there is no meaning in saying that A is
dependent on D, simply because D used to have no existence before it was
caused to exist by A.

The second assumption can be disproved by a similar argu- ment. The
third assumption means that neither of the two are the cause of the
existence of the other. Hence they require a cause beyond their
existence.

A further objection might be raised on the account of the arbitrary
proposition of N for it might be taken as the very matter itself. This
assumption contradicts the premises of logic, namely the apriori
proposition like causality.

It is needless to go further, but it can be proved easily that matter
has the same essence but different forms, then it may be asked, "What
are the causes which have given different forms to the same essence?" If
it is said that there was no original form, then matter needs a factor
beyond its essence to provide its present form. If it is said that these
forms were eternal, then what were the causes which made them differ-
ent.

If they were intrinsic, then they must have been either potential or
active. The former requires an agitating cause, while the latter needs
the existence of contradictory things simultaneously, which is against
the premises of logic. Hence the fact that matter has both an essence
and a form necessitates that it is contingent.

**d. Science**

It is known by intuition that for every intelligent work there is a
maker. Consider any example in nature such as the human brain.

Then compare it with a highly sophisticated invention, like the
computer. It is obvious that the latter is a product of the human brain.
It is then impossible for the brain to exist without an intelligent
maker. Some people like to escape towards an imaginary thing called
accident. If accident can be discarded as an impossibility, then the
only way left is to attribute it, as Max Planck, the great physicist
puts it: "to God."

Probability and chance is a very well defin- ed branch of mathematics.
If a specific card is to be drawn from a pack of ten cards at random,
then the probability of drawing that card is 1/10.

Consider the cards are numbered from one to ten, and it is required to
find the probability of drawing the cards in sequence.

The probability of that event is 1 / 10 1Â°. In com- paring the
peculiarity of this simple operation with that of a living cell, the
denominator becomes very large. In other words, the proba- bility of its
being born by accident becomes very remote.

However, if the comparison pro- ceeds to the creation of a human being,
it becomes much more remote. To clarify this point, imagine someone
tells you that his car came about by an accident through some peculiar
circumstances. One would think that he is mad. Going further in
comparing the peculiar- ity of the whole universe, the denominator
approaches infinity.

It might be objected that the universe is finite. The answer is that
ap- proaching infinity is sufficient for a mathemati- cal proof. Also we
are dealing with design and not the finite material used in the
design.

Indeed, there is no place rationally or emotionally for a blind
accident to make a human eye, that is, putting its lens and pupil in
their positions, a retina to reflect light, two types of fluid and
millions of cones and rods behind the retina to analyse light.

There is no place for a blind accident to make the genes which transfer
the biological characters of the ancestors to the descendents. It is
said that the genes of the whole human population would not fill a
thimble used by a tailor!


