The Characteristics of God
==========================

It is now established that God is the cause of existence of the
universe, hence it cannot be said that He is limited in a space or time.
His characteristics can be envisaged through His work. It is seen that
there is a good order and purpose in the world, hence He is wise. There
are great forces in the universe, therefore He is powerful, etc.

Evil is a word which has a relative meaning. God's acts, and His work
are perfect in every respect. They contain all the factors of mercy and
benevolence.

Evil is a deficiency which cannot be attributed to God. If someone
gives ten pounds, then takes one pound back he is still generous and
good.

God is one. If it is assumed that there are many then they should have
either the same will or different wills. If they have the same will,
then there is no meaning in saying they are many. If it is assumed that
they have differ- ent wills, then they are either equal or differ-
ent.

When they are equal, then the limit of their behaviour is the same, and
consequently they have the same will. When they have differ- ent powers,
then the strongest will overcome the weakest.

God is just. Injustice is a weakness which cannot be attributed to the
Creator, who is perfect in every respect.

**1. Islamism and Prophecy**

The word "Islam" has two concepts. The first concept could be realised
linguistically. The Arabic word "isldm" means "submitting willingly." It
refers to the submission to God in general, and in this sense it
includes all the religions and looking at it from a still broader view
it includes all non-willing objects.

The second concept is a formal definition which refers to Islam as a
community and any person who declares "There is no God but Allah and
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah," is a Muslim.

Islam fits man's nature and is in harmony with his needs and hopes.
Human experience shows that it is harmful to behave against one's
nature. For example, not getting married and wronging others.

Religion calls this state "sin." It is an empirical experience that
being in harmony with natural laws (God's laws) is a good thing, for
instance being truthful, trust- worthy, kind righteous, etc. Religion
calls this state "good."

Prophecy is necessary for the following

**reasons:**

i) Man is distinguished from animals by his mental capacity and freedom
of choice. The mental capacity is high but limited. His ques tions range
from the origin of the universe to the life after death. He searches for
the best means of securing his present and future life.

Furthermore, he puts his knowledge under test and examines its origin
and value. He even questions his own perception. Then it can be seen
that there is a big scope for debate and difference on any subject!
Philosophers who have a deep insight into matters differ about basic
concepts! !

All kinds of contradictory i deas are found co-existing in the world of
phi- l osophy. There is a universe, says realism. Ideal- ism claims that
there is no real universe at all, it is all a matter of imagination to
Berkley and David Hume! Marx claims that our perception is a mere
reflection of our environment.

Im- manuel Kant and Descartes said there is some basic instinctive
knowledge. Hence this confu- sion must be ended in some way.

Therefore, sending prophets is inevitable to rescue humanity from being
lost in doubts. It is necessary to show them the way of life in
conforming to God's laws; these laws are pre- sented by the Godly
religions throughout his- tory.

ii) The high standard of behaviour and moral conduct which the prophets
used to display before experiencing revelation. As an example of a
typical prophet the case of Proph- et Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p) is
outstanding. The following points are in favour of the Prophethood of
Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.).

a. He was known as truthful and trust- worthy before he claimed
Prophethood. His moral character was unique and beyond any question or
doubt.

b. He never doubted his message. 'Where were many attempts to divert
him from his course by offering him bribes of money, women, followers,
etc., but he was never shaken or moved by these offers. He lived for
twenty- three years after his Prophethood,, conforming to his ideals in
every respect.

c. He was an illiterate person. The Qur'an is the miracle that God has
given him to con- vince people of his message and Prophethood. The fine
literature, the magnificent social, eco- nomic, political and spiritual
systems presented in the Qur'an are well perfected and defined.

There are more than 750 verses in the Qur'an which state facts most of
which could never have been known to people at the Prophet's time.

d. He knew the year of his death. He also prophesied many things which
were fulfilled.

e. He waited for two years after he had received the first few chapters
of the Qur'an.

During this period he did not receive any revelation. This historical
fact strongly supports that the Qur'an is God's revelation.

**2. Life After Death**

The following points support the existence of a life after death.

a. The investigation of modern psychology in the field of clairvoyance,
precognition (proph- ecy), psychokinesis (effect of mind on mat ter) and
extrasensory perception have shown that man does not consist of this
material body only, but there is something behind and beyond it:
psychologists call it the "mind" (which is different from the physical
brain). Religion calls it the "soul." It is only a matter of ter-
minology.

b. Para-psychology works together with spiritualism in modern psychical
investigations. The following are some scientists who did some research
in this field.


Sir Oliver Lodge (Winner of Rumford medal of the R.S., President of the
Physical Society of London, and of the British Association for
Advancement of Science).

He stated that: "Speaking for myself with full and cautious
responsibility I have to state that as an outcome of my investiga- tion
into psychical matters, 1 have at length and quite gradually become
convinced, after more than thirty years of study, not only that persist-
ent existence is a fact, but that occasional communication across the
chasm - with dif- ficulty and under definite conditions - is possible.

The evidence has thoroughly convinced me (i) of human survival, (ii) of
the possibility under favourable circumstances, of communica- tion
between the dead and living, (iii) that death is only an episode in
continuous existence. I also think it fairly established that some kind
of help, guidance or inspiration reaches us at times across what is
sometimes called \`the gulf or through what is often called \`the veil.'
"

Professor Hart (in his book "The Enigma of Survival") who was quoting
Lodge said: "The hypothesis of continued existence in another set of
condition,

and of a possible communica- tion across the boundary is not a
gratuitous one made for the sake of comfort and consola- tion or because
of a dislike to the idea of extinc- tion; it is a hypothesis which has
been gradually forced upon the author - as upon many other persons - by
the stringent coercion of definite experience; the foundation of atomic
theory is to him no stronger. The evidence is cumula- tive and has
broken the back of all legitimate and reasonable scepticism."

Sir William Crookes (Inventor of the Crookes tube in electric- ity,
President of the R.S., of Chemical Society, of The Institute of
Electrical Engineering and of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, discoverer of Thallium, etc.).

He began in 1869 a scientific investigation of psychical phenomena
which led him to the conclusion "that invisible and intelligent beings
exist who say that they are the spirits of dead persons." He made the
following statement in his presidential address before the British Asso-
ciation in 1898: "Thirty years have passed since I published an account
of experiments tending to show that outside our scientific knowledge
there exists a force exercised by intelligence deffering from the
ordinary intelligence common to mortals. I have nothing to retract, I
adhere to my already published statement. Indeed I might add much
thereto."

Sir William Barrett (F.R.S. Professor of experimental physics in the
Royal School of Science in Ireland). He is another scientist who spent
decades in physi cal research.

He commented on some experi- ments where an automatic writer produced
messages purporting to come from people who had died. He says:
"Certainly, for our own part, we believe there is some active
intelligence at work behind, and apart from the automatist, an
intelligence which is more like the deceased person, it professes to be,
than that of any other we can imagine. It is an attempt at intelli- gent
co-operation between certain disembodied minds and our own."

There are many other scientists who believe in the above-mentioned
results. For example Professor Rhine, a biologist and plant psycholo
gist, and Sir Alister Hardy, present professor of zoology in the
University of Oxford.

In his book "The Living Stream," (1962) he supports very strongly these
results and states that there is a new movement in modern biology which
is aiming at what he calls "natural theology." Even an opponent to
religion like. Russel declar- ed in "Why I am not a Christian" that he
does not doubt the scientific manner in which psychical researches were
carried out.

Harnell Hart, professor of Sociology in the University of Kentucky,
said in his book, "The Enigma of Survival": "That something corre
sponding to \`the astral world' emerges logically from combination of
clear dreams and telep- athy is recognised in the writing of at least
two distinguished philosophers - C. J. Ducass, of Brown University,
Providence R.I., U.S.A., and H. H. Price, of Oxford University, England
(1956) (P.238):

"The existence of some sort of Astral world appears to be a logical
necessity. Vivid . dreams do, of course, occur, and telepathy is a
scientifically established phenomenon. Hence, there is no reason to
reject as inherently incredi- ble the numerous accounts of shared
dreams.

Eminent philosophers both in America and England have pointed out the
rationality of conceiving the life beyond death in terms of telepathy
and shared experience." (P.245). Many people suffer and they are not
com- pensated for in this world.

Many others do mis- chief and commit crimes but they have not been
punished while living on this earth. It has been already stated that God
is just because He is perfect. Then, it may be asked, "is it justice to
let good people suffer without compensa- tion?" The natural answer is
that there is a life after death where people will receive reward or
punishment for what they have done.


