The Benefecial Nature of the Islamic Doctrine
=============================================

Some points in favour of this beneficial nature:

a. Islam provides hope to people to live and a purpose to pursue - a
hope which ties them to God, a purpose which can vary from aiming at the
satisfaction of the Creator to mere selfish interest.

The purpose of satisfying the Creator is a sublime thought. Imam \`All
(p.b.u.h.) said: "I worship God neither out of fear nor for gains, but
because He is worthy of worship."

The selfish interests are manifested in the desire to enter Heaven and
avoid the torment of Hell.

b. Islam fulfills the instinctive need for a religious belief. The need
for religion is a fact which is admitted by all those who study religion
in human society.

c. The Islamic attitude towards "Sin" is a rational one. It places the
responsibility of committing sin on those who indulge in it. In other
words, Islam denies the inheritence of sin. This attitude frees man from
the sense of guilt of evil deeds which he has not committed.

d. The believers tend to respect themselves as dignified human beings
and have the same feelings for others. This respect is the result of
their communication with the Creator, through prayers, fasting,
pilgrimage, etc.

e. The Islamic philosophy about life im- plants good and tender
feelings in the Mus- li m's outlook. Muslims' view of life is that of
co-operation:

"And how many a moving creature that do not carry its sustenance; Allah
sustains it and yourselves; ..............." (Qur an, 29:60) "Who made
the earth a bed (resting place) for you and the sky a structure and
causes water to descend from heaven and thereby produces fruits for your
sustenance; ..............." (Qur an, 2:22).

It is assumed that there is order, harmony and co-operation in the
world. On the other hand, the materialistic view of life is that of
struggle, vicious competition and war.

Therefore the Islamic philosophy inculcates the feeling of peace and
tranquility. The materialistic philoso- phy injects tension, competition
and conflict among people.


THE END


