ABSTRACT
========

**For over thirteen centuries the Ṣaḥīfa al-Sajjādiyya has enjoyed
importance amongst Muslims, its authorship attributed to ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn (d. 95/713-4), the great grandson of Prophet Muḥammad, and
fourth Imam in the Twelver Shīʿi School.**

**Despite its immense and rich repository, the study of Shīʿism has
mostly been a neglected branch of Islam in the West, consequently little
has been written on the Ṣaḥīfa, other than a significant and valuable
translation with an introduction by Chittick.**

**This, being a first serious research of the Ṣaḥīfa focuses to
reconstruct its context, based on the thesis that to understand a text
is to follow its dynamics, its movement from what it says to that which
it discloses, including a biography, investigation into authenticity, an
exploration of style and themes and conclusion.**

**Chittick describes the Ṣaḥīfa as “one of the deepest veins of Islamic
spirituality”.**

**Religion and even non-religious systems although diverse, universally
and inevitably aim to achieve a better life by guiding the individual
and community by what is most natural in the form of common human values
and aspirations. These are reflected and resonated in the Ṣaḥīfa,
directing both the individual and community towards growth and thereby
fulfilling their own purpose.**

**The Ṣaḥīfā Sajjādiyya invites the reader to ponder over the depths of
goodness inherent in the human being as it serves as a treatise of
instruction in the development of the human self. God, as the Object of
the Ṣaḥīfa portrays the most noble rank befitting humanity, serving as
both a Means and the Ultimate goal for the culmination of human
beauty.**


