Chapter 1: Prologue
===================

For over thirteen centuries the Ṣaḥīfa al-Sajjādiyya, lit. The Book of
Sajjād, has been considered to be a literary work of great importance
amongst Muslims, and a part of the Islamic literary inheritance.

According to Chittick (p.xv, 1988), the Ṣaḥīfa al-Sajjādiya (The Prayer
Manual of Sajjād)1 is today one of the oldest prayer texts in the
Islamic tradition. Attributed to have been authored by the great
grandson of the Prophet Muḥammad; ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn (38-95/658-9-713-4),
it has been part of the rich history of Islamic ritual.

It has also been part of the rich history of Islamic thought, holding a
pivotal and essential position as a manual of prayers, particularly
treasured within the Shīʿa Ithnā ʿAsharī (Twelver) school (hereafter
referred to as the Shīʿi/Shīʿa)2 while its significance is still
universally acknowledged among Muslims from other theological schools.

From early days, the prayers of Sajjād have become a part and parcel of
the identity and lives of those who have used and drawn from it,
becoming an essential part of Islamic spiritual life; Chittick describes
it as “one of the deepest veins of Islamic spirituality” (Chittick, p.
xivi, 1988).3 This vein can surely have been said to sustain and nourish
the minds and souls of the Shīʿa communities in particular as much now
as then, and possibly for Muslims in general. Amongst the Shīʿa, the
Ṣaḥīfa is considered in rank only after the Qur’ān and the Nahj
al-Balāgha of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661).

Moreover it is a popular and well-established principle amongst the
Shīʿa that the authorship of the words contained in the Ṣaḥīfa belongs
to the great-grandson of Prophet Muḥammad himself, namely ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn - also known as Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn and Sajjād - who in the Shīʿa
school of thought is considered to be the fourth Imam.

It could be stated that the study of Shīʿism has for the most part been
a neglected branch of Islamic studies in the West. However, during the
last few decades a select group of scholars have given considerable
attention so particular areas within Shīʿi Islam. The forerunners in
this group include Rudolph Strothmann (1877-1960), Louis Massignon
(1883-1962) and Henry Corbin (1903-1978). More recently scholars like
Etan Kohlberg, M.A Amir-Moezzi, Farhad Daftary, Moojan Momen, Ḥusain M.
Jafri, Heinz Halm, Wilferd Madelung and others have further improved our
understanding of Shīʿi Islam.

Despite this recent research, particularly the first two centuries have
not received the same share of modern scholarship and in-depth study
they deserve. The general body of Muslim heresiographers have generally
regarded the Shīʿa as those who digressed from the norm. Western
scholars of Islam have many times adopted a similar view and treated
Shīʿi Islam as a digression or heterodoxy as opposed to an orthodoxy.

Similarly the Ṣaḥīfa being a text of such substance and significance, no
thorough study has been undertaken of it, apart from Howarth’s
dissertation in part-fulfilment of his M.A., and Chittick’s introduction
to the translation. However, Chittick’s translation and introduction of
the Ṣaḥīfa and Risālat al-ḥuqūq are a welcomed and essential
contribution to the vast and rich literary Islamic and Shīʿi heritage.

The Ṣaḥīfa and some sayings and poems, and the Risāla4 are the only
surviving works going back to ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn.

The importance of theses document and the possibility of a wider
reading, a besides analytical and linguistic investigation have been
largely overlooked in Islamic scholarship and particularly in Western
scholarship where these texts still remain fairly unknown. Most of the
studies done on the texts, even that done by Chittick (1988) has adopted
a reductionist approach by focusing only on its place within Muslim
ritual. In order to advance a wider application within Islam and beyond,
based on a re-reading of ʿAlī b. Ḥusayn’s texts it is necessary to move
from a ritualised status quoist reading to a quest for the historical
and spiritual ʿAlī b. Ḥusayn.

Methodology, Approach, Aim and Objective
----------------------------------------

In this research I intend to do two things, firstly I will study and
reconstruct the historical context in which the Ṣaḥīfa was produced.
This approach will be based on the thesis that to understand it is to
follow the dynamics of the work, its movement from what it says to that
about which it speaks. Beyond my situation as a reader, beyond the
situation of the author, I offer myself to the possible mode of
being-in-theworld that the text opens up and discloses to me in what
Gadamer calls Horizontverschmelzung in historical knowledge. Secondly,
applying the Reader Response Theory, I will engage the texts from a
contemporary discourse. This will focus primarily on a flesh and blood,
and socially located reader. Attention will also be given to praxis.

Although the Ṣaḥīfa is used in ritual, and sometimes theological
discourses, it’s a written text that has been circulated within Muslim
society for centuries.

Consequently, it’s may also be treated as a form of literature and that
means that we will have to examine its validity as a historical text
attributed to ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn. In other words, the production of the
Ṣaḥīfa can be seen to have taken place in a similar manner to that of
literature. Thus, it is possible to study it critically with the same
methods that are used to study any other ancient literature. For
example, we will ask questions about the setting within which the text
emerged and the motives that were the directing force for its
production. The text will then be delineated by observing changes in
literary style, shifts in vocabulary and phrasing, breaks in continuity,
types of connectors, thematic, and factual inconsistencies. Thus,
through the process of textual criticism we will try to identify changes
that may have occurred in the transmission of the text while at the same
time employing literary criticism to examine the content of the text;
such as its language, composition, and origin. This includes a
philological study of the text, analysis of its content, investigation
of the sources used, determining the literary genre of particular
passages, and drawing judicious conclusions regarding the authorship of
the text.

In order to have a better appreciation of the context of the Ṣaḥīfa, the
circumstances and environment within which they were produced and to
provide a wider perspective of the life ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, We will begin
with seeking to explore the milieu contemporary to him and prior to him,
during the life of his great grandfather Prophet Muḥammad (d. 632/11)
and also

before, relating only significant issues in order to enhance and develop
and augment this study as an in depth and detailed historical survey
would fall outside the scope of this work. The massacre at Karbalā
(680/61) where he was present will also be related.

Subsequently we will advance to the following chapter where I will draw
a picture of his life and personality, affording a valuable window to
the author and through him to the text and a closer glance of his
mindset.

With this behind us we will move forward to seek to investigate the text
as a textual production observing its historical background, tracing its
origins and transmissions, continuing to undertake a critical study of
the text’s authenticity, attempting to apply both traditional Islamic
and contemporary Western methods. This will also entail a linguistic
analysis of the text, examining its forms and literary aspects.
Moreover, an account will also be given of reports of what has been said
of the Ṣaḥīfa.

Following this, the next chapter will explore the style and salient
themes found across the Ṣaḥīfa, before finally arriving at the closing
remarks and conclusion. Where reference is made to the Qur’ān Yūsuf
ʿAlī’s translation has been used unless otherwise indicated.

It is my hope that in this research I will be able to show first; how
the text is as relevant today as it was when it was first produced and
secondly; how a demythologised ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn as a historical figure
represents the contemporary human aspirations.


