CHAPTER 2 The Ṣaḥīfa and ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn: An insight into their Context and Setting
=====================================================================================

1. Setting the Context
----------------------

This chapter will serve to be preparing to the thesis generally. It will
examine the contemporary thoughts and trends of the time and milieu
duringʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, such as the social, political and theological
state of affairs and characteristics of the time, going back to the
period of his great grandfather Prophet Muḥammad (d.11/632) and prior,
referring to the most significant issues as seen complementary to the
thesis.

This would afford the study with a fuller understanding of ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn as it is necessary that the wider context of his life is
examined. It could be argued that it may be close to impossible to
understand the fuller and wider perspective of the texts and the
personality of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn without considering his background
inasmuch as him being from the Banū Hāshim and being the great grandson
of Prophet Muḥammad and grandson of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, both towering and
significant figures in the Islamic landscape.

However, in order to confine this study within boundaries only the most
considerable events will be expounded upon, as the enquiry otherwise
would be far too broad and also fall outside the parameters of this
work.

It is commonly accepted amongst all Muslims that Prophet Muḥammad and
his family hold a high and esteemed position within Islam, so much so
that they are accorded an elevated rank in the Qur’ān above all other
believers. This is in line with the Qur’ān relating similar importance
to past prophets and their families, prophets who prayed for divine
assistance and favour towards their righteous family members, kin and
offspring.5 A well known example of this is the verse known as the verse
of ṭathīr (purification).

...And Allāh only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members
of the Family, and to make you pure and spotless.6

Another example depicting the status of the family of the Prophet can be
seen in the following verse:

We gave him Isaac and Jacob: all (three) guided: and before him, We
guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses,
and Aaron: thus do We reward those who do good...

...These were the men to whom We gave the Book, and authority, and
prophethood: if these (their descendants) reject them, Behold! We shall
entrust their charge to a new people who reject them not.7

Thus in light of the Qur’ān the successorship of the prophets in
relation to mulk (leadership), ḥukm (rule), ḥikma (wisdom), kitāb (the
book) and Imamate (a divine institution in relation to leadership)8 is
something that belongs to the descendants and close family of the
prophets.

In Madelungs judgement the Prophet Muḥammad could not have considered
the continual leadership after him over the Muslim community regarding
his succession in any other way than reflecting in the light of the
Qur’ān inasmuch as following the example of succession of the previous
prophets.9 However, in Watt’s opinion in that the most obvious choice in

successorship after the Prophet was Abū Bakr as he was the Prophet’s
trusted counsellor and a leading deputy and personality, while also
being one of the most significant converts in the early days of Islam.10
The contested succession to Muḥammad is clearly the key question in the
Shīʿi school of thought and the principal factor separating the Shīʿa
from the Sunnī majority.

These nascent trends and issues after the Prophets demise would clearly
be seen to have implications and an impact upon the life of ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn during his life. The issue of succession is not as simple as
to who the leader of the new Muslim community would be and the question
is not only who the successor of Muḥammad was but also the nature of the
role of this successor, for it is on both these points that both of
these schools of thought have differing views.

However it is not the aim nor the place of this study to evaluate the
details of the succession to Muḥammad or to analyse the differing views
of the Sunnī and Shīʿa as that would digress from the aim; which is to
provide a closer insight into the circumstances and the milieu of ʿAlī
b. al-Ḥusayn and the era preceding him. Thus only significant and major
circumstances have been taken into account in order to provide and
arrive at a fuller picture of his persona and position.

### 1.1 Background

###

It is commonly believed by Muslims that Prophet Muḥammad’s lineage can
be traced back to the patriarch Abraham. Thus, for the Shīʿa, the
lineage of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn is also linked to Abraham through his
father Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, his grandmother Fāṭima bint
Muḥammad, grandfather ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and great grandfather Prophet
Muḥammad b. ʿAbdullāh b. ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib. Shīʿa theologians uphold that
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn merits a privileged status since his ancestor Abraham,
being venerated by Christians, Jews and Muslims alike, holds an esteemed
position in the monotheistic faith systems. Moreover the Qur’ān
explicitly indicates that Muḥammad, his great grandfather, followed the
way and creed of Abraham.11

Furthermore the Prophet also revived aspects of Abraham’s life which has
significantly influenced the faith and conduct of Muslims.12 Thus, for
Shīʿa theologians, ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn’s status is not based on a mere
genealogical link with Abraham but also on a spiritual connection
through Prophets Ishmael, Ishaq, and their successors. The narrative of
God’s commandment upon Abraham to sacrifice his son holds an important
position in Islam. The Qur’ān describes the commandment as a divine test
from God upon Abraham and how God averted the actual slaughter at the
final moment and had a sacrificial animal replace his son.13

According to Shīʿa exegesis, the Qur’ān clearly states that the actual
sacrifice which was merely postponed in order to be replaced by a far
greater sacrifice from among Abraham’s descendants;

So when they had both submitted their wills (to Allāh), and he had laid
him prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice), We called out to him "O
Abraham! Thou hast already fulfilled the vision!" - thus indeed do We
reward those who do right. For this was obviously a trial- And We

ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice: And We left (this blessing) for
him among generations (to come) in later times:14

The last part of the above verse is thus interpreted as referring to the
sacrifice and massacre of Ḥusayn, his family and companions at
Karbalā, -where Zayn al-ʿĀbidin was also present- as a fulfilment of
God’s promise to carry out the sacrifice from among generations (to
come) in later times.15 This is succinctly captured by ʿAllāma Muḥammad
Iqbāl, also known as Iqbāl-e-Lahorī where he says:

Ismail was the beginning, Ḥusayn was the ultimate16

Although this is by no means an agreed interpretation among all scholars
of Qur’ānic exegesis, it has been influential among devout Shīʿa
scholars and followers.17

Alongside the Prophet, being his great grandfather, the other towering
personality in Islam was the grandfather to be of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn,
namely ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib who was born on the 13th Rajab 24. It is widely
reported among both the Sunnī and Shīʿa, the Shīʿa popularly accepting
that he was born in the Kaʿba in Mecca, an incident that had been never
been reported to have taken place previously or after.18 It would not be
difficult to imagine what commotion the news of this birth would have
caused as it would have spread around Mecca and further onwards by
people coming for pilgrimage as they returned back. After some years
Muḥammad would follow the example of his uncle Abū Ṭālib when he took
the young ʿAlī under his guardianship and care.

After the death of his protector, carer and uncle Abū Ṭālib and his wife
Khadīja, who had been a great support for him, the persecutions against
Muḥammad increased in number and intensity. This eventually led to the
hijra, Muḥammad’s migration from Mecca to Medina in the year 622.19 The
Quraysh, receiving information of this sent an armed troop who
surrounded Muḥammad’s house with intent to kill him before his imminent
departure. However to their surprise they found that Muḥammad had
managed to leave and instead found ʿAlī in his place inside his bed.20
Shīʿa commentators also interpret in their exegesis that the following
verse refers to this particular incident, and according to them together
with many other verses and prophetic traditions further distinguishing
the position of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib.

And there is the kind of man who gives (sells) himself to earn the
pleasure of Allāh. And Allāh is full of kindness to (His) devotees.21

In the year 62322 the grandmother to be of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, Fāṭima,
whom Muḥammad dearly loved and considered as his own flesh and blood,
being his only surviving child, was married to ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib after
many suitors had been refused.23 From such distinguished and venerated
personalities were born ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn’s father Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī, his
uncle Ḥasan b. ʿAlī, (more known as Imam Ḥusayn and Imam Ḥasan) and
aunts Zaynab and Kulthūm bint ʿAlī, the latter two who would also be
with him through the massacre and ordeal at Karbalā.

Historical sources point out that immediately following the Prophet’s
death in Medina (11/632) there was a dispute regarding his succession
and an ad hoc assembly by the notables and leading figures in Islam met
at th

saqīfa (assembly hall) in Medina to settle on the essential question of
leadership.24

However the election that ended in favour of ʿAbdullah b. ʿUthmān (d.
13/634), better known by his kunya or agnomen, as Abū Bakr was not as
simple as is generally believed. A conspicuous absentee during this
election was ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, ʿAlī b.al-Ḥusayn’s grandfather, the
Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law, as he had remained at the Prophet's
deathbed and occupied with the funeral services. Several sources suggest
the existence of at least a few people at this early meeting at the
saqīfa who felt that ʿAlī had a valid claim to the succession who
considered that in the view of a number of statements made by Muḥammad
in his lifetime, ʿAlī should have occupied the leading position – not
only as the temporal head (caliph) but also as the spiritual head
(Imam). They objected giving the bayʿa (allegiance) to Abū Bakr stating
they would not give it to anyone but ʿAlī, although Abū Bakr was
considered a prominent companion of Muḥammad during his lifetime and
subsequently became the first Muslim to rule after him. The followers of
ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib however believed he violated Muḥammad's direct orders
and effectively a coup d’état was orchestrated.25

What is significant from the point of view of this study and
historically are reports which maintain such claims and sentiments about
ʿAlī and his family and which are contained in the earliest Islamic
writings.26 Some accounts uphold that the dissent raised in favour of
ʿAlī did not quiet down after the decision was made in favour of Abū
Bakr at the saqīfa.27 These sentiments survived in varying degrees
during the reign of the two following Caliphs, ʿUmar b. al-Khattāb (d.
644) andʿUthmān b. al-Affān (d.656) which in the future would have a
significant impact upon the life of Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn.

It was during the last years of the reign of ʿUthmān b. ʿAffān (d. 656)
that the social and political unrest began leading to his assassination,
after which the Muslims rallied around the grandfather of Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn, ʿAlī .b Abī Ṭālib to take up the office of the Caliphate.
ʿAlī reluctantly accepted, as he describes the situation in his famous
Khutba Shiqshiqiyya.28

ʿAlī’s rule lasted between the years 656-661, this was one of the more
chaotic periods in Muslim history, and also coincided with the First
Fitna during which a schism took place which led to the first civil war
in Muslim history, leading to ʿAlī’s fatal wounding while leading
prayers in the mosque of Kūfa, ending in his death (40/661).

The Kūfans then pledged allegiance to ʿAlī’s son Ḥasan b. ʿAlī, being
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīns uncle, who ruled for a short period. During this time,
Muʿāwiya b. Abū Sufyān held command of the largest force in the Muslim
Empire, and had declared himself caliph, despite ʿAlī’s explicit
instructions and designation - naṣṣ, of Ḥasan and that only the Ahl
al-Bayt of Muḥammad were to reign the caliphate29 , and marched his army
into Iraq, the seat of Ḥasan's caliphate. War followed during which
Muʿāwiya gradually subverted the generals and commanders of Ḥasan's army
with large sums of money deceiving promises and threats until the army
rebelled against him. Finally, Ḥasan was forced to make peace and to
yield the caliphate to Muʿāwiya.

These events during this continued tumultuous period would ultimately
lead to the massacre at Karbalā where most part of the males in ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn’s family were killed along with their few companions and where
he remained as one of the only male survivors.

The massacre at Karbalā and the events that took place there would form
to greatly impact upon the life and persona of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn. In the
next chapter we will closer examine his personal biography, the person,
and the mindset, providing us with a window to the author and through
him to the text.


