Chapter 3: Life and Works of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn
==============================================

Introduction
------------

This chapter will explore the life and contribution of ʿAlī b al-Ḥusayn
and establish a link between the socio-cultural and political context of
that time with the text attributed to him. Although the Ṣaḥīfa is
generally viewed as a text on devotional supplication (du’a), however it
can also be read as a wider commentary of the time in which it was
produced. The Ṣaḥīfa and other texts attributed to ʿAlī b al-Ḥusayn are
part of the literary, theological, spiritual, and political discourse of
that era. Thus, there is in the text an interplay between spirituality,
theology, and history.

1.1 General Sketch
------------------

Alī b. al-Ḥusayn was born in Medina, according to most sources in the
year 37-38/658-9.30 He may have been too small to have remembered his
grandfather ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, whom he lived with for two years and who
was killed in 41/661. He was brought up in the presence of his uncle
Ḥasan b. ʿAlī (d. 49/669) with whom he lived for 12 years and his father
Ḥusayn b. ‛Alī (d. 60/680) whom he lived with for 23 years.31 Ḥasan and
Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī were the Prophet's grandchildren from his daughter
Fāṭima. Many Shīʿa sources state that his mother was Shahrbanū or
Shazanān as she is also called, the daughter of Yazdigird, the last
Sasanian king of Persia.32 Due to this, according to Ibn Khallikān he
was said to be Ibn al-Khiyaratayn, the ‘son of the best two’, meaning
the Quraysh among the Arabs and the Persians among the non-Arabs.33
According to some accounts, his mother was brought as a captive to
Medina during the caliphate of ʿUmar, who wanted to sell her. ʿAlī
suggested instead that she be offered her choice of the Muslim men as a
husband and that her dower be paid from the public treasury. ʿUmar
agreed and she chose ʿAlī’s son Ḥusayn. She is said to have died shortly
after giving birth to her only son ʿAlī, Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn.34

At this stage we shall not recount in detail the massacre at Karbalā' in
60/680, when Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī and many of the male members of his family
were killed by the forces of the ʿUmayyad caliph Yazīd, an event which
had effects to a great extent on the Islamic world and gave impetus to
the nascent Shīʿa movement. Several accounts are related concerning his
grief over this tragedy. One such account is that for twenty years
whenever food was placed before him, he would weep.35

Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn resided in Medina until his death at the age of
fifty-four in the year 95/713-4.36 He was the object both of great
sympathy because of the massacre of his family, and of veneration as the
great grandson of the Prophet. He dedicated his life to learning and
worship and became an authority on prophetic traditions and law, but he
was known mostly for his nobility of character and his piety, which
earned him his sobriquet already in his lifetime. The details that have
reached us about his life in Medina mainly take the form of anecdotes
affirming his constant preoccupation with worship and acts of
devotion.37 He fathered fifteen children, eleven boys and four girls.38

After Karbalā, there were a number of different factions in the Shīʿi
community, not all of whom supported ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn as the rightful

leader and Imam of the Muslim community. Many Shīʿa, such as those
involved in the Tawwābūn movement, felt that the ʿUmayyads had to be
overthrown and that it was the duty of the Imam to lead a revolt,
however he refused to become involved with politics.39

1.2 Childhood
-------------

Qarashī mentions that difficulty and pain accompanied him from the time
of his childhood; among them being that his mother died while he was in
infancy.40 He also states that Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī his father, tried his best
to save her from the illness described as childbed fever, but was unable
to do so. The fever had become intense and she suffered from severe pain
for numerous days until she died. Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī together with prominent
Muslim figures and a large number of Muslims escorted her burial
procession and she was finally buried in Kūfā.41 His father then
arranged for a nursemaid to see to the care of his son ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn. Qarashī describes the nursemaid as a righteous lady, treating
the child just like an affectionate mother would treat her own son and
that ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn grew up in an atmosphere of intense secrecy
regarding the death of his natural birth-mother, and no one told him
about her death until he had become grown up lest he would become
saddened.42 There are two other narratives regarding his mother one of
which is that that she threw herself in the river Euphrates after the
incident at Karbalā while the others says that she was among those who
survived Karbalā.43

Qarashī describes him as quite thin and weak as he became old due to his
constant worship, and also due to the effects and sorrow from the
massacre at Karbalā.44

However, despite this, al-Shaykhani al-Qādirī narrates about him that
“beholders were fixed in a gaze at the handsomeness of his face.”45

It is also interesting to note that the most well known of the titles or
agnomen that ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn became known by, Sayyid al-ʿĀbidīn (the
master of worshippers) is reported to have had its roots from the
Prophet Muḥammad himself. One such report is from Al-Hāfiz b. ʿAsākir
who reported on the authority of Sufyān b. ʿAyyina on the authority of
b. al-Zubayr, who said:

“While we were (sitting) with Jābir, ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn came. Jabir said
to him: ‘When I was (sitting) with Allāh’s apostle, may Allāh bless him
and his family, al-Ḥusayn came to him. He (the Prophet) embraced him
(al-Ḥusayn), kissed him, sat him beside him and said; ‘A son will be
born from this son who will be called ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, and a caller
will call out on the day of Judgment’; ‘let Sayyid al-ʿĀbidīn stand up’,
‘and he [i.e. ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn] will stand up.’ ”46

The first years of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn were spent under the wings of his
father Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī, paternal uncle Ḥasan b. ʿAlī and grandfather ʿAlī
b. Abī Ṭālib. The period with his grandfather lasted about two years
after which ʿAlī b. Abi Talib died as a result from sustaining injuries
after an assassination attempt at the Mosque of Kūfā during prayers by
the infamous ʿAbd al-Rahmān b. al-Muljim, known as Ibn Muljim.

The climate that followed may be described as quite turbulent, with much
unrest, particularly for those who subscribed to the leadership of ʿAlī
b. Abī

Ṭālib and the Imamate. Those who considered ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and the
Imams after him as the temporal and spiritual leaders came to be known
as the Shīʿa (lit. followers, and in this context the Shīʿat ʿAlī, i.e.
the followers of ʿAlī).47

It is evident that ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn grew up in the midst and
surrounding of prominent personalities of Islam. As mentioned, his
father Ḥusayn, uncle Ḥasan and aunts Zaynab and Umm Kulthūm all of them
being the children of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and Fāṭima and thus the
grandchildren of the Prophet and Abū Ṭālib. He may have been too young
to remember the ordeal surrounding the death of his grandfather ʿAlī .b
Abī Ṭālib, at which he was about two years old. He was subsequently
looked after by his paternal uncle Ḥasan and father Ḥusayn, both of whom
poured much affection, love and care unto the child. Qarashī mentions
that Ḥusayn found his son’s qualities noble and similar to that of the
Prophet, thus he took great care of him and instilled within him noble
values, and accompanying him most of the time.48 It appears very likely
that despite the tragic circumstances of the loss of his mother as a
child and the difficult circumstances surrounding his grandfather’s
death, he was showered with great care and affection from his family
members. There is an interesting incident when ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn as a
child became ill, his father Ḥusayn hurried to visit him and asked him
if he wanted or wished for anything saying; “What do you wish my little
son?” He replied; “I wish I would be among those who did not suggest
(anything) to their Lord. I am satisfied with what my Lord decides.”
Ḥusayn was greatly moved by these words of his son and admired the
indication of his great knowledge and deep sense of faith and said with
admiration; “Bravo! You are similar to Abraham, the Friend of Allāh
(referring to Abraham’s title Khalīl Allāh) when [angel] Gabriel asked
him; ‘Have you any need?’ He (Abraham) replied; ‘I do not suggest
(anything) to my Lord, rather Allāh is sufficient and the best Agent!’
“49

1.3 How Imamate came to him
---------------------------

Shīʿa scholars and historians provide various accounts regarding how
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn received the Imamate.50 One of the earliest incidents
is reported to be during the lifetime of his grandfather ʿAlī b. Abī
Ṭālib. Qarashī describes it to be the time when ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib had
been wounded51 and was in the last hours of his life, he gathered his
family members and sons around him, including ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn. He
entrusted the Imamate to his sons, Ḥasan first and that Ḥusayn was to
succeed his brother Ḥasan. ʿAlī also designated the young grandson as
the future Imam (after Ḥusayn). Qarashī narrates that ʿAlī recited the
greetings of the Prophet to ʿAlī b al-Ḥusayn and to his future son
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Bāqir (who was to be the fifth Imam, after ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn).52

Furthermore there are reports that the Prophet himself in his lifetime
appointed and foretold of his twelve successors and trustees after him
while also mentioning their names.53 Al-Qarashī further states that had
there been no texts indicating and confirming the Imamate of ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn even then his ideals and his outstanding qualities would be
enough to confirm it.54 There is also a fascinating account of the Black
Stone at the Kaʿba testifying to his Imamate at a time of dispute.55

2.1 Hagiographical reports on His Personality and Spiritual Standing
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There appears to be a general consensus among early as well as later
Muslims regarding the noble personality and high spiritual standing of
ʿAlī b al-Ḥusayn. The Medieval Arabic biographer Ibn Khalikān writes in
his Wafāyat al-aʿyān:

The merits and noble qualities of Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn are so many that they
cannot all be listed.56

The details regarding his personality have been recorded in
hagiographical texts from both the Sunnī and Shīʿa traditions. Jābir b.
ʿAbdallā al-Anṣārī (d. 78/697) the wellknown and senior companion of the
Prophet would express his great admiration of the Imam by saying; “None
of the children of the prophets was like ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn (i.e.

none of them could match him in respect of his exceptional being,
personality and character).”57

ʿAbdAllāh b. ʿAbbās (d. 68/690), despite his old age and prominent
position among people he would respect the younger ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn and
would stand up from his seat when seeing him saying; “Welcome the most
beloved one (Marhaban bi-l ḥabīb al-ḥabīb)!”58

The well-known scholar and jurist Muḥammad b. Muslim b. Shihāb al-Zuhrī
(d.124/741-2) is found to have stated his view regarding the personality
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn in many sources: “I have never seen a Hāshimī like
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn.”59

“I have never met among the Ahl al-Bayt (Members of the House) a person
more meritorious than ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn.”60

Above Al-Zuhrī is referring to the well-known Prophetic tradition
mentioned previously which states; “When the Day of Judgment takes
place, a caller will call out from inside the Throne; ‘Let the lord of
the worshippers stand up! So he will stand up.’”61

Sufyān b. Ayyina relates that he asked al-Zuhrī if he had ever met ʿAlī
b.al-Ḥusayn to which he replied; “Yes, I have met him. I have never met
a person more meritorious than him. By Allāh, I have never known that he
had a friend in secret or an enemy in public”, at which he was asked why
that was and he replied; “Because all those who loved him envied him out
of their abundant knowledge of his outstanding merits, and all those who
hated him took care of him because he took great care of them.”62

Thābit b. Safiya (d. 150/767) better known as Abū Hamza Thumālī from the
well known supplication given to him by ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and named
after him (i.e. the supplication of Abū Hamza Thumālī) is reported to
have said: “I have never heard that there is a person more ascetic than
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn except [his grandfather] ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib.”63 Another
similar report with an addition is; “I have never heard that there is a
person more ascetic than ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, who caused to weep all those
who were in his presence when he talked about asceticism and
preaching.”64

His grandson and sixth Shīʿi Imam, Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq (d.
148/765) said of him that: “None of ʿAlī’s children [i.e. ʿAlī b. Abī
Ṭālib] was more like and nearer to him in manner of dress and
understanding than ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn.”65

His high esteem was not merely confined to his supporters and followers
but also extended to those who bore enmity or malice against him. An
example of this can be found in the words of ʿAbd Allāh al-Malik b.
Marwān (d. 86/705) who was known to harbour animosity towards the
members of the Ahl al-Bayt.66

The well-known poet al-Farazdaq (d. 109-111/728-730) was among those who
held ʿAlī b. Al-Ḥusayn in high esteem and composed his much famed ode at
the incident during the time of pilgrimage when both Hishām (d.125/743),
the son of the ʿUmayyad caliph ʿAbdul Malik and Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn were
trying to reach the Black Stone around the much crowded Kaʿba.67

We find even Ibn Taymīyya (d. 728/1328), known for his hostile and
unsympathetic views concerning the Ahl al-Bayt report in favour ofʿAlī
b. al-Ḥusayn.68

It appears from the hagiographical literature available on ʿAlī Ibn
al-Ḥusayn that he is a celebrated figure in various schools of thought
who have reported on the personality of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, despite their
different thoughts and inclinations it can be said that they were
unanimous in their regard for him.

Whether the above narratives of ʿAlī b al-Ḥusayn’s personality and
spiritual standing can be authenticated or not is a question that
deserves an independent critical study, a study that would fall outside
the scope of this thesis. What is certain however from the above
hagiographical statements is that he clearly enjoys an exalted position
in the lives of both Shīʿa and Sunnī Muslims. What can be said though of
him regarding the view of his contemporaries and the historians, who
although at times had differing doctrines and inclinations is that they
seem to be very much in line with Shīʿi view that it is necessary for
the ‘Imam’ to be the most meritorious, righteous and knowledgeable
person of his time.

Furthermore, any discussion on the inter-relationship between the Ṣaḥīfa
and ʿAlī b. Al-Ḥusayn and the wider context within the Shīʿa tradition
will have to consider the place and significance of Karbalā in Shīʿa
discourse. While the event of Karbalā is significant to both Sunnī and
Shīʿas, it has had a greater impact on Shīʿa identity.69

3.1 Karbalā – The Prelude
-------------------------

In order to have an enhanced understanding of an event and to understand
it clearer, it becomes necessary to analyse and consider the history and
occurrences that are behind it and related to it, whether directly or
indirectly, so that an attempt can be made to see through the eyes of
the author of the Ṣaḥīfa.

Such would also be the case behind the events of Karbalā which have lead
to shape the identity and have impacted the people who relate with it.
It may be considered that the events leading to Karbalā would have their
traces much further back in time than when they occurred in 61/680,
which also have been discussed previously.70

It is not within the scope of this study that we examine closely in
detail the political situation and the intricate power grapples that
were present including the social conditions and also inequities that
existed amongst the

different people, such as the Anṣār and the Muhājirūn, the wealthy and
the poor, the Arabs and non-Arabs, the Muslims and non-Muslims and also
the theological conditions in as much as all the different factions that
had began emerging among the Muslims and the effects and influences of
such views and the ethical and moral values and circumstances that were
prevailing during the era. However, the previous discussion would have
provided us with a window and a sketch nonetheless of the turbulent and
at times chaotic period.

The resistance and opposition from the ʿUmmayads would continue in
various forms against the Hāshimī’s from the time of the Prophet
throughout the time of ʿAlī b. Al-Ḥusayn, the culmination of which could
be seen to be the event of Karbalā.

The ʿUmayyads, from the time of the Caliphate of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, with
Muʿāwiya b. Abū Sufyān at the forefront as the governor of Syria, had
refused to pay allegiance to ʿAlī’s Caliphate being determined to fight
against the Hāshimites and paralyse them, which also lead to divisions
of the Muslims. Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn had to witness his uncle Ḥasan and
later, his father Ḥusayn go through this ordeal during the government of
Muʿāwiya and after him, Yazīd b. Muʿāwiya. Ḥusayn had not risen against
Muʿāwiya during his time due to honouring the peace treaty that his
brother Ḥasan had to sign with Muʿāwiya and also due to the fact as he
understood his revolt would have failed, similar to what had occurred to
his brother Ḥasan, as Muʿāwiya had very cleverly turned the situation to
his favour implementing strong policies and wealth.71

Despite the treaty which had stipulated the rule to go back to Ḥasan b.
ʿAlī and the Hashimites after his death, Muʿāwiya (d. 60/680) had
actively scheming to instate his son Yazīd as the next ruler after him,
and thus for the first time in Islam establishing dynastic rule and
deviating from Islamic norms. Many notable leaders considered this
unacceptable, including Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī, Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn ’s father.72

Muʿāwiya had left Yazīd with written instructions with specific
strategies on how to deal with these people, with special warning about
Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī, as he was the only blood relative and also grandson of
the Prophet Muḥammad.73 Also Ḥusayn, being the only living grandson of
the Prophet remained as the most significant threat to this dynastic
rule. Yazīd was successful in coercing the majority of others, however
in order to strengthen his position and rule as the Caliph of the
Muslims, also demanded Ḥusayn to pay allegiance (bayʿa) to him, thus
intending that Ḥusayn had confirmed and supported his rule with the
stamp of approval, giving it legitimacy.

Ḥusayn denied this with his famous words; Mithlī lā yubāyiʿū mithlah
“someone like me can never pay allegiance to someone like him.” Below is
an extract of his statement;

We are the household of the Prophet, the substance of the Message, the
ones visited by the angels; it is through us that Allāh initiates and
concludes. Yazīd is a man of sin, a drunkard, a murderer of the soul the
killing of which Allāh has prohibited, a man who is openly promiscuous.
A man like me shall never swear the oath of allegiance to a man like
him.”74

Shortly after the coercive attempt demanding his allegiance, Ḥusayn left
Medina for Mecca to perform the pilgrimage with his family including his
son Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn and a small group of followers. During this period
many letters were received by Ḥusayn from the people of Kūfā, the former
seat of the Caliphate of his brother Ḥasan and father ʿAlī. The letters
stated the people request for him to come and guide them, assuring him
of their support.75 In order to answer their calls and better evaluate
the situation, he sent his cousin Muslim b. ʿAqīl as his representative.
He was initially welcomed by the people and most swore allegiance to
Ḥusayn and him. At this preliminary conclusion Muslim replied to Ḥusayn
stating that the situation was favourable. However the situation soon
turned in Kūfā after the arrival of ʿUbayd-Allāh b. Ziyād as the newly
appointed governor by Yazīd, and Muslim together with his host Hānī b.
ʿUrwā were executed.76 The people who had earlier sworn allegiance had
been intimidated and threatened by ʿUbayd-Allāh and had not put up any
considerable resistance.77

Meanwhile Yazīd had despatched and army with ʿUmar b. Saʿd b. al-ʿĀs as
the head, with instructions to intercept and kill Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī during
the Ḥajj.78 As this news reached Ḥusayn, he decided to leave Mecca, just
a day before the starting of the pilgrimage, and only performed the
ʿUmra (minor pilgrimage) in order to prevent the strong possibility of
violation of the sanctity of the Kaʿba and the surrounding area of
Mecca, by the spilling of his blood.79

As Ḥusayn was preparing to leave for Kūfā, the news of the death of
Muslim not yet having reached him, some of the leaders of Mecca met with
him, advising him of not journeying towards Kūfā. However, if he was
determined, then at least not to take any women or children on this
perilous journey. Ḥusayn had however resolved to continue with his plan
and addressed the people of his intentions before his departure.80

It could be imagined these events would have had a significant effect on
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn, having to leave the city of Medina in haste, being his
great grandfather’s city and then leaving Mecca under such threatening
circumstances.81

En route to Kūfā, Ḥusayn’s small caravan were met with the tragic news
of his cousin, Muslim’s execution and how the people had swiftly
turned.82 Ḥusayn however still decided to continue and was intercepted
by Yazīd’s army, only two days away from Kūfā by a contingency of
Yazīd’s army of about 1000 men, led by Ḥurr b.Riyāḥī. Ḥusayn’s caravan
was prevented to move forward by the orders of Yazīd and Ḥurr’s army
forced them to camp at al-Ṭaff, at a place out of reach from the vital
water supply of the river Euphrates.83 When Ḥusayn was informed the
place was also known as Karbalā, he exclaimed; “O Allāh! I seek refuge
with You against karb [affliction] and balā’ [trial and tribulation]”
and continued; “Here we shall erect our tents, here our blood shall be
spilled, here we shall meet our death and from here we will rise once
again on the day of Resurrection! My grandfather, the Messenger of
Allāh, had informed me so.”84

3.2 Karbalā
-----------

Having considered the prevailing circumstances and conditions during and
before the time of ʿAlī b. Al-Ḥusayn, albeit in brief, would have
provided us with a clearer understanding of the situation that
culminated at Karbalā These events would later have a profound impact
upon the life of ʿAlī. b. al-Ḥusayn, shaping his personality and also
subsequently resulting in and forming his identity and subsequently his
words as the author of the Ṣaḥīfa. We find Majlisī in his Biḥar
mentioning this where he has written a chapter dedicated to ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn with the heading; “His Mourning and Weeping on the Martyrdom
of his Father, May the Grace of Allāh be on Both”85

It is not possible within this study to fully investigate and narrate
the events taking place at Karbalā; however it is also not possible not
to mention them as they were probably the most significant events in the
life of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn. For the sake of brevity we will give a few
succinct accounts that somewhat capture these events.

Finding himself together with his family and small number of companions
on the plains of Karbalā we find that Ḥusayn tried to reason with his
antagonists in order to avoid confrontation, using rationale and
mentioning his merits and lineage;

... Then Hosein mounted his horse, and took the Koran and laid it before
him, and, coming up to the people, invited them to the performances of
their duty: adding, O God, Thou art my confidence in every trouble, and
my hope in all adversity!… He next reminded them of his excellency, the
nobility of his birth, the greatness of his power, and his high descent,
and said, “Consider with yourselves whether or not such a man as I am is
not better than you; I who am the son of your Prophet's daughter,
besides whom there is no other upon the face of the earth. ʿAlī was my
father; Jaafar and Hamza, the chief of the martyrs, were both my uncles;
and the apostle of God, upon whom be peace, said both of me and my
brother, that we were the Chief[s] of the youth of Paradise. If you will
believe me, what I say is true, for by God, I never told a lie in
earnest since I had my understanding; for God hates a lie. If you do not
believe me, ask the companions of the apostle of God [here he named
them], and they will tell you the same. Let me go back to what I
have...86

Despite trying to reason with the ʿUmayyad forces, they were not
convinced and the impasse ended in the massacre of Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī
together with the male members of his family and his companions. Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn describes the day, which is also known as the day of ʿĀshurā
(lit. meaning ‘the tenth’ signifying the tenth of the month of Muḥarram
in the Islamic calendar) as one of the most difficult days.87

When Ḥusayn remained alone, the male members of his family and
companions slain he called out for assistance, as Qarashī describes the
moment;

Imam al-Ḥusayn, who was afflicted with disaster, looked with great
sadness and sorrow at the members of his family and his companions. He
saw them slaughtered like sheep on the sand of Karbalā under the heat of
the sun’s rays, and he heard his womenfolk weeping and lamenting over
their martyred ones. He did not know what would happen to them after his

martyrdom. That tragic sight had a great effect on him, so he sought
help to protect the womenfolk of Allāh’s Apostle, may Allāh bless him
and his family, saying: “Is there anyone to protect the womenfolk of
Allāh’s Apostle, may Allāh bless him and his family? Is there any
monotheist to fear Allāh through us? Is there any helper who seeks hope
from Allāh through helping us?”88

Qarashī further describes the moment of Ḥusayn’s calling and Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn waking up from his partial unconsciousness, due to severe
illness, when hearing his father, struggling to get up, leaning on a
stick, to come to his assistance. Ḥusayn seeing this called out to his
sister Umm Kulthūm; “Hold him back lest the earth becomes void of the
descendants of the family of Muḥammad!” As Ḥusayn was surrounded by the
ʿUmayyad soldiers, severely wounded and his condition worsening with no
hope of survival, we find an account of him turning his face towards the
sky, in a state of munajāt (intimate conversation with God);

O Allāh! Sublime You are, Great of Might, Omnipotent, Independent of all
creation, greatly Majestic, Capable of doing whatever You please,
Forthcoming in mercy, True of Promise, Inclusive of Blessings, Clement,
Near to those who invoke Him, Subduing His creation, Receptive to
Repentance, Able, Overpowering, Appreciative when thanked, Remembering
those who remember Him! You do I call upon out of my want, and You do I
seek out of [my] need! From You do I seek help when in fear and cry when
sorrowful! Your help do I seek in my weakness, and upon You do I rely! O
Allāh! Judge between us and our people, for they deceived and betrayed
us! They were treacherous to us, and they killed us though we are the
ʿItrat [family]of Your Prophet and the offspring of the one You love;
Muḥammad whom You chose for Your Message and entrusted with the
revelation! Do find an ease for our affair and an exit, O most Merciful
of all merciful ones!

Grant me patience to bear Your destiny, O Lord! There is no god but You!
O Helper of those who seek help! I have no god besides You, nor do I
adore anyone but You!

Grant me to persevere as I face Your decree, O Helper of the helpless, O
Eternal One Who knows no end, O One Who brings the dead back to life, O
One Who rewards every soul as it earned, do judge between me and them;
surely You are the Best of judges.89

As Ḥusayn was drawing his final breaths the following account is given;

Zainab the wise, cried out, “O Muḥammad! O father! O ʿAlī ! O Jaʿfar! O
Hamza!

Here is Ḥusain in the open, slain in Karbalā!” Then Zainab said, “I wish
the heavens had fallen upon the earth! I wish the mountains had crushed
the valley!” She was near al-Ḥusain when ʿUmar Ibn Saʿd came close to
her flanked by some of his men.

Al-Ḥusain was drawing his last breath she cried out, “O ʿUmar! Should
Abū ʿAbdullah be killed as you look on?!” He turned his face away. His
tears were flooding his beard. She said, “Woe unto you! Is there [not]
any Muslim man among you?” None answered her. Then [ʿUmar] Ibn Saʿd
shouted at [the] people, “Alight and put him to rest!” Al-Shimr was the
first

to do so. He kicked the Imam with his foot then sat on his chest and
took hold of his holy beard. He dealt him twelve sword strokes. He then
severed his sacred head...90

The persecution continued even after the men had been killed, when the
enemy soldiers set upon the camp and tents of Ḥusayn’s family;

Ḥussein accepted and set out from Mecca with his family and an entourage
of about seventy followers. But on the plain of Kerbela they were caught
in an ambush set by the … caliph, Yazīd. Though defeat was certain,
Hussein refused to pay homage to him. Surrounded by a great enemy force,
Ḥussein and his company existed without water for ten days in the
burning desert of Kerbela. Finally Ḥussein, the adults and some male
children of his family and his companions were cut to bits by the arrows
and swords of Yazīd's army; his women and remaining children were taken
as captives to Yazīd in Damascus. The renowned historian Abu Reyhan
al-Birunī states;

“… then fire was set to their camp and the bodies were trampled by the
hoofs of the horses; nobody in the history of the human kind has seen
such atrocities.”91

Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi describes the aftermath and relates that no
Imam could have begun his Imamate in a more painful tragic circumstance
and situation than ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn. He says;

No Imam began his Imamate in a more tragic atmosphere. The first day of
his Imamate saw him seriously ill and a captive of the army of Yazīd in
Karbalā. His father and predecessors had sacrificed all he [they] had on
the altar of truth; and Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn found himself with a group
of helpless widows and orphans being led from place to place, from the
durbar [palatial court] of Ibn Ziyād to the court of Yazīd. Finally they
were thrown into a prison, where the Imam spent the first year of his
Imamate, cut off from the followers of his father and unable to look
after their affairs.”92


