Chapter 4: The place of the Ṣaḥīfa al-Sajjādiyya
================================================

In Muslim Tradition: An Analysis Into Authenticity
--------------------------------------------------

This chapter is divided into three sections. The first section deals
with the Ṣaḥīfa as a textual production by focusing on the historical
background of the Ṣaḥīfa, tracing its origins and transmissions.

The second section will undertake a critical study of the Ṣaḥīfa’s
authenticity, attempting to apply both traditional Islamic and
contemporary Western methods.

Furthermore, this will entail a linguistic analysis of the Ṣaḥīfa,
examining their forms and literary aspects, such as their styles,
language and the use of intertextuality and allusion to other sources.
This will be done in order to evaluate whether the Ṣaḥīfa may or may not
be placed within a specific time period and attributed to an author.

The third section will be examining the text specifically through a
traditional evaluation, also considering the matan and sanad, and
opinions expressed concerning the Ṣaḥīfa.

1.1 Background of the Ṣaḥīfat al-Sajjādiyya93
---------------------------------------------

According to Shīʿi tradition, ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn had collected his
supplications and taught them to his children, especially Muḥammad
al-Bāqir (d. 120/738)94 and Zayd (d. 122/740). In later times the text
became widely disseminated among the Shīʿa of all persuasions. The
specialists in the science of ḥadīth, such as Al-Najāshī and Al-Khū’i,
maintain that the text is mutawātir;95 in other words, it was generally
known from earliest times and has been handed down by numerous chains of
transmission, while its authenticity has never been questioned. In fact,
Ibn Shahrāshūb (d.588/1192) refers to the popular view according to
Shīʿi belief that after the advent of Islam, the Ṣaḥīfa was amongst the
earliest composed works, after the writings of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and
Salmān al-Fārsī, Abūdharr al-Ghaffārī, Asbagh b. Nabāta, ʿUbaydallāh b.
Abī Rāfīʿ, all from the first/sixth century.96 Traditionally, in the
opinion of the majority of Shīʿi scholars, from the early era to the
contemporary, it has been upheld that the Ṣaḥīfa traces its roots back
to ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn and has been known during the ages by the
honorifics. During the years Shīʿa scholars have unanimously agreed,
without denial, that the Ṣaḥīfa traces its roots back to Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn, the different opinions may be due to the different
collections of prayers the scholars have collected.97

However, according to Chittick’s translation, the arrangement of the
text allows to draw a certain distinction between the fifty-four
supplications, which make the main body of the text, and the additional
supplications which make up the fourteen addenda (including the prayers
for the days of the week) and the fifteen munajāt or ‘whispered
prayers’. He maintains that the original fifty-four supplications show
an undeniable freshness and unity of theme and style, while the latter,
especially the munajāt, add a certain orderliness and self-conscious
artistry which may suggest the hand of an editor.98 The addenda are said
to have been collected and added to the text by Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad b.
Makkī, known as al-Shaḥīd al-Awwal (the ‘first martyr’), the famous
author of Al-Lumʿat al-Dimishqīyya in

jurisprudence (fiqh) who was killed in Aleppo in 786/1384. The fifteen
munajāt have been added to several modern editions of the Ṣaḥīfa and
seem to have been brought to the attention of the main body of the Shī‛a
by ‛Allāma Muḥammad Bāqir Majlisī (d. 1109/1698), author of the
monumental compilation of Shī‛ī ḥadīth, Biḥar al-Anwār.

Over the years many scholars have written about the Ṣaḥīfa and numerous
commentaries have been written, Buzurg Ṭihrānī lists them in the Dharīʿa
to be close to seventy, with one of the earlier commentators being
ʿAllāmah al-Ḥīllī (d.726/1325)and Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d.
1109/1698).

2.1 Authenticity of Text
------------------------

As with any classical document or text not being free from and exempted
from the critique and analysis concerning its historical reliability,
particularly in light of modern scholarship, a study of the authenticity
of the Ṣaḥīfa is inescapable. Questions concerning the authenticity of
the text, which have also been put to the body of early Arabic poetry,
started early, and in ʿUmayyad times at the latest and have continued
since.99 To undertake a serious study and analysis of the relative
historical reliability of the individual supplications found in all the
versions of the Ṣaḥīfa, would be a study of great proportions, an
undertaking which would certainly fall outside the scope of this study,
as it alone may equal independent research in itself. However, for the
sake of our study we have attempted a serious analysis into the subject
without necessarily expending critical examination and investigation.
The study of the authenticity of the Ṣaḥīfa may be undertaken in a
number of ways. To begin with, we have chosen a study of the semantic
meanings and usages of the word Ṣaḥīfa, in order to evaluate the
historical meanings of the word and identify what they indicate to.

This is followed by a linguistic analysis of the text in order to assess
the possible similarities and differences in the manner of the author’s
deployment of language and use of allusion and reference. Furthermore,
an attempt will also be made here to look at any possible significant
and characteristic or thematic usages that may be specific to the text.
An analysis of this kind, for a text of this nature, is significant as
it may be one of the few alternatives besides the traditional analysis
to candidate for critical examination. Such an analysis may possibly be
able to place the Ṣaḥīfa within a certain time frame, together with
traditional analysis. Moreover, this kind of analysis may indicate any
specific usage that may direct towards indicating authorship. The last
part of this section, deals with how traditional Islamic scholarship has
evaluated and transmitted texts. Together with an analysis and
application with reference to the Ṣaḥīfa, a brief overview will be given
concerning the sciences (ʿilm al-ḥadīth and ʿilm al-rijāl) developed for
evaluating texts. For the object of our study and analysis, as for the
Ṣaḥīfa, reference will be made to the text established by al-Shaḥīd
al-Awwal translated by Chittick.

2.2 Semantic meanings and usage of the word Ṣaḥīfa
--------------------------------------------------

According to Ibn Manzūr (d. 711/1311) the word ṣaḥīfa is meant to be
something that is written upon.100 Al-Zuhrī (d. 742/1341) maintains that

muṣḥaf (pl. of ṣaḥīfa, other forms of the plural are saḥā‘if, suḥufun
and suḥfun) is a collection of that which is ‘written between two
covers’, similarly Al-Jawharī (d. ca 860/1456) refers to the word ṣaḥīfa
to mean book.101 According to Lane (d. 1876) ṣaḥīfa is something written
on paper or skin, it may also mean a book or a volume, a letter or an
epistle, something synonymous with kitāb (book).102 Watt gives it a
similar meaning, he however adds that it may be applied especially to
fragments of the Qur’ān or Ḥadīth or any other document of a solemn
nature, whence finally are the written ṣaḥifa themselves.103

An example of the early usage of the word can be found from the Qur’ān:

“...and this is in the books (ṣuḥuf) of the earliest (revelation), the
books of Abraham and Moses”104

Another example of the early usage of the word may be demonstrated
according to Ibn Hanbal105 (d. 241/855) and Ibn Māja106 (d. 272/886),
when the Prophet, just before his death asked for a ṣaḥīfa for writing
upon at his dictation.107

From the above there seems to be concurrence regarding the meaning of
ṣaḥīfa to be something that is written, either in a book form or
otherwise, from the classical to the contemporary era. Watt further
maintains that the term (ṣaḥīfa) appears contemporaneously with the
advent of Islam, but must evidently have existed before then.108

The appended word ‘Sajjādiyya’ to Ṣaḥīfa in the title of the text makes
reference to one of the agnomen or titles of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, meaning
‘the one who frequently prostrates’. This kind of usage is common when
making reference to possession or ownership in the Arabic language,
particularly in view of authorship and attribution of a document to its
writer. E.g. an epistle or letter attributed to a person called Jaʿfar
may be given the title Risāla Jaʿfariyya.

2.3 Linguistic Analysis
-----------------------

A close reading of the Ṣaḥīfa, will expose differences in the language
and style used by the author. However, what is common is that the author
makes constant reference and allusion to the verses of the Qur’ān and
the ḥadīth. As the text is punctuated with ḥadīth and verses, it is in
many places throughout that such references are acknowledged.

We find in the Ṣaḥīfa examples of this kind as it is a frequent address
for reference to the verses of the Qur’ān and ḥadīth as well, both
directly and in allusion. Whereas such sources are of course employed in
other prayer manuals,109 in the Ṣaḥīfa we find that such usage
demonstrates knowledge and familiarity of an intimate nature to the
sources, being one of the hallmark features characterising it. The
language and style of the Ṣaḥīfa is generally Qur’ānic, or drawn from
the Qur’ān and ḥadīth, it may have been for this reason the Ṣaḥīfa is
also known as Ukht al-Qur’ān (The sister of the Qur’ān).110

The following are some examples where this can be seen; Chittick
illustrates one such instance regarding the theme of the predominance of
God’s mercy. He sets the scene of the worshipper, when faced with the
reality of both the mercy and wrath of God, he does everything to seek
out the one and avoid the other. This theme is constant in devotional
literature

but particular in the Ṣaḥīfa. The pattern for this is set in the
wellknown supplication of the Prophet saying; ‘I seek refuge in Thy good
pleasure from Thy displeasure and in Thy pardon from Thy punishment. I
seek refuge in Thee from Thee.’111 Here the worshipper prays to God for
protection against God Himself, as there is in reality no other threat
of significance. God is He who pardons and punishes, He who’s pleasure
and displeasure is earned. What is more is that the supplicant can be
confident that God’s mercy will eventually overcome, since God’s Essence
is mercy, and His wrath only accidental. Mention of God’s predominating
mercy is found in the Qur’ān112 as being all embracing, however no such
suggestion is made that His wrath is so universal. Allusion to these
Qur’ānic and ḥadīth sources can be found in several places within the
Ṣaḥīfa, such as in ‘His Supplication in Seeking Asylum with God’:

O God, if Thou willest, Thou wilt pardon us through Thy bounty and if
Thou willest, Thou wilt chastise us through Thy justice…

…and grant us sanctuary from Thy chastisement through Thy forbearance,
for none of us has the endurance for Thy justice and none of us can
reach deliverance without Thy pardon!113

Another example of a similar allusion can be found in ‘His Supplication
on the Day of Sacrifice and on Friday’:114

O God, nothing repels Thy wrath but Thy clemency, nothing repels Thy
displeasure but Thy pardon, nothing grants sanctuary from Thy punishment
but Thy mercy, and nothing will deliver me from Thee except pleading to
Thee before Thee…115

This is further illustrated in ‘His Supplication against that which he
Feared and Dreaded’, this verse is almost identical with the one found
in ‘His Supplication on the Day of Sacrifice and on Friday’:

My God, nothing repels Thy wrath but Thy clemency, nothing delivers me
from Thy punishment but Thy pardon, nothing rescues from Thee but Thy
mercy and pleading to Thee!116

A language similar to that of the Ṣaḥīfa can be found in the prayers
ascribed to the legendary Ḥaṣan al-Baṣrī (d.110/728) who has come to be
known as one of the first mystics.117

A closer reading of the prayers attributed to Haṣan al-Baṣrī would
reveal certain similarities to the Ṣaḥīfa, such as allusion, reference
and use of expression. This could be due to the fact, amongst other
things, that both personalities were of a high spiritual standing, and
interestingly also that the language employed in the Ṣaḥīfa, when
compared, is suggestive of being from the same early period. There are
many additional examples to draw from which would be found in the
thematic study in the subsequent chapter of this thesis.

2.4 Sajʿ in the Ṣaḥīfat al-Sajjādiyya
-------------------------------------

Another distinguishing linguistic feature the author employs is the
recurrent employment of sajʿor Arabic rhyme. In addition to
demonstrating exceptional proficiency in composition and rhetoric, the
sajʿ adds to the element of eloquence to the text. The author may also
have had the readers in mind as this may have been due to ease for the
readers to memorise some

of the supplications and to harmonise the flow of the text. However,
there are places where this sajʿ is breached:

Lā yamlukūna ta’khīran ʿammā qaddamahum ilayhi Wa la yastaṭī‛ūna
taqadduman ilā ma akhkharahum ʿanhu.118

In the above example of the Ṣaḥīfa taken from the first supplication,
the verb lā yamlikūna is rhymed with la yastaṭī‛ūna. The verbal noun
ta’khīran is immediately followed by the verb qaddamaha, which is on the
same morphological scale as ta’khīr (akhkhara -ta‘khīr / qaddama -
taqdīm). However, after the verb yastaṭī‛ūna the verbal noun taqadduman
is used instead of taqdīm, which rhymes which ta’khīr and is from the
same morphological scale as the verb akhkhara, which immediately follows
taqaddum. This change in the choice of words is designed to change the
meaning of the supplication. The rhyme is then applied again in the
remaining lines of the supplication.119

It is a correct and acceptable form but one that seems to have appeared
in later writings when Arabic etymology (al-ishtiqāq) developed. Most
early Arabic dictionaries do not have these forms.

What is interesting is that this may raise the question whether the
examples are frequent enough to indicate that the work, the whole body
or parts, may be of a later period, different to what is popularly
believed? It may not be the place here, for the sake of brevity and
conciseness, to undertake a detailed and comprehensive study for such an
analysis. What can be said is that word substitution may have taken
place during transmission, which may be very likely, since it is claimed
that the Ṣaḥīfa was transmitted textually, it is not clear whether the
original text contained the diacritical points and vowels or not. It is
possible that the scribes of later copies later inserted these vowels.

However, if this may tantamount to the text being manufactured or
contrived and also from a different time period is difficult to
envisage, as the ‘errors’ would be too conspicuous and blatant not to
have been avoided and noticed. Furthermore, if it may be a case of
manufacturing, the question arises why the text were not attributed to
any of the later Imams, such as Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq (d.148/765)
or ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā (d.202/818), who were historically more renowned
and attribution to whom may have been less challenging? This is a
question that may remain unanswered.

Moreover, what may be maintained is that changes in the forms of the
actual words, as long as not damaging the body of the text and changing
the meaning, would not equal to questioning the integrity of the work. A
reference related to this can be found in al-Kāfī in ‘The Book of
Excellence of Knowledge’ regarding the quoting of books and traditions,
and adhering to them. Muḥammad b. Māʿsūm enquired from Abū ʿAbdillāh
(Imam Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq):

“I hear the tradition from you and then (when quoting it to others) I
add to it and subtract something from it.” The Imam replied, “It does
not matter if you intend to convey the meaning of the tradition”120

Reference to a similar narration is also found in al-Kāfī, this time
from Dāwud b. Farqad who asked the same:

I hear the words and then intend to relate them as I have heard from
you, but I cannot recall your words. The Imam enquired of me; “Do you
deliberately change my words?” I replied; “No not at all!” The Imam
further enquired;

“Do you intend to convey my meaning?” I replied; “Certainly!” At this
the Imam observed; “Then it does not matter.”121

Apart from the above words discussed, there are other points that can be
made regarding the language and grammatical construction of the Ṣaḥīfa.
We shall only make reference to such points later in this thesis when
they contribute to our interpretation of the central questions of this
study.122

2.5 Authenticity of Early Arabic Poetry
---------------------------------------

Although, as mentioned earlier, such discussions concerning authenticity
have always taken place, the debate was once again brought to light
after doubts were cast concerning the authenticity of early Arabic
poetry by Ṭaḥa Ḥusayn and Margoliouth in the 1920’s. The propositions of
both these scholars, which were put forward independently are described
by Jones (1992) to be quite flawed, and he describes the counter
arguments propounded by the their opponents to be better.123 The debate
however drew to a close, not least because of the epilogue to Arberry’s
The Seven Odes, in which the arguments were set out, analysed and
rebutted.124 Understandably it would not be the place here to discuss
the whole body of arguments for or against concerning the discussion of
authenticity of early Arabic poetry, as it would make the discussion
extensive and take it outside our bounds. Nonetheless, it is interesting
to note that perceptive scholars as they are called by Jones, such as
Gibb, who were not even directly involved in the debate would forward a
succinct case in favour of authenticity and had this to say (Arabic
Literature p. 21):

… it would have been impossible for the rāwīs of the eighth century, if
they had nothing behind them but the undoubtedly genuine productions of
the seventh, to have imagined the markedly different poetry of the
pre-Islamic age, and to have invented all its particular local and
personal diversities.

While it may very seldom be possible to provide objective evidence for
the authenticity of any given poem with complete certitude, nevertheless
(and notwithstanding all possible sources of error, verbal modification,
or rearrangement) there can be no doubt that the commonly accepted
nucleus of poems ascribed to the poets of the sixth century is a
faithful reproduction of their poetic output and technique, and thus
substantially authentic. Most, indeed, of what must have been an immense
volume of poetry has perished, but what survives includes, at least, all
those works which have been most highly esteemed by every generation of
native critics.125

Before entering the final part in our study of authenticity, which is
the Traditional Analysis, an evaluation of the issues of linguistic
analysis may give rise to some interesting matters to questions
discussed in the sections concerning Arabic rhyme and Arabic poetry.
Moreover, an assessment of the linguistic analysis of the Ṣaḥīfa with
regard to allusion, reference and use of language draws the picture of
an author with an intimate familiarity to and knowledge of the sources
(Qur’ān and the sunna).

Chittick, in his words, when in the process of comparing and contrasting
the Ṣaḥīfa and the personality of ‛Alī b. al-Ḥusayn “with a text which
expresses the highest aspirations of the Muslim souls”,126

says:

…if the author of the Ṣahīfat al-kāmila was not Imam Zayn al-‛Ābidīn, he
– or they – would in any case have to have been a spiritual authority of
equal rank.127

It may well be appropriate here to say that such a familiarity appears
to be quite coherent and in character with the personality of ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn, who is considered largely by the majority of the body of
Muslim scholars to be held in the highest esteem. Further reference to
his personality will be given subsequently in the biography.

3.1 Traditional Analysis
------------------------

Traditional Islamic scholarship has evaluated texts and transmitted
documents in two ways: first by a critical study of the chain of
transmitters of the text, or what is known as the ṣanad.128 Secondly, by
a critical study of the subject matter of the text, what is known as the
matan. Moreover, if the chain itself is believed to be interrupted or
broken (munqati‛) the authenticity of the tradition or text will be
questioned. If the subject-matter of the text or the matan is found to
be contradicting the Qur’ān and other authenticated ḥadīth, or ʿaql
(reason), or if the language is not believed to be from the period in
which the narration or text is supposed to have originated, it will not
be accepted as authentic.129

Ḥadīth scholars have further divided the authentic report or the saḥiḥ
into two main categories: the mutawātir (multiple successive
transmissions) and the āḥād (single transmission) or khabar al-wāḥid.130
The use of this terminology and methodology is not restricted to Ḥadīth
Criticism only; it is commonly and frequently applied to other fields as
well.131

For example, in Arabic linguistics and lexicography the ṣanad played a
very significant role in the study of words and their meanings.
According to Suyūtī (d.910/1505), any meaning of a word would not be
accepted until certain conditions were fulfilled.132

Furthermore, ‛ʿ Abū al-Faḍl, expresses a similar opinion from the
Lumaʿi-l adilla of Ibn al-Anbarī to that of Suyūṭī, with the addition of
the influence and implications on language and law.133 From this it may
be arrived to the fact that the study of the chain of transmitters was
not limited to ḥadīth literature only.

Those who have written on the authenticity of the Ṣaḥīfa have claimed
that their chains are mutawātir.134

There are many chains that have been used to transmit the Ṣaḥīfa.135 The
most popular are those leading back directly to Muḥammad al-Bāqir b.
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, and al-Shaḥīd al-Khālid Zayd b. ʿAlī also the son of
Zayn al-‛Ābidīn. Zayd is said to have possessed a manuscript of the
Ṣaḥīfa in his custody, which was later passed on to his children and to
the children of ʿAbdullah b. al-Ḥasan al-Muthanna, as mentioned in the
beginning of the manuscript.136 There was yet another manuscript in the
hands of Muḥammad al-Bāqir.137 According to al-Abṭaḥī, in Majlisī’s
account, the number of narrators in the chains of those who transmitted
the Ṣaḥīfa

reached over fifty six thousand people138 , this number is consistent
with the view held by other scholars as well.139 Furthermore, Chittick
mentions a reference found in Mishkāt’s and Marʿashī’s introduction to
the Ṣaḥīfa, that Majlisī’s father, Mullā Muḥammad Taqī Majlisī
(d.1070/1659-60) counted all the chains of transmission by which he had
received the Ṣaḥīfa to be more than a million.140 What possibly could
have been meant is the number of reporters in all of the chains.

The wording of the ṣanad itself suggests that the Ṣaḥīfa may have been
transmitted both orally and as a written document. The narrator in the
beginning of the chain uses the verb ḥaddathanā (‘he related to us’),
which is an indicator that he is reporting directly from his sources as
opposed to the words ʿan (from), which allows the possibility of
indirect transmission.141 Another verb used in the same ṣanad is
akhbaranā (he informed us) which is a technical term used by narrators
to indicate that they are transmitting from a written document.142 The
words qirā’atan ʿalayhi wa anā asmaʿ (he recited it to him while I was
listening) also used in the chains explicitly suggests that the Ṣaḥīfa
was being circulated and transmitted in written form.

Likewise, verbs such as samiʿtuha (I heard it) also suggest that the
transmission of the Ṣaḥīfa is through unbroken chains.

Since there are hundreds of such chains used to transmit this work,
discussing each chain individually will prove to be an exhausting task
and a study of this magnitude, is perhaps more suitable in the fields of
Tradition studies or Ḥadīth criticism. It is not the intention here to
analyse all the chains and the biographies of fifty six thousand or more
narrators who are believed to have transmitted this work since such a
study has already been undertaken by others in the field of rijāl and
ḥadīth studies.143

The terms ṣaḥīfa seems to suggest that the text may have been written by
the author himself and not merely attributed to him.144

Regarding the authenticity of the Ṣaḥīfa, Chittick in his introduction,
maintains that:

The opinion of the writer of these lines concerning the authenticity of
the Ṣaḥīfa – admittedly based only upon an intimate acquaintance with
the text gained through months spent in translation – is that the
original fifty-four prayers go back to Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn, that the addenda
are nearly as trustworthy, and that the munajāt may have been worked
upon by others.

But the Ṣaḥīfa in its larger forms probably contains a good deal of
material from later authors.145

Of course it may be difficult to identify exactly what would have
convinced Chittick concerning the authenticity of the Ṣaḥīfa. However,
it may be observed that what seems to be an additional factor -and
perhaps the deciding factor- over and above his investigation and
analysis, which may have led to give the identity of a ‘person’, it
seems that the ‘intimate acquaintance’ gained with the text by spending
months in translation, as mentioned above, may have given gave a ‘face’
to that person, the person and the face being that of ʿAlī b. Ḥusayn
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn.

What many of those who work with and translate texts of various kinds
might agree with, is that often an in-depth and close relationship may

gradually evolve towards the object of study, which in turn might allow
the text to be viewed from ‘within’ rather than to be observed from the
‘outside’.

Traditionally, in the opinion of the Shīʿa at least, there has been no
doubt concerning the integrity and authorship of the Ṣaḥīfa.146

Although there is some disagreement among non-Shīʿa scholars regarding
the authorship of the Ṣaḥīfa,147 it is not maintained within the body of
Shīʿa scholarship as mentioned, particularly in the minds of Shīʿa
worshippers who use the prayer manual. For them, according to Howarth
(1991, p.19) “the value of the book cannot be divorced from the history
and personality of Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn himself.”148 He records an
interesting incident in his thesis to illustrate this point as recounted
by Naṣr: Henry Corbin, a noted Western scholar in Shīʿa studies,
remarked once to the well-known Shīʿa scholar ʿAllāma Ṭabaṭabā’ī, the
compiler of the renowned commentary of the Qur’ān, al-Mizān, that
“Western scholars claim that ʿAlī is not the author of the Nahj
al-balāgha.” The ʿAllāma “raised his head and answered in his usual
gentle and calm manner”, and replied:

“For us whoever wrote the Nahj al-balāgha is ʿAlī, even if he lived a
century ago.”149


