CHAPTER 5: The Style and Themes in the Ṣaḥīfa Sajjādiyya
========================================================

Regrettably not much has been written on the aspect of style or the
themes contained within the Ṣaḥīfa independently. The Arabic
commentaries on the Ṣaḥīfa150 largely focus on the linguistic analysis
of the terms and phrases used by the Imam ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn in addition
to supplementing the contents of the prayers with supporting reports by
the Prophet and the Imams in the Shīʿa tradition. In this respect the
only contribution appears to be from Chittick in his introduction to the
translation of the Ṣaḥīfa151 and Colin Turner's article on Prayers
within the Twelver Shīʿa tradition.152

Padwick’s Muslim Devotions is, as described by Colin Turner, a magnum
opus that covers the whole Muslim world in terms of the practise of
prayers, yet is weakest when it comes to the subject of prayers within
the Twelver Shīʿa tradition.153 Padwick does touch upon the Ṣaḥīfa but
not independently, yet in fairness does cover certain themes contained
within the Ṣaḥīfa in a more general sense. Turner in his article has
offered a broad sevenfold categorisation of prayers within the Twelver
Shīʿ’a tradition;154 the prayers within Ṣaḥīfa generally fall into five
of these genera.

Chittick’s work, although brief, is insightful and very useful in
acquainting the reader with the personal, spiritual and theological
dimensions that run through the crosssection of the prayers. Thus from
Chittick’s introduction of describing the style of the Ṣaḥīfa and the
category description given by Turner in his article together with a
general understanding of prayers within the Muslim world by Padwick we
have a very small nonetheless a very useful point of beginning into the
study of the Ṣaḥīfa within the English language.

Our analysis of the Ṣaḥīfa in what will follow will be to explore at
both the general structure of the prayers and the content of the
prayers. As for the structure, we will look at the way in which the Imam
generally begins and ends his prayers. In terms of the contents we will
first look at the fundamental tenets that are present within the prayers
such as the notion of Unity of God, Essential lack and Need inherent
within the creatures, which forms the overall worldview of the Imam and
determines the creature-God relationship. After this we will elaborate
on factors that are subordinate to the above such as ethical, social and
spiritual. Finally we will place the prayers of the Ṣaḥīfa into broad
categories and genera in terms of the prayers recited spontaneously or
being premeditated, highly spiritual or semi spiritual and rational,
together with placing them in other lesser fundamental categories. In
our discussion on both the style and the content, we will, as far as
possible, site from the broader Islamic spiritual literature in order to
give a better understanding of why the Imam has employed his particular
style and content.

1. The Style of Supplications in terms of Content and Structure
---------------------------------------------------------------

The style and contents of prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa generally transcend
religious limitations and boundaries. We cannot deny that both the style
and

the contents of the prayers are a product of the influence of Islam upon
the Imam155 , yet there is a deep sense of humanness about the prayers
that would appeal to any individual. The Imam’s approach is in the
context of his ‘createdness’ and ‘creaturliness’ that is common across
humanity. In this sense he unhesitatingly displays his strengths and
weaknesses, joys and sorrows, anxiety at situations beyond his control
and a deep need for a God in Whom he confides and seeks support from.
These are the psychological challenges that face all human beings in the
course of their lives regardless of creed and culture. The prayers in
brief are what I term as ‘spiritual ethics’, designed to bring a state
of wholesomeness within an individual and do not necessarily require an
individual to profess faith in a particular belief or doctrine.

With the exception of the Names of Allāh, personalities of Islam and
references to eschatology, there is not much that would delineate these
prayers as something particular to the Muslim. On that note we notice
that prayers generally are an ideal means to create that much needed
moral common ground of discourse between people of different religious
persuasions, however in particular the ethical-spiritual content within
the prayers of the Ṣaḥīfa may even appeal to people of non-religious
persuasion. In brief the language of the prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa in
many instances is a human language with an appeal to humanity at large.

Having said this we can consider the style of the supplications within
the Ṣaḥīfa in terms of both the structure and the contents. The
contents, as mentioned above, have a broad human appeal and shall be
dealt with in subsequent sections; as for the structure, it is very much
inline with the particular Islamic and Shīʿa teachings and whose
relevance would not be appreciable by readers who are not acquainted
with the spiritual etiquettes of prayers within Islam. The Imam
commences every prayer with the Praise of God and sends salutations upon
the Prophet and the members of his household and ends the prayers with
salutations.156 In many prayers the Imam frequently invokes the blessing
of God upon the Prophet and his family during the course of the prayers
not merely at the beginning and end.157 The reason for this is that
there are uncountable reports from the Prophet and the Imams that God
accepts prayers and supplications when they commence with His praise,
similarly there are numerous reports stating that a guaranteed means for
the granting of requests is to invoke God’s blessings upon the Prophet
and his household.158

The Qur’ān commences with the praise of God in the very first chapter
named Surat al-Ḥamd or Surat al-Fātiḥa (the Chapter of Praise or
Opening) where it states: al-ḥamdu-li-llāhi rabbil-ʿālamīn “All praise
is for Allāh the Nurturer of the worlds…”159

Similarly the Muslim daily devotions, which comprise of seventeen units
to be prayed throughout the day, contain the statement: samiʿ Allāhu
liman ḥamidah “Surely Allāh responds to the one who praises Him” in
every single unit.160 As for the invocation of blessing and salutation
upon the Prophet and his family the Qur’ān states: inna allāha wa
malāikatahu yuṣallūna ʿala n-nabiyy yā ayyuhalladhīna āmanū ṣallū
ʿalayhi wasallimū

taslīman “Indeed Allāh and His angels send blessing upon the Prophet
thus O you who believe, invoke blessings and salutations upon him!”161

### 1.1 Basic General Tenets of the Prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa

###

### 1.1.1 Individuality and Spontaneity

###

The Ṣaḥīfa is a collection of prayers recited by the Fourth Shīʿa Imam
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn on various occasions of his life and in different
personal and psychological states. Prayers in Islam and within the
Twelver Shīʿa tradition enjoy a prominent place within the communal and
individual life of the Muslim. Prayers fundamentally are means of
relation and connection between the individual and God and fall into a
variety of classifications as attested to by all three of the above
authors. The most central and the broadest category of prayers is one of
obligational and recommended.

The manner and the method, together with the time and place for the
performance of the obligatory prayers is prescribed and fixed by the
Prophet, whereas the recommended prayers have a scope for personal
improvisation in terms of time, place, personal state and occasion. By
and large it is this allowance of personal improvisation and formulation
of prayers that marks the fundamental distinction between the obligatory
and recommended prayers. The non-obligatory recommended prayers as
mentioned above are of various genera such as supplications for needs or
on special occasions or for others to mention but a few, and are such
that the individual can be both spontaneous and original.162

The key terms used within the Qur’ān denoting prayers, generally of both
the obligatory and supererogatory categories but with greater emphasis
on the nonobligatory are Duʿā and Dhikr. Dhikr a verbal noun from the
root verb in Arabic dhakara, literally means to make a mention of or to
remember163 and is used frequently within the Qur’ān in the general
sense of consciously connecting with God in great frequency and on all
occasions. For example we have the following verses from the Qur’ān, at
the completion of the main ceremonies of the major pilgrimage, the Ḥajj:
“Then remember Allāh as you remember your forefathers or a more intense
remembrance"164 Or: “Remember Allāh an abundant remembrance and glorify
Him at daybreak and at dusk”165 and finally verses in the praise of
righteous people such as:

“Those who remember Allāh standing, sitting and on their sides, they
reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth and state; our
Lord! You have not created this in vain, save us from the chastisement
of the Fire."166

As for the word duʿā from the root verb daʿā, literally means to call or
call upon.167

Duʿā within the Qur’ān denotes a direct, spontaneous and an
unpretentious communication with God. Verses such as those depicting the
psycological state of anxiety where an individual in the face of danger
lets go of inhibition and calls upon God, for example: “They call upon
God imploring Him...”168 There are numerous verses within the Qur’ān
where the word duʿā gives the meaning of a personal and direct
relationship between

the creatures and their Lord in which God, in an encouraging tone,
commands the creatures to call upon Him. For example the verse:

“Say to My servants of Me that I am indeed near, I respond to the
supplication of one who calls upon Me whenever he calls upon Me.”169
And: “Call on to Me and I shall respond.”170 Such verses encourage a
personal unpretentious relation with God where an individual feels at
liberty with the procession of a more or less, right on God to approach
Him on the individual’s terms. Whereas verses such as: “Call Allāh or
call al-raḥmān (Most Merciful) whichever you call upon, Allāh has the
beautiful Names,”171 give right to personal improvisation and
formulation of communication with God to the individual’s desire.
Although the devotees do repeat the adʿīya (plural of duʿā) dictated by
the Imams for various occasions however, even in such ceremonial
performances, the individual is ideally required to be in a
psychological state where the duʿā is intended as a personal discourse
with God which is made possible by the universal language of the duʿā as
mentioned above.

The tenets of dhikr and duʿā, namely the frequent rememberence of God on
all occassions and the display of an intimate personal relation with God
resulting in an unpretentious natural and spontaneous communication with
God to the formulation of an individual’s desire and chosing are the
essentials of supererogatory communication with God. The Ṣaḥīfa in its
entirety depicts these two tenets where the Imam in every prayer
displays his individuality and humanness, where he at a very personal
and intimate level portrays a direct relationship with God in which he
unashamedly and unassumingly speaks to God from the depths of his soul.
This is fairly apparent from a cursory reading of the titles of the
prayers and their contents. For example, we have prayers that the Imam
has recited at mornings and evenings, on the completion of the
recitation of the Qur’ān, and Day of fast-breaking, among others. In
contrast, we have prayers he recited for seeking help in paying his
debts, asking for water during drought, when death was mentioned or
prayers for his parents, children and friends.

Finally at a personal level there are prayers recited when he was sick,
making confession of his inadequacies, atonement at acts of
wrongdoing,172 in moments of fear and for removal of worries. In every
one of these prayers there is a very personal tone that the Imam is
using where he profeses his own state of inadequcy and calls upon the
mercy of God.

### 1.2 Particular tenets of prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa

###

### 1.2.1 Theological Tenets- Unity of God and the notion of Lordship and Servant-hood

###

Within the Shīʿa tradition there are numerous reports from the Prophet
and the Imams that talk of duʿā as the essence of worship and the best
form of worship.173 In turn worship in Islam is the fundamental reason
for the creation of humans and the Jinn as attested to by the verse: “I
have not created Jinn and Men except for My worship.”174

In Muslim theology and spirituality, worship establishes the distinction
between God and His creatures. Through worship an individual
acknowledges his or her state of createdness and need to God, and

establishes God’s rank of being the Creator and the One in a state of
absolute completion without any deficiency. Duʿā in this sense of
marking a distinction between God and the creatures occupies a
fundamental position with the Shīʿ spiritual and theological outlook.
For example Imam ʿAlī in his famous prayer popularly known as Duʿā
Kumayl, highly recommended to be prayed by the faithful on the eve of
Thursdays, states towards the end;

Indeed You have decreed upon Your servants to worship You and have
commanded them to pray to You and have guaranteed Your response. Thus to
You O Lord I turn my face, and towards You I extend my hands, by Your
honour grant my prayer... Forgive the one who owns nothing but a
Duʿā...175

Duʿā, in essence, is therefore a conscious acknowledgment of need to God
and God’s state of untarnished perfection. Chittick terms this tenet of
the prayers within Ṣaḥīfa as tawḥīd (the Unity of God) in Devotional
Mode. The Imam in his prayers as Chittick points out, continuously
attributes all goodness, mercy, love, perfection… to God in a way
compatible with the Unity of God as in “there is no god but God”, “there
is no love except through God’s initiative”, “there is no knowledge but
in God”, “there is no mercy except from God”…. Whilst at the same time
attributing all deficiency, lack, sin and inadequacy to his own self.176

The dimension of Tawḥīd is a central principle of the prayers within the
Ṣaḥīfa where the other tenets that are mentioned below are seen as its
facets and subordinate to it.

### 1.2.1.1 Variety of Names and Attributes of God to approach Him by during various needs

###

Different trends of thought within the Islamic intellectual traditions
have classified the Names and attributes of God in somewhat of a
different manner each in accordance with their particular outlook.
Fundamentally, each group within the Shīʿa tradition accepts the notion
of the essential unity between God, His Attributes and Names due to the
strict teachings of Unity of God within the Shīʿi religious literature;
the only difference in this respect is in terms of the variety of
function of God in relation to the world and His envisaged purpose from
creation. Chittick alludes to some of the approaches to the Attributes
of God within the Muslim intellectual traditions, however due to the
lack of scope within his introduction to the Ṣaḥīfa he does not discuss
the issue in the context of the prayers of the Imam.

The theologians look at the Attributes of God in terms of affirmation
and negation or in terms of the Attributes of the Essence and Act of
God177 whereas the theosophers178 and mystics focus more on the
distinction of the Attributes of Beauty and Majesty whilst looking at
the world as a stage for the display of God’s Attributes and Names.

Rūmī reduces human-Divine psychology squarely to the Attributes of
Gentleness and Severity where each human state corresponds to a facet of
God’s Attribute of Mercy or Wrath, through which individuals both
connect with God and arrive at the fullness of their vested
potentials.179 This is precisely the manner in which the Shīʿa Imams
have introduced the notion of the function of the Names of God through
their teachings and in particular through the prayers.

The famous Duʿā by the name of al-Jawshan al-Kabīr180 which is recited
by the faithful in the nights of the month of Ramadan and is attributed
to the Prophet of Islam consists of a thousand Names and Attributes of
God. The prayer of al-Jawshan al-Kabīr describes God’s absoluteness,
unity and perfection through His various Names and Attributes in
relation to His function in human life. For example; “O Friend for one
who has no friend... O Physician for one who has no physician… O
Strength of the weak... O One Who elevates Ranks… O One Who defends…”
and so forth. Thus from reading the prayers of the Imams we find that
there are Names and Attributes of God for particular types of situations
through which He is to be invoked and approached.

Imam ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn follows this method prominently in certain
prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa.181

### 1.1.2 Spiritual Dimensions

###

Great emphasis is placed upon the individual psychological state of the
supplicant to the extent that the individual state is seen as a means of
assurance for the Divine response. In this respect several spiritual
factors as forming the overall psychological state of an individual are
dictated by the Prophet and the Imams. These factors, to list the main
ones are things such as; the softness of heart (al-riqqah), tearfulness,
acknowledgment of sin, directedness to God etc. I term these tenets
generally as the dimension of the individual’s conscious presence and
God-focus.

In several reports from the Prophet and the Imams, the faithful are
exhorted to approach God through a state of softened heart and
tearfully.182 Similarly, elsewhere they are told be God–focused during
prayers and being mindful that they are in the presence of God who sees
and hears them183 , and finally the supplicant is told to have full
faith and confidence of Divine grace at the point of prayer. All these
factors in turn are, as taught by the Prophet and the Imams, assured
means of securing God’s response.184

The Imam displays the above psychological states throughout his prayers
but more so in some of them than others. For example we see in his
Supplication of Confession and Seeking Repentance:185 where he says; “So
here I am my Lord, standing at the gate of Thy might, the standing of
the lowly, the surrendered, asking Thee in my shame, the asking of the
destitute, the pitiful… He is bowed before Thee, bent, his head lowered,
thrown down, his legs shaking in fear, his tears flooding his cheeks….”

(Ṣaḥīfa, p. 44).

Moreover, Chittick brings an interesting discussion in his introduction
to the Ṣaḥīfa in relation to the Imam’s attitude of confessing sins and
considering himself to be utterly unworthy. Whereas on the one hand the
Shīʿa theologically maintain that the Imams are flawless creatures in
every respect, yet on the other we witness from the prayers of all of
them without exception, and especially from ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn, such
admission and confession of sin. This, as Chittick points out of sort,
is in keeping with the Imam’s conscious acknowledgement of his
inadequacy in the presence of God’s perfection, not that the Imam is
guilty of crimes associated entities lesser than him.186

### 1.1.3 Ethical and Moral Dimensions

###

The Prophet, when asked about his missionary role and purpose, replied:
“I have been sent to complete or perfect the noble human traits.”187
Similarly the Qur’ān states in the praise of the Prophetic conduct: wa
innaka la ʿalā khuluqin ʿaẓīm “Indeed you possess lofty human traits.188
Acquisition or completion of befitting human morals has been a priority
on the agendas of the Prophets and the saints. Imam ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn
places great emphasis on human moral makeup, outlook and conduct through
his prayers. Human values are dealt with fundamentally from the
perspective of rights of others upon an individual, where the other is
not constituted by mere other persons, but also in terms of one’s own
soul, mind and limbs. Thus, moral betterment is considered by the Imam
as the betterment of oneself through the reformation of character and by
fulfilment of the rights of others. The rights of others fall into three
categories: The rights of God, the rights of the individuals’ own person
and the rights of other creatures. The Imam seeks pardon from God for
the transgressions committed against the rights of the others in the
above sense and invokes Divine assistance to redress the situation
wherever possible. There are three major parts within the Ṣaḥīfa that
deal with moral issues in a direct way, these are- The Treatise of
Rights189 , Prayer for Worthy Morals and The Prayer of Penance.

The Prayer for Worthy Morals,190 again talks of the betterment of the
soul fundamentally before talking of interaction with others. In the
Prayer of Penance,191 the Imam implores God through admission of his
transgression upon his soul, upon the rights of God and rights of other
creatures and asks for Divine pardon and assistance in rectifying the
wrongs that he has committed.

### 1:1:4 Social and Political Dimensions

###

The Qur’ān in several places teaches that the human community has
essentially been a single community and that there has always been a
single dīn (religion or a way of submission) See for example verses such
as: Mankind was one single nation, and Allāh sent Messengers with glad
tidings and warnings...192

However in particular the Qur’ān talks of the Muslim community as a
single entity where the community almost forms the greater identity of
its members. Elsewhere and to a lesser degree, the Qur’ān addresses the
issue of the shared identity and fates of the People of the Book, Ahlul
Kitāb or the religious traditions branching from Abraham namely the
Jews, Christians and Muslims through verses and at places the Qur’ān
guarantees salvation and deliverance to the believers, Jews, Christians
and the Sabeans: “Those who believe (in the Qur’ān), and those who
follow the Jewish (scriptures), and the Christians and the Sabeans,- any
who believe in Allāh and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall
have their reward with their Lord; on them shall be no fear, nor shall
they grieve.”193

The understanding that the umma in particular is a single family is
further emphasised though numerous Prophetic traditions encouraging a
general concern for other Muslims such as: “Indeed, if a person does not
have concern for the affairs of the Muslims then this, in reality, is a
deficiency in ones Islam.”194 Similarly from al-Ṣādiq we have: “To see
to

the needs of a believer is better than the acceptance of a thousand
pilgrimages performed with all its rites and freeing a thousand slaves
for the sake of Allāh.”195

The Imam, in line with this Qur’ānic and Prophetic outlook, invokes
God’s blessings upon previous prophets, their religions and adherents.
The Imam states for example;

“O God... in every era and time in which Thou didst send a messenger and
set up for people a director, from the period of Ādam down to Muḥammad
(God bless him and his household), from among Imams of guidance and the
Leaders of the God-fearing (upon them be peace – remember them with
forgiveness and good pleasure!”196

Needless to say, such prayers are a product of untarnished human
sentiments and can be a potent means for inter-religious dialogue in our
modern pluralistic world where through the core literature of Islam and
by one of its most celebrated personalities, pluralism as opposed to
mere inclusivism is advocated as a part of the Islamic worldview. At
other instances we have numerous examples where the Imam prays for the
Umma and the rectification of its affairs, the soldiers guarding the
Muslim frontiers, neighbours and believers, such as in the prayers of;
His Supplication for himself and the People under his Guardianship, His
Supplication for his Neighbours and Friends when he Mentioned them, His
Supplication for the People of the Frontiers, etc.197

### 1.1.5 Esoteric Dimensions

###

In a certain number of prayers such as the Munājāt or the Whispered
Prayers, the Imam interacts with God through an informal, mystical and
Sufi like manner. Here the language is one of love where formality and
courtesy in addressing God feature less prominently. These appear at
such moments where the Imam has his guard down and has let go of his
inhibitions and approached God on the terms of a loving friend who
desires non-other than his friend. The Imam in these prayers, unlike the
other supplications, does not show as much concern about salvation and
deliverance from Hell, rather the emphasis in these prayers is upon the
meeting with God, absorption and effacement within God. The Imam
supplicates for the attainment of the love of God and beholding the
splendour of His Face. These are prayers in which intuition and love
carry an individual beyond the threshold of reason and intellect.
Prayers such as: The Whispered Prayer of the Lovers and The Whispered
Prayer of the Beseechers,198 amongst others, clearly demonstrate that
the Imam is in a very private moment of intimacy with his Most Beloved
and at the core desires nothing beyond God, for example he says;

My God! Who can have tasted the sweetness of Thy love, Then wanted
another in place of Thee?

Who can have become intimate with Thy nearness, Then sought removal from
Thee?199

2. Broad Categories of the Prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa
----------------------------------------------------

Although the cross-section of the prayers within the Ṣaḥīfa maintain the
fundamental feature of God-creature relation, where God is the source of
all good and the creature as the point of deficiency, yet the manner of
prayer

and content allow us to group them into different genera. As mentioned
earlier, both Chittick and Turner have shed some light on the subject.
We will look at the category of prayers in accordance to both these
authors in what follows. Although the distinctions these authors make in
terms of the categories may not be exhaustive, nonetheless are admirable
contributions to an overall understanding of the nature of prayers
contained within the Ṣaḥīfa.

### 2.1 Broad Genera- Spontaneous and Premeditated

###

Chittick in his introduction to his translation to the Ṣaḥīfa makes a
distinction among the prayers in terms of those that were supplicated
spontaneously and those that were recited and practised. In this
respect, Chittick states, the prayers generally are those that were
offered spontaneously by the Imam on behalf of his own self with the
exception of prayers that were ceremonially offered on particular events
or those offered for others such as the prayer for his parents. The
prayer for the Day of ʿArafa, for example, Chittick observes, must have
been taught by the Imam to his disciples due to its ceremonial recital
on the Day of ʿArafa. Similarly Chittick believes that the prayer for
his parents must have been a dictation of the Imam to his followers
based on certain sentiments contained within the prayer and the Imam’s
own personal circumstances.200 This then is a broad twofold category of
the prayers in terms of those prayed spontaneously and those that were
premeditated.

### 2.2 Another Broad Genera- Rational and Intuitive

###

This is another broad category of prayers based on the psychological
state of the Imam. Although neither Chittick nor Turner have mentioned
this directly, both have alluded to it in some ways. By and large we
find that the Imam addresses God in a very courteous and a formal way
where his words are fashioned and expressed in a way that are of a sober
devotee who supplicates to his Lord, Authority and Master.

Here the Imam is restrained, constrained, contained and acutely aware of
the distinction between Master and servant or slave. However there are a
number of prayers such as the Munājāt where the Imam allows himself the
liberty to address God in a less formal manner. Here the Imam talks more
as a lover obsessed with God rather than a slave talking to his master.
In these prayers the heart and the intuition of the Imam seems to
predominate his reason in relation to what he seeks from God.

These prayers speak of the meeting with God, His love and His presence.
I have decided to term the distinction here as distinction based on the
predominance of either reason or spiritual intuition.

### 2:2 Five Particular Genera

###

Following are five categories of the seven categories given by turner in
his article201 on the general types of prayers within the Shīʿa
tradition found within the Ṣaḥīfa:

### 2.2.1 Prayers designed as paeans of praise and thanks to God

###

Although most prayers in the Ṣaḥīfa begin with the praise to God there
are certain prayers specifically dedicated to that, such as the very
first prayer with the title ‘Praise of God’ where the Imam says:

Praise belongs to God, The First, without a first before Him, The Last,
without a last behind Him.

Beholders’ eyes fall short of seeing Him, Describers’ imaginations are
not able to depict Him.202

Another example is seen in His Supplication when Perils were Repelled or
Requests quickly granted, where we find:

O God, to Thee belongs praise for Thy excellent accomplishment and for
Thy trial which Thou hast turned away from me!

But make not my share of Thy mercy the well-being which Thou hast
quickly granted to me, lest I become wretched through what I have loved
and someone else gain felicity through what I have disliked!203

### 2.2.2 Invocations that include requests of forgiveness and clemency

###

The Ṣaḥīfa is punctuated with supplications that reach out for God’s
forgiveness and mercy, such as the prayers of His Supplication Asking
Pardon, His Supplication in Seeking Pardon, His Supplication in
Repentance, such as:

This is the station of him whom sins have passed from hand to hand.

Offenses’ reins have led him on, and Satan has gained mastery over him.

He fell short of what Thou hast commanded through neglect and he pursued
what Thou hast prohibited in delusion...

...O God, so here I am: I have come to Thee obeying Thy command (for
Thou hast commanded supplication) and asking the fulfilment of Thy
promise, (for Thou hast promised to respond) Thou hast said, Supplicate
Me and I will respond to you204

...O God, I repent to Thee in this my station from my sins, great and
small, my evil deeds, inward and outward, my lapses, past and recent,
with the repentance of one who does not tell himself that he might
disobey or secretly think that he might return to an offense...205

In the supplications of repentance we also find ʿAlī .b Ḥusayn not only
repenting for his own inadequacies towards God, but also seeking
forgiveness and repair for the wrongdoings towards others, seeing them
ultimately as his own shortcomings, such as ‘His Supplication in Asking
Pardon for Misdeeds to God’s Servants and for Falling Short in their
Rights and that his Neck be Set Free from the Fire’:

O God, I ask pardon from Thee for the person wronged in my presence whom
I did not help, the favour conferred upon me for which I returned no
thanks, the evildoer who asked pardon from me and whom I did not pardon,
the needy person who asked from me and whom I preferred not over myself,
the right of a believer who possesses a right incumbent upon me which I
did not fulfil, the fault of a believer which became evident to me and
which I did not conceal, and every sin which presented itself to me and
which I failed to avoid.

I ask pardon, my God, for all of these and their likes, with an asking
of pardon in remorse which may act as an admonisher against similar
things ahead of me...206

### 2:2:3 Prayers for individual’s spiritual betterment or for the spiritual, emotional and material wellbeing of others

###

In this category we also find many prayers, perhaps the most well-known
being ‘His supplication on Noble Moral Traits and Acts Pleasing to God’
also known as Duʿā Makārim al-Akhlāq. Here we find the Imam intensively
conversing with God in beseeching Him to assist him to refine his
character, for example:

O God, bless Muḥammad and his Household, cause my faith to reach the
most perfect faith, make my certainty the most excellent certainty, and
take my intention to the best of intentions and my works to the best of
works!

O God, bless Muḥammad and his Household, adorn me with the adornment of
the righteous, and clothe me in the ornaments of the god-fearing,
through spreading justice, restraining rage, quenching the flame of
hate, bringing together the people of separation, correcting discord,
spreading about good behaviour, covering faults, mildness of temper,
lowering the wing,207 beauty of conduct, gravity of bearing,
agreeableness in comportment, precedence in reaching excellence,
preferring bounteousness, refraining from condemnation, bestowing bounty
on the undeserving, speaking the truth, though it be painful, making
little of the good in my words and deeds, though it be much, and making
much of the evil in my words and deeds, though it be little!208

### 2.2.4 Prayers that are made on behalf of others

###

In this group we find prayers such as ‘Prayers for his Parents, for his
Children, for his Neighbours and Friends, the People of the Frontiers’
etc., such as:

...And single out my parents, O God, for honour with Thee and blessings
from Thee, O Most Merciful of the merciful!

...and let me be devoted to them, with the devotion of a compassionate
mother!

Make my obedience and devotion to them more gladdening to my eyes than
sleep to the drowsy and more refreshing to my breast than drink to the
thirsty, so that I may prefer their inclination to my inclination, set
their satisfaction before my satisfaction, make much of their devotion
to me though it be little, and make little of my devotion to them though
it be great...209

### 2.2.5 All prayers not locatable in any of the above

###

In this category we have prayers such as the ‘Fifteen Whispered
Prayers’, ‘His Supplications for the Days of the Week’ and various other
supplications such as ‘His Supplication Against what he Feared’ etc:

My Lord, make me not the target of affliction nor the object of Thy
vengeance, respite me, comfort me, release me from my stumble, and send
not affliction after me, for Thou hast seen my frailty, and the paucity
of my stratagems. So give me patience, for I, my Lord, am weak, and I
plead to Thee, my Lord!

‘I seek refuge in Thee from Thee’, so give me refuge!210

Albeit not extensive, trying to remain within the boundaries of this
study, which may well be extended much further, the reader would have a
better

and hopefully richer understanding of this classical literary textual
heritage within Islam, of the main streams that run through the text and
the various arteries they flow into, taking us towards the end of this
study ending with the conclusion to follow.


