CLOSING REMARKS
===============

The aim of undertaking the study of this masterful piece of spiritual
literature was to allow myself a chance of being introduced to the
treasury of wisdom and gems of human beauty, which I found not only
serve to enlighten minds but also instil confidence in our abilities. As
people we are at times faced with situations in our lives where we stand
defeated amidst trials and adversities, while on other occasions life
may lose all sense of purpose and meaning. It is at such moments that we
most require reassurance and encouragement together with an enduring
sense of purpose to continue living meaningful lives.

The truest form of encouragement and purpose can only come from within
us and through the beauty of our humanity. It is this very humanity that
leads us to a sense of fulfilment and satisfaction, and it is that one
reality which bonds us through its undiscriminating and undiscerning
want to extend goodness.

It equally shares among all of us whether we belong to a faith scheme or
otherwise.

Faith, religion and even non-religious systems despite their variety,
inevitably aim at bringing about a better life by directing the
individual and community through that which is most natural in the form
of common human values.

I found in the Ṣaḥīfa Sajjādiyya an invitation to me as a reader and the
supplicant to ponder over the depths of goodness inherent in the human
being as it serves as a treatise of instruction in the development of
the human self.

God, as the Object of these prayers and devotions portrays the most
noble rank befitting humanity, and He serves as both a Means and the
Ultimate goal for the culmination of human beauty. This beauty is then
reflected in the attainment of personal contentment and genuine concern
for others in a way allowing us to empathise and celebrate in their
pains and joy through unconditional love.

The realisation of such level of being would represent the embodiment of
the beauty of God and human completion. I hope the words of ʿAlī b.
al-Ḥusayn someday will also touch the hearts of those who come across
the Ṣaḥīfa and whereby naturally directing their growth and thereby
fulfilling their own purpose.


