Future - a Will
===============

Hope has its main role in moving towards the future and it is one of
the most important motives which makes us hurry to move towards a better
tomorrow. But, a will, since it is a stirring power and self-motivation,
makes expectations possible to be achieved and dreams able to be facts
and events.

Surely, the force of will and its ability for stirring man's powers
depends on the size of the aim towards which man is striving to reach,
and as long as the goal is great, the force of will or its incentive
power will be great, too.

The firebrand extinguishes once it reaches a desired aim. For example,
if a student strives exhausting efforts for the sake of getting a
diploma, surely, the firebrand of rushing will be limited with such a
goal, i.e., it extinguishes as soon as it reaches that certificate.

And as long as our goal - as Muslims - is to seek the Almighty Allah's
pleasure, surely the firebrand of will, which stirs movement towards
this goal, will not be completely extinguished. Whenever we finish a
stage, we will see other stages before us. This means that we should
strive towards abundance and the spreading of good in whatever
represents a gift for humanity. We should not be satisfied or stop at a
station, among the stations of a long way, because we would look like a
greedy businessman who adds profits to his wealth and raises his funds.
When a businessman is lazy, but we do not say he is satisfied, because
laziness is against satisfaction. Thus, in such a case, surely he loses
a golden opportunity for improving his conditions and 'opportunities
pass like clouds."

Indeed, we, as Muslims, should deal with such profitable, active and
secure trade with Allah, the Most High Who says:

"O you who believe! Shall I show you a merchandise which will deliver
you from a painful chastisement? (That) you should believe in Allah and
His Apostle, and strive in the way of Allah with your possessions and
your selves; that is better for you, if you but knew! He will forgive
you your sins and admit you into gardens, underneath which flow rivers
and excellent abodes in the gardens of eternity; that is the supreme
achievement. And another (blessing will He bestow) which you love, (that
is) the help of Allah, and a victory at hand; so give you (O Our Apostle
Muhammad!) the glad tidings unto the believers." Holy Qur'an (61:
10-13)

Will we be pleased to be only lazy traders? Or will we work to be
active and competing traders in doing good deeds in order not live a
life full of regret and sorrow when all these traders are going to be
distinguished from each other in the Day in which presents and outcomes
are distributed?! Thus, determination is an essential factor among the
factors of principles towards reaching our aims, whatever great and
important are. In this regard, a hadith says: "If an intention of one of
you is hanged on to Pleiades, surely he will get it." A pleiades is a
star in the highest point of the sky and is a metonymy to the farthest
aim which man can imagine.

There is nothing impossible with a conscious and apprehensive will. How
many times did such desires break the chains and penetrate the obstacles
to make miracles and cause great essential movements in the life of
people who really knew the value of what Allah gave them of great powers
by which they benefit their own lives and the life of humanity; of their
achievements which are, always, remembered and thanked.


**The Future Means Hard Work**

Those people who were successful in their lives confirm an important
fact, and that is, what they achieved of offerings and projects were
only passing in their minds as dreams at the beginning. They never lived
such dreams in the way certain lazy people do who indulge themselves in
the hope of "I hope" and "perhaps". But, indeed, they transferred these
dreams from imaginations, which were running through their minds, into
plans written on paper and, then, into practical projects with which
they actually live in i.e., they planned towards reaching the islands of
their dreams in order to activate them with their continuous striving
and efforts into real and live facts.

Indeed, it was through their strong will, patience, and having
optimistic trust in Allah's victory and support, and, preparing
themselves to face obstacles and challenges by accepting the results,
whatever they may be, that they their ways and made their ships reach
not only remote islands, but also, those remote and undiscovered
continents.

Indeed, Christopher Columbus, the discoverer of the American Continent,
challenged his enviers to make an egg stand on its end. They tried hard,
but they failed. When he pressed its end, it became flat. His
competitors, altogether, shouted "We can do that!", he answered them,
saying: "But you did not do itâ€¦and is not the discovery of America like
this!?"

The aim, which seems to be far at the highest top or at the most
distant horizon, needs a brave heart. A proverb, in this regard, says:
"There is no impossible in front of a brave heart." Once you put your
foot as a first step in a way, unless it is very far, will be passed
successively. Thus, the distance of one thousand miles may be
successively done in a first step if it is followed by endeavor,
seriousness, hard work and striving, otherwise, it cannot be crossed
automatically as we see it in some imaginary films which have nothing to
do with reality.

Surely, great schemes are great dreams of those people who never stop
at the threshold of imagination and wishes. Because a single desire is
the capital of a bankrupt one who cannot drop a date from a date palm
full of dates, nor bring a river near a thirsty mouth, nor uproot a
thorn from the road, nor build other than palaces out of sand which may
seem to be high in the air. However, they are leveled with the ground
with the first flood and are turned to part of a sandy coast as bubbles
which are quick both in swelling and exploding.

Undoubtedly, you have read and heard that inventors, authors, geniuses,
and informers were not satisfied to criticize what is common of current
ideas, opinions, and theses, but they worked hard with what they have
been given of wisdom, experience, patience, and will change the present
(reality) according to the view they bear for what is better and more
safe. And if they were satisfied with negative criticism or expected
from others to achieve for them the best picture, surely most ideas,
means and deeds remained without change.

For example, if you want to reach Mecca, and desire to visit the sacred
land from the depth of your heart, but you remain only wishing for many
years, without paving the way for it, nor preparing to have the
necessary means to perform anything which makes you reach there, will
you, then, reach?!

In such cases, you will remain moving in your place, while Mecca
remains only a dream which cannot be achieved, and the distance between
Mecca and you remains far.

Dream is required because it forms an effective motive towards the
goal. It looks like an intention which moves the organs to work. Thus,
future = hope + will + striving in the present time.


**Future Concerns**

In infancy, a doctor's child may wish to be a doctor, the son of an
engineer may hope to be an engineer and, likewise, the daughter of a
teacher may wish to be like her mother. But, childhood ambition may not
be necessarily the future plan of that particular person; he may change
with the development of his age. Because the more a child reaches the
puberty stage, he will start to feel he is an independent personality,
which is looking for anything that will make him a beneficial element in
the society.

At this stage, a young boy or girl changes from a person, into a
personality who is looking for a way that will find a new way and value
to their personalities, like being an artist, a scientist, a leader and
so on. In this stage, the youths will never hide themselves in the
social circle, which might be the family circle or other social
circles.

No doubt a young man or woman try their best to be in the best position
they choose for themselves. These ambitions and hopes are what they are
looking for and work in order to achieve them.

It is a great mistake for us to regard our social position as a
predetermined fate, which we cannot change, as if it is a strong
building that cannot be destroyed or a firm tree that can never be
uprooted. This is because our future is in our hands. There are many who
stay in their position, without any movement to take themselves out from
such a position or stance. Having a glance at our own environment, we
will see how the son of a laborer becomes a doctor, or the son of an
ordinary worker becomes a lawyer, or the son of a grocer becomes a
renowned engineer, or maybe a son of an illiterate man becoming a
well-known writer and so on.

At school time, the youths are anxious about their future, even though
they have already set their path by choosing the course of studies or
their social status, or it was chosen for them from his examination
results, but with all these he will continue to live in such a state. A
serious student doesn't regard his university studies at the station of
his life. Many a time, university graduates continue their studies and
get higher certificates. How many times have graduates from a particular
course, continued their studies to the extent that they past those who
were before them?

Being the fact that we cannot get all of what is hoped for or achieved,
it is possible that some of us will not be opportuned to finish our
studies due to either family conditions or financial or political
problems. But, from all that we have seen there are some who were able
to find their way in life and surpass some of their mates.

Therefore, study is among the important things in the future, and it
the basis and root from which the youths will start practicing their
professionalism. Indeed, the time has passed in which a student regards
the time he receives his university certificate with high credits as the
fruits of his effort, thereby, he is inclined to it for the rest of his
life.

Today, we are faced with a developed life that will never accept what
was accepted at the time of our forefathers, because the university
degree of today may be like a certificate of preparation of yesteryears,
and a master's degree as a preparatory stage of a doctorate degree. Even
those who attained doctorate degree are continuing their studies.

No doubt, if my mate or neighbor or a friend is able to achieve such a
higher stage of knowledge, I can - under the same conditions - reach
where he reached, because the future doesn't favor anyone above
othersâ€¦the doors are opened for all. Those who enter through wide doors,
are those who turn their future concern into a determination and a will;
it is said, "Whoever puts much effort, achieves what he wants and
whoever plants, harvests." The next thing, which disturbs the minds of
the youths, is 'work'. It is possible that a young fellow may finish his
university without getting a suitable job or a place where he can
practice what he learned. The condition may force him to change what he
has learned or work in another field.

It is either that he fights in order to work in the field he likes and
had hoped to work in or he will not be able to achieve that which he
strived for, therefore, not fulfilling what he wanted to fulfill.

But, if you achieve what you hope to achieve, then, it is necessary for
you not to be dull and lazy in your work, rather try to be perfect. Be
an inventor in your work, a competitor in increasing your knowledge and
experience, and do not regard the stage you are in as the end of the
road. But, if a difficult condition separated you and the work you
wanted to achieve, then you ought to remember that you might have missed
a chance, but there are many chances that you can achieve your
personality and your ambition.

Because the favor and capabilities granted to you by the Almighty Allah
were not confined to a particular field. Many a time, we have seen young
men and women who achieved something in life, even far away from their
own field due to some reasons, because they didn't surrender to the
condition, that is not on their side.

The third thing is 'money'. Today's needs are many and it may be
possible that what a youth achieved cannot satisfy those needs,
therefore, we must arrange our needs according to our earnings. Because,
the list of our needs can never finish when left unquenched, thus, we
must feel that 'money is for our service and we must not be at the
service of money'.

But there is no harm in seeking; rather it is among the hopes of a
person who opposes vacillating. Because accepting little is much better
than getting much as a grant, which is regarded as failure. The Almighty
Allah says:

"â€¦traverse then its broad sides, and eat of His provision; and unto to
Him (alone) is the return." Holy Qur'an (67:15)

Even though, financial problems disturb the youths much, and force some
of them to work in more than one place or migrate to other countries
where there is more work, but what we wanted to draw attention to is
that developing abilities and professionalism in more than one field and
depending on Allah, are among the ways of getting rid of such
problems.

Whatever the case may be, money is important but it must not be our
prime goal, because it is not only food that makes man live.

There is also the importance of 'marriage' as a future plan. Most of
the time a young man or woman thinks about this social and blessed
phenomenon, and he even gives much time and importance to it. They want
to build an Islamic family living under the shade of Allah's favor to
both of them: "And of His signs is that He created for you mates that
you may dwell (inclined) with them, and caused between you love and
compassionâ€¦" Holy Qur'an (30: 21)

The family life partnership is an important future plan, which requires
making a better choice on the part of both parties. The Almighty Allah
has predestined for a believing man to marry his suited believing woman,
because they have suited each other both mentally and spiritually and in
their goals. By choosing a nice partner, we will be sure of raising a
pious family that is capable of developing a pious society.

There is a saying of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) which says: "Decide
where your sperm will go, because the veins are inter woven." This,
then, is clear that marriage is not just for fulfilling ones urges. The
believing men have the right of choice, likewise, the believing women,
"If someone whom you have no doubt in his religion and morals comes to
you, then marry him."

Another subject is seeking position and fame. We, young men and women,
must not hurry in seeking it, because it will come if we do good in our
work and be patient till the time comes. We must work and the Almighty
Allah will pour it forth, but on the condition that it was done for His
sake. Working in order to show power, capability and favor is legal, but
work for showing and seeking people's consent destroys the good face of
our work. If we make our intention pure and for the sake of Allah, the
Almighty, and be firm on His path and pay our services to people on the
path of "the best of men is he who benefits men", causing them to be
happy because of it, then by these we will get Allah's consent.

"(Saying): 'We feed you only for Allah's sake, we ask not of you any
recompense, nor (even) thanks (thereof)!'" Holy Qur'an (77:9)

No doubt Allah will make us famous and cause us to have a position in
the heart of the people. Therefore, we must work for the betterment of
the people seeking Allah's pleasure and consent, and we will get a nice
position in the sight of the people. It is reported in some Du'as that:
"How many good features, which I didn't possess, but You spread themâ€¦"
Therefore, do your best and the outcome will appear.


