Difficulties On the Way
=======================

The path toward the future is not a path full of flowers; there are
many obstacles and difficulties on it. Maybe it is the sweetness of the
goal that makes someone forget the bitterness of the difficulties,
otherwise, whoever seeks a good future in a simple and easy way will
never get anything but a small portion of it that can never fulfill his
ambition and hopes.

Thus, whoever seeks a shiny future must endure obstacles and
difficulties on the way. He must be like the water whose road was
blocked by rocks, he must fight in order to find a way to pass.

Some problems can be solved or can be reduced through patience, wisdom
and hard work, but it is difficult to pass some this way, because
solving or reducing them is in the hand of the young boy or girl. Here,
we must seek the assistant of those whose experience is above ours like
our parents, neighbors, sincere friends, teachers and so on, on how to
solve the problems and difficulties. It is narrated in one of the
prophetic sayings, "in experience there is beneficial knowledge."

The obstacle may be a family one, in which one of the parents or both
of them stand on the way of their future by refusing to give them (their
children) the right to choose a particular course of study or to
continue their studies or to work in a particular city that doesn't have
the field he or she studied, or they interfere in choosing the partner
of their children, and so on.

In such a situation, wisdom in relation, power of conviction and
kindness are factors that can help in reducing the difficulties, thereby
leaving the issue of the future as the outcome of discussion. If not,
then it is the right of the youth that can never be deprived by anyone.
It is necessary for the parent to look into the future of their
children, and that their success is their (the parents) success also,
they must not do something that can destroy the future of their
children.

There is also a social obstacle for a society that lives with cultures
and morals that cannot give chance to even behaviors, which are not
against the habits of the parent. Even though it is an obstacle that
requires enough time in order to overcome and change it, an ambitious
youth is against a dull and stagnant ruler. It may be possible that the
risk- without care - may be a suitable treatment for this kind of
conditions. This is because among the ways of changing a backward
society is the method of 'shock and hit', if not, then there will be no
inventions or great and firm achievements.

There may be more obstacles, but the most important thing is that a
youth should not allow it to block his way of concentration and hard
work. It is said a proverb: "the worst water is the stagnant water."
This stagnant water that cannot flow, in view of this, is smelly and not
good for drinking; rather it may harm someone's life.

We ought to remember that the obstacles may be big, but the will of man
is greater than it; "a body can never be weak if the intention in it is
firm." Failure in studies - for instance - is never a source of blocking
the way of the great scholars: Anichtain, Adeson, Sikaki, and others,
who affected and benefited humanity with their great inventions in spite
of their being unsuccessful in their studies.

One of the famous revolutionaries, who freed his country from the
hegemony of America, wrote a book titled "My Dreams do not know Limits".
In this book he mentioned his memo while he was a young fellow: "I
wanted to cross the Argentinean Sahara - it is a Sahara full of dust,
which is 300 kilometers long and 100 kilometers wide- alone on a
motorcycle; with me only a half liter of water. I wanted to feel the
hotness of the sun in such a place full of sand.

Whoever I talked to, concerning my trip, would say that crossing such a
Sahara with only a half liter of water is impossible, but the water will
be enough for me on my trip, believe me, oh people"!! He was able to do
so…and he who said there is nothing impossible if there is will, was
right

**Signs on the Way**

In order to remove the blocks and obstacles on your future:

1- Break the condition of fear and doubt in you, because most of the
anxieties are illusions, and most of the doubts and wavering are not
based on a firm foundation, "If you decide to do something, then, do it,
because too much fear is greater than that which you are fearing".
Anxiety - many a time - is like the moss and algae that grow on trees
and hinders their growth. Experience has proved that fear and abstention
prevents man from inventing important things. And, likewise, bravery and
determination helps in creating great projects and development that
cannot be achieved if not because of the bravery of those people and
convincing the mind that it should be patient in order to see a positive
outcome.

A psychologist said: "Man's will can never achieve perfection unless it
becomes morally wise and turns toward good". Thus, will - in all human
beings - works as a moving power in a motorcar, if it is a good will, it
will take its possessor to a great and high perfection, which a person
with a weak and unstable will can never reach.

2- Hope is a torch you hold in order to reach a final destination. A
future path may be full of darkness, thus, it is necessary to light it
with a shining light…this light of hope that makes our young generation
and our surroundings shine. However, we don't need an outside or foreign
lamp in such a great and honorable stage. Rather, to an internal light,
which lit our way in order to achieve our goal. This is the light of
faith and beliefs, which spread the light of hope from its lamp. It is
said in one of the proverbs, "In the kingdom of hope, misery doesn't
have a place."

3- Youths create their own future. Always remember this, it is in this
stage of our life that we can make nice decisions for achieving our
ambitions, no matter what difficulties are there. We are in a stage of
affirming our being, and in the path of achieving it we must do all that
we can in order to achieve our goal and wide ambitions. We should keep
it in mind, though, that zeal is not everything, because when you want
to reach a particular place, you need the means of transportation
suitable for the journey and provisions that will help you reach your
destination.

Reaching your future is more closer to this example, if your zeal is as
the intention or the fuels which move will, then, it is the will that
can light and help you in getting the means of achieving your goal,
which will ease your way, however much difficulty there is in it. It is
said, "A good will makes two feet as two wings". There is no will that
deserves such description than your will, oh you young man or you young
girl who are looking forward to a bright future.

4- Look for someone who will help you in building your future and
reaching it, and whatever our will is strong and our hope is sold and
our confidence in ourselves is high, nevertheless, we should not prevent
ourselves from benefiting from the experiences of others, their advices
and guidance. It is reported in one Prophetic narration, "Whoever seeks
peoples' advice is as if he shares them in their mind". Therefore, we
must look for a sincere counselor who will add confidence to our
confidence and hope to our hope and caution to the danger that we may
forget and a sound instruction on how to walk toward the right path that
can shorten our way to the future.

No doubt, those who enter a forest before us, and know what is in it
from trees, paths and animals, can guide us to its map and safe ways,
which can give us the opportunity to escape from danger and
difficulties.

5- Do not be in haste to reach your destination, because each way has
its own distance, and each food has its own period of cooking on the
fire; if we add more fire it will burn and if less it delays the
cooking. Therefore, "The best issues are the middle ones." For us to
reach our destination safely, we must move slowly with caution because
"there is safety in moving slowly with caution and there is regret in
haste". And it is said, "mistakes increase with haste."

The most important thing is to continue our journey toward the point we
choose as a goal and we must not give away or turn round; the outcome
will be on our side, God willing. For instance, when you pluck fruits
before they are ripe, can you eat them? The case is the same thing with
the fruits of the future; you are in need of hard work and determination
and a particular duration of time before it is ripe and suitable for
eating.

6- Sometimes, we will not be able to get what we want, nor we get our
dreams but for only a small portion of them. The gap of hopes and loss
is great, but - in all conditions- we must not lose confidence in Allah
and in ourselves. We must take a lesson from Prophet Jacob (Ya'akub)
(a.s), upon all the signs that became clear to him that his two sons
Joseph (Yusuf) (a.s) and Benjamin (Binyamin) would not come back, but he
addressed his other sons, saying:

"O my sons! Go and inquire about Joseph and his Brother, and despair
not God's mercy; verily no one despairs nor of God's mercy but the
disbelieving people." Holy Qur'an (12: 87)

The light around him is off, but the hope inside him is not. It is
said, "despair is the suicide of the heart". If the heart is killed with
the dagger of despair and hopelessness, the body would fall and the will
would be affected with a total paralysis. We should also take a lesson
from Prophet Yunus (a.s). He was swallowed by a whale, and lived in a
total darkness that affected his sight and was facing death, but with
all these, he didn't give up hope that he would escape.

"And (remember) Jonah (Zannun i.e., Yunus) when left he in anger, and
imagined he that never would We straiten him; then he cried out from the
darkness: 'There is no god but You (O my Lord!), Glory be to You, verily
I was of the unjust ones!' "Then responded We unto him and delivered him
from the grief, thus do We deliver the believers." Holy Qur'an (21:
87-88)

Failure, mistake and the feeling of despair and hopelessness in
reaching a particular goal is a natural phenomenon. Most of the famous
and big men in history had faced such conditions. Their life was not
always connected to success, but they knew how to utilize their failure
and change it - with determination- into a tool that could help them in
achieving success in the future. It is said, "Greatness is not in
falling down, rather greatness is being able to stand up again after
falling down". Also, a proverb says, "Don't suffice with knowing how to
ride a horse, rather you ought to know (what to do) when you fall off
it."

Always remember, that failure once or twice or even more than that
doesn't mean intellectual failure. Keep in mind that if you are not
successful in this stage, maybe you will be in the following. Try to
find out where the mistake is and correct it, even if you don't succeed,
at least you have known something.

In all circumstances, come to terms with yourself on how to endure
failure so as it not becoming a disaster to you.

A poet, in this regard, says: "Man should strive according to his
ability, but it is not for him to become successful."

No doubt determination - in this situation - is a beneficial treatment,
for instance, say: "I will start from the beginning", and know that time
heals all wounds, and falling down is admissible, but standing up is
necessary. 7- We should agree with our mistakes and shortcomings. These
paths are very important in moving toward the future, because "we cannot
move over the planet if there are pebbles in our shoes".

It is a mistake to hold others responsible for our failure and forget
ourselves. Some youths are fond of holding their parents responsible for
their failure without looking at their responsibility and role in this
failure, whose cause may not be necessarily what he is thinking. Maybe
there are some reasons behind the failure, which may continue to be
present till the end of life.

Let us stand in front of the mirror of ourselves, and with all bravery
say: Here we made a mistake, we are not suppose to do this here, this is
bad, this is our point of weakness, this is a mistake we must correct
it, this is weakness that is not suppose to be with us…and so on. In
this way, we prepare our self and give it the possibility of passing
difficulties, be triumph in hard times and clinch the cup of future
success.

8- We must not be thinking of big plans that are above our capability.
It is said, "The greatest obstacle in reaching success is our waiting
for big success and happiness", and there is no such success in life.
There is no harm in making ambition, but it is not necessary to draw a
plan that is above our capacity, "May Allah have mercy on a person who
understands the value of his self". We must remember while we are
achieving a small success here and a bigger one there, because a "small
item brings about a bigger list."

9- Prepare for hard work lest you spend your time and effort lavishly
in different endeavors…give all your concern and interest in the work
you like in order to be able to succeed, but giving concern to different
work spoils or decreases the chances of invention. The more you give all
your concern to a particular work, the more you will have success in it.
It is said, "If you want to get water dig a well in one place."

Do not forget - the young boy that you are or the young girl - we are
in a world of specialty and knowledge and there is no limit or end to
it. Always be in complete preparedness to give a great and better
service and inventions. But the range of your ambition must be in range
of your ability…gaze from a far, cut your circle round by round. You can
never achieve this except by giving all your time, thinking at the time
and your total love to the work you are doing.

10- Maybe a young girl in our Muslim countries is facing an unfortunate
situation and views that a woman cannot do anything or she fails in
doing certain works and endeavors. This view may cause backwardness in
the determination in a young girl who is looking forward to a better
future. But this social problem must not deprive you from understanding
that you (as a woman) are a possessor of a sound mind and intellect,
better than some men, as well as will and determination. It is said that
Bilqis (as a woman) was the best Qur'anic example for management and
planning.

Choose your own way with caution; continue your own way to achieve your
goal. Many great women in history have faced rejection, distress,
humiliation and disgrace, but they - without any distinction - knew that
a great goal and ambition needs physical sacrifice, thus, they achieved
many things that many men were not able to achieve.

Move forward towards the path of your future…be cautious and do not
stop much on the blocks that are in your way, this may waste your time.
Give others a chance to give you their own advice and views.

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.


