The Spiritual Mission of Religion
=================================

Man's relations to the realm of matter and nature, placing his
interests exclusively on them, confining his consciousness and feelings
to their narrow field, and moulding everyday behaviour and tendencies
according to them, gradually change his life into a mechanical one,
killing in him the perception of the Grand Truth, and taking from him
the secret of happiness and the source of human perfection in this
life.

Sensuality and believing only in the material world, cannot lift man
above the bestial and material level of the senses. Neither they grant
man a loftier image, nor help him to understand a truth higher than that
towards all his aspirations and hopes are inclined.

He is not like the believer who believes in a supreme objective and
aims to be higher than the level of the materialistic and instinctive
desires. A believer, therefore, follows a spiritual conduct which
sublimates through into his supreme humanity, passing through successive
stages of perfection, continuing higher and higher, planting in him the
love of good and perfection, because the continual growth towards Allah
the Perfect, stamps in the believer's heart the love of perfection and
the adhersion to the attributes of the Absolute Perfect. He thus places
world and whatever there is in it, on a lower level, as a secondary
thing, leading a life, in which his foremost anxiety is to adhere to
loftier ideals, only to meet his basic needs and not to tie his
existence to it. He regards the life in this world as a transient stage,
a stop for one to muster and mobilize one's strength to move on to a
higher and more supreme world, the afterworld.

Such a believer lives in the highest degree of spiritual happiness, and
the most supreme stage of faith, feeling assured of the results of his
existence. He sees nothing in the unknown to be afraid of. He has no
feeling of non-being or fear of pershing that may discomfort him in his
life. He lives with a perpetual hope of progressively proceeding towards
a world full of joy, under the shelter of happiness and spiritual
quietness.

"And (as for) those who believe and do good work, and believe in what
has been revealed to Muhammad, and it is the very truth from their Lord,
He will remove their evil deeds from them and improve their condition".
Holy Qur'an (47:2)

So, the spiritual man leads, through his faith, a happy life (and
feels) being true to himself. He satisfies the need of the soul which is
proceeding naturally towards eternity, and removes from it the
apprehensions of perishability- a feeling which chases the infidel and
the sceptic, knowingly or unknowingly, turning his life into an
unbearable hell, a misery that sees no happiness at all: "Surely those
who act in opposition to Allah wad His Apostle shall be laid dawn
prostrate as those before them ..." Holy Our'an (58:5)

To have faith in Allah, and observe the valuable principles of
religion, satisfy in man yet another spiritual need - the tendency in
the human soul to sanctify and glorify.

Man, through his innate feelings and psychological construction, senses
the existence of a Greater-Being, a complete perfection, before which he
feels humble and tiny; so he starts to glorify it, yet he cannot
understand it clearly. Hut as he inevitably has to express these innate
feelings, he may either proceed in the right direction - that is, in the
direction of worshipping the Creator, through the guidance of the
prophets and the sound teachings of religion, or in the wrong direction
through worshipping man-made creatures and idols, or adoring the
detested ego' which is the source of danger, inequity, aggression and
greed, causing man to turn into a slave, worshipping and glorifying, not
Allah, but tyrants, aspirations, desires, wealth, authority, pride, etc.
Thus, humanity's tragedy is actualized in the ugliest forms of
deviation, tyranny and abnormal practices. Allah has truthfully said:

"You Only worship idols besides Allah and you create a lie ..." Holy
Ouran (29:17)

Anything worshipped other than Allah, is but a fictitious and illusive
image. And any inclination not to Him is a twisting of the instinct of
worship and sanctification.

Religion guides man to worship Allah, the Exalted Truth, over
everything else in this world, such as desire, pleasure, riches, dignity
and power. Man is, thus, directed to worship tie One to Whom are
attributed all the qualities of perfection, such as justice, mercy,
truthfulness, kindness, gentleness, knowledge, wisdom, power, etc.. The
whole life, by this continual journeying towards Allah, coincides with
the values of truthfulness, righteousness and perfection which are the
attributes of Allah the Glorious, worshipped by man ...

There is still another spiritual fact which religion cultivates in
man's conscience, implanting it deep inside him. It is the sense of
responsibility and willingly undertaking it, affected by his conscious
connection with Allah, the Exalted. The person who believes in Allah
feels he is being watched by Him and fears Him. So, he acts knowing that
Allah is with him, watches him, and nothing is concealed from Him,
whether in the heavens or in the earth:

"And those who disbelieve say: The hour shall not come upon us.

Say: Yea! My Lord, the Knower of the unseen, it shall certainly come
upon you; not the wig/it of an atom becomes absent from Him, in the
heavens or at the earth, and neither less than that nor greater, but
(all) is at a clear book." Holy Qur'an (3.4:3)

"He knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal." Holy
Qur'an (40:19)

This awareness and the true faith is sufficient to urge man to perform
his duty and to undertake his human responsibility in every phase of
life, legal; devotional or ethical.

The Qur'an rears up this spirit of responsibility in its followers and
believers, and stresses its cultivation and development through many
texts and concepts: "... these are the limits of Allah, (imposed by
Allah) so do not exceed them, and whoever exceeds the limits of Allah
these it is that are the wdust." Holy Qur'an (2:229)

So, a believer is keen on respecting the limits imposed by Allah and
observing His instructions, and adheres to the law which organizes his
life and directs his activities, contrary to the unbeliever who, having
no faith in Allah and no fear of His observation, seizes every
opportunity to transgress the limits of law and order, to cast away all
responsibilities, and tread upon them whenever he finds a chance for
disobedience and rebellion. This is because neither he accepts the
sanctity of the law which organizes his life, nor does he believe in
Divine punishment as long as be thinks he can slip away from the grasp
of the authority and its just punishment.

This phenomenon - that of defying the will of truth and justice -
constitutes one of the most grave problems from which the contemporary
ignorant society is suffering, owing to the fact that the concepts of
belief have disappeared from its horizon, and dutifulness has faded away
from its conscience, and that its moral criteria is confused, it is
natural that this collapsed inner constitution of the lost and
materialistic man should affect his civil position and social relations;
and it is natural, too, that the human rights and man's dignity should
be lost under this state of ignorance.

Before ending this study, it is necessary to summarize the positive
results that can be brought about by a Muslim individual or society
believing in Allah. These may be arranged as below :

1. Faith in Allah, His justice and Wisdom makes man realize his own
value and the meaning of life. It helps man to understand that there is
no injustice, uselessness and ruin in this life.

2. Faith in Allah frees man from the anxieties of being lost and
perished, due to man's believing in the eternal existence in the other
world.

3. Faith in Allah makes man's soul conscious, fells he respects life,
and cares for society's laws and just values.

4. Faith in Allah frees man from the inclination of being submissive
and yielding to other forms than Allah; and thus, grants him freedom and
self-consciousness.

5. Faith in Allah raises in the believer the idea of Divine perfection
and directs him towards it.

The Role of Religion in the Psychological and Moral Perfection "To this
then so on inviting, and go on steadfastly on the right way as you are
commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I believe in
what Allah has revealed of the Book and I am commanded to do justice
between you ..." Holy Qur'an (42:15)

Realizing life's value depends on the presence of an important sensible
reality, that is to feel happy. Happiness, as a supreme vital value,
cannot be estimated through sensual practices, nor through the abundance
of luxuries. So there are many nations, although materially developed,
with numerous sensual pleasures exceeding their needs, yet, a high
percentage of their nationals are found suffering from a most dangerous
crisis of mental strain which often drives them to commit crimes and
aggression just to ease themselves from their complexes. Sometimes this
tension reaches its highest, driving them to commit suicide, as is the
case with the man of the modern materialistic civilization in the
countries of Europe, America and elsewhere all over the world.

The secret behind all this is that this man is suffering from a
crushing spiritual vacancy, and is in quest for an unknown truth which
he cannot find. He continues trying, groping about, suffering, feelings
self- tortured, despite drowning himself and his feelings in different
pleasures, physical satisfaction and sensual expressions.

Statistics speak every year of tens of thousands of suicidal and other
criminal events. Streets, squares and parks are crowded with hundreds of
thousands of aimless roamers and social dropouts running away from this
torturing hell of life, individually and in groups, calling themselves
different names. The one, who is plunged into the filth of this modern
material culture, does his best to run away from the hell of this life
and tries to escape it, even by resorting to a world of imagination and
hallucination, enjoying oneself with shadowy happiness, and to burying
the world of reality in the cemetery of illusion, through addiction to
drugs and narcotics, such as morphine, heroin, alcohol etc. By this, man
loses the joy of life and buries the spirit of happiness in the
formidable grave of materialism, and deprives himself of all the
beautiful spiritual joys and pleasures. He deprives himself even of the
pleasure of sound sleep in the lap of a comfortable slumber.

Thus, millions of inhabitants of the major cities of the world, such as
Washington, London and Paris, are unable to sleep even with the help of
tranquillizers. Tens of millions of human beings are now suffering from
nervous sicknesses and diverse psychological complexes, and the number
of the mental homes go parallel to the number of hospitals in most parts
of the world, the means of physical satisfaction, though numerous and
varied, cannot provide them with relief or mental calmness. On the
contrary, as statistics confirm, man's psychological crisis and its
result on society are getting more complex day after day as the ways of
satisfying get more sophisticated, because the sensual expressions are
actually void of any spiritual and moral values.

So, what is, then, happiness?

Where can it be found?

Because of the importance of an answer, and the importance of its role
in man's life, diverse groups take part in the quest for it and in
formulating it. They include philosophers, physicians, psychologists,
moralists, socialists and others interested in finding an answer to this
question. But all efforts deem to be fruitless, as they all fail to
illustrate man's happiness on the earth.

Yet, the different studies, researches and statistics which have been
compiled by those concerned with human and cultural studies, all confirm
that happiness does not come through physical satisfaction, and that its
existence is not a physical case. It is "a feeling of contentment and of
being in harmony with man's good nature', or, in other words, it is "a
mental feeling of contentment and security.

Hence the impossibility, by the material resources - such as food,
drink, sex, wealth, pleasures, etc.- to realize this wonderful dream, or
to capture this much wanted objective of the human soul. Such pleasures
are unable to give man happiness, the feeling of contentment and joy.
The human soul reacts to all these pleasures only temporarily with an
obvious feeling of floating on the surface of man's life, while his
inner feelings and his quest for the lost happiness revolve in a
miserable vacancy, wandering through a world of emptiness and horrible
sorrow. Nothing but faith in Allah can provide him with happiness, and
make him feel confident, secure and pleased, coordinating his
instinctive desires, practices and feeling contented.

Imam Ja'far Al-Sadiq (a.s.) wonderfully illustrates the concept of
happiness by saying:

"Allah the Exalted through Has justice and equity, placed comfort and
relief in faith and contentment, and placed anxiety and sorrow an doubt
and discontentment ."

Uncertainty, sorrow and misery are psychological punishments
self-imposed by man's conscience as a natural result of the spiritual
vacuum of the soul and its being void of faith in Allah-the faith which
brings tranquility, comfort and a feeling of content. Allah has
truthfully said: "Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by
the remembrance of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the
hearts set at rest "(As for) those who believe and do good, a good fowl
state shall be theirs and a goodly return." Holy Qur'an (13:28-29)

"And that when we heard the guidance, we believed in it, so whoever
believes in his Lord, he should neither fear loss nor being overtaken
(by disgrace)." Holy Qur'an (12:13)

"And (as for) those who believe and do good, and believe in what has
been revealed to Muhammad, and it is the very truth from their Lord. He
will remove their evil deeds from them and improve their conditions."
Holy Qur'an (42:2)

Thus, believing in Allah, looking towards Him, having a heart full of
His love, and feeling content with life and in harmony with His will,
are the way to attain happiness, feeling self-satisfaction filled with
love, sensing the beauty of life, and attaining a state of coordination
between man's inner feelings and the objectives to which he proceeds in
life.

Therefore, believing in Allah is a natural inborn need, without which
man's journey towards the goal cannot be enriched, while he looks for
happiness, security and contentment, and is anxious to end his spiritual
torture, to uproot fear and anxiety and free himself from them. Fear, as
the psychologists say - fear of the unknown, fear of danger, fear of
being lost, fear of being deserted, fear of danger, or need and poverty,
fear of emptiness, fear of death, etc. is the source of his misery.
Allah had truthfully said:

"And his people disputed with him. He said: Do you dispute with me
about Allah? And He has guided me indeed; and I do not fear in any way
those that you set up with him, unless my Lord pleases; my Lord
comprehends all things in His knowledge; will you not then remember? And
how should I fear what you have set up (with Him), while you do not fear
that you have set up with Allah that for which he has not sent down to
you any authority; which then of the two parties is surer of security,
if you know? Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with
inequity, those are they who shall have security and they are those who
are rightly guided." Holy Qur'an (6:80-82)

How exact and meaningful is what Imam Ali (a.s.) says, by the way of
expressing this fact and formulating it into a psychological principle
of life: "He who fears has no life."

Thus, feeling secure, tranquil and stabled is the first reflection of
faith on the soul; while happiness and being contented with life are the
first fruit of those feelings which religion implants in the human soul,
ripened by the fragrance of faith spread through one's conscience.
Consequently, Islam offers the basic factors for mankind's happiness.
These are:

1. Enjoying security and social peace, as the Qur'an says:

"With it Allah guides him who seeks His good pleasure ..." Holy Qur'an
(5:16)

2. Developing man's good characteristics so as to coincide with the
principles of perfection and proceed towards Allah, the source of
perfection.

3. Coordinating the environment to the native and natural inclinations,
through cherishing this natural system and being in harmony with it.

Therefore, man's attempts have proved successful to provide for himself
security, safety, a feeling of contentment and submission, and bring
about a spiritual and lawful harmony to create co-ordination between the
picture of the inner self of the believer, and the outer form of life
and society.

Islam, too, is keenly interested in keeping the natural system, in
protecting it against deviation, and in guiding it along the straight
path of Allah, so as to realize happiness for man, and to solve his
spiritual and moral problems. To achieve this, it starts with purifying
the inner self, cleansing it from its leaning towards evil and
transgression, and developing the inclinations towards good and probity,
such as love, sympathy, tenderness, justice, unselfishness, security,
contentment, optimism, truthfulness, honesty, etc.., besides attempting
to uproot the factors of the negative tendencies, such as hatred,
selfishness, fear, despair, aggression, cowardice, deceit, etc ...

All of these are to consolidate the movements of the psychological
balance and to protect the safety of the mental and moral constitution,
which is the starting point for the movement of behaviour, and of
cultivating the pushing power. This sort of conduct and culture, which
is personified in man, illustrates man's spiritual development and
status. Every movement and every brick in the construction of man's
culture and life, are but representatives of the contents of the soul,
of its deep desires and established moral endowments. Truthfully Allah
the Almighty says:

"Say: Every one acts according to his manner; but your Lord best
bestows who is best guided in the path." Holy Our'an (17:84)

**Society's Need for Religion**

"Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed to you that you
may bring forth men, by their Lord's permission, from utter darkness
into ligh, to the way of the Mighty, the Praised One." Holy Qur'an
(14:1)

"O followers of the Book! indeed Our apostle has come to you making
clear to you much of what you concealed of the Book and forgiving much;
indeed, there has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah. With it
Allah guides him who seeks His good pleasure into the ways of peace and
brings them out of utter darkness into light by His will and guides them
to the right path." Holy Qur'an (5:15-18)

"He said: O my people! have you considered if I have a clear proof from
my Lord and He has given me a goodly sustenance from Himself ; and I do
not desire that in opposition to you I should betake myself to that
which I forbid yow I desire nothing but reform so far as I am able, and
with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to a right issue; on
Him do I rely and to Him do I turn." Holy Qur'an (11:88)

"And to Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. He said: 0 my people!
serve Allah, you have no Allah other than Him; clear proof indeed has
come to you from your Lord, therefore give full measure and weight and
do not diminish to men their things, and do not make mischief in the
land after its reform; this is better for you if you are believers."
Holy Qur'an (7:85)

"There is no good in most of their secret counsel except (in his) who
enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation between people; and
whoever does this seeking. Allah's pleasure, We will give him a mighty
reward." Holy Qur'an (4:114)

"They who turn (to Allah), who serve (Him), who praise (Him), who fast,
who bow down, who prostrate themselves, who enjoin what is good wad
forbid what is evi4 and who keep the limits of Allah, wad give good news
to the believers." Holy Qur'an (9:112)

"Ta this then go on inviting, and go on steadfastly on the right way as
you are commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, wad I am commanded to do
justice between you ..." Holy Qur'an (42:15)

"and help one another in goodness and piety, and do not help one
another in sin wad aggression; but keep your duty to Allah; surely Allah
is severe in punishment." Holy Qur'an (5:2)

"And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together and be not
disunited, and remember the favor of Allah on you when you were enemies,
then He united your hearts, so by His favor you became brethren; and you
were on the brink of a pit of fire, then He saved you from it; thus does
Allah make clear to you His communications that you may follow the rigid
way. And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful." Holy Qur'an (3:103-104)

"Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and that
when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing; Hearing."
Holy Qur'an (4:58)

The above mentioned Qur'anic verses are rich with their concepts, alive
in their spirit and contents, full of meanings and ideas, and prolific
in organizing and guiding notions and values. By combining these
concepts and ideas, and by connecting them to the objectives stated
through their letters and expressed by their texts, we realize that they
are a clear statement inviting people to organize, reform and protect
the society, and to draw a program for it according to the best possible
legislative and cultural forms.

This can be discerned by scrutinizing the words of the verses and the
details of Qur'anic texts, so that their implications and contents can
be comprehended. If we do so, we will be able to discover the
following:

1.The Glorious Qur'an is the torch of light and guidance for humanity
and guides it on the road to safety and righteousness. It prevents
humanity from going astray, hrough its principles, its laws and its
values for the purpose of organizing the society, building its structure
and basing its being on the foundation of truthfulness, justice and
order. Allah the Exalted says: "... indeed, there has come to you light
and a clear Book from Allah. With it Allah guides him who seeks His good
pleasure in the way of peace, wad brings them out of utter darkness into
Light by His Will; wad guides them to the right path." Holy Our'an
(5:15-18)

2. The call of religion is the call for reforming and rejecting
mischief, and for fighting against destruction, as well as against those
practices borne by mankind's ignorance during diverse ages and
generations as a distinguishing characteristic and a historic indication
showing its culture. "Therefore, fear Allah and obey me, and obey not
the command of the prodigal who spread corruption in the earth wad do
not reform." Holy Qur'an (28:150-152)

3. Religion calls upon people to do good and to forbid evil, mischief,
wickedness and tyranny. Allah, the Exalted says: "Surely, Allah enjoins
justice wad kindness, and giving to kinsfolk, and forbids lewdness and
abomination and wickedness. He admonishes you in order that you may take
heed." Holy Qur'an (16.90)

4. According to Islam, injustice, deviation and crime in this life are
man-made, and man is responsible for them; but these devious phenomena
are not imposed on man as inevitable; and thus Islam urges man to refuse
injustice, mischief and deviation, stirring in him the spirit of
resistance, to block the way of evil and error. By this man rejects the
theory of compulsion and fate that leads to acceptance of injustice and
submission. The Qur'an is quite explicit in communicating this fact and
in placing it before man's eyes:

"Corruption has appeared on land and sea because of (the evil) which
men's hands have done, that He may make them taste a part of that which
they have done, in order that they may return." Holy Qur'an (30:41)

"It was not for Allah to wrong them, but they wronged themselves." Holy
Qur'an (29:40)

5. Islam tries to establish a unified and cooperative society dominated
by the spirit of brotherhood and equality. "... help one another in
goodness and piety, and do not help one another in sin and aggression
..." Holy Qur'an (5:2)

6. The invitation of religion is to establish a state of truth and
justice, and to make them the foundation of the law as justice is the
most sacred symbol and the loftiest truth that Islam discerns in the
world. To make certain the sanctity of justice, and to demand it to be
implemented, it suffices to note that Allah, the Exalted describes
Himself as Just, and acquits Himself from injustice, and He commands His
apostle to rule with justice, equality and to adhere to truth and
equity.

Allah the Exalted says:

"To this, then go on inviting and go on steadfastly on the right way as
you are commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, and I am commanded to do
justice between you ..." Holy Qur'an (42:15)

"O David! Surely We have made you a ruler in the Land; so judge between
mankind with justice, and do not follow desire ..." Holy Qur'an (38:28)
So, the Glorious Qur'an defines the most obvious social aims of
religion, and explains man's need for them, and states the most
important measures to be taken to build the society and to organize and
preserve it. These measures are:

**First: Individual Education**

Islam set a sound educational program for the individual so that he may
be prepared to live in society and to hold fast to the principles of
ordered life. Allah the Exalted says:

"And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and
restrains his soul from low desires, surely the garden will be his
home." Holy Qur'an (19:40-41)

"He is indeed successful who purifies it, and he is indeed a failure
who corrupts it." Holy Our'an (91.-9-10)

"O you who believe! Observe your duty to Allah with right observance,
and die not unless you become Muslims (unto Him)." Holy Qur'an (3:102)

**Second: Organizing the Society**

The second step taken by Islam in this respect is to move from
educating the individual to organizing the society, through adherence to
the law and keeping it, in order to protect social life and Islam's
teachings. Allah the Exalted says:

"... these are the limits (imposed by) Allah, so do not exceed them,
and whoever exceeds the limits of Allah, these it is that are the
unjust." Holy Qur'an (2:229)

"And whoever disobeys Allah and His messenger and goes beyond His
limits, He will cause him to enter fire to abide in it, and he shall
have an abasing chastisement." Holy Qur'an (4:14)

**Third: Building the State**

The third step taken by Islam after building society is to construct
the state and to implement justice, as a sacred principle in life, which
is the foundation for a good government through which the rights are
observed, the duties are carried out, and the regime is protected.

**Fourth: Preserving the Safety of the Social Structure**

The fourth and last stage in an Islamic society is to make reforms and
prevent mischief and corruption from creeping in after the society has
been constructed, organized and reformed. Allah the Exalted says quoting
prophet Hud (a.s.): "... I desire nothing but reform m far as I am
able."
Holy Qur'an (11:88)

"... and do not make mischief in the earth after its reformation." Holy
Our'an (7:58)

When the disease of deviation and decay creeps into society's body, and
there appear the signs of injustice, mischief and confusion, Islam
imposes on every individual the obligation to do his duty of reforming
both the individual and the society, and to resist corruption and pluck
out the roots of evil and transgression, so as to guide the progress of
society on the straight path, and merge with the procession of truth and
justice. Allah the Exalted says:

"And from among you there should be a party who invite to good, and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it as that shall be
successful." Holy Qur'an (3:104)

Accordingly, the construction of society, and measures for its welfare
and safety are implementable only through religion. Therefore, the
message of religion and the principles of belief are indispensable to
the society. This discernable cultural reality is confirmed by man's
social experience and by his sufferings from deviated principles,
systems and theories.


