Religion and Physical Care
==========================

As religion has its moral, spiritual and mental programme and plans, it
similarly has its exact and complete program for taking care of the body
and meeting its physical and instinctive needs. This bodily care is in
harmony with that of the mental, psychological and spiritual programmes,
since man is regarded as one complete unit of inseparable soul and body.
The religious laws and values have been formulated to satisfy,
coordinate and guide all the human inclinations and activities. So,
Islam legislated laws for economy, matrimony, food, drink, worship,
cleanliness, etc.., in order to meet these needs within the limits of
the law.

Islam has founded its special plan for taking care of the body and the
instinctive activities, on the following basic principles: 1. Accepting
the physical needs of the body and man's inborn instincts, and the
necessity to satisfy them in a natural way so as to keep the body
balanced. This admission has been met by the laws and teachings which
provide for man all his needs of food, drink, shelter, clothes,
marriage, medical treatment, etc ... Allah the Exalted says:

"And seek by means of what Allah has given you the abode of the
hereafter, and do not neglect your portion of the world and be kind as
Allah has been kind to you, and do not seek corruption in the earth.
Sure& Allah does not love mischief-makers." Holy Qur'an (28:77)

2. Islam has offered a complete programme for the protection of the
body and its energy against diseases, vanity and waste. It prohibits
whatever is harmful and immoral, such as wine, adultery, sodomy,
extravagance, lust, etc. It also purifies and protects the body against
sickness, filth and impurity which attack the body and destroy health
and cleanliness. Allah the Exalted Says:

"Say: My Lord forbids only indecencies, those apparent of them and
those concealed, and sin and rebellion without justice and that you
associate with Allah that for which He has sent down no a authority, and
that you say concerning Allah that which you do know not." Holy Our'an
(7:33)

3. Islam has a plan for utilizing man's energy and bodily effort in the
fields of construction, production and innovation. Allah the Exalted
says: "... he brought you into being from the earth, and has made you
dwell in it ..." Holy Qur'an (11:81)

"And do not make mischief in the earth after its reformation ..." Holy
Qur'an (7:58)

4. Islam has given man the right to enjoy the beauties and the
adornments of life, and to make use of its good things. "Say: Who has
forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has brought forth for His
servants, and the good provisions?" Holy Qur'an (7:32)

By these practical and scientific measures, Islam protects the health
of the body, provides man with physical happiness, keeps his natural
right to live, and saves his sanity and energy from uselessness, from
being completely lost and from the destruction imposed upon him by the
ignorant programmes, the man- made laws and dogmatic theological
calls.

**Can Religion be Substituted?**

Can man reject religion and replace it by the discoveries and the
knowledge to which he could attain in the fields of social organization,
in morals and behaviour, and in ideological explanations?

Would man be happy, dignified and comfortable if he took that as a
substitute for religion?

This must be studied carefully so as to find an objective and correct
answer, since the advocates of ignorance have one answer, and the
believers in Allah have another. All the ignorants, notwithstanding
their different materialistic and infidel philosophies, sects and
secular trends, reject religion and advocate its replacement by man's
scientific and theoretical achievements, with an argument based on a
deformed idea and a disordered concept about the origin of religion, its
message and aims - the concept which takes religion to be nothing but a
mythical legend or an imagery created by a superstitious mind during the
backward and primitive ages. According to them in those ages man tried
to interpret the appearance of the universe and life. Having failed to
discover the scientific laws of nature and life, he attributed. that to
an unknown creator. He saw the rain, observed the sunrise and the
sunset, and discerned the growth of plants and animals, their
multiplication, their birth and death; yet he did not know how those
events happened, because he was ignorant of their scientific
explanation. He, therefore, invented an imaginary theory, fabricated by
his illusions, telling of the existence of a god behind this physical
existence, and of an unseen divine power that was behind the movement
and direction of all these things.

Then, as man gradually started discovering the laws of nature, he came
to obtain a materialistic answer to eveiy event; so, now he has no need
of religion and he would not like it.

Prophets, from the viewpoint of this ignorant concept, are men
representing the thought of their communities, backward in their beliefs
and knowledge. They are distinguished because of the class - struggle
and an inclination to reform. So, they are movedby economic and social
factors to enact social reforms according to their thinking and the
conditions of their communities. As for Allah, revelation and
prophethood, they say they do not exist except in the minds of those who
believe in them.

Such are the calumnies of the modern ignorant mind and the
materialistic, infidel thought which rejects religion, revelation and
prophethood, and which is founded on denial, infidelity and disbelief in
the existence of a Creator of this universe, refusing to accept
revelation and prophethood as being true and real.

These religious facts are regarded by this ignorant and denying
interpretation as ideas expressing peoples' low understanding, and
illustrating their inferior level of knowledge. This ignorant argument
is the idea which is being repeated by the infidel seculars, according
to which they demand the abolition of religion, replacing it with the
materialistic interpretation and organization, which man reached through
researches and experiments, announcing that man is in no need of
religion, and thus severing his ties with Allah.

Religion, likewise, presents its own answer to the question: (Can
religion be substituted?), and explains its point of view.

Religion's answer is derived as we shall see, from intellect and human
experience. The answer is: There is no substitute for religion. This
answer is based on numerous scientific and known facts which prove that
man cannot do without religion. They confirm the scientific discoveries
which pave the way for organizing social life and coining laws to govern
behaviour - such as the discoveries in the science of economy, finance,
statistics, psychology, sociology, health, etc. But without divine
guidance these are incapable of the two cases. By scrutinizing both
practices, the social and the natural, their basic differences can be
detected, and then we may clearly discern the grave mistake in treating
the two practices on the same level. It is a mistake committed by
materialistic thought when it regards the social experience as equal to
the natural one, ignorant of the differences between the two.

These differences are:

**a. Concerning the natural experience**

In this experience man deals with matter, which possesses no will to
refuse or to resist. It responds to the law, and is forced to submit
exactly to the movement of that law.

Whereas in the social experience, the dealing is with the human will
which has the power to refuse or accept, and it is the will which
handles the law, not the contrary.

b. As for the natural laws, man utilizes them to his interests as soon
as he discovers them. He cannot forge these interests or falsify the
results. But he can fabricate the social laws, motivated by his
selfishness and the benefits thereof, in order to take hold of the
results. Whereas in the case of the social laws, knowing them does not
inevitably imply carrying them out and utilizing them. Actually, man's
desires and selfish interests affect the law and misinterpret it or even
cancel it.

c. In relation to the law, man can live without having to know or to
discover most of the natural laws, or to continue the search for
discovering them, and apply those already discovered to serve his
purpose. Man, in encountering failure in his natural experiments, or
being short of comprehending them, (or knowing very little about them),
does not harm himself whatsoever.

Whereas in respect to the social law, to ignore it, or to neglect to
comprehend it, inevitably causes disorder and chaos in the society, and
man himself would be the victim of this deficiency and failure in his
social experiment. What can man win if he loses himself and his
happiness? True is Allah's saying:

"... say: the losers will be those who lose themselves and their
house-folk on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that will be the manifest
loss!" Holy Qur'an (39:15)

So many social experiments proved disappointing! So many systems that
were applied failed! And man was the victim, and suffered much torture
and misery. When a human society lacks the social system that
establishes 3ustice, equality and respect for peoples' rights, it loses
much more than what it loses in being ignorant of the laws of the
atom,or of the planets, or of the depths of the oceans.

Man can do without that kind of knowledge. There is no harm in his
failing to discover these laws, or in their incorrect application; but
the case is not so with the concepts of justice, truth, equality, etc.

d. There is still another difference. The natural facts can be
discovered through observation and laboratory-experiments; whereas this
is not the case with the concepts of truth, equity, goodness, etc., by
which the social laws and values are measured.

These measures, the legislative and moral values, ate not the results
of laboratory experiments, nor are they something tangible in as much as
a social experiment can explicitly distinguish. They are moral and
spiritual values or measures, or evaluating facts that need knowledge,
understanding and estimation, outside the limits of an experiment, and
an objective treatment of man. They are general facts that man tries to
attain, but in reality he is always short of them, while their
contraries have always been there during his bitter experience at the
time of ignorance. So, how can man attain them? How can he make them?

Thus, in light of the above reasons, it is a grave mistake to equate a
social experiment with a natural one and, consequently, give up religion
as a social legislator. Our scientific discoveries and experiments,
though satisfying us from the natural and materialistic viewpoint,
miserably fall short of solving our social life and organizing.

In fact, we have but to open wide the doors of learning and the windows
of the intellect, in order to accept the word of Allah, and to respond
to the preachings of the Qur'an and look into them carefully:

"O you who believe! Obey Allah and the Messenger when He calls you to
that which gives you life and know that Allah intervenes between the man
and his heart, and to Him you will be gathered." Holy Qur'an (8:24)

At the end of our essay, we should not forget to say that the errand of
the religion is not only organizing life and guiding it; but the
ultimate goal is the other world, a much bigger reality in the message
of religion. Preparing for the afterlife is a basic and most important
task of every religion and divine message.

Man should think of that world before thinking of the transient travel
of this life. The other life is a real fact, and it is the inevitable
end at whose shores man will have to anchor. Science is incapable of
guaranteeing safety for man in the afterlife, nor can it make him
believe in it and work for it, away from the message of religion and the
guidance of faith.

**The Testimony of Figures**

In concluding this study we cite the testimony of statistics in support
of the viewpoint of religion, confirming that there is no substitute for
religion, and that man cannot make a civilization that is capable of
offering him prosperity and peace, away from religion and the message of
Allah. These figures, as we shall see, are a witness telling the truth
before the tribunal of history and judgement of intellect; the witness
that will explain to us the severity of the tragedy under the reign of
the substitute brought by man to take the place of the civilization of
Faith, after having dismissed from his life the idea of faith, the moral
values and the way of religion.

Let us hear these figures speak, and let us ask for the testimony of
the institute for statistical researches. Let us put the contemporary
civilization in the cage of accusation, so that we may uncover its
secrets and its identity before the eyes of deceived humanity. We can
figure out only snap-shots and mere samples, randomly taken, to disclose
the bitter truth hidden behind these figures.

The concerned studies and statistics show horrible facts about the
incidents of the individual and social decline and ruin, in the
materialistic and capitalistic communities. Hereunder are excerpts from
those statistics:

\* A crime is committed every 30 seconds in New York.
\* Nine girls out of every twelve are raped or kidnapped in Great
Britain. The police could arrest only 13% of the criminals.
\* The percentage of crimes increased by 84% during recent years;
whereas the juvenile crimes increased by fivefold during the first half
of 1975.
Groups of youngsters - below 20 years of age -are kept every day
waiting at the doors of the courts, for grave crimes such as burning
vehicles, immoral transgression, rape, robbing and murder. 3

Dr. Homer, a Swede, and envoy of the United Nations who had been asked
to study the status of the women in the Arab countries in 1975,
announced: "It is the Swedish woman who should demand her freedom. as
the woman in the Arab countries has already reached the peak of her
freedom under Islam. "She also said: "The Swedish woman tries these days
to have this year announced as The International Year of the Woman', and
then declare another year for the man, so that he may extract his rights
from the woman. She added that the tragedy of the Swedish woman is the
very freedom which took her to a dangerous and tem1~'ing stage.

In her report, Dr. Homer says: "25%of Swedish women suffer from
psychological and nervous sicknesses; and 40% of Sweden's income is
spent on these diseases caused by the freedom which the Swedish woman
attained and which she is practicing. 4 \* Another report disclosing the
tragedy of humanity under the materialistic culture says: "The American
association for Family Services announced that the disintegration of the
family, which reached an epidemic stage, tops the list of social
problems. Every year more than one million persons are separated or
divorced, which is sevenfold higher in percentage, compared to that of a
hundred years ago.

\* The juvenile crimes, which are strongly connected to divorce cases,
are three times as much compared with the statistics of 1940.~ \* Let us
listen to Mr. Winch, who says: "Do you know that most of the murder
crimes are not committed by professional criminals, and that they are
not motivated by theft; and that most of them are committed by friends
and relatives?

\* The Federal Bureau of Investigation (F.B.I) reports that in murder
cases within families, the husbands are mostly the murderers; and in 15%
of family murders the children are the victims of their parents. 6

\* According to a referendum carried out recently by the UNESCO, 60% of
the housewives in the USA and Europe feel discontented, disappointed and
miserable. 7

\* In the report issued by the French Physician, Dr. Lyreete: 30,000
people die every year in France of Syphlis, while in the USA the victims
of inherited syphlis are between 30,000 and 40,000 children.8 This
disease is spread by adultery. \* A report about divorce cases on the
grounds of unfaithfulness in Great Britain shows the following
figures:

In 1938 9970 cases
in 1950 29096 =
In 1960 27870 =
In 1969 60134 =
In 1970 70575 =
In 1971 110017=
In 1972 109822=
In 1973 115048=

\* The grave problem in the pre-Soviet communist society was that of
every two marriages one was ended in divorce, in most of the cities of
west USSR. In Moscow, for example, 49 out of 100 marriages ended in
divorce after the birth of the first child. In Mavadansk the percentage
of divorce is 72.9%. The Physicians' Conference held in Moscow in 1975
called for urgent measures to tackle this grave social instability -
that is, the high divorce percentage and low birth rate ... 9

The "Hospital Today , a magazine of London, in its editorial of the
April 1975 issue, published a summary of the annual report of the
British Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. It says:

"... Despite the abundance of contraceptive medicines and legalized
abortion, it is noted that 8.6% of the children are born to unmarried
mothers! There is a further serious problem. In 1973 the following cases
were noted:

I case of an 11 - year old pregnant girl.
6 cases of 12 - year old pregnant girls.
38 cases of 13 - year old pregnant girls.
255 cases of 14 - year old pregnant girls.

There were 166,000 cases of legal abortion during the same year, 50% of
which were by unmarried women. If these talking figures give us
astounding facts about the social and moral state of the materialistic
and communist civilizations, there are some other figures which draw the
picture of their economic tragedy, giving more evidence of the failure
of man-made systems and their being incapable of solving man's
problems.

\* International statistics show that, "there are in the world 400
million persons undergoing a slow death because of hunger , and that
five million persons actually die of hunger. Several conferences have
been held within the past two months in Bucharest, Rome, London and
elsewhere to discuss the food problem. Before holding each of these
conferences, the observers used to assert that the results of the
conference would be no better than those of the previous one. They say:
"It has become a common thing to see these conferences held and
concluded without finding the solution for this human drainage to which
the peoples of the world are subjected, especially in Africa and
Asia..." 10

"... at the same time, the experts stress that the USA alone can feed
all those millions of people who are being subjected to slow death ..."
11 Perhaps the best confirmation of the said statement came from the
American Minister of Agriculture who announced: "If we killed half of
the cats and dogs we keep, the food which we thus spare can satis1~ all
the hungry stomaches in the world.' 12

"In the fields of development, food and housing, all the experts
unanimously agree that the available natural sources in the world can
meet the needs of all the people of the world, should there be enough
good intention to exploit them, and to equally distribute them among the
people of the world. But the root of the problem stems from the unjust
distribution of wealth. 13

This is the picture which is drawn by the figures and statistics
accumulated by the substituted civilization, a civilization devoid of
any faith and spirit. A civilization devised by the deviated ignorant
minds after refusing to live under the shade of the message of the
religion and faith, the message which tells the truth, and invites the
lost and the proud to repeat the reckoning of their accounts, and review
the history of their lives, and reconsider the evaluation of their
attitudes, deriving a lesson from Allah's saying:

"And how many a generation We destroyed before them who were mightier
in prowess than they! so they went about in the lands! Is there a place
of refuge? Surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or
he gives ear and is a witness." Holy Qur'an (50:38-37)

And praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1- (a.s.) are the abbreviations of the Arabic phrase
aloyhi/alayha/alayhim/ as-salam which mean May peace be upon
him/her/them'.
2- (s.a.w.) are the abbreviations of the Arabic phrase sal-lallahu
alayhi wa alihi' which mean May Allah's blessings be upon him and his
descendants'.
3- Al-Mujtama Magazine, No. 282, pp. 4-5, Kuwait.
4- This information was extraced from a bulletin issued by Alexandria
University in Egypt, under the title The Mingling of the Two Sexes in
Islam,' p. 39
5- Ibid, p. 34
8- Ibid. p. 34
7- Ibid. p. 35
8- Fathi Yakon, Islam and Sex', p. 82
9- Medical Interphase', April, 1977
10- Oggi Magazine, Italian, quoted from the Kuwaiti AI-Qabas Paper, No.
1525 0115/8/1976
11- Ibid
12- Ibid
13- Ibid


