Volume 8: Surah An-nisaa, Verses 11-14
======================================

Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females; then if they are more than two
females, they shall have two-thirds of what (the deceased) has left, and
if there is one, she shall have the half; and (as for) his parents, each
of them shall have the sixth from what he has left if he has a child,
but if he has no child and (only) his two parents inherit him, then his
mother shall have the third; but if he has brothers, then his mother
shall have the sixth after (the payment of) any bequest he may have
bequeathed or a debt; your parents and your children, you know not which
of them is the nearer to you in usefulness; an ordinance from Allah:
Surely Allah is knowing. Wise (11). And you shall have half of what your
wives leave if they have no child, but if they have a child, then you
shall have a fourth from what they leave after (payment of) any bequest
they may have bequeathed or a debt; and they shall have the fourth from
what you leave if you have no child, but if you have a child then they
shall have the eighth from what you leave after (payment of) a bequest
you may have bequeathed or a debt; and if a man or a woman leaves
property to be inherited by neither parents nor offspring, and he (or
she) has a brother or a sister, then each of them two shall have the
sixth, but if they are more than that, they shall be sharers in the
third after (payment of) any bequest that may have been bequeathed or a
debt that does not harm (others); this is an ordinance from Allah: and
Allah is Knowing, Forbearing (12). These are Allah's limits; and whoever
obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will cause him to enter gardens
beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them; and this is the great
achievement (13). And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and goes
beyond His limits, He will cause him to enter fire to abide in it, and
he shall have an abasing chastisement (14).

**COMMENTARY**

Qur'an: Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have
the equal of the portion of two females;

"al-Isa" and "at-tawsiyah" (to entrust, to enjoin); ar-Raghib says in
Mufradatu 'l-Qur'an: "al-Wasiyyah" = to direct someone - with a shade of
exhortation — to do something." The use of the word al-awlad (children)
instead of al-abna' (sons) shows that the rule of one or two shares is
restricted to the deceased's immediate children.

As for the children's children, how low so ever, they should get the
share of their progenitor through whom they are connected to the
deceased; thus a son's daughter would get two shares while a daughter's
son would be given one share — provided there is no one nearer to take
their precedence. Likewise, the offspring of brothers and sisters would
get the share of him or her through whom they are connected to the
deceased. [All this is inferred from the word, al-awlad whose root word
signifies birth.] But the word, al-ibn (son) does not necessarily mean
immediate child, as the word, al-ab (father), may be used in a general
sense for other than the immediate progenitor.

As for the divine words at the end of the verse: your parents and your
children, you know not which of them is the nearer to you in usefulness,
we shall explain later that there is a special consideration which has
made the word, al-abna' (lit. sons) preferable to al-awlad (children).

The expression, "The male shall have the equal of the portion of two
females", was chosen to point to the nullification of the system
prevalent in the era of ignorance whereby women were not given any share
in inheritance. This expression takes the female’s share as granted and
confirmed, and based the male's share on it - that it is double of it.
Or let us say that the female's share is treated as the yardstick of
legislation and the male's share is fixed with its help.

If it were not for this consideration, it could simply be said:, the
female shall have the half of the male's share; but it would not have
given that connotation, and the context would have changed. — as you may
see. This theme has been mentioned by a scholar and the point seems
well-established. The idea is also strengthened by the fact that the
verse does not describe explicitly and independently except the women's
shares; if and when it ex­plains some of men's shares it is always done
as an adjunct to the women's shares, as may be seen in the following
verse and in the verse at the end of this chapter.

In short, the statement, "The male shall have the equal of the portion
of two females", explains the beginning clause "Allah enjoins you
concerning your children". The definite article in "the male" and "the
two females" denotes genes or category, i.e., the category of male is
equal in share to the two of the female category. This principle shall
be applied when there are males and females among the heirs, as the male
shall have twice the share of a female. The verse did not use such
expressions as, "The male shall have equal to two shares of a female",
or, "double of a female's share"; because the chosen expression explains
also the share of two females when they are the only heirs, as will be
explained later — and all this with such brevity.

In any case, when there are males and females among the heirs, every
male shall have two shares and every female one share — no matter what
their number may be.

Qur'an: then if they are more than two females, they shall have
two-thirds of what (the deceased) has left,:

This sentence, coming after the preceding one, The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females, apparently shows that it is in
conjunction with a deleted but understood clause, i.e., 'This law is
when there are males and females among the heirs', but if they are more
than two females ... Such deletion is common in usage. For example, look
at the following two verses:

And complete the hajj and 'umrah for Allah, but if you are prevented,
(send) whatever offering is easy to obtain (2:196). For a counted number
of days; but whosoever among you is sick or on a journey, then (he shall
fast) a (like) number of other days (2:184).

The conjunctive personal pronoun hidden in the verb kunna (they are)
refers to the 'children' (in the phrase, "your children"); the feminine
gender has been used to make it agree with the predicate 'females'; the
other such pronoun hidden in the verb, "has left", refers to 'the
deceased', which is understood from the context.

Qur'an: and if there is one, she shall have the half,:

The pronoun refers as above to the "the child", understood from the
context, and its feminine form agrees with the predicate; "the half"
refers to the half of what the deceased has left — thus the definite
article stands for the second construct of the genitive case.

The verse is silent about the share of two females, because it may be
understood from the clause: The male shall have the equal of the portion
of two females. Let us suppose there is a male and a female heir;
according to this verse, the female shall have a third of the estate and
the male, the two-thirds - as it is the share of the two females. In
other words, two females shall have two-thirds of the inheritance. This
much may be inferred from the verse in a general way, but it is not in
itself the verse's definitely fixed connotation; there would have been
no contradiction if the verse had continued to say, for instance, and if
there are two females they shall have a half (or the whole) of the
estate.

But the verse by its silence about their share confirms the inferred
meaning; and the clear statement about the share of the more than two
females indicates that that silence is intentional, and not an
oversight. Moreover, the fact that they should get two-thirds of
inheritance is confirmed by the Prophet's practice, and the said sunnah
has continued uninterrupted since the days of the Prophet till this day,
with complete unanimity of the Muslim jurists - except one reported
dissent by Ibn 'Abbas.

This is the best explanation why the two females' share has not been
clearly stated. al-Kulayni (may Allah have mercy on him!) has written
al-Kafi: "Surely Allah has appointed the two females' share as
two-thirds; because He says: The male shall have the equal of the
portion of two females; so when a man leaves a daughter and a son, the
male shall get the equal of the two females' share, that is, two-thirds;
therefore the share of two females is two-thirds. After this, there was
no need to say that two females would get two-thirds."

The same explanation has been quoted from the exegete, Abu Muslim:
"(The said rule) is inferred from the divine words, The male shall have
the equal of the portion of two females. A male with a female gets
two-thirds; thus two-thirds shall be the share of two females." But
these two explanations are not perfect; they should be completed in the
light of what we have written above. Ponder on it.

There are some other explanations given for this verse which are quite
unworthy of divine words. For example, someone has written that the
words; if they are more than two females, means, two females or more;
thus this sentence contains the description of the share of two females
as well as of more than two. Another writer has said that the share of
two daughters is known by analogy from the law concerning two sisters
(coming at the end of the chapter) where it apportions two-thirds to
them. There are other similarly ridiculous claims.

Qur'an: and (as for) his parents, each of them shall have the sixth of
what he has left if he has a child... then his mother shall have the
sixth;

The conjunction of parents with the law of the children, shows that the
parents are co-sharers with the children and together they constitute
one class. The words: "and (only) his two parents inherit him", indicate
that they are the only heirs. The words: "but if he has brothers",
(coming after the clause: "but if he has no child and [only] his two
parents inherit him") show that brothers come into second class, after
the class of sons, daughters [and parents], and they would not inherit
as long as there is an heir of the first class - but the brothers shall
partially exclude the mother from one-third [as it would be reduced to
one-sixth].

Qur'an: after (the payment of) any bequest he may have bequeathed or a
debt;:

Bequest and will has been enjoined by the divine words: Bequest is
prescribed for you when death approaches one of you, if he leaves behind
wealth . . . (2:180). Although in this verse bequest precedes debt, it
does not contradict the sunnah which says that debt takes precedence of
bequest at the time of payment; because sometimes during a talk one
mentions less important things first and then progresses towards more
important ones. It is done when an important matter, because of its
position and strength, does not need as much emphasis as the unimportant
one does - and giving precedence in description is one way of
emphasizing. Accordingly, the words: "or a debt", put the things in
ascending order or importance.

This also shows why "bequest" has been qualified by the words, "he may
have bequeathed"; it puts further emphasis on it, and also points to the
necessity of showing reverence to the deceased and honoring his wishes
when he has made a bequest. Allah has said: Whoever then alters it
[i.e., the bequest] after he has heard it, the sin of it then is only
upon those who alter it (2:181).

Qur'an: your parents and your children, you know not which of them is
nearer to you in usefulness;:

It is addressed to the heirs, that is, the general public, inasmuch as
everyone inherits his deceased relatives, The sentence alludes to the
reason why the inheritance share of the parents differs from that of the
children. It also provides a sort of education to them; that is why they
have been addressed with the words: "you know not"; and such expressions
are commonly used by the people.

Had the verse been addressed to other than the heirs, i.e., to the
dying people who would, after their death, be inherited by their parents
and children, there would have been no reason to say: "which of them is
nearer to you in usefulness"; because apparently usefulness and benefit
implies making use of, and benefiting from, the inherited property, and
it fits on the heirs, not on the deceased.

The parents have been mentioned before the children; it is a sort of a
hint that the parents are nearer in benefit than the children. It is
like the verse: Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs of
Allah... (2:158), as we had quoted the tradition that the Prophet had
said: "I begin with what Allah has begun ..."

From the point of view of relationship and considering the human
sentiments, it is a fact that man feels more compassion towards his
children than towards his parents. In his eyes, his child's existence is
his own - but not so that of his parents. Man's parents have stronger
connection with him, when compared to his children's attachment to him.
When usefulness is based on this principle, then at the time of dividing
an inheritance, man should naturally get, for example, from his father a
greater share than he would from inheriting, for example, his son -
although it would appear from a superficial glance that the opposite
should be the case.

This verse (i.e., your parents and your children, you know not which of
them is nearer to you in usefulness) proves that Allah has based the
inheritance law on a creative reality found outside imagination - like
other natural Islamic laws.

This principle is also supported by other unrestricted Qur'anic verses
which speak about legislation in general. For instance: Then set your
face uprightly for the (right) religion in natural devotion (for the
truth); the nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no
alteration in the creation of Allah; that is the right religion (30:30).
In presence of such verses, it is un­thinkable that the shari'ah would
contain such compulsory and unchangeable rules and laws, without there
being to a certain extent basis for them in the creation.

It may possibly be inferred from this verses {your parents and your
children .. . ) that children's children would have precedence over
grandfathers and grandmothers; the grandparents will not inherit as long
as a child or a child's child [how low so ever] is present.

Qur'an: an ordinance from Allah . . . :

Apparently it is in accusative case governed by a deleted verb, e.g.,
obey, or, hold fast, etc. It has a reinforced emphasis that the
described shares are decreed and fixed; and that they cannot be
changed.

This verse prescribes the shares of the first class of the heirs, i.e.,
the children, the father and the mother, with all the variations, either
explicitly or implicitly.

Explicitly: Shares of the father and the mother: They get a sixth each
if the deceased has a child or children; but in the absence of children,
the mother gets either one-third or one-sixth (depending on the details
mentioned in the verse);

Share of a single daughter: She gets a half;
Share of several daughters when they are the only children: They get
two-thirds;
Shares of sons and daughters when they are together: The male shall
have the equal of the share of two females;
And to this is added the share of two daughters, and it is two-thirds,
as explained above.

Implicitly: Share of the only son: He shall get the whole property; it
is understood when we read the clause; The male shall have the equal of
the portion of two females, in conjunction with the clause, and if there
is one [daughter], she shall have the half.

Likewise, when he has left only the sons as heirs, they shall share it
among themselves equally, because the clause, The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females, indicates that the males shall have
equal shares among themselves.

The verse is truly amazing in its comprehensiveness with such
brevity.

It should be noted here that the verse with its unrestricted-ness shows
that there is no difference whatsoever — in matters of inheritance —
between the Prophet and the other people. We have seen similar
unrestrictedness or generality in the divine words: Men shall have a
share of what the parents arid the near relatives leaves, and women
shall have a share. .. (4:7). Someone has opined that the general
Qur'anic declarations are not applicable to the Prophet, because he had
announced them himself. But such views are not worth looking at. Of
course, there is a dispute between the Sunnis and the Shi'ahs whether a
prophet is inherited by his heirs or whatever he leaves goes to charity.
This originates from the tradition which Abu Bakr had narrated in the
case of Fadak. This discussion is beyond the scope of this book;
therefore we think it better not to go into it here; the reader should
consult relevant books for it.

Qur'an: And you shall have half of what your wives leave if they have
no child… after (payment of) any bequest they may have bequeathed or a
debt;

The meaning is clear. The half share has been described in possessive
case, "half of what your wives leave"; but the one-fourth share is
disconnected; and they shall have the fourth from what you leave; when
on such occasions a possessive construct is disjointed, it becomes
necessary to complete it with min (from) — either in words or implied
and understood. This min gives the connotation of taking from and
beginning; this meaning seems appropriate when the word related to min
is a negligible portion of the whole, when it is a small part or ratio
of the original, like one-sixth, one-fourth or one-third; but not when
it is a larger portion Like a half or two-thirds. That is why Allah has
said: sixth from what he has left; the mother shall have the third; you
shall have a fourth from what they leave — all this with disjointed
possessive. But He has said: half of what your wives leave; two-thirds
of what (the deceased) has left — all this in possessive case; also He
has said: she shall have the half as the definite article, "the", stands
for the second construct of the possessive case, i.e., half of what he
has left.

Qur'an: and if a man or a woman leaves property . .. and Allah is
Knowing, Forbearing:

'al-Kalalah is in fact a masdar which means to encompass; from it is
derived al-iklil (crown) because it encircles the head; also al-kull (=
whole, all, total) comes from it because it encompasses its parts;
another derivative is al-kall (to be tired, dull); it implies a sort of
wearisome encompassing against the one on whom he depends. ar-Raghib
says: "al-Kalalah is an heir other than the child and the father." Again
he says: "It has been narrated that the Prophet was asked about
al-kalalah. He said: 'He who dies and does not leave behind a child or a
parent.' Thus he (the Prophet) has taken it as an attribute of the
deceased; and both explanations are correct, because al-kalalah is a
masdar which encompasses the inheritor and the inherited, both."

The author says: In that case, it is possible to treat 'kana' was — it
is not included in the translation of the verse,) as an auxiliary verb,
and "a man", as its subject, with "to be inherited'", as an adjectival
phrase related to the said subject, and al-kalalah as its predicate.
Then the meaning will be as follows: and if a man or a woman who is to
be inherited is neither a parent nor an offspring of the heir.

Also, we may take kana (was) as a perfect verb, with, "a man or a woman
to be inherited", as its subject, and kalalah as a masdar used as a
circumstantial clause. The meaning again will be the same: that the
deceased is neither a parent nor an offspring of the heirs. az-Zajjaj
has reportedly said: According to those who have recited yurithu (makes
someone his heir), kalalah will be the object; and according to those
who recite yurathu (is inherited by), kalalah is a subjective, being a
circumstantial clause.

The clause, that does not harm (others), also is a subjective and a
circumstantial clause. al-Mudarrah (to harm, to impair). Obviously, it
forbids the dying person to harm the heirs through the debt; he should
not indulge in borrowing with intention of harming the heirs and
depriving them of inheritance. Another interpretation: He should not
harm their interest by bequeathing more than one-third of his
property.

Qur'an: These are Allah's limits; . . . And whoever disobeys.. . he
shall have an abasing chastisement:

al-Hadd means a barrier between two things which prevents their mixing
together and keeps their mutual distinction and differentiation intact,
like the limit or boundary of a house or a garden. The word, as used
here, refers to the inheritance laws and the decreed shares. Allah has
shown their utmost importance by describing, in these two verses, the
reward of obeying Allah and His Messenger in this respect, and the
abasing everlasting chastisement for him who disobeys Allah and His
Messenger.


