Volume 8: Surah An-nisaa, Verses 15-16
======================================

And as for those who are guilty of indecency from among your women,
call to witness against them four (witnesses) from among you; then if
they bear witness confine them to the houses until death takes them away
or Allah makes some way for them (15). And as for the two who are guilty
of it from among you, afflict them both; then if they repent and amend,
turn aside from them; surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), the
Merciful (16).

**COMMENTARY**

Qur'an: And as for those who are guilty ... from among you:

Atah and ata bihi (translated here as being guilty) actually means
"doing it". al-Fahishah is derived from al-fuhsh (indecency); thus
al-fahishah means indecent behavior; it is generally used in the meaning
of fornication; it has also been used in the Qur'an for sodomy or for
sodomy and lesbianism both, as Allah quotes Lut (a.s.) as saying: Most
surely you are guilty of an indecency which none of the nations has ever
done before you (29:28).

Apparently this word refers here to fornication, as explained by all
the exegetes. They have narrated that when the verse of flogging was
revealed, the Prophet said that the flogging is the way Allah has opened
for them when they are guilty of fornication. It is also supported by
the style of the verse which clearly shows that this order was to be
abrogated soon, as Allah says:

or Allah makes some way for them; and nobody has said that the penalty
of lesbianism was abrogated by any succeeding order, nor that this
penalty [of flogging] was meted out to anyone guilty of lesbianism; [all
this together shows that this verse is not concerned with sodomy or
lesbianism]. The phrase, "four (witnesses) from among you", indicates
that the witnesses should be males [because the pronoun used for 'you'
is of masculine gender].

Qur'an: then if they bear witness confine them . . . some way for
them:

The confinement, that, is, perpetual imprisonment, depends on the
evidence, not on actual guilt without the required evidence although it
might be known; it is one of the mercies of Allah on the ummah showing
His magnanimity and forbearance.

The punishment is perpetual confinement; it is clearly indicated by the
prescribed limit, "until death takes them away". But Allah has not used
the word, imprisonment or internment; instead He has said faamsikuhunna
which literally means, then restrain them; the use of this mild word is
another clear indication of His indulgence and tolerance.

The clause, "until death takes them away or Allah makes some way for
them", means: or Allah opens a way for them to be free from perpetual
confinement. The alternative indicates probable abrogation of the order;
and it happened when the rule of flogging replaced this order. Everyone
knows that the penalty given to fornicating women - since the later
period of the Prophet and in practice among the Muslims after him - is
the flogging, not confinement to the houses. The verse, supposing that
it contains the rule about the fornicating women, has been abrogated by
the verse of flogging; and the way mentioned in this verse undoubtedly
refers to flogging.

Qur'an: And as for the two who are guilty of it from among you, afflict
them both:

The two verses are inter-related, and certainly the pronoun 'it' refers
to 'indecency'. It supports the view that both verses deal with
punishment of fornication. The second verse therefore completes the
order given in the first one; the first one had explained the law only
to the extent it affected the women, while the second one describes the
rule as it affects both parties - and it is the, 'affliction'. So the
two verses together explain the rule of fornicating man and fornicating
woman both that both should be afflicted and the confinement of women to
the houses.

But this explanation does not agree with the following clause: then if
they repent and amend, turn aside from them; obviously it does not fit
in with the order of confining the women for the life.

Therefore, it is necessary to say that turning aside from them refers
to discontinuation of their punishment while the confinement continues
as before. That is why sometimes it is, said - following some traditions
which shall be quoted later - that the first verse speaks about those
women who are not virgin while the second one gives the order about the
virgins;, accordingly the virgins who commit fornication should be
punished by confining them to the houses until they repent and amend
their behavior, and then they may be released from the confinement. But,
this explanation leaves two problems unsolved:

First: Why should the first, verse be reserved for non-virgins and the
second one to virgins when there is nothing in the wordings to support
this differentiation?

Second: Why does the first verse speak about the fornicating women
only, while the second one talks about both parties; "And as for the two
who are guilty of it from among you,. .."?

It has been said that according to the exegete, Abu Muslim, the first
verse ordains the law about lesbianism, and the second one about sodomy,
and that both verses are un-abrogated.

But that view too is obviously wrong. As for the first verse, the
explanation given by us earlier (for the words, As for those who are
guilty of indecency from among your women . ..), proves un-tenability of
Abu Muslim's interpretation. As for his explanation of the second verse,
it is rejected by the well-established sunnah that the penalty of sodomy
is death. The correct hadith of the Prophet says: "Whoever among you
commits the sin of the people of Lut, kill (both) the doer and (the man)
done to." This law is either from the beginning (which has not been
abrogated); or is a subsequent law which has abrogated the verse; in any
case, it refutes Abu Muslim's views.

Looking at the apparent meaning of the two verses (which come to the
mind at once), and at the associations found with them; and keeping in
view the difficulties arising but of the given explanations, we may;
interpret the verses as follows - and Allah knows better:

The verse lays, down the law concerning adultery by married women.
Also, the fact that; the verse mentions only women, and not men,
indicates this meaning; the word, 'women', is commonly used for 'wives'
and especially when it appears as first construct of a genitive case
where the second construct is 'men', as is the position in this verse:
"you [i.e., you men’s] women"; also Allah says: And give women their
dowries as a free gift (4:4); … of your women to whom you have gone in
(4:23)

Accordingly the first and temporary order; was to confine them to the
houses then stoning was ordained for them. al-Jubba’i has used this
example to prove that the book maybe abrogated by the sunnah; but it is
not so. Abrogation repeals an order which was apparently meant to
continue for ever; while this order of confinement contains a clause
that points to its temporariness; and it is the words: or Allah makes
some way for them. These words clearly show that there was another order
that would be promulgated later.

Even if it were called ‘abrogation’ there would be no trouble; because
it would not contain those difficulties which were inherent in
abrogating the Book with the, sunnah - the Qur'an itself indicates here
that this Order was to be repealed after sometime; and the Prophet is
the one who explains the meaning of the honored Qur'an.

The second verse promulgates the rule about fornication (other than
adultery), that the parties should be afflicted; that punishment
includes confinement, hitting them with shoes, admonishing and shaming
them by harsh words or other such ways of hurting them. Accordingly this
verse stands abrogated by the verse of flogging in the chapter of 'The
Light'. As for a tradition that this verse speaks about virgin girls who
commit fornication, it is a khabaru 'l-wahid, apart from being
al-mursalah, and therefore weak. And Allah knows better. (However, this
interpretation is not free from weakness, because prior indication that
a certain rule would be abrogated later, does not water down the
abrogation.)

Qur'an: then if they repent and amend, turn aside from them:

Repentance is qualified by amendment; it is to establish the reality of
repentance, to make it clear that repentance is not mere utterance of
some words or just to be carried away by some pangs of conscience; [it
requires definite improvement of behavior and character].

**TRADITIONS**

It is narrated in at-Tafsir of al-'Ayyashi from as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said about the word of Allah: And as for those who are guilty of
indecency from among your women ..., that it was abrogated and that the
'way' [referred to here] was the laid down penal code. (al-Kafi)

al-Baqir (a.s.) was asked about this verse and he said: "It is
abrogated." He was asked: "How was it?" He said: "When a woman committed
indecency [i.e., fornication], and four witnesses stood (to give
evidence) against her, she was confined to a house; no one spoke to or
talked with her, nor anyone sat with her; she was provided her food and
drink - [this was to continue] until she died or Allah made some way for
her.

" Then he said: "Making way (for her) is the flogging and stoning." It
was said:" (And what is the meaning of the words of Allah:) And as for
the two who are guilty of it. . . ?" He said: "It means, when a virgin
is guilty of the indecency which was done by this non-virgin." [He was
asked the import of the words:] afflict them both. He said: "She will be
confined." (ibid.)

The author says: The story that the rule in the early days of Islam was
to confine them into the houses until death, has been narrated by the
Sunnis through many chains of narrators, from Ibn ‘Abbas', Qatadah,
Mujahid and others. It has, been narrated from as-Suddi that confinement
into the houses was the rule for non-virgins and the affliction
mentioned in the second verse was the order for unmarried girls and
boys.

But you have seen what is to be said in this context.


