Traditions
==========

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, inter alia, in his last sermon:
"Whoever repents one year before his death, Allah will turn (mercifully)
to him." Then he said: "Surely, a year is too long; whoever repents one
month before his death, Allah will turn (mercifully) to him." Then he
said: "Surely a month is too long; whoever repents one day before his
death, Allah will turn (mercifully) to him." Then he said: "Surely a day
is too long; whoever repents one hour before his death, Allah will turn
(mercifully) to him.

Then he said: "Surely an hour is too long; whoever repents while his
soul has reached here" - and he pointed with his hand to his throat -
"Allah will turn (mercifully) to him." (Man la yah-duruhu 'l-faqih)

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said when he was asked about the word of Allah, And
repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until when death
comes to one of them, he says: "Surely now I repent": "That is, when he
looks at the affairs of the next world."

The author says: al-Kulayni has narrated the first tradition in al-Kafi
through his chain from as-Sadiq (a.s.); it is also narrated through the
Sunni chains, and there are other traditions too of the same import.

The second tradition gives the explanation of the verse; also it
explains those traditions which say that repentance in presence of death
is not accepted. Accordingly "in presence of death" means 'when man
knows that the process of death has begun, and sees the signs of the
hereafter'; it is at that point that the door of repentance is closed
against him. But if a man is unaware of his impending death, then there
is no snag in acceptance of his repentance. Some of the following
traditions have similar meaning.

Zurarah has narrated from Abu Ja'far (a.s.) that he said: "When the
soul reaches here", pointing to his larynx, "then there is no repentance
for the knower; but there is repentance for the ignorant." (at-Tafsir,
al-Ayyashi)

It is reported in ad-Durru 'l-manthur that Ahmad, al-Bukhari (in his
at-Tafsir), al-Hakim and Ibn Marduwayh have narrated from Abu Dharr,
that he said: "Surely the Messenger of Allah (s.a. w.a.) said: 'Surely
Allah accepts repentance of His servant, or forgives His servant, until
the curtain comes down.' It was asked: 'And what is the coming down of
curtain?' He said: 'The soul goes out while a polytheist.' "

- Ibn Jarir has narrated from al-Hasan that he said: " [A report] has
come to me that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: 'Verily Iblis
said when he found that Adam had cavity [in his body]: "By Thy honor! I
will not leave his cavity as long as there was soul inside him." Then
Allah, the Blessed, the High, said: "By My honor! I will not come
between him and repentance as long as there was soul inside him." ' "
(ad-Durru 'l-manthur)

'Ali al-Ahmasi has narrated from Abu Ja'far (a.s.) that he said: "By
Allah! None gets deliverance from sins except he who confesses them."
Also he has narrated from the same Imam (a.s.): "Enough is remorse for
repentance." (al-Kafi)

It is narrated in al-Kafi through two chains from Ibn Wahb that he
said: "I heard Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) saying: 'When the servant repents, a
sincere repenting, Allah loves him and covers him.' I said: 'And how
does He cover him?' He said: 'He makes his two angels forget what they
had written against him; then He inspires his limbs and the areas of the
earth to conceal his sins. Thus he meets Allah - when he meets Him - and
there is nothing to give evidence against him concerning his sins.' "

Muhammad ibn Muslim has narrated from Abu Ja'far (a.s.) that he said:
"O Muhammad ibn Muslim! sins of the believer are forgiven to him when he
repents from them. Therefore, the believer should perform his deeds
afresh after repentance and forgiveness. But, by Allah! it is not but
for the people of faith." "I said: (But what if he relapses into sins
after repentance and forgiveness, and then repents again?'

He said: 'O Muhammad ibn Muslim! do you think that a believer servant
feels remorse for his sin and asks forgiveness from Allah for it and
repents and then Allah will not accept his repentance?' I said:

'Then if he does so repeatedly; commits sin and repents and asks
forgiveness?' Then he said: 'Whenever the believer returns asking for
forgiveness and repenting, Allah the High, returns to him with
forgiveness; and surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful; He accepts
repentance and pardons the evils. Therefore, be careful, lest you make
the believers lose hope of Allah's mercy.' " (al-Kafi)

Abu 'Amr az-Zubayri narrates from Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) about the words
of Allah, And most surely Tarn most forgiving to him who repents and
believes and does good, then continues to follow the right direction
[20:82], that he (a.s.) said: "This verse has an explanation, which
explanation is proved [by the fact] that Allah does not accept any deed
from any servant except from him who meets Him with fulfillment of that
explanation, and with that condition which Allah has imposed on the
believers.

" And he said: "Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil in
ignorance; Allah means that every sin which the servant does - although
he may be aware of it - he is ignorant when he thinks in his heart to
disobey his Lord; and Allah has spoken about it quoting the talk of
Yusuf to his brothers: Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother
when you were ignorant? [12:89]. So he charged them with ignorance
because they planned in their hearts to commit sin against Allah."
(at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: The text of the narration is not free from confusion
and disarray. Apparently the earlier portion is meant to show that good
deed is accepted when the servant fulfills its condition and does not
destroy it. After all, repentance is acceptable only when it restrains
and prevents the repenter from sin - even for a limited time.

And probably the text, "And he said: Repentance with Allah is only for
those ... ", is a new topic, to show that the word, in ignorance, in
this verse is an explanatory clause, and that sin in general is
ignorance - it has already been given as an alternative explanation in
the commentary. This latter part is narrated also in Majma'u 'l-bayan
from the same Imam (a.s.).


