Volume 8: Surah An-nisaa, Verses 19-22
======================================

O you believe! It is not lawful for you that you should inherit women
against (their) will; and do not straiten them in order that you may
take part of what you have given them, unless they are guilty of
manifest indecency; and live with them in a proper manner; then if you
hate them, it may be that you dislike a thing while Allah has placed
abundant good in it (19). And if you wish to have (one) wife in place of
another and you have given one of them a heap of gold, then take not
from it anything; would you take it by slandering (her) and (doing her)
manifest wrong? (20). And how can you take it when one of you has
already gone in to the other and they have made with you a firm
covenant? (21). And marry not women whom your fathers married, except
what has already passed; this surely is indecent and hateful, and it is
an evil way (22)

**COMMENTARY**

The talk returns to the subject of women, guiding the Muslims about
some related matters. This piece contains the clause, and live with them
in a proper manner; then if you hate them, it may be that you dislike a
thing while Allah has placed abundant good in it. It is a basic Qur'anic
principle which regulates woman's social life.

Qur'an: 0 you who believe! it is not lawful for you that you should
inherit women against (their) will:

The Arabs of the era of ignorance counted wives of a deceased person as
part of his inheritance if the woman was not the heir's mother, as
history and traditions have reported.

The heirs took the widow as part of their share; one of them threw a
cloth on her and she became his property. If he wished, he married her,
inheriting the deceased's marriage — without giving her a fresh dowry.
If he disliked marrying her, he held her in his custody; then if he was
so pleased, he gave her in marriage to someone and used her dowry
himself; and if he wished, he kept her in straitened condition, not
allowing her to marry, until she died and he inherited her property, if
she had any. Apparently, the verse forbids some custom that was
prevalent among them; and as some exegetes have written, it could be the
above-mentioned system of inheriting the widows.

But the clause, "against (their) will", does not agree with this
interpretation, whether we take it as an explanatory clause or a
restrictive one. If it were taken as explanatory clause, it would imply
that that inheritance was always disliked by women, always happened
against their will - and obviously it was not so. If it were taken as a
restrictive clause, it would mean that that inheritance was unlawful
only if it took place against the woman's will, but there was no harm if
she freely agreed to it — but this too is not correct.

Of course, dislike and unwillingness was a certainty when the heirs
prevented them from re-marrying, coveting, in all or most cases, their
property after taking their possession by inheritance. Obviously, it is
this factor — contriving to inherit the woman's property against her
will — which this verse has forbidden.

As for marrying them by inheritance, this verse does not deal with it;
that is forbidden by a coming verse, which says: And marry not women
whom your fathers married.. . So far as the custom of giving them in
marriage to someone else and usurpation of their dowry by the concerned
heir is concerned, it is forbidden by such verses as: and women shall
have the benefit of what they earn (4:32). Also the verse:.. . then when
they have fully attained their term, there is no blame on you for what
they do for themselves in a proper manner (2:234), discredits the whole
custom, guiding the people to the Islamic way.

As for the words: and do not straiten them in order that you may take…,
they do not refer to the afore-mentioned prevention of their remarrying
(with intention of getting their property on their death), because the
subsequent clause: in order that you may take part of what you have
given them, clearly speaks about taking away part of the dowry which the
oppressing husband himself had given her; it does not refer to any
property which she might have got from other sources.

In short, the verse stops men from inheriting women's property against
their will; it is not concerned with the custom of taking women
themselves as part of inheritance. Accordingly, either the word,
'women', metaphorically refers to their property, or the word, 'property
of' is implied before it.

QUR'AN: and do not straiten them in order that you may take part of
what you have given them, unless they are guilty of manifest
indecency:

The conjunctive, 'and', conjoins it either with the preceding : that
you should inherit, (in which case it should be translated: nor that you
should straiten them), or with: it is not lawful for you, (taking the
negative present tense as equivalent to prohibitive mood). al-'Adl (= to
prevent, to straiten, to put in difficulty); al-fahishah indecency; it
is mostly used for fornication al-mubayyanah (clear). Sibawayh has
reportedly said that abana, istabana, bayyana, tabayyana all have the
same meaning, and are used both as transitive and intransitive - all of
them are used to say, for example: The thing became clear, or, I made
the thing clear.

The verse makes it unlawful to put the wife in straitened condition -
in any way - with intention of compelling her to pay back to the husband
a part of dowry for dissolution of marriage-tie, so that she may
extricate herself from that difficult life. Imposing such difficulties
with this intention is unlawful for the husband. Of course, if the wife
commits manifest indecency, i.e., adultery, then he may put restrictions
on her, keeping her in straitened condition, in order that she may pay
him something to obtain divorce.

This verse is not in conflict with the verse 229 of the chapter of 'The
Cow': and it is not lawful for you to take any part of what you have
given them, unless both fear that they cannot keep within the limits of
Allah; then if you fear that they cannot keep within the limits of
Allah, there is no blame on them for what she gives up to become free
thereby. It is a specification; the verse of the chapter of 'The Women'
specifies the one of the chapter of 'The Cow', by restricting it to the
case of fornication. Moreover, the payment mentioned in the chapter of
'The Cow' refers to that which is given by mutual agreement, and that
cannot particularize this verse.

QUR'AN: and live with them in a proper manner;… abundant good in it:

"al-Ma'ruf’ is that thing or custom which people recognize in their
social structure, which they do not reject or disapprove. As the order
to live with them is qualified with al-ma'ruf, it tells men to live with
women in a manner that is known and recognized by the society.

The living together that is known and recognized by the people is as
follows:

Every individual is an integral part of society, having equal
importance with all other parts; they all together constitute human
society; and each of them has a responsibility to strive as much as he
can to make up the society's deficiencies. He earns and makes what is
beneficial, takes from it according to his requirements, and gives the
surplus to the society. If someone is treated 'in a different way, and
is oppressed in a manner that his identity as an integral part is
nullified, then he becomes a vassal, he is exploited but is given
nothing in lieu of his labor. But it is exceptional case.

Allah has described in His book that all people — men and women alike —
are branches of a single human root; parts and components of one human
species. Society, for its existence, needs males as much as it needs
females — in equal degree. Allah has said: you are (sprung) the one from
the other (4:25).

There is nothing contradictory when we see that each sex has been
bestowed some distinct characteristics which are not found in the other.
For instance, men on the whole are distinguished for their strength and
hardiness; and women by nature are more endowed with sentiments and
soft-heartedness. Humanity, in its creative and social lives, needs
demonstration of strength and hardiness as much as it requires
permeation of love and mercy. The two qualities together represent the
forces of attraction and repulsion which are prevalent in human
society.

Thus the two sexes are equally balanced in weight, effect and
influence; in the same way as individual males are equal in their affect
and influences on this structure, in spite of their difference in
natural and social matters, like strength and weakness, knowledge and
ignorance, intelligence and obtuseness, smallness and greatness,
leadership and subordination, mastership and servitude, nobleness and
vileness, and so on.

This is the social order emanating from perceptivity of a normal
society that continues on the natural way without deviation. Islam has
fulfilled all requirements of society and removed its deficiencies. No
wonder that it had to establish the system of equality in society; and
it is this equality that is called social freedom. It gives freedom to
the women like the men.

Man, per se, has got the faculty of understanding and free will; with
that independent will he chooses what is beneficial to him and discards
what is harmful. Living in society he has the right to choose whatever
he wants - as long as it does not go against the society's well-being -
with independent will without any hindrance from anyone; he is not bound
to opt for someone else's choice without any will of his own. But, as
you have seen, this principle is not in conflict with specialization
that some classes, or a few members of the same class, should be
distinguished with some especial qualities - or should be particularly
devoid of some qualities.

As for example, Islam has reserved judiciary, administration and jihad
for men; also they have been given responsibility of maintaining the
women. Or, as minor children are not competent to make any
acknowledgement or deal, and are exempted from the shari'ah's
obligations. These examples show that different classes and individuals
are governed by different laws — which are based on difference of their
weight in society — although all of them are equal in their basic value
inhuman social structure where the only criterion is that all are human
beings having understanding and free will.

Such restrictions and exclusions are not peculiar to the Islamic laws;
they are found, in varying degrees, in all civil codes; nay, in all
human systems, even in primitive customs. The clause, that encompasses
all these meanings, is the word of Allah: and live with them in a proper
manner, as explained above.

As for the words of Allah: then if you hate them, it may be that you
dislike a thing while Allah has place abundant good in it, it presents a
known and definite fact in the shape of a doubtful matter. Often this
style is used to prevent incitement of antagonism and prejudice in the
audience. The same style is seen in the following verses: Say: "Who
gives you the sustenance from, the heavens and the earth?' Say: "Allah.
And most surely we or you are on a right path or in manifest error."
Say: "You will not be questioned as to what we are guilty of, nor shall
we be questioned as to what you do." (34:24-25).

At the time when the Qur'an was revealed, human societies did not
accord the women the status of human being; they were not considered as
integral component of humanity. Some well-advanced civilizations treated
them as an appendage - beyond the human circle - whose only purpose was
to be used and exploited by man.

Others recognized that women were human beings, but of inferior
quality; they were deficient in humanity, like children and idiots, but
with one difference: While children's or idiot's deficiency was
removable (after adulthood or by treatment, respectively) women could
never attain full human status. Consequently, it was necessary for them
to) live as a dependent under total authority of men for ever. It is
interesting to note that Allah has not said: if you dislike their
marriage; He has ascribed the dislike and hate directly to their person:
"if you hate them"; probably this expression was used keeping the
above-mentioned social norm in view.

QUR'AN: And if you wish to have … manifest wrong?:

al-Istibdal (to seek a substitute); it is used here for replacement of
a wife with another; or it implies taking a wife in place of another by
substitution. That is why "you wish" has been used with the istibdal,
although the latter's paradigm itself gives the meaning of wishing and
wanting. Accordingly, the meaning is as follows: And if you wish to take
one wife in place of another by substitution.

al-Buhtan is what stuns and bewilders someone; it is generally used in
meaning of false accusation. Grammatically, it is al-masdar, but in this
verse it has been used for an action, i.e., taking back a part of dowry.
Syntactically it describes state of the verb, "would you take it"; and
so does the phrase, "manifest wrong". The question shows disapproval.

The meaning: If you wish to divorce a wife and marry another in her
place, do not take back from the divorced wife any part of the dowry
which you had paid her - even if the amount you had given her was huge
and you want to take only a small portion. QUR'AN: And how can you take
it... a firm covenant?…:

The question creates a sense of astonishment. "al-Ifda’” (to reach, to
arrive at) is used for intimate touching; it is derived from al-fada'
(space, vastness).

As taking back a portion of dowry is an oppression and injus­tice, and
the parties had lived in intimacy and union, it was really an amazing
situation. Marriage and the resulting intimate sexual relation makes
husband and wife like one being; and it is really strange that one
should oppress one's own self, or one part of a body should oppress the
other part.

Apparently, the clause, "and they have made with you a firm covenant",
refers to the union which the man had firmly established through
marriage-tie; and one of whose concomitants is the dowry fixed at the
time of marriage and which the woman receives from the man by right.
Someone has said that the firm covenant refers to the promise taken from
man for woman that he would either retain her in a proper way or let her
go with fairness, as Allah has mentioned [in 2:231]. Someone else has
said that it refers to their becoming lawful to each other as a result
of marriage. But quite obviously, these interpretations are far-fetched,
as the words of the verse show.


