Accident…Again
==============

The son prepared a few questions for his father that night. Some of the
questions were collected from some books he had previously read and the
rest were the result of discussions with his friends and teachers at
school. His father was late, so he began writing down his questions on a
piece of paper so that he won’t forget them. When his father came later
on, he was carrying a sack made of cloth, but the son could not figure
out what was inside it.

When the time came for his lesson, the son asked the following question:

**S** Dad, I feel astonished: How do some people deny the existence of
the Creator while the entire world is filled with proofs of His
existence?

**F** I’d like you to be more precise in presenting your question. Does
your question concern their denial of the Creator or it is about their
disbelief in Him, glory and praise be to Him?

**S** What is the difference?

**F** The difference between denying God’s existence and not having
faith in God is that the denier has a reason about non-existence of God.
But the one who doesn’t believe in God doesn’t have proof of God’s
existence.

**S** Which group is the majority? Those who deny God or those who don’t
believe in His existence?

**F** Those who deny God do not exist. Denial requires a reason, and how
can they get one? Of course, there are people who deny His existence but
when you discuss it with them, you’ll find out that in fact they do not
deny the facts but they just don’t believe.

**S** But there are many people who deny God’s existence because they
are not convinced with the evidences of His existence.

**F** These are not called deniers. A denier is a person who has
convincing and solid reasons for the non-existence of God. And you see
that this is different from the one who doesn’t believe in Him (Glory
and praise be to Him). So, son, distinguishing between these two groups
is necessary.

**S** What about the group that doesn’t believe in God?

**F** Those are creeds and trends...Why are you looking at this sack
son? What are you thinking of?

**S** I’m listening to you. I was looking at the sack because I don’t
know why you’ve brought it here?

**F** You’ll see that this sack has a close link to one of the creeds
that doesn’t believe in God.

**S** I’m listening to you, Dad!

**F** There are different types of those who don’t believe in God; they
are usually named materialists because they solely believe in materials
and deny anything immaterial. The most two important ideas they believe
in are: First: the universe doesn’t need a Creator as materials do exist
since ever. And this is what we call the eternity of materials.

Second: The universe is organized and this fact can’t be denied except
that this organization has no organizer and has been created
accidentally along the years. This is called creation by chance, the
probability theory so if you ask the infidels: who has created the
universe? They would reply: Nobody has created the universe; the
universe is eternal. Also, if you asked: How do you interpret the
organization in every aspect of the universe? They would answer: The
organization is there by chance.

The father noticed that his son kept having a glance on the sack
whenever he has an opportunity so he smiled and the son understood the
reason behind this smile. Then the son laughed and said:

**S** How does the content of the sack reply to the materialists?

Is it a reply to the eternity of the universe or to the accidental
creation of it?

**F** The second one... it’s a reply to the idea which says that
organization is created by an accident or chance. Take the sack and look
what is inside...

The father emptied the sack; there was ten metal pieces that have the
same size, numbered from one to ten. He continued:

**F** In the past, there were some people who used the word “chance” to
justify their ignorance. It is just like a cave that they turned to in
order to deny the existence of God because chance doesn’t have rules and
it’s not ruled by a specified pattern... chance means that there will be
no place for law and rules. However, today things are different...
modern mathematics worked around the case and discovered governing laws
to the contrary of what some would think that there are no regulations
that govern this operation.

**S** One time, our mathematics teacher spoke about the probability law
but he did not explain it for us.

**F** What you’re talking about is called the Probability Theory. It has
been evolved and it’s now considered as one of the important theories
used in many fields where the old mathematical laws are not functional.

**S** Will you explain it for me?

**F** Yes! Look at the ten numbered pieces... put them in the bag and
mix them well.

**S** OK!... Well... Is that enough?

**F** Mix them more. Hold the sack from both sides and move it well.

**S** Well... I’ve mixed the pieces very well

**F** Now, without looking, get me the piece with number one.

Can you do that?

**S** I’ll try... OK! Number one; please come out... Well...

Oh! No, it’s number seven.

**F** Put it back in the bag, mix the pieces in the bag once again and
then try fetching another piece. Maybe number one will come out.

**S** The second attempt... First I mix the pieces and then get one
piece... It is number four.

**F** Try for the third time!

**S** Well!... It’s number two. I’m going to be closer to number one.
May I repeat once again?

**F** Yes, go ahead and do one more attempt.

**S** Number ten comes out this time. I’ve got far away. How long should
we repeat this for the piece with number one to come out?

**F** Look, son! The probability theory says: the probability that
number one comes out is one to ten which means you have to repeat the
process randomly ten times so that you may get number one.

**S** Ok!

**F** But if you want to get two pieces say, number one and two
sequentially, the probability will be 10 x 10 which means you have to
repeat your attempts randomly a hundred times in order to find those
numbered pieces sequentially. If you want to have three pieces
sequentially, then you have to perform 1000 attempts. Therefore, the
possibility of getting the three pieces in order is one to thousandth.

**S** What if I want to get out all the ten pieces sequentially?

**F** In this case you have to perform 1010 operations. That’s ten
billion attempts.

**S** This probability seems to be impossible.

**F** Actually it is.

**S** Well, now how can we infer that what materialists say about the
accidental creation of the universe is invalid?

**F** We show the invalidity of what they rely upon with the following
method: The number of organized things and particles in the universe is
countless. All aspects of the universe are controlled by a law or a
system of rules. Each organization involves a number of units which far
exceeds the ten pieces you saw in the sack. The possibility of these
countless things being randomly organized to create an organization is
almost zero in Mathematics. So the universe’s organization could not be
created randomly or accidentally. Thus, there is planning, knowledge,
will and power gathered to establish the universal organization. All
constituents of the universe follow a system and blind chance doesn’t
play any rule in this highly organized system.

**S** Well-done Dad! This is very convincing scientifically

F I’ll give you a practical example of this.

**S** Please go ahead, Dad.

**F** The example is based on the protein elements which are the basic
constituents of any living substance. I’ve extracted this section from a
book called “The Manifestation of God in Modern Science.” This is a
valuable book and I advise you to read it, but I’m not sure if you can
find it in libraries or not. Anyway I borrowed it from a friend and
copied the parts I needed. Take these few sheets and read them.

**S** Give them to me, please!

Protein is one of the essential components of all living cells. It
constitutes of five elements: Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Oxygen and
Sulfur. The number of atoms in each single protein is 40,000. If we say
that the 92 chemical elements in the world are distributed randomly,
then the possibility of mixing these five elements together to make one
single protein component can be calculated to know the quantity that
should be mixed in order to make this component and to know the duration
of this process. The Swiss mathematician, Charles Yujengay, has
calculated the probable time required for the above- mentioned
processes. He found out that the probability of having the opportunity
for the random formation of protein is 1/10160 which means that the
process may have to be repeated over and over 10160 times in order to
end with the formation of one protein component.

This number is not expressible in simple words. Another interesting fact
is that the amount of substances required for the formation of one
protein component by chance far exceeds all the substances currently
available in the world by millions of times. The duration involved in
the random formation of this single protein element on the surface of
the Earth is endless billions of years. The Swiss mathematician
estimated the period as 10243 years. Proteins are formed of long chains
of amino acids. So how does the constituents match?

If they were formed in an alternative way, they would not be suitable
for living and sometimes they turn into toxins. The British scientist,
J. B. Leathes, has calculated the number of reactions necessary in one
of the simple proteins and he found out that it would be 1048.
Therefore, it’s rationally impossible for the entire reactions to occur
randomly just to form one single protein component.

Interestingly, proteins are lifeless chemical components.

They don’t come alive unless they acquire that strange secret which we
don’t know the real essence and nature of, yet. It is the unlimited
brain. It is God solely Who is able to know the fact that the protein
component is capable of being the basic component of life. So He built
it, visualized it, and favored it with the secret of life.

**S** Dad! What a great scientific reasoning! Indeed “***Those***
***truly*** ***fear*** ***Allah,*** ***among*** ***His***
***Servants***”

**F** All what you’ve read was about the formation of a single component
of protein! Can you guess the number of protein components in the
universe? What about the non- protein elements? How many infinite
systems are there in the world? Thinking of that makes the accidental
creation of the world a sort of madness or intentional obstinacy based
on irremediable complex personality.


