Rational And Evaluation Reasoning
=================================

**S** Dad! I’m still overwhelmed by the scientific reasoning of refuting
accidental creation of the world. Certainty of God’s existence is
something that is open to discussion, glory and praise be to Him. I’m
now familiar with the error of materialists. Dad! Would you please tell
me about the other theory of materialists and their idea of the eternal
material existence which claims that there is no Creator for the
universe?

**F** Of course, son! They claim that the universe has been in existence
since ever so there is no point of asking who the creator is because, as
they assume, that there was no time where there was nothing existent.
This allegation is just some kind of assumption for they have no
evidence that the universe has been in existence since ever!

**S** Right Dad! What’s their evidence?

**F** I told you; they have no evidence; on the contrary, the evidence
they forward is against their allegation. Scientifically, the age of the
universe is around billions of years which means that at the beginning
it wasn’t inexistence and later was created. What does this mean other
than: “It is X years old”?

**S** Quite correct... If we pinpoint an age for the universe, it means
that there should be a beginning.

**F** It also means that it’s not eternal

***S*** Of course! And according to that there should be a Creator and
He is the Almighty God. But Dad! Is there any scientific proof that the
universe is not eternal?

**F** Yes son! Physics will provide us with the reason. Thermal Dynamics
proves that the constituents of this universe lose their energy
gradually and this leads towards a day when all creatures are
approaching the temperature of absolute zero. At that time, there won’t
be any energy and there will be no movement at all. There is no get away
from this situation because of the gradual loss of energy as time
passes. This proves that the universe is not eternal. If it was so, then
it would have reached the temperature of absolute zero long time ago.
The burning Sun, the shining stars and the Earth, which is full of
different forms of lives, are clear evidence that the universe is
originally related to a time started at a specific moment. Thus it is an
event amongst the events and this means that there should be a beginning
for the universe and there should be an Ageless, Eternal, Wise Creator,
Who encompasses everything. His Power is unlimited and He must have
created this universe.

**S** Mighty... Great... Glory be to God... “***Truth*** ***has***
***(now)*** ***arrived***”

**F** “***and*** ***Falsehood*** ***perished***”

**S** Actually the progress in science serves faith and brings human
beings closer to God... Where did you find this reason, Dad?

**F** From the same chapter of the book “The Manifestation of God in
Modern Science.” Frank Alen had written this chapter.

**S** May God reward him the best! What a great service he has delivered
in refuting the materialists’ claims about the eternity of the universe
and its accidental creation. But Dad! Did this book deal with the
Organization Proof?

**F** Yes... The same author discussed aspects of the universal
organization and concluded that there has to be a Creator to the
universe. He said:

“The Earth provides a suitable environment to life which cannot be
attributed to mere chance. The Earth is a sphere hung in the space
rotating around itself which results in the succession of days and
nights; it also rotates around the sun once a year which results in the
succession of sequential seasons that expand the livable regions of our
planet and increase the types of different vegetables far more than if
the Earth being static. The Earth is enveloped by gases which are
necessary for all forms of life, more than 500 miles above the earth.

The thickness of the gas- cover protects us from the deadly meteorites
which possess an approximate speed of more than thirty miles per second
by preventing them from reaching the surface of the Earth with such
deadly speed. Also the gas-cover keeps the Earth’s temperature within a
range suitable for life. It also carries water vapor from the oceans to
far regions flourishing life in those lifeless regions. Rain is the
source of fresh water without which the Earth would be a desert without
any sign of life. In conclusion, the oceans and the atmosphere
complement each other to create a balance in the universe.

Water is characterized by four significant properties that protect lives
in the oceans, lakes and rivers, especially when winter becomes long and
extremely cold. Water absorbs great amounts of Oxygen when its
temperature is low. The density of water reaches its maximum at four
degrees Celsius. We also know that the density of ice is less than that
of water which makes the ice formed in lakes and rivers floats over the
water surface because it is lighter than water. Thus the water maintains
its temperature making life possible underneath water in extremely cold
regions.

When water freezes, a great amount of heat is liberated which helps
protect the living creatures in the seas. The dry parts of the Earth are
suitable for many creatures. The soil contains several elements that
plants absorb and transform into various types of nutrients which
animals lack and need. There are also a large number of minerals close
to the surface of the Earth.

It was the reason behind the creation of the current civilizations and
the emergence of the available industries and arts. In conclusion, the
Earth is created in the best way for living. It’s doubtless that all
this is arranged by a Wise and Expert Creator. It’s not sensible that it
is a mere coincidence or a random mixture of things. Asheia (one of the
Jewish prophets) was right when he said the following and this is aimed
at God: “***He*** ***didn’t*** ***create*** ***it*** ***aimlessly;***
***it*** ***has*** ***been*** ***created*** ***and*** ***visualized***
***for*** ***the*** ***creatures***.”

Some people mock the size of the Earth compared to the infinite space
surrounding it. If the Earth was smaller than it is now, e.g. equivalent
to the size of the moon or its diameter is quarter of the Earth’s
current diameter, it would be unable to keep the surrounding atmosphere
and water vapor; the temperature would have reached a degree that no
living creatures would be able to survive. On the other hand, if the
Earth’s diameter was double its current one, the surface would expand
four times the current size and this would result in doubling its
gravity. As a result, the height of the atmospheric envelope would
decrease and the atmospheric pressure would increase from 1Kg/cm2 to
2Kg/cm2 which would highly affect life on earth. In this situation the
area of the cold regions would highly expand and the area of the livable
regions would greatly decrease. Therefore, people would have group and
live separately far from each other; the isolation would grow and
traveling and communication would become impossible.

If the Earth’s size was the same of the sun (assuming that it should
have the same density), its gravity would be 150 times more than what it
is currently. Also, the height of the atmospheric envelope would be four
miles less and as a result water vaporization would become impossible.
The atmosphere pressure would be more than 150 Kg/cm2; so an animal of a
one-pound weight would weigh 150 pounds. The size of a human being would
shrink to the size of a weasel or a squirrel and their intellectualism
would be impossible to develop.

If the Earth’s orbit moved to double the distance from the sun, the
quantity of heat received from the sun would decrease to one fourth of
its present level; the rotation time around the sun would take longer
and the winter would become longer and all living creatures on Earth
would freeze. On the other hand, if the distance of the Earth from the
sun was half of the current one, the heat received would be four times
greater; the rotation velocity would increase; the duration of the
seasons would shrink to the half if we call them seasons at all; and
living on Earth would become impossible.

In conclusion, the current size of the Earth, its distance from the sun
and its velocity within its orbit provide the living conditions and the
prerequisites for human beings to live, think and enjoy life the way we
see it.”

**S** O God! This is the best useful knowledge I’ve ever heard.

I must look for this book and read it carefully. If I find it, I would
buy it for any cost.

**F** Also look for the book “The Faith Story” written by Sheikh Nadim
Al-Jeser. You’ll find excellent discussions and useful experiences about
faith.

**S** Would you please tell me about it?

**F** We will continue our discussion tomorrow, son!


