Mind and Freedom
================

Tonight the son was eager to hear his father’s experiences with the
materialists and he didn’t prepare any question in advance. He was ready
to hear his father:

**F** My first experience with the materialists was before reaching
puberty. I acquired my religious personality from the social environment
where I grew up; my parents were honest believers; the school atmosphere
was religious; and the city where I lived when I was young generally
followed religious culture and practices. That’s how I passed my
childhood and was about to reach adolescence. I was a good believer in
theory and practice, but... What kind of belief and faith? I followed
and did what others did. I didn’t know that such kind of faith wouldn’t
endure or last against the first encounter of doubt. This actually
happened when I was thirteen years old; I was given a lot of attention
from my geography teacher who was a communist and was planning to draw
me closer to his beliefs and then enroll me in the communist party.

That was after he noticed my excellence at school and my ideological
interests which were different and distinctive from those of my peers at
that level of junior high school. The preliminary discussions between us
were about simple insignificant religious matters. He intended to
influence my thoughts while I intended to influence his. I was unaware
of his plan of changing my ideology. After a few meetings, I noticed
that he was avoiding direct clash with my religious thoughts. After a
while he manipulated the discussion from simple cases to deeper concepts
over ideology, the creation of the universe and monotheism. He gradually
moved to discussing the existence of God but in a gentle way avoiding
any direct clash which might end up with a strong reaction from me
because of what I carried from my environment.

He had profound knowledge about the psychology of dealing with youth who
have just begun to shape their own ideologies, and at this age, they
also feel so confident and bumptious. Young people at this age deny what
they don’t believe in even if all mankind have unanimity upon.

This attitude might finally result in revolt and disobedience which is
the basics for building new thoughts and ideologies. That’s why
missionaries and messengers try to attract the youth who make up a large
proportion of people in adolescence in order support their thoughts and
ideologies. The youth would sacrifice themselves without caring for the
harm they may get afterwards (as the cave companions did). You can see
in the Arab world that the [political] parties originate among young
students in schools and these thoughts become part of their daily lives
until their graduation from university. It’s extremely rare that an
ideological stream chooses men in their forties or businessmen, or those
who have large families.

**S** That’s right Dad! I also noticed that most of the parties form
students’ unions which become the most powerful and active of all
unions.

**F** But this is before getting the authority in their hands

**S** And after getting the power?

**F** Afterwards, they don’t give people a chance to live at ease unless
they show unconditional support. It’s an opportunity for those to seize
power in an illegal way and be in a position to crush people, deny them
their basic rights and transform the government apparatus into a fearful
tool against people.

**S** Do you think, Dad, that it is better to keep the authority in the
hands of ideologists or in the hands of dictatorial and opportunists

**F** First of all, the question should be about the ideology. If the
ideology is not Islamic, then it should not be considered as the best
option. It should be rejected whether it’s been carried by the
ideologists or opportunists. If the ideology is Islam, the believers are
responsible for protecting it. Neither rich nor those who believed in
Islam after its victory are eligible for this responsibility. For, if we
won, they would say: Weren’t we with you? And if the infidels won or had
a share, they would say to them: didn’t we support you and prevented the
believers from hurting you?

**S** OK Dad! Will you please continue about the teacher of geography?

**F** Yeah! This man utilized his knowledge about the psychology of the
youth and discovered my love for reading just like your love for reading
so he encouraged me to solve the problem of God existence by reading
books. Thereby he advised me to read the book “The Origin of Kinds”
written by an Egyptian unbeliever called Salama Mousa. But when he saw
that I couldn’t find the book, he lent it to me. Soon I started reading
it.

**S** As far as I know, the book “The Origin of Kinds” is written by
Darwin the one who established the theory, isn’t it?

**F** Yes! The original book was written by Darwin and he was the one
who formulated the theory of evolution and development. He has said:
“All kinds of animals are from one origin and later they evolved and
varied through natural selection according to the law of survival of the
fittest, which assumes the survival of the fittest and death of the weak
ones.” Darwin chose this title for his book but the Coptic author
(Salama Mousa), who was a representative of the Western ideology in the
Islamic world, tried to publicize these thoughts amongst Muslims.

He also named his book “The Origin of Kinds” and extracted his concepts
from Darwin’s book. The book was written in a simple style to attract
young people and to turn them away from religion much more than the
original book of Darwin did.

**S** Why did Salama Mousa do that?

**F** Darwin did believe in God while Salama Mousa was not only an
unbeliever but also a propagandist of the disbelief in God. Salama Mousa
presented the theory in an attractive way avoiding the principal weak
points. These weak points were mentioned by Darwin in his original book,
which if one reads, he would feel that the author didn’t try to find an
alternative for the faith in God, while Salama Mousa tried to mislead
young people by claiming that the Darwin theory is an undisputable
scientific fact and that this fact is the alternative of the myth which
says that God is the creator. God is far greater than what those
ignorant ones claimed.

**S** Well! What else?

**F** I read the book carefully... My belief started to crack... What is
happening here? I’m facing scientific facts that said: Human species are
not created by God, they evolved through a number of random steps; those
steps were repeated many times and provided a countless numbers of types
and species with different properties and characteristics; the weak
species became extinct while the stronger ones survived during their
evolution; therefore human beings are created in the same way. He
claimed that science was supported by many facts and undeniable evidence
and archeological discoveries. Should I respect my mind and accept those
so-called scientific facts? Or respect my parents and society and accept
what they taught me?

**S** It must have been a hard choice for you then!

**F** The information in the book was supported by striking photos which
consolidated those facts. But he organized the information in a
misleading way as to perplex and confuse simple minded readers. I was
like a villager who has just come to the capital of his country
wondering about everything with a feeling of awe, daze and happiness.

It was the first time I’ve read a book that destroys religion
completely; it showed how what my people, society, family, everyone I
knew including myself believed in was wrong; All traditions, religious
practices, prayers and social relationships were false. What we believed
in or practiced was either derived from religion or related to religion
somehow and because the whole religion is based on faith of God, then
everything would collapse if what this book claims turns to be true.

**S** This was a terrible feeling for anxiety could tear a human being
and turn him into a feather in a blowing wind. I experienced this
condition when you started your program with me. When you separated me
from the school of traditional faith to get me enrolled with a free will
in the school of real faith. You’ve done well, Dad!

**F** Anyway, I decided to choose between my mind and my social
environment... It’s true that my social environment was precious to me
but my mind was more precious. I was a young man who respected his mind
which was capable of showing me the right path. So should I choose my
mind but then... No... No... If I followed my mind then I would be
disobeying my parents whom I loved and respected and respecting them was
a moral and religious obligation...

What? Moral obligation? And religious obligation? What is moral? What is
religion? God’s law? What’s God’s law? Who is God? What is God? Is He
the One, my mother told me about, or the one Salama Mousa called a myth?
Should I follow women’s opinions or the opinions of authors,
intellectuals and prominent scientists? O God! What should I do? O
God... Did I say “O God”? How can I call God when I doubt him? What was
inside me that made me say “O God”... Was it myself, or part of myself,
or what? A wind stormed inside my mind; I started reviewing
everything... I decided to swim against the current but if I couldn’t, I
would rest on the bank to find out the right direction then swim again.

**S** What happened after that?

**F** After a long deep thinking, I decided to deal with the case
rationally as well as morally. The rational approach means that I had
decided to investigate the problem by research and rational examination
and to judge the case accordingly. And if I reached a conclusion
ñwhatever it wasñ I would believe in it and follow it whether it matched
the inherited thoughts or not and whether the social environment agreed
with it or not. However, from the moral point of view, it was fair not
to show any hostility and conflict with the society because I was still
in the investigation stage of ideology. So conflicting with the
inherited and traditional customs was not rational before reaching the
correct final conclusion.

**S** This was quite a sensible and rational decision.

How long did it take you to study the ideological issue?

**F** It took about two years. I was in doubt all the time and was
trying to find a way out.

**S** What about your religious obligations during those couple of
years... I mean did you, for instance, abandon prayers?

**F** Good question... I didn’t make the mistake that young people
usually commit during the doubt period... The majority of young people
who encounter this stage, which is full of doubts about their religion,
leave their prayers. After they pass this difficult period, however,
they find it too hard to start praying again because they’ve quit
calling God and “***By*** ***no*** ***means!*** ***But*** ***on***
***their*** ***minds*** ***is*** ***the*** ***stain*** ***of***
***the*** ***(ill)*** ***which*** ***they*** ***do!***.” But I
rationalize the problem this way :I thought after the doubt period I
would reach one of two conclusions:

o Either I would believe in God and the fact that religion, Heaven and
Hell are reality,

o Or I would discover that all the above-mentioned concepts are myths.

After considering both approaches, I thought which one was safer and
better for my future: stop praying or continue it? The answer was quite
clear... So I decided not to cease praying.

**S** You were like a student studying for an exam. But he/she is in
doubt about whether a chapter is included or not in an exam and then he
decided to study that chapter anyway to be on the safe side.

**F** Yes, exactly! In our Islamic history, there were many ideological
streams posing doubts about the religious principles. Scholars and Imams
confronted them with intellectual arguments and provided reasoning for
every case. Those who are doubtful sometimes submit to rational proof
and sometimes they wander away. Imam Jaafar al Sadeq has solved this
problem when he tried the “precaution method” with Ibn Abi al-Ojae

**S** Who was this person, what did he say to him?

**F** Ibn Abi al-Ojae did not believe in the hereafter. So Imam Sadeq
argued and said to him: “You see, if the truth was what you say, then we
would all survive. But if the truth was what we have said - and it truly
is, then we would be saved while you would be doomed.”

So, if the case is what you say (there is no God, Heaven or Hell), then
we all will be saved from punishment. But if the case is what we say
(the existence of God, Heaven and Hell), then we’ll be saved, while
you’ll be punished. In both conditions, a believer will always be safe,
but unbelievers would have 50% chance of survival. Thus, what does a
sane person do when there is a possibility of danger?... And what kind
of danger?... The danger of being in Hell. This method (precaution
method) is what we adhere to in our daily life, and it is what I applied
concerning the prayer, as I didn’t cease to pray throughout the doubt
period.

**S** Dad! God was supporting you.

**F** That’s how I continued my prayers as I was looking for God, in
order to find Him myself as you found Him yourself.

**S** But I found Him in no time.

**F** O Son! This is because of the program that God helped me to
prepare for you... But in my case, I was navigating without any guide or
compass.

**S** May God help you Dad! Please tell me how you spent your journey
from doubt to faith?

**F** After I decided not to follow the inherited and traditional
ideology and thoughts, I considered the fact that every single idea
(without exception) might be either true or false and that the sole
reasoning is the mind. As I avoided following the ancestors, I decided
not to be deceived by the superficial concepts, as well. So it wouldn’t
be rational to accept and confirm Western ideologies just because they
came from the West and from technologically and industrially advanced
countries.

The Western civilization has both the good and the bad. It’s not wise to
adopt what is bad through guidance to good aspects. Should we, for
instance, import AIDS as we import medical sciences from the West? Or
should we be selective and take science and leave the disease? Is it
acceptable to follow their footsteps in everything because we respect
their progress in technology? It’s not wise to admire everything in the
Western society. It is necessary to question every idea even if it’s
presented by someone who claims that it is a scientific concept. That’s
how I found out that Salama Musa had deceived me by presenting Darwin’s
theory as a confirmed scientific fact when later I found out that Darwin
himself didn’t fully believe what Salama Musa advocated. Salama was
simply misleading his readers by leading them to Hell.

**S** So you started your research by rejecting both the imitation of
traditional customs and the dazzle of every new or modern thing.

**F** Yes! It was so. I began reading books which were either proving
the existence of God or denying His existence. In the beginning, I read
the books, which were written by those scholars or semi-scholars, that
were available in the bookstores... I found sincere attempts and honest
intentions for guiding people to the right path but they addressed the
older generation. Those sincere ones know neither today’s language nor
today’s culture. Therefore, if the youth read those books, they will
neither understand the language nor the content. Hence, the reader would
abandon reading such books after just looking at the strange style of
writing and the content of the first page. On the other hand, books
which propagate atheism follow another strategy. Such books don’t
provide the reader with a direct and frank infidelity.

They usually provide the reader with information which is genuinely true
but follows a wrong track. So when the reader pursues reading, he/she
will find him/herself following a track that takes him/her far away from
religion. He will neither be given an infidel’s concept nor asked to
publicly declare his deviation from religion, but he’s inspired as if he
had chosen freely to devalue religion without being asked to. The
declaration of infidelity was a very rare concept that was adopted by
the Eastern Bloc and the Soviet Union who were controlled by communism.
It was just when the political parties began spreading the materialistic
ideology, known as Dialectics Materialism.

It was a necessary step to penetrate politically inside the Soviet
Union. Hence, Materialistic concepts, in this situation, were a
conspiracy against Muslims to make them join the Eastern Bloc. The
Western culture, which I carefully studied for many years, is not an
atheistic one; it has an anti-religious attitude which means that it
doesn’t deny the existence of God frankly but it tries to create a kind
of religious doubt as if it attempts to weaken human faith in God
without fully destroying the concept of the Creator.

**S** What is the secret behind this, Dad?

**F** The same as the one in the communist concept... This is also some
kind of preparation to encourage joining the Western policy because
Christian people in the West do believe in God but they don’t want
Muslims to comply with their religion. This is because they know that
Islam doesn’t allow its followers to be enslaved by others “***And***
***incline*** ***not*** ***to*** ***those*** ***who*** ***do***
***wrong***”, so they are bound to create suspicions about our religion
and to separate Muslims from Islam to facilitate their politicians’
intention. The colonization masters had utilized this condition in
recent centuries. The Christian’s missionaries were the first ones who
involved in colonizing Muslims’ countries. If you wish to know more
details, you can read the book entitled “Missionaries and Colonization”
to be more familiar with the facts.

***S*** What is about Zionism?

***F*** Zionism is a political-religious movement. In the last century,
Western policy was dominated by Zionism. American Jews control 95% of
the political and economic fields in America, while they don’t make more
than 5% of the American society. This new emerging force has played more
decisive role in opposing Islam and alienating Muslims from their
religion in order to attach them to the Western culture. They started by
occupying Palestine which acted as nucleus for their greater vision of
establishing greater Israel that spreads between the Nile and Euphrates
rivers and using the whole world to serve their intentions as God’s
chosen people, as they claim. The Western powers have proved their
enmity towards Islam during the last century.

This attitude can be proved through the double standard they have
adopted towards Judaism, Christianity and Islam. They have extended
their assistance and an unconditional support to Israel, the only
country with religious system in the Middle East, while they have
declared an open war against Iran and Sudan because of their inclination
towards Islam. If the West is against religion, why do they support
Israel? And if they are not against Islam, why are they against Iran and
Sudan?

***S*** Father! Do you remember Salman Rushdy’s crisis?

***F*** May God bless you. Salman Rushdy is an example of what I am
saying. He did not claim that God is a myth. He mocked of the
personality of the Prophet of Islam, his conduct and thoughts. The whole
Western World, with its political and cultural institutions, moved to
defend the intellectual freedom which was, according to them,
demonstrated in Salman Rushdy’s personality.

This paradox was carried further to the Western judicial system when a
group of Muslims filed a lawsuit against Rushdy in the UK. The case was
rejected! They found out that British law stands against slandering
Christianity and Judaism but does not do the same for Islam! Therefore,
according to the British law Rushdy cannot be punished for offending
thousands millions of Muslims in the UK and across the world.

Can you see, son! If someone slanders Christianity or Judaism he would
be persecuted but not if he slanders Islam. So freedom of expression
works on one direction only, when it is alright to slander Islam and
Muslims!

Similarly, it is the freedom of the dress code. If a woman in a western
country decides to walk in the street nearly naked, no one will
interfere with her individual personal freedom which should be protected
by law. She is only using her right to choose the way she dresses! But
when Muslim female students wear head scarves in France as their choice
to dress, the French Minister of Education approved personally of
expelling them from school! No personal freedom was practiced or
protected!

***S*** What vulgar bias they have practiced against Islam. It is an
obvious fight against Islam under the name of freedom! Women have the
right to reveal their bodies but are not permitted to wear head scarves!
A writer has the right to slander Islam but not allowed to criticize
Judaism!

***F*** Another striking example is the case of Rogieh Garouy, the
Marxist French philosopher who has embraced Islam after deep study and
scrutiny. He was a respected cultural figure in France and enjoyed
freedom of expression before embracing Islam. But, this freedom was
taken away after he became a Muslim. He was persecuted for his research
regarding the actual number of Jews killed by Nazis during the Second
World War

***S*** Is it a crime to discuss and question a historical event? Where
is the freedom of intellect, then?

***F*** Because it was about Jews.

***S*** It is Zionism, then, that stands behind mottos of personal and
intellectual freedom to serve its intentions and attack Islamic
ideology.

***F*** And the freedom of trade; it was intended to lift the boycott of
Israel. Upholding free trade meant not mixing politics with trade. When
Libya, Iran, or Sudan policies were not acceptable to the West, they
applied economic sanctions on them and freedom of trade did not exist
anymore for Muslim countries.

***S*** Father! The same thing happened with democracy. They uphold
democracy when it goes along with Western interests. They advocate
people’s right to choose their leaders through ballot voting while they
support dictatorships against people’s will when they choose Islam. This
has happened in Turkey and Algeria in recent years. Democracy is not
meant to be for Islam or to be a choice for Muslims, for example, Nixon,
a president of the U.S.A., in his book “The Leaders” said: “If democracy
was applied in Egypt or Saudi Arabia, it would be a catastrophe!”

Western deceit and double standard have been disclosed to the whole
world.


