The Philosophy of Contradiction
===============================

**F** O son! Is there anything new?

**S** Yes Dad! I’ve thought too much about the purpose proof, which we
talked about... I’ve tried the a question “why”, but that led me to many
questions, which I couldn’t find answers to, and I fear that I would
disturb you by asking you for more explanation.

**F** No, it’s not disturbing at all. Ask whatever you want and don’t
hesitate.

S So, Dad... Why has God created both Heaven and Hell and didn’t create
Heaven only? Why have He created pain, evil, death, disasters and
disease? Why have He created tyrants, wicked people to hurt innocent and
weak people?

**F** Do you know son, that you’ve answered your questions in your
question unintentionally?

**S** How is that, father?

**F** You said: why were the Heaven and Hell created? You also said: why
were evil, tyrants, diseases and disasters created? Didn’t you?...

**S** Yes Dad! This is the question, which preoccupied my mind recently.

**F** OK! Let me describe the problem or the problems on condition that
you fully pay attention to what I say.

**S** I’m attentively listening now, my dear father.

**F** First of all, listen to the following poem and memorize it by
heart:

*If* *there* *was* *no* *ugly,* *there* *would* *be* *no* *beauty* *If*
*there* *was* *no* *imperfection,* *there* *would* *be* *no*
*perfection*.

**S** Yes Dad! I’ve memorized it. It’s easy-to-memorize, but what do you
mean? Or what do you want to convey by this poem? It’s a nice verse of
poetry.

**F** Of course! Don’t you believe that if all the ladies were beautiful
and charming to the same extent, there would be nothing called beautiful
on the Earth at all and there would be no beautiful and charming lady!

**S** How is that, Dad? Let me think... Yes!... Right! If all the ladies
were beautiful... Or, if there were no ugly (or less attractive) lady,
none would be more beautiful or beautiful at all...

**F** Exactly! If, say, blue eyes were beautiful and all ladies on Earth
had blue eyes, there would be no preference for having blue eyes over
those who have black eyes (or vice versa). The same rules apply for
height, nimbleness, countenance, nose or any other feature that is
beautiful in a human body.

**S** Yes, if all ladies were beautiful, there would be no meaning for
beauty at all.

**F** On the other hand, ugliness makes beauty beautiful... Also,
imperfection means that there should be perfection, shouldn’t it?

**S** But Dad! What is the fault of a poor one who is ugly or less
beautiful?

**F** She has no error... The reward will be given in the hereafter,
when she will be granted with the most beautiful eyes. That is if she
takes good care of her role and submits to God’s will... On the other
hand, other ladies who are proud of their beauty [insulting other less
beautiful ladies, directly or indirectly] will be given ugly eyes or
less attractive eyes in the hereafter. It’s on that Day, justice will be
applied, when each one will be held responsible for their conduct,
intentions and activities... There would be no injustice, oppression or
impartiality...

**S** Yes! It’s correct philosophy... and the same rule applies to those
who are brave, noble, generous etc... we can say that: if there was no
greediness, there would be no generosity; also if there was no
cowardice, there would be no bravery; similarly, there would be no
nobility, if there was no lowness... the same logic continues for all
contradictions...

One poet said:

*Antithesis* *unveils* *the* *mask* *from* *its* *antithesis*

*It’s* *with* *contradictions* *that* *things* *are* *distinguished*

**F** So it’s the battle of noble antithesis to unmask the imperfection
from perfection and ugliness from beauty... Human beings are happy with
this unveiling process. By this process, they feel proud if they are
worthy of real success, not a false success or pretension.

The same rule applies for the rest of imperfections and

pains... an hour of patience could result in years of happiness and
pleasure... Everything could be endured if compared with another thing
which has superior value. So disease is a way to have a better health;
danger is a way to have better appreciation of security; recognizing the
necessity of existence of these diseases for employing doctors, chemists
and nurses and the necessity of buying clothes to have textile companies
functioning; the perishable property of plants and absorption of
nutrients enables agriculture to live and grow, bear fruits etc.

The demolition of the old gives birth to the new which takes over. This
process continues in all aspects of life. If the laws were not so, life
would not function in way we are familiar with. Then there would be no
meaning to death, pleasure, hope, wonder, taste and surprising events...

**S** Tell me more, Dad! Your speech is nice and the talk about
philosophy is more interesting...

**F** O son! The subject of contradiction, ugliness and beauty is so
wide that a mind can easily scout through and hardly touch that concept.
It’s from there that the philosophy of Heaven and Hell came... or the
world and hereafter. Without the difficulties of worldly life, we won’t
be able to taste the pleasure of the hereafter... if there was no
hereafter and Heaven, life would be completely meaningless.

The existence of this two-sided concept (that is ugliness and beauty;
Heaven, life and Hell; world and hereafter) has a very useful meaning.
The taste of, say, fresh water is known; the taste of hunger; the
pleasure of sleeping; the suffering of thirst; the pleasure of being
healthy and so forth can be experienced when there is its opposite...

How pleasant is sleep after spending many hours without sleep, and how
pleasant is fresh water when feeling very thirsty.

**S** God bless you, Dad!

If there were no black eyes, then blue eyes would not look beautiful!

**F** Maybe on the contrary... If there were no blue eyes, then black
eyes would not seem beautiful; if there were neither, then yellow eyes
would not have seemed beautiful and vice versa. So ugliness is relative
as well as beauty...

The son went on repeating the following verses of poetry in rhythm:

**S** *If* *there* *was* *no* *ugliness,* *there* *would* *be* *no*
*beauty.*

*If* *there* *was* *no* *imperfection,* *there* *would* *be* *no*
*perfection.*

Thank you, for these nice verses of poetry, wise proverbs and rational
philosophy.

**F** It’s better to say: Thanks God for His high Wisdom, beautiful
creation and magnificent Will...


