The End
=======

More than a week passed from the last discussion between the father and
his son. This inactive time period was intentional in order to give the
son time to grasp monotheism lessons and to review the concepts already
discussed and to perform some experiments on them. The son was
preoccupied during the day... Things that were not important before are
now catching his eyes and attracting his attention.

He went out towards the garden, looked at each specific section
specified for each plant and took one of the fruits without cutting
out... He watched and then he pondered over this fruit when it was
little seed thrown on the earth and covered with soil... How magnificent
and grown up it is now! A strong tree giving odoriferous, nice and
delicious fruit “***It*** ***is*** ***Allah*** ***Who*** ***causeth***
***the*** ***seed-grain*** ***and*** ***the*** ***date-stone*** ***to***
***split*** ***and*** ***sprout***.”

Suddenly, a sound coming from the henhouse disturbs his stream of
thoughts... This is a sound of a hen announcing the coming of a new
egg... He goes towards the henhouse thinking about the creation of an
egg from the hen which lay down... “How does God create this animal with
this precise organization?” he asked. “How did He supply this
transparent white material of the egg, which is important for feeding
human beings? The Hen eats seeds, which are made up of starchy
materials, and then strangely enough, these materials are transformed
into a transparent material with high nutritious value in eggs... or in
the meat itself... Glory and praise be to God... You have created the
most expensive food from the least expensive materials...

You have created the eggs from seeds; milk from grass; and meat from
clover... All those excellent food stuff are all chemically coming from
cheap materials... seeds or grass, which grow in the earth... these
seeds or grass are nothing other than sucrose materials at the final
analysis stage... Glory be to God, Who creates transparent materials
from sucrose!!”

“Where did these sugary materials come from?” he continued.

“Plants create them from simple raw materials; that is water and air
through photosynthesis... How great this is! How magnificent is the
Creator of this huge factory in the leaves of plants, which mix water
that is absorbed through the roots from the ground as well as Carbon
Dioxide from the air and by getting assistance from the Sun’s rays that
are coming from millions of miles away? Who taught these tiny leaves to
perform all these sophisticated chemical operations that provide food
for human beings and animals?”

“The aim, purpose and wisdom are apparent here. The proof of the
organization, the aim and the purpose are all addressing sound minds
with the following: “***Such*** ***is*** ***the*** ***Creation***
***of*** ***Allah:*** ***now*** ***show*** ***Me*** ***what*** ***is***
***there*** ***that*** ***others*** ***besides*** ***Him*** ***have***
***created***”, he added.

He had the feeling of submission and humility... a pleasant sense of
having a relation with a Powerful, Wise, Knowledgeable, Merciful and
Gracious Creator. He couldn’t express his feeling at that very moment
except with prostration and kneeling (with the forehead touching the
ground). Falling immediately to prostration and kneeling on the soil and
repeating: There is really no creator, except God; the deniers of God
have lost; “they have verily strayed afar, far away from the Path” and
they are really lost. He goes on kneeling till sunset.

When the Sun has disappeared behind the clouds, his imagination goes
into the way that clouds were created... the role of the water cycle
appears at this moment and he remembers the “Organization Proof” in the
construction of this cycle, as well as the “Aim Proof.” He remembers the
lessons given by his father and then recites: “***It*** ***is***
***Allah*** ***Who*** ***sends*** ***the*** ***Winds,*** ***and***
***they*** ***raise*** ***the*** ***Clouds***.”

He found himself taking monotheism from the soil and what grows on it;
from the hen and what it produces; from the cloud and what it carries;
from the shining Sun and the blowing winds. He used to take science from
the school of the universe; and his teachers are all the creatures
too... the nature; the day and night; the Sun and the Moon; the water
and air; animals and plants; humans and minerals... these are all
lecturers in monotheism; and every part of the universe is his school
leading him to faith. How magnificent! How pleasant! Where are the kings
and their sons to feel this enjoyment?

The son could now understand the meaning of the sentence that he has
heard from his father at his prostration:

*“What did the one, who found You, lost? And what does the one, wholost
You, find? Be blind the eyes which don’t see Thou! “*

“*O* *God,* *those* *who* *lost* *you,* *found* *nothing,* *and* *those*
*who* *found* *you,* *lost* *nothing*”

He met his father at that night to let him know about his new sense that
had just born and said:

**S** Dad! I feel that I’m a student at the monotheism school...

**F** Where is this school located?

**S** Everywhere, Dad.

**F** Who are the teachers at that school?

**S** Every creature, every phenomenon and everything are teachers
there.

**F** What about the working hours?

**S** Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. The lessons are
falling just like a torrent rain in a thunderstorm.

**F** What about the teaching language?

**S** All languages are supported.

**F** The teaching level?

**S** The simplest ones can understand the lessons; and the greatest
thinkers can deeply meditate.

**F** What is the final awarding degree and certificate?

**S** The degree carries the following title: “There is no creator, but
God”


