Obligation.. Doubt.. Who Is God?!
=================================

The son was watching TV when his father came home late at night. He knew
that there was something serious his father wanted to say. The family
had just finished supper when the father asked his son to go into a
quiet room nearby to have their conversation. The son was very curious
to know the subject to be discussed with his father.

***F*** Do you know why I wanted to see you tonight, son?

**S** No Dad. But I guess it is something serious.

***F*** I have been thinking and planning for this meeting and the
coming ones for a while.

**S** Since when, Dad?

***F*** Since your puberty, about a year ago. I’ve been preparing a
special program for you.

**S** What is this program? And what does it have to do with my puberty?

***F*** Puberty is the transition period between childhood and manhood,
fun and seriousness, unlimited freedom and responsibility, as you know.
In this program, I’m going to have a series of discussions with you
about religion, beliefs, faith, life, mankind, society, the universe and
many other things that you should know the true meaning of and develop
an opinion and attitude suitable to your state of maturity and
adulthood.

**S** Thank you, Dad, for trusting me.

***F*** Son, first of all, this trust is God’s trust. And if you didn’t
have the capacity, He wouldn’t entrust you with obligations. It is an
honor that humans alone, of all the creatures of the earth, are
entrusted with obligations.

***S*** Quite right Dad, what you say makes me feel proud, and love God
even more because He obliges me with responsibility. I hope to be a good
servant of God and to love and obey him.

***F*** Well-said. A righteous servant loves God and obeys Him.

Love and obedience are inseparable. A poet said “A lover obeys the
beloved.”

**S** It seems to me that those who disobey God do this because they
don’t have the love of God in their hearts.

***F*** Exactly, even some of those whose faith is weak don’t feel the
love for God; so, when they perform their religious duties, they do so
with reluctance, and when they pray, they pray with laziness.

**S** Yesterday, I read this in the Quran: “***If*** ***ye*** ***do***
***love*** ***Allah,*** ***Follow*** ***me:*** ***Allah*** ***will***
***love*** ***you***.”

***F*** What do you understand from this verse?

**S** I infer that there is a mutual love between God and the believer.

***F*** And that love means obedience and enduring hardship for the sake
of the beloved.

**S** I liked the supplication that Mom read yesterday in the *al-*
*Sahifah* *al-Sajjadiyyah*[^1] and I’m trying to memorize it.

***F*** Which supplication, son?

**S** The supplication that says: “***..*** ***I*** ***ask*** ***for***
***your*** ***love*** ***and*** ***the*** ***love*** ***of***
***those*** ***who*** ***love*** ***you;*** ***the*** ***love***
***of*** ***every*** ***task*** ***which*** ***brings*** ***me***
***closer*** ***to*** ***You,*** ***to*** ***be*** ***my***
***strongest*** ***love*** ***rather*** ***than*** ***any***
***others’,*** ***and*** ***to*** ***make*** ***my*** ***love***
***towards*** ***You*** ***as*** ***a*** ***lead*** ***to*** ***your***
***Heaven,*** ***and*** ***my*** ***eagerness*** ***to*** ***You***
***as*** ***a*** ***prevention*** ***of*** ***disobedience***.”

***F*** This supplication also sheds light on the relationship between
love and obedience.

**S** But Dad, how can we find God’s love in our hearts?

***F*** It is simple: by knowing Him. If you truly know Him, you’ll get
the ultimate love.

***S*** So, the first step is: knowing God.

***F*** “The first thing in religion is to be aware of it”, mentioned in
*Nahj* *al-Balaghah*[^2]*.*

Knowing God is the first thing in religion, and this knowledge is a
prerequisite for loving Him. Therefore, knowing God is a prerequisite
for religion and for loving Him. This is a mathematical equation, son,
or something similar to a math equation.

**S** How?

***F*** In math, there is something called substitution when dealing
with equations.

***S*** Yes, you remind me of that. When we apply it, we say: Knowledge
= Religion. Knowledge = Love; and by substitution we find that religion
is love, don’t we, Dad?

***F*** And this is what Imam al-Sadiq (Peace be upon him) said.

**S** What did he say?!

***F*** He said “***Is*** ***religion*** ***anything*** ***other***
***than*** ***love!”*** Son, love is the most beautiful thing in the
world.

**S** God is great.[^3] You are speaking with me in the youth language,
the language of...

***F*** An adolescent?

**S** Well, Dad, I was shy to say this.

***F*** Yes, I spoke to you using the teenagers’ language, as God’s
Messenger (Peace be upon him) commands us to speak with people according
to their way of thinking. God sent each Messenger to speak to people in
their own language. So why shouldn’t I speak with you like a teenager?

**S** Exactly Dad, unless someone hears something in his own language,
he won’t understand it and hence won’t interact with it. One of our
teachers had given me a religious book as a present. I struggled when I
tried to read it, and after a while I gave up because of its language
which sounded like that of our ancestors who lived ages ago; therefore,
it had nothing to do with our life today.

***F*** This is the reason why some youth turn away from religion
because they find no representation of religion in a language that they
can understand. This time is the time of computer and internet, and it’s
impossible to present Islam through very old books written long time
ago.

**S** How nicely you speak, Dad! I feel I love you more than ever and
love God and thank Him for giving me such a wonderful father.

***F*** And I love God more for giving me such a son.

**S** Praise be to God!

***F*** Praise be to God!

**S** We wandered away from the subject, Dad.

***F*** On the contrary, we have reached the core of the subject... we
reached the subject of love. My love for you and my love for God lead me
to talk to you about religion, life, God, human beings, the world and
the hereafter... I want you to have a comprehensive review of all
thoughts related to religion after you have reached your maturity.

**S** But Dad, you have discussed with us almost all of our religious
issues, explained many ideological problems, clarified the principles
and the components of the religion and showed us the path of guidance.
Do you see a shortcoming in my faith, or defect in my behavior?

***F*** It’s not about a shortcoming in faith or misbehaviors, son.

It is something else, completely different and extremely dangerous.
That’s why I want you to be prepared and informed about some issues
without being shocked.

**S** OK, Dad! What’s that important and dangerous matter which I should
know after my puberty?

***F*** I wanted to tell you that what you have learnt from me about
religion was incorrect.

**S** What?! Dad! What are you saying?!

***F*** As I said, all that you have heard from me about religion was
completely wrong.

**S** Dad! What are you saying?! What do you mean? Which aspect of
religion was wrong? The ideology? The manners? Please Dad, be frank with
me.

***F*** I mean the basics of religion, the ideology: the faith in God,
the hereafter, the Prophet and the Messengers and all what you have
learnt about is incorrect.

**S** Seek God's forgiveness. Dad, what happened to you? Sorry Dad for
being impolite. How can believing in God, the hereafter and the
Messengers be wrong? I cannot believe what I’m hearing.

***F*** I will answer this question tomorrow.

**S** Dad! Please be frank about your intentions, for you made me feel
uncertain. How can you leave me in this state? And how can I pray then,
while I’m in a state of uncertainty.

***F*** Who asked you to pray?

**S** Didn’t you ask me to pray and to perform it patiently?

***F*** Then your prayer is not accepted at all.

**S** Not accepted? What does that mean? Shall I abandon praying then?

***F*** It is up to you whether you want to pray or not.

**S** That’s strange. I’m going crazy. How can my father ask me to give
up praying? How? My father, who taught me how to pray, is asking me to
give it up now!

***F*** I am not asking you to give it up. I am telling you that you may
give up or continue praying, as you wish.

**S** This is strange too. Didn’t you say that praying is the pillar of
religion and the first thing I’ll be asked about in the hereafter? And
that God says: “***Establish*** ***regular*** ***prayer*** ***for***
***celebrating*** ***My*** ***praise.”***

***F*** I told you that all you’ve heard from me before your puberty was
wrong.

**S** Dad, it’s forbidden to say so!

***F*** What is the meaning of forbidden?

**S** Forbidden means that God doesn’t allow it.

***F*** God? Who is God?

**S** O God... this is madness!

***F*** Don’t be mad. I asked you a question; answer me or say “I don’t
know’.

**S** But you asked me “Who is God?”

***F*** What’s wrong with this question?

**S** Dad, please! What is going on? Is this real that you, my father,
are saying what you’re saying? I cannot believe it.

***F*** Yes, I’m your father saying this. If I didn’t do so, then I
wouldn’t be your father.

**S** My God! What happened?

***F*** We’ll continue this discussion tomorrow. Now go to bed. Good
night!

[^1]: Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah (also called the Psalms of Islam) is a
famous book comprising a collection of prayers said by Imam \`Ali ibn
al- Husayn al-Sajjad (A.S.).

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah is a book comprising a collection of sermons,
epistles, and aphorisms of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s) compiled by
al- Sharif al-Razi (406/1015).

[^3]: In the original text, the author wrote, “allahu-akbar.” In Muslim
heritage, this phrase is used to express surprise.


