Anxiety And Prayer
==================

The father left his son in a state of shock and went to his bedroom
where his wife was waiting anxiously for the result of the meeting. He
asked her with a smile on his face:

It seems that you have heard the discussion, haven’t you? She answered:
“Yes, but can he handle this shock?”

“I think so”, he said, “like his brother had done before”, he continued.

The mother sighed praying: “O Lord, guide him, lead him to obey You and
assign him to serve You.” Then she addressed the father: “I remember his
brother when he reached puberty. I was very worried that day when I told
you that you’re playing a dangerous game that may lead to the deviation
of your son. But you reassured me and explained the necessity of that
process. And now we can see the outcome. He is currently one of the
prominent figures in Europe who leads people to God. Ignorance has never
reached or contaminated our son and couldn’t lead him astray from the
right path.”

The father thought for a moment and then said:

If we had left him with his traditional way of worship, the usual
prayers and the inherited ideology derived from home and society, he
might have deviated when facing different ideologies, social trends or
traditions while living abroad.

“My dear son! How are you going to spend this night?” The mother sighed
and glanced towards the room of her son.

The father had a meaningful glance as he said: “How did Abraham spend
the nights as he was thoughtfully looking at the skies and the earth
until he believed. This was only resolved when he turned his eyes to the
Originator of the skies and the earth as a true Muslim and monotheist.”

After the father closed the door of the teenager’s room, the boy stood
still in a state of shock, and then he felt dizzy and threw himself on
the bed. Ongoing and conflicting thoughts continuously roamed in his
mind, but he couldn’t understand what was happening and how to deal with
it. He felt that his head was about to explode, but then he remembered
what his mother usually does in tough times; she sits down on her prayer
rug towards the kiblah[^1],1 raising her hands and saying with a humble
voice: “O God, whom I have no one but You to turn to and ask for help
and guidance, put me on the right path.”

Hurriedly, he stood up and went to the sink to perform ablution and get
ready to pray. With conflicting thoughts in his mind and sense of fear
and worry roaming over him, he was praying while he was thinking of his
father’s words:

“All you have learnt about religion before your puberty was wrong.”

He had a pause during his prayer and was about to terminate it, but he
continued his efforts in focusing on what he was saying. His father
taught him to concentrate in his prayer and to pay attention to the
meaning of what he says. His father’s statement had interrupted his
thoughts:

“Who is God?”

He was shaking, but he tried to control himself until he reached the
Qunut[^2]. Then he raised his hands and uttered the following words
strongly and meaningfully:

“God... the Leader of the confused, the Guide of the misguided, the most
Merciful, it is You Who is closer to me than my jugular vein; please
save me from my confusions and guide me to the right path.”

He stopped for a few moments. He had conflicting thoughts and his heart
was beating rapidly. After a while he felt better when he remembered the
verse that he had always read in the mosque and suddenly felt confident:

***“When*** ***My*** ***servants*** ***ask*** ***thee***
***concerning*** ***Me,*** ***I*** ***am*** ***indeed*** ***close***
***(to*** ***them): I*** ***listen*** ***to*** ***the*** ***prayer***
***of*** ***every*** ***suppliant*** ***when*** ***he*** ***called***
***on*** ***Me:*** ***Let*** ***them*** ***also,*** ***with a***
***will,*** ***Listen*** ***to*** ***My*** ***call,*** ***and***
***believe*** ***in*** ***Me:*** ***That*** ***they*** ***may***
***walk*** ***in*** ***the*** ***right*** ***way.”***

[^1]: Kiblah is the direction of the Kaaba that Muslims must turn their
faces to during prayers.

[^2]: Qunut is a part of prayers in which a person raises his/her hands
towards the heavens, supplicating the Lord.


