The Conscientious Reason
========================

***F*** How are you, son?

**S** You know Dad, it’s obvious. I’m not the same as before at all.

***F*** Why? Are you sick?

**S** I wish I am sick!

***F*** Don’t say that, son! What happened?

**S** You’re asking me “What happened?” It was me who asked you this
question last night.

***F*** Everything is alright.

**S** What do you mean alright? You threw me into a sea of doubt; the
huge waves drifted me away from the coast. Neither swimming nor riding a
boat could save me.

***F*** Thank God, thank God. It was exactly what I wanted.

**S** Dad, why did you do that? Please tell me.

***F*** I’ll tell you, but first tell me where you have finally reached
after you’ve been thrown away by the waves where neither swimming nor
riding a boat could help you.

**S** I felt weak and lost. There was no way and no one who could be of
assistance. I began looking for an absolute power to save me from this
rough sea and help me reach the coast safely. Suddenly I felt that this
power is near me, so I exclaimed profoundly: “O God the greatest”, and
then a feeling of reassurance and certainty submerged me and made the
doubts go away. Then I departed the sea of the awful doubt to the coast
of faith.

***F*** Well-done son. God be praised. This was exactly what I wanted
for you. I wanted you to find God by yourself and to suffer in this
trip, so you know the value of what you have found. I wanted you to
experience the trip from doubt to faith in order to believe in the God
that you have found, not the one that you’ve heard of from your father.
There is a big difference between this and that.

**S** You are right Dad. My heart is filled up with confidence after
that painful experience. And now I do feel the difference between my
former faith and the new one I gained after this conscientious
experience.

***F*** This experience is called the conscientious reasoning of God’s
existence. It’s neither based on rational reasoning nor on intellectual
analysis and theological inference. It’s the reason for the pure nature,
simple and genuine experience that leads naturally to God after dusting
off the heaps of misunderstanding that concealed the truth.

**S** Explain more, Dad!

***F*** Look son, human nature instinctively believes in God and it
doesn’t need a reason. Have you ever seen how a thirsty person moves
directly towards water? If you stop him/her while he/she is raising the
glass to drink and ask whether he/she is sure that what he/she is
drinking is water, what will he/she reply?

**S** So, why don’t most people believe in God if their innate nature is
their guide?

***F*** Son, an eye sees but if you put a thick headband on it, then it
won’t. An ear can hear, but it cannot if it gets stuffed. Human nature
works in the same way but it should be unrestricted and free. Lust must
not control it and satanic temptations should not conceal it.

**S** Yes, Dad. Please continue your interesting talk.

***F*** The conscientious reasoning of God’s existence says that if
human beings get used to living in a deviating society that inherited
aberration from its ancestors, the innate nature of the members of that
society will be impaired. The following is a quotation from the Quran:
“***But*** ***long*** ***ages*** ***passed*** ***over*** ***them***
***and*** ***their*** ***hearts*** ***grew*** ***hard?*** ***For***
***many*** ***among*** ***them*** ***are*** ***rebellious***
***transgressors.***” Also read about the inheritance of straying and
aberration: “***We*** ***found*** ***our*** ***fathers***
***following*** ***a*** ***certain*** ***cult,*** ***and*** ***we***
***do*** ***guide*** ***ourselves*** ***by*** ***their***
***footsteps***.”

If a human being continues with life full of lust and extravagance, his
nature will be dull, as God Says: “***But*** ***after*** ***them***
***there*** ***followed a*** ***posterity*** ***who*** ***missed***
***prayers*** ***and*** ***followed*** ***after*** ***lusts***
***soon***.”

The Quran expresses regret for those unbelievers who are greedy, take
over other people’s inheritance unjustly, and love being wealthy.

Another verse mentions that innate nature can remain impaired until the
end of life if love of wealth and offspring overcomes the human nature:
“***The*** ***mutual*** ***rivalry*** ***for*** ***piling*** ***up***
***(the*** ***good*** ***things*** ***of*** ***this*** ***world)***
***diverts*** ***you.*** ***Until*** ***ye*** ***visit*** ***the***
***graves***.”

If you read history, you’ll find that the desire for life left its
impacts on historical events. That’s why [the tribe of] Quraish was
afraid that their political and financial powers would collapse after
the emergence of Islam. Another case was when some of the companions of
the Prophet came to \`Ali son of Abu-Talib to congratulate him on
assuming the post of caliphate. He blew out the candle to show that he
would not spend even what a candle would worth from the public money to
have their support. Soon they joined the enemy’s camp, and they fought
him in the Jamal (The Camel) battle.

Also, as you know the sexual desire instigated Ibn Moljam to kill Ali to
marry a beautiful woman named Qotam. Omar ibn Sa\`d Killed Imam
al-Husayn[^1] to be the ruler of Ray province. The \`Abbasid dynasty
grasped the power even though they had already known that they have no
right to assume power. Harun al-Rashid, an \`Abbasid ruler, once
addressed his son: “If you compete with me for the power, I’ll issue an
order to behead you.”

**S** So, it’s the desire that kills the innate nature.

***F*** No, it doesn’t kill nature, but impairs it. Nature never dies.

**S** So, how can we re-activate its power?

***F*** By giving it a shock.

**S** That was exactly what you have done with me, wasn’t it?

***F*** Yes, son.

**S** Well-done Dad!

***F*** Good for you, son. You have successfully passed the test. Your
mother was worried about you but I wasn’t. I had confidence in your pure
nature, you know.

**S** Did Mom know about it?

***F*** Yes, I let her know, in order not to spoil the plan, I mean...
to help me with it.

**S** Oh! So, you involved her in order not to spoil the plan... you
mean to help you. Do you think both of these sentences have the same
meaning?

***F*** Son, you know she is a mother and she is full of kindness and
mercy for her son. Thus, it was not easy for her at all to see you in
that situation without disclosing the secret.

**S** Well Dad, let’s go back to the main subject, I mean our discussion
about conscientious reasoning of God’s existence or the innate
reasoning. I have a question for you.

***F*** Go ahead.

**S** Who taught you how to perform such a plan to awaken my static
nature and allow me to live the conscientious experience?

***F*** Who taught me? Don’t you know that knowledge and delivering of
knowledge is a blessing?

**S** Quite true.

***F*** ***“And*** ***ye*** ***have*** ***no*** ***good*** ***thing***
***but*** ***is*** ***from*** ***Allah”***

**S** God be praised!

***F*** Isn’t it true that having knowledge comes after the fact that
one didn’t know anything before?

**S** Yes.

***F*** “***Taught*** ***man*** ***that*** ***which*** ***he***
***knew*** ***not***”

**S** So, it was God that showed you how to awaken the static nature
through shock. But how did God show you that?

***F*** “***Verify*** ***this*** ***Qur’an*** ***guides*** ***to***
***that*** ***which*** ***is*** ***most*** ***right*** ***(or***
***stable)***”

**S** Oh, now I understand. There is a verse. I guess it’s from the
Meccan[^2] chapter, narrating an experience about sailing in the sea
while the climate was good. Then the ship reached the high seas where
tempest raged and waves were overwhelming. The passengers were terrified
and looked for someone to save them from an inevitable death. With all
the anguish, they turned to God and God saved them... Glory to God...
this is the same experience that I went through yesterday, but instead
of a real sea it was a sea of doubt.

***F*** I didn’t wish to throw you in a real sea. I have not been told
to do so.

**S** Is it rational that you have been instructed to do so?

***F*** Why not?

**S** How can it be sensible for a father to throw his son in a sea?

***F*** What if you see a mother is ordered to throw her son in the sea.

**S** I can’t believe it.

***F*** You forgot the Quran...

**S** Oh, yes, right... “***So*** ***We*** ***sent*** ***this***
***inspiration*** ***to*** ***the*** ***mother*** ***of*** ***Moses:***
***“Suckle*** ***(thy*** ***child)***.”

***F*** “***but*** ***when*** ***thou*** ***hast*** ***fears***
***about*** ***him,*** ***cast*** ***him*** ***into*** ***the***
***river,*** ***but*** ***fear*** ***not*** ***nor*** ***grieve:***
***for*** ***We*** ***shall*** ***restore*** ***him*** ***to***
***thee,*** ***and*** ***We*** ***shall*** ***make*** ***him***
***one*** ***of*** ***Our*** ***apostles.***”

**S** It was a great tribulation for this forbearing mother!

***F*** Your God afflicts everyone with trials according to his
endurance. Human beings must suffer on earth. The Mulk Chapter explains
that tribulation is one of the reasons behind the creation of the human
beings. O son! Don’t assume that tribulation only means trouble,
disaster or something of the sort. It means trial and test. God tests
human beings in various situations. “***He*** ***Who*** ***created***
***death*** ***and*** ***life,*** ***that*** ***He*** ***may***
***try*** ***which*** ***of*** ***you*** ***is*** ***best*** ***in***
***deed***.”

Notice the following holy verses:

“***We*** ***have*** ***tried*** ***them*** ***with*** ***both***
***prosperity*** ***and*** ***adversity***.” “***and*** ***We***
***test*** ***you*** ***by*** ***evil*** ***and*** ***by*** ***good***
***by*** ***way*** ***of*** ***trial***” “***Now,*** ***as*** ***for***
***man,*** ***when*** ***his*** ***Lord*** ***trieth*** ***him,***
***giving*** ***him*** ***honor*** ***and*** ***gifts,*** ***then***
***saith*** ***he,*** ***(puffed*** ***up),*** ***“My*** ***Lord***
***hath*** ***honored*** ***me.”*** ***“But*** ***when*** ***He***
***trieth*** ***him,*** ***restricting*** ***his*** ***subsistence***
***for*** ***him,*** ***then*** ***saith*** ***he*** ***(in***
***despair),*** ***“My*** ***Lord*** ***hath*** ***humiliated***
***me!***”

**S** So God tests all His servants anyway. He grants them something to
see what they will do. On the other hand, God sometimes prevents his
servants from something in order to see their response.

And the most severe afflictions are specified for prophets, and the next
are the virtuous believers.

***F*** Yes son. Because they have the strongest endurance for bearing
troubles. But the principle that you should bear in mind is that it is
impossible for God to afflict human beings greater than their ability.
God is fair and merciful and doesn’t afflict a person with something
beyond his capacity.

**S** But Dad, we see some people suffer from a severe affliction and
they say that they cannot endure it.

***F*** This is impossible, son. God doesn’t charge a person with
something more than his power and ability. Those people are able to
overcome their troubles with strength and forbearance unknown to them.
Remember your experience yesterday, could you imagine that you would
have borne that doubt which shocked all your indisputable religious
ideologies?

**S** You’re right Dad. I couldn’t imagine that I’d bear that. I thought
that I’d become a disbeliever or turn mad.

***F*** Now you are neither disbeliever nor mad. You were able to endure
that tribulation, but you were not aware of your ability. God made that
clear to you and to those who think that they’re unable to bear certain
difficulties.

**S** While reading Quran, I sometimes pass by the story of Abraham and
how God commanded him to sacrifice his son. He woke up and told the
dream to his son Ishmael, who instantly agreed and said: “***O***
***my*** ***father!*** ***Do*** ***as*** ***thou*** ***art***
***commanded:*** ***thou*** ***will*** ***find*** ***me,*** ***if***
***Allah*** ***so*** ***wills*** ***one*** ***practicing***
***Patience*** ***and*** ***Constancy!***” At that Moment, I shake
humbly for this submissiveness to God, Glory be to Him, especially when
Abraham held the knife on his son. Dad!

When I visualize this scene, I shudder. The son was on the ground, the
father was holding a sharp knife in his right hand onto his son’s neck
and his son’s head was in his left hand. Ishmael surrendered to his
father who was passing the knife on the neck of his dear one, but the
knife didn’t hurt the son. The father thought that this maybe because of
his fatherly passion, so he pressed more on the knife to slaughter his
son, but O God! The knife didn’t harm him. You know Dad, my body
trembles when I talk about this.

***F*** Me too. I believe that this is a true holy love. Don’t you see
my voice is wavering and my eyes are pouring tears while I’m listening
to you? Two great loves competed, but the greater love (the love and
obedience to God) overcame the lesser one (the father’s love for his son
and the son’s love of life)!

**S** How great is the patience of Abraham and Ishmael on this
tribulation! God says: “***And*** ***We*** ***shall*** ***try***
***you*** ***until*** ***We*** ***test*** ***those*** ***among***
***you*** ***who*** ***strive*** ***their*** ***utmost*** ***and***
***persevere*** ***in*** ***patience;*** ***and*** ***We*** ***shall***
***try*** ***your*** ***reported*** ***(mettle).***”

***F*** O son, prophets suffered much more than this. God tested them
with wives who hurt them, sons who disobeyed them and tribes who
deserted them but they were patient and strong. So that God compensates
them. You know that God rewards those who endure ultimately.

**S** I wish I could have lived during the time of prophets to believe
in them, support them and strive with them for the sake of God. But,
unfortunately this is a wish that will never come true.

***F*** Why not son?

**S** How could it be, while we are many centuries away from them?

***F*** My son. God, be He exalted, said: “***All*** ***who***
***obey*** ***Allah*** ***and*** ***the*** ***Apostle*** ***are***
***in*** ***the*** ***company*** ***of*** ***those*** ***on***
***whom*** ***the*** ***Grace*** ***of*** ***Allah*** ***is,*** ***of***
***the*** ***prophets*** ***(who*** ***teach),*** ***the***
***sincere*** ***(lovers*** ***of*** ***Truth),*** ***the***
***witnesses*** ***(who*** ***testify),*** ***and*** ***the***
***Righteous*** ***(who*** ***do*** ***good):*** ***Ah!*** ***What***
***a*** ***beautiful*** ***fellowship!***”

**S** So the way is clear, it is by obeying God and His prophet[s].

***F*** You can fulfill your wish in his way, so don’t get disappointed.
One more thing; don’t you love them?

**S** Yes, I do Dad.

***F*** So you’ll meet them in the hereafter. There, people will be with
those whom they love.

**S** You don’t mean superficial love, do you?

***F*** Of course not. The true love is the one which leads us to follow
prophets’ way.

**S** Well Dad, here you go back to the subject of love!

***F*** Is religion anything but love? OK son... now go to bed early so
that you can wake up for the morning prayers. Good night

**S** OK Dad, good night.

[^1]: Imam al-Husayn, son of Imam \`Ali, is buried in Karbala, a city in
Iraq. Imam al-Husayn’s tragic story is one of the most famous and
impressive stories in Islam, especially amongst the Shi\`ah. He is
considered the first hero of Islam who sacrificed himself and his sons
for the sake of God and religion. I recommend you to read his story.
You’ll find it really impressing and worthwhile.

[^2]: According to the place of their revelation, the Chapters (Surah)
of the Holy Qur'an are divided into Meccan (those revealed at Mecca) and
Madanite (those revealed at al-Madinah).


