Doubt… Certainty
================

**S** I apologize, Dad, if sometimes my frankness is considered
impolite.

***F*** Not at all. I really urge you to be frank, particularly in such
discussions. Don’t feel embarrassed or uneasy so that we can discuss
ideological subjects freely in order to reach solid views which have
immunity against deviation. Views which are held just to please others
will not survive against uncertainties and desires.

**S** Thanks a lot Dad. I really feel comfortable with this warm,
friendly atmosphere although this atmosphere is not new to me. You’ve
always treated me like a friend in addition to being my father.

***F*** Having a strong friendship with teens is a necessity. Being an
unapproachable father or not being easy to get along with can do nothing
but to grow the seeds of separation and distance. This distance might
lead teenagers to look for an alternative relationship to fill in this
gap. In some situations a bad fellow with evil thoughts might come
across the son’s way and take him away from home. Then that friend will
follow an alternative road to mould the son’s character; the father
often notices the problem when it’s too late.

**S** God bless you Dad, for treating me with such a friendly spirit.

***F*** So now, in this friendly atmosphere, I urge you to be as frank
as possible and to discuss all the religious matters that you have
doubts about, even objections or denial. Feel free. You know son,
keeping doubts and uncertainties unsolved in your mind along with
shyness and fear from the narrow-minded will have bad effects on you. In
the future, you might encounter someone who would answer your doubts
with erroneous answers which may result in pushing you away from
religion. Then you may not find the right person to consult and to
resolve the problem. Hence, God forbid, you’ll be in Satan’s domain of
vices which will divert your way to God.

**S** Glory to God. It seems that you know what’s on in my mind. I’ve
been suffering from some doubts about different aspects of religion for
sometime and I wanted to discuss them with you, but I couldn’t. I won’t
hide it that I tried to approach several people seeking for answers and
then finally found a clergyman, representative of a religious
institution who was in his eighties. When I asked him a question, he
pointed to his ear. I repeated my question louder ,but he couldn’t
understand my question and I couldn’t grasp his reply; it seemed that
he’s living in another era talking about some prehistoric things that I
couldn’t understand. Afterwards I realized that he only answered with
yes or no, forbidden or not forbidden. As far as I’m concerned my
question required more than a short answer with yes or no, I was not
granted much attention. When I looked around, I didn’t see anyone close
to my age. I couldn’t comprehend what was going on around me, except the
discussion of some businessmen compromising some religious dues to be
levied as if Prophet Mohammad was sent to be a levy collector, not a
guide for people! Then I heard that this money was intended to be spent
on the affairs of the religion about which I came enquiring but found no
answers

***F*** Wait a minute, son. You can’t talk like this. Choose your path
calmly and follow those who turned to God without repentance. Don’t be
hateful to such people; they are helpful in their regions; they have
done a lot to their people. So it’s not fair to compare the old style
services to the current needs.

**S** But Dad, can you believe that the Prophet was only answering
enquiries?! Were his relations and responsibilities restricted to
merchants only? Had he ignored the youth?

***F*** No! Never! He answered all enquiries about ideologies, ethics or
rules. He was advising and preaching without seeing it as degrading or
having any drawbacks. Generally speaking, all prophets paid attention to
youth who constituted the forefront of the believers in bearing heavenly
duties.

Didn’t you read that: “***But*** ***none*** ***believed*** ***in***
***Moses*** ***except*** ***some*** ***children*** ***of*** ***his***
***people,*** ***because*** ***of*** ***the*** ***fear*** ***of***
***Pharaoh*** ***and*** ***his*** ***chiefs,*** ***lest*** ***they***
***should*** ***persecute*** ***them***” This offspring was the youth
who were enthusiastic and sacrificed sincerely. That was what the Cave
Companions (Seven Sleepers of Ephesus) did and as you know they were not
old people, but they were young “***We*** ***relate*** ***to***
***thee*** ***their*** ***story*** ***in*** ***truth:*** ***they***
***were*** ***youth*** ***who*** ***believed*** ***in*** ***their***
***Lord,*** ***and*** ***We*** ***advanced*** ***them*** ***in***
***guidance***.”

**S** We need a clergyman to meet people and join them, pray with them
and deliver lectures. A clergyman who answers questions directly and
solves people’s problems, follows up with them in different parts of the
world, follows the world’s events and understands their impact on
people. We need a clergyman who makes appropriate decisions and doesn’t
feel content with publishing few hard-to- understand books which require
interpretation where an educated person or a university student won’t be
able to understand. We need someone to write for the ordinary public.
Religion concerns all people and is sent as guidance for all.

God sent a Prophet who is merciful to the world, to talk with people in
accordance with their level of understanding in order to grasp what he
says. He was responsible for demonstrating skilful and clear preaching.
It wasn’t only preaching but also the prophet made sure that people
understood what he had said and sometimes he asked, “***Have*** ***I***
***delivered*** ***what*** ***should*** ***be*** ***delivered?***”

***F*** Quite right, son. As stated in the Quran: we didn’t dispatch a
prophet unless he is able to communicate in his people’s language.

**S** Will we see the day when all barriers between the clergymen and
the nation, particularly the youth, are removed and it becomes possible
to communicate with them through the Internet and enquire about religion
issues?

F They find it far away, but we think that it’s not. When this happens,
you can ask any question and express your doubts without any problem.
The Prophet and his descendents taught us that there is no shame in
tackling religious issues, as they say: “Ask, because asking is the key
to knowledge.” Our religion is the religion of logic and intellect, so
why should we fear teen’s questions? Don’t we have rational responses?
Ask any question you wish, son. Ask about everything; don’t keep any
doubt concealed in your heart about religion.

**S** Well, my first question is why did you say in our last meeting
that my prayer is unacceptable?

***F*** Because you said: you prayed because I ordered you to pray. Then
all your prayers were performed only to obey me; therefore, they lacked
the correct intention and were invalid. If you had prayed for the sake
of God not for me, then it would have been correct.

**S** But I prayed as obedience to God and you both.

***F*** Am I a partner to God?

**S** No.

***F*** Let me clarify this: it is a must that a Muslim obeys God only,
not anyone else other than God unless:

First, he urges other to obey God.

Second, his command doesn’t contradict God’s commands.

By looking at the verse: “***Obey*** ***Allah,*** ***and*** ***obey***
***the*** ***Apostle***”, you deduce that obeying the Prophet is the
same as accomplishing God’s commands. So if we comply with the Prophet’s
orders, then we are obeying God. God said: “***He*** ***who***
***obeys*** ***the*** ***Apostle,*** ***obeys*** ***Allah***.”

**S** When you ordered me to pray, my obedience to you was a result of
the first rule. That’s obeying the One, who’s commanding to obey God.

***F*** Hence, it’s obedience to God and not to me.

**S** Dad, would you please give me a clear idea about obeying others.
When it is considered acceptable and when it is considered as
polytheism?

F The criterion, son, is quite easy. You can find it by yourself. Man is
aware of himself. Apply it on yourself. Whenever you face anything, ask
yourself whether it’s allowed by God. If it is against God’s commands,
then it’s considered sin and disobedience.

**S** Quite clear.

***F*** And if what you’re doing isn’t against God’s content, ask
yourself: if it was going to upset God, would you do it? If so, then it
would be forbidden

S So I have to be always aware of God’s existence in my conscience, and
work hard to please Him. I have to remember this as a criterion for all
my actions.

***F*** And to think of everything in order to carry out what God
approves and to abandon which He disapproves.

**S** Wonderful.

***F*** Therefore, if your prayers were performed to please me and if I
had asked you to quit, you would have done so, then this kind of prayer
would not be only unacceptable, but also it would be a kind of
polytheism.

**S** A kind of polytheism?!

***F*** Yes, because you were seeking my content not God’s.

Your intention was obeying me not God.

**S** Hence I must think carefully and thoroughly about my actions to
keep them away from polytheism.

***F*** That’s right son, polytheism penetrates the human soul quietly
and destroys it as vinegar does with honey.

**S** I’ve read that polytheism penetrates slower than a black ant
crawling on a soft rock in a dark night.

***F*** Yes, that is the way polytheism follows. In addition, it may
penetrate while performing our duties without feeling it. Haven’t you
heard of the tradition (Hadith), which says: “Those, who lend their ears
to a speaker, will obey him; if the speaker speaks about God, they will
obey God, and if he speaks about Satan, they will obey Satan”?

**S** O God! How many followers of Satan are out there?

***F*** And they don’t even know it!

**S** How can a person purify his/her actions from hidden polytheism?

***F*** He should free his/her heart from love of wealth and life
desires, and abandon all materialistic matters then save pleasures until
the hereafter. One should disregard all except God’s satisfaction. This
means loosening his tight relations with offspring, wives, relatives,
wealth and home and establishing a firm relation with the One Who grants
us offspring, wives, relatives, wealth and home.

It is He Who gives and takes away and gives again. So if human beings
turn away from the universe to the source of it, direct their wishes and
love to the creator instead of the creatures and do not think of the
livelihood and wealth but of the provider of the livelihood and wealth,
it is then when a human being can become a divine person, who honestly
speaks to God saying: “Thanks are due to You for purifying my heart from
polytheism.”

**S** What’s greater than such a rank and who is more fortunate than the
one who reaches this position!

***F*** Haven’t you heard what Imam Ali once said: “***O*** ***God!***

***Those*** ***who*** ***lost*** ***you,*** ***found*** ***nothing,***
***and*** ***those*** ***who*** ***found*** ***you,*** ***lost***
***nothing***.”

**S** Tell me more, Dad.

***F*** A person devoted to God describes the joy of leaving all life
joys and turning towards God by saying: “Where are the kings and their
offspring to feel this joy?” Another one said: “We are in a joy, that if
kings hear about, they will fight us with swords to grasp.”

**S** I, indeed, experienced the joy of supplication to God, especially
during overnight prayer, while people are sleeping and no sounds except
the voice of a humble servant addressing God, looking at the sky with
the twinkling stars. It seems as if those stars are glorifying God and
the servant saying: “the Most Holy, the Most Divine...”or as if they are
just witnesses in the conscience court. They witness that there is no
god but God, no creator but God, and no provider but God. Humans join
these creatures to inspire the following holy verse: “***Whatever***
***beings*** ***there*** ***are*** ***in*** ***the*** ***heavens***
***and*** ***the*** ***earth*** ***do*** ***prostrate***
***themselves*** ***before*** ***Allah***.”

So one feels the integration with all these creatures in their humble
joyful, long prostration and when he raises his head and looks around,
he sees all those who have fallen into deep sleep, feeling sorry for
those who have missed this opportunity! How unfortunate they are.

***F*** Calling God at midnight is a training course and a condensed
lesson in knowing Him. It’s a cup full of love to God and it is joy that
only fortunate ones can get. So congratulations son, on your closeness
to God.

**S** But Dad, how can I be close to God when I still have some
enquiries which you have encouraged me to ask you about?

***F*** O son! Your interest in exposing and pursuing those doubts and
questions proofs your seriousness about your religion and your ideology.

**S** Dad, you’re encouraging me and making me feel relaxed.

I will start with a simple question?

***F*** Go ahead.

**S** You said that the conscientious reasoning or innately proof is the
main guide that leads us to prove God’s existence.

***F*** That’s right, I said so.

**S** Is this the sole reason and proof of God’s presence and existence?

***F*** No, but this is an easy-to-reach, available, and ready-to- use
reason when it is needed. But it’s not the only reason. It is just like
the mother’s breast for a baby; he turns to it whenever he feels hungry
.The number of evidences of God’s existence equals to the number of His
creatures’ breath, and the number of stones and sand.

***S*** The comparison of conscience reasoning to a mother’s breast for
a baby is a nice one. I remember my younger brother on his first day of
his life when he was crying and seeking mother’s breast and he didn’t
calm down until Mom nursed him; it seemed as if he already knew this; it
was just then that he calmed down and felt contented with what he was
given. I asked myself that day: who taught this weak creature who had
just come to the world where to get food from?

***F*** He was directed to his need by instinct. Instinct relates a
human to his natural needs, and this doesn’t require having knowledge as
you noticed with this newly born baby. The same thing applies to God’s
existence innate reasoning. Human beings instinctively feel the need to
God and search for Him like a baby seeking his mother’s breast. Once
he/she gets it, he feels content and comfortable. There is no rational
proof in innate reasoning of God’s existence as you cannot find out the
reason why a baby seeks his mother’s breast. It’s just the instinctive
feeling of the need to God that everyone has in moments of human
weakness when he detaches himself from all the materialistic concerns
and turn truly to God without being able to give you any theoretical
justification or ideological analysis to his action.

***S*** So why don’t all people believe in God? Isn’t it true that
nature exists in all human beings? Isn’t it true that nature never dies?

***F*** But it can be impaired temporarily.

**S** Yes, sometimes it is impaired, but it does exist, so why many or
most people don’t believe in God, while this is a tangible reality and
we see it in many verses: “***Yet*** ***most*** ***people*** ***are***
***disbelievers,*** ***although*** ***you*** ***may*** ***be***
***keen*** ***to*** ***guide***.”

***F*** Good question. I’m very glad that you’re asking such questions
to build your faith on a firm, doubtless basis in a sound environment
far away from imitating the parents and intimidating ideology. Listen to
the answer now:

The verse said: “***Yet*** ***most*** ***people*** ***are***
***disbelievers,*** ***although*** ***you*** ***may*** ***be***
***keen*** ***to*** ***guide***.”

This verse and the other similar verses talk about a general concept of
faith and its different parts which cover wide areas such as believing
in God, Prophets, the hereafter and commitment to God’s obedience. True
believers who have this sense of belief are minority. However, believing
in God’s existence is a common belief which prevails in all areas and
times. You know that believing in God is privilege to human societies
throughout history.

From a scientific point of view, when something is associated with
humanity at all times and places then it is considered an integral part
of human lives not just a phenomenon. If it was a phenomenon, it would
disappear at times and reappear in different places at different times.
As you see, believing in God was in the past and present and will
continue into the future. Thus, belief in God is associated with human
instincts and it can not be considered an abnormal case in history. This
means that believing in God is something like “***Allah’s***
***handiwork*** ***according*** ***to*** ***the*** ***pattern***
***on*** ***which*** ***He*** ***has*** ***made*** ***mankind:***
***no*** ***change*** ***(let*** ***there*** ***be)*** ***in***
***the*** ***work*** ***(wrought)*** ***by*** ***Allah:*** ***that***
***is*** ***the*** ***standard*** ***Religion:*** ***but*** ***most***
***among*** ***mankind*** ***understand*** ***not***.”

**S** So why doesn’t this minority believe in God?

***F*** Because their nature is corrupted .Haven’t you seen how a baby’s
taste turns unpleasant when he gets sick; he would turn away from his
mother’s breast? Natural instincts can be corrupted in this way and
hence one abandons worshipping God. Like the baby who goes back to his
mother’s breast after getting better, so is the instinct. It turns back
to God after remedy.

***F*** And this remedy could be a shock or inevitable danger one cannot
deal with.

***F*** Well-done! This remedy helps even the most perverted people and
those who are farthest from God. Imagine a person who did not only
perform all acts of polytheism, but also claimed to be god. Pharaoh once
said: “I’m your greatest god.” The nature of such a person, when faced
with death, awakened and only then he manifested his faith when he said:
“***At*** ***length,*** ***when*** ***overwhelmed*** ***with***
***the*** ***flood,*** ***he*** ***said:*** ***“I*** ***believe***
***that*** ***there*** ***is*** ***no*** ***god*** ***except***
***Him*** ***Whom*** ***the*** ***Children*** ***of*** ***Israel***
***believe*** ***in.***”

So you see the one who claimed to be god returned to his nature when
facing serious crisis, so it is very natural for those who are less
corrupted with infidelity and polytheism to do the same.

**S** Thanks for this lesson Dad, but I have another question.

***F*** Go ahead.

**S** You said: faith is associated with human beings’ nature, and the
evidence is that people at all times and places believe in God.

***F*** Yes.

**S** But we see paganism spreading throughout history. How do you
explain this?

***F*** This is construed through the action of your baby brother when
he is hungry.

S What? My infant brother! How? I can understand monotheism through my
baby brother, but how can paganism be construed?

***F*** Have you ever seen him sucking his finger instead of his
mother’s breast?

**S** Oh! Yes... yes. He searches for the source of food, and if he
mistakes it or cannot find it; he sucks his finger as an alternative.

***F*** Just like paganisms, the innate nature mistakenly finds the
wrong alternative. This mistake happens because of some external
reasons, such as the unavailability of the mother for her baby who is
driven to suck his finger. As you know, after a while the baby refuses
the alternative (finger) when hunger bites him and sucking his finger
won’t provide him with milk. Similarly, an idolater may also leave
his/her idol when he/she faces a serious situation which forces the
innate nature to reappear once again when idols fail tosatisfy the
innate demands of reuniting with a real god- that is God.

**S** Thank God and thank you Dad. Please let me summarize what I’ve
understood from our talk. The innate reasoning is the natural feeling
that everyone has as a guide to God. This type of proof is a spiritual,
instinctive attractiveness, not a rational, intellectual proof .It is
the ultimate, unseen power to which humans resort when they are
helpless. This instinctive attractiveness to God diminishes as a result
of committing sins and corruption repeatedly. But it’s restored soon
when people face overwhelming crisis. Thus, nature guides people and
brings them back to God.

***F*** This is a great summary. Do you have another question, or shall
I add another one?

**S** Please go ahead.

***F*** There was an ideology which appeared in the twentieth century.
It appeared and lasted for about eighty years, but finally collapsed
because of its failure to appeal to human nature. This phenomenon,
particularly during its failure, is strongly related to our subject.

**S** What is it, Dad?

***F*** It is the Leninist- Marxist ideology or Communism, which
appeared in the early twentieth century and ruled half of the Eastern
World. Around one third of the whole world’s population yielded to that
Power. It had dominated for about three quarters of the last century and
it was supported by huge political, economical and military power.
Threats and inducements were intensively used to spread atheism. But
what was the result?

The result was a complete crash and clear failure to all the tremendous
efforts which lasted for all that long time and involved two generations
who were dominated and raised on communism. Atheism could not survive,
and people did not accept the deviating communist ideology. Despite of
all those efforts, people retained their relation with God. Now,
atheists are minority and believers are the overwhelming majority in the
world. That proofs that faith is inherent in human’s nature and is not
acquired through nurture and society.

**S** If faith had been acquired, it would have vanished as a result of
the new ideological education practiced by communists for three quarters
of the last century and didn’t spare any aspect of religion without
being destroyed. Communism was injecting atheistic thoughts in schools,
streets, radio, television, stadiums, military camps and wherever there
is a mouth to speak, an ear to listen and an eye to see. Despite all
that, faith in God remained unshaken and atheism was defeated.
“***That*** ***is*** ***because*** ***Allah*** ***-*** ***He*** ***is***
***the*** ***Reality;*** ***and*** ***those*** ***beside*** ***Him***
***whom*** ***they*** ***invoke,-*** ***they*** ***are*** ***but***
***vain*** ***Falsehood***”

***F*** “The Almighty God is true.” Well-done son.

**S** “***Allah*** ***is*** ***He,*** ***than*** ***Whom*** ***there***
***is*** ***no*** ***other*** ***god;-*** ***the*** ***Sovereign,***
***the*** ***Holy*** ***One,*** ***the*** ***Source*** ***of***
***Peace*** ***(and*** ***Perfection),*** ***the*** ***Guardian***
***of*** ***Faith,*** ***the*** ***Preserver*** ***of*** ***safety.***”

***F*** Thank God for leading us to this way, which we couldn’t
otherwise find without His mercy. OK son go to bed now, good night!


