God Or Nature
=============

***F*** Have you thought of yesterday’s talk about nature?

**S** Certainly Dad, I thought deeply. That talk has left a great impact
on my heart and mind. I have thoroughly reviewed my concepts. In my deep
spirit I am searching for that evidence or innate proof as you named it.
I suffered a lot at the beginning as I was examining that huge amount of
thoughts that I have learned throughout my life. And then I have had to
get rid of all that I’ve inherited from the past and acquired from
people. Then I went deeper and deeper as if I wanted to find out a small
valuable ring that had fallen in a deep well as if I had to empty that
well of water completely to find that ring which rests at the bottom.

***F*** Well done...

**S** Finally when I reached the bottom of the well after removing all
the things which I’ve inherited or gained through my life, I faced my
soul bare from all the social habits and cultural teachings and
instructions. I met a genuine inclination, but a very strong one. Yet
that genuine inclination is attached to an ultimate Power, which is
capable of doing everything and knows everything. I also felt that this
Power is very close to me, can hear my inner deep thoughts and even feel
my heart beat.

Also Dad, I felt that this Power loves me and I love this power too. I
recognized that Power. It was that Power which saved me from those high
waves of uncertainty where I was about to drown into when you started
talking to me. So I’ve found it father, I’ve found it... found it...

***F*** What you have reached through this journey of diving into the
depth of your nature is the unshakable faith which is firmly tied into
the depth of every human being.

**S** Then how can some people deny His existence glory to Him?

***F*** They do this through falsification or deceit, which the Holy
Quran refers to as follows: “***And*** ***they*** ***rejected***
***those*** ***Signs*** ***in*** ***iniquity*** ***and***
***arrogance,*** ***though*** ***their*** ***souls*** ***were***
***convinced*** ***thereof***.”

**S** Woe to those people!! Alas! What a pity!!

***F*** Don’t feel sorry for those people.

**S** Denial of God needs a lot of falsification, and shameless
boldness. It also needs boldness to turn away from the call of both soul
and mind and away from nature and conscience of human beings.

***F*** Nobody can deny the existence of God, my son. But they give God
other names, or describe Him differently.

**S** How is that, Dad? How do you say that? The official textbooks are
full of talking about nature. Yes, nature ñ as they call it ñ dominates
the entire universe and organizes its rules very wisely and perfectly.

***F*** They give God another name. They call Him “Nature” either
unconsciously or obstinately. Therefore, when you ask them about nature,
they will say, “It is the power which dominates the universe, has an
ultimate capability, absolute knowledge and great wisdom.”

As you see, all these characteristics cannot be found but in

the Creator of the universe. The difference between them and us is only
in the terminology. They call the Creator, “Nature”, while we call him
“God.”

**S** There is another difference father.

***F*** What is it?

**S** We worship God, but they don’t worship nature.

***F*** I think they do worship nature, son.

**S** How is that Dad?

***F*** Sanctifying something and submission before its greatness is the
core of worship. Those people sanctify nature and get humble before its
greatness, thus, they worship it. Devil has embellished their deeds and
turned them away from the real path.

**S** And what turned them away from God, who created them?

***F*** If they admit to His existence, glory be to Him, they would
oblige themselves to obey Him. But they don’t want this. They only go
after their desires. Therefore, they worship their desires, while we
worship God.

**S** Would you mind explaining this in detail Dad? You have just said
that the meaning of worship is sanctifying the worshipped.

***F*** And the other meaning is the obedience to the worshipped. So, if
we obey, we worship Him. And if we obey our desires, we worship them.
Haven’t you read in the Holy Quran: “***Then*** ***sees*** ***thou***
***such*** ***a*** ***one*** ***as*** ***takes*** ***as*** ***his***
***god*** ***his*** ***own*** ***vain*** ***desire?***”

So the person who obeys his/her desires makes these

desires his/her god. It means that he/she worships his/her vain desire.
Everyone or everything obeyed (except God) is a god in this perspective.

**S** Then there are many meanings for the word ‘worship’, and the word
‘God’, aren’t there?

***F*** Yes, there are. We shall come to this subject in detail later.

**S** Now, let’s go back to the main issue about the innate proof which
leads every human being to God, glory to Him. I’ve searched the Quran
for the verses which talk about the innate proof particularly the
paragraph which relates to the sea journey.

***F*** Have you found this proof in this verse about the trip in sea?

**S** Yes, Dad. I found it in a certain paragraph in Younis sura.

In verse No.22, God says: “***He*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Who***
***enabled*** ***you*** ***to*** ***traverse*** ***through*** ***land***
***and*** ***sea;*** ***so*** ***that*** ***ye*** ***even*** ***board***
***ships;-*** ***they*** ***sail*** ***with*** ***them*** ***with***
***a*** ***favorable*** ***wind,*** ***and*** ***they*** ***rejoice***
***thereat;*** ***then*** ***comes*** ***a*** ***stormy*** ***wind***
***and*** ***the*** ***waves*** ***come*** ***to*** ***them***
***from*** ***all*** ***sides,*** ***and*** ***they*** ***think***
***they*** ***are*** ***being*** ***overwhelmed:*** ***they*** ***cry***
***unto*** ***Allah,*** ***sincerely*** ***offering*** ***(their)***
***duty*** ***unto*** ***Him*** ***saying,*** ***“If*** ***thou***
***dost*** ***deliver*** ***us*** ***from*** ***this,*** ***we***
***shall*** ***truly*** ***show*** ***our*** ***gratitude!***”

***F*** In the dictionary of Quran you find all verses that talk about
traveling by sea on the same page. Most of them talk about monotheism in
one way or another.

**S** I will come back to the subject of the Quran index at another
time, but now I have some inquiries.

***F*** Go ahead. Ask about everything you like, because the key to
knowledge is inquiry.

**S** Now, I have two questions;

First: Has the Quran presented any evidence other than the innate
reasoning to proof the existence of God?

Second: How does the Quran argue with the disbelievers? And a third
question has just jumped into my mind, no... no, two questions are
enough for me now.

***F*** No, No, son. Don’t leave any queries about religion hidden in
your mind without seeking answers. Let it out.

**S** But, Dad, there are so many questions, some I have heard from my
friends, and some from my teachers in school, those who don’t believe in
God. I also read some of them here and there in different books and
magazines, or I heard them in the media, and much more which raise
suspicions about different aspects of the religion and, frankly, can
shake the faith.

***F*** That’s why I encourage you to ask questions and keep those
queries outspoken without any hesitation, shame or fear.

**S** But, Dad, I heard that the habit of asking many questions is not
recommended, and God had prohibited this habit in the Quran. Haven’t you
heard of this verse: “***O*** ***ye*** ***who*** ***believe!***
***Ask*** ***not*** ***questions*** ***about*** ***things***
***which,*** ***if*** ***made*** ***plain*** ***to*** ***you,***
***may*** ***cause*** ***you*** ***trouble***.”

Moreover, there was the story of the Cow and the people of Israel and
how they were put to the test and stricken because they were importunate
with queries.

***F*** Listen to me, son. This is a completely different subject.

Queries are forbidden if they cause harm; queries which are not about
the ideology of the religion, but are details that would be of no help
to anyone, if not damaging. An example of that is the story of the cow
in Surah of al- Baqarah. God asked the people of Israel to sacrifice a
cow. It was sufficient to obey the command and to sacrifice any cow
available. If they had done what they were commanded, it would have been
for their own good, but they started asking question after question
about the cow’s features, color and nature. So when God saw their
hesitation, disobedience, and delay in performing the command, which
revealed their deviation and desire to postpone and disagree, He
narrowed the choice scope as a penalty for their disagreement and delay
of fulfilling God’s command, glory and praise be to Him. These types of
questions are forbidden.

However, questioning about the religion and especially the ideological
aspects that originate from a person’s concern to know, understand and
perceive instead of following others blindly, is one of the holiest
tasks that human beings can adhere to. So ask anything you want, my son,
and don’t hesitate. There is nothing we are afraid of in our religion
whether addressed by youth or old.

**S** OK Dad! Will you answer my former two questions or shall I present
the third one?

***F*** As you like, I don’t want to put any pressure or restrict your
thoughts even with the types of questions you ask or with their
sequence. You know that influencing your thoughts is not good and
rejected by human’s natures. It represents a weak weapon against the
different intellectual streams and is not any longer possible in the
twenty first century where accessing all kinds of information is
feasible now even to a little boy living in any part of the world. One
can get any sort of information about anything by a single click. So how
do the narrow-minded apply their intellectual tutelage on youth? Ask and
don’t be afraid.

**S** First of all, answer my first two questions, please.

***F*** OK! Your question was: has the Quran presented any proof other
than the innate reasoning to prove the existence of God? The answer is
that it leads to other proofs too. The most important ones are:

(1) The organization proof. (2) The purpose proof.

The response to the other question which was about the way Quran argues
with infidels about God:

Most of the infidels didn’t explicitly deny belief in God.

They disclaimed Heavenly religions. The discussion about God’s existence
was very rare. For example, Pharaoh and Nimrod were among those who
claimed to be gods. There were some interesting discussions between them
and the prophets about this subject. Apart from that, most of the
discussions with the prophets were about prophecy and its legitimacy;
there were debates about what the prophet brought of laws and
instructions that should be obeyed by people in order to be granted
Paradise and be saved from hell in the hereafter. The infidel’s attitude
was denying the prophecy to free themselves of responsibilities and
disclaiming the hereafter to hide their nature, which fears God’s
punishment.

**S** Dad, I’d like to hear the discussion that took place between
Pharaoh and Moses about monotheism.

***F*** Pharaoh said to his people “I am your great lord.” But Moses and
his brother faced Pharaoh fatefully and defeated him thoroughly when
they addressed him as ‘God’s servant’. They were commanded to deliver a
specific message from God:

“***Verily*** ***we*** ***are*** ***apostles*** ***sent*** ***by***
***thy*** ***Lord:*** ***Send*** ***forth,***

***therefore,*** ***the*** ***Children*** ***of*** ***Israel***
***with*** ***us,*** ***and*** ***afflict*** ***them*** ***not:***
***with*** ***a*** ***Sign,*** ***indeed,*** ***have*** ***we***
***come*** ***from*** ***thy*** ***Lord!*** ***And*** ***peace***
***to*** ***all*** ***who*** ***follow*** ***guidance!***”

Pharaoh was shocked by falsifying his claims about being the great lord.
So he tried to change the course of discussion by asking them: “Who is
your God, Moses?” Moses replied:

“***Our*** ***Lord*** ***is*** ***He*** ***Who*** ***gave*** ***to***
***each*** ***(created)*** ***thing*** ***its*** ***form*** ***and***
***nature,*** ***and*** ***further,*** ***gave*** ***(it)***
***guidance***.” This way Moses gave his ideology a comprehensive
universal dimension. Thus Pharaoh tried to change the subject again so
he queried about the past generations: what about the first generation?

These type of questions attempt to lead the discussion to an endless
maze because they were about unknown topics that no one had ever heard
of. Also, answering such questions wouldn’t be useful to the actual
debate. So Moses replied with a gently and wisely and brought him back
to the main subject when he said:

“The knowledge of what you have asked only God knows about, in a Book
where my God neither goes wrong nor forgets.” Then Moses continued his
talk about God as follows: “***has*** ***made*** ***for*** ***you***
***the*** ***Earth*** ***like a*** ***carpet*** ***spread*** ***out;***
***has*** ***enabled*** ***you*** ***to*** ***go*** ***about***
***therein*** ***by*** ***roads*** ***(and*** ***channels);*** ***and***
***has*** ***sent*** ***down*** ***water*** ***from*** ***the***
***sky.”*** ***With*** ***it*** ***have*** ***We*** ***produced***
***diverse*** ***pairs*** ***of*** ***plants,*** ***each***
***different*** ***from*** ***the*** ***others***.”

When Pharaoh, just like anyone who fears for his worldly life, found no
way to escape that embarrassing situation, he turned to his audience,
shouting cheap accusations calling Moses names: liar, magician, saying:
“***(Pharaoh)*** ***said*** ***to*** ***the*** ***Chiefs*** ***around***
***him:*** ***This*** ***is*** ***indeed*** ***a*** ***sorcerer***
***well-versed***.”

He also added: “***Truly*** ***your*** ***apostle*** ***who*** ***has***
***been*** ***sent*** ***to*** ***you*** ***is*** ***a***
***veritable*** ***madman!***”

Refuting the accusation, Moses responded politely and in a prophetic
eloquence: “***Lord*** ***of*** ***the*** ***East*** ***and*** ***the***
***West,*** ***and*** ***all*** ***between!*** ***If*** ***ye***
***only*** ***had*** ***sense***.”

And then he addresses the audience: “***Your*** ***Lord*** ***and***
***the*** ***Lord*** ***of*** ***your*** ***forefathers!***” That means
if you believe that Pharaoh is your god then who was your God before the
birth of Pharaoh? Who was your ancestors’ god?

**S** How nice is this talk! It is a combination of simplicity and
depth, power in inference and conciseness in style.

***F*** This is the language of prophets and those who follow their
ways. While the followers of Pharaoh chose the language of accusations,
discrediting, and lying they also mobilized the general public to make
them enemies of prophets and pious people. You can find the same debate
between Nimrod and Abraham (Peace Be Upon him)

**S** Dad! Please tell me more about the dialogue between Nimrod and the
father of all prophets (Abraham).

***F*** Abraham stated the domination of God over all mankind and His
control of their lives and death, as follows: “My God is the one who
grants life and bring death, and this is a rational proof of His
Lordship (Praise and glory be to Him). It is He Who possesses all that
concerns human beings from the beginning to the end.” No liar pseudo-god
can survive against this powerful rational proof by false pretence and
fabrication. He could only cheat simple public by claiming that he’s
able to bring life and death.

To prove that Nimrod called for two prisoners who were sentenced to
death; he pardoned one and set him free; then he said: I granted him
life because I saved him from death. Then he killed the other and said:
I killed this one so I’m the one who grants life and death. When Abraham
found himself in front of a great humbugger who used forgery and
falsification to keep his control over public’s minds, he resorted to a
different way that revealed Nimrod’s deception before the nation:
“***But*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Allah*** ***that*** ***caused***
***the*** ***sun*** ***to*** ***rise*** ***from*** ***the*** ***East:***
***Do*** ***thou*** ***then*** ***cause*** ***him*** ***to*** ***rise***
***from*** ***the*** ***West.”*** ***Thus*** ***was*** ***he***
***confounded*** ***who*** ***(in*** ***arrogance)*** ***rejected***
***faith***.” So this process uncovered the fact that leads to believe
in the real God and displays Nimrod’s lies.

**S** Peace be upon the Father of Prophets. I feel special love for this
great Prophet, who destroyed the idols, hung the hatchet on the neck of
the biggest idol, and said: “***Nay,*** ***this*** ***was*** ***done***
***by*** ***him-*** ***this*** ***is*** ***their*** ***biggest***
***one***.” I’m very fond in his style of enlightening the public about
the true facts of faith.

***F*** But you know that guiding and enlightening people about true
faith is a dangerous process for those who are practicing it. You’ve
seen how that led them to throw Abraham in fire but God saved him by His
will.

**S** Also it led Pharaoh and his soldiers to pursue Moses and his
followers. But death overtook Pharaoh and his soldiers who were drowned
in the sea.

***F*** Yes son. Prophets and their followers bear hardships for the
sake of God, and God in return disgrace their enemies. Eventually, the
fruitful outcome is to the believers.

**S** And Abraham’s name remains dear to me

***F*** Do you like the name “Abraham” very much?

**S** Yes! By all means, Dad!

***F*** So, do you like to be called “Abu Abraham?”

***S*** Ah... well, actually I’ve been thinking about it for a while,
but...

***F*** But what? It’s preferred to call a person with “Abu...” So you
are Abu Abraham from now on.

**S** Thank you Dad, but...

***F*** But what? What about Um Abraham you mean?!

**S** No, No... I didn’t mean that.

***F*** I mean that son... you’ll find Um Abraham yourself at the right
time.

**S** May God bless you Dad, but I don’t mean this. I’m still young.

***F*** You’re not young... anyway; we’ll leave this subject to another
time. Generally the Quran urges marriage and the Prophet’s Sunnah
recommends early marriage too. But this doesn’t mean a hasty marriage at
all. It definitely means not to delay marriage without a good reason.
Getting married is fulfilling half of one’s religious duties. And if one
delays his marriage because of fear of financial difficulties, it means
that he has misunderstood God’s will. God, praise and glory be to Him,
said: “***if*** ***they*** ***are*** ***in*** ***poverty,*** ***Allah***
***will*** ***give*** ***them*** ***means*** ***out*** ***of***
***His*** ***grace:*** ***for*** ***Allah*** ***encompasseth***
***all,*** ***and*** ***he*** ***knoweth*** ***all*** ***things***.”

**S** I have another question.

***F*** About a wife and a son?!

**S** No! About the One who has neither wife nor son.

***F*** Postpone this subject to another time.


