Organization Proof
==================

***F*** Today, I’d like to talk to you about another proof of God’s
existence. I mean the organization proof because we’ve had enough on the
innate reasoning.

**S** I do like this subject, as I seem to live with the monotheism
concept every minute of my life. When I wake up or when I go to bed, I
keep thinking of God and I feel that I got into a new stage of knowing
God. I really enjoy being close to God and even feel deeply humble
during meditation. I can also feel the connection to Him while reading
His Chapters. I do sense His care and protection in my journey from
traditional faith to the real faith. Now I do value myself as a divine
human who links to the origin of the existence and creation. I see the
world very small and unworthy compared to the greatness and magnificence
of its Creator. I just want to hasten my life cycle and reach the time
where I stand before God. My prayers have become meaningful; my kneeling
has become purposeful and my prostration before God has become
significant. Dad! Please tell me about the organization proof to know my
God better.

***F*** I will, son. First of all, tell me how do you study Physics,
Chemistry, Botany and Zoology sciences?

**S** Well, there are theoretical lessons in the form of lectures and
practical lessons in the laboratory where we watch applications or do
experiments based on what we’ve learnt in the classroom.

***F*** It is the same way with the organization proof. We’ll take
theoretical lessons and also practical ones.

**S** Where will our practical lesson be carried out? I mean in which
laboratory?

***F*** You’ll see where the laboratory is then.

Now, let’s begin our theoretical lesson about monotheism and the title
is “Organization Proof.” Give me one of the monotheistic books you study
at school.

**S** Monotheistic book? But Dad! We don’t have such kind of books in
school.

***F*** That’s quite strange. Don’t you study monotheism?

**S** Oh, I got it. You mean our religious books?

***F*** No, that’s not what I meant because most of religion books don’t
teach monotheism as they are supposed to. By monotheistic books I mean
the following books: Physics, Chemistry, Botany, Zoology, Geography,
etc.

**S** What do you want to say Dad? How can my Physics textbook and
textbooks of other sciences be monotheistic books?

***F*** I’ll tell you why science books are monotheistic books.

But first tell me what the science of Physics is? Or what does it mean?

**S** Well, it’s a science that studies the laws which control material
both in quality and quantity.

***F*** Excellent, what about Chemistry?

**S** It is the science of matter that studies the structure, and
composition of substances as well as their transformations and
interactions to become new compounds. Also it refers to chemical
decompositions where chemical compounds are fragmented into elements or
smaller compounds.

***F*** How do all these interactions occur? Do the interactions take
place randomly or they follow laws which govern the process?

**S** Well, definitely they follow rules.

***F*** Now, what are Botany and Zoology?

**S** I think I got your point. They also study the rules that govern
plant life and animal life.

***F*** Does this apply to the rest of sciences?

**S** Yes, of course. They all follow rules.

***F*** Therefore, the whole universe is governed by rules, and sciences
try to find out these rules.

***S*** Yes, that is it.

***F*** Now tell me if the law of gravity functions occasionally or it
is always constant and applicable?

S It always works; it is a law. If it only worked sometimes and turned
disable in other times, it would not be called a law.

***F*** What about other laws of Physics, Chemistry and other sciences?

**S** Similarly, they are also fixed; they never change.

***F*** What about Psychology, Anatomy, Biology, Astronomy and
Agricultural sciences?

**S** They are the same. The whole universe is controlled by rules.

***F*** Now, tell me if certain parts of the universe can escape the
rules or are they all forced to follow those rules precisely and
literally?

**S** They are all forced to follow those rules precisely.

***F*** So all the subjects you are studying at school lead us to the
following fact: the universe is governed by specific rules which
organize its relations and interactions and that there is no way for
contradiction.

**S** That’s right.

***F*** Now we raise two questions:

First: is there any rule without a rule maker, code without a codifier,
an organization without an organizer, a plan without a planner, and a
decision without a decision maker?

Second: what are the characteristics of the one who puts the rules for
the whole universe?

***S*** You are magnificent Dad! That is truly concise understanding of
all kinds of sciences. All sciences lead human beings to God. That’s
really magnificent. We are studying how to know God in all subjects
without actually feeling it. How inattentive we are! As if we are in a
deep sleep without even being aware! You’ve opened my eyes.

***F*** That’s why God says: “***Those*** ***truly*** ***fear***
***Allah,*** ***among*** ***His*** ***servants,*** ***who*** ***have***
***knowledge***.”

**S** So all our subjects are considered chapters of monotheism...

***F*** And they all lead to God if they are delivered properly and if
the misleading terms are replaced by the correct ones. But unfortunately
the authors of the textbooks follow the western ideology which talks
about the rules of nature when meaning “Divine rules.”

**S** You’re right Dad. In spite of the fact that all the authors of our
books believe in God and the hereafter, I cannot see even a single
indication to the word “God” in any book.

***F*** This is a Western education and policy, which separates life
from religion. It aims at freezing our religion in old books and
restricting teaching programs in mosques. It also aims to confine
praying to the prayer niche and religion to the ceremonies of marriage,
divorce and death. Let’s go back to the two important questions:

The first one: Are there any rules without a rule maker or an
organization without an organizer?

And the second question is modified a little bit: Does this organized
world, which is based on an infinite number of rules, proves that the
Creator of this universe has an absolute knowledge and power? Or is he
weak and ignorant?

We can also ask whether the Organizer of the universe is one of the
living creatures in this universe or not. In other words, is the creator
of time and space is outside of time and space or is he in the
dimensional physical world in which we live.

**S** It seems that I’ve began to understand what monotheism means and
what real belief in God is... that’s magnificent! This idea is extremely
rational and simple. It leads to peace of mind and soul. God is great!
God is great! Glory to God! Thanks God for guiding me to know you
better. You’re right Dad! The universe is governed by rules which
reflect a highly precise and accurate system and means that this
universe is controlled by the One who created that system. God created
the system with all its components and has controlled all its functions.
He is Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Almighty; there is no lord except God.
Praise the Lord, praise be to God of the whole universe!

***F*** The arrogant submitted to Him, kings yielded to Him and they
have all obeyed Him and followed His rules.

**S** What is it worth for the kings to rule a small part of this small
planet? That is like a dot in comparison to the infinite world? What is
the value of those kings compared to the King of all kings?!

***F*** “***Blessed*** ***be*** ***He*** ***in*** ***Whose***
***hands*** ***is*** ***Dominion;*** ***and*** ***He*** ***over***
***all*** ***things*** ***hath*** ***Power;*** ***He*** ***Who***
***created*** ***Death*** ***and*** ***Life,*** ***that*** ***He***
***may*** ***try*** ***which*** ***of*** ***you*** ***is*** ***best***
***in*** ***deed:*** ***and*** ***He*** ***is*** ***the*** ***Exalted***
***in*** ***Might,*** ***Oft-Forgiving;*** ***He*** ***Who***
***created*** ***the*** ***seven*** ***heavens*** ***one*** ***above***
***another:*** ***No*** ***want*** ***of*** ***proportion*** ***wilt***
***thou*** ***see*** ***in*** ***the*** ***Creation*** ***of***
***(Allah)*** ***Most*** ***Gracious.*** ***So*** ***turn*** ***thy***
***vision*** ***again:*** ***seest*** ***thou*** ***any*** ***flaw?***”

**S** Praise to the Lord... and thank you God of the universe... Thanks
for guiding me to know You better. Thanks God. Dad! I feel great
happiness... a unique joy. I feel my heart is filled with love of God. I
wish I could fly to the highest Supreme Kingdom.

***F*** “***Those*** ***whom*** ***Allah*** ***(in*** ***His***
***plan)*** ***willeth*** ***to*** ***guide,-*** ***He*** ***openeth***
***their*** ***breast*** ***to*** ***Islam;*** ***those*** ***whom***
***He*** ***willeth*** ***to*** ***leave*** ***straying,-*** ***He***
***maketh*** ***their*** ***breast*** ***close*** ***and***
***constricted,*** ***as*** ***if*** ***they*** ***had*** ***to***
***climb*** ***up*** ***to*** ***the*** ***skies***.”

**S** Thanks God for guiding us, and thank God for all that He has
granted us.

Dad! Please continue speaking about the design proof which leads to
knowing God.

***F*** I have given you the key and now you should make use of it. All
parts of the universe and all aspects of life are organized precisely.
There is no place or time that doesn’t follow the rules and every system
or process reminds us of God, His Greatness, His Absolute Knowledge, and
His ultimate Power. This is the key. So wherever you set your eyes, you
would find a perfect sign of God’s existence. If you look at yourself
and at the skies, you’ll find the sign of God spreading everywhere in
nature. “***Soon*** ***will*** ***We*** ***show*** ***them*** ***our***
***Signs*** ***in*** ***the*** ***(furthest)*** ***regions*** ***(of***
***the*** ***earth),*** ***and*** ***in*** ***their*** ***own***
***souls,*** ***until*** ***it*** ***becomes*** ***manifest*** ***to***
***them*** ***that*** ***this*** ***is*** ***the*** ***Truth.***”

**S** Dad! You’re right. You provided me with a significant concept.
I’ll keep thinking about this new concept of faith.

The concept of the organization in every thing and the related evidence
that there should be a Wise Creator.

***F*** Well, this way we put an end to our theoretical lesson under the
title of “Organization Proof.”

**S** Sorry Dad! But my theoretical lesson has just begun and it will
never be finished. I’ll keep learning monotheistic lessons in every
thing I set my eyes on leading me to the universe organization,
throughout my life. So the lesson has just begun and will never end.

***F*** Well-done son! God bless you and may God lead you to the
position of the truthful righteous people. My son, go to bed now.

**S** What, Dad? Sleep! You’ve opened the heaven’s gates for me, how can
I sleep? I’ll stay up with the beloved; I’ll speak with Him till dawn so
I won’t miss the morning prayers. I shall remain with the beloved all
night, the One who took heed of me, while I was heedless of Him.


