Monotheistic Proof
==================

In the evening, the young boy was eager for the theoretical lesson. He
has experienced the practical applications of that lesson in the
laboratory and learnt that those experiments which his dad had planned
would have not been absorbed if he had only thought of them
theoretically. The sign of the books and clothes scene in the his room
then the torn phone book which was waiting for the wind to be rearranged
as before and the scene of Abu Ahmed who was deeply engaged in looking
for a great poem to be created randomly; and the scene of workers who
tried hard to mix up letters and take a handful of them for printing
hoping to create a nice poem; also the scene of his younger sister who
was proud of cooking a delicious meal and the scene of tasting a morsel
with no salt from the dish and the next one with too much salt and the
third morsel with the right amount of salt, which means that his tongue
could also participate in finding out about the “Organization Proof.”

All these scenes were like illustration tactics and procedures used to
have those experiences everlasting in his mind without using a camera.
However, the son was thinking about publishing a detailed monotheistic
encyclopedia to assist young people who are overwhelmed by doubt. Yes,
he’ll write a book and give it to Abu Ahmed to have it published. But
not in the way he wanted to compose a poem!

Thus, the teaching method is very important in teaching faith. What he
could achieve in just one day would not be achieved through many years
in school receiving religious lessons. Religious lessons are
insufficient to reveal religious facts in practical ways.

He wondered why there was a huge disparity in the teaching methods in
school curriculum. Physics was taught through the most modern teaching
method, while it’s not the case with religion. Why religious lessons
were not based on the recent techniques in teaching too although they
are both taught in one school and there is one ministry of education and
one minister? Is it Intentional?

Are the Ministries of Education and the teaching cadre incapable of
doing what his father did in teaching the religious ideas in a
theoretical and practical way, accompanied with interesting experiments
which respect the learner’s mind and encourages powerful and scientific
inference?

Why are religious books ignored, while it’s not the case with, say,
Chemistry books?

Also, why is religion taught at schools, but not at universities? Does
that mean that university students do not need religious education or
had they already had enough religious knowledge and there is no more to
learn or discuss?

If this is the case, then why do we see different ideological currents
in the universities which divert students’ minds away from their
religion and put them astray in all directions?

Maybe students have studied religion before reaching the universities
and now turned away from it and are no longer feeling the need to engage
in religious discussions.

The fact that the educational system avoided religion shocked the young
boy. He remembered that the term “God” is missing from all textbooks. He
also remembered that the state’s law punishes whoever stands against the
leader’s law but doesn’t punish those standing against God’s laws. He
thought that all citizens were forced to obey the leaders, but not
obligated to obey God. That’s why whoever curses the leader is
imprisoned but the one who curses God is not. He was terrified by the
fact that he’s living in a society where people turn away from God and
do not obey His laws while they have to submit to the leader and his
laws.

This society worships the leader but not God. This society assigned the
leader to be worshiped instead of God. He remembered a story that his
father once narrated: One day some Christians called on the Prophet
while he was reciting the following verse: “***They*** ***take***
***their*** ***priests*** ***and*** ***their*** ***monks*** ***to***
***be*** ***their*** ***lords*** ***in*** ***derogation*** ***of***
***Allah***.”

The Christians objected that they didn’t take their priests and monks as
their lord in derogation of Allah. The Prophet replied: “The priests
have allowed Christians what is forbidden and for bided what is allowed
and people obeyed them.” Thus, they worshipped the priests not God.”

The young boy concluded that the society worshipped the leader instead
of God which made him shout: There is no god but God and we don’t
worship anyone other than Him. Our trust is in Him, even if polytheists
disagree. He suddenly stopped thinking and asked himself: “Isn’t it true
that those people say: There is no god but God? So how come they don’t
fear saying it? And why doesn’t the leader hold them responsible for
saying there is no god but God?” So they don’t know the importance of
this phrase because they don’t know its meaning.

If people knew that this phrase means that there is no one to worship
and obey except God, there is no canonization except for God, no power
and authority except for God, no one to fear but God, and there is no
law but God’s law, they would fear its danger, both rulers and the
ruled. And you’d find that saying “there is no god but God” is a crime
that deserves a life imprisonment because that endangers the national
security and destabilizes the government.

Arabs truly understood the meaning of “There is no god except God” when
the Prophet publicly declared it and he suffered so much from the
enemies of Islam who refused to accept it. If they had not understood
its meaning, they would have let him and his followers say whatever they
wish to say. But they truly perceived the danger of this simple phrase.

In the evening, the family gathered around the dinner table reviewing
the events of the day and the experiences resulting from each one. The
father was happy and commented with a smile: “We all have participated
in giving you monotheistic lessons: myself, your mother....” His young
daughter interrupted him saying: “And me Dad! Me!”

“And of course you, my daughter” The father said, “no one left except my
dear young baby, who is unable to speak and can just suck and cry.” The
son answered:

**S** Even this baby gave a monotheistic lesson without even noticing
that.

**F** How, son?

**S** I looked at him while mother was breast-feeding him. He opened the
book of knowing God and I started going through it page by page. This
weak creature feels hunger and shows it by crying; crying moves Mother’s
emotion. If this emotion was not created with mothers, they would ignore
their babies ñ the mother then hugs the baby and puts him close to her
warm breast and he begins sucking; he is not aware of anything but he
knows where to get food. That breast pours out milk and the baby ceases
crying to get food. He carries out until he gets full. The baby stops
sucking when he is full. If he stops before getting enough, he will
starve. On the other hand, if he doesn’t stop, he will get fat. But the
equation had been set in a way to fulfill the balance; the baby takes
the amount necessary for his growth and to overcome his hunger. As you
know, mother’s milk is rich with all the necessary nutrients a baby
needs. No one could ever make anything similar to this milk with all its
characteristics such as nutrient elements, taste, temperature, and not
to forget the emotional side for breast feeding; they would not be able
to succeed. Father! My baby brother gave me a good lesson in monotheism.

**F** Monotheistic lessons can be found everywhere. The Quran names
every lesson a sign. So God’s signs are numerous and countless. They are
as many as the number of stones and grains of sand. But every sign
requires wariness and a sound innate. “***Verily*** ***in*** ***this***
***is*** ***a*** ***Message*** ***for*** ***any*** ***that*** ***has***
***a*** ***mind*** ***and*** ***understanding*** ***or*** ***who***
***gives*** ***ear*** ***and*** ***earnestly*** ***witnesses***
***(the*** ***truth).***”

God’s signs and the innate nature simulate to radio signals and radio
transmission. The atmosphere around us is full of signals from many
hundreds broadcasting stations, either radio or television based
stations. But there should be a device that is capable of receiving what
those stations are transmitting. The more modern the device is, the
better signal quality we get and the more channels are available to hear
and see. The human innate nature is similar; if it is pure, modest, sin
free and not affected by society’s traditions, it will receive and
perceive the lessons available in all places. Haven’t you heard what
[Imam] Ali ibn Abi- Talib said: “I haven’t seen anything but perceived
God before, during and after it”?

**S** God is great!... Dad! I’ve approached one third of the position
that Ali son of Abi-Taleb had achieved.

**F** How?

**S** While experiencing your theoretical and practical lessons, I found
God myself. Since then I’ve always felt the existence of God in whatever
I see, but I cannot feel Him before and after that. And you know that
this is the third of what we try to reach.

**F** Take it easy, son! All who follow the path will reach a
destination. A human being is capable of reaching the greatest things
with the least of effort.

**S** The greatest thing is God.

**F** And the least effort is the intention. I mean the honest
intention. So if you have a sincere intention to reach God, praise and
glory be to Him, He will help you in your journey. Haven’t you read the
following verse: “***And*** ***those*** ***who*** ***strive*** ***in***
***Our*** ***(cause),*** ***We*** ***will*** ***certainly*** ***guide***
***them*** ***to*** ***our*** ***Paths***” If a servant of God moves
toward him a span, God will come forward to his servant hundred spans.
Also, if a servant walks towards God, God will rush towards him.

**S** This is the most possible divine kindness for a servant wishing to
be as close as possible to God. Father! I’m eager to pursue the
monotheistic lessons. Will you please give me another lesson today?

**F** No, not now. You’d better fully understand what you’ve learnt
first and see if you have any questions. Then after grasping the main
idea, we will proceed to the next lesson.

**S** I’ve got a question now.

**F** Go ahead.

**S** Would you please tell me whether the method which you’ve chosen to
apply in my case, is your own idea... or...?

**F** “***We*** ***didn’t*** ***leave*** ***anything*** ***in***
***the*** ***Book***.”

**S** It is from the Quran then?

**F** Yes. The Quran has illustrated many examples for the necessity of
calling people to God in practical ways. For example, Abraham’s story,
when Abraham argued with his people to cease worshiping the idols, which
could neither hear nor think, he couldn’t motivate his people to abandon
the idols’ worship. So he changed his tactics by planning a practical
lesson. He carried his ax and smashed the idols to pieces and destroyed
them all. However, he left the biggest idol intact and hanged the ax
around its neck.

When the people came to worship their idols, they found

them destroyed...

***They*** ***said,*** ***‘Who*** ***has*** ***done*** ***this***
***to*** ***our*** ***gods?*** ***He*** ***must*** ***indeed*** ***be***
***some*** ***man*** ***of*** ***impiety!***’

***They*** ***said,*** ***‘We*** ***heard*** ***a*** ***youth***
***talk*** ***of*** ***them:*** ***He*** ***is*** ***called***

***Abraham.***’

***They*** ***said,*** ***‘Then*** ***bring*** ***him*** ***before***
***the*** ***eyes*** ***of*** ***the*** ***people,*** ***that***
***they*** ***may*** ***bear*** ***witness.’***

***They*** ***said,*** ***‘Art*** ***thou*** ***the*** ***one***
***that*** ***did*** ***this*** ***with*** ***our*** ***gods, O***
***Abraham?’***

***He*** ***said:*** ***‘Nay,*** ***this*** ***was*** ***done***
***by*** ***that*** ***-*** ***the*** ***biggest*** ***one***
***among*** ***them!*** ***Ask*** ***them,*** ***if*** ***they***
***can*** ***utter!’***

**S** What was the result?

**F** They thought to themselves and said: “***So*** ***they***
***turned*** ***to*** ***themselves*** ***and*** ***said,***
***“Surely*** ***ye*** ***are*** ***the*** ***ones*** ***in*** ***the***
***wrong!”***”. All the former theoretical and ideological arguments
didn’t give any acceptable solution, but this practical lesson made them
return back to their innate senses and confess frankly that they were
wrong.

**S** So, you’ve learnt the practical method from Prophet

Abraham?

**F** Yes, Abu Ibrahim!


