Preface: Diversity in the Topics of Fiqh
========================================

If we study the subjects of Fiqh in detail, we find that every one of
them is peculiar and singular in itself. There may seem to be some
similarity at, first glance, but a deeper study reveals a different
aspect contained. It meets with the requirements of all walks of human
life.

Some of the laws relate to the natural urge in human beings to adore and
worship. It guides us to worship none but Allah, in the prescribed form,
seeking His pleasure. Then there are laws which prompt us to serve, be
helpful and useful to human society, at the same time affirming our
obedience to Allah. These are Zakat, Khums, our social and political
duties, Jihad, Amr bil Ma'roof and Nahy anil Munkar, training in martial
arts etc.

Other laws enunciate man's duties towards oneself like refraining from
suicide or harming oneself or even avoiding celibacy. Certain laws deal
with human life in relation to nature surrounding him like food, drinks,
hunting, slaughtering, dresses, use of utensils and so on. Then there
are laws of judiciary, requital and compensation. As for personal life,
Fiqh guides us in matters of nikah, talaq, dhihar, and lian. In matters
of economy and earning one's bread, there are rules governing business,
partnership, silent partnerships, bankruptcy etc. Fiqh also deals with
such versatile acts like Hajj which apart from being an act of worship,
is an opportunity of unity, collaboration and an international
conference.

In spite of this diversity, Fiqh has one single aim. To lead human
beings to happiness on earth, conjoining it with salvation in the
hereafter. Therefore, Fiqh is considered as one, composite science of
Islam and is taught as such in the Hawzas. The basis of Fiqh is the Holy
Quran, the sound Traditions, Consensus and Reason. A faqeeh looks at the
diverse component of Fiqh as parts interwoven into one fabric, with a
single aim to guide mankind in respect of its duties and
responsibilities towards Allah.


