Part 1: Fiqh
============

This system commonly known as ilm­ul­ Fiqh, is extensive, covering a
very wide range; and its history dates back to the earliest Islamic era.
It has been taught with great detail and ramifications in every era,
producing several jurist consults of repute during every century. Among
the jurists, known as faqih (pl. Fuqaha) some were genius. A number of
volumes have appeared to elucidate the Islamic jurisprudence; some of
them are masterly treatment of the laws on every walk of human life.

Most of the problems confronting human society are dealt with by various
laws, like, the civil laws, the family laws, the penal code, the
management laws, and so on. Fiqh deals with all of them under various
chapters, and in different names. Moreover, it deals with such laws
which are not covered by the modern day laws, like the ones related to
the acts of worship. Because of a very wide range of subjects covered by
Fiqh, it actually includes numerous faculties which are normally learnt
separately today.

The term 'Fiqh' in the Quran & Hadith
-------------------------------------

The word 'Fiqh' and its derivation 'tafaqquh' has been extensively used
in the Quran and Hadith, and in almost all cases it denotes in ­depth
study and profound understanding. The Quran says:

***"If a group of people from every tribe stayed behind to study (and
ponder on) the religion, (they would be able) to warn and admonish their
people when they return to them so that they are cautious." (Al­-Tawbah.
V.122)***

And the Prophet (s.a.w) is reported to have said:  
 "Whoever commits forty Hadith for the sake of my Ummah shall be
resurrected by Allah as a learned faqih."

It is not known whether the term faqih was applied to the learned
companions of the Prophet (s.a.w). However, we certainly know that the
generation which followed the companions, known as tabe'een, used this
appellation for a number of scholars among them. There were for example,
seven great jurists among them who are known as 'fuqaha sab'ah' i.e. the
seven fuqaha. The year 94 A.H. was known as 'sanatul fuqaha' (the year
of the Fuqaha) because in that year, together with our fourth Imam, Ali
b. Hussain (A.S.), great jurists like Saeed b. Musayyab, Urwah b.
Zubair, Saeed b. Jubayr and others died. Thereafter, great Islamic
scholars, particularly the jurists were commonly classified as Fuqaha.

Our Imams (peace be upon them) have used the term Faqih quite often.
Some of their companions were recommended to study religion thoroughly
and become Faqih, and when they attained that degree of knowledge, they
were called fuqaha. We know of quite a few students of our Imams (A.S.)
who were known as Shi’ah Fuqaha by their contemporaries.

The Term faqih as elucidated by Islamic Scholars
------------------------------------------------

In the Quran and Hadith, Fiqh denotes profound understanding and
knowledge of Islamic fundamentals and laws, and is not confined to any
particular branch of religious sciences. But with the passage of time,
the word becomes synonymous with the knowledge of Islamic laws and
jurisprudence.

The Ulema have divided Islamic teachings into three groups:

**Principles of Faith:** ­ These are the fundamentals which are related
to one's faith, like the belief of God, the resurrection and the Day of
Judgement, the Prophethood, the divine revelation, the Angels, the
Imamat.

**Moral behaviour and ethics:**­ These are aimed at improving human
behaviour and cultivating spiritual aspects of our existence. They deal
with taqwa, Justice, Generosity, Bravery, Patience, Submission to the
Will of Allah, and so on.

**Practical laws:** ­ These deal with the rules and regulations laid
down for certain acts, and also provide guidelines for the way these
acts be performed.

The Fuqaha of Islam have restricted the use of the word Fiqh to the
third category, perhaps because it has been a matter of popular concern,
and that the believer sought such guidance more often. This is why men
of proficiency in this branch of Islamic knowledge only came to be known
as 'Fuqaha'.

Hukm taklifi & Hukm wadh'ee
---------------------------

It is important that we are acquainted with some of the terminologies
used by fuqaha in relation to Islamic laws. The divine laws are divided
by them in two groups: taklifi and wadh'ee. taklifi laws are wajib,
haram, mustahab, makrooh and mubah. These are five aspects of Islamic
laws which a Muslim has to keep in mind while discharging his
obligations.

In Islam, every human act will fall in one of these five categories.
There are acts which are wajib, which must be performed as an
obligation, like the daily prayers, as opposed to those which are haram
and forbidden, like speaking lies, being unjust, intoxication, and so
on. Then there are acts which are optional. They are recommended acts
which are rewarded, but if not performed, no sin is committed. The
example is optional prayers (nafilah) which either precede or follow the
daily prayers.

On the other hand, there are certain unworthy acts, i.e. makrooh, which
a Muslim is advised to avoid, but no sin is committed if he engages in
them, like talking about worldly affairs in the Mosque which is supposed
to be a place of worship. Besides, there are acts which are mubah,
meaning permissible acts, doing or not doing of them does not entail any
reward or punishment.  
 Thus, we see that Taklifi laws are based on 'do's' and 'don'ts',
enjoining, forbidding, or generally permitting a Muslim.

Wadh'ee laws are an amalgam of temporal and divine laws, partly governed
by natural or moral duties, like matrimony, proprietorship, contracts
and so on.

Ta'abbudi and Tawassuli
-----------------------

The obligatory (wajib) acts are of two types: ta'abbudi and tawassuli.  
 Those Wajib acts which must be performed with a vivid and clear
intention (niyyat) of earning the pleasure and proximity of Allah
(qurbat) are ta'abbudi. Such a niyyat is a prerequisite, in absence of
which the act would be considered invalid. The examples are all acts of
worships, like the daily prayers, fasting etc.

But there are other obligations which do not necessarily require the
intention of qurbat for their validity, like obedience to the parents,
fulfilling promises and pledges, honouring the contracts, performing
incumbent social responsibilities and so on.

Ayni & Kifai
------------

Wajib acts have been further classified as Ayni and Kifai:  
 Wajib­e­Ayni are those obligatory acts with which every individual
Muslim is charged, like the daily prayers and fasting during the month
of Ramadhan. But Wajib­e­ Kifai remains a collective obligation on the
general Muslim populace, until it is performed by one or few among them,
thus relieving the rest of the obligation.

Like the social obligations of qualifying as a doctor, becoming a
soldier, a judge, a farmer or a businessman, and in this form of
obligation is included the rituals of Ghusl­e­ Mayyit, kafan and burial
etc.

Ta'yini & Takhyiri
------------------

This is yet another classification of Wajib acts. Wajib­e­Ta'yini
relates to those particular acts which have been specifically identified
as obligatory, like the daily prayers, fasting, Haj, Khums, Zakat, Amir
bil Maroof, Jehad etc. But Wajib­e­Takhyiri offers choice and
alternatives, like in the case of kaffara for a person who has
deliberately left out a fast in the month of Ramadhan. He will either
free a slave, or feed sixty deserving poor, or keep sixty fasts.

Nafsi & Muqaddami
-----------------

In this classification, Nafsi Wajib acts are those which are obligatory
by themselves, and are not a prelude to another obligation. For example,
it is Wajib to rescue a person who is on the verge of being burnt,
drowned or harmed to death.

Muqaddami obligation, besides being Wajib itself, is actually a mean to
performing another Wajib act. For example, it is Wajib to rescue a
person who has fallen into a well, but preparing for the rescue by way
of procuring a rope or any other implement is a Muqaddami Wajib.
Similarly, Haj is a Nafsi Wajib, but attending to its prerequisites like
getting a passport, buying the tickets, and other necessary preparations
will be termed Muqaddami. In the case of the daily prayers, for example,
Wudhu and Ghusl at the time of the prayers would be called Muqaddami.


