Chapter 2: Torture and Prisons Must Be Purged
=============================================

**Chapter 2: Torture and Prisons Must Be Purged**[^1]

Any kind of torture, and however it may be justified, is prohibited and
unequivocally Haram - i.e. unlawful, for Allah has not revealed any
evidence to permit this act at all. Therefore it is imperative that
torture is avoided at all costs, even towards the enemy.

For he who humiliates an individual will not be able to defend and
uphold the dignity of mankind, and he who practices torture, even once,
and yet claims he wants to lead mankind to dignity, his claim is nothing
but absurd and nonsense.

For he not only will not attain such aim, but will stand as a criminal
before Allah Almighty, and will loose all dignity and credibility in
society. There are those who think that if they commit this heinous act,
they will go unnoticed, forgetting Allah's promise

***{And say: Work, for Allah will observe your work, and His Messenger,
and the Believers: and you will be brought back to the Knower of the
unseen and the seen, then will He show you the truth of what you
did.}***[^2]

Torture is an un-Islamic Phenomenon
-----------------------------------

Undoubtedly it is possible to arrive at the truth without resorting to
torture, but through careful investigation of all available evidence, as
well as detailed questioning, as seen in many cases dealt with by the
well-known judicial judgements of Amir-ul-Mu'minin Imam Ali (A)[^3].

This chapter is taken from the author's book “The Dynamics of Change for
the Salvation of Muslims” pp 136-152. The book is addressed to Muslim
reformists and activists who aspire to establish some form of Islamic
government in their homeland. Imam Shirazi emphasises that such groups
must resolutely adhere to the teachings of Islam, whether before they
reach government or after assume office of government.

In accordance with Islam, Imam Shirazi in this work calls upon Muslims
to refrain from violence and adopt peaceful and non-violent means in all
aspects of their conducts and activities, within their group and
without, towards their fellow members, or towards the general public at
large, and even towards their enemies. This work constitutes a “Book of
Conducts” for Islamist political movements.

Another book in this respect is “The Judgement of Amir-ul-Mu'minin (A)”
by Sheikh It may be argued if torture is not exercised against the
criminals, they would not admit the truth, and therefore some of the
truth will remain hidden, as claimed by despots.

The counter argument is that, first it is better for some of the truth
to remain hidden than to violate the human rights of the individual
through torture. Secondly, even with torture some of the truth still
remains hidden, for some of those tortured, falsely admit to things they
have not done to alleviate the torment of torture, which is also hiding
the truth!

Means of discovering the truth
------------------------------

There are various approaches and strategies that may be adopted to
uncover the truth without resorting to torture, despite the complexity
of the cases involved. Arriving at the truth through permissible and
scientific means is possible although it takes time and expertise for
this to be achieved.

### Psycho analysis

A body was discovered in the city of Isfahan, during the governorship of
Hujjatul-Islam Muhammad Baqir al-Shefti. He explored various avenues to
identify the murderer but to no avail. He eventually called upon the
services of an experienced psychoanalyst, who examined the corpse
thoroughly.

He then ordered all the butchers (of the city) to a gathering in the
presence of the governor, and in that gathering he asked them to line up
such that their backs are to the governor. In the end, he told the
butchers, “You can go now.” As they began to walk away, he said, “You!
The murderer, where are you going?” at this moment suddenly one of them
unconsciously turned back. The expert ordered him to be detained, and
when after questioning, it became apparent that he was the murderer.

Afterwards when the psychoanalyst was asked how he arrived at his
conclusion, he said that when he examined the corpse, he noticed traces
on the clothing of the deceased, which were indicative of the murderer
wiping clean the murder knife, and this is the practice of the butchers
when they slaughter a sheep, they wipe clean their knife on the wool of
the animal.

The murderer is aware of his crime but he suppresses his conscience to
keep it hidden, however occasionally the crime is revealed through a
slip of an action if he is caught unawares. Imam Ali (A) is reported as
saying; Muhammad Taqi Kadhem al-Tustari, 1321-1410 H, and also the book
“Astonishing Judgements” by Ibn Abil-Hadid al-Mo'tazili.

“An individual does not intend something unless it shows in the
expressions of his face, or in the slips of his tongue[^4].”

### The rule of repetition and doubt

It is also reported from the reign of governor al-Shefti, that a woman
complained to him that “one of the well-known and influential
individuals has managed to usurp (my) orchard that is adjacent to his
orchard, and as he has the influence and the money, he has made many
people to act as witness that the orchard is his, and all of this was
done in my absence.

Now that I have found out about this, I do not seem to have evidence to
counter his, to prove that the orchard is mine. Do you think you could
do something for me?”

After he satisfied himself of her honesty, governor al-Shefti decided to
pursue the matter further. He first approached the individual concerned
and said to him that this woman claims the orchard is hers, what do you
have to say in this matter? The man refuted the allegation and presented
the papers to prove the property belonged to him, along with the
signatures of numerous witnesses testifying to that effect. The governor
noted the evidence and discharged him.

After a while the governor asked that man “For how much did you buy the
orchard?” and the man replied, “I did not buy the property.” . . .
Sometime later the governor asked the man “Who gave you this orchard?”
and the man replied, “Nobody gave me it.”

On yet another occasion the governor asked the man “Did you inherit it
from your father or from someone else?” and the man replied negative. In
this way and on different occasions the governor continued to ask the
man questions about how came to possess the property, and on each
occasion the man answered negatively without realising the consequences
of his replies.

The set of questions the governor had asked and the set of answers the
man had given proved that he was not the rightful owner of the property.
The governor then turned to the man said “You denied all possible ways
of owning the orchard, so how did you come acquire this orchard?

“The man tried to justify his actions but failed to present a viable
case for his claim, and given the replies he had previously given, it
became apparent that the documents and the witnesses were all false. The
rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings then ordered the
documents to be destroyed, and decreed that the orchard belongs to the
woman unless someone else could prove otherwise.

### Twist and Turn

On the method of investigations by one of the judges, it is reported
that a man came to the judge and said to him, “a friend and I owned some
money that we buried in the vicinity of tree outside the town for safe
keeping.

After a while I needed the money and my friend and I went to the
location to excavate the money, but there was no trace of any money in
the place that we had buried it. I strongly believe that my friend had
taken the money, since no one else knows about the money we had buried
there.”

The judge asked the man if he had any witness or proof for his claim.
The man replied “No. Except that no one else knows about this.” The
judge summoned the friend and asked him about the money and the tree, he
denied all knowledge about them.

The judge then asked the friend to remain there for a while to which he
obliged. The judge then asked the claimant to go to the tree near which
the money was buried and check again. The man said, “What is the use of
this action?”

The judge said, “Perhaps the man who had taken the money changed his
mind and brought the money back or you might find him there, and take
the money from him.” The man was not satisfied with the idea, but did
what the judge had asked him to do. A while after the claimant had left
the judge said to the friend, “It seems that your friend is taking too
long.

“The friend said, “no he is not.” The judge asked “Why not?” the friend
said, “Since the tree is too far out from town.” The judge then turned
to the friend and said, “You have now admitted you know where the tree
is . . . you must now bring forth the money which you had taken
dishonestly.” The man had no choice but to give the money to the judge
as he inadvertently admitted the whereabouts of the tree.

When the claimant returned, the judge told him, “The only reason I asked
you to go to the location of the tree was to give me an opportunity to
question him again and extract the admission from him, and my idea
worked as I planned, and here is your money.”

### Probing and Examination

It is reported that a man came to 'Adhdu-Dawlah al-Buwayhi, and
complained to him saying, I buried some money under a tree outside the
city of Baghdad, and no one saw me doing this. When I returned back to
the location to retrieve the money, there was no trace of it.

Al-Buwayhi asked the man, “do you know what kind of tree it was?” The
man said, “Yes, it was castor-oil tree.”

Al-Buwayhi then summoned the physicians in Baghdad and asked them if
anyone had prescribed roots of castor-oil plant to any of his patients.
One of them said he had done so. Al-Buwayhi asked the physician if he
knew the patient he prescribed the roots. The physician said the patient
was one of the governer's ministers.

Al-Buwayhi summoned the minister concerned and asked if he had been
prescribed castor-oil roots by the physician. The minister confirmed
this and when asked how he obtained the root, he replied that his
servant had acquired it for him. Al-Buwayhi asked for the servant to be
summoned.

Al-Buwayhi: “Did you obtain castor-oil roots for the minister?” Servant:
“Yes, I did.”

Al-Buwayhi: “Where did you get it from?”

Servant: “from a tree in countryside” Al-Buwayhi: “What is the location
of the tree?” The servant gave the precise location of the tree and it
became apparent that they were talking about the same tree. In this way
the servant admitted to digging under the tree without him realising,
and indirectly admitted to taking the money.

Al-Buwayhi said to the servant that you should return the buried money
you found under the tree while you were digging for the roots of the
tree. When all the evidence was out in the open the servant had no
choice but to give back the money, except what had already been spent,
which the owner forgave. In this way Al-Buwayhi managed to unravel the
details of that complicated case in the calm and clever way.

### Insight and Astuteness

In another case for 'Adhdu-Dawlah al-Buwayhi, a businessman came to him
with a complaint. He said to him “I wanted to go to the Hajj pilgrimage
and I had some one thousand gold Dinars to spare, and for safe keeping I
deposited the money with one of the businessmen and left for Hajj. When
I came back from Hajj I asked for the money I had deposited with him,
but he denied all knowledge of this.

Al-Buwayhi said to the man, “All you need to do is go and stand in front
of his shop such that he can see you. I shall arrange for my cortege to
pass through that road and when I see you I shall warmly welcome you and
ask you to come with me to my house, but refuse, and say you have other
business to attend to.”

On the following day the businessman went and stood opposite the shop of
the other businessman and while the other businessman protested him
standing there, he ignored him. At this moment the royal cortege arrived
and when he saw the man standing there,

Al-Buwayhi got off and warmly welcomed him back and asked him to join
him in his cortege, but he refused. Al-Buwayhi insisted that he come to
his house but, as planned, the man refused the offer. Al-Buwayhi asked
the man if he needed any help, but the man replied negative. After
Al-Buwayhi left the scene, the businessman who had seen what went on
between the two came forward and said to the man standing outside his
shop, “can you remind me what was the sign of your deposit, since I have
forgotten what it was? “

In this way al-Buwayhi managed to help retrieve the man's money from the
other (without resorting to brute force or violent means). Needless to
say there are countless cases in this respect reported in relevant
books, and we only referred to a few of these for the benefit of the
reader.

We mentioned in the books al-Hudood[^5] and al-Qadhaa'[^6] the absolute
illegality of torture, and that under no circumstances does it exist in
the Islamic system of government. We also mentioned there some of the
reported cases and the response and conduct of Prophet Muhammad (S).

One should not think that he could base his approach of uncovering the
truth on torture, and then denounce torture when it suits him.

Exposing Torture and Ill Treatment
----------------------------------

It is imperative to expose torture and any form of ill treatment in
detention. This may be achieved through the publication of millions of
books, and through all the various means.

For torture in prisons, which has become widespread in the prisons of
the Muslim world, in an Islamic country or otherwise, is a despicable
and abhorrent act and must not be allowed to continue.

Torture weakens the determination and the will of the people to topple
the despot ruling their country. Imprisonment may not have as much of an
effect as torture, people may tolerate imprisonment but not torture,
whether physical or mental has detrimental effect on them. This is why
many colonial governments, such as Britain, USA, France, Russia, and
China, as well as their puppets ruling other countries used torture in
order to hold a tight grip on power in Muslim countries.

It is therefore imperative that the Muslims expose the practice of
torture in their countries so that this may lead to salvation of the
Muslims and their countries. When the government of Gamal Abdul-Nasser
fell, the Muslims in Egypt made a limited effort to expose the routine
use of torture by his regime, which in turn led to the demise of the
notion of nationalism - which was instigated by him - in Egypt as well
as in all other Arab countries; the fall of his regime was like that of
the tyrannical regime of the Umayyad dynasty,

which fell thirteen centuries ago and its reputation never recovered. In
this way means of holding on to power must be removed from the hands of
a tyrant ruler. Although torture is still practiced in Egypt, it is to a
lesser extent than that which leads to Nasser's disgrace.

No to Prisons and Detention Centres
-----------------------------------

Just as it is absolutely imperative upon reformists to refrain from
torture, it is equally imperative to reduce prisons and prisoners
numbers to the least amount possible, since not only is it suppression
of freedom of the individuals, it is also illegal in the Islamic
Shari'ah, for prison is a prime example of manifestation of suppression
of freedom.

It is not rational that one who calls for Islam, would act in opposition
to Islam on one of its important rulings. Furthermore, prison entails
much damage and harm (to the society) for which nothing can compensate,
and one may not resort to it except for the most urgent exceptional
circumstances, and given the priority of the issue involved. In those
cases, the following must be noted:

The number of days imprisoned,

The reason for imprisonment

The severity of imprisonment

The continuation of imprisonment

Who is imprisoned in Islam

We reported in some of our investigations in the Fiqh[^7] that those who
are imprisoned in Islam are not more than twenty cases[^8], all of whom
had

The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings committed 'real'
crime, and not crime as defined by man-made laws.

Needless to say that more than ninety percent of those who are
imprisoned in our world today, are sent to jail for violating laws which
were laid down by a despot, or by his ministers, or by his revolutionary
command council, or in the best case scenario, by freely elected
parliament - the like of which does not exist in the Islamic world
today. Therefore most of those imprisoned today must not be punished
according to Islamic teachings, as Islam does not see their acts as
crime. In other words they are criminals before the law of man and not
necessarily before the law of God.

Needless to say that there have been many occasions when the law devised
by freely elected parliaments were later shown to be against the general
interest of future generations, and therefore revised or abandoned.

As for the nature of prisons at the time of leaders of Islam, it is
reported that Imam Ali (A) used to construct the prison from the
leafless branches of palm tree, were it not for the prisoners managing
to escape from their cells, the prison construction would have stayed
the same.

The Disadvantages of Prisons
----------------------------

The harm and the damages of imprisonment can be seen in various domains;
such as political, social, economic, educational, health, etc.

### Political Harm

Imprisonment causes psychological complexes for the prisoner, which in
turn brings about his hatred towards the people and the state. As for
the state, he would regard it as an oppressive and tyrannical force, and
on this basis he would act to destroy anything that is associated with
it and bring about its downfall.

As for the people, a complex-driven individual would dislike all the
people since he considers them as having failed to help him, for it is
rare that a criminal considers himself of being guilty. For example a
thief considers himself as being forced to steal since he did not have
enough money to live on, whereas he see the rich steal the money of the
poor through phoney laws.

Such as the Usurper of others' property, he who betrays something given
to him in trust for safe keeping by denying it, negligent physicians, he
who does not pay for his wife's expenses, giving false alibi.

Other political disadvantages of imprisonment are: some of the prisoners
would train others in crime, corruption, mischief, etc. since, given the
extra time they have in prison, each will convey their experience in
crimes to other prisoners, and this is seen in most prisons throughout
the world.

### Social Harm

As for social harm, they are numerous too:

1. the prisoner thinks that he has fallen from the community, and that
society has expelled him, and for such reasons he turns against society
in all his conducts, and therefore he turns from being a useful member
of society to a harmful one.

2. imprisonment of the head of a family is not without effect on the
family, for the family is affected socially, materially and
psychologically, and may fall from being dignified members of society.

3. both sides of the family may suffer from or fall into immoral
conducts concerning sexual matters. The prisoner has his own sexual
needs and consequently, may fall into practicing homosexual acts. As for
the family of prisoner, they too may engage in immoral sexual practices
to satisfy their sexual needs, if not to earn means of living.

### Economic Harm

As for economic harm, this is caused by the inability of the prisoner to
engage in his normal occupation to earn his living. Not only has he not
earned the money he usually generates, but the family loses that income
too, which in turn lead the family to poverty and its dire consequences.
We have in a hadith, “Poverty is a shame in both worlds[^9]” And it is
reported that Abu Tharr al-Ghifari[^10] said, “it bewilders me how the
poor do not revolt against the rich with their swords.”

i.e. in this world and in the hereafter. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p 30
Abu Dharr al-Ghefari was one of the most prominent and loyal companions
of Prophet Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih, who was known for his
sincerity and honesty. After the death of the Prophet, he also became
known for his brave criticism of wrong actions or policies of the
government, and for his standing up to tyrant and despot rulers of his
time.

### Educational Harm

In this respect, the prisoner could potentially be denied the
opportunity to continue his studies and graduate from university. The
consequences of this is twofold; first it causes his failure in society,
where he sees his colleagues have successfully managed to graduate from
universities, which in turn could bring about his hatred towards
society, and therefore create his desire to seek revenge from it.
Secondly it brings down the general level of education in society, and
enhances ignorance and immorality in the society.

### Health Harm

As for health harm, this is as a result of the anxieties and
psychological complexes that he may develop, for they develop into
physical and mental illnesses, and it is proven that mental illness
could lead to physical illness and vice versa. Other examples of health
harm are the anger a prisoner creates amongst his relatives when they
see his state, depression, and anxieties,

the problems caused amongst the prisoners themselves, since they become
more irritable when they lose hope of life and aspiration, the spread of
drug abuse inside prisons, and its consequences, the spread of gambling
inside the prison, since they have much time to kill, causing further
anxiety, and hatred.

### Other harmful effects of imprisonment

Imprisonment could cause other personal and social harms that are
interlinked to each other. For example since a significant majority of
the prison inmates are young, a generation will be brought up with
violence, crime, corruption and this could be very damaging to society
as a whole.

There are also administrative and financial costs to imprisonment such
as:

the time, money, and effort wasted in managing a prison system, the
inflation of government's bureaucracy for managing it, the fact that
most of those who go to prison are from the poor, since the rich,
firstly do not usually need to engage in such criminal activities such
as theft, and secondly, if they are sentenced to a prison sentence, they
usually manage to buy their way out of prison. Therefore the prison is
an additional means of oppression upon the poor; for the society brought
about his poverty in the first place and then imprisoned him!

In addition to the harms of prison cited above, there is the time wasted
by the relatives of the prisoner to visit him and the effort involved in
this process, whereas they could spend that time and effort for the good
of the community. Of course the list for the harmful consequences goes
on, which would make a massive book if we were to go into details.

Therefore all such issues must be taken into account when considering
the need for imprisonment, and the latter should only be taken up when
in absolute emergency and no better alternative is available.

[^1]: This chapter is taken from the author’s book “The Dynamics of
Change for the Salvation of Muslims” pp 136-152. The book is addressed
to Muslim reformists and activists who aspire to establish some form of
Islamic government in their homeland. Imam Shirazi emphasises that such
groups must resolutely adhere to the teachings of Islam, whether before
they reach government or after assume office of government. In
accordance with Islam, Imam Shirazi in this work calls upon Muslims to
refrain from violence and adopt peaceful and non-violent means in all
aspects of their conducts and activities, within their group and
without, towards their fellow members, or towards the general public at
large, and even towards their enemies. This work constitutes a “Book of
Conducts” for Islamist political movements.

[^2]: The Holy Qur'an: Repentance (9): 105

[^3]: Many scholars have written specific books about the judicial
judgement of Amir-ul- Mu'minin (A) or have allocated significant
sections of their books about this issue. Some of the books are Bihar
al-Anwar; by al-Majlisi, Ma'adin al-Jawahir; by Ibn Abil-Hadid,
Madinat-ul-Ma'ajiz; by al-Bahrani, etc. The first person to write about
this topic is Obaydullah ibn Abi Rafi', secretary of Amir-ul-Mu'minin
Imam Ali (A) during his entire reign. Ibn Abi Rafi' is the first who
wrote about the battles, skirmishes and excursions, and he died in 100
Hijra, and the title of his book is “Judgements of Amir-ul-Mu'minin
(A)”.

[^4]: The governor Nahj-al-Balaghah, Short Words of Wisdom; 526

[^5]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, volumes 87-88

[^6]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, volumes 84-85

[^7]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, volume 100, The Rights, pp 348 - 354.

[^8]: Such as the Usurper of others’ property, he who betrays something
given to him in trust for safe keeping by denying it, negligent
physicians, he who does not pay for his wife’s expenses, giving false
alibi.

[^9]: i.e. in this world and in the hereafter. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69,
p 30

[^10]: Abu Dharr al-Ghefari was one of the most prominent and loyal
companions of Prophet Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih, who was
known for his sincerity and honesty. After the death of the Prophet, he
also became known for his brave criticism of wrong actions or policies
of the government, and for his standing up to tyrant and despot rulers
of his time.


