Chapter 3: Islamic Penal Law - Criteria For Implementation
==========================================================

**Chapter 3: Islamic Penal Law - Criteria For Implementation**[^1]

Introduction
------------

It is the responsibility of society that anyone who suffers from any
illness, physical or mental, receives the required treatment, even if
the individual concerned caused his own illness. Equally, it is the
responsibility of society (towards a criminal) to rehabilitate him.
Therefore any punishment must be based upon two related issues:

Protecting society from the reoccurrence of crime, Rehabilitating the
criminal as far as possible. Muslims use the laws that are based on
Islamic teachings, and they may not make laws that are in contradiction
to those teachings. The Muslim judge may therefore legislate within the
framework of Islamic teachings.

The judge may prescribe the punishments for those offences that have not
specifically been outlined in Islamic Shari'ah. He may prescribe the
penalties for offences relating to 'secondary' laws, such as traffic
regulations. [These regulations are implemented on the basis of the
principle “no harm may reach anyone[^2]”]. Also a judge may, for
example, prescribe the penalties for the employee who is in breach of
his employment contract.

According to Islamic law, punishment may be classified into two groups:

Those defined by Islamic law, known as Hadd [plural Hodud][^3]. Those
not specifically defined by Islamic law. This category of punishment is
referred to as Ta'zir. A judge may prescribe the Ta'zir punishment
either for offences for which no specific punishment has been prescribed
in Islamic law (such as defrauding, e.g. giving short measure), or for
secondary offences such as traffic law violation. The rights of
prisoners according to Islamic teachings prescription of the Ta'zir
punishment is made on the basis of the criteria detailed in Islamic law.

The author has detailed in some other of his works[^4] that those acts
that are defined as 'offences' under Islamic law are far less than those
defined under man-made law found in western democracies. The ratio is 1
to 100 or even less. This is because of the vast number of freedoms that
are naturally available under Islamic law (but are suppressed under
man-made laws). Only those acts are punishable if they are recognised as
offences under Islamic law. Furthermore, Islamic punishment for
'recognised' offences can only be implemented under an Islamic system,
as discussed in the book “The Process of Change[^5].”

Otherwise how can a thief be expected not to steal when he is hungry and
cannot find the means of feeding himself? Or how can one who commits
illegal sex be expected not to do so when he cannot afford to marry?
Allah states in the Qur'an:

***{On no soul does Allah place a burden greater than it can
bear***[^6]***.}***  
***{Allah puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given
him***[^7]***.}***  
***{Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden greater than we have strength to
bear***[^8]***.}***

Therefore as far as the offences that take place under non-Islamic
environments are concerned; no punishment may be carried for some of
them, [and some form of punishment, lesser than the prescribed ones -
Hadd - may be handed down for others]. An example of the first category
is the case of stealing and eating others' food during a famine. Another
example is the case of the woman who was impelled to commit adultery.
[In the case of the second category,] offences may carry some form of
preventative punishment as seen fit by the judge. This is in cases where
an individual had the opportunity to refrain from committing an offence,
or could have committed a lesser offence when he was compelled to do so
in a given situation.

Under an Islamic system, the government provides the Islamic freedoms
such as those in agriculture, manufacturing, trade, education, and
freedom in procuring and utilising the earth and its resources. Under
such a system, one is able to earn his living honourably.

He is able to provide food and shelter for himself. He is able to marry
and provide for his family. Those who are unable to provide for
themselves are supported by the public fund. The (social) environment
upholds the moral and ethical conducts and does not corrupt the
individual through encouraging seduction and promiscuity, consumption of
alcohol, broadcasting sex programs, etc. (hence) luring the individual
to corruption in various forms. Workers earn decent levels of income and
their rights are not violated.

The environment should not be such that workers are forced to work day
and night only to get less than their right, as detailed in the book,
Economics[^9]. It is under such a system, which is positive in one way
and negative in another (i.e. the freedom of many rights and the denial
of some others), that the religious law considers the thief guilty. It
considers those who gamble, commit adultery as offenders. They will then
be dealt with according to the prescribed punishments.

However, if the law of the land legalises the production, sale and
serving of alcohol, prostitution, homosexuality, and other immoral
conducts, then those who engage in such conducts may not be prosecuted
under Islamic law. If one is unable to earn a living and subsequently
resorts to either stealing or other immoral means of earning, such as
prostitution, in such cases Islamic punishment may not be carried out.
Otherwise it will be against the teachings of the Qur'an, the
Sunnah[^10], the consensus of the scholars, and reason:

The Holy Qur'an states ***{except under compulsion of
necessity***[^11]***}.*** The Prophet Muhammad (S) is quoted as saying;
“(in) nine cases my people would be excused[^12].”

Doesn't the consensus of the scholars agree with this? Doesn't reason
point to the necessity of the duties and obligations being humane? In
addition to the general principles which makes it evident that Islam is
a religion or a “set of teachings” to facilitate and make life easy for
mankind, Allah states, ***{Allah intends every facility for you. He does
not want to put you to difficulties***[^13]***.}***

Imam Sadiq alayhis-salam states, “Our followers are in a greater
opportunity (facility) than what is between the heaven and the
earth[^14].” However, the conduct of the ignorant and the greedy
individuals in power reduces and narrows down, if not eliminates, the
opportunities available to mankind. The contradictions of those who
claim to be Islamic governments may be as follows:

under repressive and un-Islamic laws, and in inappropriate environments
(from the Islamic point of view) they implement the punishments
prescribed for a truly Islamic system[^15]. This (policy) presents Islam
as a repulsive executioner, which drives people away from Islam.

Secondly, they carry out those punishments while preconditions for their
implementation are not met, as prescribed in jurisprudence texts[^16].

Thirdly they go further to prescribe other forms of punishments,
penalties, as well as torture and imprisonment (under the banner of
Islam) whereas there is no evidence for such measures anywhere in the
four sources[^17] of Islamic jurisprudence, but in fact the four sources
are totally against such measures.

Such conducts by governments who carry 'Islamic' labels have depicted
Islam as a brutal and oppressive regime. Islamic penal law - criteria
for implementation Criteria for executing the penal law Penal laws may
only be executed if all pre-requisites and criteria for implementing the
Islamic penal system are met, otherwise the pre-defined punishment - the
Hadd - may not be carried out. Furthermore, all aspects of the social
environment, the offender, and the offence must be taken into account
before it is permissible to execute the Islamic penal code. Some of
those criteria and considerations are:

Correctness and validity of the ruling government, Circumstances of the
offender and the offence, Validity of the offence under Islamic law.
Correctness and validity of Government A corrupt government lures the
people into crime, as the Arabic saying goes: “people follow the conduct
of their leaders”.

Religious scholars have pointed out that the criterion for the
leadership of government is being a Marje' (religious authority), since
the Marje' is the representative of the Imam al-Mahdi
alayhis-salam[^18]. The author has also discussed the necessity of
establishing a Council for religious authorities, if there were more
than one Marje' which is often the case[^19]. The criteria for the
Marje' are such aspects as knowledge, expertise, ability, faith, and
being a practising Muslim, as detailed in the book of Taqleed[^20].
Therefore the government may only be led by those who are sincere and
qualified to do so. Allah states in the Qur'an:

***{O you who believe! Why say you that which you do not? Grievously
odious is it in the sight of Allah that you say that which you do
not***[^21]***.}*** Furthermore, Allah states in the Qur'an:

***{My Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers***[^22]}, See
Islamic system of government by the author for more details. Here the
author refers to the 12th Imam who has been appointed by the Prophet
(S), on instructions from Allah, to lead the Muslims after the Prophet
(S). alayhis-salam (A). This clearly confirms that unjust and corrupt
rulers may never stand to represent the system set out in Islamic
teachings.

A statement in this regard from the Prophet (S) declares, “Curse be upon
those who order others to do good but do not practice it themselves, and
(upon) those who preach others to refrain from evil while they follow
it[^23].”

In one event, someone saw the caliph cutting off the hands of a thief
and said, “the overt thief cuts (the hand of) the covert thief”.
Circumstances of the offender and the offence The act of the offence, as
an act does not warrant punishment until it is associated with the
circumstance of offence.

Some of the criteria for the offender to receive punishment are:
adolescence, sound mind, consciousness, choice, comprehension and that
he is not compelled by any means[^24], to commit that offence.
Otherwise, the underage, the insane, the non-conscious such as the
sleepwalker and the one under the influence of alcohol, the compelled,
the coerced, the one ignorant of the law and occasionally even the one
who knows the law, may not be punished as detailed in jurisprudence
texts.

There are exceptional cases, such as an underage offender who is able to
distinguish, in which case the offender is disciplined in some cases.
Also punishment will be waived in cases where on the basis of “questions
of priorities” offences are committed. For example, in the case of a
ship being in an imminent danger of sinking the cargo is dumped and, as
in the case of the prophet Jonah, even some of the passengers may be
thrown overboard.

(In this event, the prophet Jonah was thrown overboard, as recorded in
history[^25].) Another example is, damaging a ship in order to prevent
it from being confiscated by pirates or despot authorities[^26]. Some
modern schools of thought refer to what we have discussed here on the
personal aspect (of the individual who commits the crime) alongside the
crime itself. Aspects of the crime and the person are not considered
alone, but they are considered together. On this basis, two sets of
dossiers are created for each crime. Furthermore the judge should
co-operate with experts and relevant organisations such as
psychiatrists, social scientists (workers) and charity organisations as
a means to eradicate crime.

It is imperative to eliminate crime and not to antagonise the criminal.
If the offender committed adultery and s/he does not have a partner due
to factors beyond his/her ability, the judge, in co-operation with say,
a marriage agency should arrange for the offender to marry. If the
offender steals because s/he does not have a job, the employment agency
helps the offender to find a job, etc.

There have been many references in the Islamic Shari'ah to the above
criterion (circumstances of the offender and of the offence), which in
fact deserves the compilation of an entire book. Some of those
references are outlined below together with the nature of the
consideration.

References of Circumstance
--------------------------

1. A history of good conduct and behaviour waives or reduces the
punishment: The Prophet (S) used to waive the punishment against those
offenders who generally had had a good code of conduct and behaviour,
for example like the case of Hateb (committing an offence) who also had
a good history of participating in the battle of Badr.

The poor circumstances that drive the offender to offend: For example
the circumstances of Kufa before Imam Ali (A) took office of
government[^27]. Therefore Imam Ali (A) pardoned those who had
(committed certain offences such as) stealing, adultery or sodomy, etc.
and arranged for an adulteress to marry without punishing her, since
they had committed those acts in chaotic and lawless circumstances.

If one commits minor offences but avoids major ones: as stated in the
holy Qur'an:

2. 3. When Imam Ali (A) took office of government, he did not punish
many offenders, if at all, because as a result of the policies of the
previous ruler, there was widespread social injustice and deprivation of
basic rights in the society.

The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings ***{Those who
avoid great sins and shameful deeds, only (falling into) small faults;
verily thy Lord is ample in forgiveness***[^28]***.}***.

The circumstances of priorities: On the basis of this principle the
Prophet (S) pardoned those who had deserted the battle even though
desertion is regarded as a significant offence according to the Qur'an.
Juvenile: As it has been reported “deliberate offence of a juvenile is
(treated as) a mistake (and therefore unpunishable).

The sick (physically and mentally): where the punishment for the sick is
reduced as derived from “And take in thy hand a bundle of (straw)[^29]”
and discussed in details in the book of Hudood[^30] Women: Imam Ali (A)
ordered (his troops) in Basra 54[^31] not to confront women, “even if
you or your leaders were insulted by them.”

The punishment of the parent: A parent may not be punished or prosecuted
by the child. A parent may not be imprisoned for a debt to the child; as
reported in the case of a son who complained about his parent to the
Prophet (S). In a later debate, the Imam (A) said to the enquirer (about
such a case) “Did you ever see (any report that) the Prophet (S)
imprisoned the parent for his debt to his son?[^32]” The punishment of
the slave is less than that of the free, as stated in the Qur'an:

***{ ... when they are taken in wedlock, if they fall into shame, their
punishment is half that for free women. This (permission) is for those
among you who fear sin; but is better for you that ye practise
self-restraint. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful***[^33]***.}***

10. The first offence carries less punishment than the second and so on.
For example, in the case of hunting during the Hajj pilgrimage (to
Makkah), Allah states in the Qur'an:

***{O ye who believe! Kill not game while in the Sacred Precincts or in
pilgrim garb. If any of you does so intentionally, the compensation is
an offering, to the Ka'ba, of a domestic animal equivalent to the one he
killed, as adjudged by two just men among you; or by way of
compensation, the feeding of the indigent; or its equivalent in fasts;
that he may taste of the penalty of his deed. Allah forgives what is
past: for repetition Allah will exact from him the penalty. For Allah is
Exalted, and Lord of Retribution***[^34]***.}***

11. The severity of punishment is more during 'favourite' circumstances
than during 'poor' circumstances, therefore the punishment of the
married adulterer is more severe than that of the unmarried one.

12. Compelling circumstances: In such a circumstance Imam Ali (A) waived
the punishment against a woman who was compelled to commit adultery.

13. A case of mistake, where, say, a man commits adultery with a woman
thinking that she is his wife. For example he may mistake his wife's
sister for his wife.

14. Reduced level of punishment for women: For example a woman is not
killed if she commits apostasy. The difference between this and the
example of a previous case (no. 7) is that the previous case was
concerned with Ta'zir punishment and in this case it is concerned with
Hadd punishment.

15. Punishment may not be carried out in certain places such as in enemy
land, or in the Holy Mosque (in Makkah). For example when someone
commits an offence and seeks refuge in a holy mosque.

16. Punishment may not be carried out at certain times, e.g. punishing a
thief when there is a famine.

17. Punishment may not be carried out when there is doubt. The Prophet
(S) said, “punishments are waived by doubt (or uncertainties).” This
concerns any aspect of the case; whether the judge, the witness or the
offender.

18. Punishment my not be carried out in extreme weather conditions, i.e.
when it is very hot or very cold.

19. “The establishment of an Islamic government annuls whatever preceded
it.” as reported from Imam Ridha, (A).

20. “Islam annuls whatever preceded it.” i.e. one may not be punished
for offences (committed) before becoming Muslim.

21. “Iman annuls whatever preceded it.”, i.e. one may not be punished
for offences committed before guidance to the teachings of
Ahl-ul-Bayt[^35].

22. If one commits a 'good' deed, it annuls a 'bad' one, as stated by
some of the scholars of Islamic jurisprudence.

In a report, Imam Sadiq (A) narrates that during the government of Imam
Ali (A), a man was brought to him on suspicion of murder. He was found
in a derelict place holding a bloodstained knife, and standing next to a
slain man in a pool of blood. Imam Ali (A) asked the man “what do you
have to say?” The man replied, “I killed him.”

Imam Ali ordered him to be detained. When he was taken away, another man
rushed to Imam Ali (A) and said, “I killed the man.” Imam Ali (A) said
to the first man “what made you confess to the murder?”

The man replied “I could not have said (otherwise) when these people had
seen me with a bloodstained knife in my hand standing next to a slain
man in a pool of blood. I admitted this in fear of being beaten to make
the confession. In fact I had just slaughtered a sheep nearby. As I
needed to pass water I went to that derelict place, where I noticed the
murdered man and I went to take a closer look. At that moment these
people arrived and saw me at the scene.”

Imam Ali (A) said take these two to (Imam) Hassan (A) and ask him for
the ruling for their case. After hearing their stories, Imam Hassan (A)
said, tell Amir-ul-Mu'minin (Imam Ali (A)) that: “If he (the second man)
killed the man, he also gave life to this man (the first man). Allah the
Almighty says (in the Qur'an):

***{ ... And if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life
of the whole people***.} [^36]

Therefore they both go free and the blood money for the killed man is
taken from the public fund (the treasury).

These are some of the many examples that can be found within the Islamic
jurisprudence, Teachings of the Prophet (S) and (Islamic) history.

Validity of the Offence under Islamic Law
-----------------------------------------

The third aspect, which must be taken into account if the Islamic penal
code were to be carried out, is that the committed act must be regarded
as an offence under Islamic law. As mentioned previously, Islam does not
consider as an offence, most of what is defined an offence under-man
made law.

Anyone who would take an inquisitive look into the courts-of- law and
prisons in the democratic countries reveals this truth. Tens of
thousands of people who are convicted in the courts-of-law and therefore
imprisoned would neither be tried nor imprisoned under an Islamic
system.

And if, one day, an Islamic system of government is established, there
will be no trace of those courts of law, prisons or the prisoners. We
shall mention 100 aspects (of man-made laws) the violation of which
results in prosecution, whereas Islam considers all of them to be legal
and the human right of the individual whether a Muslim or not.

This is of course in relation to the so-called free and democratic
countries. As for the so-called third world countries, which include the
Muslim countries, the situation is worse.

These issues, which we shall mention here, are free in Islam but
restricted (to various degrees) under man-made laws in that if one
violates those restrictions, they will be prosecuted. These issues are
freedom[^37]:

• of buying [^38],

• of selling,

• of loan security,

• of surety,

• to make a deposit (of any kind) for safekeeping,

• to make any new kind of contract not prohibited by Islamic
jurisdiction,

• of bail,

• of arbitration or settlement,

• of insurance,

• of forming a partnership,

• The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings of investment
(Mudahrabah)[^39],

• of farming investment[^40],

• of irrigation investment[^41],

• to procure the land (for any kind of development)[^42],

• to procure anything permissible[^43],

• of borrowing,

• of letting,

• to make a power of attorney,

• to make an endowment,

• benevolent or trust fund,

• to give alms to charity,

• to make a gift,

• to make a conditional or unconditional donation,

• of abode,

• of time-limited abode,

• of racing,

• of archery,

• to make a will,

• for men and women to marry either long term or temporarily,

• to divorce,

• to exercise Khol'a[^44] divorce,

• of breast-feeding,

• to travel,

• to settle in a place,

• to open a shop,

• of admission (of guilt),

• to give prizes etc. to the winner of a competition,

• of publishing,

• in the amount of dowry and other particulars of marriage, to practise
any desired vocation, to pursue useful knowledge with the result of
becoming a doctor, engineer, lawyer, or political or economic expert or
otherwise or to become a religious scholar or lecturer or writer etc, of
responsibility or promise of oath, of vows,

• to exercise the right of pre-emption, to partake of permitted food in
any way desired, to revive the barren land[^45],

• of inheritance (in that the legacy belongs to the inheritor according
to the rules explained by the emissary of Allah - according to Islamic
law. The Prophet (S) said: “Whoever dies leaving a family with no
guardian then it (their welfare) is my responsibility, and whoever dies
leaving wealth behind then it belongs to the heir”.[^46]

• This is in contrast to the man-made laws, which can make up to ninety
per cent of the legacy to go to the government, as it is well known), to
consult any legal judge[^47], to testify (in front of a particular
judge) and seek the testimony of others, to demand blood money, or
punishment or to forgive, to practise agriculture,

• to manufacture, of construction, for a person to be without
nationality or identity or other formalities that are commonplace now,
to publish a newspaper,

• to publish a magazine, to own a radio broadcasting station, to own a
television broadcasting station, of action,

• to express an opinion, of meeting or gathering, to form a trade union,
to form associations, to form organisations,

• to form a political party, to elect 71, of governorship, of
guardianship or of religious leadership, to make or accept an envoy or
representation or ambassador to choose any occupation in the civil
service,

• from being monitored by the government using spying or phone tapping
equipment or by a secret police, to give birth to any number of
children,

• for a man to marry up to the limit of four on a permanent basis or
more on a temporary basis,

• of beliefs; Allah Almighty has said: 'There is no compulsion in
religion', of type of food and drink consumed and clothes worn etc, to
come and go from one's house at any time of day or night,

• to build mosques,

• to build schools,

• to build religious centres,

• to build hospitals,

• to build clinics,

• to build publishing houses,

• to build cultural establishments,

• to build hostels and hotels,

• to build maternity units,

• to build old peoples’ houses,

• to set up banks,

• to join a students' union,

• for a person to leave any institution or position of employment, to
furnish a house or shop in any way, to select any type of vehicle
required, of (any deal or contract) interaction with others, to make or
accept a loan,

• to grant the custody of any endowment or entailed estate to anyone, to
choose a name for himself or for a place associated with him, to set up
poultry farms, to follow the rulings of any competent religious
authority desired, to choose any lecturer or preacher desired, to record
any contract with any religious scholar.

• There is no age limit for individuals to vote or take part in any
election, i.e. children have the right to take part in elections too.

We have referred to some of them in details in the book “The New Order
for the World of Faith, Freedom, Prosperity and Peace”.

The one hundred issues mentioned above are free in the Islamic framework
but are restricted under man-made law, and violation of these
restrictions would result in prosecution and imprisonment. If these one
hundred issues are multiplied by the number of violations that could be
committed, as an example we shall mention only ten possible violations
here, then there would be one thousand cases in which one would be
liable to prosecution and imprisonment.

The ten possible violations of the imposed restrictions may be due to
the individual's ignorance; forgetfulness; mistake by not applying for a
permit, say in time; temptation and encouragement, by a person, to
counterfeit it; not thinking it being necessary, from the religious view
point, to comply with the restriction; not getting the chance to do it;
not setting high priority for it; not being possible for him to do it;
being prevented from doing it by government (for any reason); or due to
exceptional circumstances e.g. his life being in danger.

So as can be seen from the above, these are one thousand violations in
not applying for a permit. Assuming that each of these violations were
committed by, say 10 individuals, then there would be ten thousand
individuals who would be taken to the courts of law and either
imprisoned or fined. All of this is clearly accompanied by wastage of
time and money as well as insult to the dignity of the individual. This
is in addition to the swelling of bureaucracies and the personnel
recruited to administer them, which are in turn a great burden on the
public purse (to say the least).

When can prescribed punishments be carried out? Islam only permits the
execution of punishment after achieving and securing the health and
safety of the society, as seen from Qur'anic verses and Prophetic
traditions; for example Allah states:

***{and do no mischief on the earth after it has been set in
order}***[^48]

In a hadith[^49], it is reported, “Government and Hodud are for the Imam
of the Muslims[^50]” which means that during the circumstances and time
of the presence of the (infallible) Imam of the Muslims the rules of
Islam may be executed, and the significance of the presence of the Imam
of the Muslims means he is authorised to establish the rule of Islam. It
is clear the rule of Islam is only established when all freedoms are
made available to the masses and everyone is able to achieve whatever
s/he wants in terms of knowledge, wealth, position, etc. according to
their ability and expertise, in order to attain a prosperous life
befitting their life and dignity.

For if the atmosphere and political/social/economic environment is not
Islamic, and if one is not able to obtain enough income to lead a decent
life, how can his hand be cut off for stealing? If he cannot find enough
money to get married, how can he be lashed (for committing adultery)? If
alcohol and decadence is freely available in the country, how can he who
indulges in them face the Hadd? Needless to say if one admits to
stealing, and gives back the good, his hand would not be cut off.

Henceforth, we have in hadith “(embracing) Islam annuls all previous
practices (of the new Muslim[^51])” and “Iman annuls previous
practices[^52]”. It is also applicable, as it can be concluded from
other hadith, that “the assumption of the office of government by a just
ruler annuls all previous practices (of illegal acts committed by
individuals.)”.

This is in addition to the invalidity of coercion that, as the author
has mentioned in his works on Islamic jurisprudence, includes to the
social/environmental coercion, as well as to coercion on the individual
personally. There are also the exceptional circumstances of
'desperation', 'not knowing', and 'not being able[^53]'. Furthermore we
have the principle decreed by the Prophet (S),

“The Hudood (punishments) are waived by uncertainties[^54].”

[^1]: This chapter is taken from the author's al-Fiqh series, vol. 100,
book of “Rights”, pp 454- 476.

[^2]: This principle is based on the Prophet Muhammad statement: “No
(one may) harm nor (be) harmed in Islam.” See Man la Yahdharuh-ul-Faqih,
vol. 4, p 224.

[^3]: The author has mentioned, in his books on jurisprudence that the
head of state (of an Islamic state who is a Marje' or religious
authority) has the authority to waive such punishment if it is prudent
to do so. See the book of Hodud & Ta'zirat, volumes 87-88 of the al-Fiqh
series, and the Islamic system of government by the author.

[^4]: M. Shirazi, “The New Order for the World of Faith, Freedom,
Prosperity & Peace”, and “We want it an Islamic government”.

[^5]: Under an Islamic system of government and environment, one is
given all the possible opportunities to attain one's goals and
aspirations, and therefore one would not usually be in a position to
need to commit crime or any illegal act.

[^6]: The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 286.

[^7]: The Holy Qur'an: Divorce (65): 7.

[^8]: The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 286.

[^9]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, volumes 107-108, Economics.

[^10]: Sunnah meaning the teachings and traditions of the holy Prophet
Muhammad salla-llahu- alayhi-wa-aalih (S), meaning Allah's peace and
blessings be upon him and his pure progeny. It is a mark of piety and
devotion in Islam to use this salutation when mentioning the name of the
holy Prophet Muhammad.

[^11]: The Holy Qur'an: The Livestock (6): 119.

[^12]: (These are when they:) make a mistake, forget, do not know,
cannot bear, are forced (by circumstances), were coerced (by others),
(expectation of) bad omen, devilish insinuation when thinking about
existence and creation, and envy, if it does not manifest in the tongue
or hand.” See al-Khisal, p 417; al-Kafi, vol. 2, p 463, and al-Wasa'el,
vol. 11, p 295.

[^13]: The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 185.

[^14]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p 409

[^15]: Islamic punishment may only be carried out if an Islamic system
has been established in every domain: socially, politically,
economically, etc.

[^16]: E.g. preconditions for punishing a thief under an Islamic system
of government are more than 40, all of which must first be
simultaneously met before qualifying for carrying out the Islamic
punishment. - M. Shirazi, “The Process of Change”, pp 448-451.

[^17]: They are the Qur'an, the Sunnah, consensus (of the scholars) and
reason.

[^18]: It is a mark of piety and devotion in Islam to use this
salutation when mentioning the name of one of the impeccable Imams of
the Ahl-ul-Bayt.

[^19]: Mortadha Shirazi, “Council of Religious Scholars” - Showra
alfoqaha.

[^20]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vol. 1 “Ijtihad and Taqleed”.

[^21]: The Holy Qur'an: The Array (61): 2-3

[^22]: The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 124.

[^23]: Wasa'el al-Shi'a, vol. 16, p 151

[^24]: taking into account the priorities of the circumstances.

[^25]: The Holy Qur'an: The Arrays (37): 142. See also the Bible: Jonah,
1: 15.

[^26]: The Holy Qur'an: The Cave (18): 71.

[^27]: When Imam Ali (A) took office of government, he did not punish
many offenders, if at all, because as a result of the policies of the
previous ruler, there was widespread social injustice and deprivation of
basic rights in the society.

[^28]: The Holy Qur'an: The Star (53): 32.

[^29]: The Holy Qur'an: (The letter) S (38): 44.

[^30]: M. Shirazi, al-Fiqh series, vols. 87-88, Hudud & Ta'zeerat.

[^31]: This is in reference to the Battle of Camel, which 'Aesha
spearheaded against Imam Ali alayhis-salam, the successor of Prophet
Muhammad salla-llahu-alayhi-wa-aalih.

[^32]: al-Kafi, vol. 5, p 136

[^33]: The Holy Qur'an: Women (4): 24.

[^34]: The Holy Qur'an: The Table Spread (5): 95.

[^35]: Ahl-ul-Bayt, literally meaning house members, refers to the pure
or Ma’soom progeny of the holy prophet Muhammad. They are the holy
prophet Muhammad, his daughter Fatima al- Zahra’, and the twelve Imams
or caliphs (successors of the prophet).

[^36]: The Holy Qur'an: The Table Spread (5): 32.

[^37]: The freedom of the individual in engaging in any of the above are
restricted in western democracies in one form or another, for example by
the imposition of taxes, charges, stamp duties, or the need to seek
permission form the authorities, etc. whereas no such restrictions are
permissible under Islam. needless to say, there are few activities that
are classified as illegal such as production or sale of alcohol, and
gambling.

[^38]: i.e. no value added tax (VAT) or any other form of taxation is
levied on goods in Islam.

[^39]: Mudahrabah is a business scheme where one party contributes the
capital, and the other the labour or expertise, and the profit or loss
of the venture is divided between them according to a previously agreed
ratio.

[^40]: This scheme is similar to that above with difference that one
party provides the farmland and the other the workforce. Similarly the
profit or loss of the venture is divided between them according to a
previously agreed ratio.

[^41]: This scheme is similar to that above with difference that one
party provides the farm and the other agrees to irrigate it. The profit
or loss of the venture is divided between them according to a previously
agreed ratio.

[^42]: ... without the need for any permission from any authority.

[^43]: ... e.g. fishing, mining, etc. without the need for any
permission from any authority.

[^44]: This kind of divorce is initiated by the wife.

[^45]: Without the need for any permission to do so from any authority
or for any payment in exchange for the use or possession of that land.

[^46]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p 406.

[^47]: For example to have his case dealt with a particular judge rather
than other judges.

[^48]: The Holy Qur'an: The Heights (7): 85.

[^49]: A hadith is a statement of the prophet Muhammad or one of the
Imams of the Ahl-ul-Bayt.

[^50]: Wasa'el al-Shi'a, vol. 18, section 13, p 7.

[^51]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 40, p. 235. The words in brackets are
included for clarity. Translator

[^52]: Here Iman means adhering to the teachings of the Ahl-ul-Bayt
peace be upon them

[^53]: This is in reference to hadith “(in) nine cases my people would
be excused.” given earlier.

[^54]: These uncertainties could be associated with either the judge or
the defender.


