Chapter 4: Rights of a Prisoner
===============================

**Chapter 4: Rights of a Prisoner**[^1]

The prisoner is a human being, and s/he has the dignity and freedom, as
defined by Allah the Almighty. Normally the prison sentence should carry
as little hardship as possible while it can still be called a prison
sentence, as “necessity is relative”[^2] , i.e. it is judged
accordingly. Whether the individual is being sentenced according to
Islamic law, where there are rare cases for imprisonment, or man-made
law as currently practised, the authorities must ensure that the
prisoner is treated according to his human dignity.

Under current prison regimes, two illegal practices are being committed,
the prison concept itself, and the criteria and conditions of prisons.

If the government is committing the first, at least it should ensure
that the second is not practised, i.e. the circumstances of the crime
and the criteria for the crime and imprisonment must be observed and
taken into account.

It is imperative to treat the prisoner as a free individual with the
exception of being confined to prison. This may be achieved with the
following measures, some of which are manifested in some of the
international convention for prisons, and these measures are derived
from Shari'ah laws which are on the basis of the principle “people have
dominion upon their wealth and their selves[^3]”:

The prisoner may choose to engage in all dealings and transactions
inside the prison or outside it, personally or through an agent, or by
telephone. These dealings could be of any nature such as sale, buying,
loan, letting, investments, agriculture, Hawalah (to agree to be
responsible for one's debt) and even Kafalah to be a guarantor for
someone to be released from custody if possible.

Rights of a Prisoner
--------------------

### Marriage

The prisoner may engage in marriage or divorce for himself or for
others, as a representative or guardian, for those inside or outside the
prison. He could also be an agent or a trustee for endowment, charity,
etc.

### Witness

The prisoner may be a witness in person or remotely for those inside or
outside the prison. For those outside, the prisoner may be a witness via
such means as the telephone. An exception, as the author has stated in
jurisprudence texts, is in the case of divorce, if the witnesses are not
physically present at the location of the divorce proceedings, but wish
to take part remotely via such facilities as the telephone.

### Writing, Teaching, Lecturing

The prisoner may engage in public speeches, teaching, writing to the
press, and acting for those inside the prison or outside through various
means such as TV, radio, etc.

### Skills

The prisoner may engage in any profession such as trade, manufacturing,
painting. He may also engage in studying and writing books, etc.

### Sport

Space and facilities for outdoor activities such as sport must be
provided for prisoners.

### Hobbies

The prisoner may decorate his cell with any painting and artefacts,
chandeliers and he may keep domestic or wild animals as pets.

### Family visits

The prisoner's family may visit him at any time they wish. The
prisoner's spouse may also visit and stay with him. It is reported that
Imam Ali (A) allowed the prisoner's family to stay with him. It is also
reported that a woman complained about her husband and sought help from
Imam Ali (A). The husband did not provide sustenance with the intention
to harm

The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings her. Imam Ali
ordered the husband to be imprisoned. The husband asked for his wife to
be with him, and Imam Ali granted him his request. 82

### Segregation

Segregation between prisoners: e.g. men, women and juvenile prisoners if
this does not pose a problem or danger. Dangerous prisoners must be
segregated from the rest of them. Also those prisoners who pose harm to
others such as the mentally ill must be isolated from others. Prisoners
may be accommodated together, for example if different members of a
family wish to be held together then this may be so even if there are
different categories i.e. men, women and children.

### Health and Hygiene

The prisoners must be provided with healthy environments from the point
of view of space, fresh air, lighting, heating, ventilation, suitable
hygienic lavatories, showers, etc. Hot and cold water must be provided
according to the time of the year and the prisoners must have access to
the showers whenever they wish to use them.

### Food and Drink

The prisoner must be provided with food, drink and suitable clothing
throughout the year as well as medical attention and medicine as and
when required. All of this must be provided in the prisoner's comfort.

Imam Sadiq (A) is reported as saying that when Imam Ali (A) was
assassinated by Ibn Moljim, while on his deathbed, Imam Ali (A) said:

“Detain this prisoner, feed him and treat him well while in detention.
If I live I shall deal with him; if I want I shall seek (compensation)
from him, and if I want I shall forgive him and I shall reconcile with
him. But if I die it is up to you. If you decide to kill him do not
mutilate him[^4].” However, it is clear that Imam Ali (A) wished his
followers and next of kin to forgive his killer Ibn Moljim, as the
former is quoted in the Nahj\_ul\_Balaghah[^5]:

***“Until yesterday I was a companion of yours, today I am lesson to
you, and tomorrow I shall leave you. If I survive, I shall be
responsible for my blood [i.e. whether to prosecute or to forgive the
perpetrator], and if I die, death is my destiny. If I forgive,
forgiveness is a means of closeness (to Allah), and it (forgiveness) is
a good deed for you, therefore forgive (him), Don't you love Allah to
forgive you***[^6]***?*** ”

There are exceptional circumstances where the prisoner is subjected to
harsh treatment in an attempt that this hardship will make him
relinquish the rights of others, (which is the outcome in most cases),
when he will be released[^7]. An example of such cases is the dispute
raised by a woman to Imam Ali (A) about her husband. The husband had
stopped his sexual activities with her and at the same time refuses to
divorce her.

The woman wanted her husband to either resume his sexual life with her
or divorce her. It is reported that Imam Ali (A) detained the husband in
a shed and fed him on one quarter of his normal diet in order to make
him divorce his wife. It is clear that this imposed hardship was to make
the husband either resume a normal sexual life with his wife or divorce
her, in either case he would be released from detention[^8]. In another
similar report, unless the husband would resume normal (sexual
relationship with his wife), he would be imprisoned in an enclosure made
of straw, and his food and drink rationed until he divorces (his
wife)[^9].

### Students of the prisoner

If the prisoner was a lecturer, for example, his students should be
allowed to meet him regularly so as to attend his lectures, and or
discuss and debate issues of concern.

### Psychological well-being

If the prisoner suffered from mental disorder, then he must receive
appropriate treatment either in prison or in a specialist hospital if
deemed necessary. It is necessary to make provision for such
facility/environment to help him maintain a healthy state of mind.

### Women prisoners

In women prisons, specific accommodation, facilities, and medical care
must be provided for women to use, similar to any such facilities
outside prison. Similarly if pregnant woman prisoners need medical
facilities not available in prison, they must be transferred to
maternity hospital to give birth. They must be provided with the care
and facilities they need before and after giving birth. Mothers should
be allowed to keep their babies and should be provided with the
necessary facilities for their babies, and they must have their freedom
as if they were outside prison. They should also be allowed to keep in
touch with their children outside prison.

### Inspector of prisons

There must be an independent inspector of prisons to check the welfare
of the prisoners and establish that prisoners are being treated
according to the law in all aspects. It is important that the prison
inspector is not from the prison management or its affiliation. He must
be from different affiliation, for example from an opposition party etc.
Any problem or shortcoming must be brought to the attention of the
prison authorities and measures recommended to address those problems.
If the latter fail to address those issues then they must be raised with
higher authorities.

### Chastisement of prisoners

The prison management may not punish prisoners. In the event of
prisoners committing any offence, then this must be reported to the
police and other legal authorities. It is imperative that the police and
the prison service are segregated. A prisoner must be treated like any
other free person outside prison when an offence is committed.

The prison management may not give any authority to any of the prisoners
to punish other prisoners (for their wrongdoings). However, teaching and
training programmes may be set up by prisoners to teach fellow prisoners
in any field of learning, material or spiritual, morals, economics,
politics, sociology, etc.

### Offence of prisoner

If a prisoner commits an offence, s/he will go through the same
procedures of police investigation, appearing before court of law, etc.
as any other person would outside prison. The crimes prisoners commit
inside prison carry the same penalty as others who commit outside it.
The same law applies to individuals inside the prison as to those
outside.

### The right to a defence lawyer

The prisoner may ask for a solicitor to defend him, may ask for an
interpreter if needed. If the prisoner cannot afford the cost of them,
the relevant authorities must pay for these. Absolutely no to torture

The prison management may under no circumstances use inhumane and brutal
punishment against the prisoners, even if it is to discipline them.
Therefore, they may not hold prisoners in solitary confinement, or in a
dark cell, or flood the cell, or tie the prisoner to the wall, or chain
them, or any other means of torture.

### Amongst prisoner's rights

Every prisoner must always have the opportunity to present his
requirements or complaints to such authorities as the prison governor,
the prison inspector, etc. It must be made known to the prisoners that
they can be in touch with their friends or families through visit,
correspondence, etc.

When the prisoner receives visitors, the prison authority may not
eavesdrop on their conversation or may not use glass screens to keep the
prisoner apart from their visitors, regardless of the prisoner's
nationality. If the prisoner wishes to contact a lawyer or charity
organisation or any other such institution or individual, the prison
authority should facilitate his demand. If the prisoner has been
described as dangerous by a judge, then the prison authority may limit
his contacts according to the judge's written permission.

### Prison rules

Prison rules and regulation must be given to every prisoner, in written
form for those who can read, and on audiocassette for those who cannot.

Access to media The prisoners should have access to the communications
media such as the newspapers, magazine, radio and TV, etc. A
comprehensive library must be provided for all prisoners; men, women and
children. If a prisoner needed a book not available in the library, the
prison authority must provide the book whether at the expense of the
prisoner if s/he can afford it or that of the prison budget.

### Practice of Religion

Every prisoner must be allowed to practice his/her religious duties such
as prayer, fasting and to possess the Qur'an and religious books such as
prayer and supplication books, etc. Also if the prisoner sought the
services of a religious clergy then s/he must be provided with one.

The prisoners may perform congregational prayers either themselves or
with the help of external clergies. During the holy month of Ramadahn,
the prisoners who fast must have their food provided during the
allocated times; i.e. before dawn and after dusk.

During the month of the Hajj pilgrimage those prisoners who are able and
wish to go to Hajj must be allowed to do so after taking the necessary
measures to ensure their return to prison, such as taking out bail.
Similarly if a prisoner had made a vow to visit or remain in a holy site
or shrine, s/he must be allowed to do so while on bail. Also if the
prisoner needed a secluded place for study or prayer and worship, s/he
must be provided such a place.

All of this is also applicable to a non-Muslim prisoner, and if s/he had
special ceremonies s/he must also be allowed and facilitated to practice
them.

### Religious rites and festivals

A prisoner must be allowed to attend religious festivals and all other
important religious ceremonies such as those on the occasion of the
birthday or demise of the Prophet (S) and other infallible Imams (A).
The prisoner must also be allowed to visit his sick family members or
attend their funerals or weddings, while on bail for instance.

It is reported that Imam Ali (A) used to release the prisoners, who were
debtors or murder suspects, to attend Friday prayers and then are
returned to prison by their guarantors[^10]. It is also narrated that
Imam Sadiq (A) said that the leader must arrange for the prisoners to
attend congregational prayers on Fridays and on other festive occasions
such as Eid. When they perform their prayers they are returned to prison
by their guards[^11].

### Choice of prison location

The prisoner has the right to request transfer from one prison to
another in a different locality, if feasible. In general, the principle
is that the particular offender must be imprisoned, but the details of
the imprisonment are flexible. The prisoner may request to be imprisoned
in a house, even in his own house if the cost of such arrangement is not
too high for the government,

unless the prisoner is prepared to pay for the cost of this arrangement
such that the authorities are assured that the prisoner remains in the
house. For example by means of mechanical or electronic tagging, or if
the prisoner promises not to leave the house, and if the authorities
believe his words. We have shown in jurisprudence texts that the
prisoner may serve his sentence in instalments.

### Prisoner's possession

The prisoner's possession such as clothes, money, watch, jewellery and
other valuable items must be listed and kept for the prisoner and
returned to him when leaving the prison.

Prison uniform The prison authority may not impose the wearing of
uniform on prisoners and they may wear what they choose.

Receiving mail and goods In general the prisoner may receive goods from
outside prison, with the exception of forbidden items such as narcotics
unless prescribed by medical expert.

### Informing next of kin

The family of the prisoner must be informed immediately of his/her
imprisonment. They must also be informed if the prisoner is transferred
to another prison, or if the prisoner is seriously ill or if s/he dies.
Similarly the prisoner must be informed of the illness or death of a
family member.

The rights of Prisoners according to Islamic teachings
------------------------------------------------------

As it was previously mentioned, the prisoner must be allowed to visit
the sick or attend the funeral of a family member. On the other hand, if
the prisoner wishes to be transferred to another prison, a comfortable
means of transport must be used, and the cost of transport must be met
by the prisoner if s/he requested the transport and can afford the cost
of transport, otherwise it must be paid from the prison budget.

### Men and women prisons

Prisons for men must be staffed by men entirely and those for women must
be staffed by women only. Men may not staff women prisons and vice
versa. Male staff must be married and so too must female prison
staff[^12]. If any of the prison staff wanted to live with his/her
family, in the living quarters of the prison complex, they may do so.
Juveniles must be segregated in prisons. It is important to have
separate prisons for boys and girls.

### Insanity of prisoner

If a prisoner became insane s/he must be treated and if their illness is
incurable, s/he must be detained in mental hospital or unit. If it was
diagnosed that the prisoner would develop insanity or other such
illnesses (as a result of being imprisoned) s/he should be released from
prison. No to Violence

Prison staff may not use force with prisoners unless in cases such as
self- defence, or to prevent prisoner escape or to prevent a prisoner
harming others. In case force was used it must be reported to the prison
governor immediately. Prison staff must be trained to deal with abusive
prisoners. Prison staff may not carry guns unless they have written
permission and that they are qualified to use it.

### Studying

Teaching and education program must be provided for the literate and the
illiterate prisoners as well as the young offenders so that their time
is not wasted without any education for those who want to study.

### Employment inside prison

This is to reduce or prevent such conducts as sexual harassment and
abuse.

### Rights of a Prisoner

The prison management must prepare prisoners to work in accordance with
their intellectual and physical abilities. Work opportunities must be
available to stimulate and also encourage them to earn for themselves
and their family through honourable means. Prisoners must also be
trained to gain new work related skills especially for the young
prisoner.

Prisoners must choose the work they wish to do and not be compelled to
do so. The standard of work conditions inside prison must be the same as
those outside so that prisoners are prepared for life outside. The
interest of prisoners must take priority over that of the prison
institution.

### Labour law

The working conditions such as the number of working hours per week must
be the same as those for workers outside prisons. Similarly prisons must
have a day off work and must have enough time to engage in recreational
activities.

Observation of religious occasions They must also be given the chance to
observe or celebrate religious occasions.

### Equal treatment

If a prisoner accomplishes manual or scholarly work s/he should be paid
according to rates outside the prison. He should be allowed to spend
his/her earnings on himself or his family. The prison should be provided
with the facility to secure his wealth either through a bank or through
the prison service itself.

### The insane

The insane, and mentally retarded may not be imprisoned. As for one who
suffers from periodic insanity may only be imprisoned (for committing
offences) during recuperation periods.

Diminished responsibility An individual may not be imprisoned for a
crime if s/he was forced, impelled, etc. to commit such an act.

Death of prisoner If the prisoner dies as a result of part of the prison
building collapsing or due to flooding, earthquake, etc. and the prison
management had

anticipated such events[^13], in that case the prison authority should
pay compensation (blood money). Similarly if the prisoner lost a limb or
sustained other injuries, he is entitled to compensation. However, if
the prisoner dies of natural causes there is no compensation to pay.

### Prison building

The prison building must be strong enough such that prisoners do not
easily damage it. There should be no tools or means inside the prison
that could be used to damage the building, harm other fellow prisoners
or even harm themselves in any way, such as hanging.

### Prison staff

Prison staff must have an appropriate mental and intellectual level as
well as being physically able. Prior to assuming their post in prison
they must have received relevant education and have attended
specialist-training programmes to prepare them for the tasks involved in
such posts.

Furthermore they should maintain those standards but also develop
further during their service. They must have a conduct such that they
set a good example to the prisoners in terms of behaviour and moral
values. Prison staff as well as the general public must be made aware of
the role and importance of prisons and the prison service.

The salary of prison staff must reflect this aspect and must compensate
the important hard work involved. There may even be bonuses given in
appreciation of the excellent services provided by the prison staff.
Such bonuses could include leave of absence, etc.

### Expert services

The prison management and staff must be supported by specialist services
such as those of psychologists, sociologists, medical, mental, and
technology experts on a permanent basis. This is to give prisoners the
best opportunity of education and training while in prison in order to
deliver a reformed individual to society.

Education of prisoner Prison managers and higher authorities must
consider prisoners as part of the society and not the outcast from it.
Therefore a prisoner must receive e.g. through forecast by relevant
authorities, expert recommendation or evaluation, etc.

### Rights of a Prisoner

Ethical and moral treatment and education as a person and as a
responsible member of society. Arrangements must be made to ensure that
a prisoner is appropriately received by the society when out of prison.

### After release

The community must be made involved in preparing a prisoner to interact
with society. Social workers must ensure that they are in contact with
their families and that with the aid of relevant organisations the newly
released prisoner's civil rights as well as those for social security
are protected within the framework of Islamic law.

### Prisoner rights group

There should also be organisations recognised by the government,
responsible for safeguarding the rights of the newly released prisoners
and in charge of visiting them, arranging for their recreation and
helping them to join the society as reformed members.

### Prisoner's future

The prison service and other authorities associated with the prisoner
such as the judge, etc. should contemplate about the future of the
prisoner as soon as the prisoner enters prison. The prisoner should be
encouraged to be in contact with organisations that can help him and his
family and prepares him to rejoin the community again.

### Prison categories

The law applies to the different kinds of imprisonments, which are
divided into three categories under Islamic system:

### Provisional Detention

In this case a suspect is detained pending investigation into the case.
It has been reported that the Prophet (S) detained a murder suspect for
up to six days pending investigation[^14]. It is also reported that Imam
Ali (A) detained a murder suspect while investigating his accomplices.

This policy is not specific to murder cases only but is applicable to
other cases. It is reported that Imam Ali (A) judged a debtor to be
detained. If it were The rights of prisoners according to Islamic
teachings proven that he was bankrupt he would be released in order to
earn money, and if appropriate, pay back his debt[^15].

Fraud Imprisonment In this case someone is imprisoned for transgressing
or violating other people's right, which is a crime. It is reported[^16]
that Imam Ali (A) imprisoned three categories of offenders:

One who usurped (others belongings/wealth/land etc.); One who extorted
the wealth/property of the orphan; One who embezzles the deposit
entrusted with him.

### Criminal Imprisonment

In this case those convicted of committing a crime are imprisoned. The
author has mentioned a number of such cases in the “Book of
Hudoud[^17]”. In a reported case[^18], four individuals engaged in a
brawl using knives and while they were drunk. Imam Ali (A) judged to
imprison the four until they were sound again.

Two of the four died as a result of the severity of their injuries. Imam
Ali (A) judged that all four were responsible for the injuries sustained
on the four. The blood money of the two dead men is shared equally
between the four and the compensation for the other two is taken out of
the blood money given to the deceased's next of kin.

### Traditions and customs of the new judge

At the end of this section it is worth mentioning that it is a good
practice that the new judge looks at the affairs of those imprisoned by
the previous judge. This is to make sure that no one innocent or one who
served his sentence remains in prison.

In the book al-Mabsout[^19] the author, Sheikh al-Tousi, said when the
judge assumes office, the first thing he should look at is the affairs
of the prisoners in an isolated prison, as prison is a (place of)
torment (for the prisoner). There may be cases where someone has served
beyond his sentence unnoticed.

In Sharae' al-Islam[^20], (the author) Muhaqqiq al-Hilli states (the
newly appointed judge must) inquire about the prisoners and prepare a
list of the names of the prisoners. In a public announcement the new
judge calls upon the plaintiffs against each of the prisoners to appear
on a set date.

Then the judge asks each of the prisoners the reason for their
imprisonment. The judge then seeks the plaintiff's claims and if the
latter's claims stand the prisoner is returned to jail, otherwise he is
freed;

unless someone else raises a claim against him in response to a public
announcement by the newly appointed judge. Also if a prisoner appears
before the (new) judge and says, “I have no accuser”, and then if no
plaintiff appeared against the prisoner, after a public announcement he
is set free. It is stated that he would be freed under oath. Other
scholars have stated similarly too[^21]. This is also the case in other
sects of the Muslims. One of the senior scholars; Abu Isaac al-Shirazi
states, “It is desirable for a new judge to look into the affairs of the
prisoners, for prison is torment and punishment (to the prisoner), and
perhaps there are those who must be released.

### Some aspects of the duties of a judge

It appears that the duty of the judge does not end with issuing the
prison sentence, but it is his duty to follow the affairs of the
prisoners through his assistants and through government organisations
responsible for preparing prisoners to join the community again. Such
organisations must create the atmosphere to encourage the prisoner to
want to live within the law, to create the sense of responsibility and
respect for himself and the community.

[^1]: This chapter is taken from the author's al-Fiqh series, vol. 100,
book of “Rights”, pp 476- 481

[^2]: A principle in Islamic jurisprudence, see al-Fiqh series, vol.
141, “Principles of Jurisprudence”, by the author.

[^3]: This is a hadith or statement by the prophet Muhammad peace be
upon him, which therefore forms the basis of a principle in Islamic
jurisprudence. The hadith has been reported in many references such as:
'Awali al-Le'ali, vol. 1, p 222; Nahj el-Haqq, p 494. See also al-Fiqh
series, vol. 141, “Principles of Jurisprudence”, p 135, by the author.

[^4]: Al-Ja'fariyat, p 108. Qurb al-Asnaad, p 67.

[^5]: Letters, 23. Nahj\_ul\_Balaghah, (meaning Peak of Eloquence) is a
collection of speeches, sermons and letters of Imam Ali (A).

[^6]: The Holy Qur'an, The Light (25): 22.

[^7]: See for example Fiqh al-Ridha, p 248, or 'Awali al-Le'ali, vol. 3,
p 395, and Mustadrak el- Wasa'el, vol. 6, p 27.

[^8]: al-Kafi, vol. 6 p 133.

[^9]: Wasa'el al-Shi'a, vol. 22, section 11, p 28775

[^10]: al-Ja'fariyat, p 44.

[^11]: Man la Yahdharuhul-Faqih, vol. 3, p 31. See also Wasa'el
al-Shi'a, vol. 7, section 21, and Mustadrak el-Wasa'el, vol. 6, section
17.

[^12]: This is to reduce or prevent such conducts as sexual harassment
and abuse.

[^13]: e.g. through forecast by relevant authorities, expert
recommendation or evaluation, etc.

[^14]: Al-Kafi, vol. 7, p 370, hadith 5.

[^15]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 6, section 22, p 232, hadith 19.

[^16]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 6, section 22, p 299, hadith 43.

[^17]: al-Fiqh series, vols. 87-88, al-Hodoud wal-Ta'zirat.

[^18]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 10, section 4, p 240, hadith 5.

[^19]: al-Mabsout fi Fiqh al-Imamiah, by Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Tousi, vol. 8, p 91, section on the tradition of a judge.

[^20]: Shara'e' al-Islam, vol. 2, p 320, Tradition of a Judge.

[^21]: Muhaqiq al-Hilli (602-676H) in al-Mukhtasar al-Nafi', Abdul-Aziz
ibn Baraj al-Tarablosi (400-481H) in al-Muhadhab, 'Emad al-Din bin
al-Tousi in al-Wasilah ila Nayl al-Fadhilah, 'Allamah al-Hilli
(647-726H) in Qawa'ed al-Ahkam fi Masa'el al-Halal wal-Haram, Muhammad
Jawad al-Hussain al-'Amili in Miftah al-Karamah, vol. 10, p 26.


