[The Main Text of Book]
=======================

#### 1-Kalima of Maola Ali (s.a.)

####

*When Amirul Momineen (s.a.) appeared in Ka’ba, went into Sajdah first,
then raised his holy head, said Azaan & Aqamat, and said: “There is none
worthy of worship except Allah, He is One there is no partner for Him,
and I testify that Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is His Abd and His Rasool, and
I testify that I am Wali of Allah, Wasi of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.).”*

(Asbat ul Huda, V 2, P 465, print:Ilmi, Qum)

#### 2-Kalima of Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.)

####

*When Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.) appeared in this world, she*

*said: “I testify that there is none worthy of worship except*

*Allah, and that my father is Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) Syyedul Anbiya,
and that my husband is Syyedul Aosiya (s.a.) and my sons (s.a.) are
Heads of my grandsons.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 3, P 9)

#### 3-Kalima on the door of Paradise

####

*Rasool Allah said: “When I went to the skies at night of Mai’raj, then
I saw written on the door of Jannat: ‘There is non worthy of worship
except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is
Habibullah, Hassan (s.a.) & Hussain (s.a.) are Safwatillah, Fatima
(s.a.) is Amatillah, who is angry with them Allah’s Curse on them.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 10, P 125)

#### 4-The Fort of Allah: Walayat

####

*Imam Raza (s.a.) said: “Allah Ta’ala said: La Ilaha Illallah is My
Fort, who enters My Fort he will be saved from My Punishment.” When
camel started walking, he said: “But with conditions and I am among the
conditions.”*

*Imam Ali Raza (s.a.) said: “Allah Ta’ala said: Walayat e Ali ibne Abi
Talib (s.a.) is My Fort, who enters My Fort, he will be saved from
Fire.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 471)

It is obvious that any Deed can not be accepted without its Conditions.
The Fort of Tauheed e Ilahi is Walayat e Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad
(s.a.a.).

#### 5-Kalima of Imam e Qaim (a.f.s.)

####

*When Imam e Qaim (a.f.s.) appeared in this world, he said: “I testify
that there is none worthy of worship except Allah, and*

*that Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, and that Ali (s.a.) is
Haqq Amirul Momineen.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 11, P 48)

Then Imam (a.f.s.) testified all Imams & Aoliya (s.a.a.) one by one
until his own name, and said Allah will bring Ampleness through him.

#### 6-Maola Ali (s.a.): Kalimatat Taqwa

####

*Allah Ta’ala said during Mai’raj: “No doubt, Ali (s.a.) is Imam of my
friends, and Noor for those who obey Me, and he is that Kalima which I
have made inevitably obligatory for Muttaqeen, who obeys him he obeyed
Me, who disobeys him he disobeyed Me.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 609)

Namaaz is offered to become Muttaqi. Therefore by doing Zikr of
Kalimatut Taqwa of Allah in Namaaz, Taqwa is confirmed. Kalimatut Taqwa
is mentioned in verse 26 of Sura Fat’ha.

#### 7-Written Certificate of Walayat e Ali (s.a.)

####

*The servant of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), Abu Hamra narrated: Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said to me: “O Abu Hamra! Go and call one hundred men
from Arab, fifty from Ajam, thirty from Qabtis, and twenty from
Habashis.” I brought them. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Stand Arabs
in a line, then Ajmis should line up behind Arabs, then Qabtis should
line up behind Ajmis, then Habashis should line up behind Qabtis.” Then
he stood up, and did Hamd-o-Sana of Allah and explained such Purity of
Allah that creations would not have heard it before, and then said: O
people of Arab, and Ajam, and Qabat, and Habash! Do you testify that
there is*

*none worthy of worship except Allah, He is One there is no partner for
Him, and Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Abd and Rasool. The said: Yes. Then he
said: O Allah! Be witness. Until he repeated it three times. Then he
said three times: Do you testify that there is none worthy of worship
except Allah, and I, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) am His Abd and Rasool, and
that Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen and Wali-e-Amr after
me. They said: Yes. Then he said: O Allah! Be witness. Until he repeated
it three times. Then he said to Ali (s.a.): Ya Abul Hassan (s.a.)! Go
and bring me a paper and ink. Then he gave it to Ali (s.a.) and said:
Write. He replied: What I should write? He said: Write, With the Name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, that Arab, and Ajam, and Qabti, and
Habshi testify the Testification that there is none worthy of worship
except Allah, and that Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is His Abd and Rasool, and
Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen, and Wali e Amr after me.
Then stamped that document and gave it to Imam Ali (s.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 129)

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) called the Representatives of all the Races
and took testification three times, then made Allah Witness and gave a
written Certificate. Now if anyone doubts or argues that what is the
real text of Kalima Tayyiba, then actually he doubts Risalat.

#### 8-Kalima on the Shoulders of the Angels

####

The Angels (Mahmood & Sersaeel) who brought the good news of the
marriage of Maola Ali (s.a.) and Syyeda Fatima (s.a.), it was written on
their shoulders:

*“Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) Rasool Allah, Ali (s.a.) is his Wasi.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 530)

*“There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
His Rasool, Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is Moqeemul Hujjat.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 3, P 135)

This Kalima was written on the shoulders of the Angels thousands of
years (light years) before the creation of Adam and the world.

Allah beautified the Angels not only with the names of Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) and Ali (s.a.), but the great name of Hazrat Abu Talib is
also written.

#### 9-The First Azaan of the Universe

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Our family is the first family, whose
name is elevated by Allah. When Allah created Skies and Earth, He
ordered the announcer and he announced: I testify that there is none
worthy of worship except Allah (Three Times), I testify that Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah (Three Times), I testify that Ali (s.a.)
is Haqq Amirul Momineen (Three Times).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 550)

Muqassireen with dead-heart who say ‘Ali un Wali Ullah s.a.’ in Azaan
just thinking it as a Shia Habit (Shu’ar), should come into senses and
repent. This is being announced in Azaan thousands of years before the
creation of our father Adam (a.s.).

#### 10-Kalima on the Crown of Ali (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Ya Ali! On the day of Qiyamah, you
will be riding on a Norani-camel, and you will have a crown on your
head, it will have four corners, and on every corner three lines will be
written: “There is none worthy of worship except Allah – Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is*

*Rasool of Allah – Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah.” And keys of the
Paradise will be given to you, and then a chair will be put for you,
which is Chair of Honour, on it you will sit. Then all the creations,
from the first to the last, will be gathered in front of you, and then
you will command your Shias to go to the Paradise, and your enemies to
the Hell, because you are the divider (allocator) of Paradise, and
divider of Hell. And definitely he is successful who loves you, and he
lost who keeps animosity to you. Thus you are Trustee of Allah on that
day, and you are Clear Hujjat of Allah.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 669)

#### 11-Remind Kalima to the Dead body

####

Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “After lowering down the dead body in the
grave, shake his shoulders and say: “O*that* son of*that,* Allah is your
Rabb, and Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is your Nabi, and Islam is your Deen,
and Ali (s.a.) is your Wali and your Imam. Then mention Holy Imams
(s.a.a.) one by one until the Last, and say, your Imams (s.a.a.) are the
Good Guiding Imams.”

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 125)

If it is dead body of any Muqassir, he will definitely think that how
hypocrite is this Mulla, whole life he was prohibiting ‘Ali un Wali
Ullah s.a.’, and now he is shaking me to remind it forcefully.

#### 12-Kalima on Arsh e Ilahi

####

*When Hazrat Adam (a.s.) looked towards Arsh, he saw these Kalimaat
written there: “There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is
Amirul Momineen, and his wife Fatima (s.a.) is Syyeda tun Nisa al
Aalameen, and al-Hassan*

*(s.a.) & al-Hussain (s.a.) are the Head of the Youth of the Paradise.”*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza (s.a.), V 1, P 536)

Muqassir is shattered into pieces! On Arsh e Mo’alla of Allah, not only
the holy names of Anwaar e Khamsa are written, but the great name of
Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) is also written.

#### 13-Rukn of Tauheed: Walayat e Ali (s.a.)

####

*Imam Zainul Abideen (s.a.) said: “There is no curtain between Allah
Jalla Shanohu and His Hujjat, thus it is not for Allah that He has to be
behind a veil for His Hujjat, we are the door of Allah, we are the
Straight Path, we are the treasure of His Knowledge, we are the
Translator of His Wahi, we are the Arkaan (pillars) of His Tauheed, and
we are the Place of His Secrets.”*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 1, P 73)

Fourteen Infallibles (s.a.a.) are the Pillars of Tauheed. If these
pillars are removed the building of Tauheed will collapse. Muqassir
Mulla! Leave alone Kalima, Azaan, and Namaaz; those great Anwaar who
have no veil for Allah, you are trying to separate them from Tauheed,
with your evil tricks.

#### 14-Kalimut Tayyab

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said about the saying of Allah, ‘Pure Kalima
rises towards Allah, and good deed elevates it’ (Fatir 10): ‘Kalima
Tayyiba (Pure)’ means the saying of Momin: ‘There is none worthy of
worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali
(s.a.) is Wali of Allah, and Khalifa of Rasool Allah.’ And said: Good
Deed (Amal e Saleh)*

*means faith with heart that it is Haqq from Allah and there is no doubt
about it that it is from the Rabb of Aalameen.*

(Tafseer Ali bin Ibraheem)

#### 15-Encompassing Universe: Imam e Mubeen (s.a.)

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “No doubt when Allah Ta’ala created Arsh,
then wrote on it, ‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah,
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul
Momineen’, and when Allah created water, then wrote on its starting
‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and when Allah created
Kursi, then wrote on its stands ‘There is none worthy of worship except
Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul
Momineen’, and when Allah created Loh, then wrote on it ‘There is none
worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of
Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and when Allah created Israfeel
(a.s.), then wrote on his forehead ‘There is none worthy of worship
except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is
Amirul Momineen’, and when Allah created Jibraeel (a.s.), then wrote on
his wings ‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and
when Allah created the Skies, then wrote on their edges ‘There is none
worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of
Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and when Allah created the Earth,
then wrote on its strata ‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah,
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul
Momineen’, and when Allah created the hills, then wrote on its tops
‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
Rasool of*

*Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and when Allah created the Sun,
then wrote on it ‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and
when Allah created the Moon, then wrote on it ‘There is none worthy of
worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, Ali
(s.a.) is Amirul Momineen’, and that black mark which you see on the
Moon, that is it. Thus whenever anyone among you says ‘There is none
worthy of worship except Allah’, it is must he should say ‘Ali (s.a.) is
Amirul Momineen, Wali of Allah.’*

(al Ehtijaj, V 1, P 365)

#### 16-Testification of Humans in Aalam e Zarr

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said about the saying of Allah ‘And when your
Rabb took out from Bani Adam (a.s.) their children from their
backs.....’ (A’raf 172): Allah Ta’ala took out the humans who have to
come until Qiyamah from the back of Adam (a.s.), and all of them were
like particles, then Allah introduced Himself, and if this introduction
was not there, no person would have known his Rabb. Then He asked: Am I
not Rabb of all of you? Then they all replied: Why not? And He said: No
doubt, this Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is My Rasool, and Ali (s.a.) is Amirul
Momineen, and he is My Khalifa and Trustee.*

(Basair al Darajat, V 1, P 157)

Who divide the Covenant of Allah into pieces, they are worse than
animals.

#### 17-Prophets get Prophet-hood by Testifying Walayat

####

*Imam Mohammad Baqir (s.a.) said: “Allah Ta’ala took Covenant from the
Prophets (a.s.): Am I not your Rabb? Then He said: And certainly this
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool Allah, and certainly this Ali (s.a.) is
Amirul Momineen. Then they all replied: Why not. Thus they were bestowed
Prophet-hood.*

And then He took Covenant from the Olil Azm: Beware! Only I am your
Rabb, and Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is My Rasool, and Ali (s.a.) is Amirul
Momineen, and Aoliya (s.a.a.) after him are Wali of My Amr, and
Treasurer of My Knowledge, and I will help My Deen through Mahdi
(a.f.s.), and prevail My Government, and will take revenge from My
enemies.

(Basair al Darajat)

By testifying Walayat Allah bestows Prophet-hoods; and Harisi Mulla
wants to get near to Allah by rejecting it.

#### 18-Stamp of Hazrat Adam (a.s.)

####

*Imam Hadi (s.a.) said: “It was engraved on the ring of Adam (a.s.):
There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah.”*

(Makaram e Akhlaq)

Who is offspring of his father Adam (a.s.), and living on the earth of
Abu Turaab (s.a.) and eating from it, he can not forget the confirmed
Promise of Walayat with Allah.

#### 19-Sign board of Hazrat Musa (a.s.)

####

*Moammer narrated that during a travel to Syria, on the land of Balaqa
(Jordan), he saw on a mountain written in Hebrew by Hazrat Musa’s (a.s.)
hand: ‘With the Name of Allah, Haqq has come from your Rabb in the clear
Arabic language, there is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, and Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah, and
this is written by Musa bin Imran (a.s.) with his hand.”*

(Biharul Anwaar)

#### 20-Ring-stamp of Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.)

####

*Imam Ali Raza (s.a.) said: “It was engraved on the ring of our grand
father Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.): I am happy with the Lordship of Allah,
and with the Prophet-hood of the son of my brother, Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.), and with the Vicegerency of my son, Ali (s.a.).”*

(Majalis al Momineen, V 1, P 163, print Islamia)

Someone must have asked: O Abu Talib (s.a.)! I have made your lap mine
of Prophet-hood & Walayat, are you happy with it? Then Hazrat Abu Talib
(s.a.) must have stamped the firm answer with his stamp: Ya Allah I am
happy with your bestowal, and my whole holy progeny (s.a.a.) will
sacrifice on Your Tauheed.

#### 21-Kalima unacceptable without Ali un Waliullah (s.a.)

####

*Imam Mohammad Baqir (s.a.) said: “When it will be the day of Qiyamah,
and Allah Ta’ala will gather all the creations from the first to the
last on one place, will separate Kalima*

*‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah’ from all the creations
(i.e. this testification will be deleted from their deed-book) except
him who testified the Walayat of Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.), and this is
the saying of Allah Ta’ala, ‘That day Rooh and Angels will be standing
in a row, no one will speak except him whom Rahman will give permission,
and he will speak the truth. (Sura Naba)*

(al Burhan)

On the day of Qiyamah this excuse will not be accepted: Ya Allah I swear
by Your Honour! “Ali un Wali Ullah s.a.” was not written in any Tauzihul
Masail.

#### 22-Human Nature

####

*Imam Mohammad bin Ali (s.a.) said about the saying of Allah, ‘The
Nature of Allah is that on which He created the humans’: “That Nature is
‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
Rasool of Allah, Ali (s.a.) Amirul Momineen is Wali of Allah.”*

(al Burhan)

Now whoever thinks that he is a human, then he can not do any deed
against Human Nature. Namaaz is not against Human Nature as well!

#### 23-Azaan Certified by Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)

####

*One person came to Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and said: ‘Ya Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.)! Abu Zarr recites Testification of Walayat of Ali (s.a.) in
Azaan after the Testification of Prophet-hood, and he says: I testify
that Ali (s.a.) is*

* Waliullah.’ Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “It is like that, or have
you forgotten my declaration at Ghadeer e Khum: Whom I am Maola, thus
Ali (s.a.) is his Maola, then who will break this promise, he will only
cause his own loss.”*

(Kitabul Hadaya, P 45, print Hikmat)

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Azaan is like that as Abu Zarr says. He
did not say: Call Abu Zarr and ask him, if he says ‘Ali un Waliullah
s.a.’ considering it Shu’ar & Mustahib then it is alright, and if he
thinks it part of Azaan, then Azaan is Batil, say it again!

#### 24-Azaan & Mo’azzin of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): Maola Ali (s.a.)

####

*About the saying of Allah, ‘On the day of Hajj e Akbar, Azaan is from
Allah, and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) for the people, that Allah and His
Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) are immune to Mushrikeen’ Imam (s.a.) said that
Azaan is the name of Imam Ali (s.a.), which Allah revealed for him from
the skies.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 344) (al Lawameh al Noraniya, al Burhan)

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “I am Azaan of Allah in the World and His
Mo’azzin in the Hereafter.”*

(al Lawameh al Noraniya, Nehjul Israr)

*On the day of Qiyamah, Amirul Momineen (s.a.) will say Azaan: “Beware!
Curse of Allah on those who belied my Walayat, and hid my Haqq
(Right).”*

(al Lawameh al Noraniya, Biharul Anwaar)

#### 25-Azaan of the Angels and Allah’s Order for the Ummah

####

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “When I went to Mai’raj, reached above
the sky then all the Prophets (a.s.) offered Namaaz behind me, because I
am Imam of the Prophets (a.s.). There is one Angel in the 7th sky whose
name is Kalkaeel, he said Azaan, in which he recited twice ‘I testify
that Ali (s.a.) is Waliullah’. When Azaan finished, I asked: Who told
you to testify Walayat of Ali (s.a.) in Azaan? Kalkaeel (a.s.) replied:
Allah has commanded me, and He said, ‘When you will say Azaan, then My
Habeeb (s.a.w.a.w.) will ask you, and you should say: The One Allah has
commanded me to say in Azaan ‘I testify that Amirul Momineen Ali (s.a.)
is Wali of Allah.’ And He said in addition that when you go back, then
teach this Azaan to your Ummah, and tell them (Ummah) that Ali (s.a.)
the Wali of Allah is medium between Me and you (people), do not be
negligent to him, and remember: Neither your Azaan, and nor your Aqamah,
and nor your Namaaz, and nor your Fast, and nor your Hajj, and nor your
Zakaat, and nor your birth, and nor your death is complete but with the
Zikr of Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.).”

(Tanweer al Emaan)

#### 26-Azaan of Imam Hussain (s.a.) in Karbala: Jihad e Walayat

####

On 11th Moharram, when the army of Yazeed Maloon (l.u.) left with the
holy prisoners, one person from the army left behind. In the evening,
one headless holy body said Azaan, in which he testified ‘I testify that
Ali Amirul Momineen (s.a.) is Wali of Allah’. That person went near and
saw that the holy

*body was of Imam Hussain (s.a.). He was surprised that the battle of
Karbala was to finish this Testification.*

(Bahrul Masa’ib)

The Object and Aim of the holy sacrifices of Karbala was to revive
Walayat e Ali (s.a.). The sacrifice for Walayat e Ali (s.a.) started
with the martyrdom of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), then Syyeda Fatima
Zahra (s.a.), Hazrat Mohsin (s.a.), Imam Hassan (s.a.), and so on, and
the peak of sacrifice (Zibhe Azeem) is martyrdom of Hazrat Ali Asghar
(s.a.).

#### 27-Conspiracy to delete Zikr e Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) from Azaan

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “The name of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) is
called repeatedly in Azaan; Ibne Arwi is the first who deleted it.”*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 198)

After the martyrdom of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), ‘Ali un Waliullah
s.a.’ was deleted from the Azaan by forced order of the government. Then
conspiracy was done to delete the Zikr of Mohammad Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) as well. The illegal occupant of Shaam also mentioned this
evil conspiracy as his unsuccessful wish.

#### 28-Greater than Obligations: Walayat e Ali (s.a.)

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) went on Mai’raj for
one hundred and twenty times, and there was not a single time that Allah
did not advise Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) about*

*the Walayat of Ali (s.a.) and Imams (s.a.a.), more than what He advised
about Fara’iz (Obligations).*

(Khasa’il)

No doubt that Walayat is more superior to Obligations, and saying of
Allah that Kalima al Taqwa (Testification of Walayat) is Inevitably
Obligatory for the Muttaqeen, confirms it.

#### 29-Allah Jalla Jalalohu Loves severely the Lover of Ali (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said that Allah said: “That person who knows
that ‘There is none worthy of worship except Allah, I am One, and that
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is My Abd and My Rasool, and that Ali bin Abi
Talib (s.a.) is My Khalifa, and that Imams (s.a.a.) from his progeny are
my Hujjat’ , I will enter him in Paradise with My Blessing, and will
rescue him from Jahannam with My Forgiveness, and I will let him to be
Near Me, and I will do give him honour, and will complete My Ne’mat on
him, and will declare him among My special and pure servants, if he will
call Me then I will answer him, and if he will supplicate to Me then I
will accept his prayer, and if he will ask Me then I will bestow, and if
he will keep quiet then I will start Myself (bestowing Favour), and if
he will be despaired then I will bless him, if he will run away from Me
then I will call him, and if he will return to Me then I will accept his
repentance, and if he will knock My Door then I will open it. And if any
person does not testify that ‘There is none worthy of worship except
Me’, or he testifies this but does not testify that ‘Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is My Abd and Rasool’, or he testifies this but does not
testify that ‘Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is My Khalifa’, or he testifies
this but does not testify that ‘His progeny Imams (s.a.a.) are My
Hujjat’, then he denied My Ne’mat, and considered My*

*Splendour inferior, and denied My Ayaat and Kutub, so if he will intend
to come to Me then I will put veil, if he will request something then I
will deprive him, if he will call Me then I will not listen, if he will
supplicate then I will not accept, and if he will keep hope from Me then
I will cut it, and this is the reward for him from My side, and I do not
do injustice to servants.”*

(Kamalud Din, V 1, P 278)

O you afraid of one testification! Allah Azza wa Jalla loves that person
too much who testifies Walayat of all Imams (s.a.a.)

#### 30-The Last Will of Hazrat Amir Muslim (s.a.)

####

*After arresting Hazrat Muslim (s.a.), Ibne Ziyaad (l.u.) said to him:
‘You will be definitely martyred.’ Hazrat Muslim (s.a.) said: “I want to
convey my last will to any person of Quraish.” Umar bin Saad (l.u.)
stood up and said: ‘What is your last will?’ He said: “My first will is
that I testify that there is none worthy of worship except Allah, and
that Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is  Rasool of Allah, and that Ali (s.a.) is
Wali of Allah and Wasi of His Rasool and Khalifa in Ummah.”*

(Yanabeh al Mawaddat, P 539)

#### 31-Kalima of Imam Hassan (s.a.)

####

*Imam Hassan Mujtaba (s.a.) said at the time of his martyrdom: “There is
none worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of
Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah.”*

(Riyazul Quds)

#### 32-Kalima of Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*When Imam Hussain (s.a.) appeared in this world, then he testified: “I
testify that there is none worthy of worship except Allah, the One,
there is no partner for Him, and I testify that my grandfather Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah, and I testify that my father Ali is
Wali of Aoliya, and I testify that my mother is the Head of the ladies
of the Paradise.”*

(Dam’at al Sakiba)

#### 33-Kalima on Liva al-Hamd

####

*On the day of Qiyamah, Liva al-Hamd will be in the hand of Amirul
Momineen (s.a.). Momineen will be under its shadow. On its banners three
lines will be written: There is none worthy of worship except Allah –
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah – Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah.*

(Yanabeh al Mawaddat )

#### 34-Prayer of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): Mawaddat of Imam Hassan (s.a.)

####

*Abu Qatadah narrated: Once Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) was offering
Namaaz, and gave a kiss to Imam Hassan (s.a.) in the same condition.*

*Khudri narrated: Once Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) was saying Namaaz, in the
meanwhile Imam Hassan (s.a.) came, and he (s.a.w.a.w.) was in Qaood, and
he (s.a.) put his arms around his (s.a.w.a.w.) neck, then Nabi
(s.a.w.a.w.) stood up holding him with hands, and did Rakooh in the same
condition.*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 10, P 110)

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said about Imam Hassan (s.a.): “Hassan (s.a.)
used to enter the mosque during congregational prayer, and used to reach
Mehrab e Masjid through the lines of Namazis, and that time Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) used to be in Sajdah, and he used to sit on his back, and
he used to raise his head from Sajdah in such a way that his one hand
was on back of Hassan (s.a.) and other hand on his thigh. In this way he
used to complete his Namaaz. In addition, when Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
used to deliver sermon, Hassan (s.a.) was on his shoulders until he
finished his sermon.”*

(Biharul Anwaar)

#### 35-Prayer of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): Obedient to Walayat

####

*One companion narrated: I swear by my father and say that I saw Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) that he was reading prayer in the mosque, and he was
in Sajdah, in the meantime Imam Hassan (s.a.) came and sat on his back,
then Imam Hussain (s.a.) came and he also sat on his back with his
brother. When people prohibited both of them not to do so, then Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) used to indicate with hand to the people to leave
them alone. When he completed Namaaz, took both of them in lap, and said
who keeps me friend, he should keep these two friends.*

*Another companion narrated that they were praying behind Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.), and Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) made Sajdah lengthy.
Companion raised his head and saw that Imam Hussain (s.a.) is sitting on
his back, companions went into Sajdah again. People thought that either
some accident happened or revelation started on Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.). When he completed prayer, then said: Nothing happened from
these things (accident/revelation), but my son was sitting*

on me, and thought it Makrooh to let him go down quickly, until his wish
is fulfilled.

(Yanabeh ul Mawaddat, P 267-268)

Namaaz is Farooh e Deen. Imamat & Walayat is Usool e Deen, which is the
Base of Farooh. Imams (s.a.a.) are the Reality of Namaaz.

#### 36-Actions of Imam (s.a.) in childhood become Deen e Ilahi and Sunnah

####

*Once Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) went to lead Eid prayer, and Imam Hassan
(s.a.) was with him. Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) started prayer with ‘Allaho
Akbar’, Imam Hassan (s.a.) also said ‘Allaho Akbar’, and he (s.a.w.a.w.)
became very happy, and kept saying Takbeers, and with him Imam Hassan
(s.a.) also kept saying Takbeers, until he said Takbeer seven times and
Imam Hassan (s.a.) also kept saying Takbeer, on seventh Takbeer Imam
Hassan (s.a.) stopped, then Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) also stopped. When
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) got up for the second Rakat, and said Takbeer
then Imam Hassan (s.a.) also said Takbeer, thus Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) said Takbeer five times, and Imam Hassan (s.a.) also kept
saying Takbeer with him, on fifth Takbeer Imam Hassan (s.a.) stopped
then Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) also stopped. On this base so many
Takbeers are Sunnah of Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) in both Eid prayers.*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 10, P 220)

Sheikh Sudooq (r.a.) wrote a similar narration concerning Imam Hussain
(s.a.) as well.

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh)

Wali Allah (s.a.) is not under Namaaz, but Namaaz & Deen are under Wali
e Mutliq (s.a.).

#### 37-Punishment on hiding Testification of Walayat

####

*Four old companions who were present at Ghadeer e Khum, they avoided
the Testification of Walayat on demand of Amirul Momineen (s.a.), and
presented some lame excuses. Then Imam (s.a.) cursed them. A big
vitiligo mark appeared on the forehead of Ans bin Malik, which could not
be hidden with turban. Ash’us bin Qais became blind in both eyes. Khalid
bin Yazeed was buried according to the traditions of ignorance. And Braa
bin Azib went back from where he migrated, and died there in Yemen. It
happened exactly as Imam (s.a.) cursed.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 303)

#### 38-No Deed is Acceptable without Testification of Walayat

####

*Allah Ta’ala said: “I do not accept any deed from its doer except with
the Testification of Walayat e Ali (s.a.) along with the Prophet-hood of
My Rasool Ahmad (s.a.w.a.w.).”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 443)

If any deed Allah does not accept without ‘Ali un Wali Ullah s.a.’, then
isn’t Namaaz a deed? Or Mulla thinks it an exercise?

#### 39-Zikr of Imams (s.a.a.) in Qanoot, & to recite Bismillah loud

####

If a person performing Namaaz wants then he can mention names of Guiding
Imams (s.a.a.) in Qanoot, and recite Salawaat on them. Takbeeratul Ahram
is once, but to say seven times is Afzal. Bismillah should be recited
loud before Alhamd and Sura, because it is verse of Quran, and
Ism-e-Azam, which is as near Allah as the black of the eye with its
white, rather nearer than that.

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 628)

Qanoot is part of Namaaz, in which Momineen mention Imams (s.a.a.) and
supplicate to Allah to reappear our Imam (a.f.s.) as soon as possible.

On Sunnah of Hasnain (s.a.) to say Takbeer seven times is Afzal. No
doubt Bismillah is the holy name of Imam Ali (s.a.), that is why it is
Ism-e-Azam, and it is commanded to recite it loud, so that every one
willingly or unwillingly should say the name of Imam Ali (s.a.) in loud
voice. I do not know whether Mulla knows or not, but the illegal
occupant of Shaam knew that Bismillah is the name of Maola Ali (s.a.),
that is why he did not read it in Namaaz, and people said that he stole
‘Bismillah’ from Namaaz.

#### 40-Reward on doing Wazu according to the

####

#### Sunnah of Imam Ali (s.a.)

####

*One day Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said to his son Mohammad Hanafiya (s.a.)
after doing Wazu: O Mohammad! Who does Wazu like me, and read Duas like
me which Duas I read, then Allah Ta’ala will create one Angel from every
drop of water (of Wazu), who will keep doing Taqdees, Tasbeeh, and*

*Takbeer of Allah, and Allah will keep writing its reward in the deed
book of that person until Qiyamah.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 52)

If a sinful Momin does Wazu according to the Sunnah of Imam Ali (s.a.),
then Allah creates Angels from the drops of Wazu-water. Then how high
will be that Namaaz and other deeds in which Zikr e Ali (s.a.) is done.

#### 41-Beginning of Namaaz: Walayat e Ali (s.a.)

####

*After Takbeer in the beginning of Namaaz say: I turned my face to Him
Who created the skies and the earth, Knower of unseen and seen, on the
method of Ibraheem (a.s.), and Deen of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), and Sunnah
of Ali (s.a.), straight Muslim, and I am not from among the Mushrikeen,
my Namaaz, and my Ibadat, and my life, and my death is for Allah the
Rabb of Aalameen, there is no partner for Him, and the same is commanded
to me, and I am from among the Muslims; I seek refuge with Allah, all
Hearing, al Knower, from Shaitan the rejected one; with the Name of
Allah, Rahman, Raheem.”*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 202)

In the beginning of Namaaz to declare that I am on the Deen of Ibraheem
(s.a.), Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), and Ali (s.a.), then at the end in
Tashahud why to hesitate to Testify Shahadaat? What is the reason of
this hypocritical attitude? Although seeking refuge, but one mentions
the name of Shaitan in Namaaz, then why Muqassir Mulla feels choking &
death by mentioning the name of Wali of the Universe (s.a.)? Then
definitely guardian of Mulla is Shaitan.

#### 42-Recite Sura with Faza’il of Imams (s.a.a.) in Namaaz

####

*In first Rakat, recite Sura Inna Anzalna after Sura al-Hamd, because
Inna Anzalna is Sura of Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) and his Ahlul Bait
(s.a.a.). So Namazi should make these personalities (s.a.a.) his Waseela
towards Allah, because due to the same Masomeen (s.a.a.) he got Marifat
of Allah. And recite Sura Tauheed in the second Rakat, because Dua is
accepted after reciting it, then when he will read Qanoot, then Qanoot
will be accepted.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 210)

Angels come down to Masomeen (s.a.a.) in the Night of Qadr, then
circumambulate them, then present all the affairs of the next year for
signature, which is mentioned in Sura Qadr. It is Hadees that Imam Ali
(s.a.) is like Sura Tauheed (Ikhlaas). And in Sura Al-Hamd we say that
Ya Allah keep us on the Path of Ali (s.a.), the Straight Path. So in
Namaaz even recite those Suras in which there are Faza’il of Maola Ali
(s.a.). Poet Allama Iqbal (r.a.) said right that there is nothing in
Deen except the Hit (strike) of Yadullah (s.a.) and Sajdah of Shabbeer
(s.a.). Nowadays the agents of the army of Shaitan are barking: is there
nothing left in Deen other than Walayat e Ali (s.a.)?

#### 43-Do Zikr of Imams (s.a.a.) in Beautiful way

####

*Halabi asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.): Can we mention names of Imams
(s.a.) in Namaaz? Imam (s.a.) said: “Mention them in a beautiful way
(Ajmali manner).”*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 211)

#### 44-Tashahud according to Sunnah of Rasool (s.a.)

####

Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: It is Sunnah to say:

<p dir="rtl">
الاسماء وخير لله والحمد بالله و الله بسم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
عبده محمدا ان واشهد له لاشريك وحده الله الا اله لا ان اشهد لله كلها
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نعم ربى ان واشهد الساعته يدى بين نذيرا بشيراو بالحق ارسله رسوله و
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
صل اللهم الامام ونعم الوصى نعم علياً وان الرسول نعم محمدا وان الرب
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
العالمين رب لله الحمد درجته وارفع امته فى شفاعته تقبل محمد وآل محمد
</p>

(Fiqh e Kamil, P 31)

#### 45-Brief Tashahud

####

واشهد له لاشريك وحده الله الا اله لا ان اشهد لله الحمد

<p dir="rtl">
واولاده الله ولى علياً المؤمنين امير ان واشهد ورسوله عبده محمدا ان
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على صلى اللهم اجمعين عليهم الله صلوات الله حجج المعصومين
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مجيد حميد انك ابراهيم آل وعلى ابراهيم على صليت كما محمد وآل محمد
</p>

#### 46-Beautiful Tashahud

####

لا ان اشهد

<p dir="rtl">
امير ان واشهد ورسوله عبده محمدا ان واشهد له لاشريك وحده الله الا اله
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجته الحسين بن وعلى حجته والحسين حجته والحسن حجته المؤمنين
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجته جعفر بن وموسىٰ حجته محمد بن وجعفر حجته على بن ومحمد
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجته محمد بن على و حجته على بن ومحمد حجته موسىٰ بن على و
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على صلى اللهم حجته الحسن بن ومحمد حجته على بن والحسن
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مجيد حميد انك ابراهيم آل وعلى ابراهيم على صليت كما محمد وآل محمد
</p>

#### 47-Zikr of Imams (s.a.a.) in Sajdah e Shukr

####

Imam Musa Kazim (s.a.) used to recite in Sajdah e Shukr:

<p dir="rtl">
ورسلك وانبيائك ملائكتك واشهد اشهدك انى اللهم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والحسن وعلياً ومحمدنبي دينى والاسلام ربى الله انك خلقك وجميع
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وموسىٰ محمد بن وجعفر على بن ومحمد الحسين بن وعلى والحسين
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الحسن محمدو بن وعلى على بن ومحمد موسىٰ بن وعلى جعفر بن
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أتبراء اعدائهم ومن أتونى بهم أئمتى على بن الحسن بن والحجة على بن
</p>

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 221)

#### 48-Ziyarat of Masoom (s.a.) is Ziyarat of Allah

####

*Sheikh Sudooq (r.a.) said (according to Quran & Sunnah): Meeting Allah
means Ziyarat of His Prophets (a.s.) and His Hujjats (s.a.a.). Who did
Ziyarat of these personalities (a.s.) he did Ziyarat of Allah Jalla
Shanohu. And it is similar as who obeyed them (s.a.) he obeyed Allah
Jalla Shanohu, and who disobeyed them (a.s.) he disobeyed Allah Jalla
Shanohu, who followed them (a.s.) he followed Allah.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 2, P 68)

So who prohibits Zikr of Imams (s.a.a.) in Ibadat, in fact he prohibits
from the Zikr of Allah.

#### 49-To Martyr with Tongue: What is the Meaning?

####

*One sentence in the Ziyarat of Imam (s.a.) is: “May Allah kill him who
martyrs you (s.a.) with his hands or tongue.”*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 2, P 380)

To martyr Imam (s.a.) with hand is clear i.e. they used sword and
poison. Sub-o-Shitam (calling bad names) is another injustice. And to
martyr with tongue means to deny Testification of Walayat.

#### 50-Namaaz with Bughz e Ali (s.a.): Great Sin

####

الزنا اولاد جبهات على كتبت                  معروفة علامة الوصى بغض

<p dir="rtl">
زنا ام صلى الله عند سيان                      وليه الانام من يوال لم من
</p>

(al Manaqab ibne Shahr Ashoob, V 3, P 208)

It means that Bughz of Wasi (s.a.) is a well known sign; written on the
forehead of illegitimate children; who does not love Wali (s.a.) from
the creations; it is same near Allah whether he prays or does adultery.

Actually it is the translation of one Hadees which I have mentioned in
chapter 8.22 in ‘Flowers of Devotion’

‘al Manaqab’ is a ten centuries old famous Shia book. If someone objects
how Namaaz can become a Great Sin? It is similar as ‘Ahsan e Taqweem’
human becomes ‘Asfala Safileen’ by keeping Bughz e Ali (s.a.), or
becomes worse than animals.

Secondly it is not ordinary poetry.

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Who said one verse of poetry in our
favour, then Allah builds one house for him in Jannat”.*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 51)

#### 51-Explanation of Emaan

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Emaan is the name of Marifat with
heart, Testification with tongue, and Practical with limbs.”*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 397, Nehjul Balagha, P 709)

It means Momin is he whose heart has Marifat of Tauheed, Risalat, and
Walayat; then with Marifat testifies with his tongue while doing deeds.
Namaaz is also one of the deeds. Namaaz is the Practical Proof of
Testification of Walayat of Ali (s.a.), about which question will be
asked on the day of Qiyamah.

#### 52-Usool e Deen or Farooh e Deen

####

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “Four things indicate Decline:*

*1- To loose Usool e Deen*

*2- To keep in touch with Farooh e Deen, and giving it      preference*

*3- To give preference to the Mean*

*4- To leave behind the Honoured ones”*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 73)

We seek refuge with Allah, and supplicate that our Imam (a.f.s.) should
appear as soon as possible. All these signs which Maola Ali (s.a.) told
are present in the Snakes of our sleeves. Mulla is stressing on Namaaz
(Farooh e Deen) without Walayat e Ali (s.a.) (Usool e Deen). So-called
scholars with Bughz e Ali (s.a.), self made stories of their miracles
are being narrated. It is being stressed that Marifat of Highness and
Faza’il of Masomeen (s.a.a.) is not necessary, just keep doing good
deeds. They are trying their best to contact Allah directly on the base
of their good deeds without Waseela.

#### 53-Munkir e Walayat e Ali (s.a.): Munkir e Tauheed

####

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “Kufr is to deny our Walayat, and Munkir
of our Fazilat is Kafir. Its reason is obvious because there is no
difference between Munkir of Walayat,*

*Munkir of Fazilat, Munkir of Nabuwat, and Munkir of Lordship.”*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 74)

So Munkir of Fazilat (Superiority) is Munkir of Tauheed, e.g. To
consider Walayat e Ali (s.a.) Mafzool (inferior) than Namaaz.

#### 54-Haqq is with Maola Ali (s.a.) always

####

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “Swear by Allah should I remind you that
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Haqq is with Ali (s.a.), and Ali (s.a.)
is with Haqq, Haqq revolves with Ali (s.a.) wherever he goes.”*

(Nehjul Israr, V 2, P 338)

Haqq is obedient to Maola Ali (s.a.), wherever Ali (s.a.) goes Haqq is
behind him. Is our Namaaz not Haqq? Haqq is only there where Ali (s.a.)
is, otherwise Namaaz is same which Rashidud Din Mohammad ibne Shahr
Ashoob Mazandrani explained in topic no: 50.

#### 55-Imam Ali (s.a.) in Verbal & Practical declaration

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “O people! Who rejected Ali (s.a.)
verbally or practically, then certainly he rejected me, and who rejected
me, then certainly he rejected Allah on High Arsh.”*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 422)

Everybody knows that Verbal means to Testify with tongue, and Practical
means to perform deed with limbs.

#### 56-Sajdah on Earth

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Sajdah on earth is the most superior.”*

(Alul al-Shrai, V 2, P 401)

From this Earth our father Adam (a.s.) was created, from the same earth
we get food for the sake of the foot-wear of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad
(s.a.a.), we live on this earth, we will be buried in this earth, and we
will be resurrected from the same earth. And this Earth is property of
Abu Turab (s.a.), so Sajdah on earth is superior. Imam e Mubeen (s.a.)
encompasses everything. Then who barks to the Lord, curse of Allah,
Angels, and Momineen on him.

#### 57-Hyya Ala Khairil Amal

####

*Imam Abul Hassan (s.a.) said: “Khairil Amal means Walayat. The aim of
the order to stop saying ‘Hyya Ala Khairil Amal’ was that people should
not get together on it, and start inviting (preaching) towards it.”*

(Alul al-Shrai, V 2, P 435)

To invite in Azaan towards ‘Khairil Amal’ i.e. Deed with Walayat e Ali
(s.a.), and then to short-cut Namaaz without Walayat is just like what
Kufis did: Kufis called Imam Hussain (s.a.) by writing letters, and when
Imam (s.a.) came then they refused help. Some martyred Imam (s.a.) with
hand, some are martyring with their tongues.

#### 58-Understand the Reality of Namaaz

####

*One day Amirul Momineen (s.a.) was passing through the yard of Bait
al-Haraam, and saw a person offering Namaaz,*

*and he praised his Namaaz, then asked: O man! Do you know Taweel and
real meaning of your Namaaz? He replied: O son of the uncle of the Best
Creation (s.a.w.a.w.) of Allah! Is there any other meaning of Namaaz
other than Order and Service? Maola Ali (s.a.) said: O man! Know that
whichever Nabi (a.s.) Allah sent down with order, for that order there
are similarities, and its Taweel and Tanzeel as well. And this is based
on Service. Thus who does not understand Taweel of his Namaaz and its
real meaning, his Namaaz is totally deceit, faulty, and incomplete.*

(Alul al-Shrai, V 2, P 723)

*Maola Abul Hassan (s.a.) said: “Whenever these people (Munkir e
Walayat) say Namaaz, then at the time of every Namaaz Allah Ta’ala
curses on them, because these people deny our Haqq, and belie us.”*

(Alul al-Shrai, V 2, P 727)

The real meaning of Namaaz is explained by the saying of Amirul Momineen
(s.a.):*“I am Namaaz of Momineen, and their Zakaat, and their Hajj, and
their Jihaad.”*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 75)

#### 59-Mashiyat e Ilahi

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Allah created Mashiyat before things,
then created things through Mashiyat.”*

(al Tauheed, P 279)

Imam (s.a.) also said: “We are Mashiyat of Allah.” Now who will do any
deed without Mashiyat (Will, Pleasure) of Allah, whether it is Namaaz,
then what will happen to that deed and its doer?

#### 60-The Result of Separating Kitaab & Itrat (s.a.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Among my Ummah, that person will exit
from Deen like arrow exits from the bow, who separates Kitaab and Itrat
(s.a.a.).”*

(Kamalud Din, V 2, P 626)

Now if anyone during any deed recites Quran but expels Itrat of Rasool
(s.a.a.), then he exits from Deen like an Arrow.

#### 61-Hadees e Saqalain

####

*Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Certainly it is near that I will be
called, and I will say ‘Labbaik’ to it. Thus I am leaving among you Two
Weighty Things (Saqalain): Book of Allah, and my Itrat (s.a.a.). Book of
Allah is that Rope which is stretching from Sky to Earth, and my Itrat
is my Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.). And no doubt Lateef Khabeer has informed me
that they both will never separate until they will come to me on the
Pond of Kausar. So ponder that whom you make my Khalifa.”*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 1, P 132)

Now anyone who separates Quran and Itrat (s.a.a.), he belies the Haqq
Words of Allah and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.), he is battling with Qadir e
Mutliq. Everyone knows that Quran is Samit (Silent), Quran needs it's
Translator, the Masomeen (s.a.a.); and Itrat (s.a.a.) is Quran e Natiq
(Speaking Quran).

#### 62-To think Traditions & Verses about Walayat e Ali (s.a.) as Unreliable

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “More than this will be grieved
(regretting) that person who collected wealth with many difficulties by
putting him in dangers, and then spent it in charity and good works,
spent his youth and power in Ibadaat and Namaaz, but did not believe in
the Haqq of Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.), did not recognise his status and
degree in Islam, and considered those people better who do not possess
even tenth of tenth of Fazilat of Maola. When proofs of Righteousness of
Maola are presented to him, he hesitates. When proofs are presented in
front of him from the Traditions and Quranic Verses, it rather increases
his arrogance and ignorance. The grief and regret of such person will be
more than all the people on the day of Qiyamah. He will be resurrected
in such a condition that his charity will be chasing him in the form of
snakes, pythons, and Angels of punishment, and his Namaaz and Ibadaat
will convert into the Angels of Azaab (Punishment), until they will cast
him in Hell and beat him. He will say: “Curse on me, was I not from
among those who offer Namaaz? Was I not among those who give Zakaat? Was
I not pious about wealth and ladies? For what reason I am caught in so
much hardships and punishments?” He will be told: ‘Ill fated! Which
deeds you did they are of no use to you, because you left the Great
Obligation after believing in Tauheed of Allah and Nabuwat of Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.); and that Inevitable Obligation is Marifat of Haqq of Ali
ibne Abi Talib (s.a.). Along with it you made obligatory on you such
thing which Allah declared Haraam, and that is to follow the enemies of
Allah. In such a situation, you can not get anything except distance
from Rahmat of Allah, and nearness to wrath & anger of Allah, even if
instead of your these deeds Ibadaat of all the world,*

*and instead of your charities the wealth of all the world, rather more
deeds than those mentioned, and gold equal to planet Earth is given in
the way of Allah.”*

(Tafseer Imam Hassan Askari s.a.)

Mulla is declaring Ahadees, Narrations, and Quranic verses about Faza’il
of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) weak and unreliable; and those
books are also unreliable which mention Faza’il. And it is stressed
nowadays that Taqleed of fallible Mulla is obligatory, who is secretly
denier of Faza’il of Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.).

#### 63-Fourteen Infallibles (s.a.a.) in Juma Sermon

####

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “Do not talk when Imam is delivering
Sermon of Juma, and pay attention to Sermon like in Namaaz. And Juma
Namaaz is declared two Rakat due to two Sermons, and these two Sermons
are in place of the last two Rakats. Therefore these two Sermons are
Namaaz as well until Imam comes down from the pulpit.”*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1. P 269)

There is Zikr e Masomeen (s.a.a.) in the Sermon of Juma, which is equal
to two Rakat Namaaz, and replaces it.

#### 64-Ya Ali (s.a.) Maddad at Arsh

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “It is written on Arsh, ‘I am Allah,
there is none worthy of worship except Me, I am One, I do not have
partner, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is My Abd and Rasool, I Helped him
through Ali (s.a.).” Then said: “Allah revealed this verse, ‘He is Him
Who helped you with His Help and Momineen’ (Anfaal), in this verse ‘Be
Nasr’ means Ali*

*(s.a.), and he is included in Momineen as well, so in both forms Ali
(s.a.) is totally included.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 426)

Ali (s.a.) is name of HELP of Allah Jalla Shanohu, even on Arsh Sultan e
Naseer is Ali (s.a.), for everyone everywhere in the Universe Helper is
only Ali (s.a.). Muqassir Mulla should now complain to Allah Qadir e
Mutliq that at least on Arsh You should help Yourself, or at least
remove the signboard of ‘Ya Ali Maddad’ from the Arsh.

#### 65-Walayat e Ali (s.a.) or Abundant Deeds?

####

*Hazrat Jabir bin Abdullah narrated: I was sitting on one side of Nabi
Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) and Maola Ali Amirul Momineen (s.a.) on the other
side. Umar bin Khattab brought a person dragging by his neck. He
(s.a.w.a.w.) asked: ‘What is his fault?’ He answered: ‘Ya Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.)! He narrates from you that you have said: ‘Who says La
Ilaha Illallaho Mohammadur Rasool Allah, he will enter paradise’ and if
people will hear this, then they will fall short in deeds. Ya Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) did you say it?’ Looking towards Maola Ali (s.a.)
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Yes, but who will keep in touch with
his (s.a.) love and Walayat.”*

(Basharat al Mustafa s.a.w.a.w., P 212)

Nowadays Nasibi Mulla is saying as well that people are running away
from ‘Amal’ by telling Faza’il in Majalis, we should stress on Amaal.

#### 66-Majlis e Mazloom (s.a.) in the Middle of Ibadat

####

Imam Mohammad Baqir (s.a.) advised (will) to spend eight hundred Dirhams
to arrange Matam gathering on his martyrdom. In addition he advised to
arrange Matam gathering for ten years during Hajj.

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 131)

Hajj is that international congregational Ibadat which is the secret of
splendour of Islam. If someone does not go for Hajj purposely but spends
countless money in the way of Allah, it will be useless. Exactly in the
middle of such great Ibadat, it is advised to mention Faza’il & Masa’ib
of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) at Arafat. Hajj is an
international Ibadat, by placing Majlis & Matam in it, it is made clear
that Majlis & Matam is not a local tradition of any country or culture,
or it has nothing to do with the basics of Islam. It also proves that
any Ibadat, big or small, is accepted only with Zikr of Masomeen
(s.a.a.).

#### 67-Who is Masjood e Malaika?

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Allah Ta’ala first of all separated us
from His Noor, and we used to do His Tamjeed. [Someone asked Masoom
(s.a.): What is your relation with Allah Ta’ala? He said: Like relation
of Sun to its Ray.] Then Allah Jalla Shanohu created the Angels. When
Angels saw our spirits in the form of Noor, they thought us the Greatest
of all, then we said ‘Subhan Allah’, so by listening our Tasbeeh Angels
started Tasbeeh. Similarly again when Angels saw our highness and
splendour, we said ‘La Ilaha illa Allah’, on hearing this Angels started
Tehleel. Then Angels saw our high status, then we said ‘Allaho Akbar’,
on hearing this Angels started saying Takbeer. Then Angels saw our
honour*

*and power, then we said ‘La howla wa la quwata illa Billah hil Aliul
Azeem’. Again when Angels observed the Favours of Allah on us, and
Obligation of our obedience then we said ‘Al Hamdo Lillah’. Only due to
us Angels got Marifat of Tauheed e Ilahi, and through us they came to
know Tasbeeh, Tehleel, Tehmeed, and Tamjeed. Then Allah created Adam
(a.s.), and we honoured the Sulb of Adam (a.s.). And only for the sake
of our respect & honour Angels were commanded to do Sajdah to Adam
(a.s.). And this Sajdah of Angels was for the worship of Allah Jalla
Shanohu and to honour & respect Adam (a.s.), because we were in his
Sulb.”*

(Alul al-Shrai, V 1, P 6, Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 458)

Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) gave lesson of Tauheed to all
Aalameen. When their Noor came in the forehead of Adam (a.s.), Adam
(a.s.) became Masjood-e-Malaika. Then Allah sent down Noor of His
Beloved Ali (s.a.) in Ka’ba and made it Masjood-e-Khalaiq.

No one can get real Marifat of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) except
Allah. Angels learned Tauheed and Ibadaat from them. When after long
time, Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) went to Mai’raj, then these infallible
Angels of Allah fell in Sajdah on every Sky thinking that he
(s.a.w.a.w.) was Noor of Allah, and Jibraeel (a.s.) had to introduce him
(s.a.w.a.w.). If infallible Angels doubt about Masomeen (s.a.a.), they
doubt them Allah. Or Angels might have recognised that it is the same
Noor which was in the forehead of Adam (a.s.) and Allah commanded them
to do Sajdah. But definitely Najis Muqassir Mulla can not even
understand the status of the animals kept by Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).

#### 68-Ziyarat e Imam (s.a.) equal to Lakh Hajj

####

*Ahmad bin Abi Nasr read one sentence from a letter of Imam Ali Raza
(s.a.): “Convey this message to our Shias that my Ziyarat is equal to
one thousand Hajj near Allah.”*

Ahmad bin Abi Nasr asked Imam Mohammad Taqi (s.a.): ‘Maola! One thousand
Hajj?’ Imam (s.a.) said: “I swear by Allah, if one does Ziyarat with the
Marifat of his Haqq, then there is reward of one hundred thousand Hajj
for him.”

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 2, P 553)

Ziyarat of Masoom (s.a.) is equal to hundreds of thousands of Hajj.
Similarly that Namaaz in which Zikr of Masoom (s.a.) is done, is
superior to hundred thousand Namaaz.

#### 69-Marifat e Imam (s.a.)

####

*Few sentences from the sermon of Wali e Mutliq, Amirul Momineen (s.a.):
“My Marifat e Norani is Marifat of Allah, and Marifat of Allah is my
Marifat, and this is the Pure Deen...........The saying of Allah
‘Establish Namaaz’ means my Walayat............Momin is that before
anything from our Amr comes to him, Allah expands his chest to accept
that, and he does not doubt in it. And who said ‘Why and How’, he became
Kafir. Thus just accept Amr of Allah that we are Amr of
Allah............Saying of Allah ‘Ask help from Sabr and Salaat’, so
Sabr (Patience) is Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) and Salaat (Namaaz) means my
Walayat............Our birth and progeny is not by abdomens, and nothing
can be thought like people for us............In fact we are that Noor of
Allah, which does not decline or change. Every one who was sent down
(Prophets) got honour due to us. You do not say ‘Allah’ to us, then say
whatever you want about us............Destruction is for him who denies
what I said............In spite of all these Faza’il,*

*we eat and drink, walk in Bazaars, this all we do due to order of our
Rabb............ I am that who has the keys of Ghaib............I am
that Book in which there is no doubt al all (i.e. Quran e Natiq), I am
that Asma al-Husna of Allah, about which Allah has ordered to supplicate
with that............I am Namaaz, Fast, Zakaat, Hajj, and Jihad of
Momineen............I am Ism e Azam, there is no similitude for
that............I am that whose Walayat was denied by one thousand
nations, and I will reappear in the last era............I am Mohammad
Mustafa (s.a.w.a.w.) and I am Ali Murtaza (s.a.), as Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) said: Ali (s.a.) appeared from me, I am praise by Roohul
Quds, I am on whom no name or similitude can apply ............I am
Malik of Namaaz............Tooba (good news) is for the people of my
Walayat who accept these Faza’il for me............I am that
Kalimatullah with which all the affairs are completed............I see
hypocrites who say that Ali (s.a.) has declared proof for his Lordship.
Beware! Only testify that which can be asked when needed. Certainly Ali
(s.a.) is a Noor Creation, and is an Abd getting sustenance (from
Allah), who will say contrary to it, then curse of Allah and curse of
cursing ones on him............Jabir asked: Ya Amirul Momineen (s.a.),
are you alone like this? Maola (s.a.) said: ‘Add thirteen names in it
and include me in them.’*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 82, Bahrul Ma’arif)

#### 70-Tauheed e Ilahi: Ali (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Ya Ali (s.a.)! Your similitude is Sura
‘Qul Howa Allah’ in my Ummah. So who loved you with heart, it is as he
read one third Quran, who loved you with heart and helped you with
tongue, it is as he read two third Quran, and who loved you with heart
and helped you with tongue and helped you with hand, it is as he read
full Quran.*

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: On the day of Khandaq one stroke
(Zarbat) of Ali is superior to Ibadaat of all Jinns and Humans. And
said: Whole (Complete) Emaan is going to compete with Whole Kufr.*

(Nehjul Israr, V 2, P 400)

Ali (s.a.) is Sura Tauheed, Whole Emaan, Complete Islam, All Deen near
Allah Ta’ala. Who argues about Faza’il e Ali (s.a.), he is like Whole
Kufr.

#### 71-Action of Hujjatullah (s.a.) becomes Deen

####

*Imam Ali Raza (s.a.) said: “Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) started five
Sunnah, which Allah Jalla Shanohu kept as it is in Islam: He declared
wife of father Haraam for son, he declared blood-money for murder as one
hundred camels, he counted one Tawaf after circumambulating seven times
around Baitullah, he found treasure and he gave Khums from it, he dug
the well of Zam Zam again and named it ‘Saqayatul Haaj’.*

*If Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) was not Hujjat of Allah, then he would
not have intended to sacrifice his son Abdullah (s.a.) acting on the
Sunnah of Ibraheem (a.s.), and Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) would not have
said proudly about his action: ‘I am son of two slaughtered (sacrificed)
ones.’*

*Due to which reason Allah Ta’ala saved Ismaeel (a.s.) from being
slaughtered, for the same reason He saved Hazrat Abdullah (s.a.) from
being slaughtered. And the reason of safety of both personalities was
that Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and Masomeen (s.a.a.) were in their Sulb.
Due to the blessing of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and Masomeen (s.a.a.)
both were saved from being slaughtered, and it did not become tradition
to sacrifice children for the people. If Hazrat Ismaeel (a.s.)*

*and Hazrat Abdullah (s.a.) were slaughtered, then it would have become
obligatory for the people to sacrifice their children.”*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 372)

#### 72-Ali (s.a.) Masalul A’la is Matchless

####

*Allah Ta’ala said: “If Ali (s.a.) was not there, then there was no
match of Syyeda Fatima (s.a.), neither Adam (a.s.) nor someone else.”*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 396)

The saying of Allah is Haqq, but apparently Adam (a.s.) is grand father
of Syyeda Fatima (s.a.), if he was alive then marriage was not
permissible. So it becomes clear that the Reality of Mohammad o Aal e
Mohammad (s.a.a.) is different than Adam (a.s.). Adam (a.s.) and his
progeny are created from earth. Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) are
Mashiyat e Ilahi, they are not created from any thing.

#### 73-Grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.) is Great

####

Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) was delivering sermon, in the meanwhile Imam
Hussain (s.a.) came out from the holy house, and apparently tripped. On
seeing it, Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) immediately came down from the
pulpit and picked him up and embraced him. (Imam Hussain s.a. did not
fall, but it was just to show people the high status of Imam)

(Biharul Anwaar, V 10, P 111)

Sermon is Ibadat e Ilahi. In the love of Imam Hussain (s.a.) Syyedul
Anbiya (s.a.w.a.w.) left the sermon. Maola Hussain (s.a.) is the Base of
Deen of Allah, and Ibadaat are branches of Deen.

#### 74-Hazrat Zakariya (a.s.): Azadaar e Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*Summary of a saying of Imam Qaim (a.f.s.): Hazrat Zakariya (a.s.) asked
Allah Ta’ala: Teach me the names of Aal e Aba (s.a.a.), so that I can
seek refuge for their sake in every hardship & difficulty. Hazrat
Jibraeel (a.s.) told him the names of Hazrat Mohammad Mustafa
(s.a.w.a.w.), Maola Ali Murtaza (s.a.), Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.),
Maola Hassan (s.a.) and Maola Hussain (s.a.). When Hazrat Zakariya
(a.s.) was saying the name of Imam Hussain (s.a.) he was weeping
bitterly and could not control. Hazrat Zakariya (a.s.) asked, then Allah
Ta’ala told about the martyrdom of Imam Hussain (s.a.): Kaaf Ha Ya Ain
Saad, Kaaf: Karbala, Ha: Halakat of Yazidiyat, Ya: Yazeed Laeen (l.u.)
who martyred Itrat (s.a.a.), Ain: Atash, thirst of Itrat (s.a.a.), Saad:
Sabr o Raza. When Zakariya (a.s.) heard it, then he did not come out of
the mosque for three days, and did not let anyone to come to him, and
kept weeping bitterly, and said Nauha: Ya Allah, he will be in the grief
of son, who is the Best of all the Creations (s.a.w.a.w.), will Ali
(s.a.) & Fatima (s.a.) dress in grief, he will be in pain, suffering and
hardship. Then he made Dua to Allah: Ya Allah Jalla Shanohu, bestow me a
son, who should be light of my eyes in this old age, and when you give
me the son, then drown me in his love, then make me sad like your
Beloved Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P 62)

Hazrat Zakariya (a.s.) requested Allah in old age to bestow a Prophet
son Yahya (a.s.), just to make him a model (Shabeh) of Imam Hussain
(s.a.), that he should be martyred in the way of Allah like Imam Hussain
(s.a.). The Court of Yazeed Laeen (l.u.) is the same place where the
head of Hazrat Yahya (a.s.) was placed as well. Hazrat Zakariya (a.s.)
wept and said Nauha of

Imam Hussain (s.a.) in the Masjid. Similarly Hazrat Ibraheem (a.s.)
presented his son for sacrifice in the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.).

#### 75-Allah wants Homage by Shedding Blood in the Grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*When Hazrat Adam (a.s.) reached the desert of Karbala, grief and
sadness captured him, his heart was restless. When he came on the place
of martyrdom of Imam Hussain (s.a.), he hit one stone and his foot
started bleeding. Allah Ta’ala revealed: On this land my Chosen one
Hussain (a.s.) will be martyred, I wished that you should also share his
grief, and your blood should be shed on this land as well, like his
blood will be shed. Hazrat Adam (a.s.) cursed on Yazeed Laeen (l.u.).*

*Hazrat Ibraheem (a.s.) was passing through the desert of Karbala riding
on his horse, the horse fell on its head. The head of Hazrat Ibraheem
(a.s.) hit a stone, and started bleeding. Allah Ta’ala said: This is
that land on which the Noor of Eyes of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) and Ali
(s.a.) will be martyred, I wished that you should also share his
hardship, your blood should also be shed on this land, on which land his
blood will be shed. Hazrat Ibraheem (a.s.) cursed on Yazeed Laeen (l.u.)
and his horse was saying ‘Amen’*

*When Hazrat Musa came to Karbala, the strap of his foot-wear broke, his
feet were injured. Allah Ta’ala revealed: On this land the blood of
Hussain (s.a.) will be shed, I wished your blood should be also shed on
this land. Hazrat Musa (a.s.) cursed on Yazeed (l.u.) and Yousha bin
Noon (a.s.) said ‘Amen’*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P 82-84)

It is Sunnah of Olil Azm Prophets (a.s.) to pay homage to Imam Hussain
(s.a.) by shedding blood, and Allah’s Pleasure is also in it.

#### 76-Sha’air Allah: the cause of Piety of Hearts

####

*Ibne Abbas (r.a.) narrated: Going for battle of Siffeen, when we
reached land of Nainwa, Maola Ali (s.a.) wept bitterly, and told the
incidents of Karbala. Then told that Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said that
we will find dung of dears here whose colour will be yellow like
saffron. Ibne Abbas found that dung. Maola Ali (s.a.) told: Hazrat Esa
(a.s.) passed through here with his companions, and saw some dears were
weeping, Hazrat Esa (a.s.) also wept in the grief of Imam Hussain
(s.a.). Dears said to Hazrat Esa (a.s.): They graze the grass of this
holy land in the love of Imam Hussain (s.a.). Its smell was more than
Musk, or anything else. So the dung also smelt nice. Ibne Abbas tied the
dung in his Chador. Hazrat Esa (a.s.) supplicated at that time: Ya
Allah, keep this dung like this, so that the father of Hussain (s.a.)
will see it. Maola Ali (s.a.) said: Ibne Abbas! when you see that fresh
blood is oozing from it, then know that definitely my Mazloom son (s.a.)
is martyred. Ibne Abbas said: I protected that dung more than my
obligatory prayers, and always kept it tied with my arm. One day I was
asleep, suddenly I woke up, my arm was full of blood, and blood was
coming out from that dung, I started lamenting. Then saw outside that
there was a dust storm, the walls were red, and Angels were giving news
of martyrdom of Imam Hussain (s.a.).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P 92)

A well known scholar like Ibne Abbas (r.a.) was guarding the dung more
than his obligatory Namaaz, because that dung was

related with the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.). O you the snakes of the
sleeve! who are secretly opposing Zuljanah, Alam, Taboot, Mehndi, and
Cradle, still there is time for you to repent before the strike of
Zulfiqaar of Imam e Qaim (a.f.s.).

#### 77-Earth & Sky wept Blood in the Grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*According to a Hadees of Imam Baqir (s.a.), after the martyrdom of Imam
Hussain (s.a.) blood came out from the Earth, if a stone or lump was
moved fresh blood was springing, for three days blood rained from the
Sky. The same happened on the martyrdom of Maola Ali (s.a.). Sun, Moon,
Atmosphere, Angels, and everything mourned in the grief of Imam Hussain
(s.a.).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 2, P 381-382, V 1, P 121)

Every thing that has Marifat of its Creator, and understands the Wish of
Allah, pays homage by shedding blood in the grief of Imam Hussain
(s.a.).

#### 78-One Tear-drop in the Grief of Hussain (s.a.)

####

*According to the saying of Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.), if one drop of
tears of the mourner of Mazloom-e-Karbala (s.a.) is put in Hell, its all
heat will be finished.*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P 124)

If one Tear-drop of the mourner of Imam Hussain (s.a.) can cool down
completely the whole Jahannam, then how much will be the value of
shedding blood near Allah! Every one knows that Imam

Zainul Abideen (s.a.) and Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) are weeping blood. Why
hypocrite Muqassir Mulla is afraid of shedding blood?

#### 79-Syyeda Zainab (s.a.) and Shedding Blood

####

*When Syyeda Masooma Zainab al-Kubra (s.a.) saw the holy head of Maola
Hussain (s.a.), she hit her head with the pole of Mahmal (litter,
saddle), and her holy forehead was bleeding. She was weeping and saying
Nauha, and in her Nauha she was addressing Imam Hussain (s.a.) and
narrating the hardships on Syyeda Sakina (s.a.) and Imam Zainul Abideen
(s.a.).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 2, P 314, Yanabeh al-Mawaddat, P 568)

#### 80-Angels (s.a.) leave Ibadat and weep

####

Infallible Imam (s.a.) said: When Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.) weeps in
the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.), then Prophets (a.s.), Siddeeqs,
Shuhada, and Angels start weeping with her, until Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) comes, and says: O my daughter (s.a.)! You made the
inhabitants of the skies weep so much that Angels have left Ibadat. Four
thousand Angels whom Imam Hussain (s.a.) did not give permission for
Jihad on 10th Moharram, will keep weeping, with dust in their hair, they
welcome the Zaireen (visitors) of Imam Hussain (s.a.) but they can not
say Salaam due to their weeping & lamenting. They will be included in
the army of Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) after Zahoor, and will take revenge for
the blood of Imam Hussain (s.a.). If people come to know the reward of
Ziyarat of Imam Hussain (s.a.), they will kill each other for that.

(Biharul Anwaar, V 2, P 393)

Muqassir Mulla should go to Mansoor, who is the head of 4000 Angels
weeping & lamenting continuously day and night since 61

Hijri at the Shrine of Imam Hussain (s.a.), and ask: You are infallible
Angels, and you weep so much that you can not even answer Salaam, for
centuries you are soiled in dust & blood from Karbala, at least stop for
a while, do Wazu to wash dust & blood to worship Allah as well.

#### 81-Imam (s.a.) tears shirt in the Grief of Imam (s.a.)

####

*When Imam Ali Naqi (s.a.) was martyred, Imam Hassan Askari (s.a.) came
out of his holy house and his shirt was torn in front and back as well.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 127)

#### 82-To get skin-cuts is Sunnah

####

*Imam Baqir (s.a.) said: Nabi Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) let the barber make
skin cuts on his head, between his shoulders, and back three times, and
said it is beneficial, helping, and rescuing.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 296)

*If a person has a cut and it is bleeding, and its blood is soaking his
clothes, it does not matter if he does not wash it until it heals or
blood stops.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 67)

O you, who declare Matam with sword & knife Haraam! Come into senses.
Which blood is shed in the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.) neither it is
Najis itself, nor it makes clothes Najis. Prophets (a.s.) shed blood in
the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.), if you do not understand why Nabi
Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) made cuts on his holy head, neck, and back; then
curse your mother. Rather that person is Najis al-Ain who declares
Fatawa against Azadari and Walayat.

#### 83-Value of Visitor of Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Certainly Allah Ta’ala looks for
Blessing towards Zawaar of the Shrine of Imam Hussain (s.a.) during the
first part of the Night of Arfa.” Ali bin Asbat asked: ‘Even before
looking towards those staying in the Plane of Arafat?’ He said: “Yes.
Because among them (Arafat people) there are illegitimates as well, but
there isn’t any illegitimate among the others.”*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 440)

To accept Walayat e Ali (s.a.) without any doubt & hesitation is the
proof of purity of birth.

#### 84-Abundant Ibadat & Munkir e Walayat

####

*Allah said: I have created the seven skies and whatever is in them, and
seven earths and whatever is in them, no place is superior to Rukn &
Maqam. If a person does Ibadat on this place since the time I have
created the skies and the earth, and then meets Me in such a condition
that he is denier of Walayat e Ali (s.a.), then I will do cast him in
Hell.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 323)

#### 85-Emaan on Faza’il e Ali (s.a.) & Abundant Deeds

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: One day Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) asked
companions: Who is among you who keeps fast his whole life? Salman
(a.s.) said: I, Ya Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.). He (s.a.w.a.w.) asked
again: Who is among you who keeps awake (for Ibadat) whole night? Salman
(a.s.) said: I, Ya Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.). He (s.a.w.a.w.) asked: Who
is*

*among you who finishes Quran daily? Salman (a.s.) said: I, Ya Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.). Thus some people became angry, and said: Ya Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)! Salman is a Persian, he is proud, most of the days
he spends eating and drinking, most of the night he spends sleeping, and
most of the day spends being quiet. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Be
quiet. What is your status in front of him who is like Luqman Hakeem,
ask him, he will explain to you. They asked Salman (a.s.), and Salman
(a.s.) said: Certainly I keep fast three days in every month, and Allah
says ‘Who brings one good-deed, for him there are ten like that’ (Sura
An’am), and I join Shaban with Ramazan, in this way it is like keeping
fasts whole life; and Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said ‘Who sleeps with
Taharat (Wazu), then it is like he was awake (in Ibadat) whole night’,
so I sleep at night with Taharat; and Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said to
Maola Ali (s.a.) ‘Ya Aba al-Hassan (s.a.)! Your similitude is ‘Qul Howa
Allah’ in my Ummah, who recites it, certainly he recited 1/3 Quran, and
who recites it twice, then certainly he recited 2/3 Quran, and who
recites it thrice, then certainly he recited the whole Quran, who loves
you with tongue, certainly his 1/3 Emaan is complete, and who loves you
with tongue and heart, then his 2/3 Emaan is complete, and who loves you
with tongue and heart, and helps you with hand, certainly his Emaan is
perfect, and I swear by Him Who sent me with Haqq, O Ali (s.a.)! If the
inhabitants of the Earth would have loved you like the inhabitants of
the Skies love you, then no one would have the punishment of Fire. And I
daily recite Qul Howa Allah three times.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 282, Amali V 1, P 110)

The reason that Salman (a.s.) is on a high degree of Emaan is only that
he did not doubt in any saying of Allah and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.), he
did not classify Ahadees, which one to accept or which one to reject,
and he did not separate Walayat e Ali (s.a.) and Tauheed e Ilahi.

#### 86-Walayat e Ali (s.a.) is Walayat of Allah

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Walayat of Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is
Walayat of Allah Jalla Shanohu, his love is Ibadat of Allah Jalla
Shanohu, his obedience is obligation of Allah Jalla Shanohu, and his
friends are friends of Allah Jalla Shanohu, and his enemies are enemies
of Allah Jalla Shanohu, and battle with him is battle with Allah Jalla
Shanohu, and peace with him is peace with Allah Jalla Shanohu.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 107)

One can not separate Ray from the Sun, similarly Expresser of the
Attributes of Allah (s.a.) can not be separated from Tauheed.

#### 87-Reality of Ali (s.a.) only Allah & His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) know

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said to Maola Ali (s.a.): If I was not afraid
from a group of my Ummah that they will say such things which Ummah of
Esa (a.s.) said about Esa (a.s.), then I would have narrated so many
Faza’il of you, and I would have told such a thing about you that after
this if you would pass by any nation, then they would have taken dust
under your feet to put in their eyes, and they would have taken the left
over water of your Wazu for cure, but it is enough for you that you are
from me, and I am from you, and I am your heir and you are my heir, and
your relation with me is as Haroon (a.s.) to Musa (a.s.), but there is
no Nabi after me.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 246)

It is clear from the saying of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) that Faza’il of
Maola Ali (s.a.) are such that those are attributes of Allah according
to a less intelligent man. Although human intelligence and wisdom can
not encompass even one Fazilat of Mohammad o

Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.). As far as Marifat e Ilahi is concerned, what
wisdom can perceive that is not Allah. We only know Allah is that Rahman
Who sent Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad for the Guidance of Aalameen.

#### 88-Eid of Momin and Obligations of Angels

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: The day of Ghadeer e Khum is the most
superior Eid for my Ummah, and it is that day on which Allah commanded
to announce Walayat of my brother Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.), so that
Ummah can get guidance after me, and it is that day when Allah completed
Deen, and it is that day when Allah completed His Favours (Ne’mat) on my
Ummah, and chose Islam as Deen for them. Then said: O people! I swear by
Him Who sent me Nabi with Haqq, and chose me above all the creations, I
did not appoint Ali (s.a.) Khalifa on the Earth, even Allah elevated his
name in the skies and made his Walayat Obligatory on the Angels (a.s.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 311)

*Imam Mohammad Baqir (s.a.) said: Whichever Eid comes, whether Eidul
Fitr or Eidul Azha, the grief of Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) is freshened,
when they (s.a.a.) see that their Haqq is occupied by the others.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 322)

Momin is grieved for the martyrdom of Amirul Momineen (s.a.) on Eidul
Fitr, and for Amir Muslim (s.a.) on Eidul Azha.

#### 89-Survival of Universe is due to Hujjatullah (s.a.)

####

*Imam Zainul Abideen (s.a.) said: We are Imam of all Muslims, and we are
Hujjat of Allah over all Aalameen, and we are Head of Momineen, and
Leaders of the people with Bright faces, and Wali of Momineen, we are
the Cause of peace & shelter for the inhabitants of the Earth as stars
are the cause of peace for the inhabitants of the skies, and due to us
Allah has stopped the sky to fall on the earth, and due to us Allah has
stopped the earth not to drown its inhabitants, and due to us rain
falls, and due to us Rahmat is distributed, and due to us blessings come
out of the earth, and if none of us is present on this Earth, then Earth
will engulf its inhabitants.*

*Earth is never vacant from Hujjatullah since the creation of Adam
(a.s.), whether that (Hujjat) is Apparent, Famous or Ghaib, Unknown (to
people), and Earth can not be vacant from Hujjatullah until Qiyamah is
established, and if it was not like that then there would not have been
Ibadat of Allah.*

Imam Sadiq (s.a.) was asked: That Hujjat who is Ghaib in veil, how
people can benefit from him? He (s.a.) said: Like Sun is behind the
clouds, even then people benefit from it.

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 363)

The forefathers of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), from Hazrat Abdullah
(s.a.), Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.), Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (s.a.), Hazrat
Hashim (s.a.) to Hazrat Ismaeel (a.s.) all are infallible Hujjatullah,
through whom Anwaar (s.a.a.) were transferred, and due to them Universe
was perpetuating. The entire Universe is getting sustenance for the sake
of the foot-wear of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).

#### 90-Shirk with Ali (s.a.) is Shirk with Allah

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: After me Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is
Hujjat of Allah for you people, his Kufr is Kufr of Allah, and Shirk
with him is Shirk with Allah, doubt about him is doubting Allah, denying
him is denying Allah, to turn away from his Testification is turning
away from Testification of Allah, believing him is believing Allah,
because he is the brother of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), he is his Wasi,
and Imam of his Ummah, he is their Maola, and strong Rope of Allah, and
strong Support which will never break, two types of people will be
destroyed without doing any sin: first Ghali lover, and second
Muqassir.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 387)

Walayat e Ali (s.a.) is not separate from Tauheed e Ilahi, because Ali
(s.a.) is Janbullah. What is Shirk with Ali (s.a.)? If anyone says that
his name is Allah, then he is doing Shirk. Maola Ali (s.a.) is Ayat
al-Kubra (in Quran), and Ayatullah al-Uzma (in Mafatihul Jinan); Allah,
His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.), Quran, and Mai’raj are its witnesses. Now if
any person is happy to be called ‘Ayatullah al-Uzma’, then he and who
are saying it, are doing Shirk. The lame excuse is ‘Although this is
Title of Ali (s.a.) but after him we can also use it!’. Then be patient
when someone else uses other Titles of Maola Ali (s.a.) e.g. Siddeeq e
Akbar, Farooq e Azam, etc.

Ilhaad (concealing Testification) with Ali (s.a.) is Ilhaad with Allah:
it is self explanatory i.e. concealing Testification of Walayat in
Namaaz.

Now two groups who are not even sinful but will be destroyed due to Ali
(s.a.): First, those low intelligence lovers who say ‘Allah’ to Ali
(s.a.) by seeing his Faza’il. No doubt Angels also doubted Masomeen
(s.a.a.) as Allah but did not slip. That is why Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) narrated only a few Faza’il of Maola Ali (s.a.). In fact,
whoever thinks, understands, or says Ali (s.a.) is

Allah, he is Mushrik. Second group is Muqassireen, who are proud about
their Ibadaat (Farooh), but doubt about Masomeen (s.a.a.) being Hazir
Nazir, their infallibility, their knowledge of Ghaib, their Authority
over the Universe, their Help, their Highness, etc. Doubting any Fazilat
of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) makes one Muqassir. Our
intelligence and senses are limited, if any Hadees of Masoom (s.a.) is
not understood, it should be referred back to Masoom, it means that do
not argue or deny it, and wait for Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) he will explain
you. It is out of human ability to praise Masomeen (s.a.a.), which is
confirmed in Quran & Sunnah.

#### 91-Medium of Acceptance of Prayers of Prophets (a.s.)

####

*One Jew asked Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): ‘Are you superior or Musa bin
Imran (a.s.) who was Kalimatullah, and Torah and staff was given to him,
and sea parted for him, and cloud was above him for shadow?’ He
(s.a.w.a.w.) said: ‘Certainly it is not appropriate for Abd to do his
own praise but I say: When Adam (a.s.) did Tark e Aola, his repentance
was accepted when he said: O Allah! I beg You for the sake of the Right
of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) that You forgive me, so Allah
forgave him. And when Nuh (a.s.) was in the boat and got fear of
drowning, then he said: ‘O Allah I beg you for the sake of the Right of
Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) that save us from drowning’, then
Allah salvaged them. And when Ibraheem (a.s.) was thrown in the fire,
then he said: O Allah I beg you for the sake of the Right of Mohammad o
Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) that save me from it, then Allah made it cool
and peaceful. And when Musa (a.s.) threw his staff, then felt fear in
his heart and said: O Allah I beg you for the sake of the Right of
Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) that give me peace, then Allah said:
‘Do*

*not be afraid, certainly you will be prevailing’ (Ta Ha 68). O Jew! If
Musa (a.s.) finds me (i.e. he comes in this time) and does not believe
in me and in my prophet-hood, then neither his Eman can benefit him nor
his prophet-hood can benefit him. O Jew! When from my Progeny (s.a.a.)
Mahdi (a.f.s.) will reappear then Esa ibne Mariyam (a.s.) will come down
to help him, and he will request him (a.f.s.) to come in front and will
pray behind him (a.f.s.), and if Musa (a.s.) is made alive again, he
also does not have any solution other than following.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 432)

Allah only accepts Dua for the sake of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad
(s.a.a.), even Dua of Olil Azm Prophets (a.s.). But nowadays Muqassir
Mulla is preaching verse no 186 of Sura Baqarah, and misguiding people
that Allah hears His servants without any Medium, He is very close, and
this poison is being injected in a very sweet manner.

Esa (a.s.) being a Prophet, can not stand in front of the son Qaim
(a.f.s.) of Maola Ali (s.a.), otherwise his Emaan and Prophet-hood is
lost. Then what Namaaz Muqassir Mulla is saying by leaving Ali (s.a.)
behind.

#### 92-Voice of Paradise: Ali Ali (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: No doubt there is a ring of red Ruby on
a plate of gold on the door of Paradise. When that ring is knocked, it
rings and gives a sound “Ya Ali, Ya Ali” (s.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 522, Alul al-Shrai)

Who becomes breathless by hearing the slogan of ‘Ya Ali s.a.’, then it
is easy solution for him: “If you want to escape Ali (s.a.), go to
Hell”.

#### 93-The Cause of Creation of Jahannam: Muqassir and Munkir

####

*Allah Ta’ala said: If all the humans would have gathered on Walayat e
Ali (s.a.), then I would not have created the Fire (of Hell).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 645)

Mulla with lack of Wisdom says that one should eat sparrows as well;
otherwise they will complain on the day of Qiyamah that Ya Allah, you
made us Halaal but no human ate us. Muqassir also thought that Hell will
complain: ‘all went to Paradise by gathering on Walayat e Ali (s.a.)’,
so let us go to Hell not to leave it vacant, Allah must have made it
with a purpose.

#### 94-Obedient but with Bughz e Ali (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Once Jibraeel (a.s.) came to me very
happy. I asked: My lovely Jibraeel (a.s.) what is the reason of your
happiness? and what is the status of my brother and son of my uncle Ali
ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) near Allah? Jibraeel (a.s.) said: Ya Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.)! I swear by Him Who bestowed you prophet-hood, and chose
your Risalat, I only came to you at this time to say that Ali-ul-A’la
(Allah) is saying Salaam to you, and says that Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is
My Nabi e Rahmat, and Ali (s.a.) is who established My Hujjat (Proof). I
will not punish their friends, even if they are disobedient to Me, and I
will not be Merciful to their enemies even if they are My obedient.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 647)

The duty of Hazrat Jibraeel (a.s.) was only to bring the Verses or
Ahadees e Qudsi about Faza’il e Ali (s.a.). The happiness &

eagerness on the face of Jibraeel (a.s.) was indicating without asking
that he came to narrate Faza’il of Maola Ali (s.a.).

The Words of Allah are Haqq that sins of lovers of Ali (s.a.) will be
forgiven. Who is true lover of Maola Ali (s.a.), his every breath is
‘Ali Ali’ (s.a.), sin can not come near him. In fact all Ibadaat (Farooh
e Deen) are only for the lovers of Ali (s.a.).

#### 95-Saying of Lisaan Ullah (s.a.)

####

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: Keep us away from Lordship, and keep us
higher than human attributes, it means all those qualities which are
applicable to you, so one can not think to be human for anyone of us,
because we are the Secret of Allah, who are sent down in the form of
human, we are the Speaking Words of Allah, then whatever is your ability
narrate (our Fazilat), there is no doubt the sea can not dry, and
Marifat of the Secrets of Ghaib can not be gained, and Kalimatullah’s
praise can not be done.*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 47)

Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: You ought to say first in ‘Ghalow’ about us
that we are Abd who get sustenance from Allah, then say whatever you
want to say in our Fazilat.

(Nehjul Israr, V 2, P 29)

#### 96-The meaning of “Allah”

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: ‘Alif’ means ‘Aa’la’ (Favours) which
Allah sends down on creations for the sake of our Walayat. ‘Laam’ means
‘Lazim’ (Inevitable) is our Walayat on the creations from Allah. And
‘Ha’ means ‘Hawan’ lowness and rejection for them who oppose Mohammad o
Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).*

(al Tauheed, P 190, Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 1, P 43)

The Foundation, Meaning, and Aim of Tauheed is Walayat. Amirul Momineen
(s.a.) said: “Due to our worship Allah is worshiped, if we were not
there then worship of Allah would not have been there.”

O you Muqassir, running away from the slogan ‘Ya Ali s.a.’! Now you stop
saying ‘Ya Allah’ as well, because its meaning is the same as well. The
fact is that the Foundation of ‘La Ilaha’ is Hussain (s.a.).

#### 97-Why Sultan e Naseer (s.a.)

####

Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.w.) is the Beloved of Allah Ta’ala, and Allah
Ta’ala is the Lover of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.). The principle of love is
that the lover should not leave his beloved alone for a single moment,
and every wish of the beloved is the wish of the lover, and the lover
should protect his beloved even if he has to loose his life. Allah Qadir
e Mutliq chose a personality who is the Heart-beat of Allah and His
Beloved (s.a.w.a.w.) as well, and made him the expresser of all of His
Attributes, and he became the exact Picture of the Creator (Ainullah,
Lisanullah, Uznullah, Yadullah, Wajhullah, Janbullah, Qalbullah,
Nafsullah), then Allah made him the Helper & Protector (Sultan e Naseer)
of His Beloved (s.a.w.a.w.). So no one can object that Allah loves His
Beloved (s.a.w.a.w.) but in difficult times other people helped.

Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.) saw the sacrifice of Maola Ali (s.a.) for her
beloved father Mustafa (s.a.w.a.w.), she sacrificed her life and her
holy children’s (s.a.a.) life on Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 98-Sermon of Imam Hussain (s.a.)

####

*When the illegitimate army of Yazeed (l.u.) surrounded Imam Hussain
(s.a.), he delivered a sermon, a few sentences from the sermon: He is
successful who obeys me, destruction for him*

*who disobeys me. You all are acting against my commandment, and you do
not listen to my words, because your stomachs are full of Haraam, and
your hearts are stamped. Curse on you that you even do not listen to me.
Then said: O rebellions, unfaithful, cruel! You called me in your
difficult time to help you, and I came on your invitation to guide and
help you, and accepted your invitation. Now you have taken out the sword
of malice & animosity on me, and lit the fire of mutiny & rebellion for
me. Only some Haraam wealth is given to you for a reason at this moment,
you have been made hopeful by Batil governorships and false promises. O
misguided ones! Rejecters of Kitaab and Sunnah of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.)! O you who burnt Quran! O murderers of the Progeny (s.a.a.)
of Batool (s.a.)! O illegitimate offspring! Destruction on you, you are
turning away from the Progeny (s.a.a.) of Syyedul Anbiya (s.a.w.a.w.)
and helping the offspring of Abu Sufyaan (l.u.).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P 225)

Imam Hussain (s.a.) revealed that who earns & eats Haraam, he can’t
listen to any thing about Walayat, and they first called Imam (s.a.)
then rebelled. In Azaan how many times invitation towards Walayat is
announced: 1) I testify that Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah, 2) Hyya alus
Salaah (Salaah of Momin is Maola Ali s.a.), 3) Hyya alul Falaah (Falaah
is Walayat e Ali s.a.), 4) Hyya ala Khairil Amal (Khairil Amal is
Walayat e Ali s.a.). At least in Azaan eight times open invitation is
given towards Walayat e Ali (s.a.), and when people gather for Namaaz
then Walayat is murdered with tongues like in Karbala.

The illegitimate army of Yazeed (l.u.) was saying that Yazeed (l.u.) was
their Olil Amr, and his command was to martyr Hussain (s.a.), so they
would not listen to Quran & Sunnah. The so-called Shia of today is also
of the same opinion that Fatwa is superior to Quran & Hadees. So called
Shias say: Tafseer and Hadees are weak and unreliable, our Mulla has
issued Fatwa to murder Ali

(s.a.) with tongues in Namaaz. Muqassir Mulla is also hopeful for a
share in governorship and wealth.

#### 99-Religion of Nafeh ibne Hilal Bajli (a.s.)

####

*When Nafeh ibne Hilal Bajli (a.s.) came out for Jihad in Karbala, he
said loud his Rijz: “I am Ibne Hilal Bajli-----I am on Deen of Ali
(s.a.)-----and his Deen is Deen of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.).”*

*Mazaham ibne Harees Maloon came out and said: “I am on Deen of the
Third.” Nafeh bin Hilal (a.s.) replied: “O Maloon, you are on Deen of
Shaitan.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 1, P238)

All the martyrs (a.s.) of Karbala announced Walayat of Ali (s.a.) and
Hussain (s.a.) in their Rijz, and made it clear that the Battle of
Karbala is for the sake of Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 100-Poetry of Yazeed Laeen (l.u.)

####

*Yazeed (l.u.) was reading poetry when he was disrespectful to the holy
head of Imam (s.a.), he was saying:*

*Would that my forefathers who were killed in Badr, would have been
present today to see----that how the tribe of Khazraj is tossing with
pain by the strokes of swords----certainly they would say loud with
joy----and say: O Yazeed (l.u.)! your hands should keep working like
this----I am not from Khunduf, if I do not take revenge----from the
progeny (s.a.a.) of Ahmad (s.a.w.a.w.) for his (s.a.w.a.w.) works (of
Risalat).*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 2, P 330)

Maola Ali (s.a.) cast the forefathers of Yazeed (l.u.) in Hell in the
battle of Badr. Yazeed (l.u.) took the revenge of Walayat e Ali

(s.a.) in Karbala. People like Yazeed (l.u.) with impure blood, they
disguise as Muslims, and then they become the snake of the sleeve and
take revenge from Faza’il e Ali (s.a.).

#### 101-Shabeh in Skies and Zaireen

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: When I ascended to the skies during the
night of Mai’raj, then on the fifth sky I saw a model of Ali ibne Abi
Talib (s.a.). When Angels (a.s.) were eager to see Ali (s.a.), they
requested Allah: The children of Adam (a.s.) are having the honour to do
Ziyarat of Ali (s.a.) on the Earth, and we are deprived now, give us the
honour of Ziyarat of Imam (s.a.) as well. Then Allah the One, made a
model of Ali (s.a.) with His Noor. So it is just like Ali (s.a.) is in
front of them day and night, and Angels (a.s.) do his Ziyarat day and
night. When Ibne Muljam Maloon (l.u.) stroke his holy head, a similar
wound appeared on the head of that model in the skies. When Angels
(a.s.) see that model of Noor day and night, they curse on the cruel
murderer. When Imam Hussain (s.a.) was martyred, then Angels placed his
model of Noor in front of the model of Noor of Maola Ali (s.a.) on the
fifth sky as well. Angels (a.s.) do Ziyarat of Ali (s.a.) and Hussain
(s.a.) while going up and down through the fifth sky, and will keep
cursing on the murderers of Masomeen (s.a.a.) until Qiyamah.*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 2, P 397)

If any Harisi Mulla was on the sky, then he would have issued a Fatwa:
Living in Qurb-e-Ilahi, and being infallible Angels, you are starting
Bid’ah (innovations), because to make a model (Shabeh) is Bid’ah, why
you are busy day and night doing Ziyarat of models, and leaving Zikr &
Ibadat of Allah, and cursing on their murderers like Malangs do.

Model (Shabeh) is always inferior to the Real. Adam (a.s.) was created
from the Earth. And Allah makes Shabeh of Ali (s.a.) &

Hussain (s.a.) with Noor, it means that if Allah wants to make a picture
of Masomeen (s.a.a.), He makes it with Noor. Then definitely the Reality
of Masomeen (s.a.a.) is superior to Noor, and that Reality only Allah
knows.

#### 102-Who can bear Faza’il?

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: “Our Ahadees are very difficult and hard,
no one can bear them except Muqarrab Angel of Allah or Mursal Nabi, or
that servant whose heart Allah has examined with Emaan, or a walled city
can tolerate them. Walled city is that heart which does not loose its
senses.” Then Imam (s.a.) said: “No one can bear our Faza’il except for
whom we wish.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 39)

Muqassir Mulla and his Yazedi army, how they can tolerated Faza’il of
Maola Ali (s.a.), who call ‘father’ with respect to all men in their
residential locality.

Not even all the Angels (a.s.) and Prophets (a.s.), but only Muqarrab
and Mursal can bear, whose love for Walayat e Ali (s.a.) reaches its
peak, then Allah makes that Angel as Muqarrab and that Nabi as Mursal.

Congratulations to the Momineen whose hearts are successful in
Examination by Allah, and those hearts are stronger than Toor, which do
not shatter into pieces by revelation of Faza’il e Ali (s.a.).

#### 103-Zakir of Ali (s.a.): Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.)

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) narrated Faza’il of Ali Murtaza (s.a.), in
which he told that if someone wants to see the qualities of all the
Prophets (a.s.) he can see Maola Ali (s.a.).*

Here are a few sentences from that sermon: “Ali (s.a.) is the shining
Star in the 7th Sky. Allah Ta’ala has bestowed so much Fazl to Ali
(s.a.), if that Fazl is distributed among all the inhabitants of the
Earth, it will surround all the inhabitants of the Earth. Every curtain
of Paradise is decorated with the name of Ali (s.a.). Ali (s.a.) is
Mahmood near Allah. Ali (s.a.) is my Zahir, Ali (s.a.) is my Paradise,
my companion and helper. His similitude is Ka’ba, for which the whole
world goes for Ziyarat, but Ka’ba does not go for anyone’s Ziyarat.
Allah has praised him in His Book, praised him with His Ayaat (verses),
and appreciated his foot-steps. His degrees (of Faza’il) are continuous.
He is Kareem in this world and will go as Shaheed.”

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 50)

Abul Fazl Abbas (s.a.) is the owner of Fazl of Maola Ali (s.a.). Who
needs Fazl-e-Ilahi, he should hold the Flag of Maola Abbas (s.a.), who
can encompass the whole world in his Fazl. Imam Zainul Abideen (s.a.)
was standing up for respect whenever someone was mentioning the name of
Faithful Abbas (s.a.).

Maola Ali (s.a.) is Mahmood near Allah. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) will
be on Maqam-e-Mahmood on the day of Qiyamah and will intercede for
Momineen.

Ali (s.a.) is Paradise of Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.w.). O people in the
trap of Shaitan! Why you are earning Hell instead of Paradise by leaving
Ali (s.a.) in Ibadat.

Ka’ba is Needless. You have to go to Ka’ba for prayers (Namaaz), Hajj,
Umra. Ali (s.a.) will not come in your Namaaz, you have to take your
Namaaz in his presence for Acceptance. The Words & Ayaat of Allah praise
him and his progeny (s.a.a.), his forefathers and progeny is also
Kareem, his whole family is Kareem. There is no limit of degrees of his
Faza’il.

#### 104-Ali’s (s.a.) Kalima is Ali as well

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said about Maola Ali (s.a.): After me who
will oppose Ali (s.a.), he is Kafir. And who does Shirk with Ali (s.a.)
he is Mushrik. Ali (s.a.) is Allah’s Ali (Highest) Kalima; and kalima of
his enemies is very low (mean). Allah does not accept anyone’s Emaan,
except with the Walayat and obedience of Ali (s.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 55)

Any type of Shirk with Ali (s.a.) makes Mushrik, e.g. to say Ali (s.a.)
was human, got injured and martyred; now ask Allah for help, or to make
his Titles common that any Mulla can use them. (Naoozo Billah)

Kalima with Ali (s.a.) is the Highest Kalima, Allah says that it is His
Kalima. The Kalima of the enemies of Walayat is the lowest Kalima,
whether they read six instead of one. Without Walayat e Ali (s.a.) they
are disbelievers.

#### 105-Salawaat & Shahadat

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: When anyone sends Salawaat on me but
does not send Salawaat on my Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.), then seventy curtains
are stretched between him and the skies. And Allah Jalla Jalalohu says:
No reply, no good-luck, O My Angels, do not let his Dua go towards
acceptance, unless he includes with Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) his Itrat
(s.a.a.). Then Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: No one can be my friend
unless he includes with me my Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 507)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: If a person recites Salawaat on me but
does not recite Salawaat on my Aal (s.a.a.), then he would not be able
to even smell the good-smell of Paradise;*

*although the good-smell of Paradise can be smelled from a distance of
five hundred years travel.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 392)

It does not need any explanation that Salawaat (Darood o Salaam) is one
thing, and to Testify (Shahadat) someone’s status is an other thing.

Allah, His Angels (a.s.), and His Habeeb (s.a.w.a.w.) do not accept
Abtar (Incomplete) Salawaat without Aal-e-Mohammad (s.a.a.), and rather
the doors of Rahmat are closed, and the smell of Paradise is even
prohibited. Then it is not surprising that if someone does not include
Aal-e-Mohammad (s.a.a.) in Testification (Shahadat), then Allah gives
him place in the Kitchen of Hell, where Fire is Cooked, and it is the
source of offensive monsters of Hell.

#### 106-Disfigured by Bughz e Ali (s.a.)

####

*One person asked: Ya Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)! A person who says ‘La
Ilaha illa Allah’, is he Momin? He (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Our animosity will
make you Jews & Christians, certainly you can not enter Paradise, unless
you love me, and that person is a liar who thinks that he loves me but
keeps Bughz (Malice) to Ali (s.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 543)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Everything has a base, and the Base of
Islam is love of my Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.).*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 542)

O you Muqassireen! Looking the mirage of Kausar in the desert of sand,
and making hundred story buildings without Base in the desert; on the
day of Qiyamah everything will blow away like ash, and you will find
yourself standing in line with Jews and

Christians. Do not start any deed without the Base of Walayat e Ali
(s.a.).

#### 107-Destiny of Ibadaat

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: “Who wants to be happy that he has
passport to pass Siraat like fast wind, and enters Paradise for ever
without Hisaab, then he should love my Wali, and my Wasi, and my
Companion, and Khalifa of my Ahl (s.a.a.) and Ummah Ali ibne Abi Talib
(s.a.); and who wants to be happy that he should go to Fire without
Hisaab, then he should reject his Walayat. So I swear by the Honour &
Splendour of my Rabb that only he (Ali s.a.) is the Door of Allah, no
one can come towards Allah except through him, and only he is Siraat e
Mustaqeem (the Straight Path), and about his Walayat Allah Azza wa Jalla
will question on the day of Qiyamah.”*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 1, P 584)

Easy formula to go to Hot, Noisy Jahannam Club with Disco-fire lights:
just leave Walayat e Ali (s.a.)

Where Ibadat without Walayat will go? They will become snakes and
pythons and via the court of Shaitan, will go to Jahannam Club to
welcome Munkir.

Qurbat-e- Ilahi is impossible without Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 108-Jealousy to Ali (s.a.): Dark Night

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: It is near that jealousy will excel
fate. Ya Ali (s.a.)! Only those will consider my sayings about you who
are pious, pure, good, and chosen ones; and they will be so prominent in
my Ummah like white hair on the back of a black bull in dark night.*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 2, P 278)

Those who are jealous about Walayat & Faza’il of Ali (s.a.), they have
made this world a dark night of injustice. A few with bright hearts due
to Walayat are visible shining from the skies.

#### 109-Recognition of Friend and Foe

####

*Imam Ali (s.a.) said: If I injure the nose of a Momin with my sword
that he will start animosity to me, but he will never do it. And if I
shower all the favours of the world on Munafiq that he will start loving
me, but he will never do it. Because it has been decided by the tongue
of Nabi Sadiq (s.a.w.a.w.): “Ya Ali (s.a.)! No Momin can keep animosity
with you, and no Munafiq can love you.”*

(Nehjul Balagha, P 645)

*Maola Ali (s.a.) heard one Khariji was saying Tahajjud and reciting
Quran, then he (s.a.) said: To sleep with Yaqeen (firm faith) is better
than saying prayer with Shakk (doubt).*

(Nehjul Balagha, P 661)

O you who doubt in La Raib Ali (s.a.)! Ibadaat become superior with Zikr
e Ali. Zulfiqaar of Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) is waiting for Tahajjud-reader
Muqassir Qari of this time.

#### 110-Knowing Habibullah (s.a.w.a.w.)

####

Summary of Hadees of Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.): When Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) reached the 1st sky during the night of Mai’raj, Angels
(a.s.) went into Sajdah thinking that he is Noor of Rabb and said
‘Subbuhun Quddosun our Rabb and Rabb of Angels & Rooh’. Then Jibraeel
(a.s.) said loud ‘Allaho Akbar’, then Angels understood and came near to
say Salaam and asked about Maola Ali (s.a.) as well. When Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) reached the 2nd sky, there also Angels ran to go in Sajdah,
and said ‘Subbuhun Quddosun our Rabb and

Rabb of Angels & Rooh’, and thought him Noor of Rabb. Jibraeel (a.s.)
again said ‘I testify that there is none worthy of worship except
Allah’, then Angels understood and came to say Salaam to him and asked
about Imam Ali (s.a.) and his Shias as well, that how are they. When he
reached the 3rd sky, there also Angels went into Sajdah in a hurry and
said the same Tasbeeh, then Jibraeel (a.s.) said ‘I testify that
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of Allah’, then Angels understood, and
came and said Salaam to him and narrated Faza’il and Blessings of Maola
Ali (s.a.). On the 4th sky Angels offered Namaaz behind him, and said
this Namaaz is for Shias, they will keep reading it until Qiyamah. On
hearing ‘Hyya alul Falaah’ in Azaan, Angels said ‘this Falaah will be
established in the World due to Ali (s.a.)’.

(Alul al Shrai, V 2, P 367)

When Angels (a.s.) were created, they thought Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad
(s.a.a.) as Allah. Then Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) taught them
Ibadat e Ilahi and Marifat e Tauheed. Then after thousands of years,
Hazrat Adam (a.s.) was created, then Angels could not recognise Mohammad
o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) in test. Then after thousands of years, when
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) went to Mai’raj, then Angels went into Sajdah
considering him Allah, and could not recognise him.

Infallible Angels living in Qurbat of Allah can not recognise Mohammad o
Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.). We do not have an idea about the age of Angels,
who do not get tired in Ibadat.

Muqassir Mulla who is Friday to Friday, eight days old, after two hits
(thinking Sajdah) is devising the standards of limits of Infallibility,
Highness, and Authority of Masomeen (s.a.a.).

O Muqassir Mulla! You should make use of that standard first which Allah
has devised for you to judge whether you are legitimate or illegitimate?

#### 111-Great Sins

####

*Summary of a Hadees of Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.): Great sins are seven,
which are related to Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.):*

*1)    To make someone partner of Allah.....There are verses about
Mushrik. Then whatever Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said about Ahlul Bait
(s.a.a.), but people belied Allah and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.), in this
way they did Shirk.*

*2)    To murder someone, whose murder Allah has declared
Haraam.....People Martyred Imam Hussain (s.a.) and his companions
(a.s.).*

*3)    To take wealth of orphans.....To snatch the part of Ahlul Bait
(s.a.a.) from the Booty, and to give it to someone else.*

*4)    Disobedience of parents.....Allah said: “Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) has
more authority over the lives of Momineen than themselves, and his wives
are their (Momineen’s) mothers.” Disobedience of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) and Hazrat Khadija (s.a.), concerning their holy progeny
(s.a.a.).*

5)    To accuse a modest lady.....Testification of Infallible Syyeda
Fatima Zahra (s.a.) was rejected. (and they took away her right)

*6)    To run away from the battle.....Paid allegiance to Amirul
Momineen (s.a.), then ran away, and refused to help.*

*7)    To deny the Haqq (Right) of Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.).....To deny the
Haqq of Walayat.*

(Alul al Shrai, V 2, P 570)

These great sins were not only for the people of the past. Beware and
avoid them nowadays as well: 1) It is Shirk to declare Tafseer of Verses
weak and unauthentic which are related to Faza’il e Ali (s.a.); 2) to
murder by tongue by not testifying Walayat e Ali (s.a.); 3) not to pay
Khums or to give it to a Muqassir Mulla; 4) Ahadees of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) which are related to Faza’il

e Ali (s.a.), to declare them weak and unreliable by using tricks of
Ilmur Rijal and other lame excuses; 5) to declare that Fadak was not the
right of Syyeda Siddiqa Fatima (s.a.); 6) to unite under Batil, and to
prevent from preaching Walayat e Ali (s.a.) by using shield of lame
excuse of unity and preventing differences, and to run away from helping
Imam (s.a.) in this way; 7) to exclude Testification of Walayat e
Mutliqa from Ibadaat, so denying practically their Haqq e Walayat.

#### 112-Self-made Contractors of Deen

####

There is different Fatwa of every self-made contractor of Deen,
everyone’s Aeen-e-Akbari is separate, separate mosque of 1 ½ brick,
every one is self-appointed vicegerent of Imam, Wali-e-Faqeh, and claim
miracles like Masomeen (s.a.a.) and rather superior to the Infallible
Prophets (a.s.) of Bani Israeel. But those Mullas do not know what is
happening on their English websites. From their offices colourful and
strange Fatawa are being issued with their stamps. Those contractor
Mullas do not know any language except their mother tongue. Although
only he is worthy of wearing the dress of a scholar who is at home in
Arabic, so that he can read the real Kutub e Haqqa himself, and does not
have a piece of paper as certificate by only reading wrong translations
and hear say. At least Mulla should learn an international language, and
language of the majority of Momineen, so that he does not need a
translator.

Everyone knows there are many incidents, indicating that Masomeen
(s.a.a.) know all the languages, e.g. Abu Ismaeel Sindhi came to know
that there is one Hujjat of Allah in Arab, and came to Imam Ali Raza
(s.a.). And Imam (s.a.) spoke Sindhi in whole conversation. That wise
man requested Imam (s.a.) that he wants to learn Arabic, and Imam (s.a.)
touched his lips with his holy hand, and he became Alim of Arabic
immediately and started speaking Arabic.

(Biharul Anwaar, V 5, P 43)

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: “Ask me what is above the Arsh, and ask me
what is below the Arsh, ask me before you can not find me.”*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 6, P 152)

#### 113-Don’t hurt Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) Daily

####

*O My Habeeb (s.a.w.a.w.) say: You (people) do deeds, Allah and His
Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) and Momineen (Imams s.a.a.) see your deeds. (Sura
Tauba). Every body’s deeds are presented daily in front of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) and Imams (s.a.a.).*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 441, Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 137)

When someone claims in front of people to be lover and Shia of Mohammad
o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.), but denies practically at the stage of deeds,
then he commits great sin, then how much Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) is
hurt by his hypocritical attitude, when everyday his deeds are
presented.

It is useless to do Ibadat while doubting Faza’il of Aal-e-Mohammad
(s.a.a.). To sleep with firm faith in Walayat e Masomeen (s.a.a.) is
better than that.

*Some companions’ doors were opening towards Masjid-e-Nabwi. Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) ordered to close all the doors except the door of
Maola Ali (s.a.). People started talking. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
stood up and delivered a sermon, after Hamd o Sana of Allah, said: I
ordered to close all the doors except the door of Ali (s.a.), and you
people started talking about it. I swear by Allah, I neither closed any
thing myself, nor I opened myself, but I was commanded to do this, so I
just obeyed that command.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 39)

Any human nature or quality can not be applied to Masoom (s.a.). Masoom
(s.a.) appears in this world next to their infallible mother (s.a.), and
do Sajdah first, and testify Tauheed, Risalat, and Walayat, so that
people should not think/say them Allah. Whatever Masoom (s.a.) does
according to Shariah e.g. Wazu, Ghusl, Ablution, etc, it is only to
teach the Ummah. Who doubts about the Infallibility & Purity of Mohammad
o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) he actually doubts the Words (Ayat e Tat’heer)
of Allah, the Qadir-e-Mutliq.

#### 114-Faza’il & Masa’ib of Infallibles (s.a.a.)

####

*A few sentences from Hadees of Imam Ali Raza (s.a.): There is neither
substitute, nor similitude, nor example of Imam (s.a.). All Faza’il are
specific for him, which are bestowed on him without Asking or Earning,
rather they are from too much Favouring and Bestowing Allah. Then who
can reach the Marifat of Imam (s.a.)! To praise one splendour from the
splendours of Imam (s.a.), and to narrate one Fazilat (virtue) from the
Faza’il of Imam (s.a.), wisdoms went astray (loose path), intelligence
went wrong, wise became astonished, eyes were confounded, the high
became low, scholars wondered, knowledgeable became small, speakers &
orators became limited, poets got tired, intelligent became speechless,
writers became helpless, preachers became dumb; thus all accepted their
helplessness and shortfall that how praise of Imam (s.a.) can be done,
or reality of Imam (s.a.) can be narrated, or anything can be understood
from the Amr of Imam (s.a.), or how someone can understand their status,
or how someone can be needless from Imam (s.a.)!*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 1, P 140)

Muqassir Mulla is trying his best to weaken the Base of Beliefs, and
preaches: Imams (s.a.a.) did so much Ibadat that Allah raised

their status, and after success in examinations got more increments in
their degrees (Naoozo Billah)

Allah created Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) for Himself only. In
the skies they did Ibadat to teach Angels and the inhabitants of the
skies. And when they came down on the Earth then they did Ibadat to
teach the inhabitants of the Earth. Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.)
have Everything because they are Mashiyat e Ilahi. What Allah has
bestowed on them, those are Faza’il; and what the Ummah has given them
those are Masa’ib. Masa’ib are not their examinations. Karbala is the
Sacrifice to save Islam for the sake of Allah. It is impossible to
encompass one Fazilat of Imam (s.a.), or to understand any Amr of Imam
(s.a.) in its real sense, then how any human can do Ghalow (exceed the
limit).

#### 115-Zahoor e Imam (a.f.s.)

####

*Imam Hassan (s.a.) and Imam Hussain (s.a.) appeared (Zahoor) next to
Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.).*

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said to Hazrat Safia binte Abdul Muttalib
(s.a.): Bring my son to me. She said: I have not given bath to the child
yet. He (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Will you clean him, whom Allah has sent Clean
& Pure.*

(Biharul Anwaar, V 10, P 27, Amali, etc.)

#### 116-Kizb and Shirk

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Ya Ali (s.a.)! No one knows you except
Allah and I, and no one knows me except Allah and you, and no one knows
Allah except I and you, then how people claim of Marifat?*

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 40)

Only Allah and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) have Marifat of Maola Ali (s.a.),
Muqassir Mulla is not in any account at all. If any human thinks that he
knows Imam Ali (s.a.), then he belied (Kizb) the words of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.), and did Shirk by thinking himself partner of Allah’s
Knowledge.

#### 117-Protector of Namaaz

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: When Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) led the
first congregational prayer, it was Amirul Momineen Ali ibne Abi Talib
(s.a.) who said prayer with him. Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) passed by and
Hazrat Jafar (s.a.) was with him, so he said: O my son! You also stand
next to the son of your uncle and say prayer. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
knew his participation in Namaaz. Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) was smiling
and said: No doubt, my Ali (s.a.) and Jafar (s.a.) are the best helpers
during hardships and difficulties of the time; I swear by Allah, neither
I will let my Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) be disgraced, nor my progeny (s.a.a.)
who has high status will let Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) be disgraced; and you
both keep helping Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) who is the son of your uncle.*

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 270)

This is the incident of the first congregational Namaaz, since then
Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) was protecting Namaaz, and his sons (s.a.) were
praying behind Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.). At that time Namaaz was not
obligatory. Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) is the  Protector of Namaaz.
Therefore we recite Salawaat according to the order of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.):     محمد على صلى اللهم

<p dir="rtl">
مجيد حميد انك ابراهيم آل على و ابراهيم على صليت كما محمد وآل
</p>

(Amali Sheikh Sudooq, V 2, P 138)

Salawaat on Aal-e-Ibraheem (a.s.) means from Hazrat Abdullah (s.a.),
Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.), Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (s.a.), Hazrat Hashim
(s.a.) until Hazrat Ismaeel (a.s.).

Acting on the Sunnah of Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.), in Karbala Zuhair bin
Qain (a.s.) and Saeed bin Abdullah (a.s.) protected Namaaz, and stopped
all arrows & spears by their bodies, and made a shield for the Real
Namaaz Hussain (s.a.). At that time the army of Maloon (l.u.) did not
give time to Imam Hussain (s.a.) for Namaaz, and Haseen bin Nameer
(l.u.) barked: your Namaaz is not acceptable. Habeeb ibne Mazahir (a.s.)
attacked him, but the army of Yazeed (l.u.) saved him. The army of
Yazeed (l.u.) also believed that Namaaz of people with Walayat e Ali
(s.a.) is Batil.

#### 118-Who brought up Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)?

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: Jibraeel (a.s.) said to Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.): Ya Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.)! Allah Ta’ala is saying Salaam to
you and says: I have made Fire of Hell Haraam on that Sulb from which
you were revealed, on that Rahm (receiving person) who kept you, and
that lap who brought you up. He (s.a.w.a.w.) said: O Jibraeel (a.s.),
explain. He replied: That Sulb from where you revealed is Abdullah
(a.s.) bin Abdul Muttalib (a.s.), and that Rahm which kept you is Aamina
Binte Wahab (s.a.), and that Lap which kept you are Abu Talib (s.a.) bin
Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) and Fatima binte Asad (s.a.).*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, P 180, Amali V 2, P 555)

This explanation was done because hypocrites can not prove their
forefathers as Muslims, then they started putting allegation on
forefathers (s.a.a.) of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), and confabulated
false narrations.

#### 119-Highness of Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.)

####

Doomed people started accusing Emaan of the father of Kul-e-Emaan,
Kafeel-e-Risalat Abu Talib (s.a.). One person said to Imam Ali (s.a.):
Ya Amirul Momineen (s.a.)! You are on this status which Allah has
bestowed you but your father is getting punishment in fire (Naoozo
Billah)? Maola Ali (s.a.) replied: Stop! Allah destroys your face! I
swear by Him Who sent Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) with Haqq, if my father
intercedes for all the inhabitants of the earth, then Allah will accept
his intercession. Will my father get punishment in fire (Naoozo Billah)
when his son is divider of Paradise and Hell. I swear by Him Who sent
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) with Haqq, Noor of all the creations will fade in
front of my father’s Noor on the day of Qiyamah, except Anwaar-e-Khamsa,
it means Noor e Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), my Noor (s.a.), Noor e Fatima
(s.a.), Noor e Hassan (s.a.), Noor e Hussain (s.a.), because his Noor
and our Noor is one which Allah Ta’ala revealed two thousand years
before the creation of Adam (a.s.).

(Nehjul Israr, V 1, P 359)

#### 120-News of Unseen

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: No doubt Fatima binte Asad (s.a.) came to
Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) and gave the good-news of Zahoor of Nabi Akram
(s.a.w.a.w.). Then Abu Talib (s.a.) said: Be patient until ‘Sabat’, I
will give you exactly like him except Nabuwat. Then Imam (s.a.) said:
‘Sabat’ is thirty years, and the time period between the Zahoor of
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and Amirul Momineen (s.a.) is thirty years.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 450)

Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) is Kafeel & Wakeel of Risalat, his Noor is the
brightest of all the creations, his intercession will be accepted

even if he intercedes for all the sinful on the Earth, he bestows son
like Ali (s.a.) similitude of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), his name is written
on the Arsh with the name of his son Ali (s.a.).

#### 121-The Forefathers of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)

####

*Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) used to sit under the shadow of Ka’ba on a
rug, no one else could sit on it. He used to make Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) sit on it with him. Then making him sit on his shoulders,
he was circumambulating seven times. When Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) wanted
to go from this world, Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) was on his chest. And
he advised Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.) to protect and help him. Then he kept
kissing Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) until he met Allah.*

(Kamalud Din, V 1, P 204)

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) said: I swear by Allah, my father (s.a.), and my
grand father Abdul Muttalib (s.a.) and Hashim (s.a.) and Abd e Manaf
(s.a.) were steadfast on Deen of Ibraheem (a.s.). They were praying
according to the Deen of Ibraheem (s.a.) facing towards Baitullah, and
they kept practicing it.*

(Kamalud Din, V 1, P 207)

#### 122-Mufti or Ravi?

####

*Imam Ali Raza (s.a.) said: People are kept ignorant, and they are
caught in fraud concerning their Deen. No doubt Allah Ta’ala did not
call His Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) back from this world until He completed Deen
for the people. And He revealed Quran on him (s.a.w.a.w.) in which there
is detail of everything, Allah has narrated completely in it Halaal, and
Haraam, Hadood, and Ahkaam, and every thing which people*

*need, thus Allah said: ‘We did not leave anything short in the Book’
(Sura An’am). Thus Allah revealed during the Last Hajj which was the
last part of the apparent life of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): I have
completed My Ne’mat on you, and chose Islam as Deen for you, (Sura
Ma’ida) Thus he (s.a.w.a.w.) did not go from the world until he
(s.a.w.a.w.) explained the constitution of Deen, made clear the path of
Haqq for them, brought them on the Right Path, and appointed Ali (s.a.)
as the flag of Guidance and Imam, and did not leave anything which the
Ummah would need, but he explained it. Thus who made his belief that
Allah did not complete his Deen, then he rejected the Book of Allah, who
rejected the Book of Allah he is Kafir.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar V 1, P 138, Amali V 2, P 681, Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza
s.a., V 1, P 380)

Public is being misguided that there are new problems of the modern
time, therefore only Fatwa of Mulla can work! Masomeen (s.a.a.) gave the
solution of all the problems which could arise until Qiyamah. But the
real problem is that Mulla should read books or keep an account of
currency of Khums. To hide this weakness, another Trick was devised that
public should accept Fatwa of Mulla without asking Proof (Daleel).

Imam (s.a.) said that in the time of difficulty consult Ravi of our
Ahadees. Ravi will tell that the solution of this problem is like this
according to the saying of Imam (s.a.) written in this book, in which
case there is no doubt left. Fatawa of Mulla makes doubtful Deen, and
Shakk has nothing to do with Deen. Mulla says ‘Bina ber Ehtiyat’ or
‘Ahwat’ or etc., he does not know anything with firm belief.

#### 123-Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh

####

‘Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh’ is the book compiled by Sheikh Sudooq (r.a.). It
means that ‘Who does not have Faqeh (Religious

Scholar)’, it is obvious who is not a scholar, he should use this book.
In this book Sheikh Sudooq (r.a.) compiled the solutions of the problems
according to the Ahadees of Masomeen (s.a.a.). Now note the conspiracy
of Mulla: if this book was translated in different languages for the
Momineen, then who would consult Mulla? And where Khums money would have
gone? So big Mullas opened their Fatwa-shops, and printed their own
Aeen-e-Akbari or Fatawa-e-Alamgeri that this is my Fatwa, this is my
Fatwa, and excluded holy names of Imams (s.a.a.).

All Farooh e Deen (Namaaz, Fast, Hajj, Jihad, etc) Muqallid should do
himself except the one which is Khums (Money), that he can not handle,
that should go to Mulla! Why? He can sacrifice Life in the way of Allah,
but does not know who to spend money in the way of Allah!

#### 124-Congregation or Alone? Mohaddis or Moqallid?

####

*Requirements for the leader of the prayer: He should be Faqeh, good
Qari, elder, handsome, pious, founder of a mosque, best of all. He
should not be stupid, Fasiq, punished one, ignorant, illegitimate,
without circumcision, denier of Walayat. He should be cursing on the
enemies of Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 249)

*Imam (s.a.) said: If there are two people then it is Congregation. And
said about the least number for Congregation: One man and one lady, and
if no one comes to the mosque, then a Momin alone is Congregation,
because if he starts prayer with Azaan & Aqamat, then two lines of
Angels (a.s.) pray behind him, and if he only says Aqamat and does not
say Azaan, then there is one line of Angels (a.s.) behind him.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 248)

*Salim asked Imam (s.a.): When the Moazzin says ‘Qad Qamatis Salaat’
then people should stand or should keep sitting until the leader of the
prayer comes? He (s.a.) said: No. People should stand, if the leader of
the prayer comes, it is right, otherwise they should hold hand of one of
them to make him stand in front (to lead prayer).*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 254)

Did you realize the tricks of Mulla? If Mulla is not present in the
mosque or he is sick, then after Azaan people start saying ‘Brothers!
Read your Namaaz Furada’, so that dictatorship of Mulla can persist. Are
Momineen so illiterate that even one of them can not lead prayer? Or is
it a conspiracy to deprive Momineen from the reward of Congregational
prayer?

Imam Raza (s.a.) said: I wish that every Momin is Mohaddis, it means
wise and intelligent’ (Uyoon). And Mulla wants to see all Momineen
having strap in neck Muqallid!

#### 125-Who is Marjah?

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: People are commanded to get our Marifat,
accept us their Wali, and refer (consult, Rajoh) to us in all their
affairs. Then said: If they say prayers, keep fasts, testify that there
is none worthy of worship except Allah, but decide in their heart that
they will not refer to us, then they are Mushrik.*

(Usool e Kafi, V 2, P 222)

*Imam (s.a.) said: If problems occur, then consult (refer, Rajoh) the
Narrator of our Ahadees, because he is our Hujjat on you, and I am
Hujjat of Allah on them.*

(Ehtijaj e Tabrasi)

When Imam (s.a.) is present, then it is commanded to consult him
otherwise one is Mushrik. And when apparently one can not reach Imam
(s.a.) then he should consult such a scholar who is Narrator of Ahadees
of Masomeen (s.a.a.), who can tell this is the solution/decision of your
problem according to this Verse of Quran or Hadees of Masoom (s.a.). But
he can not issue Fatwa by his own name. In both cases the meaning of
Rajoh (reference, consultation) is the same: Marjah is Infallible Imam
(s.a.) or his Hadees. Faqeh/Narrator is only to find and tell
commandment of Imam (s.a.), and due to this Trust (Ahadees of Masomeen
s.a.a.) he is respectable and Hujjat on the people.

#### 126-Commandment of Imam (s.a.) about Differing Fatawa

####

*Amirul Momineen Maola Ali (s.a.) said: This is the condition of the
people that if a dispute is brought for decision to a person, he gives
decision according to his personal opinion; and then the same dispute is
brought to another person, he gives an opposite decision. After that all
the judges get together in the presence of the governor who appointed
them as judges, and he (governor) declares the (different) opinion
(decision) of all of them as right. But everyone’s Allah is One, Nabi
(s.a.w.a.w.) is one, Book is one. Did Allah order them to differ and
they are obeying Him? Or they are forbidden to differ but still they are
opposing Him? Or Allah sent down the Deen incomplete and He is asking
them for help for its completion? Or they all are partners in His
Kingdom and they are given the right to speak and then Allah has
promised to be happy about it? Or Allah sent down the Deen perfect but
Rasool e Akram (s.a.w.a.w.) fell short in its preaching and performance
(Na’oozo Billah)? Allah Subhanahu said (in Quran): We did not leave
anything short in the Book; and He said: Every thing is described in it.
And told that this Book’s*

*one part testifies the other part, and there are no differences in it.
Then Allah Subhanahu said: And if this (Quran) was from other than Allah
then there would be too many differences in it. And no doubt Quran’s
Zahir is beautiful and Batin is very deep, its Ajaib are not mortal and
its Gharaib are never finishing, and Zolomat (Ignorance) can not be
finished without it.*

(Nehjul Balagha, Sermon 18, P 58; Al-Ehtijaj Al-Tabrasi, V 1, P 620)

If anyone understands this Hadees and Order of Amirul Momineen (s.a.)
without prejudice, all problems are solved. One problem has only one
solution. The public is misguided that differing Fatawa are Rahmat, and
if Mulla issues wrong Fatwa still he will get a single Reward! If
Mulla’s study was comprehensive, then difference can not arise. People
with weak faith are being told that there are problems which are not in
Quran & Sunnah, for those problems Mujtahid is necessary. In fact
everything was completed, and there isn’t any problem left until Qiyamah
which has not been told by Masoom (s.a.). It is another issue that who
will study books in Arabic, secondly if one has insight of Walayat only
he can get guidance from Kutub e Haqqa, blind of wisdom Mulla can not
know anything even if he reads hundred times.

#### 127-Blind Taqleed

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: You should avoid State and Statesmanship,
and do not ride behind men, it means that avoid appointing (leader) any
man without Hujjat & Daleel, and then you keep testifying (accepting,
confirming) every thing he says.*

(Ma’ani al Akahbar, V 1, P 214)

Nowadays people are going opposite to the Hadees of Imam (s.a.). Who has
a state and statesmanship, or whose Fatawa are soft, colourful, and
modern, or who has a backing, or whose propaganda is powerful, his
Muqallideen are more. Scholars who are pious and knowledgeable they are
under house arrest. And it is especially stressed to accept & practice
Fatwa without asking Daleel. Although who issues a decree, should tell
it is according to this Verse of Quran or this Hadees of that Masoom
(s.a.), if it happens then no one will be left to object.

#### 128-Are all Ayatullah?

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: Certainly Firaoun accepted advice and
became afraid but after seeing Azaab, believing at that time does not
benefit. Allah says: ‘Until when drowning overtook him, he said: I
believe that there is none worthy of worship except Him in Whom Bani
Israeel believe and I am among the obeying ones.’ But Allah did not
accept his Emaan, and said: ‘What now! and indeed you disobeyed before
and you were of the mischief-makers. But today We will save your Body
that you may be a sign (Ayat) for those after you.’ (Younus 91-92).
Allah said that We will put your body on a mound so that you will be a
Sign (Ayat) and Lesson for the coming people.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 2, P 435)

It tells that there are two types of Signs of Allah, Good, and Bad. Now
a Mulla who calls himself Shia, but secretly and sometimes openly
opposes Faza’il of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.), and changes
Halaal & Haraam of Deen by different tricks, should we still call him
Ayat of Allah, but which Ayat?

#### 129-Namaaz was made Obligatory only for Zikr e Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.)

####

Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) was asked the reason of Namaaz that in those
timings people are busy in their work for their needs, and then bodily
they are tired as well. Imam (s.a.) said: It has reasons, and that is if
people were left alone without warning and Zikr-e-Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.)
which is more than the news of the past, and only Book was given in
their hands, then their End would have been the same as of the previous
nations. They took the Deen, and books were Devised (كتبا وضعوا) for
them, on which they acted and were invited to that, and killed people
for that, so their Order finished, and they went away. When they went
away then Allah wanted that people should not forget Amr of Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.), so Namaaz was made obligatory on them, everyday they
announce five times his name and do his Zikr, and do His Ibadat in
Namaaz and do Zikr of Allah, so they do not become negligent and should
not forget and his Zikr should not stop.

(Alul al Shrai, V 2, P 371)

Zikr of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) can not be erased from Namaaz
& Azaan five times a day by blows of mouths, tongues, and Fatawa.
Because it is Allah’s Decision, for the same reason He made Namaaz
obligatory. The saying of Imam (s.a.) is Haqq that previous nations who
were destroyed, they took Deen (Farooh e Deen) but left Zikr of Mohammad
o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.) which is Usool-e-Deen, the Real Base. And
their scholars Devised Books (Tauzihul Masa’il) for them, in those books
there was no Zikr of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.); just like
nowadays if you see any Tauzihul Masa’il even with microscope you will
not find Kalima Tayyiba in it. Similarly you will see that in Kutub e
Arba the name of Imam (s.a.) is written as reference

with every solution of a problem, but you will not find name of any Imam
(s.a.) in Tauzihul Masa’il.

If one reads Ahadees of Masomeen (s.a.a.) again and again with
concentration, devotion, and firm faith for guidance, then every time
you read a new secret opens; just like Quran.

#### 130-The Holy Land of Qum and Iblees Laeen (l.u.)

####

*A summary of a Hadees of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): During the night of
Mai’raj I saw towards the Earth from the Skies, then I saw a land in
between the hills, its colour was nicer than Saffron, and smell better
than Musk, suddenly I saw an old man with cap in it. Jibraeel (s.a.)
said: This is the land of your Shias and Shias of your Wasi Ali ibne Abi
Talib (s.a.), and that old man is Iblees (l.u.) who is trying to
prohibit them from Walayat of Amirul Momineen (s.a.), and will invite
them towards corruption and sins. So I came down on that land faster
than electricity, and said to Iblees (l.u.): Qum Ya Maloon (Get up from
here O cursed one)! And be a partner in the wealth and children and
women of their enemies, because you do not have authority and control
over my Shias.*

(Alul al Shrai, V 2, P 693)

Shias and especially scholars should be very careful, because Shaitan is
only after them, so that he can make them slip from Walayat e Ali (s.a.)
by any trick. If the leader of any nation becomes Muqassir, then the
whole nation will definitely drown automatically. To prohibit from
Walayat e Ali (s.a.) in any way is Fisq-o-Fajoor, and who prohibits it
is Fasiq and Fajir like Yazeed (l.u.)

#### 131-The Language of the Inhabitants of Jannat

####

*One person asked Amirul Momineen (s.a.): In which language people of
the Paradise and in which language people of the Hell will speak? Imam
(s.a.) said: Arabic is the language of the people of the Paradise, and
the language of Majoosi is the language of the people of the Hell.*

(Uyoon e Akhbar e Raza s.a., V 1, P 437)

*According to one Hadees of Imam Ali Naqi (s.a.) it does not matter if a
man supplicates in any language he wishes during obligatory prayer.*

*Saeed bin Abdullah narrated that supplication in Persian language is
not permitted in Qunoot.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 210)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: A person who believes in Allah and day
of Qiyamah, he does not send his wife to Saloon (Hamam).*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 86)

Ya Allah! We seek refuge from such a nation, whose language is the
language of Majoosi, and they send their wives to Hamam, because we can
not even supplicate in that language, because it is language of the
people of the Hell.

#### 132-Halaal and Haraam

####

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: If a person says about Halaal that it is
Haraam, and to Haraam that it is Halaal, and makes it Deen, then he will
exit from Emaan and Islam at that time, and will go towards Kufr. And he
will be like that person who enters Haram, and then Ka’ba to defecate,
then he will be*

*expelled from Ka’ba and Haram, then he will be beheaded, and he will
enter Hell.*

(al Tauheed, P 189)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Every sedative is Haraam, and which
thing is sedative in big quantity, its one sip is also Haraam.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 4, P 275)

*Amirul Momineen (s.a.) was returning after battling with Khawarij, he
passed the land of Babal, there is one area Madain where Azaab came down
on the nation of Hazrat Loot (s.a.), Imam (s.a.) did not say Namaaz on
that place, and told the detail to the companions about it, and went
further. First Idol-worshiping was done on that place as well. On such
place it is not permissible for any Nabi (a.s.) or Wasi (a.s.) to say
Namaaz. After coming out of the boundary of that area, Amirul Momineen
(s.a.) performed Asr Namaaz after returning the set Sun.*

(Mun La Yahzorul Faqeh, V 1, P 145)

Halaal e Mohammadi is Halaal, and Haraam e Mohammadi is Haraam until
Qiyamah. Due to which sin the nation of Loot (a.s.) was destroyed,
Muqassir Mulla is making it Halaal in the wrapping of Makrooh. Although
in all Tafaseer, it is prohibited in the commentary of Verse no 222-223
of Sura Baqarah, e.g. its detail is present in Tafseer al-Mezan.
Similarly Mulla is discussing the benefits of Alcohol and to what extent
it is Haraam, although there are clear orders about it in Quran. Some
big Mullas are proud about changing their Fatawa, because they did not
have exact knowledge before.

Leave alone Halaal Haraam changing, Mulla is more cruel to tell the
public that Masomeen (s.a.a.) are not fully Infallible, and Fadak was
not the right of Syyeda Siddiqa Fatima (s.a.), it means

that Mujtahid of that time was right who occupied the land of Fadak.
Definitely Zulfiqaar is waiting for such Mulla.

#### 133-Difference of my Ummah is Rahmat

####

*It was asked from Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.): It is a saying of Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.): ‘No doubt, difference among my Ummah is Rahmat’, if
Difference is Rahmat, then is Unity Azaab? Imam (s.a.) said: Not what
you thought, only Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) indicated towards the saying
of Allah ‘Why from every habitat one group does not come out to gain
knowledge of Deen, and when he returns to his nation, then warns them,
may be they will fear (Allah)’, it means that Allah Ta’ala commanded
people to come to Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), that they should come for
education from different areas, then return to their nation to educate
them. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) meant difference, the difference of
cities, and not difference in the Deen of Allah, Deen is only one.*

(Ma’ani al Akhbar, V 1, P 202)

To come from different cities and countries to gain knowledge of Deen is
Rahmat. Propaganda of Mulla that differing Fatawa is Rahmat is to
misguide public. Deen is only One and there is no Doubt or Difference in
it.

#### 134-Afzal Ibadat

####

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Afzal Ibadat is to wait for Zahoor (of
Qaim a.f.s.).*

(Kamalud Din, V 1, P 287)

Certainly waiting for Zahoor e Qaim (a.f.s.) is superior Ibadat, and the
base of Taqwa (Piety). After migration Rasool Allah

(s.a.w.a.w.) waited for Maola Ali (s.a.) outside Madina, and Quba Mosque
was built there, and Allah said that the Base of this mosque is Taqwa.

#### 135-A Dialogue on the day of Qiyamah

####

I saw in the world of thought & imagination that Qiyamah is established,
and people are going towards Jannat. On seeing those people, a group of
people standing in the scorching sun started requesting Allah:

Ya Allah! We are feeling very hot, quickly send us to Jannat, because we
believe in Your Azmat more than Iblees. For the sake of Your Highness
and Nearness what we have not done in the world. We were saying ‘La
Ilaha illa Allah’ in loud voice, and ‘Mohammad Rasool Allah’ in soft
voice, and ‘Ali un Wali Ullah’ we did not consider at all. Although
illiterate Matmi people were saying that this is Kul-e-Emaan and Islam,
but we were not considering it even part of Kalima. Our Namaaz was
Khalis for You, we were not letting even the thought of Ali (s.a.) to
come in our hearts while praying. We did not allow anyone to raise the
slogan ‘Na’ra Haideri – Ya Ali (s.a.)’ in the mosque, although
illiterate people were saying that Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) made a
pulpit in Masjid e Nabwi for Hazrat Hisaan (r.a.) to narrate Faza’il of
Imam Ali (s.a.) in poetry, therefore the pulpit is only to narrate
Faza’il e Masomeen (s.a.a.). Ya Allah! You know Yourself that in
Tauzihul Masa’il of our right scholars, there was not any Kalima, Azaan,
or Namaaz with the words ‘Ali un Wali Ullah’. We knew that Ali (s.a.)
was Your servant, after Wafaat of Hazrat Fatima (s.a.) he paid
allegiance under pressure, although Matmi people were saying that
according to Quran (Sura Mominoon, verse 71) Imam (s.a.) can not pay
allegiance to any human. Ya Allah! You remember we were asking your
direct help, although the opposite party was saying that it is written
on Arsh that Allah helped His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) with his Wasi Ali
(s.a.). But we believed in Your Nearness, our Maolana was giving

us lectures on verse 186 of Sura Baqarah that You listen to us directly
without Waseela. We want to go to Paradise on the base of our good
deeds, we were avoiding Hadees e Kisa, but we were weeping and reading
Dua Kumail in Congregation. During Majlis of Hussain (s.a.) if time of
Namaaz came, we left Majlis in front of every one and went for prayer
for Your nearness. Some of our big Mujtahids believed in small mistakes
and forgetfulness of Masomeen (s.a.a.), we also believed in partial
infallibility of Masomeen (s.a.a.), although illiterate people believed
in complete Infallibility of Masomeen (s.a.a.) according to
Ayat-e-Tat’heer. Our highly educated scholars who got education from the
centre of excellence, they believed and respected other daughters of
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) as well, other than Hazrat Fatima (s.a.). You
know we are educated people, we can not reject history. Other people
were saying to us: ‘Do not martyr Imam Ali (s.a.) with tongues by not
Testifying his Walayat in Namaaz’, but we did not take care of it;
because our Mujtahid said Zikr e Ali (s.a.) makes Namaaz of Allah Batil.
In the grief of Imam Hussain (s.a.) we were putting our handkerchief on
our eyes as well, we did not want to harm our healthy body which You
bestowed us, therefore we were neither doing hard Matam nor shedding
blood, because it was declared Haraam by our Mujtahid. Matmi people were
teasing us that Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) made cuts on his head, neck,
and back; Imam Sajjad (s.a.) was weeping blood, Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) is
weeping blood, Hazrat Zainab (s.a.) hit her head and it was bleeding,
Olil Azm Prophets (s.a.) shed blood in Karbala in the grief of Imam
Hussain (s.a.) even long before 61 Hijri. But you know we are educated,
we considered it appropriate to donate blood to Aids Patients, and we
arranged Blood Donation Camps as well to divert attention of people,
rather than shedding blood in Moharram, Safar, and Ramazan. Ya Allah You
also know that our fallible Mujtahids were very pious and we believed
that they are superior to Prophets (a.s.) of Bani Israeel, we were
accepting their Fatawa without asking any Proof or saying anything.
Although illiterate people were saying: ‘Do

not accept any Fatwa which is against Quran & Sunnah’, but we knew every
thing is not present in Quran and Sunnah. But as You know we were not
accepting any Hadees without investigating first. And our Mujtahid took
our responsibility if we would act on his Tauzihul Masa’il, this
guarantee was written on the first page with the stamp and signature of
our Mujtahid. Although ignorant people said that every one is
responsible for his own deeds, only Masomeen (s.a.a.) can intercede. Ya
Allah, You know we believed in respecting all Mujtahids, if they were
saying something about Infallibility of Masomeen (s.a.a.), or
Testification of Walayat, or Haqq e Fatima (s.a.), it did not bother us,
because it is research discussion by the knowledgeable people. We did
not spend Khums ourselves without permission of our Mujtahids.

Illiterate people were saying that if Deen is One, then there can’t be
many differing Fatawa of only one problem. But we knew that different
Fatawa of different Mujtahids is Rahmat. Illiterate people tried to be
clever and said to us: Why you do not read the full Hadees e Taqleed,
why you only know only three lines from it, you should read the signs
and qualities of the Nasibi scholars who are enemies of Ahlul Bait
(s.a.a.), and do not use Titles of Imam (s.a.). Ya Allah we did not need
to go into so fine details, we just respected all of them, and who was
more bid and famous, we gave him Title of Ayatullah al Uzma as well.

Ya Allah when the day of Qiyamah started, what was that Azaan, in which
Curse was being done on the enemies of Imam Ali (s.a.)? Qiyamah is the
day of Your Justice, and it started with Cursing (Taberra Bazi)! And why
the name of Ali (s.a.) is written on the foreheads and wings of the
Angels (a.s.)? Even on Arsh the name of Ali (s.a.) is written! We can
see Ali (s.a.) on Maqam e Mahmood, and he is occupying Siraat as well,
and on Kausar he is present, and he is casting his enemies in Jahannam
as well! Ya Allah how many Ali’s are there? We thought that the Hadees
about Ali (s.a.) being present in forty houses on invitation was merely
a story.

Ya Allah save us from this type of atmosphere quickly, and send us to
your Paradise. Ya Allah give us those Hoors on whose face ‘Ali’ is not
written. For sake of Your Deen we sacrificed every thing, our Maolana
gave permission to spend ‘Powder’ money, and other Black money to build
Your mosques, with the condition that we should give Khums from that
money to them first. Although the opposite party was telling us that You
have forbidden spending Haraam money in the Way of Allah according to
Quran, but You know those Backward people did not know the needs of the
modern time.

Ya Allah You know that we only did Zikr of Allah in our Namaaz, although
silly people were saying to Testify Walayat of Ali (s.a.) and even all
Imams (s.a.), and Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) were testifying Walayat in
Tashahud, and even by having Hasnain (s.a.) on his back in Namaaz, he
gave practical proof of Azmat of Masomeen (s.a.a.). But we kept doing
purely Your Ibadat being Khalisi, and trusting the knowledge and order
of our Mujtahids. We did whatever they said, we preferred their Fatwa
over Hadees. But we do not know what happened to our Maolana after my
death, may be he was hypocrite, after putting me in grave he was shaking
me with sticks and reminding me the names of all Imams (s.a.a.) but
during my life he prohibited us to take their name in Ibadat. Although
illiterate people were saying that Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.)
are Rooh of every Ibadat, and Allah likes their Zikr with Tauheed. Why
we should listen to illiterates, we believed in the knowledge of Maolana
educated from proper Howza.

Ya Allah we swear by Your Azmat, at least sit us under a shadow, or send
us in Paradise with our scholars whom we were following and doing
Taqleed, we will drink water in Paradise. We do not like to drink water
from Kausar, and we do not want to sit under the shadow of Liva e Hamd
as well, because we were avoiding ‘Sabeel e Ali Asghar s.a.’ to drink in
the world, rather in fact we did not join the Matmi Jaloos at all, and
we considered the flag of

Abbas (s.a.) innovation as well, but we never refused Niaz of money.

Ya Allah, send us in Purely Your Paradise where we do not have to wear
Silver Bracelets like Malangs wear, and not such a Paradise when its
door is knocked it sounds ‘Ali Ali s.a.’, because with this slogan our
hearts get arrested. We are very delicate soft hearted people. We do not
want curtains with the name of Ali (s.a.) written on them, in our Palace
in Paradise. We want to go to such Paradise where we can only say ‘Allah
hu, Allah hu’ all the time, and doing long Sajdahs like Haris.

Suddenly I saw in the world of Imagination: After that dialogue those
people were taken to a Triangular Shadow (Sura Mursalat, verse 30) along
with their leaders whose Taqleed they were doing, then the leaders &
their followers were reading Quranic verses (Baqarah 166-167, Ibraheem
21) but it was looking that they are fighting. Then they complained to
Allah: Ya Allah we did not tell you due to shame what happened to us in
the graves, perhaps this happened to us by mistake, because we are Haqq
worshiper Khalisi. In the grave Munkar Nakeer came instead of Mubashir
Basheer, and our condition was very bad. We had heard the destruction of
the nation of Loot (a.s.) due to sins, but our Maolana told us that
Shariah keeps changing, so we behaved unnaturally with our wives, and
sometimes we came across prostitutes as well, but it was as we were told
by our Scholars. Ya Allah why we are being pushed towards Hell, why we
are being forced to drink dirty pus. Ya Allah for the sake of Your
Azmat, save us.

#### 136-Hadees e Taqleed?

####

*Imam Hassan Askari (s.a.) said about the saying of Allah “Wa Minhum
Ummiyona La Yalamonal Kitaba illa Amaniya.....” that “Ummi” is related
to him that as he is born from his mother, not able to read or write;
“La Yalamonal Kitaba” this is revealed from the skies and there is no
lie in it, and they*

*can not differentiate; “Illa Amaniya” except that when it is read to
them, and it is said: ‘No doubt it is Kitab of Allah and His Words’ they
do not understand that what is read to them from the book, it is
contrary to what is in it; “Wa Ina Hum illa Yazunoon” i.e. what is read
to them, their leaders belie the Prophet-hood of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) and Imamat of Imam Ali (s.a.) who is Head & Lord of his
Progeny (s.a.a.); and they (people) do their (leaders) Taqleed, although
with them “Moharramun Alaihim” it is Haraam on them to do their Taqleed,
“Thus destruction is for those who write book with their hand, then they
say this is from Allah.....”*

*Imam (s.a.) said: This is Jew nation, they wrote qualities, and thought
that these are qualities of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), and in fact it was
opposite to his qualities. And they said to their weak ones (in faith):
These are qualities of the Nabi (s.a.w.a.w.) who will be sent in the
last era, that ‘he will be tall in height with a big body and abdomen,
strong, long hair’; but Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is opposite to it, and
(they say) ‘he will come after five hundred years from now’ and from
this they only intend to govern their weak ones and to apply their order
on them, and to prevent themselves from serving Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) and from service of Imam Ali (s.a.) and Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.)
and their chosen ones. Allah Ta’ala said: ‘Thus destruction for them for
what they wrote with their hands, and destruction for them for what they
earned’, these altered qualities of Hazrat Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) and
Imam Ali (s.a) which are opposite to their qualities, for this they have
severe punishment in the worst place of Hell, ‘And destruction for
them’, that is an other additional punishment above the first, ‘for what
they earned’, what they got by making their public to deny Hazrat
Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), and by denying his Wasi and brother Ali ibne Abi
Talib (s.a.), who is Wali of Allah.*

*Then Imam Hassan Askari (s.a.) said: Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: Thus
this was Jew Nation, did not know the book except*

*what they heard from their scholars, there was not any way left for
them, then how to declare them responsible for doing their Taqleed, and
to accept from their scholars. Is Jew Nation like our Nation, who does
Taqleed of scholars?*

*Then said: There is difference from one aspect between our public &
scholars and Jew public & scholars, and equality from other aspect. From
the aspect of Equality with them: No doubt Allah declared our public
responsible (culprit) for doing Taqleed of their scholars (Ulma), as He
declared their (Jew) public culprit; and similar is for the aspect of
difference.*

*It was asked: Ya Ibne Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) please explain for us.*

*Imam (s.a.) said: Certainly Jew public knew that their scholars are
firm to tell lies, and take Haraam and bribery, and change obligatory
orders due to recommendations and worldly things. And they know their
prejudice (bigotry, bias) which separates them from Deen. And when they
practice bigotry then they occupy the rights of one to whom they are
bias; and due to whom they were bias (to the other) they give him the
wealth of others, which he was not deserving, and due to him they do
injustice to others. And they know that they are committing Haraam, and
they know in heart that who does this what they are doing, then he is
corrupt (Fasiq), and there is no proof that it is right near Allah, and
they (Ulma) are not Medium between the creations and Allah. Therefore
who do Taqleed, they are responsible themselves because they know them,
that neither any news from them is acceptable, and nor any story is
capable of testifying, and nor any deed which they do from them for
which they are not witness. And it is obligatory on them that they
should think in their hearts about the Amr of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.),
and his (s.a.w.a.w.) proofs are so clear, those can not be hidden by
hiding, and those are so famous that there is no need to reveal them
more.*

*And similarly if the public of our Ummah knows that some from the
scholars (Fuqaha) are openly Fasiq (corrupt), are bias, and incline
towards worldly things and Haraam, and destroy him with whom they are
bias; and due to whom they are prejudiced they make his affairs right,
try for his wellbeing, do good and favour him. If they disgrace and
humiliate the deserving; thus who do their Taqleed from our public, they
are similar to those scholars who are similar to Jews, whom Allah
declared responsible (culprit) due to doing Taqleed of Fasiq Fuqaha. But
among Fuqaha who guards his self, is guardian of his Deen, is opposer of
his selfish wishes, is obedient to the commandment of his Maola (s.a.),
thus public ought to do his Taqleed. But these (qualities) are not found
in all except a few Shia Fuqaha, and who commits ugly and vulgar deeds
like the general scholars commit corruption, do not accept anything from
them, and do not respect them. And most of the time only they mix up
what they take from Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.), it is like that because what
Fasiq takes from us, he does complete alteration in it, due to his
ignorance, and does not keep things on their proper place due to lack of
Marifat, and some others belie us purposely in greed of worldly things,
for them there is only addition of Fire of Hell. And among them there
are some Nasibi people, who can not oppose openly, they learn some of
our real knowledge, and become attractable among our Shias, and they
start decreasing us (decreasing Faza’il), and then go further in that,
and keep adding and adding lies about us, from which we are immune. Some
followers among our Shias accept their words, because they have some of
our knowledge, they are astray themselves, and misguide others as well.
And they are more dangerous for our weak Shias than the army of Yazeed
(l.u.) who opposed Imam Hussain bin Ali (s.a.) and his companions
(a.s.), because they looted our lives and belongings. And those Nasibi
evil Ulma disguise as our lovers, but help our enemies, and put our weak
Shias in doubts, so*

*that they can misguide and prohibit them from the destination of Haqq.*

*He is not a culprit among the public, for whom Allah knows that what is
in his heart, and he does not intend anything except to guard his Deen,
and to respect his Wali (s.a.), and does not give anything in the hands
of that Kafir-dressed (disguised as Shia scholar), but leaves  in the
hands of a Momin, then it is up to Allah that He accepts from him, and
Allah gathers for him all good of the world and hereafter; and who
misguides for him gathers curse of the world and hereafter.*

*Then Imam (s.a.) said: Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Mischievous
scholars of my Ummah, who misguide from us, and cut off the way which
comes to us, and call our enemies with our names, give our Titles to our
opposers, then salute to them, they are worthy of curse, they call bad
names to us, and we are Honour of Allah, and Allah sends Salawaat on us,
and His Moqarrab Angels send Salawaat on us, we are satisfied with their
Salawaat.*

*Then said: It was asked from Amirul Momineen (s.a.): Who is better in
the creations after Aimatul Huda & Misbahud Duja (s.a.)? Imam (s.a.)
said: Ulma who are Saleh. Then it was asked: Who is worse after Iblees,
and Firaoun, and Namrood, who uses your names and your titles, and took
away your Right, and occupied your property? Imam (s.a.) said: Ulma who
does mischief, who reveal Batil, conceal the Facts, and Allah Ta’ala
says about them, “Those are on whom Allah curses and cursing ones curse
on them, except those who repented.....” (Baqarah 159-160).*

(al Ehtijaj al Tabrasi, V 2, P 508)

From this Haqq Hadees it becomes clear: A scholar who opposes Walayat in
any way, he can not be followed-----Who does not read and understand
Quran himself and just does Blind Taqleed, he is like a Jew-----Muqallid
is responsible for his own deeds,

why he did Taqleed and what he did-----To gain Marifat of Mohammad o Aal
e Mohammad (s.a.a.) is obligatory on every person himself; their Amr is
so clear that it does not need to be asked from Mulla-----You can follow
that scholar who is obedient to Amr (orders) of Maola (s.a.), who is
Narrator of Ahadees-----You can not follow a corrupt & vulgar scholar
(who opposes Walayat e Ali s.a.), do not respect him and do not accept
anything from him-----Such hypocrites are not outsiders, they study in
Shia Howza & Madaris, then with Aba Qaba & Amama they are Wolf in
Sheep’s clothing, who attack weak Shias, and they are worse than the
army of Yazeed (l.u.), they put doubts in the hearts of Shias about
Masomeen (s.a.a.) concerning their Faza’il; Do not leave any matter of
Deen in their hands e.g. leading Namaaz, Dars, Majlis, Nikah, Janazah
Namaaz, advice, etc.-----Curse on him who uses Names & Titles of
Masomeen (s.a.a.), and curse on their followers who are happy with
them-----Such scholars who try to decrease Faza’il with their dirty
tongues, spread doubts about Masomeen (s.a.a.), and adopt specific
Titles of Maola (s.a.) for themselves, they will be in line with Iblees,
Firaoun, and Namrood-----They hide the Haqq of Imam (s.a.) i.e. do not
tell the Verses and Traditions about Faza’il of Masomeen (s.a.a.), and
spread Mutiny by issuing Fatawa to quit Testification of Walayat e Ali
(s.a.) in Ibadat. Curse of Allah, His Angels (a.s.) and Momineen on
them.

#### 137-Musawaat

####

It is being preached that all Mujtahideen are respectable without
discrimination, it does not matter what is their belief! Then we should
respect those Companions as well who put allegations on Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) and were teasing him as well. Then we also should not
object if someone says ‘wa As’habihe wa Azwajihe Ajmaeen’ in Salawaat.

Banu Abbas snatched the Government from Bani Umayya in the name of Ahlul
Bait (s.a.a.), and when they got the Government,

they were crueller to Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.) than them. Similarly nowadays
some people get the knowledge of Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.), and after getting
status and honour, they start jealousy from Faza’il of Masomeen
(s.a.a.). Then they open their dirty evil tongue against the Reality,
Highness, Infallibility, and Authority of Masomeen (s.a.a.). In this way
actually they disclose their impure birth, and family tree.

#### 138-Bashr and Noor

####

The Misguided Mulla thinks that Masomeen (s.a.a.) are earthy humans like
him, and barks: How Noor can come in a Human family? When it is said
that Mulla will marry Hoor (Noor creation) in the Paradise, and will not
go to toilet in spite of eating, then he believes it completely! But
still he doubts about the Purity and Infallibility of the Family of Noor
(s.a.a.). Mulla does not know that Jannat is made from the shadow of
Maola Hussain (s.a.), but there was not any shadow of him. In that
Paradise earthy Human will marry Norani Hoors and will keep pure and
clean all the time.

#### 139-Namaaz is Reminder of Anwaar e Khamsa (s.a)

####

Allah Ta’ala made five times Namaaz obligatory to remember Anwaar e
Khamsa (s.a.a.). Niyyah is related to Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.), Qiyaam
is related to Hazrat Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), Rakooh is related to Maola
Ali (s.a.), Sajdah is related to Imam Hussain (s.a.), Qa’dah is related
to Imam Hassan (s.a.), and Tashahud is related to Testification of all
of them until Qaim (a.f.s.).

And the form of Namaaz is according to the name ‘Ahmad’ of Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.w.) i.e. ‘Alif’ = Qiyaam, ‘Ha’ = Rakooh, ‘Meem’ = Sajdah, ‘Dal’
= Qa’da.

Namaaz gives us the lesson: Qiyaam = Stand steadfast on Walayat like
Hazrat Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.), keep preaching Walayat until the last
breath. Rakooh = Spend your wealth on Walayat e Ali (s.a.), and keep
ready to be beheaded if needed. Qa’da = Keep sitting on the Straight
Path of Ali (s.a.). Sajdah = Sacrifice your head for Walayat e Ali
(s.a.), but do not pay allegiance to Batil. Niyyah = Our ladies and
children are also ready for sacrifice on Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 140-Evolution in Ibadaat

####

Educated but ignorant people are being trapped by the Nasibi scholars,
who say: Donate blood for patients instead of shedding blood for Imam
Hussain (s.a.)! These people have forgotten the real object & aim of
Khair al Amal, they see Ibadaat superficially. Then all Ibadaat of Islam
have to be modified according to the needs of the modern time:

Instead of Namaaz in mosque, open Health Gyms, then even non-Muslims can
benefit an exercise like Namaaz, there can be recording of Quran on
loud-speaker with exercise in Gym. Due to Fasting, now we know how the
poor feel hunger, so it is not necessary nowadays to keep Fasts, just
give money to the poor according to your ability. The Tax which
government deducts it is used in welfare of the people, so there is no
need of Zakaat. Muslims spend more than fifteen billion dollars every
year on Hajj. By stopping Hajj (Naoozo Billah) for a few years, this
money can solve all the problems of the poor Muslims of the whole world.
According to the saying of Masoom (s.a.), if a person spends too much
wealth in the way of Allah but does not go for Hajj, it is all useless.
Also instead of fighting bravely in Jihad, one should use long range
missiles with atomic heads, it does not matter if innocent children and
women are also killed. Similarly leave ‘Amr bil Maroof, Nahi anil
Munkir, Tawalla, and Taberra’ as well, because we should not hurt and
interfere others, and it is also against the Human Rights.

In fact Mulla did not understand the Rooh of Ibadaat. Five times Namaaz
is to establish the Zikr of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.), in which
we testify Walayat e Mutliqa. Azadari is the life of Humanity, it is
Life of our life. Hajj is to do Ziyarat of the place of Zahoor of Maola
Ali (s.a.), and Ziyarat of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and Jannat ul Baqeh
& Jannat ul Moalla. Fasting is Sunnah of thirst and hunger of Karbala.
Zakaat and Khums is the practical testification of Walayat of Wajhullah
(s.a.). Jihaad is to preach Walayat e Ali (s.a.), and to prevail
Tauheed. Amr bil Maroof is to invite towards Walayat e Ali (s.a.). Nahi
anil Munkir is to save people from Muqassireen. Tawalla is to announce
Mawaddat of Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.). Taberra is Sunnah of Allah and His
Angels (a.s.) to curse on people with Bughz e Ali (s.a.).

#### 141-Safeena e Nijaat

####

Kinaan thought that he will be rescued by his practical endeavour by
climbing on the high hill, but will not ride on the boat (Safeena) of
his father Nabi Nuh (a.s.). Similarly Kinaani Mulla of today thinks that
the hill of his Khalisi Prayers is very high, and he will not get into
the Safeena e Nijaat of Walayat e Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.).

#### 142-Everywhere Wajhullah

####

It is common practice of the world that on all big and high quality
things the name of its maker is engraved. Momineen are too much
delighted: On Arsh, on Kursi, on Skies, on strata of Earth, on Hill
tops, on Water, on forehead & wings of Angels, on faces of Hoors, on the
door & curtains of Jannat, on the front page of Momin’s Deed-book, and
every where Ism e Azam of Ali ibne Abi Talib (s.a.) is written. And this
is the claim of Quran: Where ever you look, you will find Wajhullah.

#### 143-Islam favoured Mulla or Mulla favoured Islam?

####

If one curses on Muqassir Mulla, then it is said: Do not create
differences and mutiny; all Ulma are the Recognition of Islam and
Shiaism, do not be rude to them. In fact this reasoning is totally
wrong. By becoming Muslim no one favours Islam (Hujrat 17). Rather Ulma
get this status and honour due to Islam and guidance by the knowledge of
Masomeen (s.a.a.). Then if any one of them follows Shaitan and is rude
to Masomeen (s.a.a.), thus becomes Murtad, then how a Momin can respect
him, and keeps quiet not cursing him.

#### 144-Be helpers of Allah

####

When someone asks for help, it means that he needs a helping hand for
work he is doing. If Allah asks Momineen to help, it means that He wants
us to do what He is doing: Allah and His Angels are sending Salawaat on
Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.), and curse on their enemies. The job
of Momin is the same: He obeys Allah by obeying Mohammad o Aal e
Mohammad (s.a.a.), narrates their Faza’il, Testifies their Walayat in
Prayers five times a day, and sends Complete Salawaat on them. Unlike
Munafiq, neither sends incomplete Salawaat, nor testifies with
incomplete (without Walayat) Testification. And curses on Muqassireen
and Munafiqeen who keep malice & jealousy of Maola Ali (s.a.), and
supplicates: Ya Allah! on the day of Qiyamah, wherever Mulla goes, his
Khalisi Muqallideen should go behind him without asking Daleel.

#### 145-Triple Compound Sect

####

Batil forces introduced new sects in Islam to weaken it. They appointed
Mulla Ghulam Ahmed as Nabi, so Mirzai Qadiani came into existence.
Similarly they backed Mulla Abdul Wahab, so Wahabi came into existence.
In this way they broke Sunni religion into pieces, and the real Sunni
sect was almost extinct, but Dr. Tahir ul Qadri is working for its
revival.

Now any wise person is forced to think: Are Batil forces friends of
Shias that they did not attack them? Not at all! Jews did this work
quietly because Shia people are more intelligent. The effects of that
conspiracy are revealing now, but the poison has been diffused in the
whole Shia Nation. Jews added another theory in the ideology of Ghulam
Ahmed and Abdul Wahab, and introduced a Trinity Religion, Khalisi Triple
Compound, i.e.

1-    Ghulam Ahmad claimed Prophet-hood. Mulla of this religion declares
himself superior to Prophets of Bani Israeel.

2-    Abdul Wahab started direct contact with Allah without Waseela.
Mulla of this religion became Waseela himself. Instead of Hadees of
Masoom (s.a.), he issues Fatawa by his name. And takes responsibility of
deeds of those who act on his Rasala e Amlia.

3-    Shaitan denied Khilafat & Walayat practically, when Allah ordered
to do Sajdah to Adam (a.s.) after transferring Noor of Mohammad o Aal e
Mohammad (s.a.a.) in him. Sajdah is part of prayer. Mulla has already
got certificate of hypocrisy by denying practically to testify Walayat
in prayer.

#### 146-To kill two birds with one shot

####

Look at the mastermind Shaitan, what lesson he taught to Mulla. The
follower of Shaitan who are gay (sodomite), what they must do after
marriage. Shaitan asked his brother Mulla to issue a Fatwa: It is
permissible to do sodomy with his wife with her

permission, but it is Makrooh. So Shaitan can also have place and
obviously then their children will be Ibleesi and Najis, then
automatically they will be far from Marifat of Masomeen (s.a.a.) due to
Najasat of their birth.

#### 147-360 Idols and Oneness

####

It is mentioned in Sura Kafiroon that Kafirs want a religion of mixture
according to their wishes, so that they can worship their 360 idols
along with one Allah, but Allah and His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) refused.
Jews also made their Ulma their Rabb i.e. whatever Ulma were saying they
were accepting without asking Daleel, they changed Halaal and Haraam,
which is mentioned in Sura Tauba v31, and Sura Baqarah v78-79. Similarly
Mulla of today who is secretly enemy of Faza’il of Mohammad o Aal e
Mohammad (s.a.a.), has printed his own Fatwa Book (Aeen e Akbari) in
which he does not mention Masomeen (s.a.a.), and forces his Muqallideen
to accept it without asking Daleel, only then they can be Salvaged!

If Mulla was sincere, he would have translated Kutub e Arba in many
languages for Momineen, in these books all commandments are with the
names of Masomeen (s.a.a.), which every Momin likes. If it was so, then
the Shia nation would have been saved from destruction.

#### 148-In Search of the Truth

####

If anyone has any doubt or hesitation about Faza’il and Walayat e
Mutliqa of Maola Ali (s.a.), and he thinks Farooh (e.g. Namaaz) is
superior to Usool (e.g. Walayat o Imamat), then he should find its
reason......First he should think: how he earns, whether he earns
Haraam? If it is Halaal way of earning, then he should look at the
atmosphere of his home, whether the atmosphere is against Shariah? And
if that is also according to Shariah all twelve

months in a year, then he should pay attention to his mother, and if she
is not present in the world, then he should go to the suburb or village
where he was born, and look around in the neighbourhood whether he looks
like some neighbour or not? If it is not like that then he should read
the translation & commentary of verse 64 of Sura Bani Israeel, whether
it is not a mischief of Shaitan? And then repent to Allah for the sake
of Masomeen (s.a.a.), certainly Allah is Forgiving.

#### 149-The Answer of Complain

####

It is not fair only to complain without suggesting rectification. Shia
scholars and public should think and start practical steps, e.g.:

1-    Wifaq Ulma e Walayat should be established in the whole country,
with its branch in every city.

2-    Momineen should be told how to spend Khums and Zakaat themselves,
like they perform other Ibadaat themselves.

3-    Titles of Masomeen (s.a.a.) should not be used for Religious
Scholars and Speakers.

4-    Kutub e Arba should be translated in all major languages. And one
brief book should be prepared as well from Kutub e Arba, in which all
commandments are written with the name of Masoom (s.a.) (e.g. Kash ul
Ahkaam, compiled by Syyed Baqir Nisar Zaidi)

5-    All Tauzihul Masail, in which Fatawa are without reference of any
Masoom (s.a.) should be destroyed, such books should be condemned.

6-    Allah is Just. Allah has given the same intelligence to all races
of all the countries. Racial prejudice should be condemned openly.
According to Islam a nation is not due to a country, it is due to common
faith.

7-    If any scholar on any stage speaks against Faza’il of Masomeen
(s.a.a.), he should be openly condemned and declared

non-Shia. All Shias should disown him in newspaper. If he repents, then
Imam Qaim (a.f.s.) will decide about him.

8-    An Open Shia University should be established in every country,
with education by post or internet, so every Shia should be Mohaddis.

9-    In Shia Madaris only Arabic should be the medium of education!
Also they should be taught major international languages e.g. English,
Urdu.

10-  Scholars should prepare a set of 10 books for children to learn
Arabic, which every Shia should teach his children at home from the age
of 5 to 15. So that children should love Arabic and can read original
books later on.

11-  Spread the lesson of Love for Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.). Aggressive
discussions should be stopped. Convey the message in a nice way as
commanded by Allah.

12-  Preach Walayat e Ali (s.a.), narrate Faza’il e Masomeen (s.a.a.),
tell children the reality of Farooh e Deen, so that they can practice
Islam with eagerness.

13-  When any scholar tells the solution of a problem, he must give
reference of the Quranic Verse or Hadees e Masoom (s.a.).

14-  There should be a monthly Shia magazine, its object should be
preaching, contact, problem solving, and all positive aspects.

15-  Majalis and Jaloos should be more graceful, and promote them more.
Azadari is our Life and Salvation.

16-  The standard of Shia Madaris should be high, so that people do not
need to go to another country for education. Syllabus should be reviewed
strictly: what is more necessary to become a real Shia scholar. The
Syllabus should be of international standard. Not just like that if any
student spends 5 years sleeping in hostels can wear Amama & Aba Qaba. At
least Matric should be the entry requirement, English, Urdu, Arabic
languages, and computer sciences should be included in the studies.

Often if a child is very naughty, or he is out of control of parents, or
he is very dull minded, runs away from school, that child is sent to
Madrisa; then after becoming Mulla he takes revenge of his ignorance
from the Faza’il of Masomeen (s.a.a.). This trend should be discouraged.
Intelligent and Honourable family members should go in this line.
Religious education is the most difficult, comprehensive and high grade
knowledge.

17-  All Ulma e Haqq and honourable Shias should sit together to think
how they have to prepare practically for the Zahoor of Imam Qaim
(a.f.s.), or just to wait with Muqassireen for Zulfiqaar.

#### 150-Bismillah

####

Bismillah is the Great Name of Imam Ali (s.a.). It is commanded to start
everything with it. Quran (Words of Allah), Namaaz, all Ibadaat, and all
personal affairs start with the holy name of Maola Ali (s.a.). O Doomed
Muqassir! Otherwise delete ‘Bismillah’ from Quran and Namaaz like
Firaoun-e-Sham, and make Haris your partner.

#### 151-The Straight Path

####

“Keep us on the Right Path” (al Fateha).

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (s.a.) said: Right Path (Sirat e Mustaqeem) is Amirul
Momineen Ali (s.a.).*

Namaaz can not be performed without Sura Fateha at all. You make Dua to
Allah in Sura Fateha to keep on the Path of Ali (s.a.),and then in
Tashahud why you choke to death to Testify his Walayat?

#### 152-Sabr and Salaat

####

“And take help from Sabr and Salaat, and no doubt it (Salaat) is very
heavy except who fear Allah” (Baqarah 45)

Sabr (Patience) is Rasool Allah, and Salaat (Namaaz) is Maola Ali
(s.a.), from whom Muttaqeen seek help. No doubt Walayat e Ali (s.a.) is
that heavy thing which does not go down the throat of people i.e. it is
difficult. But who fear Allah, they say “Ya Ali (s.a.) Maddad” all the
time. And Allah declared Ali (s.a.) in Quran as Salaat only to make
clear the relationship of Ali (s.a.) and Namaaz.

#### 153-Wajhullah – Asma e Husna

####

*“And who is more unjust than he who prevents from the mosques of Allah
that Zikr of His Name should be done in them, and strives to ruin them.
For them, it is not proper that they should enter them except in fear.
Disgrace is for them in this world and great punishment is for them in
the hereafter. And for Allah is the East and the West, therefore
whichever side you turn, there is Wajhullah, surely Allah is
Amplegiving, Knowing.”*

(Baqarah 114-115)

Allah’s chosen Ism is Ali (s.a.). Allah bestowed His name to Imam Ali
(s.a.). Allah declared His Name ‘Ali Al-Azeem’. Asma al-Husna of Allah
are Masomeen (s.a.a.). Wajhullah is also Maola Ali (s.a.).

Now if anyone prohibits from the slogan or Zikr of Ali (s.a.) in the
mosque, he actually wants to ruin the mosque. The Masjid is only and
only for the lovers & devotees of Walayat e Ali (s.a.). Muqassir should
be afraid to enter the mosque, lest he will be treated like Haris bin
Numan. In fact when the opposer of

Walayat says prayer Allah curses on him. Allah has written the name of
Maola Ali (s.a.) on every thing of the Universe, wherever you will see
you will find Wajhullah.

#### 154-The Cause of Changing Qibla

####

*“The fools among the people will say: What has turned them from their
Qibla which they had? Say: The East and the West belong only to Allah;
He guides whom He likes to the right path. And thus We have made you
‘Ummah tanw Wasatan’ (Middle Nation) that you are witness over the
people, and Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) is witness over you; and We did not make
Qibla which you had except that We might know who follows the Rasool
(s.a.w.a.w.) from them who turn back upon their heels; and this was
certainly heavy except for those whom Allah has guided; and Allah does
not make your faith fruitless; Allah is Affectionate, Merciful to the
people. Indeed We see the turning of your face to sky, so We shall
surely turn you to a Qibla which you like, turn then your face towards
the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your face towards it; and
those who have been given the book certainly know that it (Qibla) is
Haqq from their Rabb; and Allah is not unaware of what they do.”*

(Baqarah 142-144)

“Ummah tanw Wasatan” mean Masomeen (s.a.a.). Ka’ba is House (Bait) of
Allah where Imam Ali (s.a.) did Zahoor. And Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
said that Ka’ba is the similitude of Ali (s.a.), Ka’ba does not go to
anyone, but people have to come for guidance.

It is indicated in this verse of changing Qibla that Allah wanted to see
who obeys Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) concerning Faza’il of Maola Ali
(s.a.). And secondly Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) wished that Ka’ba should
be Qibla, because Ali (s.a.) came in it, and Momineen are sure that
Ka’ba is Haqq, Maola Ali (s.a.) is Haqq.

Muqassireen should not go for Hajj as well, and they should not say
Namaaz facing towards Ka’ba, rather they should lie flat like a dead
body looking towards the sky and say Namaaz. In fact the denier of
Walayat is a walking dead body.

#### 155-Haraam Earning

####

*“Surely those who conceal any part of the Book that Allah has revealed
and sell it for a small price, they eat nothing but fire into their
bellies, and Allah will not speak to them on the day of Qiyamah, and nor
He will purify them, and painful punishment is for them.”*

(Baqarah 174)

While addressing the army of Yazeed (l.u.), Imam Hussain (s.a.) said:
You do not listen to me because your bellies are filled with Haraam.

Speakers who deliver attracting speeches but try to avoid and conceal
Verses and Traditions about Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.), whatever
gift they get it is like filling their bellies with fire. And any Zakir
or Speaker or Scholar who openly speaks about Faza’il & Walayat of Maola
Ali (s.a.) without hiding anything, if the wealth of the entire world is
given to him, it is less.

#### 156-Angels carry Taboot

####

*“And their Prophet (a.s.) said to them: Surely the sign of his kingdom
is that the Taboot (chest) will come to you, in which there is
tranquillity from your Rabb and residue of the relics of what Aal e Musa
and Aal e Haroon have left, and the Angels (a.s.) are carrying it;
certainly there is Ayat (sign) in this for those who believe.”*

(Baqarah 248)

Taboot e Sakina is that chest which Allah sent down to the holy mother
of Hazrat Musa (a.s.), in which she put Musa (a.s.) and put it in the
river Nile. When Hazrat Musa (a.s.) was about to go from this world, he
put the tablets of Taurat, his armour, and other things which were
proofs & signs of Nabuwat in it and gave it to Hazrat Yousha (a.s.).
Bani Israeel did not respect that Taboot, then Allah took it away. Then
Angels (a.s.) brought it carrying to Hazrat Taloot (a.s.) with the
command of Allah. Angels are proud to carry the Signs of Prophets
(Sha’air Allah, Ayaat of Allah). Allah commanded Angels to carry Taboot;
He did not forbid them, saying: You are infallible Angels just to
worship me, Nabi’s task was to convey My message, which he did, there is
no value of his belongings, do not carry them.

We carry Sha’air Allah of the Pride of the Prophets ‘Imam Hussain s.a.’
which are Ayaatullah as well: Shabeh e Taboot, Flag of Abbas (s.a.),
Cradle of Ali Asghar (s.a.), Mehndi of Qasim (s.a.), Zuljanah.

#### 157-Aal-e-Imran (s.a.a.): Mustafa over Aalameen

####

*“Certainly Allah chose (made Mustafa) Adam (a.s.) and Nuh (a.s.) and
Aal e Ibraheem (a.s.) and Aal e Imran (a.s.) above Aalameen (worlds).”*

(Aal e Imran 33)

One day Mamoonur Rasheed said to Imam Ali Raza (s.a.): Has Allah given
Fazilat to Itrat (s.a.a.) of Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.)? Imam (s.a.) said: No
doubt, Allah has given Fazilat to Itrat e Rasool (s.a.a.) over Aalameen
in the decisive part of the Book Mamoon asked: Where in the Kitaab of
Allah? He (s.a.) said: Words of Allah: “Certainly Allah chose.....”

Allah chose Adam (a.s.) and Nuh (a.s.) but not their Aal (progeny); and
chose Ibraheem (a.s.) and Abu Talib (Imran s.a.) with their Aal.
Aal-e-Ibraheem (a.s.) means the forefathers of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.): Abdullah (s.a.), Abu Talib (s.a.), Abdul Muttalib (s.a.),
Hashim (s.a.) until Ismaeel (s.a.). Aal-e-Imran (s.a.) means the
children of Hazrat Abu Talib (s.a.): Twelve Imams (s.a.a.) and other
holy progeny (s.a.a.), this whole family is Mustafa (chosen ones).

#### 158-Don’t be Afraid of Muqassir, Carry on

####

#### Tableegh e Walayat

####

*“This day those people who did Kufr, are despaired from your Deen, so
do not be afraid of them, and fear Me; this day I have perfected for you
your Deen and completed my Ne’mat on you and chose for you Islam as
Deen;”*

(Ma’ida 3)

In this verse Allah says Kafir to Munafiq, who says with his tongue
‘Congratulations Ya Ali s.a.’ but decides to oppose Imam (s.a.) in his
heart. Nowadays Muqassir also says ‘Ali un Wali Ullah s.a.’
half-heartedly in Kalima not considering it a part, and practically
separates this Kalima while praying.

Allah perfected His Deen by announcing this Kalima and made it chosen
one due to this Kalima, it is the guarantee of acceptance of deeds.
Allah is commanding: do not be afraid of Muqassireen, rather be afraid
of the punishment of Allah, and keep preaching Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 159-Ilhaad to Asma al Husna

####

“And best names are for Allah, therefore call Him with them, and leave
alone those who do Ilhaad in His names; soon they shall get the
punishment for what they are doing.” (A’raf 180)

‘Ilhaad’ means to doubt, to turn away from testimony, to deny, or to
turn away from Deen.

*Imam Raza (s.a.) said: “When you are caught in difficulty and hard
time, then supplicate to us, this is according to this saying of Allah:
And best names are for Allah, therefore call Him with them.”*

Imam Sadiq (s.a.) said: “We are Asma ul Husna.”

So Allah commands that when you call Allah then mention Maola Ali
(s.a.), and do not turn away from his testimony, and do not doubt about
him at all, otherwise there is no chance of getting reward for good
deeds.

#### 160-For Allah Ali (s.a.) is Sufficient to Testify

####

*“And those who disbelieved say: You are not a Rasool. Say: Allah is
sufficient as a witness between me and you and who has the knowledge of
the Book.”*

(Ra’d 43)

Amirul Momineen (s.a.) was asked: What is your great praise? Imam (s.a.)
recited this verse and said: Allah means us from “who has the knowledge
of the Book”. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) and Imam Baqir (s.a.) also said
same about this verse.

If the entire Universe denies Risalat, Allah is Needless of all the
creations; if only Maola Ali (s.a.) testifies it is sufficient for
Allah. For Allah the words of Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) and Ali (s.a.) are
sufficient and great. Now who denies testifying Walayat e Ali (s.a.), in
fact he should bark on his mother for being dishonest.

#### 161-Kalima Tayyiba

####

*“Have you not seen how Allah gives example of Kalima Tayyiba like a
Tayyiba Tree whose root is firm and whose branches are in the sky.
Yielding its fruit every moment by the permission of it’s Rabb; and
Allah gives examples for the people so that they keep doing Zikr.”*

(Ibraheem 24-25)

Imam Sadiq (s.a.) said: Holy Tree is that tree, its root is Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.), stem is Amirul Momineen (s.a.), and Masomeen (s.a.a.) who
are Aal of both of them, are its branches, and the knowledge of Imams
(s.a.a.) is its fruit.

So according to the saying of Allah, ‘Kalima Tayyiba’ is exactly like
‘Shajarah Tayyiba’ (Holy Tree): ‘There is none worthy of worship except
Allah’ is the Land of Tauheed; ‘Mohammad s.a.w.a.w. is Rasool of Allah’
is the Root; ‘Ali un Wali Ullah s.a.’ is the Stem; ‘Wa Aoladahul
Masomeena Hujjajullah’ are the branches.

All Masomeen (s.a.a.) recited Kalima Tayyiba after Zahoor, in which they
testified Tauheed, Risalat, and their Walayat.

Now if any ‘production of dark land’ shows a Root only and claims that
it is a complete Tree, and stem and branches are not part of a tree,
then he is:

“Surely the worst of animals near Allah are the Deaf and Dumb who do not
understand.” (Anfaal 22)

#### 162-Who Prohibits from Walayat e Ali (s.a.), is Rebellious

####

“Those who disbelieve and hinder from the Sabeel of Allah, we will add
punishment over punishment for them because they made mischief.” (Nahl
88)

Sabeel of Allah is Walayat of Amirul Momineen (s.a.), who prohibits from
it in any way, by any trick, there is punishment over punishment for
him, and he is mischievous.

#### 163-Sunnah of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)

####

*“Say: Call Allah or call Rahman, whichever you call, the Best Names are
for Him; and do not recite your Namaaz with a very loud voice and nor
with a very low voice, and take a way in between them.”*

(Bani Israeel 110)

Imam Baqir (s.a.) said about this verse: ‘Do not recite your Namaaz in
loud voice’ means that do not express completely Walayat of Ali Murtaza
(s.a.) and whatever I have bestowed on him, until I command you about
it. And ‘And nor with a low voice’ means that do not conceal it from Ali
(s.a.), rather tell him what is his high status. And ‘take a way in
between them’ means that keep asking me to permit you announcement of
Amr-e-Walayat-e-Ali (s.a.), so he (s.a.w.a.w.) kept asking about it and
on the day of Ghadeer e Khum it was permitted to announce it, it means
“Thus what is commanded to you, announce it openly and turn away from
Mushrikeen” (Hajar 94) cancelled this verse “And do not
recite......between them” (Bani Israeel 110)

So this Hadees proves that Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) was testifying
Walayat e Ali (s.a.) in Namaaz from beginning but in low voice that only
Maola Ali (s.a.) could hear him behind, and it was openly announced at
Ghadeer e Khum. This Sunnah i.e. what Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) was
reciting in Tashahud is completely mentioned in book ‘Fiqh e Kamil’ of
great Allama Majlisi (r.a.) in chapter ‘Kitabus Salaat’.

#### 164-Respect of Sha’air Allah

####

*“That (is the real thing), and whoever respects Sha’air Allah, this is
surely due to the piety (Taqwa) of the hearts.”*

(Hajj 32)

“Sha’air Allah” means those signs by seeing them Allah is remembered,
and their respect makes the hearts pious, e.g. Safa, Marwa, animal of
sacrifice: by seeing that animal we remember the sacrifice of Ibraheem
(s.a.) and Ismaeel (s.a.) which they did to obey the order of Allah, so
we remember Azmat of Allah in this way.

And who is “Pride of Ismaeel”, there is no similitude of his sacrifice,
things related to him are definitely superior Sha’air Allah. Model of
Taboot, Flag, Zuljanah, Cradle, and Mehndi all are Sha’air Allah.
Definitely he is enemy of Allah who objects Sha’air al Hussaini.

#### 165-Amanat – Covenant – Namaaz

####

*“And those who are keepers of their Amanaat (Trusts) and their
Covenant, and those who protect their Namaaz (Prayers), these are they
who are the heirs, who shall inherit the Paradise, they shall live in it
for ever.”*

(Mominoon 8-11)

The greatest Trust among the trusts of the Universe is Walayat. Allah
presented Walayat e Ali (s.a.) to every thing, all of them accepted but
without the condition of reward and punishment; it means that reward if
he would keep steadfast on Walayat e Ali (s.a.), and punishment if he
denies.

The most important Covenant which was taken by Allah from the humans in
Alam-e-Zarr is about Tauheed, Risalat, and Walayat. So guard your Namaaz
from the enemies of Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

He who keeps the Trust of Walayat e Ali (s.a.) firm and safe in his
heart, and protects his Namaaz from Muqassir Mulla by testifying his
Covenant with Allah in Tashahud, which was done in Alam-e-Zarr, only he
will inherit Paradise.

#### 166-Ghamam – Sabeel – Zikr – Quran

####

*“And on the day when the sky will burst apart with Ghamam (Cloud), and
the Angels will be sent down a sending. On that day the Haqq Kingdom
shall belong to Rahman, and that day shall be very hard on disbelievers.
And that day the unjust one shall bite his hands, saying: Would that I
had caught Sabeel with Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.). O woe to me! Would that I
had not made Fulana (that person) my friend. Certainly he led me astray
from the Zikr, after he had come to me; and Shaitan disgraces man. And
Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) will say: Ya Rabb! Certainly my nation made This
Quran forsaken (Mahjoor, left behind, mocked).”*

(Furqan 25-30)

*Imam Sadiq (s.a.) said: ‘Ghamam’ means Amirul Momineen Ali ibne Abi
Talib (s.a.).*

*According to the saying of Imam Baqir (s.a.), the unjust one will say:
Would that I had made Ali (Sabeel s.a.) my Wali as well along with
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), and would not have listened to that (Fulana)
friend. And Zikr means Walayat e Ali (s.a.).*

*Imam Ali (s.a.) said: “Thus I am that Zikr from whom they (unjust ones)
turned away, and I am that Sabeel from which they went astray, and I am
that Emaan which they denied, and I am that Quran which they left
behind, and I am that Deen which they belied, and I am that Siraat from
which they went astray.”*

Mulla is misguiding the public by saying: You can not recite Testimony
of Walayat e Ali (s.a.) in Namaaz because during Namaaz only Zikrullah &
Quran can be read. O blind of wisdom Mulla! Ponder about this verse, you
will bite your hands on the day of Qiyamah saying: would that I had
testified Sabeel Ali (s.a.) with Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.), and would
not have turned away from Zikr (Walayat). Then that day you will know
when Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) will complain to Allah: Mulla and his
followers left this Quran-e-Natiq Ali (s.a.) behind. Quran and Zikr of
Allah is Maola Ali (s.a.).

#### 167-Deen – Fitrat

####

*“(Ya Nabi s.a.w.a.w.) Then keep your face upright for Deen in the right
state: the Fitrat (Nature) made by Allah on which He made people; there
is no alteration in the creation of Allah; that is the right Deen; but
most people do not know.”*

(Rum 30)

*Imam Baqir (s.a.) said: ‘Deen’ means Walayat of Ali (s.a.) and
Infallible Imams (s.a.a.), and ‘Fitrat of Allah’ means ‘There is none
worthy of worship except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is Rasool of
Allah, Ali (s.a.) is Wali of Allah, Amirul Momineen.’*

It means that who has firm faith in Kalima Tayyiba, then he is born on
the chosen Fitrat of Allah, and it is proof of purity of his birth. And
who doubt in it, then for him this verse applies:

<p dir="rtl">
والاولد الاموال فى وشاركهم
</p>

There can’t be any changing in Fitrat of Allah with anyone’s advice,
that Mulla can divide Kalima into pieces using his tricks, and thinks
these are different parts and this part is part of Islam and last part
is not its part.

It is obligatory on Momineen to teach Faza’il of Amirul Momineen (s.a.)
to their children, so that children can keep on the chosen Fitrat of
Allah, and be an honour for the parents.

#### 168-Janbullah (s.a.)

####

*“One soul will say: Woe to me for that I fell short of my duty to
Janbullah, and certainly I was among those who laughed at (him).”*

(Zumar 56)

On the day of Qiyamah Muqassir will regret too much: Woe, why I did not
testify Walayat of Ali (s.a.), I thought he was human and did not
mention his name in Namaaz, but alas I did mention myself in Sajdah and
used to say:

<p dir="rtl">
المسكين الحقير الذليل ضعيف عبدك ارحم يارب
</p>

Woe to me, now I realize that I considered my own zikr in Namaaz better
than Zikr of Imam Ali (s.a.).

#### 169-Mawaddat al-Qurba

####

*“That is of which Allah gives the good news to His servants, those who
believe and do good deeds. Say: I do not ask you any reward for it
(preaching prophet-hood) but Mawaddat (devotion) of my Qurba (Syyeda
Fatima Zahra s.a., nearest relative); and whoever earns good, We give
him more of good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful.”*

(Shura 23)

Allah gave Guidance to all the creations through Hazrat Mohammad
(s.a.w.a.w.) and declared the Reward of Prophet-hood as Devotion
(Mawaddat) to Syyeda Fatima Zahra (s.a.).

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) himself paid this Reward of Risalat: He
(s.a.w.a.w.) used to stand up to welcome Syyeda Fatima (s.a.) and

make her sit on his place, he (s.a.w.a.w.) used to recite
Ayat-e-Tat’heer when coming on the holy door of Syyeda Fatima (s.a.),
her sons Hasnain (s.a.) used to sit on his (s.a.w.a.w.) shoulders on the
Stamp of Risalat strolling in Madina, sitting on his holy back while he
was in prayer, waited for her husband Maola Ali (s.a.) during Rakooh in
prayer.

That Ali (s.a.) for whom Syyedul Anbiya (s.a.w.a.w.) waits in Rakooh,
Mulla has deleted his chance of Salvation by deleting that Ali’s (s.a.)
Zikr from Namaaz.

We are sinful, our backs are not capable that Hasnain (s.a.) can sit on,
but we write the story of our devotion to Hasnain (s.a.) by Zanjeer
Matam.

#### 170-Faza’il e Ali (s.a.) & Munafiq

####

*“And when a similitude of the son of Mariyam (a.s.) was given, then
your people clamoured at it. And they said: Are our gods (idols) better
or he? They did not give example but to dispute; rather they are
contentious (quarrelsome) people.”*

(Zukhruf 57-58)

*Hazrat Salman Mohammadi (a.s.) narrated: Once Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
was sitting among the companions and said: After sometime a person will
come to you who is similitude of Esa (a.s.). In the meanwhile Imam Ali
(s.a.) came and one person said: Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) is never tired of
narrating Faza’il of Ali (s.a.), until he made him similitude of Esa
(a.s.) as well, our idols which we worshiped during the time of
ignorance were better than this. At that time this verse was revealed.*

Munafiq was fed up by listening Faza’il of Ali (s.a.) from Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) all the time, but his love for the worship of idols never
faded in heart. Muqassir Mulla of today similarly says: Why all the time
in Majalis Faza’il of Ali (s.a.), Testimony

of Walayat of Ali (s.a.)? Is there nothing left in Deen other than “Ali
un Wali Ullah s.a.”? One should mention Farooh e Deen in Majalis as
well.

But without Walayat of Ali (s.a.), Farooh e Deen is just like Pooja
Paat, idol worshiping, and Shirk.

Ali-ul-Ala, Ali-ul-Azeem, Ali-al-Jabbar, becomes happy by Zikr of
Faza’il of Ali-al-Murtaza (s.a.), and Kafir (Munkir, Munafiq) burns,
which Allah mentioned in Surah Fat’ha verse 29.

#### 171-Drowning Mulla will let you drown as well

####

*“Cast, you both, into Hell every Denier Rebellious one, forbidder of
Khair (good), exceeder of limits, doubter, who sets up another god with
Allah, so you both cast him into severe punishment.”*

(Qaaf 24-26)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: Ya Ali (s.a.)! On the day of Qiyamah
Allah will gather all the humans, that day I and you will be on the
right side of the Arsh. Then Allah will say to me and you: You both get
up, and whoever kept Bughz with you, and whoever belied you, you cast
them in Hell; and whoever loved you enter them in Paradise.*

Now whoever doubts Walayat e Ali (s.a.), and prevents others as well
from this “Khairil Amal” by issuing Fatawa, and thus exceeds his limits,
he is doing Shirk by rejecting the Choice of Allah. Doomed ones consider
Walayat e Ali (s.a.) which is Inevitable Usool e Deen inferior to Farooh
e Deen.

#### 172-Marajal Bahrain

####

*“He has made the two seas to flow, they meet together, between them is
a curtain (Barzakh, barrier) they do not excel each other; then which of
the bounties of your Rabb you both will deny? From both pearls (Lo’lu)
and corals (Marjan) come out.”*

(Rahman 19-22)

*Imam Sadiq (s.a.) said: Ali (s.a.) and Fatima (s.a.) are two deep seas,
none of them excels the partner (i.e. their status is equal), and Lo’lu
and Marjan means Imam Hassan (s.a.) and Imam Hussain (s.a.). In
Traditions Barzakh means Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.).*

The Progeny (s.a.a.) of Risalat started with the two seas of Noor: From
the son of Abu Talib (s.a.) Imam Ali (s.a.) and the daughter of Rasool
Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) Syyeda Fatima (s.a.). Similarly again the Progeny of
Imamat started with the two seas of Noor: From the son of Imam Hussain
(s.a.) Imam Zainul Abideen (s.a.) and the daughter of Imam Hassan (s.a.)
Syyeda Fatima (Umm e Abdullah s.a.).

#### 173-Aamul Huzn

####

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) did not mourn for three or ten or forty days
on the martyrdom of Hazrat Khadija ul Kubra (s.a.) and Hazrat Abu Talib
(s.a.), but he declared the whole year Aamul Huzn (the year of
mourning).

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said on the martyrdom of Hazrat Abu Tablib
(s.a.): O my father, O Abu Talib (s.a.), I am too much grieved on your
departure, how can I forget you. You brought me up during childhood, and
accepted my invitation*

*when I was big, my similitude with you is like an Eye in the Orbit, and
Rooh in the Body.*

According to the Hadees of Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) the Eyes and Rooh
of Abu Talib (s.a.) are Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.w.).

#### 174-Buying & Selling

####

*“O you who believe! When the call is made for Salaat on Friday, then
hasten towards Zikr of Allah and leave the trading; that is better for
you if you know.”*

(Jum’ah 9)

‘Friday’ means that day when Allah gathered all the humans in
Alam-e-Zarr and took the Covenant of Walayat. Salaat and Zikrullah means
Amirul Momineen (s.a.).

Thus O Shia nation! When you are called to Namaaz by saying “Hyya Ala
Khairil Amal”, then remember the Covenant of Walayat of Alam-e-Zarr and
go to Zikrullah (Ali s.a.), and shut down the trading of Fatawa against
Walayat e Ali (s.a.), it is better for you, otherwise and anyway the
holy son of Ali (s.a.) is coming with Zulfiqaar.

#### 175-Keep Steadfast on Shahadaat

####

*“And those who are faithful to their Trusts and their Covenant, and
those who are steadfast on their Testimonies, and those who keep guard
on their Namaaz, those shall be in Paradise, with honour.”*

(Ma’arij 32-35)

The greatest Trust (Amanat) of the Universe is Walayat of Ali (s.a.)
which Allah presented, and humans accepted it. And the

greatest Covenant which was done in Alam-e-Zarr is also the same i.e.
Tauheed, Risalat, and Walayat. Therefore Allah used the Plural sense
“Shahadaat” (Testimonies) i.e. Testimonies of Tauheed, Risalat, and
Walayat. Note that word “Shahadatain” (Two Testimonies) is not used in
Quran!

Therefore those who keep Trust of Walayat in heart, recite Testimonies
of Tauheed, Risalat, and Walayat with true heart, offer Guarded Namaaz
(such Namaaz which is not lost), those people will stay in Paradise for
ever with honour.

Namaaz or any Ibadat without Walayat e Ali (s.a.) will be lost, will be
thrown back on face, will blow away like ash, will convert into snakes
to welcome in Hell.

#### 176-Zikr of Rabb

####

*“So that We might try them with it; and whoever turns away from the
Zikr of his Rabb, He will enter him into afflicting punishment.”*

(Jinn 17)

*“And do Zikr of Ism of your Rabb, and devote yourself to him with
(exclusive) devotion.”*

(Muzzammil 8)

*Abdullah ibne Abbas (r.a.) said that it means Zikr of Walayat of Ali
Amirul Momineen (s.a.).*

It means that who does not consider Zikr of Ali (s.a.) as Zikr of Allah,
punishment is for him. And Allah says to His Rasool (s.a.w.a.w.) to do
“Ali Ali s.a.” and not care anyone else. Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.)
announced Walayat e Ali (s.a.) in the very first invitation of Islam
i.e. Dawat e Zul Ashera. Then whole life he (s.a.w.a.w.) narrated
Faza’il & Walayat of Ali (s.a.), and the Last Announcement in Ghadeer e
Khum was also Walayat e Ali (s.a.).

#### 177-Says Prayers but not Namazi!

####

*“Except the people of the right hand, they will be in Jannat, they will
ask from the guilty ones: What brought you into Hell? They shall say: We
were not among those who used to pray, and we did not feed the poor, and
we used to criticise with the criticisers, and we used to belie the day
of judgement.”*

(Muddassir 39-46)

Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: It means that they were not followers of
Imams (s.a.a.), about whom Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
المقربون اولئك السبقون والسبقون
</p>

Don’t you see that a horse which is on Second position in a horse race
is called مصلى , so those people will say المصلين من نك لم , so it means
that they will say we were not followers of “Sabiqeen” (s.a.a.).

Shias (As’habul Yameen) of Imam Ali (s.a.) from Paradise will ask the
Culprits (Deniers of Walayat) who will be in Hell and they will reply:
We were not real Namaazi, it means that we were saying Namaaz but
without its Rooh. Therefore Maola Ali (s.a.) said: I am Namaaz, Zakaat,
Fast, Hajj, and Jihad of Momin. So who criticizes the Haqq (Walayat e
Ali s.a.) or he is happy with the criticizers, and gets Fatawa against
Walayat as well, he actually belies Day of Judgement.

*Imam Baqir (s.a.) said: We and our Shias are As’habul Yameen. And every
that person who keeps Bughz with Ahlul Bait (s.a.a.) is in the prison of
his deeds.*

It means that Ibadat of Denier of Walayat is Imprisonment with Hard
Labour, which has no Reward, after finishing the time of imprisonment
then Death Sentence.

#### 178-Munkir e Walayat: Donkey

####

*“Then what is the matter with them that they are turning away from
Tazkirah (advice, mentioning), as if they were wild donkeys, that fled
from a lion.”*

(Muddassir 49-51)

*“The example of those people who were charged with Taurat, then they
could not bear it, they are like donkey carrying books. Evil is the
likeness of those people who belied Ayaat of Allah, and Allah does not
guide the unjust people.”*

(Jum’ah 5)

*Imam Musa Kazim (s.a.) said: “Tazkirah” means Walayat of Amirul
Momineen (s.a.).*

So Allah calls Wild Donkey to Denier of Walayat e Ali (s.a.), who runs
away from Asadullah. And this Munkir e Walayat is uncultured (Wild) and
foolish (Donkey), but sometimes he carries books i.e. considers himself
an Alim after spending sometime in Madrisa, but in fact he is just
bearing the load of books, he does not have Marifat what is written in
them. Whoever denies Ayat-al-Kubra Ali (s.a.) with heart or tongue or
practically, he is unjust, astray, wild donkey.

#### 179-Namaaz of the Successful Ones

####

*“Indeed he is successful who purified himself, and does Zikr of Ism of
his Rabb and prays (say Namaaz).”*

(Ala 14-15)

The chosen Ism of Rabb is Ali Murtaza (s.a.), who offered prayer while
mentioning his name is successful.

*Imam Raza (s.a.) said: When you remember you Rabb, then send Salawaat
on Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).*

It means that Tauheed, Risalat, and Walayat have intimate relationship,
they can not be separated.

#### 180-Hisaab Kitaab

####

*“Surely to Us is their return, then certainly upon Us is the taking of
their account.”*

(Ghashiya 25-26)

*Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) said: When it will be the day of Qiyamah, we
will take care of the account of our Shias. Who will have short fall in
the obligations of Allah, then we will decide about it and Allah will
keep our decision valid. And who will have short fall in the rights of
the people, we will recommend the affected party to forgive the mistake,
and his mistake will be forgiven for our sake. And who will have short
fall concerning our right, then we have the right to overlook and
forgive.*

(Uyoon V2, P 137)

There is not a single human who can enter Paradise on the basis of his
good deeds without Intercession of Mohammad o Aal e Mohammad (s.a.a.).

#### 181-Swear by the holy Father of Maola Ali (s.a.)

####

*“Nay, I swear by this city; and you live in this city, and swear by the
father and his children.”*

(Balad 1-3)

Allah swears by Makkah city because Habeeb Ullah (s.a.w.a.w.) lives in
it. And Allah swears by Abu Talib (s.a.) and his Aal (s.a.a.). Some
people just say in ignorance it means Adam (a.s.) and children of Adam.
Then Firaoun, Namrood, and Yazeed Maloon is also among his children, how
Allah can swear by them!

#### 182-Swear by the horse of Maola Ali (s.a.)

####

*“I swear by the running horses, panting breathing, then making sparks
of fire with their hoofs, then they raid early morning, then raise dust
due to that, then they rush (penetrate) into the assembly (of
enemies).”*

(Adiyat 1-5)

This Sura was revealed in 8 Hijri at the time of Battle of
Zat-tus-Salasal. The enemies of Islam gathered with an army of twelve
thousand soldiers at the land of Yalees, and made a pact that they will
do murder Mohammad (s.a.w.a.w.) and Ali (s.a.) (Naoozo Billah). First
Rasool Allah (s.a.w.a.w.) sent a big army of companions but they
returned unsuccessful. Then he sent an army under the leadership of
Maola Ali (s.a.). He (s.a.) reached there early morning by travelling
very fast at night according to the instructions of Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.), and surrounded them and presented Islam, but they did not
accept. Then Imam (s.a.) attacked at dawn when still it was dark
atmosphere, and conquered. Here in Masjid-e-Nabwi Rasool Allah
(s.a.w.a.w.) was telling the companions all the movements of Maola Ali
(s.a.), and recited this Sura in Fajr prayer.

Allah swears by the horse of Maola Ali (s.a.), then swears by different
conditions of that horse, and makes them Verses of Quran, so that you
should recite Quran willingly or unwillingly, then you mention horse of
Ali (s.a.) as well.

#### 183-Namaaz of Munafiq

####

*“So woe to the praying ones (Namazi), who are unmindful of their
prayers, who do (good) to be seen.”*

(Maoon 4-6)

Imam (s.a.) said: ‘Riya’ (show off) means Namaaz of Munafiq. Imam Ali
(s.a.) said: I am Namaaz of Momin.

It means that who testifies Walayat e Ali (s.a.) with tongue among the
people like Munafiq, but ignores (unmindful) Walayat like Munafiq in
Namaaz, destruction is for him. Some scholars say that “Sahoon” means to
consider ‘light’. This meaning is also right, because two heavy things
(Saqalain) are Quran and Itrat (s.a.a.), so who leaves Itrat (s.a.a.)
from these two weighty things, he made his Namaaz imbalanced and light.
Anyway it is strongly forbidden to separate Quran and Itrat (s.a.a.),
the Saqalain.


