1.1. What is jihad?
===================

The Arabic word “jihad” literally means “utmost exertion”. Islamically,
the word or concept of jihad refers to exertion towards the cause of
Allah. It implies striving towards the cause of Allah or striving
towards advancing the cause of Islam[^2] . A number of verses of the
Quran and traditions of the Prophet Muhammad SAW prescribe jihad as a
principle of faith[^3] . The Prophet calls upon Muslims to perform jihad
by their hearts. These are acts of worship which would make a Muslim
stronger in his faith and is referred to by the prophet as the “greater
jihad”[^4] . Jihad may also be done using words. That is calling
unbelievers towards the religion of truth by extolling its virtues and
persuading them of the falsity of their path. This was the method
preferred and mostly used by the Prophet Muhammad (SAW) himself. Where a
Muslim perceives a wrong being done, either by unbelievers or even
amongst the believers against Islam, a Muslim may perform jihad by using
physical means to correct those wrongs. This would, however, not entail
using violence to effect the corrections.

In all these forms of jihad, violence is not an element nor is it
advocated. The Prophet was ordered by Allah SWT, and he so ordered his
companions and followers to call the unbelievers towards the religion of
Allah through righteous acts and words[^5] . Where, however, Muslims are
faced with oppression or aggression which challenges their faith, Allah
SWT says“...permission (for warfare) is given to those who are attacked
and definitely wronged”[^6]

The Quran also says

“fight those who have not faith in God and in the hereafter

and who forbid not what God and his Prophet have forbidden

and who are not committed to the religion of truth...”[^7]

These verses and more in the Quran legalize outright war as form of
jihad. It must be noted, that war as prescribed by these verses, is to
be fought as a defense and not to be used as a form of aggression. Where
the need for war arises, however, Islam is not a religion of cowards.
The Prophet Muhammad SAW said “whenever you are called for jihad, go
immediately”[^8] . Allah has prepared great reward for the Muslim who
upon being called comes out unconditionally without thought for worldly
gain or advancement. Those who give all their properties and even their
lives towards the cause of Islam enjoy an elevated position before
Allah[^9] . At the same time, whosoever backs away from jihad for fear
of losing his life or worldly possessions, the Qur’an says “such are men
whom Allah has cursed for he has made them deaf and blinded their
sight”[^10]

Jihad, manifested as war, is fought for either one of, or the sum of,
three reasons. Jihad may be fought to defend and protect the
Muslim*umma* [^11] and the religion against persecution and oppression
as was fought by the Prophet in the first days of the establishment of
Islam in Makka and Madina. It may also be fought to ensure the
liberation of mankind on earth so that they may serve Allah SWT alone.
This does not imply that Muslims must fight to compel non-Muslims to
accept the religion of Islam as one of the main principles of Islam is
“there shall be no compulsion in religion”[^12] . Finally jihad is
fought to remove obstacles which prevent the call of Islam from being
spread. All three reasons may point to the same conclusion; Muslims have
been ordered to fight jihad to free mankind from regimes which impede
them from recognizing that all submission is owed to Allah alone[^13] .

In all situations however, peace, when offered, must be accepted. Allah
SWT says;

“If they incline towards peace, incline also to it and trust in

Allah. He is the Hearer and the Knower” [^14]

“If they hold aloof*from* you and wage no war against you

and offer peace, Allah allows you no way against them”[^15]

“O you who believe! When you go forth to fight in the way

of Allah say not unto those who offer you peace ‘thou are

not a believer’ seeking the chance to profit of  his life so that

you may despoil him” [^16]

Where war is to be waged, Islam has laid down set rules and guidelines
for conducting the war. Neither  women, children nor the infirm, the
weak or the old may be attacked or killed. The war is taken to and
fought with only those combatant men who come out to fight[^17] .
Prisoners of war, if taken, may either be enslaved or released on
ransom[^18] . The killing of prisoners is only allowed where it is
established, without a doubt, that leaving  them alive will be dangerous
to the Muslim*umma.*


