2.2. The Islamic Position on Suicide Bombing
============================================

A suicide attack is an attack in which the attacker or attackers expect
to die. The usual method employed in modern times involves the use of
bombs either strapped upon the body of the attacker or in a vehicle
which he is driving or anywhere else close to his person which, upon
detonation or impact, kills the attacker and any person or persons
around him/her. This a method used to cause maximum damage to the enemy
with minimal loss to the instigators of the suicide attack. This is
because the targets for suicide attacks are usually either heavily
populated areas or important military bases.

Suicide bombings or attacks are considered as a form of tactic in
warfare. Though it first emerged during World War II and became a
favorite of terrorist groups and guerillas such as the Tamil Tigers. It
has now, since the attack on the World Trade Center on September 11
2001, become largely recognized as a strategy used by Islamic militants
such as AI-Qaeda, Hamas, and Muslims involved in the Iraqi insurgency.
In support of the use of suicide bombing as a tactic by Muslims fighting
an oppressive situation, despite the outright prohibition of suicide by
both the Qur’an and the hadiths of the Prophet Muhammad SAW, several
scholars — such as Yusuf al Qardawi, Sheikh Ahmad Qubeisi of Iraq,
Sayyed Moahmmed Musawi[^26] - have equated suicide bombing with
martyrdom operations. In their view, a martyr who goes into a fight with
a view to destroying the enemy not knowing whether he would live or die
is no different from a suicide bomber who also fights with the intention
of destroying the enemy and does not care whether he lives or dies.

To legitimize suicide bombings, verses of the Qur’an and hadiths of the
Prophet are used as evidences in issue. One of the foremost verses of
the Quran referred to is that in Suratul Tauba where Allah SWT says;

“Verily, Allah has purchased from the believers their selves

and their wealth, in return for Heaven being theirs. They fight

in the path of Allah and they kill and are killed” [Quran, 9:111]

Reliance is placed also, on a hadith of the Prophet SAW narrated by
Muslim. The Prophet narrated the story of a young boy who was sought to
be killed by his king because of his faith in the religion of Islam. All
attempts to kill him proved futile until the boy himself gave the king
instructions to call the people of the town to a particular location,
use the boy’s arrow and while invoking the name of Allah, shoot the boy.
The boy was killed but the onlookers acknowledging the power of Allah
accepted the religion of Islam declaring “we believe in the lord of the
boy” He then ordered a ditch of fire to be built and whoever refused to
denounce the religion was thrown onto the ditch. A mother holding her
baby hesitated when it came to her turn but the baby spoke to her giving
her courage to stay on the right path and she jumped.

In their view, the Muslims who died in this narration died in the
interest of their religion and their death is not considered a suicide
but they died as martyrs. They narrate various hadiths where companions
of the Prophet went into battle knowing that they would probably be
killed and the Prophet declared that they had died as martyrs. For
example, in a hadith narrated by Ibn Abi Shaybah a companion of the
Prophet, Muadh ibn Afra asked the messenger of Allah “what makes Allah
laugh upon his slave and the Prophet replied “the servant immersing
himself into the enemy without armor” Muadh then took off his armor and
fought until he was killed. These and other hadiths and verses of the
Quran have been interpreted by such scholars to justify their view that
though suicide has been prohibited, jihad has some special rules which
permit that which is normally prohibited. In their view, suicide bombing
has become necessary as the Muslims in these oppressed nations are
outclassed militarily. They don’t have the superior weaponry needed to
retaliate in kind to attacks and therefore have no option but to attack
with their hands or sacrifice themselves. Hence the resort to suicide
attacks.

The majority of sunni[^27] scholars[^28] , on the other hand, view
suicide bombing as forbidden and going against all the laws of Allah and
the traditions of the Prophet. The verses of the Quran, the hadiths and
the various analogies which have been used by the proponents of suicide
bombing to legitimize it have been misconstrued and twisted to serve
their purposes. For example the verse in Suratul Tauba where Allah SWT
states that he has purchased the life of Muslims must be read to the end
and not in a vacuum. The verse continues***“. .they fight in Allah’s
cause so they kill (others) and are killed*** ” sunni scholars say this
implies that there are only two states of dying in the battlefield. The
Muslim either kills or is killed. It does not include the third option;
killing oneself in the purchase of the Muslim’s life by Allah.

A number of fatwa (rulings) pertaining to the legality or otherwise of
suicide bombings have been made by these sunni scholars. Attention has
been drawn to the distinction, which they believe has been ignored by
the proponents of suicide bombing, between the martyr who immerses
himself in the enemy and is killed by them and the person who kills
himself by his own hands. They have methodically analyzed and broken
apart those evidences in the Qur’an and the hadiths used to legitimize
suicide bombing. Regarding the story of the boy who was killed by the
king and the people thrown into the ditch of fire, they died not
fighting the unbelievers but were killed because they refused to
apostate and they died not by their own hands but were killed by the
king. To use their story to justify suicide will therefore be an
erroneous analogy. Moreover, their situation occurred before the time of
the Prophet Muhammad SAW and the establishment of shari’a and cannot be
used to guide Muslims in present times on matters which have been
already dealt with by the shari’a. The man who goes into the enemy
without armor and is killed did not die by his own hand but is killed by
the enemy.

By its very nature, suicide bombing necessitates the suicide bomber to,
in a premeditated fashion, blow himself up with his own hand in order to
have a successful mission. The martyr goes to fight the enemy accepting
his death but also hoping to survive. The suicide bomber hopes not to
live at all. Allah SWT says “*and spend of your substance in the cause
of Allah, and make not your own hands contribute to your own
destruction”* [^29]

It must be noted that in most situations, the aim of the suicide bomber
is to kill as many people as possible, apart from himself. Hence the
detonation of the bomb in populated areas, thus constituting it as not
only a suicide but also a murder or multiple murders. Even when the war
was at its hottest with the unbelievers, the Prophet Muhammad SAW
forbade the killing of women, children, the infirm or non-combatants.
The suicide bomber has no consideration for this and most of the
victims***are*** women, children or non-combatants possibly because
these are the least protected. The methods used by the suicide bomber
include secrecy, sneaking into the enemy camp and taking them unawares.
Both stipulations in the Qur’an and traditions of the Prophet prescribe
that the enemy may only be attacked after a warning has been sent to
them.

The technique of suicide bombing is an “an anathema, anti-ethical and
abhorrent to sunni Islam. It is considered legally forbidden,
constituting a reprehensible innovation in the Islamic tradition,
morally an enormity of sin combining suicide and murder and
theologically an act which has consequences of eternal damnation.


