3.0. Conclusion
===============

Allah SWT says*“Among mankind is one who sells himself seeking the
pleasure of Allah. And Allah is most merciful towards his servants”*
Qur’an 2:207. To seek this pleasure however, The Muslim must act within
the dictates of the shari’a of Islam and the hadiths of the Prophet
Muhammad SAW.

“Fight in the cause of Allah those who fight you but do not

transgress limits; for Allah loveth not transgressors.”[^30]

In every action of a Muslim, guidance must be sought from the pure
legislation- the Quran and the hadiths of the Prophet Muhammad SAW.
There is no doubt that both have prohibited the suicide of a Muslim for
whatever reason. To justify suicide bombing as something which is
necessary due to a change in times is to introduce an innovation into
the religion. The alleged “success” which suicide bombing has brought to
the fight of the Muslims who embrace it does not legitimize it. In fact
the success of the strategy may be contested. This is what is found from
the practice of the Jews with the people of Palestine. When a
Palestinian blows himself up and kills seven or eight people, then in
retaliation they kill sixty or more. This does not produce any benefit
for the Muslims but only results in more able bodied Muslims being
killed. The practice of suicide bombing

has been going on in the fight between the Palestinians and the Israeli
but it has not helped in deciding the war in favor of the Palestinians.

Arguably, a critique of suicide bombing cannot be done without looking
at the political ramifications of declaring it legal or illegal as far
as Muslims who have adopted it as strategy are concerned. From their
point of view-being in an oppressive situation- it may look like a last
resort to a difficult and hopeless situation and that changes in
situation, Islam being a dynamic religion, have resulted in their
actions creating a new and contemporary law to suit the situation. They
are forgetting that they are not the first Muslims to face oppression
and that forbearance in the face of persecution is itself a divine
trial. True, Allah SWT commands Muslims to fight oppression but he has
laid down rules to guide such fight and there are valid techniques of
jihad which exist and have proven to be effective. In fact, as a
military tactic, suicide bombing may, in the short term look effective
as it involves the loss of fewer lives than a conventional military
tactic but war analysts believe it to be a failure in the long term. To
win a war, a campaign must progress from guerilla warfare to a
systematized operation as utilized by the Western Powers.

It may also be noted that for the fight of these Muslims subjected to
oppression, to deserve to be referred to as a jihad, it must follow the
rules of jihad. A majority of jurist believe that these fights do not
qualify as jihad going by the definition of what the fight of jihad
entails vis the justification for, the method of and rules guiding the
conduct of it. To qualify as jihad the fight must be established on a
solely Islamic banner established upon Islamic regulations[^31] .

Suicide bombing is a reprehensible innovation into Islam and jihad and
the Prophet Muhammad SAW has said*“every reprehensible innovation is a
misguidance and every misguidance is from hell”.* For those who try to
justify it, they must remember:

He who inaugurates a beneficial sunna in Islam earns himself the reward
of it and of all who perform it after him without diminishing their own
rewards in the slightest and he who introduces a reprehensible sunna is
guilty of the sin of it without diminishing their sins in the
slightest[^32] .

Moreover, the Prophet has said*“leave that which you are in doubt to
that which you are not in doubt”* the existence of different rulings as
to the legality or otherwise of suicide bombings casts a shadow of doubt
on its legality. The best course that may be taken by a Muslim should be
the avoidance of it altogether.

Notes
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Maryam Dikko is a lecturer with the Centre for Islamic Legal
Studies, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria

[^2] Qureshi, M.M.(1971) Landmarks of Jihad, S.H.Muhammad Ashraf  p4

[^3] Malik. Al –Muwatta, Hadith no [^21]:4

[^4] Ibid. Hadith [^21]:1

[^5] Bukhari.  Sahih, Hadith no [^9]:469

[^6] Qur’an 22:39

[^7] Ibid. 9:29

[^8] Bukhari. Sahih, Hadith no. [^3]:60

[^9] Ibid. hadith no. [^4]:71

[^10] Qur’an 47:23

[^11] Arabic word for society

[^12] Qur’an 2:256

[^13] This is a strong view held by Sayyid Qutb in his book  In the
Shade of the Qur’an particularly in the introduction to Suratul An’am

[^14] Qur’an 6:81

[^15] Ibid 4:90

[^16] Ibid 4:94

[^17] Bukhari. Op.cit, No.[^4]:280

[^18] Muslim, sahih, Hadith no. 4345

[^19] Mutahhari, Ayatollah.(1985). Jihad (The Holy War of Muslims and
its Legitimacy in the Qur’an), Islamic Propagation Organisation, Tehran,
Iran.

[^20] Abdulkadir As-Sufi. (1978), Jihad, A Groundplan, Diwan Press
England

[^21] Qur’an 9”29

[^22] Oxford Law Dictionary. 6th Edition

[^23] Verse 30

[^24] [24] Though muslim scholars agree that there is no ban on
performing the funeral prayer for a muslim who committed suicide. The
Prophet’s refusal to do so being a form of reprimand and not creating a
prohibition.

[^25] Bukhari, op.cit. Hadith no. [^2]:445

[^26] Sayed Moammed Musawi is the head of the World Islamic League

[^27] Otherwise referred to as Ahl-al sunna (followers of the traditions
of the Prophet)

[^28] Such as Sheikh In Uthaymeen Khaled Ibn al Fadl

[^29] Qur’an 2:195

[^30] Ibid 2:190

[^31] This is the view held by Imam Muhammad Nasiruddeen Al- Albanee

[^32] At Tirmidhi, Hadith no 168
