Preface
=======

The famous scholar, (late) Shaykh Ja'far Shushtari[^1] had written a
small booklet, Manhaju 'rishad, dealing with some important aspects of
the Fundamentals of Religion which every Muslim should know. Later,
someone combined it with some other booklets of fiqh, and the collection
was known as Majma'u 'r-risa'il, which served as an 'amaliyyah[^2] for a
long time.

When after the death of (late) Sayyid Abul-Hasan Isfihani (d.
1365/1946), the Shias oflndian sub-continent (like their brothers in
other countries) did taqleed of (late) Sayyid Hussyn Brojardi (Qum),
some 'ulama translated his 'amaliyyah in Urdu; among them was Sayyid
Qamaru 'z-Zaman, who translated Majma'u 'r-risa'ilwith foot-notes of
Sayyid Brojardi, and named it Jami'u 'l-masa'il.[^3]

In 1950, (late) Sayyid Khadim Husayn (Faizabad, lndia)[^4] translated
Manhaju 'r­ rishad only from Majma'u 'r-risa'il, and named it Tuhfatu
'I-'ibad.[^5]

When I was writing Day of Judgement in 1974, I wanted to include in it
some matters explained by late Shaykh Ja'far Shushtari, because
generally those subjects are not found in other 'amaliyyas; but I could
find neither book in Dar-es-Salaam.

I left East Africa in August, 1978. But, as Allah willed it, I came back
this year in February, for a short visit.

In May, when I was in Mombasa, I found a copy of Jami'u 'l-masa'il in
the personal collection of my elder friend and host, Haji Ali Mohammad
Jaffer Shariff.[^6] I showed the abovementioned part to him, where the
author has enumerated six important things which a child must know
and/or do the moment he/she becomes baligh (attains maturity); also the
various categories of people according to their beliefs and deeds. Haji
Ali asked me to translate the two items into English in order that our
people may know and benefit from it.

In 1974, I went to Iran for about a week. There was not much time; so I
decided to go to Mash-had in the morning, returning to Tehran in the
evening. Mr. Dhikiri Omari Kiondo (now Editor of Sauti Ya Bilal) was
then in Tehran, engaged in higher Islamic studies under the patronage of
the World Organization For Islamic Services. On their suggestion, Mr.
Dhikiri accompanied me for the said Ziyarat. At Mashad airport, I
suggested to him that it would be better to go first to Ayatullah
Milani's house to pay our respects to him; because then we could stay,
up to the last possible moment, in devotion at the holy shrine of the
Imam, without any extraneous thought and then proceed to the airport
direct from there.

Soon after our arrival at Ayatullah Milani's place, his grandson,
Hujjatul-Islam Fazil Milani brought an American brother to me who wanted
to enter the fold of true Islam; and requested me to teach the American
youth important matters of Shi'ism, so that when he recited Kalimah, he
would understand what was involved in it and what responsibilities he
was taking upon himself.

Hard-pressed though I was for time, I spent more than one and half hour
with the young man and he became Shi'a. Understandably, I had to select
only very essential Matters to teach him in that short time; and that
experience again drew my attention to the six important things mentioned
by late Shaykh Ja'far Shushtari.

Since then many brothers engaged in tabligh work have asked for a small
booklet giving a list of what they should teach a new convert when he
decides to become a Muslim.

Hopefully the first three chapters of this booklet will serve as a guide
to those parents whose children are reaching the age of majority, as
well as to those missionaries who bring someone into the fold of true
Islam. It would show them the minimum that their wards should believe in
and act upon the moment they become baligh or are converted.

It is not a literal translation. Many fine details have been omitted and
the arrangement of subjects has been drastically changed. Also it
appeared necessary to elaborate many ideas and add a lot of details here
and there to make the topics intelligible to an english reader who is
neither well-versed in Islamic theology nor familiar with its
terminologies. The list of the major sins and of some Zaruriyat-e­ deen
and Zaruriyat al-madh-hab have been taken from other books.

As mentioned above, late Ayatullah Brojardi had written foot-notes on
the original book. While translating, I have followed his foot-notes,
and, wherever necessary, have changed them to the ruling of Ayatullah
Sayyid Abul-Qasim al-Khoui.

This booklet was started at Mombasa on 22nd Shaban, 1405 (13th May,
1985); but what with one thing or the other, could not be completed till
today, when I have been at Nakuru for about a month. As good luck would
have it, my host here Haji Husain A. M. Jaffer happened to have a copy
of the above-mention Tuhfatu 'I-'ibad, and I have now compared this
writing with that booklet too.

Presently at Nakuru (Kenya) 2nd Shawwal, 1405

20th June, 1985.
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi Director General
World Ahlul-Bayt (A.S.) Islamic League,
London

[^1]: Died in 1303; Author of the well-known book Al-Khasa'isu
'l-Husayniyyah.

[^2]: A book containing rules of fiqh (jurisprudence; shari'ah),
prepared for the use of muqallidin (followers) of a mujtahid (religious
scholar having authority to give rulings on religious problems).The act
of following a mujtahid is called taqleed.

[^3]: It was published by Kutub Khana Husayniyyah, Lahore.

[^4]: Died at Mombasa (Kenya) in 1969.

[^5]: It was published as a Book supplement with the al-Jawad (monthly),
Varanasi (India) June-July, 1950.

[^6]: He is one of the Founders of the Bilal Muslim Mission; even at
this age, he spends all his time in the noble work of tabligh


