The Seven Responsibilities
==========================

We are not eternal; we have a beginning and an end. Also, we are not
self-existing; someone must have created us, must have brought us into
being. That Creator is Allah, Who is free from all defects and
short-comings.

Doing a work without any reason or purpose is a defect; we do not like
anyone to accuse us of working aimlessly. Obviously Allah too must have
created us for some good purpose. He points to this fact when He asks
mankind in the Qur'an, â€œWhat! Do you then think that we have created you
in vain and that you shall not be returned to us? (Surah 23, ayah 115).
So there is a purpose behind our creation.

We come into this world, live a life full of worries and tension and
then die. Is this the aim of our life? No; it is the life, not the aim
of life; the aim should be different from the life itself.

Are wealth, health and power the aims of life? No; these are the means
to support the life; but not its aim. Is acquiring honor, fame and
authority purpose of our creations? No; these are various facets of
life, and not its purpose. The purpose behind our creation must be
something higher than the life itself.

Let us ask the Creator Himself why He has created us. If He tells us,
that would be the really authentic and genuine reason. And He, in His
mercy, has already told us without our asking. He says: And I have not
created the jinn and the human beings except that they should worship
Me. (Surah 51, ayah 56)

Every man and woman must fulfil the purpose of his or her creation;
everyone should submit him or herself to the Will of Allah and worship
Him. When we worship Allah, we acknowledge His majesty and power and
confess our helplessness and neediness, in a manner prescribed by Him;
and we do it with sincere intention and pure heart in obedience to
Allah, in order that we may come nearer to Him.

Allah has sent Prophets, appointed Imams, revealed Books and prescribed
laws of sharia in order to guide us to the Right Path, and to teach us
the proper way of the divine worship. We must follow their guidance,
because it is the only way by which we may attain to the goal of our
life, fulfil the purpose of our creation.

Allah, in His mercy, has not ordered minor children or mad persons to
fulfil this duty. Only when a child attains majority and is of sound
mind, he or she is obligated to follow the above-mentioned divine
guidance, i.e. the rules of sharia.

A boy attains majority (becomes baligh for adult) when he reaches the
age of fifteen years, or semen is ejaculated from him (in sleep or when
he is awake), or pubic hair starts to grow.

A girl attains majority when she is nine years old, or when pubic hair
starts to grow. When a boy or girl attains majority and is sane (i.e.
not mad), he or she is called mukallaf (feminine = mukallafah). We may
translate this term as, one who is obligated to follow the rules of
sharia; one who is considered responsible for his/her words and deeds.

As soon as one becomes mukallaf, one is responsible for one's belief,
words and actions. Before that, generally speaking, one is really
neither a believer nor a disbeliever. But a Muslim's child is considered
Muslim, and a non-Muslim's child is considered non-Muslim. It is based
on the principle of taba'iyat (following), by which children are
governed by the rules that govern their parents. [^1]

It is incumbent on every person to have correct faith the moment he or
she becomes baligh. Therefore, for all practical purposes, he/she must
acquire correct knowledge of fundamental beliefs - Usul al-deen, roots
of religion - long before the expected time of attaining bulugh (=
majority, adulthood).

There are SEVEN things which the mukallaf must look into at the moment
of his/her attaining majority:

1. Roots of Religion, Usul al-deen

2. Learning Salaat (practical, if not learned earlier)

3. If he or she had done anything, during childhood, which makes a ghusl
compulsory (e.g. had touched a dead body), he or she must do ghusl at
once in order that his/her salat and other such actions may be correct

4. Learning important rules of salat and other obligatory things like
fast, etc (if not learned earlier)

5. If there are other people's right due on him or her, they must be
repaid to those persons, or they should be requested to forgive him/her

6. He/she must learn necessary rule of shari'ah regarding his/her
occupation or profession, (like trade, partnership, employment, rent
etc.), in order that his/ her earnings may be lawful

7. He/she must know the major sins, in order to avoid them; also other
unlawful things, so that he/she may protect him or herself from
them.[^2]

The same rules apply to the one who accepts Islam after spending some
time, in kufr.

For a logical explanation of the Roots of Religion, the reader may study
my booklet "Islam".[^3] But a short description of its most essential
aspects is given here. It will be followed by a list of the major sins.

[^1]: The above statement is based on a general observation. But there
are cases of boys of about ten years of age having got enough
understanding and intelligence to differentiate falsehood from truth, to
distinguish wrong from right; and they have chosen right and truth
against wrong and falsehood. Such children are Muslims, and their
parents' disbelief would not be held against them. That is why Shaykh
Tusi (a .r.) has said that "Responsibility of the boys is of two kinds :
Responsibility to acquire true belief and correct faith - It begins for
the boys at the age of ten. Responsibility to follow and perform the
rules of sharia - It begins for the boys at the age of fifteen:' The
same is the import of the fatwa of Sayyid Kazim Yazdi in al-Urwatu
'l-wuthqa, with which all other Mujtahidin agree. Sayyid Mohsin al-Hakim
had gone a step further. According to him, even if that child's Islam
was not based on logical understanding (i.e., he was influenced by some
individual or society), it would be acceptable and he would be a Muslim.

[^2]: The original book mentions only six responsibilities, combining
the "Knowledge of unlawful things" with the sixth heading. I have listed
it separately because of its utmost importance

[^3]: It has been translated into Italian, Japanese, Thai, Indonesian
and Hausa languages, by the World Organization for Islamic Services
(WOFIS), Tehran; and Swahili translation has been published by the Bilal
Muslim Mission of Tanzania, Darussalam.


