Zaruriyat al-Deen
=================

Every matter which is accepted as part of Islam by most of the Sunni and
Shi'a scholars is called Zaruri al-deen (Plural = Zaruriyat al-deen). It
makes no difference whether that matter is proved by the Qur'an, hadith,
ijma' (consensus) or rational proofs. Also it does not matter whether
the subject concerns Usul al-deen or Furu al-deen or Islamic ethics and
morality.

Zururiy al-madh-hab
-------------------

Zururiy al-madh-hab (Plural - Zaruriyat al-madh-hab): Every matter which
is accepted as part of a madh-hab by most of the 'ulama of that
madh-hab. For example, justice of God and infallibility of the twelve
Imams are among the Zaruriyat al-madh-hab of the Shi'a Ithna 'ashari
faith.

Anyone who refutes, rejects or has doubt about any of the Zaruriyat
al-deen, becomes kafir and unclean although he might be claiming to be a
Muslim. Likewise, anyone who refutes, rejects or has doubt about any of
the Zaruriyat al-madh-had al-Shi'a, becomes Sunni, although he might be
claiming to be a Shi'a or might be believing in the five Usul al-deen.
If they die without repentance, then in the eyes of Allah, the Prophet
and the Shi'as of Ahlul-bayt, the former is kafir and najis, and the
latter a Sunni. The former is called murtadd (apostate) from Islam; and
the latter a murtadd from Shi'a madh-hab.

As mentioned in a preceding chapter, a person who rejects a Zaruriy
al-deen or Zaruriyat al-madh-had, becomes murtadd only if he knows that
it is a Zaruriy-eÂ­deen or Zaruriyat al-madh-had, or if he is a man who
cannot be oblivious of this fact - for example, if he is a learned man
of religion or has lived in a place where religious discourses are often
held.

If a man does not reject openly a Zaruriy al-deen or Zaruriy
al-madh-hab, but his behavior shows that he does not believe in it (even
if he does not disclose his disbelief because of fear), then he will be
treated as a murtadd. For example if he, says insulting things about an
Imam and yet professes to believe in him, or insults the Qur'an and yet
says that it is incumbent to respect the Qur'an.

Here we mention some of the Zaruriyat al-deen which are accepted by both
the Shi'as and the Sunnis to be an integral part of the Islam.

### God

There is one God, Ever-living, All-powerful and Eternal. He is
All-knowing, All-perceiving. He does whatever He does by His own will.
He speaks and is Truthful. He does not enter into any body, needs
nothing, and does no evil. It is He Who has created the universe and it
is He Who sustains it.

### Prophets

It is Wajib to believe in the prophet hood of the previous prophets as
well as of the Holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.). The prophets were free
from kufr and (with some difference of opinion in details) they were
sinless. Also they were free from every such defect in body or character
which might create repulsion in people.

The Holy Prophet of Islam ascended to the heavens in mi'raj. The Qur'an
is the word of Allah; hadith is an authentic source of shari'ah. The
Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (s.a.w.a), is the last and final prophet; no
prophet is to come after him.

It is wajib to believe in questioning in grave through Munkar and Nakir,
and in the squeeze of grave. Angels, the Satan and the jinns do exist.

### Day of Judgement

One day the world would come to end; then all people will be resurrected
for judgement. The Day of Judgement is a fact and truth; transmigration
of soul is a wrong idea. Everyone will get recompense of his/her good or
bad deeds. Mizan (weighing scale), Hisab (reckoning of deeds), Sirat
(Path, the bridge over the hell) are facts and truth; scrolls of deeds
will be given in people's right or left hands. Shafa'at (intercession)
by the Holy Prophet is a fact and truth. Repentance is wajib. Paradise
and hell do exist even now.

### Furu' al-deen

Prayer, fast, hajj, zakah, jihad, enjoining good and prohibiting evil
(with all their well-known details, like prayer's ruku: sajdah, number
of rak'ah etc.) are wajib.

### Ethics

Virtue of truth, patience, contentedness; doing good to parents,
relatives and neighbors. Evil of lie, back-biting, miserliness and
disobedience of parents, besides many other virtuous and evil deeds
well-known in Muslim society,

Zaruriyat al-madh-had al-Shi'a Ithna 'ashari
--------------------------------------------

Zaruriyat al-madh-had al-Shi'a Ithna 'ashari: Some of the Zaruriyat of
the Shi'a Ithna 'ashari faith are as follows:

### God

God does not compel anyone to do a good or bad deed.

### Imams

Imams are appointed by Allah. There are only twelve Imams after the Holy
Prophet of Islam and they are his true successors; first of them is 'Ali
(a.s.) and the last Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). The twelve Imams and Bibi
Fatima (a.s.) are infallible like the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) from every
sin and mistake from the beginning of their life to its end. The twelfth
Imam, al-Mahdi, Muhammad son of the 11th Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari
(a.s.), is alive and hidden at present; he will reappear when Allah
allows him, before the Day of Judgement, and will establish the kingdom
of God on the earth, filling it with justice and equity as it would have
been filled of injustice and oppression.

### Furu' al-deen

"Hayya 'ala Khayril 'amal is part of adhan and iqamah; 'as-salatu
khayrum minan nawm is not allowed in adhan or iqamah; mut'a marriage is
lawful; a wife is not entitled to any share in land; as for other
immovable properties like buildings or standing trees of a garden, she
gets one-eighth (or one-fourth) of its market value, but not the thing
itself.

Important
---------

All detail given in the chapters 3 (Usul al-deen) and 4 (Major Sins) are
among Zaruriyat al-deen or Zaruriyat al-madh-had. Here only a few of
them have been enumerated as example. There are many more Zaruriyat in
Furu' al-deen and ethics, for which the readers should consult reference
books.

**Note:** These details have been adapted from "Tosha al-Akherat" of
late Syed Rahat Husayn Golpalpuri (Ex-Principal of Madrasatul-Waezeen,
Lucknow), printed at Mujtabai Press, Patna; no date; pp. 23-29.


