Fourteen Categories of People
=============================

Shaykh Ja'far Shushtari has divided the people into fourteen categories,
according to their knowledge and belief (or lack of knowledge and
belief) of Usul al-deen.

**First:** A person who, before attaining majority, knows the five Usul
al-deen with their rational proofs, and sincerely believes in them.
Without any doubt such a person is Muslim and mu'min in his own rights
as soon as he/she becomes baligh. (It makes no difference whether he/she
can explain those proofs in his own words or not.)

**Second:** A person who, before attaining majority, sincerely believes
in Usul al-deen, because he/she has been so taught by his/her parents or
by another trusted person, and then he/she continues on the same belief
after becoming baligh. According to stronger theological reasons, there
is no harm in it. If he continues on the same belief without ever
doubting its truth, he shall be treated as a mu'min in this world and
the hereafter, God willing.

**Third:** A man acquires true knowledge of Usul al-deen and firmly
believes in them. Yet sometimes adverse thoughts or satanic whisperings
come into his mind which he does not like at all - in fact he feels a
repulsion towards such thoughts or ideas. There is no defect or
deficiency in such a man's faith and belief; the fact that he is pained
because of such thoughts is in itself a proof that his faith is strong.
The Holy Prophet and Imams - Peace be on them all - have suggested a
remedy for it: Whenever he is troubled by such thoughts he should say:

(There is no god except Allah; we believe in Allah and His Messenger;
and there is no power or strength except with Allah.)

**Fourth:** A person, on attaining majority, began looking into Usul
al-deen, and after a few days became sure of its truth, either by
rational proofs or because some trusted person convinced him/her about
it. There is no doubt that after acquiring certainty, such a person is
mu'min. The difficulty arises about the period he /she was engaged in
the said research. If he/she dies in that period, he/she shall not be
punished in the hereafter. And if, before attaining majority, he was
treated as a Muslim - because of taba'iyat - others will continue to
treat him as Muslim. But it is difficult to adjudge him a Muslim in
reality in that period.

**Fifth:** If a person has not acquired a sincere belief in Usul al-deen
before attaining majority, - even by teaching of parents or others - and
is oblivious of religion and its beliefs on attaining majority, he/she
will not be treated as a Muslim; and it is difficult to say that he/she
is tahir.

It is the responsibility of parents or guardian to teach him/her
necessary matters of faith and then guide him to recite Kalimah, in
order that he/she should become Muslim and tahir.

**Sixth:** A person who knows and believes in all Usul al-deen, but is
unable to explain them in his words - like many people in far-off rural
areas who cannot describe why God is one, or many people in urban areas
who cannot enumerate the positive and negative attributes of Allah - but
if you ask them, whether God is Omnipotent, they would say 'Yes'; or
whether God can be seen, they would say, No. Such people are mu'min, and
this much knowledge and belief is enough.

**Seventh:** We know that a man recites Kalima and says that he believes
in oneness of God and Messengership of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.). But we do
not know whether he really believes so. We shall treat such a person as
Muslim; we are not obligated to search inside his heart; and we may say
about him: 'O Allah! We do not know about him except good, i.e. we know
that he is a Muslim:

But what is his own responsibility about himself? He should ascertain
whether his belief is sincere. Ifnot, then he is required to correct his
belief and acquire sincere faith.

**Eighth**: A man recites Kalimah; but he realizes that he has doubts
about tawhid, nubuwwat of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) or qiyamat. If he
expresses his doubt before the people, he shall be treated as Kafir and
najis.

If such a man does not disclose his doubt in words, but his action and
behavior show that he has doubt about existence or oneness of God,
prophet hood of Muhammad (s.a.w.a) or the day of judgement, then -
according to stronger proofs - it is unlawful for a Muslim woman to
marry him. And it is ahwat to treat him as najis, and not to eat an
animal slaughtered by him.

**Ninth:** A man does not have firm belief in existence and oneness of
God or in prophet hood of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) or qiyamat; he has only
strong inclination towards these things. The question arises what is his
own duty in this respect, and what are other Muslims to do about him.

As for himself: If he may acquire firm belief of the above matters, and
still neglects to do so, then the rule about him is the same as for the
doubter (Seventh category), and he will not be saved on the day of
judgement.

But if he cannot be more certain of these matters even after trying his
utmost, then he will not be punished on the day of judgement, but he
will not be treated as a Muslim in this world.

And it is ahwat not to marry him to a Muslim woman, or eat an animal
slaughtered by him; he should be treated as najis.

**Tenth:** A child of a Muslim, before attaining majority and before
acquiring true belief, became insane, then he will continue to be
treated as a Muslim. The same is the law for a child of a non-Muslim who
acquired true belief even before attaining majority and then became
insane; as well as for a baligh person who had true belief and then
became insane. All three types of people shall be treated as Muslims.

If a child of a Muslim attained majority and became insane before
acquiring correct belief, then he will not be treated as Muslim or tahir
(unless he had professed to be a Muslim and hidden his lack of belief
from others). The same rule applies to a child who, on becoming baligh,
began looking for true belief but became insane before acquiring correct
belief.

**Eleventh**: Mustad'afin among non-Muslims and non-Shi'as. The word,
Mustad'afin literally means "weak ones': In theological terminology it
refers to those people whose belief is not strong, i.e, those whose
belief is not based on knowledge and conviction. They are of two types:
Those who are oblivious, and the simpletons.

Oblivious are those who have never thought that they should took into or
amend their beliefs nor has anyone ever drawn their attention to it.

Simpletons are those who are neither insane, nor do they have knowledge,
nor is it possible for them to acquire knowledgeable belief.

Non-Muslim Mustad'afin, like the Eskimos of Canada and Pygmies of Zaire.
The law about them is as follows: They will be treated as Ka.fir in this
world; but it is against the divine justice to punish them in the
hereafter; of course, they cannot enter the Paradise; they may be placed
in A'raf (the boundary between the Paradise and the Hell); or they will
be given a test on the day of judgement and then sent to the Paradise or
Hell, depending on the outcome of that test.

Non-Shi'a Mustad'afin: In the hereafter their condition will be similar
to the above-mentioned Non-Muslim Mustad'afin. But in this world, they
will be treated as general Muslims.

**Twelfth:** Shi'a Mustad'afin: In this category are included those who
believe in tawhid and nubuwwat, and accept that 'Ali (a.s.) was the
first Imam; but they do not know the names and sequence of the Imams, or
do not know what Imamat is - provided they are oblivious or simpleton
and have not intentionally neglected acquiring this knowledge.

No doubt such people are tahir because they believe in tawhid, nubuwwat
and qiyamat; also they will not be punished in the hereafter - may be
they would be sent to Paradise too. But the question arises whether in
this life they are allowed to enjoy all the rights of a true believer.
For example, it is ahwat not to give them from kaffarah and radd
al-mazalim; also they should not be given zakah from the shares of poor
or miskin - although they could be given from the share of "the way of
Allah" if a religious benefit depends on it. Possibly they could be
given from fitrah too.

**Thirteenth**: The above-mentioned category dealt with those Shi'a
Mustadafin who were either oblivious or simpleton. Now we come to a
person who has accepted Shi'a faith, is not oblivious or simpleton and
yet neglects acquiring necessary knowledge of the twelve Imam, does not
know their names, sequence or their necessary details.

As mentioned in the twelfth category, such a person is tahir, because he
believes in Allah, Muhammad and the day of judgement. But it is very
difficult to say that he would be saved in the hereafter - - -
especially so if he has no knowledge of the Imam of our times, or does
not believe in his life and ghaybat (occultation) or in the fact that he
is the Hujjat (Proof) of Allah over His creatures. The same is the case
if he carelessly neglects to acquire this knowledge and belief.

**Fourteenth**: Apostates: These are the people who accepted true faith
and then renounced it. They are called Murtadd, and their position is
the worst of all; the rules about them are harder than general Kuffar.
Some details about murtadd have been given in the chapter 4 above. Some
other important matters are appended below.

(A)Conditions of apostasy: Five conditions must be fulfilled before a
person could be declared a murtadd:

1) & 2) He must be baligh and sane;

3) He must be knowing what he is speaking. If a word of kufr (disbelief)
slips out of his tongue without his having any intention to do so, it
would not be held against him.

4) He should be knowing that it is a word of kufr and then uses it in
that same meaning. If he speaks a word of kufr, without knowing its
meaning, or uses it in some other lawful meaning, then it would not be
held against him. If he knew that it was a word of kufr and used it in
the same meaning, he would become murtadd and najis, even if he was not
aware of the consequences of his utterance.

5) He should utter word of kufr by his own free will. If he was forced
to say such words and he did so to save his life (i.e. in taqiyyah),
then it would not be held against him.

(B) Apostacy may occur through heart, tongue and/or action:

Apostasy through heart: If someone disbelieves after believing, or
harbours doubt after being sure.

Apostasy through tongue: When he denies the existence or oneness of
Allah, or refutes God's justice or knowledge etc., or tries to show that
God's actions are aimless or against wisdom, or rejects any of the
Zaruriyat al-deen like prayer, fast, zakah, hajj, or disparages
religion, qiyamat, Qur'an or hadith.

Note: Some people say in du'a, "May Imam Husayn prolong your life': or
"May Hazrat 'Abbas increase your sustenance' or "May Ali (a.s.) give you
children''; or "May a certain shahid (martyr) protect you from
troubles': The question arises whether it is correct.

Reply: If his real intention is to say that "May you get those benefits
by the barakat or wasilah of those sacred personalities’: or "May they
intercede with Allah on your behalf so that He gives you children,
increase your sustenance or prolong your life': then it is very good.
But if he means to say that those personalities are, God forbid,
sustainers or creators, then the matter will be really difficult.

Apostasy through action: When someone, say, throws the Qur'an down (with
intention to insult it), or with that intention tears it down, or kicks
at it or throws it into a dirty place. The same is the rule if he
insults the books of du'a, or hadith, or the names of Allah.

There are three things which, without any difference of opinion, make a
person kafir:

Denial of anyone of the Zaruriyat al-Deen. Its examples have been given
chapter 5 above.

Objecting to any command of Allah. It was this offence because of which
Shaytan became kafir; otherwise he believed in one God, Qiyamat and
almost all divine commands; but he objected to one order given by Allah
and became kafir and accursed. The objection was: Why did you order me
to do sajdah before Adam while I am superior to him?

To treat any divine order with disdain even if it is sunnah law. For
example it is sunnat that moustache should be trimmed; now if someone
disdainfully says: What nonsense is this? Or, what it has got to do with
shari'ah? He will become kafir.

**Note**: Shaykh Ja'far Shushtari has not mentioned Munafiqin in this
list. But in my view it should be included as the Fifteenth category.
The details have been mentioned in ch. 4.


