Surat ar Roum The Romans, Chapter 30
====================================

One of the important topics discussed in Sura ar­-Rum is the proof of
the Creator present in the many wonders of creation around us. In ayats
20­25, and then ayats 46­54 of the Sura, Allah talks about His signs
present in the creation of the world and in human beings, in the wisdom
behind the system running in the Universe, and the power and mercy of
Allah so evident in the working of the world. There is an invitation to
ponder over these signs, to gain a firm and un-doubtful faith in the
Creator.

Many people, however, reject these clear signs, and prefer to continue
in disbelief. Believers are sometimes affected by such skeptics, and may
waver in their faith. Sura ar-­Rum ends by describing the fate of such
skeptics on the day of Judgement, and warns believers not to be affected
by them in the world.

This sura derives its name from the prophecy in the beginning of the
sura that the Romans (who were Christians) would defeat the Persians
(who were idol-­worshippers) in the near future. This was reassuring for
the Muslims who had been taunted that the idol­-worshippers were gaining
victory over those who believed in One God.

Recitation of sura ar-­Rum is highly recommended on Laylatul Qadr.

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.*

1. Alif Lam Meem.

2. The Romans have been defeated.

3. In a nearby land, but after being defeated, they shall soon be
victorious.

4. Within a few years; Allah's is the command before and after, and on
that day the believers shall rejoice.

5. With the help of Allah. He helps whom He pleases, and He is the
Mighty, the Merciful.

6. (This is) the promise of Allah! Allah does not fail His promise, but
most people do not know.

7. They know (only) the external appearance of the life of this world,
while they are heedless of the Hereafter.

8. Why do they not reflect on themselves, that Allah did not create the
heavens and the earth, and what is between them, except with the Truth,
and (for) an appointed term? And surely, most people disbelieve in the
meeting with their Lord.

9. Have they not travelled on the earth, and seen the end of those who
were before them? They were stronger than them in might; they dug up the
earth, and built on it, more than what these people have built; and
there came to them their Messengers with clear signs and Allah would
never treat them unjustly, but they were unjust to themselves.

10. Then evil was the end of those who did evil, for they denied the
signs and mocked them.

11. Allah originates creation, then reproduces it, then to Him you shall
be returned.

12. And on the day when the Hour shall come, the guilty shall be in
despair.

13. They shall not have any intercessors among their associates (with
God), and they shall deny their associates.

14. And on the day when the hour shall come, they shall be separated
(into groups).

15. Then as to those who believed and did good deeds, they shall be made
happy in the garden.

16. And as to those who disbelieved, and denied Our signs and the
meeting of the hereafter, they shall be brought to the punishment.

17. So Glory be to God, when you enter the evening, and when you enter
the morning.

18. For Him is all Praise in the heavens and the earth, at night and
when you enter midday.

19. He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead
from the living; and He gives life to the earth after its death, and
thus shall you be brought forth.

20. From His signs is that He created you from dust, then lo! you are
mortals, scatterd (on earth).

21. And from His signs is that He created for you mates from among
yourselves, that you may find rest in them; and He placed love and mercy
between you; surely in this are signs for a people who reflect.

22. And from His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
the variety of your languages and colors; surely in this are signs for
the learned.

23. And from His signs is your sleeping by night and day, and your
seeking of His grace; surely in this are signs for a people who would
hear.

24. And from His signs is that He shows you the lightning, causing fear
and hope; and He sends down water from the sky, and gives life with it
to the earth; surely in this there are signs for a people who
understand.

25. And from His signs is that the heaven and the earth stand firm by
His command. Then when He calls you with a (single) call from out of the
earth, lo! you shall come forth.

26. To Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth; all are
obedient to Him.

27. He it is who originates creation, and then reproduces it,

and that is easy for Him; His are the exalted attributes

in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

28. He sets forth for you an example from yourselves; do you have, among
those whom your right hands possess, partners in what We have provided
for you, so that you are alike in it, you fear them as you fear each
other? Thus do We make Our signs clear for a people who understand.

29. Nay! those who are unjust follow their vain desires without any
knowledge, so who shall guide those whom Allah has allowed to stray?
They shall not have any helpers.

30. Then set your face upright for religion, devoted to the truth;
(following) the nature made by Allah in which He has made mankind; there
is no altering in Allah's creation, that is the right religion, but most
people do not know.

31. Turn(ing) towards Him, and fear Him, establish prayer and do not be
from the polytheists.

32. (Do not be) from those who have split their religion, and have
become sects; every party rejoices in what they have.

33. And when harm afflicts men, they call upon their Lord, turning to
Him; then when He causes them to taste mercy from Him, lo! some of them
associate partners with their lord.

34. That they may be ungrateful for what We have given them; but enjoy
yourselves (for a while); soon you shall know.

35. Have We sent down an authority, so that it speaks of what they
associate with Him?

36. When We make people taste of mercy, they rejoice in it, but if evil
befalls them for what their hands have earned, lo! they are in despair.

37. Do they not see that Allah increases His provision for whoever He
wills, and straitens (for whoever He wills)? Surely in this there are
signs for a people who believe.

38. Then give to the near of kin his due, and the needy, and the
wayfarer; that is best for those who want the pleasure of Allah, and
they are the successful ones.

39. Whatever you give out as interest so that it may increase in the
wealth of the people, it shall not increase with Allah; and whatever you
give in charity, wanting the pleasure of Allah, they shall receive a
manifold increase.

40. Allah is He who created you, then provided for you, then will cause
you to die, then bring you to life. Is there any of your associate ­gods
who does any of those things? Glory be to HIm, exalted is He above what
they associate.

41. Corruption has appeared on the land and sea on account of what the
hands of men have done, so that He may make them taste a part of what
they have done, perhaps they may return (towards Him).

42. Say: Travel on the earth, and see how was the end of those who were
before; most of them were polytheists.

43. Set your face upright for the right religion before there comes from
Allah the day which cannot be averted; on that day they shall be
separated.

44. Whoever disbelieves, then on him will be (the charge of) his
disbelief; and whoever does good deeds, they are preparing for
themselves.

45. So that He may reward those who believe and do good deeds, out of
His grace, surely He does not love the disbelievers.

46. And from His signs is that He sends forth the winds bearing good
news, that He may make you taste of His mercy; and that ships may sail
by His command. and you should seek of His grace , and so that you may
be grateful.

47. Indeed We sent before you, Messengers to their people, and they came
to them with clear proofs Then We punished those who were guilty, and
helping the believers is a duty on Us.

48. Allah it is, who sends forth the winds, so they raise a cloud, then
He spreads it forth in the sky as He pleases, and causes it to break up
so that you see the rain coming forth from inside it; then when He
causes it to fall upon whom He pleases of His servants, lo! they rejoice

49. Though they were, before it was sent down upon them, in complete
despair.

50. Look then at the traces of the mercy of Allah; how He gives life to
the earth after its death, surely this (God) is the giver of life to the
dead, and He has power over all things.

51. And if We send a wind, and they see it to be yellow, they remain
after that, disbelieving.

52. Surely you cannot make the dead to hear, and you cannot make the
deaf to hear the call, when they turn back and withdraw.

53. Nor can you lead the blind out of their error. You cannot make any
to hear except he who believes in Our signs, and so they submit.

54. Allah it is who created you of weakness, then He gave strength after
weakness, then gave weakness after strength, and grey hair; He creates
whatever he will, and He is the all­knowing, the Powerful.

55. On the day when the hour shall come, the guilty shall swear that
they have not stayed for more than an hour; such was their lying.

56. Those who were given knowledge and faith will say: Indeed you stayed
according to the Book of Allah, till the Day of Resurrection; so this is
the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know.

57. But on that day, the excuse of those who were unjust, shall not
profit them, nor will they be allowed to make amends.

58. Inded we have set forth for people every kind of example, in this
Qur'an; but if you bring them a sign, those who disbelieve will say: You
are nothing but false claimants.

59. Thus does Allah set a seal on the hearts of those who do not know.

60. So be patient; Surely the promise of Allah is the truth. Let not
those who have no certainty make you unsteady.


