Surat al­'Ankabut ­The Spider, Chapter 29
=========================================

The sura has been named Ankabut because of ayat no.41 which talks of the
fragility of the false gods, comparing them to the web of a spider.

Commentators of the Holy Qur'an state that this sura talks about the
following main subjects;

1. The trial of a believer and the distinguishing factors of hypocrites.

In difficult times the real believers can be separated from those who
only claim belief.

2. Narrations of previous Prophets and the opposition faced by them.
This is to inspire true believers to face troubles and obstacles in the
way of Allah.

3. Oneness of Allah and the signs of Allah in His creation.

The sura also briefly covers other topics.

Overall the sura is meant to strengthen believers in their dedication to
the right path.

Whoever recites suras Ankabut and Rum on the 23rd night of Ramadhan will
certainly be among the people of Paradise without any exception . . .
and surely these two suras have a high position with Allah. Imam Ja'far
as­Sadiq (a)

Recitation of Sura al­Ankabut with understanding brings about an
increase in faith and sincerity in actions. These two effects of the
sura have an impact on a believer's life and help make him/her steadfast
on the path of Allah.

*In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful*

1. Alif Lam Meem.

2. Do people think that they will be left alone on saying, we believe,
and they will not be tried?

3. Certainly We have tried those before them, and surely Allah knows
those who are true, and He knows the liars.

4. Or do those who do evil think they will escape us? Evil is what they
judge!

5. Whoever hopes for the meeting with Allah, then surely the term
appointed with Allah will come, and He is the all-­Hearing,
all-­Knowing.

6. Whoever strives, strives only for himself. Certainly Allah is
self­sufficient, above (the needs of) the worlds.

7. Those who believe and do good, We will certainly do away with their
evil deeds, and We will reward them the best of what they did.

8. And We have enjoined on man goodness to his parents. If they strive
(to force) you to associate (others) with Me, of which you have no
knowledge, do not obey them. To Me is your return, then I will inform
you of what you did.

9. And those who believe and do good deeds, We will cause them to enter
among the good.

10. And among men are those who say; we believe in Allah. But when they
are persecuted in the way of Allah they think the persecution of men to
be punishment of Allah. But if there came help from your Lord, they
would certainly say, surely we are with you. What! Is not Allah the best
knower of what is in the hearts of mankind?

11. Most certainly Allah knows those who believe and most certainly He
knows the hypocrites.

12. Those who disbelieve say to those who believe; follow our path and
we will bear your wrongs. Never shall they be the bearers of any of
their wrongs; surely they are the liars.

13. They shall carry their own burdens, and other burdens with their
burdens, and they shall be questioned on the Day of Judgement as to what
they forged.

14. We sent Nuh to his people, and he remained among them a thousand but
fifity years. Then the flood seized them while they were unjust.

15. We delivered him and the inmates of the ark, and We made it (the
ark) a sign for the people of the worlds.

16. And (remember) Ibrahim when he said to his people: worship Allah and
fear Him, that is better for you if only you knew.

17. You only worship idols besides Allah, and you create a lie; surely
those whom you worship besides Allah do not control sustenance for you.
Therefore seek the sustenance from Allah, and worship Him and be
grateful to Him; to Him you shall return.

18. If you deny (the truth), then surely nations before you have denied
(the truth), and nothing is incumbent on the Messenger except a clear
delivering (of the message).

19. What! do they not see how Allah originates creation, then brings it
back again? Indeed that is easy for Allah.

20. Say: Travel on the earth and see how He has originated the creation,
then Allah causes another development; surely Allah has power over all
things.

21. He punishes whom He pleases and has mercy on whom He pleases, and to
Him you shall be turned back.

22. And you shall not escape on the earth nor in the heaven. You have
neither a protector nor a helper beside Allah.

23. Those who disbelieve in the signs of Allah, and the meeting with
Him; those are the ones who have despaired of My mercy, and those are
the ones for whom there is a painful punishment.

24. But his people did not reply him except to say; ”slay him” or “burn
him.” Then Allah delivered him from the fire. In this are signs for a
people who believe.

25. He (Ibrahim) said: You have taken for yourselves idols besides
Allah, in friendship between yourselves, in the life of this world. Then
on the Day of Judgement, some of you will deny the others, and some of
you will curse the others. Your abode will be the fire and you shall not
have any helpers.

26. And Lut believed in him. He said, I flee to my Lord, surely He is
the Mighty, the Wise.

27. We granted him Ishaq and Y'aqub, and We placed Prophethood and the
Book in his progeny. We gave him his reward in the world, and indeed in
the Hereafter he will be among the righteous.

28. And (remember) Lut when he said to his people: you commit an
indecency which none of the people of the worlds has done.

29. What! do you approach the males, and rob on the highway, and commit
evil deeds in your assemblies? But his people did not answer except to
say: Bring us the punishment of Allah if you are truthful.

30. He said: My Lord, help me against the corrupt people.

31. When our messengers came to Ibrahim with the good news, they said:
We are going to destroy the people of this town, surely its people are
unjust.

32. He (Ibrahim) said: Amongst them is Lut. They said: We know better
who is amongst them. We will deliver him and his followers, except his
wife; she shall be of those who remain behind.

33. When our messengers came to Lut, he was grieved for them and felt
powerless to protect them. They said: Do not fear, or grieve. We will
deliver you and your followers except your wife, she shall be of those
who remain behind.

34. We are bringing down upon the people of this town a punishment from
heaven for their transgression.

35. And certainly We have left a clear sign of it for a people who
understand.

36. To Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu\`aib. He said: O my people,
worship Allah and hope for the last day and do not act corruptly on the
earth, making mischief.

37. But they denied him, so a severe earthquake seized them and they
became motionless in their abodes.

38. And (We destroyed the peoples of) \`Ad and Thamud, and this is clear
to you from their abodes. Shaytan made their deeds fair­-seeming to
them, so he kept them back from the path although they had insight.

39. And (We destroyed) Qarun, and Fir\`awn and Haman. Indeed Musa came
to them with clear signs but they were arrogant on earth, although they
did not overtake (us).

40. So each We seized for his sin; among them was he on whom we sent a
violent storm, and among them was he whom the blast seized, and among
them was he whom we caused to be swallowed by the earth, and among them
was he whom We drowned. Allah does not do injustice to them but they are
unjust to themselves.

41. The example of those who take guardians other than Allah is like the
example of a spider; it takes a house, but surely the frailest of houses
is the house of a spider; if only they knew.

42. Allah knows whatever thing they call upon besides Him, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

43. These are the examples We have set forth for mankind, but none
understand them except those who know.

44. Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth, surely in this
there is a sign for the believers.

45. Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book, and establish
prayer; surely prayer keeps you away from indecency and evil.
Remembrance of Allah is the greatest, and Allah knows what you do.

46. Do not dispute with the people of the book except with what is best,
except those of them who act unjustly, and say: We believe in what was
revealed to us, and what was revealed to you; our God and your God is
one, and to Him we submit.

47. Thus We have revealed to you the book. Those whom we have given the
book believe in it, and of these (Jews and Christians) there are those
who believe in it; and none deny Our signs except the disbelievers.

48. You did not recite any book before it, nor did you transcribe one
with your right hand, for then those who follow untruth would have
doubted.

49. Nay! It is a clear sign in the hearts of those who have been given
knowledge; and none dispute Our signs except the unjust.

50. They say: Why are signs not sent down upon him from his Lord? Say:
The signs are only with Allah, I am only a plain warner.

51. Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book
which is recited to them? Surely in this there is a mercy and a reminder
for a people who believe.

52. Say: Sufficient is Allah as a witness between me and you, He knows
what is in the heavens and the earth. Those who believe in falsehood and
disbelieve in Allah, those are the losers.

53. They ask you to hasten the punishment, and had not the term been
appointed the punishment would certainly have come to them; and indeed
it will come to them suddenly, while they are not aware.

54. They ask you to hasten the punishment; surely Hell encompasses the
disbelievers.

55. On the day when the punishment will cover them from above, and from
below their feet, and He shall say: Taste (the results of) what you did.

56. O My servants who believe, My earth is wide, therefore worship Me
alone.

57. Every soul shall taste of death, then to Us you shall be returned.

58. Those who believe and do good deeds, We shall lodge them in lofty
chambers in the gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall abide
therein. How excellent is the reward of those who perform (good) deeds.

59. Those who are patient, and rely on their Lord.

60. And how many a living creature does not carry its own sustenance ;
Allah sustains it and yourselves; and He is the All­-Hearing,
all-­Knowing.

61. If you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, and made the
sun and moon subservient, they will surely say Allah. Why are they then
turned away?

62. Allah makes abundant the sustenance of whoever He pleases and
straitens it for him (who He pleases). Surely Allah is Aware of all
things.

63. If you ask them who sends water from the sky, then gives life with
it to the earth after its death, they will surely say Allah. Say : All
praise is for Allah. Nay! most of them do not understand.

64. The life of this world is nothing but a sport and play. Surely the
abode of the Hereafter, that most certainly is the life, if only they
knew.

65. When they ride on the ships they call upon Allah, making the
religion sincerely His. But when He brings them safely to land, lo! they
associate others with Him.

66. Thus they become ungrateful for what We have given them. Let them
enjoy; soon they shall know.

67. Do they not see that We have made a sacred territory secure, while
people are carried off by force from around them? Will they still
believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favour of Allah?

68. Who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against Allah, or
denies the truth when it comes to him? Is not Hell the abode of the
disbelievers?

69. Those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly guide them to
our ways; and Allah is always with the doers of good.


