Surat ad-Dukhan The Smoke, Chapter 44
=====================================

The sura derives its name from ayat no.10 which warns of a clearly
visible smoke descending on the unbelievers. Some commentators believe
it refers to the smoke which will envelop the world before the day of
Judgement, and which will be especially painful for the unbelievers.

There is great reward for reciting this sura in obligatory and
recommended prayers.

At the beginning of this sura, an indirect reference is made to the
night of Qadr. This was the first time Muslims were told about Laylatul
Qadr. The only other mention of Laylatul Qadr in the Qur'an is in Sura
al足-Qadr, which has a direct reference to the holy night. Thus both
surahs are recommended for recitation on the night of Qadr.

The first six ayaat discuss the holy night, and its blessings. The Sura
also ends with a mention of the Qur'an as a reminder for the people.

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.*

1. Ha Meem.

2. By the clear Book.

3. Surely We sent it down on a blessed night, surely We have (always)
been warning.

4. Therein every wise affair is made distinct.

5. An order from Us, indeed We are the senders.

6. A mercy from Your Lord; surely He is the all-足Hearing, the
all-足Knowing.

7. Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, if you
have faith.

8. There is no god but He; He gives life and causes death; your Lord and
the Lord of your fathers of before.

9. Nay, they are playing in doubt.

10. Therefore be on the watch for the day when the heaven shall bring a
smoke clearly visible.

11. Covering the people, this is a painful punishment.

12. (They will say) Our Lord, remove from us the punishment; surely we
are believers.

13. How shall they be reminded, when a Messenger making clear (the
truth) already came to them?

14. But they turned their backs on him, and said: he is taught (by
others), a madman.

15. Surely We will remove the punishment a little, but certainly you
will return (to evil).

16. The day We shall seize them with a great seizure, surely We will
retribute them.

17. And We tried before them the people of Firaun, and there came to
them a noble Prophet.

18. Saying: Deliver to me the servants of Allah; indeed I am a trusted
Messenger to you.

19. And exalt not yourselves over Allah; I come to you with a clear
authority.

20. And I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord that you stone me (to
death).

21. If you do not believe me, then leave me alone.

22. Then he called upon his Lord: These are a guilty people.

23. (He was commanded saying) Go forth with My servants by night,
certainly you will be followed.

24. Leave the sea calm; they are a host that shall be drowned.

25. How many have they left, of gardens and fountains!

26. And cornfields, and noble places!

27. And blessings in which they took delight!

28. Thus (was it), and We gave them as heritage to another people.

29. So the heaven and the earth did not weep for them, nor were they
respited.

30. We delivered the children of Israel from a degrading affliction.

31. From Firaun, he was haughty, and from those who are extravagant.

32. Certainly We chose them, having knowledge, over the nations.

33. We gave them of the signs, wherein was a clear trial.

34. Surely these (people) say:

35. There is nothing except our first death, and we shall not be raised
again.

36. Bring (back) our fathers, if you are truthful.

37. Are they better, or the people of Tubba, and those before them? We
destroyed them, for surely they were guilty.

38. We created not the heavens and the earth, and what is between them,
in sport.

39. We created them not but with the truth, but most of them do not
know.

40. Surely the day of separation, is an appointed term for all of them.

41. The day when a friend shall not be of use to a friend, nor shall
they be helped.

42. Except those on whom Allah shall have mercy; Indeed He is the
Mighty, the Merciful.

43. Certainly, the tree of Zaqqum.

44. Shall be the food of the sinners.

45. Like molten brass, shall boil in the bellies.

46. Like the boiling of hot water.

47. (It will be said) take him, then drag him down into the middle of
Hell.

48. Then pour on his head the torment of the boiling water.

49. (It will besaid) Taste; surely you were (thought yourself to be) the
mighty, the honorable.

50. This is what you disputed about.

51. Indeed the pious ones will be in a safe place.

52. In gardens and springs.

53. They shall wear silk and brocade, (sitting) face to face.

54. So shall it be; and We will unite them with wide足eyed houris.

55. They shall call therein for every kind of fruit, in security.

56. They shall not taste death therein except the first death, and He
will save them from the punishment of Hell.

57. A grace from your Lord; that is a mighty achievement.

58. We have made it (the Qur'an) easy on your tongue, that they may be
reminded.

59. So wait, they (too) are waiting.


