Du'as for the nights of Ramadhan
================================

The nights of Ramadhan are a time for worshipping Allah, for praying to
Allah and seeking His forgiveness. Allah knows that human beings are
likely to sin, and need of an opportunity to repent and reform
themselves. Hence the month of Ramadhan, a season of Du'a and Istighfar
whereby Muslims can relieve themselves of the burden of sins. The Du'as
which follow have been taught by the Ma'sumeen (a) and show us how to
seek the Forgiveness and Mercy of Allah in this month.

Du'a no. 1
----------

After praising Allah, the following Du'a describes the excellence of
Ramadhan, and its distinguishing features. Worshippers and supplicators
receive special favours when they ask in this month. This Du'a is also
recommended after obligatory prayers.

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful***

O High, O Mighty, O Forgiver, O Merciful,

You are the Mighty Lord, who has none like Him,

and He is the All­-Hearing, the All­-Seeing.

This is a month which You have made;

exalted, honored,

ennobled and excelled over the other months.

It is the month in which You have made

fasting obligatory on me,

and it is the month of Ramadhan,

in which You sent down the Qur'an,

***a guidance for mankind, having clear signs of***

***guidance and distinction. (2:185)***

You have placed in it the night of power,

***and made it better than a thousand months. (97:2)***

O One who favours, and none favours You,

favour me by saving me from the fire,

amongst the ones You favour,

and make me enter Heaven,

by Your mercy, O the most Merciful.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عليّ يا عظيم يا غفور يا رحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت الرب العظيم الذي ليس كمثله شيئ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو السميع البصير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا شهر عظمته وكرمته
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وشرفته وفضلته على الشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو شهر الذي فرضت صيامه عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو شهر رمضان الذي أنزلت فيه القرءان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُدى للناس وبيّنات مِن الهُدى والفُرقان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعلت فيه ليلة القدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعلتها خيراُ من ألف شهر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيا ذالمن ولا يُمَن عليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُنَّ عليّ بفكاك رقتبي من النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيمن تمُن عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأدخلني الجنة برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Du'a no.2
---------

**Du'a no. 2 (for the nights of Ramadhan and for all occasions)**

One of the etiquettes of Du'a is to ask for others, to remember those
who are in need. It is a selfless act, displaying humanity and
consideration for others. Allah loves a person who first asks for
others, then prays fpr himself. The Sixth Imam (a) says: When a Muslim
prays for his brother, (increase in) sustenance is given to him,
afflictions are driven away, and the angels tell him “You will also
receive the same”.

Many people all over the world suffer indescribable miseries. Tyranny
and oppression are rampant in many countries. There is little we can do
to alleviate the sufferings. However we can at least pray sincerely for
them, hoping that Allah will relieve them as He has power over all
things. We also pray that Allah may give us the will and the ability to
help others in whatever way we can.

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

O Allah bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad.

O Allah, gladden the people of the graves,

O Allah, enrich every poor person,

O Allah, satisfy every hungry one,

O Allah, clothe every unclothed one,

O Allah, help every debtor pay his debts,

O Allah, relieve every distressed one,

O Allah, return every traveller (to his home),

O Allah release every prisoner,

O Allah, correct every wrong in the affairs of the Muslims,

O Allah, cure every sick one,

O Allah, ease our poverty by Your wealth,

O Allah, change our evil state to a good one

through Your excellent state,

O Allah, relieve us of our debts, and help us against poverty,

Surely You have power over all things.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد وال محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم ادخل على اهل القُبور السرور
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اغن كُل فقير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اشبع كُل جائع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اكس كُل عُريان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اقض دين كُل مدين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم فرج عن كل مكروب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم رُدّ كل غريب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم فُك كُل اسير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اصلح كُل فاسد من امور المُسلمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اشف كُل مريض
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم سُد فقرنا بغناك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم غيّر سؤء حالنا بحُسن حالك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اقضِ عنا الدين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واغننا من الفقر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنك على كل شيئ قدير
  </p>
</blockquote>

Du'a no. 3
----------

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

O Allah send Your blessings on Muhammad

and the family of Muhammad.

O Allah, Lord of Ramadhan

in which You sent down the Qur'an

and made fasting obligatory on Your servants

Bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad

and enable me to go for pilgrimage to Your sacred House

in this year and in every year

and forgive me those great sins (that I carry)

for surely, none can forgive them except You

O Beneficent, O All­-Knowing.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد وأل محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم رب شهر رمضان الذي انزلت فيه القُران
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وافترضت على عبادك فيه الصيام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلي على محمد وال محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وارزقني حج بيتك الحرام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في عامي هذا وفي كُل عام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واغفر لي تلك الذنوب العظام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإنه لا يغفرها غيرك يا رحمن يا علام
  </p>
</blockquote>

An Introduction to Dua al-Iftitah
---------------------------------

Du' al­-Iftitah was taught by our twelfth Imam (a) for Shi'as to recite
every night during the month of Ramadhan. The Du'a is excellent for
moulding man's attitude towards his Creator as it discusses many aspects
of the wretchedness of the human being, and the Grace of Allah. The Du'a
can be divided into two parts:

1) Man's relationship with Allah.

2) Divine leaders.

The first section of the Du'a describes different qualities of Allah,
and reveals the graciousness and love of Allah for the human being. This
section of the Du'a can further be divided into the following parts:

a) Praise of Allah. As is the etiquette of Du'a, Du'a al­-Iftitah begins
with the praise and glorification of Allah. This is not because Allah
needs to be praised before He answers our Du'as, but to remind the
supplicant of the Supreme Being he is addressing, and consequently put
the awe of Allah into hearts which are often heedless.

The beginning of the Du'a also places the supplicant between hope and
fear, the ideal attitude while praying. Allah is most merciful, but is
also severe in punishment. Humans are not to despair, nor to be too
confident but constantly strive in His way.

b) Emphasis on the Oneness of Allah. Allah has no partner nor son, and
has complete, undivided power and control over creation. The inhabitants
of the skies and the heavens depend on Him. This is to strengthen
reliance of the supplicant on Allah, as there is none else he can turn
to.

c) The Generosity of Allah. The treasures of Allah do not cease, and are
always liberally bestowed on His creatures. The needs of the human
beings are enormous, and by placing open the door of Du'a, Allah has
given them the keys to His treasures. His doors are always open, and no
supplication to Him is rejected without some answer.

But man is often ungrateful, and always greedy. He expects that his
du'as will always be immediately granted. When such gratification is not
forthcoming, he turns away, instead of reminding himself of all the
favours he enjoys.

d) Relationship of Allah and the human being. A strange relationship
indeed! Although it is the human who needs Allah, and should strive
towards Him, it is Allah who invites and encourages him to come, who
shows love and mercy and continues to favour him in many ways.

As the 4th Imam says in Du'a ­Abu Hamza Thumali:

Praise be to Allah who answers me when I call Him, although I am
reluctant when he calls me, and Praise is for Allah who gives me when I
ask Him, although I am miserly when he asks me. This is worth pondering
over for those who think of Allah as a tyrannical master imposing His
rules over humans.

This section of the Du'a is an excellent lesson in the Islamic view
point of the qualities of Allah. The God of Islam is a loving, gracious
God who treats the human being better than he deserves. The root of the
relationship between Allah and man is the love of the Creator for His
creatures. It is on man to search his heart for a reciprocal response.

The second section of the Du'a send blessings on the Holy Prophet (s)
and the M'asumeen, and then discusses the role of the twelfth Imam (a).

a) Salawat on the Prophet(s). After faith in Allah, the next most
important part of religion is faith in His sent ones. Thus after
acknowledging the greatness and graciousness of the creator, the Du'a
teaches us to acknowledge the Divine leaders as our guides towards Him.
Blessings are sent to the Prophet (s) as a sign of love and appreciation
for the Prophet (s) and as an acknowledgement that he is a human being
and needs mercy and blessings from Allah. It also strengthens
remembrance of the Prophet (s) and the inspiration to follow his path.

b) Blessings on the Masumeen. After the Holy Prophet (s), his successors
are remembered and prayed for. These are the true leaders of the Muslim
Ummah who were Divinely appointed by Allah. Belief in them, and love for
them, is an important part of the Shi'a faith.

c) Role of the Twelfth Imam (a). In every era Allah has His
representative who guides His creatures towards establishing truth and
justice on earth. The Twelfth Imam is the leader of our time, who will
come and Allah's religion on earth. The last part of Du'a al­-Iftitah
talks about his coming, preparing believers for the anticipated
establishment of the rule of Allah on earth.

Praying for help and victory for the twelfth Imam reminds us that we are
waiting for him, and need to prepare for his coming. We become aware of
our responsibilities in his ghaybat, and the importance of training
ourselves as his helpers. We pray for the ultimate dream of a Muslim, a
state in which the religion of Allah is paramount, and disbelief and
hypocrisy are degraded.

Du'a al­-Iftitah reminds us that both faith and action are necessary to
be a true believer. Faith in Allah entails acting on His message brought
by His messenger, and establishing His religion on earth. While that can
only be done through the Imam, we should work and pray for his arrival.
Human beings can only enjoy true justice and peace, and a fulfilment of
all their needs, under the leadership of a Divine leader.

Du'a al­-Iftitah is not only a supplication for our needs, but a
teaching of the roots of faith, and a planning for a way of life. It
remains on us to plot the chart of our life as we recite this beautiful
du'a during the nights of Ramadhan.

Du'a no.4, Du'a al­-Iftitah
---------------------------

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

O Allah send Your blessings on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad.

O Allah, I begin glorifying You with Your Praise

You direct towards what is right through Your Grace

I am convinced that You are the most Merciful in matters of forgiveness
and mercy

but most severe in matters of warning and retribution

and the most mighty in matters of power and magnificence.

O Allah You have allowed me to supplicate to You and ask from You

Then hear my praise O One who hears all

and answer my call O Merciful

and decrease my mistakes O most Forgiving

How often, O my God, You have relieved me of troubles

how many griefs You have dispelled

how many mistakes You have prevented

how many blessings You have spread

and how many series of afflictions You have separated

All Praise is for Allah who has not taken a wife nor a son

who has no partner in His Kingdom

who has no friend to protect Him from humiliation

so magnify Him with a great Magnificnace

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد وأل محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني افتتح الثناء بحمدك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنت مُسدد للصواب بمنك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأيقنت أنك أنت ارحم الراحمين في موضع العفو والرحمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واشد المُعاقبين في موضع النكال والنقمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعظم المُتجبرين في موضع الكبرياء والعظمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اذنت لي في دُعائك ومسئلتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاسمع يا سميع مدحتي واجب يا رحيم دعوتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واقل يا غفور عثرتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكم يا الهي من كُربة قد فرجتها وهمُوم قد كشفتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعثرة قد اقلتها ورحمة قد نشرتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحلقة بلاء قد فككتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي لم يتخذ صاحبة ولا ولداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولم يكن له شريك في الملك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولم يكن له وليّ من الذل وكبره تكبيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

All Praise is for Allah for all His praiseworthy acts

for all His favours and blessings

All Praise is for Allah who has no opposition in His Kingdom

nor any challenge to His command

All Praise is for Allah who has no partner in creation

nor anyone like Him in His Greatness

All Praise is for Allah, His commands operate over His creation

His Praise is evident through His Generosity

whose bestowal stretches out liberally

His treasures never decrease

(rather) the frequency of His Giving increases

His Generosity and Kindness,

Surely He is the Mighty, the Bestower.

O Allah I ask You a little from much

although I am in great need of it

while You are eternally needless of it

though it is a lot for me

while it is easy and simple for You.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله بجميع محامده كُلها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على جميع نعمه كله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله لا مُضاد في مُلكه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا منازع له في أمره
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي لا شريك له في خلقه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا شبيه له في عظمته
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الفاشي في الخلق امرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحمده الظاهر بالكرم مجدُه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الباسط بالجُود يده
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي لا تنقُص خزائنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تزيده كثرة العطاء إلا جُوداً وكرما
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنه هو العزيز الوهاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسئلك قليلا من كثير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مع حاجة بي إليه عظيمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وغناك عنه قديم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو عندي كثير وهو عليك سهل يسير
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, indeed Your forgiveness of my sins

and Your overlooking my faults

Your pardoning my oppression

Your hiding my ugly deeds

and Your forbearing my many wrongs

done intentionally or unintentionally

tempted me to ask from You

what I did not deserve from You

which You (still) gave me out of Your Mercy

provided me by Your Power

and made known to me from Your answers.

So I became habituated to call You trustingly

and ask You familiarly

neither fearing nor scared

but with confidence in You for what I intended

Then if there was a delay (in Your answer)

I would blame You, due to my ignorance

and perhaps the delay was best for me

for You know the outcome of all affairs.

I have not seen a more generous master

patient with a wretched slave than You are with me

My Lord, You call me and I turn away from You

You show affection to me and I show hatred towards You

You display Your love for me and I do not respond

as though I am above You

But this does not prevent You from having mercy on me

being good to me

and favouring me, through Your Generosity and Nobility

so please (continue to) have mercy on your ignorant slave

and be kind to him through the excellence of Your Grace

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إن عفوك عن ذنبي وتجاوزك عن خطيئتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصفحك عن ظُلمي وسترك على قبيح عملي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحلمك عن كثير جرمي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عند ما كان من خطاي وعمدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اطمعني في ان اسئلك ما لا استوجبه منك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي رزقتني من رحمتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واريتني من قدرتك وعرفتني من اجابتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فصرت ادعوك امنا واسئلك مُستانسا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا خائفا ولا وجلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُدلا عليك فيما قصدت فيه اليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن ابطأ عني عتبت بجهلي عليك ولعل الذي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابطأ عني هو خير لي لعلمك بعاقبة الأمور
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلم ار مولىً كريما اصبر على عبد لئيم منك عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ربي إنك تدعوني فأولي عنك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتتحبب إليّ واتبغض إليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتتودد إليّ فلا اقبل منك كأن لي التطوُّل عليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلم يمنعك ذالك من الرحمة لي والإحسان إليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والتفضل عليّ بجودك وكرمك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فارحم عبدك الجاهل وجُد عليه بفضل احسانك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely You are the Bountiful, the Generous.

All Praise is for Allah

The Owner of the Kingdom

who makes the ships sail,

controls the wind,

causes the dawn to break,

is the authority on the Day of Judgement,

the Lord of the worlds.

All Praise is for Allah

for His patience despite His knowledge.

All Praise is for Allah

for His forgiveness despite His power.

All Praise is for Allah

for the lengthy respite He gives despite His anger,

though He has the power to do as He wills.

All Praise is for Allah

the creator of all creation,

the provider of plentiful sustenance,

the cleaver of the dawn,

possessor of Glory and Honor,

and Excellence and Blessings,

who is far and thus cannot be seen,

but is close and thus witnesses secret conversations,

Blessed and Exalted be His name.

All Praise is for Allah

who has no equal who argues with Him

nor anyone similar to Him

nor any Helper to support Him

He overpowers the mighty by His strength

the great humble themselves before His tremendousness,

He accomplishes what He wishes through His power

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنك جواد كريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله مالك المُلك مُجري الفلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُسخر الرياح فالق الأصباح
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ديّان الدين رب العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله على حلمه بعد علمه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحمد لله على عفوه بعد قدرته
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحمد لله على طول اناته في غضبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو قادر على ما يُريد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله خالق الخلق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باسط الرزق فالق الإصباح
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذي الجلال والإكرام والفضل والإنعام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي بعد فلا يُرى وقرب فشهد النجوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تبارك وتعالى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي ليس له مُناز يُعادله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا شبيه يُشاكله ولا ظهير يُعاضده
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قهر بعزته الأعزاء وتواضع لعظمته العُظماء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فبلغ بقدرته ما يشاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

All Praise is for Allah

who answers me when I call Him

covers all my faults yet I disobey Him

increases His bounties on me

but I do not acknowledge them.

How many pleasant gifts He has given me

how many great fears He has removed

how many delightful joys He has shown me

Thus I glorify Him, thanking Him

and I remember Him with praise.

All praise is for Allah

whose curtains cannot be opened

whose doors cannot be locked

who does reject the one who asks Him

and who does not disappoint the one who places hope in Him.

All Praise is for Allah

who provides safety for the frightened

rescues the virtuous

raises the oppressed

humiliates the proud

destroys kings

and replaces them with others.

All Praise is for Allah, who crushes the tyrants

annihilates the oppressors

watches over the runaways

punishes the oppressors

assists those who cry for help

grants the requests of the beseechers

and is the confidence of the believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي يُجيبني حين اناديه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويستر عليّ كل عورة وأنا اعصيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُعظم النعمة عليّ فلا اجازيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكم من موهبة هنيئة قد اعطاني
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعظيمة مخوفة قد كفاني وبهجة مونقة قد اراني
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاثني عليه حامداً واذكُره مُسبحا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي لا يُهتك حجابه ولا يُغلق بابه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا يُرد سائله ولا يُخيّب امله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي يُؤمن الخائفين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُنجي الصالحين ويرفع المُستضعفين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويضع المُستكبرين ويُهلك ملوكا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويستخلف أخرين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحمد لله قاصم الجبارين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مبير الظالمين مُدرك الهاربين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نكال الظالمين صريخ المستصرخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موضع حاجات الطالبين معتمد المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

All praise is for Allah

in whose awe the skies and its inhabitants shake

the earth and its inhabitants tremble

the sea and all that swims in it, billows

All praise is for Allah who guided us to this

and we would not have been guided

had He not guided us to this.

All Praise is for Allah

who creates but is not created

gives sustenance but is not given sustenance

feeds but is not fed

causes the living to die and gives life to the dead

He is Ever-living and does not die

in His control is all good

and He has power over all things.

O Allah send Your Blessings on Muhammad

Your servant, Your Messenger

Your trustee, Your chosen One, Your beloved

the best of Your creation

the preserver of Your secrets

and the preacher of Your messages.

prosperous, pleasant, holy and sublime

more than what You have blessed

given, had mercy, sympathized and greeted

anyone from Your servants

Your Prophets, Your Messengers

Your chosen ones

and the honorable ones from Your creation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي من خشيته ترعد السماء وسُكانها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وترجف الأرض وعُمارها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتموج البحار ومن يسبح في غمراتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما كُنا لنهتدي لو لا أن هدانا الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الذي يخلق ولم يُخلق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويرزُق ولا يُرزق ويُطعِم ولا يُطعم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُميت الأحياء ويُحيي الموتى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو حيّ لا يمُوت بيده الخير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو على كل شيئ قدير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد عبدك ورسولك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأمينك وصفيّك وحبيبك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخيرتك من خلقك وحافظ سرك ومبلغ رسالتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افضل واحسن واجمل واكمل وازكى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانمى واطيب واطهر واسنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واكثر ما صليت وباركت وترحمت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتحننت وسلمت على احد من عبادك وانبيائك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورسلك وصفوتك واهل الكرامة عليك من خلقك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, and send Your blessings on ‘Ali

the commander of the faithful

and the successor of the Messenger of the Lord of the worlds.

Your servant, Your friend

the brother of Your Messenger

Your proof over creation

Your great sign

and the mighty awaited news.

And send blessings on the truthful, pure (lady)

Fatima az­-Zahra

the leader of the women of the worlds.

And send Your blessings on the two grandsons of mercy

(to the world, i.e. the Prophet),the leaders of guidance

Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn

the leaders of the youths of Paradise.

And send blessings on the leaders of Muslims

‘Ali son of Husayn

Muhammad son of ‘Ali

Ja’far son of Muhammad

Musa son of Ja’far

‘Ali son of Musa

Muhammad son of ‘Ali

‘Ali son of Muhammad

Hasan son of ‘Ali

and the successor, the guide and the rightly guided

(these are) Your proofs over Your servants

Your trustees on Your land

(bless them with) numerous and continous blessings

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على عليّ أمير المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووصيّ رسول رب العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبدك ووليّك واخلي رسولك وحُجتك على خلقك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وايتك الكبرى والنبأ العظيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلي على الصديقة الطاهرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاطمة الزهراء سيدة نساء العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلي على سبطى الرحمة واماماي الهُدى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن والحُسين سيدي شباب اهل الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلي على أئمة المسلمين ، عليّ بن الحسين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومحمد بن عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجعفر بن محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وموسى بن جعفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعليّ بن موسى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومحمد بن عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعليّ بن محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحسن بن عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والخلف الهادي المهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُجتك على عبادك وأمنائك في بلادك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلوة كثيرة دائمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah and send blessings on the guardian of Your orders

the one who will rise

the one hoped for, the awaited justice.

Surround him with Your favourite angels

and assist him with the holy spirit

O Lord of the worlds.

O Allah, appoint him to invite towards Your book

to establish Your religion

make him the successor on the earth

as You caused others to succeed before him

establish for him his religion which You have approved for him

give him security after fear

(so) he worships You and does not associate any with You.

O Allah, give him power and through him strengthen (others)

help him and help (others) through him

help him with a mighty help

give him an easy victory

and grant him an assisting authority from You.

O Allah, make manifest through him Your religion

and the way of Your Prophet

until nothing from the truth remains hidden

from any human being.

O Allah, we earnestly desire from You

an honored state

through which You strengthen Islam and its people

and degrade hypocrisy and its followers.

And make us in it

amongst the inviters towards Your obedience

and the leaders to Your path

give us through it

honor of the world and the Hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم وصلي على وليّ امرك القائم المؤمل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والعدل المنتظر وحُفه بملائكتك المقربين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأيده بروح القدس يا رب العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اجعله الداعي إلى كتابك والقائم بدينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
استخلفه في الأرض كما استخلفت الذين من قبله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مكِن له دينه الذي ارتضيته
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابدله من بعد خوفه امناً يعبدك لا يُشرك بك شيئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اعزه واعزز به وانصره وانتصر به
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانصره نصراً وافتح له فتحاً يسيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واجعل له من لدنك سلطاناً نصيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اظهر به دينك وسُنة نبيّك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حتى لا يستخفى بشي من الحق مخافة احد من الخلق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إنا نرغب إليك في دولة كريمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُعز بها الإسلام واهله وتُذل بها النفاق واهله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتجعلنا فيها من الدعاة إلى طاعتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والقادة إلى سبيلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وترزقنا بها كرامة الدنيا والأخرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, what You have made known to us of the truth

help us bear it

and what we fall short

make us reach it.

O Allah, through him

put order in our affairs

gather and unite our flocks

join together our separations

increase our minority

lift us from degradation

relieve our miseries

pull us out of our debts

remove our poverty

fill the gaps in our confusion

ease our difficulties

brighten our faces

free our prisoners

grant our requests

fulfil our promises

answer our calls

grant us our requests

cause us to obtain what we hope for

from this world and the hereafter

and give us more than our expectations.

O the best of all who are asked

and the most generous of bestowers

through him, cleanse our chests

remove the stains of anger and hatred from our hearts

and guide us to the truth on disputed matters

By Your permission

Surely You guide whom You wish to the right path

through him help us to overcome Your enemy

and our enemy

O God of truth, Ameen.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم ما عرفتنا من الحق فحملناه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما قصرنا عنه فبلغناه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اللمم به شعثنا واشعب به صدعنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وارتُق به فتقنا وكثر به قلتنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعزز به ذلتنا واغن به عائلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واقض به عن مغرمنا واجبر به فقرنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسُد به خلتنا ويسّر به عُسرنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبيض به وجوهنا وفُك به اسرنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانجح به طلبتنا وانجز به مواعيدنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واستجب به دعوتنا واعطنا به سؤلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبلغنا به من الدنيا والأخرة امالنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعطنا به فوق رغبتنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا خير المسؤولين واوسع المُعطين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اشف به صُدورنا واذهب به غيظ قلوبنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واهدنا به لِما اختلف فيه من الحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بإذنك إنك تهدي من تشاء إلى صراط مستقيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وانصرنا به على عدوك وعدونا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إله الحق أمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, we complain to You

of the absence of our Prophet

Your blessings be on him and his family,

the concealment of our leader

the abundance of our enemies

the scarcity of our numbers

the severity of our trials

and the victory of the era against us.

So bless Muhammad and his family

and help us overcome that by,

granting us an immediate victory

dispersing miseries

giving us a help that strengthens

providing an authority of truth which You manifest

a mercy from You which is clear to us

and a well­being from You which clothes us

by Your mercy O most merciful.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إنا نشكوا إليك فقد نبيّنا صلواتك عليه وأله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وغيبة وليّنا وكثرة عدوّنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقلة عددنا وشدة الفِتن بنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتظاهر الزمان علينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فصل على محمد وأله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعنا على ذلك بفتح منك تُعجله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبضُر تكشفه ونصر تُعزه وسُلطان حق تُظهره
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورحمة منك تُجللناها وعافية منك تُلبسناها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
برحمتك يا ارحم الراحمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Du'a no. 5
----------

The rewards and tortures awaiting human beings are described vividly for
the believer to be able to visualize them. It is not enough to only
rationally believe in the Hereafter. Just as it is recommended to
imagine oneself dying in order to prepare for death with certainty, it
is also necessary to imagine oneself in Heaven or Hell for a
strengthening of faith in the Hereafter.

This Du'a talks about the pleasures of Jannat (Paradise) and the
punishments in Jahannam (Hell). Belief in the hereafter is the last
important root of religion and the Du'a is a befitting follow up of Du'a
al­-Iftitah which talks about the other roots of faith.

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

O Allah bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad.

O Allah, by Your mercy,

include us with the virtuous,

raise us to be with the distinguished people,

make us drink a cup of water

from the spring of salsabeel,

pair us with houris, by Your mercy,

give us the service of the young heavenly helpers,

well groomed like pearls,

feed us with the fruits of Paradise,

and the flesh of birds

and clothe us with robes of thick brocade of silk and gold.

Grant us the benefits,

of the night of power,

and the pilgrimage to Your sacred house,

and of dying in Your way.

Answer our prayers, and requests,

which are good.

And when You gather the people,

of the earlier and later periods ,

on the Day of Judgement,

have mercy on us,

write for us a protection from the fire,

do not confine us to Hell,

try us not with Your punishment and disgrace,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد وأل محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم برحمتك في الصالحين فادخلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي علييّن فارفعنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبكأس من معين من عين سلسبيل فاسقنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن الحور العين برحمتك فزوجنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن الولدان المُخلدين كأنهم لؤلؤ مكنون فاخدمنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن ثمار الجنة ولُحوم الطير فاطعمنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن ثياب السُندس والحرير والإستبرق فالبسنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وليلة القدر وحج بيتك الحرام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقتلاً في سبيلك فوفق لنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصالح الدعاء والمسئلة فاستجب لنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا جمعت الأولين والأخرين يوم القيامة فارحمنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبرائة من النار فاكتب لنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي جهنم فلا تغُلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي عذابك وهوانك فلا تبتلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

feed us not from the bitter tree,

nor the thorny fruit (of Hell),

do not place us with the devils,

nor throw us face downwards in Hell,

and do not clothe us with the flames and tar of Hell.

Save us from all evil,

O (one who),there is no god but You,

for the sake of there being no god but You,

save us.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن الزقوم والضريع فلا تُطعمنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومع الشياطين فلا تجعلنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي النار على وجوهنا فلا تكببنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن ثياب النار وسرابيل القطران فلا تلبسنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كل سوء يا لا إله إلا أنت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بحق لا إله إلا أنت فنجّنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Du'a no. 6
----------

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad.

O Allah, I beseech You to place,

in what You destine and decree,

from the orders which are definite,

and orders which are wise,

from the decree which is not reversed nor changed,

write my name as one of the pilgrims of Your sacred house,

whose Hajj is approved,

whose efforts are appreciated,

whose sins are forgiven,

and whose evil deeds are pardoned.

And place for me,

in what You destine and decree,

a lengthening of my life,

in goodness and health,

and an increase in my sustenance.

Make me among those through whom,

You support Your religion,

not substituting any in my place.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على محمد وأل محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني اسئلك أن تجعل فيما تقضي وتُقدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من الأمر المحتوم في الأمر الحكيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من القضاء الذي لا يُرد ولا يُبدل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن تكتبني من حُجاج بيتك الحرام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المبرور حجُهم المشكور سعيهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المغفور ذنوبهم المُكفر عن سيئاتهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأن تجعل فيما تقضي وتقدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن تطيل عمري في خير وعافية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتوسع في رزقي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتجعلني ممن تنتنصر به لدينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تستبدل بي غيري
  </p>
</blockquote>

Du'a no. 7
----------

***In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

I seek refuge with the majesty of Your gracious self.

from the passing of the month of Ramadhan,

or the appearance of the dawn of this night,

while I still have a duty I have not carried out,

or a sin that You may punish me for.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أعوذ بجلال وجهك الكريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن ينقضي عني شهر رمضان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أو يطلع الفجر من ليلتي هذه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولك قبلي تبعة أو ذنب تُعذبني عليه
  </p>
</blockquote>


