Rituals for Just before (Ehtezar) and Immediately After Death
=============================================================

Let us create a scenario in which you are sitting in front of a very
sick friend or a relative whom you have come to visit. He/she is alone
in the house. You are the only other person present. Suddenly you see
him/her struggling for breath. He/she is taking his/her last breath!
Dying! The color of his/her face is changing. He is said to be in
*Saqarat* - the pain of death. Gradually, he/she stops breathing and is
dead. What should you be doing as required by the *Shariah* while the
person is in the course of dying and soon after death?  
    
 I am not aware of the legal requirements here in Canada. Therefore, I
will leave it to you to find out.  
  

Before the Death, During the Saqarat ul Mawt
--------------------------------------------

   
 a)      Move the dying person to face *Qibla* in such a position that
the soles of his/her feet face *Qibla*. In other words, if he/she were
to sit upright his/her face would face *Qibla*.  
 b)      Recite the *Shahadah* and make him/her repeat it. It should
cover *Tawhid /Nubuwwat/ Imamat* and make him/her recite dua for
*Istighfar* to ask forgiveness from Allah for his/her sins.  
 c)      Recite *Surah Yasin*, *Wassafat*, *Ayatul Qursi* and other
Ayats from the Qur'an to ease the moments of *Saqarat*.  
  

Right After the Death
---------------------

** **  
 d)      Close the eyes and the mouth of the dead person.  
 e)      Stretch his/her arms along his/her sides and keep his/her legs
straight.  
 f)        Cover his/her body with a sheet of cloth.  
 g)      Inform his/her *Wali* or next of kin (if *wali* is not present)
to come immediately.  
 h)      Recite the Qur'an until the body is taken away for *Ghusl
Mayyit.*  
    
 The *Wali*, the personal representative appointed by the deceased in
his/her *will* or next of kin is personally responsible for all the
after death rituals. His prior permission is necessary before any other
person(s) can handle the body.  
  


