Introduction
============

There was a great upheaval, a veritable revolution at Medina on the
death of the Pro- phet.

Muhammad had not left the community in any doubt as to the person who
was to suc- ceed him in the spiritual and temporal headship of Islam.

He had often, notably at Ghadir Khumm on the occasion of his return
journey from the last hajj, declared in unequivocable terms that \`Ali
would succeed him, and on this occasion, he formally announced his
appoint- ment as his successor.

But there was a party among his companions who were determined to seize
power and place their own man on the throne.

How they achieved their object is fully described in this book: "The
Political Upheaval at Medina on the Death of Muhammad, the Prophet of
Islam." by Aqa Muhammad Sultan Mirza, District and Sessions Judge,
(Retd.).

The Book is concerned chiefly with analysing and criticising the theory
on the basis of which the so-called election was arranged at Saqifah.

This theory is the dogmatic assertion, supported nei- ther by facts nor
by logic, that the Prophet of Islam did not designate anyone as his
successor.

From this they wanted the people to conclude that their meeting at
Saqifah to select a successor of the Prophet was not only quite
justified but was also absolutely necessary. All the rewards and
allurements that a ruling fiction can offer and all the threats and
punishments that are in its power were employed to weave this idea into
the warp and woof of the very existence of the Islamic Nation.

To give it greater security and immunity from criticism, it has been
taken into the fold of religion. But after all, the fact remains that
this is purely a question of history.

and must be treated as such. It is the first con- cern of the
historians of Islam to describe the constitution of the Islamic State
founded by Muhammad; and how the head of a State is to be appointed, is
the chief question relating to the constitution of that State.

It has been proved in this treatise that the arrangement by which the
head of the State was appointed at Saqifah was neither open election nor
honest selection.

An appeal is made to impartial historians, un- hindered by
considerations of religion and un- mindful of noisy propaganda, to
examine this assertion and theory critically in the light of proved
facts and dictates of sound reason, and give their own finding,
regardless of all con- siderations, political, religious or social.

That his "loving" companions left the dead body of the Prophet to take
part in the meeting at Saqifah, that his relatives including \`Ali
remained by his side, overwhelmed by the great calamity that had
befallen the whole nation,

that he died before noon on Monday and was not buried till late at
night on Wednesday according to some 1 and till late at night on Tuesday
according to a minority including Mawlawi Shibli,

2 that his funeral was not taken through the town to a secluded place
in the graveyard and that on this occasion also as on other similar
disputed occa- sions Abu Bakr came out with an alleged saying of the
Prophet which no one else had heard and which has no rationalistic basis
that Prophets are buried at the very place where they die, 3 and that,
therefore, he was buried in the hujrah (room) of Abu Bakr's daughter,

\`A'ishah, are clear indications that all was not well, and that there
was something wrong somewhere. This book discloses what that something
was and where it was wrong.

It must be patent to every student of History that some of those
historical facts the correctness of which had for centuries been
considered as finally established were eventually discovered to be
incorrect,

but that it was only when the causes that had given rise to them had
ceased to exist, and the passions and prejudices that had nursed them
had subsided.

He often finds crystals of historical truth lying concealed in the
layers of falsehood accumulated through centuries of religious
fanaticism, personal pre- judices or state policies of rulers who had
gained the throne after a struggle, open or secret, but not based on
right and justice.

Their first neces- sity is to gain control of History and Propaganda,
and stiffle any the slightest voice that is or may be raised in favour
or sympathy of their defeated rivals. A criticism of their policy, nay,
even of their daily movements and actions is taken to be an offence
against State to be atoned for with nothing less than life.

This has been the govern- ing principle of politicians from the age of
Hannibal to the days of Hitler, and this in spite of that much-talked-of
boon called Modern Civilisation which is held to be the last word on all
that is best and wisest in Man. That great historian of Muslim Spain,
Dr. J. A.

Conde, has laid down a maxim of universal application which may serve
as a guide to all who want to write impartial history, and have an
ambition to occupy the position of an impartial judge of the Past. He
says:

"A sort of fatality attaching itself to human affairs would seem to
command that in the relation of historical events those of the highest
importance should descend to posterity through the justly suspected
channels of narrations writ- ten by the conquering parties.

The mutation of empires, the most momentous revolutions and the
overthrow of the most renowned dynasties seem all to be liable to this
disadvantage; it was by the Romans that the history of their own
aggrandisement was written;

the narration of their rivalry and sanguinary wars with the
Carthaginians has come down to us from them- selves; or if Greek writers
have also treated the subject, these men were the tributaries and
dependants of Rome, nor did they spare the flatteries best calculated to
conciliate her favour.

Scipio thus appears to us the most admirable of heroes, but is not that
in part because the history of his life is the work of his admirers and
flat- terers? 1t is true that the noble and illustrious Hannibal cannot
look otherwise than great and glorious even in the narratives of his
mortal enemies,

but if the implacable hatred and aggressive policy of Rome had not
commanded the destruction of all the Punic annals, the renowned African
general would doubtless ap- pear to us under an aspect differing much
from that presented by the ruthless barbarian, des- cribed by Livy and
accepted by his readers as the portrait of Hannibal., ,4

What a striking resemblance with the early history of the khilafah
(caliphate) and its heroes, which was the result of a struggle between
two parties, one of which won the throne by a very clever coup d'etat.

Under the circumstances, it is apparent, as Conde goes on to remark
that "a sound and just discrimination forbids us to content ourselves
with the testimony of one side only, this requires that we compare the
rela- tions of both parties with careful impartiality, and commands us
to cite them with no other purpose than that of discovering the
truth."

It is really very strange that the European writers on Islamic History
have entirely lost sight of this wholesome axiom based on mere com mon
sense, and have accepted, with credulity almost criminal,

the version of the events of that troublous period as published by the
party that had won the throne and displaced the rightful heirs by means
of a very skilfully planned coup d'etat giving rise to a fierce and long
drawn struggle between the two parties and their representatives, in
which one party had almost always the upper hand.

And this in spite of their knowing, or having enough material at their
disposal to know the following facts: The appointment of a successor to
the Prophet at Saqifah Bani Sa'idah was not an open, sincere and
peaceful affair.

It was a very skillfully arranged scheme to capture the throne after
the death of the Prophet. That it was nei- ther open and sincere nor
peaceful is apparent from both (a) direct and (b) circumstantial
evidence.


