A. Direct Evidence
==================

i) As soon as the Islamic movement entered its first stage of
expansion, meeting and defeat- ing the rival forces in the open field,
it became clear to all thinking persons that an Islamic State was in the
making.

This idea grew in strength with time, and took possession of the mind
of ambitious spirits; ii) The utterances of the Prophet and his conduct
combined with the outstanding person- ality of \`Ali and his services in
the cause of Islam particularly his feats in the field of battle had not
left any doubt that he had been marked out by the Prophet as his
successor in the spiritual and temporal office.

There was another party which, as \`Umar ibn al-Khattab rightly said 6
was bitterly opposed to this combination of nubuwwah (prophecy) and
khilafah in one family, as they were averse to the rise, over other
tribes, of one family, which looked to them un-precendented and
intolerable.

This combined with the ambitious rivalry and jealousy of some and the
personal hatred against \`Ali of others whose.

relatives he had killed in the battles of Islam and who did not like
his extreme zeal in the cause of Islam gave rise to a very noisy and
powerful party against the house of the Prophet as represented by
\`Ali.

There was a third party of rich and i nfluential people who expected,
as their birth right, a preferential treatment at the hands of the
Caliph, and who rightly surmised that \`Ali was not the proper person in
this respect, as he would never sacrifice his principles of justice and
equity for their sake, in fact, for any one's sake.

Naturally enough, this party wanted a pliant ruler who should pander to
their wishes, and treat them as privileged people superior to the common
run of men. All these factors joined together to give birth to a very
powerful faction against \`Ali; they had their own designs on the
throne.

Though open opposition to the Prophet was impossible during his life,
yet they were not entirely inactive even then. They tried secretly to
secure adherents to their cause by taking advantage of every event that
took place.

They pointed to the conduct and the utterances of the Prophet which
appeared to them as giving undue preference to \`Ali, they criticised
the conduct of the Prophet when he confided his secrets to \`Ali at an
exclusive meeting with him, 7 their mur- murings amounted almost to open
revolt when the Prophet passed a general order requiring all the
companions whose houses opened into the mosque, except \`Ali to close
their doors.

These were thus shut out of the mosque, and the exception was galling
to them.8 The members of this clique took a great advantage of this
event to spread disaffection among the companions and to secure
adherents to their cause.

They went to the extent of expressly disobeying the commands of the
Prophet which seemed to them as creating opportunities for the smooth
succession of \`Ali.

They did not hesitate to plan the death of the Prophet. They could not
con ceal their chagrin, and bitterly criticised his last speech at
Ghadir Khumm holding up \`Ali to the sight of a huge gathering as his
successor. The Prophet himself was aware of the existence of this very
powerful faction among his compan- ions.

The Qur'anic verse hints at the existence of a party to whom the
succession of \`Ali was distasteful, and for that reason they were
prepared to go to the extent of causing harm to the Prophet.

iii) The attempts of this party to foil the efforts of the Prophet that
were intended to provide means for the peaceful succession of \`Ali.
Clear instances of these attempts are recorded in History.

During his last illness, the Prophet thought that \`Ali might succeed
peace- fully if these ambitious members and leaders of this party were
out of Medina at the time of his death. He, therefore, ordered all his
compan- ions except \`Ali and Banu Hashim to go out and join the army
under Usamah ibn Zayd that was to invade the Roman territory to avenge
the defeat and death of Zayd, father of Usamah. It appears that this
punitive expedition had been postponed for this occasion
intentionally.

The leaders of the opposite party were shrewd enough to realise the
significance of this expedi- tion at this juncture, and refused to go.
The Prophet continued urging the need of immediate march, but they kept
evading the orders.

They did not move out, and the Prophet died.10 Another instance of this
criminal and un- abashed disobedience of the express orders of the
Prophet came during the same illness when the Prophet expressed his wish
to write a will appointing \`Ali as his successor.

The leaders of this opposition party prohibited the people from
supplying the writing material to the Prophet, saying that the Prophet
was delirious and talking non-sense.11 It is significant that Abu Bakr
wrote his last will when he was so ill that he fainted during the
dictation, so much so that \`Uthman who was scribing the will wrote the
name of \`Umar ibn Khattab in the will while Abu bakr was unconscious,

fearing lest he might not regain conscious and die without completing
the will.12 This shows the extent to which the members of this party
were prepared to go.

They would not hesitate even to forge a will and foist it upon the
nation. On that occasion the charge of ravings of a diseased brain was
not levelled. On the other hand, \`Umar ibn al-Khat- tab himself took
out the document and forced the people to declare allegiance to what was
writ- ten in it, with out announcing the contents.

13 iv) At the meeting of the Sagifah where the Caliph was to be
"elected,"' Ali and his relatives, in fact Banu Hashim were not invited
not even informed of it. 14


v) The possibility of a necessity arising to use force at the meeting
at the Saqifah was not lost sight of by the actors of the Coup, and had
been amply provided for. They had an armed force in Banu Sulaym ready
for the occasion; and when the altercations reached a critical stage,
they did intervene. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab says that he was not sure of
his success until the armed force of Banu Sulaym had arrived on the
scene. 15 vi) The ansar (Helpers) were not averse to 'Ali's succeeding
the Prophet; but the deeds and intrigues of the Opposition party of the
muhaji- run (Immigrants) had convinced them that they would never accept
\`Ali and would get their own man placed on the throne. The ansar, could
not, of course, tolerate this. They were, therefore, forced to set up
their own man, Sa'd ibn \` Ubadah as a candidate for the caliphate. They
23 were not the first to move in the matter; long before they collected
at the Saqifah, Abu Bakr had asked the people to come and elect a caliph
from among themselves. This election speech was given just after the
death of the Prophet when the speaker returned from his house at as-Sunh
and saw his associate biding time by declaring, sword in hand, that he
would kill anyone who would say that the Prophet had died. It is said
that \`Umar's extreme love for the Prophet caused him this loss of his
senses. But this ebullition of exuberant love subsided at the sight of
his comrade Abu Bakr, and then both of them went to the Saqifah as if,
to use the words of Shibli, nothing had happened. 16 It seems that after
this temporary politic loss, the senses returned with a vengeance.
Shibli is forced to admit that this seeming loss was not due to any
softer feelings, but that it was a political move to~arrest the news of
the Prophet's 24 death from spreading.17 All this is a clear proof of
the fact that this opposition party of the muhajirun and not the ansar
were the first to move in the matter and start opposition against \`Ali.
The ansar stood up, not to oppose \`Ali but to present a front against
this party. The fact that after the people had been tricked or coerced
into paying homage to the candidate of this party the ansar accepted the
fait accompli and did not rise in revolt against the established
authority who used all means in his power to guard against this
eventuality has more explana- tions than one and is quite irrelevant in
the present discussion. vii) This opposition party laid their plans very
carefully and moved very cautiously. They foresaw possible lines of
friction, and proceeded to smooth their way all round. They had their
spies among the ansar, and had also tried to sow 25 dissentions among
them. The speeches and the defections that took place in the meeting at
the Saqifah clearly indicate that this policy of creating divisions
among the enemy succeeded very well. viii) After the so-called election
at the Saqifah, there was a bitter controversy, nay, open hostility,
between the ansar and the muha- jirun over the question of outsing \`Ali
from the caliphate, and \`Ali took the part of the ansar. ix) The
so-called election was defective in many material points; it was not
representative, no intimation of it had been given to the nation not
even to the persons about whom every body knew that their leader had the
best right to the khilafah and had been selected for it by the Prophet.
26 x) The election was, therefore, neither unanimous nor complete; Banu
Hashim, Banu Umayyad, Banu Zuhrah, Zubayr, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, \`Abd
ar-Rahman ibn Awf, \`Utbah ibn Abi Lahab, Khalid ibn Saeed ibn al-'As,
al- Migdad ibn \`Amr, Salman al-Farsi, 'Ammar ibn Yasir, al-Buraa ibn
\`Azib, Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Sa\` d ibn \`Ubadah and his party all declined
to do homage to Abu Bakr. These persons occupied high positions in the
nation. xi) The first care, therefore of the opposi- tion which was now
the Government Party was to win these persons over by threats or entice-
ments and both were used in abundance. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab went with
sword and fire towards the house of \`Ali, and threatened to burn the
house over them if they did not come out and pay homage to the Caliph.
It was reminded to him that Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet 27 was
also in that house. He replied, "Let her be, I do not mind."19 He also
went to the mosque where those reluctant people had collected, and beat
them into submission. 20 \` Ali went to the Caliph, but did not do the
homage, though others had been terrified into submission. xii) The
allurements offered by the Govern- ment were not less effective. The
Caliph sent valuable gifts to win over the people to his side; most of
them accepted them, but we hear of a widow who disdainfully refused to
sell her conscience to them. 21 xiii) The arguments that were made at
tlic Saqifah at the time of the so-called "election\* were concerned
solely with the question whether the Caliph should be selected out of
the muha- jirun or out of the ansar; they mentioned neither the good of
the State as the criterion or aim of 28 the election nor the abilities
of any candidate. The wishes of the Prophet were not even hinted at. All
this shows beyond all doubt that the party interest and not the good of
the State was the object on which they had set their heart. xiv) During
his Caliphate, \`Umar ibn al-Kha- ttab heard the unpleasant news of a
man saying that when \`Umar would die, they would win the Caliphate for
\`Ali by the same contrivance by which Abu Bakr had been placed on the
throne. This was too unpleasant to be entertain- ed even in thought;
this set him thinking, and he came to the conclusion that though the hit
had secured the boundary for him, yet that it was neither lawful nor
reasonable and had set a dangerous example. He, therefore, ascended the
pulpit, and gave a long harangue enlarging on the defects of this coup.
He summed up his lecture with the order that if 29 anyone resorted to
that sort of contrivance in favour of anyone, both that man and his
candidate should be slain outright. 22 No better commentary on the
nature and utility of so- called election proceedings can be imagined.
The author himself condemns his own work. B.

