B. Circumstantial Evidence
==========================

i) The effort of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab to check the news of the
Prophet's death from spreading, as he was not just then ready, his
associate Abu Bakr being at as-Sunk, is very material in this enquiry.

As soon as the latter arrived, he at once started to put his plans into
action. His imagination conjured up before his eyes a rally of 'Ali's
friends before he himself was ready.

ii) The speech of Abu Bakr on his arrival was altogether a party
speech, and not a bemoaning oration. He chastised the people for
mourning over the loss of their Prophet and Benefactor; and invited them
to select a successor.

iii) When they all were collected round the dead body of the Prophet,
one of the spies appointed for the purpose came, and concealing himself
behind a wall called \`Umar ibn al-Khat- tab alone to himself, and
informed him that the meeting at the Saqifah to nominate a Caliph had
started.23

iv) \`Umar kept the news a secret from all except Abu Bakr whom he took
with himself and both started towards Saqifah.

On the way, Abu \`Ubaydah ibn Jarrah met them as if by appointment. Of
all the muhajirun, these three persons alone were present at the Saqifah
meeting. 24 On the way, two more spies met and gave them the news of the
Sagifah.

v) The next important factor is the place of the meeting. Saqifah was
an out-of-the-way place where dacoits, ruffians and women mon gers used
to assemble and contrive means for the execution of their nefarious
projects.

It was at a distance from the mosque of the Prophet and his house. See
how the plan is being kept secret from 'Ali and his relatives. The whole
idea was to inflict it upon him as a fait accompli.

vi) The time chosen for action was in keeping with this plan. They knew
the lofty nature of 'Ali and his high ideals. They were perfectly sure
that 'Ali would not leave the dead body of the Prophet to join in the
race for worldly, sordid gains.

vii) Had it been a frank, open and honest election or selection, they
would have waited till the obsequies were over, and then would have
invited the whole nation to a common meeting place, preferably the
mosque where such political meetings had taken place before, and were
taken after this incident.

There was no immediate need. They ought to have suggested to the ansar
the advisibility of attending first to the funeral of the Prophet.

viii) The most important point to note in this connection is that they
anticipated the eventuality of using force, and made arrange- ments for
it.

ix) The coup was over, in the heat and haste of the moment, the people
had done homage to Abu Bakr; now they found time to repent at leisure
when the right and the wrong of the matter began to dawn upon them; they
began to blame each other for acting hastily and falling a prey to the
machinations of a party.

This was to be provided against, and it was done. Hastily and en masse,
they were sent out on foreign expeditions which developed into Persian
and Roman wars.

It was in consonance. with Arab nature; Arabs were passionately fond of
women, loot and fighting, and this happy stroke of statesmanship
provided them with all they wanted. There was a bit of pass-time nearer
home as well.

Some of the tribes did not acknowledge Abu Bakr to be the rightful
Caliph; they therefore, refused to pay him zakat which was in the nature
of a tax. This was a dangerous beginning which might develop into a
poisonous growth.

But a mere denial of zakat cannot be a good cause for killing a Muslim.
It was, there- fore, given out that they were renegades from Islam.

It was not an organised rebellion, and those people were speedily
over-come. But the armies were not allowed to come to Medina. While they
were on the way, they were ordered to invade Persia and Rome, though
these count- ries had given no cause for this action.

Such Imperialistic wars are not permitted in Islam. But to avoid
internal trouble, they had to be undertaken. This is a contrivance which
has been very often adopted by statesmen in similar circumstances.

In the face of this overwhelming evidence, it would be sheer folly to
deny the following facts which are fully established:-

1. The succession to the Prophet was a disputed one;

2. There were distinctly two parties to this dispute. One party put
forth \`Ali as the rightful claimant to the succession by virtue of his
ability, kinship with the Prophet and his desig- nation by the Prophet
as his heir and successor; the other party headed by certain leaders had
an eye on the throne.

3. Various causes which have been detailed in the book contributed to
the success of this latter party. They captured the Caliphate by means
of the coup which has been mentioned above.

Henceforth, naturally enough, their main concern was to keep down the
rival party by any means, fair or foul. For this purpose, the first
thing that they did was to divide the Muslim nation into two factions,
(i) Compa- nions, and (ii) Ahlu'1-bayt, that is, the descen- dants of
the Prophet.

The Government party identified itself with the Companions, and tried
to win over all the companions by this move.

They won them over to their side by represent- ing to them that if the
ruling power was once acquired by \`Ali it would remain in the family of
the Prophet, and they would never be able to get it, but that if it were
confined to them alone, everyone of them might hope to get it in his
turn.

During the proceedings at Saqifah the question of ability and fitness
was not allow- ed to come in. In short, the children of the Prophet were
from the very beginning con- sidered as a rival party and throughout the
period of the Caliphate were treated as such.


