Preface
=======

Ever since man has attempted to determine his relation to the external
world, the formulation of world view has been a central problem of
philosophic thought. The author's aim is to present the world view of
Islamic philosophy against the backdrop of other views presented by
modern Western philosophy, especially Marxism.

Two issues are involved in the difference between world views:

The first one relates to realistic and idealistic conceptions of the
world. Realism believes in the existence of an objective reality
independent of mind, while for idealism reality can be only mental. The
second issue involves two separate outlooks within realism: materialism
and theological realism. Materialism regards sensible matter as the
common ground of all existence including mind and consciousness.
Theological realism (hitherto referred to as 'realism')goes beyond
matter and asserts the existence of an eternal and infinite cause as the
primary cause of all phenomena, including the mental and the material
realms.

Correction of Some Errors: Here, it is necessary to correct the
misconceptions n of some modern writers. The first of these errors is to
consider the conflict between theology and materialism as the one
between idealism and realism, as if theological thought advocated
idealism and materialism was the only representative of realism.

The second is the accusation that the theistic world view attributes
every phenomenon to a supernatural cause and thus makes science
impossible by completely eliminating causality and law from the realm of
nature. This accusation is false, because theology considers God as a
cause transcending nature, as a power above nature and matter. This
error involves a misunderstanding of the place of the transcendent cause
in the causal chain.

The third error is that of identifying spirituality with idealism,
whereas spirituality can be considered as an attribute of idealism as
well realism; it has a different meaning in each of these outlooks.

Thus there are three kinds of world views: idealism, materialism and
theological realism. Idealism was studied in Part 1, while discussing
the theory of knowledge. Materialism and theological realism will be
studied in this part.

A Clarification: At the outset a number of points have to be clarified.
Firstly, what is the basic feature that distinguishes all the various
versions of materialism from theological realism, making them two
conflicting schools? The answer is that the basic distinguishing feature
of materialism is its denial that there is anything beyond the scope and
realm of experimental science. Both the theologian and the materialist
accept the findings and formulations of science, but they differ over
the issue that there is an immaterial realm of existence beyond the
realm of experiment and sensible phenomena. The materialist considers
natural causation revealed by experiments as the sole ground of all
existence, including mind and consciousness. The theological realist, on
the contrary, regards the knowing subject and its knowledge as being of
an immaterial nature. Further, theological realism asserts that the
developments and movements studied by science are, in the ultimate
analysis, attributable to a cause transcending nature and the material
world. The materialist denies this and claims that no immaterial or
transcendent causes are revealed in the field of experiment; nature is
dynamic, autonomous, self-sufficient and self-contained.

It is clear that there is no dispute between theology and materialism
with regard to scientific truths. The theologian admits all scientific
truths; he just admits other truths and asserts the existence of a
primary, non-sensible and immaterial cause of nature's movements and
phenomena.

Secondly, if the conflict between theology and materialism is that of
affirmation and negation, which of the two schools is responsible for
giving evidence in favour of its position? The theologian must offer
reasons for his affirmation and the materialist for his negation, for
absolute denial like absolute affirmation requires proof. The
materialist, by his absolute denial, in fact asserts that he has
examined the entire realm of being and not found any immaterial cause in
it.

Now a second question arises : What kind of evidence that can be?

The answer is that the evidence for the affirmation or for the denial
must be based on reason, not on sense experience. This is contrary to
the materialist view, which considers sense experience as its evidence
and claims that the propositions of metaphysics and theology cannot in
general be verified by sense experience and that an analysis of
experience and nature does not reveal the existence of immaterial
things. Now if materialism is correct in its claim that sense experience
and science do not constitute a proof for the propositions of theology,
then neither can they be proof for its absolute negation. Moreover, the
truths of science are not the subject of disputation between theology
and materialism. For the disputation relates rather to the philosophical
interpretation of these truths which asserts the existence of a cause
transcending the limits of sense experience. It is clear that sense
experience cannot be considered as a proof for the negation of a truth
outside its own limits.

Science does not affirm the materialist view of the world. All the
truths uncovered by science leave room for the assumption of a cause
above matter. Scientific experimentation cannot prove that matter is not
created by an immaterial cause. Therefore, the proof in support of
materialism cannot be based on scientific truths or sense experience.
Rather, materialism is a philosophic interpretation of experience and
scientific truths, in the same way as theological realism is; both of
them give different interpretations to the findings of science. The
soundness of these interpretations cannot be established on the basis of
sense experience.

This leads us to a third question: If scientific experimentation is not
sufficient by itself for deciding the issue, is there any other means
available to the human mind? Al-Sadr's answer is that human reason is
sufficient for studying this issue, in the same way as it studies all
scientific issues in the light of primary rational knowledge, which is
independent of experience. Thus the method adopted by theological
realism in demonstrating its propositions is ultimately the same method
by which we prove all scientific truths and laws.


