Matter and Philosophy
=====================

The above discussion related to the necessity of the efficient cause of
the world in relation to matter as conceived by science. Thereafter,
al-Sadr proposes to examine the question in the light of the
philosophical conception of matter. By 'philosophical matter' he means
the most primary matter of the world, whether or not experimental
science is able to posit it. Philosophical matter is matter simpler than
scientific matter and has a form. Its existence can be demonstrated
philosophically.

Atomic physics posited Democritean atomism, the theory that bodies are
not continuous and are composed of minute atoms. But there is a
philosophical side to the Democritean theory which is rejected by
philosophy. Philosophically, according to al-Sadr, the unit of matter
posited by science must be continuous, for it cannot be a real unit
without internal continuity.

At the same time, on account of its continuity, it should be capable of
division and separation. That is, the unit must have a simple matter
which is receptive to division and separation. Matter, therefore, is
that which is receptive to division and separation, which are
destructive of unity. Philosophically, it is not possible to conceive a
unit without the receptivity to division, regardless of the ability of
scientific tools and methods to affect such a division. The discovery of
the so-called fundamental particles as the primary units of matter does
not settle the question as to whether or not they are receptive to
division.

When the philosophical conception of matter, as something composed of
matter and form is understood, we know, according to al-Sadr, that
philosophical matter cannot be the first cause of the world.


