Matter and Motion
=================

Matter is in continuous motion and constant development. Can the same
thing be simultaneously a subject of motion and a cause of it?

Metaphysics insists on the multiplicity of the mover and the moved,
because motion (i.e. growth) is a gradual development and completion of
a deficient thing. A deficient thing cannot be the cause of its own
completion. In the light of this, the cause of developmental motion is
not matter itself, but a cause transcending matter that imparts to
matter linear motion and gradual development. Here it should be noted
that al-Sadr does not attempt to distinguish between different kinds of
motion, such as simple mechanical motion and organic growth.

Dialectical materialism, on the contrary, does not recognize this
duality between the mover and the moved, and considers matter itself as
the cause of its motion and development. From the viewpoint of theology,
there are no actual contradictions contained in matter. The internal
content of matter is empty of everything except receptivity and
capacity. Motion is a gradual departure from potentiality to actuality.
Matter is not the cause of motion, for it is devoid of the levels of
completion attained in the various stages of development. It is,
therefore, necessary to search for the cause of the substantial motion
of matter outside its limits.

It is also necessary that this cause be God, the Exalted, Who
encompasses essentially all the ranks of completion and perfection.

Al-Sadr then calls our attention to the digestive and circulatory
systems which provide proper nutrients to every one of the billions of
cells in the body. In the same way, he calls attention to the eye and
the apparatus of vision as a proof of the design of a supreme
intelligence.

He points out that experimental biology has failed to explain the
origin of life upon the earth. He asks whether the astonishing work of
the genes, which control the character of every cell and bestow
particular traits to an organism, could be products of haphazard chance.
He discusses various theories of animal instinct and finds all of them
in- adequate in explaining the wonderful behaviour of the bee, the
shark, the ant, the hen and the eel. The only adequate explanation is
that instinctive behaviour is the result of a mysterious, divine,
supernatural inspiration. The marvellous order underlying nature bears
testimony to the presence of an omniscient, omnipotent and omnipresent
intelligence.


