Dialectics
==========

In classical Greek philosophy 'dialectics' meant a specific method of
discussion in which the debate between the representatives of opposite
points of view begins from preliminaries admitted by both the sides and
proceeds until one of the points of view is affirmed or a new conclusion
is reached by the way of synthesis of formerly opposite viewpoints.

Dialectic in modem Western philosophy is not a method of discussion but
a method of explaining reality and a general law of the universe
according to which movement is a continuous development of oppositions
and contradictions, their merging and reconciliation. The idea is an old
one, foreshadowed by Empedocles (who explained change as a conflict
between the world forces of Love and Strife) and Zoroaster, and embodied
in the 'golden mean' of Aristotle, who held that "the knowledge of
opposites is one." Hegel was the first to establish a complete logic
(and metaphysics, which in Hegel is same as logic) on the basis of the
notion of dialectic.

In this logic, which is claimed to govern thought and existence, the
fundamental principle is one of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, which
involves a constant 'taking up' and reconciliation of pairs of
contradictories in higher, more comprehensive and penetrating ideas,
until finally all oppositions are overcome in the all-inclusive,
all-reconciling and all-explaining Absolute Idea.

Hegel views conception as a hierarchy of syntheses whose skeleton is
constructed of ascending triads in which seemingly antagonistic concepts
are reconciled by dialectic in higher logical concepts. The most basic
triad involving the concepts of being and non-being as thesis and
antithesis yields the synthetic concept of becoming. The ideas of
becoming and change involve the concepts of identity and difference
which are reconciled in the concept of essence. The concepts of essence
and existence, whole and part, appearance and reality are resolved in
the concepts of ground and force. The concept of force suggests those of
actuality and potentiality, whose dichotomy is reconciled in the concept
of fact. Also the notion of fact suggests those of necessity and
freedom, which are resolved in the concept of 'nature of things'

. Now we are confronted with the thesis and antithesis of substance and
its attributes or accidents. This contradiction is overcome by regarding
the substance as the cause of its attributes. Here cause contains the
effect and so cause and effect become one. Similarly final and efficient
causation are synthesized in the identity of means and end, which are
neither external to nor distinct from each other, by the concept of
process. The world-process and the Absolute are one; it is its own cause
and its own goal. Hence the actual is the ideal; on the moral plane,
value and fact are identical.

Hegel's stand on the law of contradiction is dubious. As can be seen,
the driving motive behind every Hegelian synthesis is avoidance of
contradiction; i.e. it is inspired by belief in the impossibility of
contradiction. Moreover, he holds that the nature of Reality can be
deduced from the sole consideration that it must not be
self-contradictory.

On the contrary, according to Hegel, truth and falsehood are not
sharply defined opposites, as is commonly supposed; nothing is wholly
false and nothing that we can know is wholly true. The truth is the
'whole', and nothing partial is quite true. Whatever the value of his
arbitrary analysis of concepts, it does not seem correct, on the whole,
to hold that Hegel rejects the principle of contradiction.

Hegel is one of the most confused of philosophers. His philosophy is
difficult because it is difficult to understand confusion. The Marxist
interpretations, or misinterpretations, of Hegelian dialectics have
added to this difficulty. Therefore, when al-Sadr criticizes Hegel, he
has the Marxist interpretation of Hegel before him.

Thus when we see al-Sadr charging Hegel with the complete rejection of
the principle of contradiction and with holding that contradiction is
not only the primary principle of all knowledge but the general law of
the universe, we should understand him as criticizing the Marxist
interpretation of dialectics rather than Hegel. With these remarks now
we turn to al-Sadr's criticism of Marxist dialectics.

According to the Marxists, the dialectical method is characterized by
four main points: (1) The movement of development, (2) the contradiction
of development, (3) the leaps of development, and (4) the general
linkage. These are supposed to replace the four laws of thought
recognized by formal logic: the law of identity, the law of
contradiction, the law of conversion, and the law of demonstration.
Al-Sadr then goes by one on to deal with the four points of the
dialectical logic one.


