The Movement of Development
===========================

The dialecticians reproach metaphysics and traditional logic for
considering nature in a static state of unchanging frozenness and
stagnant stability and for failing to reflect nature in its moving and
progressive reality. According to this claim, the poor metaphysician is
an unperceptive being devoid of consciousness and awareness who tails to
notice change, transformation and movement in the realm of nature.

Al-Sadr briefly recapitulates the standpoints of Greek philosophers
regarding motion. He refers to the paradoxes of Zeno (d.c. 430 B.C.)
which were arguments put forward to demonstrate the inconceiv ability of
motion and to the acceptance of motion by the Aristotelian school. The
problem is related to the manner in which motion was conceived: either
as a succession of pauses in instants of time or as a gradual advance in
which there is no pause or rest.

Islamic philosophy pictures motion as the gradual actualization of the
potentiality of a thing. Development always consists of something actual
and something potential. Thus motion continues as long as a thing
combines both actuality and potentiality, existence and possibility. It
possibility is exhausted and no capacity for a new stage remains, motion
ceases. Mulla Sadra (1572-1641) demonstrated that motion does not
pertain to the accidental surface of things but goes on inside their
very substances. Not only that, he also showed clearly that motion and
change is one of the necessary principles of metaphysics.

The accusation of the dialecticians that metaphysics views nature as
static and frozen is due to their failure to understand motion in its
proper philosophical sense. The difference between the ways metaphysics
and dialectical materialism view motion consists of these two points:

Firstly, dialectical materialism views motion as being based on
contradiction and strife among contradictories. According to the
metaphysics of Muslim philosophers motion is a progression from one
stage to an opposite stage without involving the union of these
opposites in any one of its stages.

Secondly, motion according to Marxism is not confined to external
nature but is also common to intellectual truths and ideas. On the basis
of this, there can be no absolute truths. According to Muslim
philosophers, motion and development do not intrude into the realm of
knowledge and thought.

In regard to the first point, al-Sadr quotes a passage of Engels
wherein motion is conceived as continuous succession of contradiction
and the temporary reconciliation of this contradiction. "The simplest
mechanical change in place," says Engels, "cannot, in the last analysis,
occur except by means of the presence of a certain body in a certain
place at a certain moment and in another place at the same moment.

In other words its being and non-being are simultaneously in one
place."

This shows that the Marxists have not made much progress since Zeno in
conceiving motion. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi also raised similar objections
against the gradual emergence of a thing. The Marxists however differ
from the ancient Greek philosophers in that while the latter negated
motion because it involves contradiction, the former use this conception
of motion to justify contradiction.

The alleged contradiction in motion is only due to the confusion
between potentiality and actuality. At no stage does motion involve a
specific rank in actuality and another rank in potentiality. In other
words, motion is a gradual actualization of potentiality. The confusion
in the Marxist conception of motion arises due to its considering the
entanglement of actuality and potentiality, or their union in all the
stages of motion as a union of actual opposites, a continuous
contradiction and a strife among the contradictories.

Now that motion is not the result of an inner cause in the form of
conflicting contradictories, it is also impossible for motion to be
self-sufficient or to be without an external cause that takes a thing
continuously from potentiality to actuality. Applying this idea to
material nature as a whole, al-Sadr derives a theological conclusion.
The very existence of nature is a gradual progression and continuous
departure from potentiality to actuality. Since there can be no
self-sufficiency in the form of internal contradiction, the law of
causality forces us to recognize a cause transcending the limits of
nature.

Al-Sadr then takes up the second thesis of dialectical materialism,
that dialectical change and development also occur in the realm of
thought and truth, which could not portray nature if thought did not
grow and develop dialectically like nature. "Reality grows", states a
Marxist citation, "and the knowledge that results from this reality
reflects it, grows as it grows, and becomes an effective element of its
growth." Al-Sadr rejects this dialectical picture of the movement of
thought for the two following reasons:

1. The realm of nature involves fixed laws that reflect fixed truths in
the realms of thought and knowledge. Scientific knowledge reflects the
permanent underlying the transient in nature.

2. Firstly, concepts and ideas, no matter how accurate, do not possess
the actual properties of the things to which they pertain (e.g. the idea
of radium does not emit relation). Motion is one of those properties. A
true idea, although it reflects objective reality, need not possess the
actual properties of the reality it represents. Hence the concepts of
changing things do not change in order to reflect the objective reality
of those things.

Al-Sadr then takes up the second Marxist argument intended to
demonstrate the dialectic development of thought, that knowledge is a
natural phenomenon and therefore governed by the same laws that rule
nature. It changes and grows dialectically as do all the phenomena of
nature. The laws of the dialectic apply to both matter and knowledge.

This argument rests on a pure materialistic explanation of knowledge.
Al-Sadr postpones the analysis of this view to an independent chapter,
"knowledge", at the end of the book. Here it suffices to put a question
to the Dialecticians : Is this materialistic explanation of knowledge
reserved for the thought of the dialecticians or does it extend also to
the thought of others who reject the dialectic? It becomes contradictory
for Marxists to accuse other's thought of being frozen and static; for
if the dialectic is a natural law common to both thought and nature,
then it must apply to all human thought alike.

Thirdly, al-Sadr examines the Marxist effort to produce the history of
science as an empirical evidence for the dialectical movement of
thought. Although progress and development in human knowledge is an
undeniable fact of history, this development is not a kind of motion in
the philosophic sense intended by Marxism. It is no more than an
increase in the quantity of truth and a decrease in . the quantity of
errors. When a theory moves from the level of hypothesis to that of law,
it does not mean that scientific truth has grown and altered. Al-Sadr
gives a few instances from the history of science to prove his point, He
goes on to remark that Marxism seeks to achieve two ends by applying the
dialectic to truth. First, it seeks to destroy metaphysics on which
theology rests, by holding that since truth moves and grows there can be
no fixed and absolute truth. Second, by denying absolute falsity it
seeks to make all truth relative.


