The Contradictions of Development
=================================

Here al-Sadr takes up the Marxist rejection of the law of contradiction
and the claim of dialectical materialism that all change, becoming and
development involve contradiction. He explains the meaning of the law of
contradiction and points out that no logical person can deny the
absolute validity of this law. He points out that the Marxist denial is
based on a misunderstanding of what is meant by contradiction. He
examines one by one seven instances of contradiction cited by the
Marxists, and argues that none of them involves a union of actual
contradictories. The first example is that of motion, which according to
Engels is in itself contradictory, As explained previously, there is no
contradiction in motion. The second example is that of the growth of the
living body, which, according to Engels, is at every moment itself and
something other than itself. Other examples include the contradiction:
of the positive and the negative charges, of action and reaction in
mechanics, attack and defeat, advance and retreat, victory and defeat in
war, etc. Al-Sadr disposes of all these examples by pointing out that
actual opposites are not logical contradictories and that no logical
contradiction is involved in any of these cases.

Al-Sadr points out that this compulsive urge to see contradictions in
everything has political motives. In its effort to give a reassuring
analysis of the conflict between the capitalist and the working classes,
Marx builds up a whole social philosophy on the dialectic of
contradictories that promises the ultimate collapse of capitalism and
the victory of communism.

However, the social and political application of the dialectic would
lead to its self-refutation. In the communist utopia envisioned by
Marxism, in which classes and class-conflict are abolished, social
development would also come to a halt due to the abolishment of
contradiction.

Al-Sadr sarcastically remarks that such a static and stagnant fate has
indeed overtaken the communist states, wherein the subjugation of all
thought to the official doctrine has led to intellectual repression,
stagnation, and backwardness.


