The Leaps of Development
========================

This is another idea in the Marxist ideological arsenal. According to
the dialecticians, gradual quantitative changes reach a point when the
accumulated change produces a sudden qualitative change. Hence
development is not a circular movement but a linear progression from one
qualitative stage to a new one. Moreover, they assert that this is a
general law of nature. One of the examples offered is that of some
substances, like water, which pass from solid to liquid state and from
liquid to gaseous state at specific temperatures.

Al-Sadr points out that although instantaneous leaps do occur in a
number of natural phenomena, they are by no means general and do not
hold true in the case of all phenomena (e.g. biological organisms,
language, etc.). In the example of water, experimentation does not
demonstrate that heating is a result of contradiction, nor there is any
dialectical development involved. Secondly, neither the heating up of
water nor its passage from one state to another is a linear,
irreversible progression.

Thirdly, the leap from solid to liquid state or from liquid to vapour
state does not take place suddenly for the complete mass of water
heated. Why should, then, the leap in the social sphere be imposed on
society as a whole? Finally, al-Sadr points out, the change of state of
water is as much a matter of quantitative change from the viewpoint of
science as the change in temperature. Here al-Sadr seems to refer
vaguely to the kinetic theory of heat, according to which the changes of
state are quantitatively related to the speed of molecular movement and
the force of molecular cohesion.

Al-Sadr goes on to criticize Marx's view of transformation of Surplus
value into capital as an instance of accumulated quantitative change
passing into qualitative change. Although he is right in pointing out
that money does not undergo any qualitative change by passing into
capital, his insistence that the change involved is merely verbal
amounts to ignoring a significant economic fact pointed out by Marx.


