The General Linkage
===================

Marxism, following Hegel, insists on considering nature as a whole in
which things and events are linked together organically and are
dependent on one another. No thing or event makes sense if isolated, as
allegedly done by metaphysics, from other things and events that
surround it. Martyr al-Sadr denies this allegation. Metaphysics
considers the world as completely interlinked in accordance with the law
of causality. The novelty introduced by the Marxist dialectic lies not
in the general linkage itself but in its application to political
aims.

However, two points are noteworthy in regard to the view of the theory
of general linkage held by metaphysics. First, the linkage of every part
of the universe to the causes, conditions and circumstances relevant to
it does not mean that one cannot notice or define it in an independent
manner. Second, the causal linkage among the parts of nature cannot be
circular.

Here, at the close of al-Sadr's refutation of the dialectics, which was
an attempt, albeit an unsuccessful one, to understand and interpret
historical change and indeed to bring it about it is essential to point
out that traditional Islamic philosophy as well historiography have not
paid adequate attention to historical change, which is a kind of
'macro-change' that reveals itself over extended ages and eras of time.
Western philosophy and science, at least since Hegel and Darwin, have
been keenly cognizant of historical change and development and have
tried to see beyond the immediate panorama of micro-changes of all
sorts: physical, chemical, biological, social, economic, political and
cultural.

Although al-Sadr insists that traditional metaphysics has not been
blind to change, he himself gives no clear indication of the recognition
which is due to macro-changes. One of the most significant
characteristics of modem science is its attention to change that lies
behind the veils of permanence in the universe. This historical
awareness is now common to all the disciplines which have to deal with
the past from astronomy, geology and biology to sociology, history,
anthropology, and the historical study of art, technology, religion,
politics, language and ideas.


