The Principle of Causality
==========================

The law of causality, al-Sadr states, is a necessary rational principle
present in the core of man's nature as a rational being. It is on the
basis of this principle that (1) the objective reality of sense
perception, (2) the validity of scientific theories and laws based on
experimentation and (3) the validity of all philosophical and scientific
inference, are based.

Al-Sadr explains that although the objective existence of the world is
a necessary primary judgement that requires no evidence, the objective
reality of every particular sense perception is not known in a necessary
manner. It is on the basis of the principle of causality that a specific
perception, under specific circumstances and conditions, reveals the
existence of its cause as an external object.

Experimental theories do not acquire a scientific character unless they
are generalized beyond the limits of particular experiments. And this is
not possible without reliance on general causal laws which are: (1) the
principle that every event has a cause, (2) the principle that every
cause necessarily produces its effect, and (3) the principle of harmony
between causes and effects.

Without the laws of causality, there would not be any link between
evidence and conclusions and no evidence would lead to any result.

Even those who attempt to deny this principle by resorting to a certain
evidence would not make this attempt had they not believed that the
evidence on which they rely is a sufficient cause of the knowledge of
the falsity of this principle. But this is in itself an application of
this principle.

It is wrong to regard the principle of causality as an inductive law
based on experimentation, because such a view reopens the fundamental
question about the validity of perception and experimentation, to which
no answer can be found. It is a principle which is accepted
independently of the senses and is above experimentation. From the
viewpoint of Islamic philosophers, (1) causality is not limited to the
natural phenomena which figure in experimentation, but is a general law
of existence, applicable to the material and the immaterial; (2) the
cause whose existence is confirmed by this principle need not be subject
to experimentation, nor it need be of a material nature; (3) the fact
that experimentation does not disclose a specific cause of a certain
phenomenon does not imply a failure on the part of this principle, for
it does not rest on experimentation. These salient points differentiate
the mechanistic, materialistic interpretation of the law of causality
from its theological interpretation. Causality and Microphysics:

Inevitable uncertainty entered the realm of modern physics as a result
of experimentation with subatomic particles. If the position of an
electron were to be accurately measured, radiations of very small
wavelength would have to be used for the determination. But such
radiations possess quanta of high energy, and would alter the momentum
and energy of the electron by impact. Similarly, to measure the momentum
of an electron, quanta of low energy would have to be used.

The wavelengths of such quanta being large, the position of the
electron would be correspondingly indeterminate. Heisenberg's Principle
of Uncertainty followed from the wave-particle duality of matter and
radiation, and from the fact that the characteristics of objects were
usually unavoidably altered during the course of experimentation.

The indeterminacy at the subatomic level meant that there could be only
probabilistic knowledge of subatomic events. This fact made the
physicists and erroneously according to al-Sadr abandon belief in the
universality of the principle of causality. Not only that, they came to
interpret the causal fixity and regularity of macroscopic events as a
statistical phenomenon, analogous to the stability of, say, suicide
rates.

Al-Sadr points out that the doubts raised by scientists in microphysics
are based on a specific notion of the principle of causality different
from the notion of it held by Muslim philosophers. According to the
latter notion, the principle is not based on experimental evidence and
stands above experimentation. Moreover, the limits of experiment prove
only our inability to apply it in some fields, not the invalidity of
this principle in those fields. In addition, microphysical experiments
do not offer any scientific evidence proving the falsity of the
principle of causality in the field of subatomic physics. The
introduction of indeterminacy is a problem of the observing subject,
something which does not warrant the elimination of causal laws from the
universe.


