The Meaning of Causality
========================

Al-Sadr states that there are four theories which resulted from
attempts to answer the question: Why do things require causes? (1) The
first theory, adopted by some Marxist theoreticians, states that an
existent requires a cause for its existence. According to it, causality
is a general law of existence as confirmed by scientific experiments. To
regard the law of causality as an inductive principle, al-Sadr points
out again, is an error. It is not within the scientific possibilities of
experiment to indicate that the secret of the requirement for a cause
lies at the heart of existence in general. The principle of causality is
a purely philosophical principle and so also are the issues concerning
it and the theories that treat its limits.

(2) The second theory, which al-Sadr calls "the theory of creation",
asserts that things need causes for coming into existence. Thus if a
thing exists continuously and always and has not come into being after
not having existed, there will be no need in it for a cause, nor will it
enter the realm of causality. While the first theory goes too far in
generalizing causality, the second theory goes too far in restricting
it.

(3) & (4) The other two are the theories of "essential possibility" and
"existential possibility". These two theories assert that what makes
things need their causes is possibility. They differ from each other due
to their different notions of possibility, which relate to a difference
regarding quiddity and existence. Since a discussion of this difference
lies outside the scope of the book, al-Sadr limits himself to the
discussion of the theory of existential possibility, advanced by Mulla
Sadra, which asserts the fundamentality of existence.

According to this theory, causality is a relation between two
existences: the cause and the effect. If, for example, B is an effect of
A, does B have an existence independent of A? The answer is in the
negative. Causality requires that the effect does not have a reality
prior to its link with its cause; otherwise, it will not be an effect.
Moreover, B is not something that has a link or relation to the cause;
rather it is the very linkage, in the sense that its being and existence
become a conjunctive being and relational existence. The discontinuity
of its linkage to its cause means destruction of it and an end of its
being, for its being is represented in that linkage. A relational entity
cannot be detached from the thing to which it is essentially linked or
related. Moreover, all being is not governed by the principle of
causality. Rather, this principle governs the relational existents,
whose reality embodies linkage and relation.

Here Martyr al-Sadr points out that the Marxists fluctuate between the
dialectical model and causality while explaining phenomena. That is,
while they regard internal contradiction as a sufficient explanation of
every phenomenon in the universe, they also take recourse now and then
to the cause-effect relation for explaining some phenomena by external
causes. A relevant caw is the Marxist assertion that the means of
production make up the social infrastructure, whereas all other aspects
of society, including the intellectual and political conditions, the
considered superstructural. This means that the relation between the
superstructure and the means of production is a cause-effect relation.
Here, there is no contradiction but causality.


