Contemporaneity Between Cause and Effect
========================================

Since the existence of the effect is essentially linked to the
existence of the cause, the cause is necessary for the effect and the
effect must be contemporaneous with the cause so that its being and
existence the linked to that cause. This is the law of contemporaneity
between the cause and the effect. Two arguments were forwarded to prove
that it is possible for the effect to continue after its cause ceases to
exist.

(1) The first argument, put forward by theologians, rests on two idea.
The first is that things need causes in order to come into existence;
after its coming into being, a thing has no need for a cause.

However, as pointed out earlier, a thing's need for a cause is not for
its coming into existence, but because its existence is essentially
linked to its specific cause.

The second notion is that the law of contemporaneity between the cause
and the effect is not consistent with a certain group of phenomena in
the universe. For example, a building erected by builders continues to
exist even after all of them are gone and are no more alive. Al-Sadr
states that in all such examples, the error lies in identifying the real
causes.

(2) The other theory, suggested by the modem science of mechanics,
assert that in the light of the laws of motion continuity of motion does
not require a cause. According to the first law of motion, a body
continues to move with a uniform velocity in a straight line, after an
impulse is imparted to it, unless disturbed by an external force.

According to al-Sadr such an assertion leads to an immediate
cancellation of the principle of causality. If it were possible for
motion to continue without a cause, then it would also be possible for
it to occur without a cause and for things to begin existing without a
cause.

The reason is that continuity of motion always involves a new coming
into existence.

According to al-Sadr, the experiments which suggest the first law of
motion do not actually show that the external force is cause of motion.
It is possible, he says, that the real cause of ethereal is something
that had existed all along; external causes act the force within the
body and prepare it as cause (Muslim have believed that all accidental
motion, including the mechanical motion of bodies, is produced by a
force within bodies). As a result, al-Sadr finds the law of inertia to
be incompatible with the law of causality.

It is amazing that the author should consider the first law of motion
as incompatible with the principle of causality. But that is because he,
in the tradition of Mulla Sadra, considers motion as a continual renewal
of existence, a continual recreation. Mechanics, on the other hand,
considers rest as well as uniform motion in a straight line as unchanged
states. Only acceleration is considered a change of state that requires
an external cause or force. Also, Mulla Sadra considers circular motion
as the most perfect kind of motion (and, it may be remarked, such a
conception of motion can have unfortunate consequences for any
civilization that adopts it). There is no reason why simple mechanical
motion should necessarily be considered a continual renewal of existence
and no reason why the first law of motion should be logically
incompatible with the principle of causality.

One wishes that al-Sadr had treated some concepts of traditional Muslim
philosophy with the same critical scrutiny with which he treats the
dialectics. It is the view of some historians of science that certain
misconceptions about motion inherited by Muslim philosophy and science
from Aristotle were responsible for the failure of Muslim scientists to
develop the science of mechanics, which was developed by the West only
after it discarded the misconceptions of Greek philosophy regarding
motion.

On the whole, it may bestated that the arguments advanced by the author
in favour of contemporaneity of cause and effect are not very
convincing. At the end of the chapter he draws a theological conclusion
from the above discussion. The causal chain which relates relational
entities cannot be infinite or circular; for in that case all the parts
of the chain will be effects. Hence the world proceeds from a being
necessary in essence, self-sufficient and not requiring a cause. Every
cause except the first cause is a cause-effect, and hence needs a
cause.

The first cause, being a pure cause, does not require a cause prior to
it, for a thing does not require a cause qua cause but as an effect qua
effect.


