Biography of the Author
=======================

The author of this work, *Secret of the Hajj, is* the grand Ayatullah
al­ Hajj ash‑Shaikh Husain Mazaheri. Born into a religious family in
1934 in the city of Isfahan, Iran, Ayatullah Mazaheri was a mere 15

years old when he began his Islamic studies in the Hawza \`Ilmiyyah of
Isfahan. He completed his \`Arabic studies under the guidance of the
late Hajj Agha Ahmad Muqaddas. His higher studies were conducted under
the guidance of Ayatullah Khadimi, and Ayatullah Fayyad.

Four years later, he moved to Qum to continue his studies under the
supervision of the late scholar to‑Qum Hajj Shaikh \`Abd al‑Jawad Jabal
al‑\`Amuli, the late Marja\` Ayatullah al‑\`Uzma al‑Sayyid Shahab al‑Din
Mar'ashi Najafi, and the late Ayatullah Shaikh Murtada Haeri.

For more than eight years, he studied Dars‑e‑Kharij under Ayatulldh
al­\`Uzma al‑Hajj al‑Sayyid Husain Burujerdi, and then ten years under
Ayatullah al‑\`Uzma al‑Haj al‑Sayyid Ruhullah Musawi Khumayni, and
twelve years under Ayatullah al‑\`Uzma al‑Hajj al‑Sayyid Muhammad
Muhaqqiq Damad. He also studied the book *Al‑Asfar* written by Mullah
Sadra and *ash‑Shifa* of Abu 'Ali Sind under the late \`Allamah
al‑Sayyid Muhammad Husain Taba'taba'i ‑ author of *Al‑Mizan Fi Tafsir
al‑Qur'an.*

Since 1980, he has been teaching the higher classes of Fiqh and \`Usul,
and he recently moved back to Isfahan to take over the responsibility of
maintaining the Hawza \`Ihniyyah there.

This great teacher of Islamic Ethics has lectured extensively in Iran on
ethics and spirituality. In addition to speaking and offering advice to
the Muslims, many of his speeches have been compiled into books such as,
*Jihad Ba Nafs (Struggle with the Soul* ‑ four *volumes), Upbringing of
Children, Commentary on Dua al‑Kumayl, Control of One's Sexual Urges,
Ma\`ad (Resurrection) in the Qur'an,* and countless others.


