The First Stage of the Hajj
===========================

In the first stage, above all other things, that which is the most
important is repentance *(tawbah)* and to be vigilant. The meaning of
repentance is to shun all devils and all forms of despotism, and turn
back towards Allah . It means to disregard one's wishes, low desires and
the lower *soul (al‑Nafs al‑Ammarah)* and proceed towards spirituality
and the (higher) qualities (of a human being).

Completing all that was performed in the past such that there is no
responsibility or obligation between Allah and His creations on the
person's shoulders, the person leaves his city in such a state that not
a single person is upset with him ‑ except of course the Devil
*(Shaitan).*

The meaning of being vigilant is that one focuses his attention on the
grandeur and majesty of the House of Allah .

He focuses on the fact that it is the Creator and Maintainer of the
Universe that has given him this opportunity (to perform the Hajj). He
focuses on the fact that on this journey, he must not allow anyone or
anything to aggravate him. He focuses on the fact that if he performs a
Hajj that is accepted, then without doubt, he has reached to that level
which mankind was created to reach to (the level of meeting Allah and
the level of true worship). He focuses on the importance of performing
all those things, which are obligatory to perform, such as the Salat,
etc...

A woman performing the Hajj safeguards her modesty and her Islamic
attire *(hijab).* She focuses on the importance of refraining from all
sins, and she knows and understands that Allah does not accept the deeds
of those who commit sins. The acceptance of all actions is connected to
one's piety *(taqwa).* Thus, Allah does not accept the Hajj from those
people who commit sins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“**Verily Allah only accepts from those who guard (against evil).”***
[^1]

The person must keep in mind the importance of performing the
recommended *(mustahab)* acts, most importantly of which is serving the
creations of Allah, which is one of the ways that the obligatory
*(wajib)* acts are accepted.

The person must keep in mind that especially during this journey,
wherever he may be and in whatever state he is, he is constantly in the
presence of Allah , the Noble Prophet (s) and the Pure A'immah (as)
(such as we are told in the Qur'an):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلِ اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى اللَّهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say‑ Work! Allah will see your work and (so will) His Messenger and
the believers...”*** [^2]

The person must keep in mind that using any forbidden *(haram)* wealth
or property on this trip ‑ rather in any act of worship, will not lead
to anything except the accumulation of sins, transgression and
misfortune in this world and in the next life.

After repentance and being vigilant, the person must also reach to a
stage of emptiness and annihilation, such that if he can not reach to
the level where he is able to remove all the detestable characteristics
such as *jealousy, miserliness, pride, greatness, worship of the world,
etc...* then he should at least try to acquire the praiseworthy
characteristics such as *mercy, generosity, humility, asceticism, and
freeing the soul from all that it is attached to* within himself.

A person should try to at least control those detestable attributes that
he possesses and not allow them to take power over him.

Similarly, one must try to allow justice, equity and the fear of Allah
to rule over himself such that unknowingly and on its own, the soul
gains control in a way that all the obligatory *(wajib)* actions are
performed and all sins are refrained from. This should be accomplished
at least to the extent that these (positive traits) take control over
one's *al‑Nafs al‑Ammarah* and over one's own wishes and desires, and do
not drag the person towards sin.

Once this has been accomplished, then one, through the pleasures of the
religion (Salat, fasting, recitation of Qur'an, supplication, humility
and humbleness while in the presence of Allah , pleasing the creations
of Allah , etc ...) and through seeking help by way of *Tawassul* to the
Ahl al‑Bait (as) (it is better to go to Madinah after performing the
Hajj, if one is able to), especially seeking help from *Imam Wali al‑
Asr* (may Allah hasten his noble return and may my soul and the souls of
all of those of the universe be sacrificed for the dirt under his feet)
and by the continuous recitation of *Ziyarat Jami\`ah al‑Kabirah* which
is one of the best forms of *Tawassul* to the 12th Imam, one will reach
to the level of glory and praise ‑ meaning that our soul will become
illuminated by the light *(Nur)* of Allah .

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we placed for him, a light (Nur) by which he walks amongst the
people..”*** [^3]

In this blessed journey, while in the security of the Truth, one should
be able to reach to a level of true servitude, where one can distinguish
between good and bad, friend and enemy, and what Allah (swt) wants, from
what one's own evil soul wants...

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ فُرْقَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you are careful of (your duty to) Allah, then He will grant you a
distinction.”*** [^4]

What is more important than which has been mentioned is at this stage,
one must attain sincerity *(khulus).* This means that in one's heart and
thoughts during this journey, nothing should remain except Allah and the
performance of the Hajj exactly as the way Prophet Ibrahim (as)
performed it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ حَنِيفًا
وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the
polytheists.”*** [^5]

The person should not perform Hajj simply for people to congratulate
him; or, may Allah protect us, to make other people work hard and go
through troubles, meaning his Hajj is not simply to use other people. In
fact, his Hajj should not even be for Allah to bestow upon him, both in
this world and in the next, blessings and bounties. Rather, all of his
attention and focus on this journey must be for Allah , the goal of
reaching to Him and to the true worship, such that no one else or
anything will be in his sight except the pleasure of Allah .

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لِأَحَدٍ عِنْدَهُ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ تُجْزَ إِلَّا ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ
رَبِّهِ الْأَعْلَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***\`And no one has with him any blessing for which he should be
rewarded, except the seeking of the pleasure of his Lord, the Most
High.\`***[^6]

In summary, at this stage, one's intention must be sincere and there
must not be anything of the worldly pleasure, in fact not even the
pleasures of the next life should be in his sight. Just as the Qur'an
mentions, the best *colour* is the *colour* of Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِبْغَةَ اللَّهِ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللَّهِ صِبْغَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(Receive) the colour of Allah, and who is better than Allah in
colouring?”*** [^7]

The worst of colours is the colour of conceit, and it is clear that if
Allah forbid, through one's actions, speech, or if in one's heart or
soul this trait is already there, then he has reached to the stage of
disbelief *(kufr):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ
الَّذِينَ هُمْ يُرَاءُونَ وَيَمْنَعُونَ الْمَاعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So woe to the praying ones, those who are unmindful of their
prayers, Who do (good) to be seen, And withhold the necessities of
life.”***[^8]

[^1]: Surah al‑Maidah (5), Verse 27

[^2]: Surah al‑Tawbah (9), Verse 105

[^3]: Surah al‑An'am (6), Verse 122

[^4]: Surah al‑Anfal (8), Verse 29

[^5]: Surah al‑An'am (6), Verse 79

[^6]: Surah al‑Lail (92), Verses 19‑20

[^7]: Surah al‑Baqarah (2), Verses 138

[^8]: Surah al‑Ma'un (107), Verses 4‑7


