The Third Stage of the Hajj
===========================

**Third Stage:** The third stage is going from Makkah and Madinah back
to one's hometown

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سير من الحق إلى الخلق
  </p>
</blockquote>

The responsibilities at this stage are much more difficult than they
were at the first and second level, since it is at this level that one's
responsibilities become just like those of the Prophet of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُبَلِّغُونَ رِسَالَاتِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who convey the messages of Allah.”*** [^1]

In the first and second stage, one was busy with self‑building, but at
this stage, one must work on building others. Although the act of
enlightening others is dependent upon self‑building, however, this task
is so difficult that the Noble Prophet Muhammad (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شيبتني سورة هود لمكان قوله: فَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ وَمَن تَابَ
مَعَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surah Hud made my beard white from the point where it was revealed,
***\`Continue then in the right way as you are commanded, as also he who
has turned (to Allah) with you (O' Muhammad)'.”*** [^2]

Self‑building has also been mentioned in Sarah al‑Shuara where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Continue then in the right way as you are commanded.”*** [^3]

However, that which caused the beard of the Prophet to turn white was
the command to build others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن تَابَ مَعَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“...as also he who has turned towards Allah with you (O'
Muhammad).”***

After returning from Makkah and Madina, the Hajji must convey that which
he has brought with him (his self‑building) to others through his
actions. His speech, actions, manner and disposition must be an example
for others, and this is truly the best gift that one can bring back for
the rest of the people.

The Hajji must inform others of the importance of Salat by performing it
right when the time sets in, reciting it in the Masjid, in congregation
*(Jama\`at),* and paying attention to the overall importance of it.

Without doubt, that *Hajji who* is not concerned about the Salat, such
that the time for it sets in, but one is absorbed in making a living,
has truly not experienced the Hajj. The Qur'an speaks to people like
this and curses them by saying: \`Curse be on you ‑ you are not a Hajji
‑rather, you are not even a Muslim!'

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then woe to those who pray ‑ those of them who are heedless of
the Salat.”*** [^4]

Paying attention to all of the acts which are obligatory *(Wajib),*
namely paying *Khums* and those things which are forbidden such as not
taking interest, not taking bribes, not selling less that what one takes
money for, not selling things for more than their worth, not to hoard or
cheat in business transactions and... are some one the traits that one
must bring back from the Hajj as gifts.

One must enliven into the hearts of others things such as paying
importance to those acts that are obligatory and staying away from sins.

That Hajji who after returning from Hajj stops paying Khums is not only
not regarded as a Hajji, but from the point of the Qur'an, is a
polytheist *(Mushrik)* and a disbeliever *(Kafir):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ
بِالْآخِرَةِ هُمْ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And woe to the polytheists: those who do not give poor‑rate and do
not believe in the hereafter.”*** [^5]

The woman who has just returned from Makkah and Madinah after the Hajj
must improve her hijab, and make it the same as the hijab of Fatimah
az‑Zahra (as) so that her covering is an example and model not only for
herself, but also for others.

That woman who has gone to Makkah but returns without the gift of the
hijab of Fatimah az‑Zahra (as) for others and continues to wear her
hijab in a wrong manner, or does not wear the hijab at all, has trampled
over more than ten verses of the Qur'an and her Hajj was nothing more
than troubles to herself.

Yes! The Muslim man and woman, after completing the Hajj must through
his and her Islamic etiquette ‑ both amongst their household and amidst
the people ‑ be practical propagators of the faith.

Forgiveness and absolution, dedication and sacrifice should be their
mottoes and others must be able to benefit from these maxims, just as
the Qur'an has repeatedly mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُنْفِقْ ذُو سَعَةٍ مِنْ سَعَتِهِ وَمَنْ قُدِرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقُهُ
فَلْيُنْفِقْ مِمَّا ءَاتَاهُ اللَّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let him who has abundance, spend out of his abundance and whoever
has his means of subsistence straitened to him, let him spend out of
that which Allah has given him**.”* [^6]

The Hajji must be an example for others. How difficult this third level
truly is, however the rewards are just as great!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever keeps (one person) alive, it is as though he kept alive
all of mankind.”*** [^7]

The one thing that a man and woman who have returned from Hajj must
always keep in mind at the third stage is that the Hajjis accountability
before Allah , the Ahl al‑Bait (as) and the people is much different
than that of the accountability that the \`common people' have.

For the Hajji, Allah and the Ahl al‑Bait (as) open another \`book of
accounts' in the same way that the common people look at the one who has
returned from Hajj in a different light.

Prophet Adam (as), did nothing more than a *tark‑e‑Awla (not performing
something that was better, rather performing something good' in its
place),* but since he was one of the \`chosen' people and this
*tark-e-­Awla* was not appropriate for one with such a holy spirit, thus
he was addressed as such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهْبِطُوا بَعْضُكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ عَدُوٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Get down from here (you two), one of you being an enemy to the
other.”*** [^8]

He was expelled from that high status *(Jannah)* to the lower status
*(this world).*

Even with the status and position that Prophet Yusuf the Truthful (as)
held, and with all the high marks that he scored in his tests, still he
spent close to ten extra years in prison just for seeking help from
other than Allah (swt).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَبِثَ فِي السِّجْنِ بِضْعَ سِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So then he spent some more years in the prison.”***[^9]

Prophet Yusuf (as) did not commit a sin, since he was immune from
committing sins *(ma\`sum),* but it was this *tark‑e‑Awla* that he
performed which was not befitting for one at his status, and thus he was
forced to spend an ten extra years in prison.

There are many more stories like this in the Qur'an that are examples
for the men and women who have returned from Hajj.

If a woman who has returned from Hajj ‑ through her actions and the way
she carries herself or by not wearing the hijab or not observing it in
the proper way, lowers the (value of the) Hajj amongst the people, then
her sin is so great, that it is beyond our comprehension whether
repentance can absolve her (of her sin) or not.

If a man, through his etiquette and not staying away from sins,
especially those which are the *Haqq al‑Nas* meaning those sins which
are related to the rights of others, or through not paying proper
attention to the Salat, or utter disregard of the Mimbar and Mihrab such
that the people consider what he is doing to be permitted, leads the
people to think that this Hajji has returned from Allah however (due to
his actions) the magnificence of the Hajj is removed from their hearts,
then his sin is so great that the Qur'an mentions that it is comparable
to murdering all of humanity:

*“Whoever slays a soul, unless it be for manslaughter or for mischief in
the land, it is as though he slew all men; and whoever keeps it alive,
it is as though he kept alive all men.* '’ [^10]

In the completion of our discussion, I would request every man and woman
who has been blessed with this great opportunity, and who is now being
addressed with the name *\`Hajji'* that each and every day you read the
above mentioned noble verse of the Qur'an to yourself, and remember the
meaning of the verse just as Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq (as), has taught it.

Make yourself a living example of this noble verse of the Qur'an (the
verse quoted above), continuously repeat it, and say to yourself

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I am that person which, from the view point of the Qur'an and the
explanation of Imam Jafar as‑Sadiq (as) that if I give life to one
person through my speech, acts or performance in propagation (of the
religion), then 1 am like as that person who has saved the entire
humanity.*

*However, if through my speech, actions or the way I carry myself, I
cause even one person to be lead astray, and have reduced the (worth of
the) Hajj, and reduced the (worth of the) religion in that person's
heart, then and I am just like person who has killed all of those in the
world.'*

*I pray to the Maintainer of the Universe for the success of everyone in
this spiritual and celestial travel (performing the Hajj in its true
essence) under the shadow of the close watch of Imam Wali al‑ Asr, may
Allah (SWT) hasten his noble return.*

Husain Mazaheri

[^1]: Surah al Ahzab (33), Verse 39

[^2]: Surah Hud (11), Verse 112

[^3]: Surah al Shuara (26), Verse 15

[^4]: Surah al Ma'un (107), Verse 4 - 5

[^5]: Surah al Fusilat (41), Verse 6 - 7

[^6]: Surah al Talaq (65), Verse 7

[^7]: Surah al Ma'idah (5), Verse 32

[^8]: Surah al Baqarah (2), Verse 36

[^9]: Surah Yusuf (12), Verse 42

[^10]: Surah al Maidah (5), Verse 32


