Translator’s Note
=================

“Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,

Be it ever so humble, there is no place like home”

John Howard Payne,’ *Home Sweet Home*

This book is a presentation of 24 illuminating talks given by Ayatullah
Hussein Madhahiri to highlight the concept of the home and family in
Islam; a concept that is based on faith and love.

For eligible girls and boys this will be invaluable information before
they embark on matrimony and make a home of their own.

Islam lays great stress on the importance of the family institution**.**
Today, when we look at the Western society, it gives us a fair idea
about the Need of a close-knit family as required in the Islamic
society. In the Western society old parents are forced to spend their
twilight years in homes for the aged. Perhaps they get all the physical
comforts in these homes, but they badly miss the love and affection of
their near and dear ones.

Here I would like to mention the experience of a friend of mine and his
wife who stayed as paying guests with an old American couple in a small
university town for a couple of years. This young couple gave a lot of
love and affection to the old landlord and his wife. When they were
returning home after completing their studies, the old man said with
tearful eyes, “Son! With you we really enjoyed true filial love and
affection. Our own sons and daughters come to us only for the family
get-togethers during the holiday season and seldom bother about us the
rest of the year! Now that you are going, we shall badly miss you!”

The foundation for the family and home in the Islamic society that is
laid with the marriage of a young couple is the most beloved in the eyes
of Allah and flourishes with the passage of time.

The publication of this compendium of the erudite lectures of the
learned Ayatullah shall be a guide, Inshallah, for the young individuals
who are on the threshold of embarking on married life. Our sincere good
wishes and blessings for all such young persons!


