The Ninth Talk
==============

1. Formation of a Household
---------------------------

Today's discussion is concerning the formation of the family and the
importance that Islam gives to it. This is a very useful topic for
discussion and I do hope that we shall be able to discuss several issues
concerning our society. Formation of families gives tremendous
advantages to people and the satisfaction of the sexual instinct becomes
insignificant when compared to the benefits that are concomitant with
the formation of the family structure. In the previous talk we have
stressed the point that suppressing the sexual instinct is not right
from the Islamic point of view. Satisfying the sex instinct is
absolutely necessary and the benefits accruing to the family from this
are very distinct. The first step for the formation of a family is to
respond positively to the urge of nature because man and woman are
absolutely necessary for each other. The progeny emanates from the
mating of man and wife. When the human beings first set foot on the
world, one woman was chosen for one man and they parented a few
offspring. The first example of a human couple has been Adam (a.s.) and
his wife Hawwa. If the family can give virtuous offspring to the
society, then, in the eyes of Islam, there is, probably, nothing more
blessed and rewarding than this act.

A verse from the Holy Quran stresses on the great value of human life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن قَتَلَ نَفْسَا بِغَيرِْ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فىِ الْأَرْضِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا وَ مَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا
أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***.....whosoever killeth a human being for other than man-slaughter or
corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he had killed all mankind,
and whoso saveth the life of one,it shall be as if he had saved the life
of all mankind.*** ***(Sura al Maidah, 5: 32)***

What we have mentioned here is the apparent meaning of the Verse. Imam
Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) has given another, finer (*lateef*), meaning to
the verse. He says that if a person misguides a person from the right
path, his sin is as severe as if he has massacred the entire population
of the world. Similarly, if a person guides another person to the right
path, saves him from going astray and turns him into a pious and
truthful person, then the act will be equivalent to giving life to the
entire population of the world.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) says, “Beware! Don't lead men astray with
your talk. In your homes you should not implant in the minds of the
children, distorted notions about the Faith, the scholars, the prayer
niche and the pulpit. If you let this happen, it will be tantamount to
massacring the entire population of the world. You should always use
your tongue, your pen, your manners and behavior to bring people to the
right path to the best of your ability. If you do this, it will be
equivalent to giving life to the entire population of the world!"

The interpretation of the verse given by Imam Jafar al Sadiq (a.s.)
highlights another meaning of the verse. If a husband and wife train
pious offspring for the society, the reward will not only be equivalent
to making a mosque or a school, nor equivalent to giving life to one or
two persons, but it will be equal to giving life to the entire
population of the world! The recompense for giving noble and pious
offspring to the society is more than that for any other pious act. This
is possible only if the family is established on the right path!

There are several traditions of the Prophet of Islam (s) and the
infallible Imams on the subject. When a person dies, his actions are
terminated and he will not earn any further benefits on account of his
actions. But a person who has left behind *Baqiyatus Salehat* (pious
assets), will continue to get more and more rewards. Pious and truthful
offspring are included in the *Baqiyatus Salehat* of a person. When a
person leaves behind a pious son or a daughter, and they offer prayers,
recite the Holy Quran and perform other pious deeds, then the parents
will share the rewards that the children earn! When a son or daughter
earns reward for a good deed, an equivalent reward will be allocated for
the dead parents too. The good deeds of such parents will not stop with
their death!

One tradition that is very popular with both Sunni and Shia scholars is
quoted by Sheikh Saduq (a.r.) in his book*, Sawaab al Aamaal:*  
 'If a person leaves behind *Baqiyatus Salehat* in the world like
building a mosque, establishing a school, building a bridge or any other
constructive activity, he will get rewards. But a better *Baqiyatus
Salehat* is a person leaving behind pious and noble offspring in the
society. In addition when the child performs any good deed, one reward
is for the child himself, another is for his father and a third reward
is given to his mother.'

There are umpteen traditions of this nature. Therefore people should
strive to form families of a pious and noble character, so that good
offspring can be turned over to the society. This is the demand of
Islam, which is a faith that conforms with nature! But the enemies of
humanity have, from times immemorial, perpetrated such activities that
hamper the growth of pious and noble generations in the human race. The
Quran says about them: *mufsid fil ardh* - their work is to spread
mischief on the face of the earth

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فىِ الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا وَ
يُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ عَلىَ‏ مَا فىِ قَلْبِهِ وَ هُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَام
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And among the people is he whose conversation on the life of this
world pleases you and he calls Allah to witness as to that which is in
his heart; yet he is the most rigid of opponents.*** ***(Sura al
Baqarah, 2: 204)***

This verse means that some people make sweet talks and win the hearts of
the people till they form their own school of thought. Some examples of
such persons are Marx, Freud, Nietze etc. They write books, and
establish their schools of thought which then take root in the East and
the West. But Allah knows what is in their hearts. The Holy Quran says
that such men are the worst enemies of humanity. The Quran doesn't say
that such men are enemies only of Islam. It says *huwa 'aladdul-khisaam*
which means that they are the enemies of the human race! The Holy Quran
enumerates one of their characteristics that if they are unable to usurp
power, then they create discord in the minds of the people. But if they
are able to attain power, then:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذَا تَوَلىَ‏ سَعَى‏ فىِ الْأَرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيهَا وَ يُهْلِكَ
الْحَرْثَ وَ النَّسْلَ وَ اللَّهُ لَا يحُِبُّ الْفَسَاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when he turneth away (from thee) his effort in the land is to
make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle; and Allah
loveth not mischief.*** ***(Sura al Baqarah, 2: 205)***

When they attain power, they misguide people. They loot assets and
destroy entire generations. The same thing happened with Iran after the
Revolution. The American bred dog attacked hapless populations in the
villages and perpetrated general massacre. He not only destroyed the
buildings and mosques, but also uprooted the trees and destroyed crops.
Quran says**,** ***yuhlikal harsa wan-nasl**,* meaning that when
aggressors like Saddam get power, they lead the people astray or
massacre people. Their aim is always to destroy the habitations.

Another meaning of the verse is that those who are the enemies of
humanity try to mislead the young generations. They entice women to
discard their hijab. In the name of progress they introduce forbidden
habits in the society. They misguide men into forbidden ways. They make
people engrossed in serving their selfish ends and satisfying their base
desires, and thus the present generation is destroyed. This way they
ensure that not only the present generation is ruined but the future
generations, too, are destroyed. This is the reason that they work more
in the schools, colleges and the universities. They try to keep the
children away from the pulpit and the mosque. If they don't succeed with
their foul motives on the present generation, they turn their attention
to ruining the future generations. Russel is a well known British
philosopher. The world recognizes him as a philosopher of high caliber.
He very foolishly thought it unnecessary to have a family. Even the
Pharoah was of the same opinion. But the Quran says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلَا فىِ الْأَرْضِ وَ جَعَلَ أَهْلَهَا شِيَعًا
يَسْتَضْعِفُ طَائفَةً مِّنهُْمْ يُذَبِّحُ أَبْنَاءَهُمْ وَ يَسْتَحْىِ
نِسَاءَهُمْ إِنَّهُ كاَنَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! Pharaoh exalted himself in the earth and made its people castes.
A tribe among them he oppressed, killing their sons and sparing their
women. Lo! he was of those who work corruption.*** ***(Sura al Qasas,
28: 4)***

Pharaoh was an evil person. He created major problems for the *Bani
Israel* when he established power over them. First he created
differences amongst the people, and thus ensured his own success.
Generally all the commentators of the Holy Quran interpret the words,
***yudhabbihu 'abnaaa-'ahum**,* to mean that he arranged killing of all
new-born males to ensure that Prophet Musa (a.s.) was prevented from
coming in the world! He left the new-born females of the tribe unharmed.
But some researchers interpret the verse saying that Pharaoh did this to
demoralize men and make the women shameless and hand them over to the
society as play-things!

One act of Pharaoh was to destroy the future generations of *Bani
Israel.* His plan was to make the women totally shameless. Pity on the
society in which women render themselves shameless! We read in the
traditions that *haya* (shame) or bashfulness is divided into ten parts.
Nine are for women and only one for men. It is a shame for a society
where all the nine parts of modesty in women disappear. That is the
stage when a woman wears perfume and comes out in public, scantily
dressed. So shameless does she become that she exposes her face and
bares her bosom. In this condition she moves about in the bazaar or goes
to a shop, talking and laughing with *namahrams*. Shame on such a
society and more shame on such women! Pharaoh was enforcing these
shameful things to strengthen his hold over the tribe of *Bani Israel*
and to weaken their future generation. Today's exploiters too have
similar plans to destroy the coming generations.

2. Modesty And Bashfulness
--------------------------

When these people succeed in their nefarious schemes, they destroy
modesty and bashfulness in women. They involve the women in sensual acts
and destroy the manliness of men. A father sees *namahram* males eyeing
his daughter sensually, but it does not affect him. Men see their wives,
daughters and sisters going to the market in see-through dresses,
without hijab, they know that their women have dressed up for others.
When a society comes to this pass, we should offer a silent prayer for
it! You might wonder why the autocratic Reza Shah and the king of Turkey
ordered general massacres. They did this to succeed in rendering women
immodest through their tyrannical force! Whenever Reza Khan came to any
meetings, he used to say that he personally did not want the women to
come out of the veil, but that they were themselves insisting on this
change in their lifestyle! He said that the only thing he wanted was
that the women should not wear the *chador*. When Reza Shah had gone to
Isfahan, the elders had gone to meet him with a request. He told them
that the women could be in hijab, only they should not wear the *chador*
(full body covering). The Westerners knew it well that if women don't
wear the *chador*, there will be no stopping them; they will spiral
towards complete immodesty! And, unfortunately, we saw that women
reached the stage where they were seen moving semi-naked on the streets.
In addition, they were proud of their immodest behavior!

Reza Shah and the king of Turkey wanted to make Iran and Turkey
***“***liberated” and immodest in this manner. Whether it is the
Pharaoh, or the foreigners, Haman or America, they all aim to misguide
the future generations and promote immodesty. Therefore it is binding on
Muslims that they implicitly follow the commandments of Islam, otherwise
they will be dragged towards evil. Pharoh planned to make men weak and
the women immodest. He used to start with the girls when they were still
small, so that they grew up to be immodest women, and men feel no
compunction. When a society is reduced to this state, then it becomes
very easy to dominate and overpower the people. When you see the Quran
and traditions stressing on the formation of the family, do not be
surprised. Only a pious generation can truly bring about sound progress.
Only a virtuous generation can make scientific progress to the extent
that others envy them. Islam calls on us to look after our children so
that we can turn over a virtuous son and a modest daughter over to the
society. The reward for doing so is more than constructing a mosque, or
visiting the Kaaba or any other worship. If a person does a lot of good
deeds and another gives two virtuous children to the society which deed
is better? According to Islam handing over virtuous children to the
society is better. Hence I congratulate the ladies who stay within the
four walls of the house, and raise virtuous children. These ladies are
like the *mujahideen* (soldiers) who are fighting the enemy on the
frontline. In addition their house is also like a school. They are
rewarded so much, as if they have given life to the whole world.

3. Giving Virtuous Progeny To The Society
-----------------------------------------

Islam wants men and women to pay attention to certain things. A wife and
husband, while in the act of copulation, should not think of others. For
example, the man thinking of some other woman or the wife, may Allah
forbid, thinking of some other man at that time. If a child born out of
such mating turns out to be an adulterer when he grows up, it is the
parents who should be blamed and not the child. Islam is so particular
about the upbringing of the child that it forbids the parents to display
sexual behavior even if the child is still in the cradle! They must go
to another room to fulfill their urge, if they desire to do so. It is
mandated that during copulation no third person should hear even the
breathing of the couple. They should exercise care that no third person
sees their faces or the bodies during their conjugal act. Islam forbids
its followers looking at *namahram* persons. All these commandments are
to protect the future generations from going astray. The person who
stares at *namahram* or the trader who looks at *namahrams* cannot give
virtuous progeny to the society. Try and become modest. Islam has warns
you against immodesty! Islam has warned of grave danger for a lady who
doesn't mind looking at and dealing with a *namahram*.

The day a child is born, Islam says that the *adhaan* is to be recited
in its right ear and the *Iqamah* in the left ear. If you wish the child
to be a good Shia, put a little soil from the graveside of Abi Abdallah
al Husayn (a.s.) near his lips prior to feeding the mother's milk.

Feed the child mother's milk. Mother's milk is most important for the
baby's health and welfare. However the milk should be one that is from
Halal sustenance. The Prophet of Islam (s) used to say:

*If the child becomes foul mouthed, the sin will go into the
nama-e-Aamaal (the Account of Deeds) of the parent, as well as that of
the child because he is the one who has used abusive and foul language.
This will go in to the accounts of the father and the mother, even if
they are dead and gone! (Bihar al-Anwar, Vol 1, page 71)*

A person who has given immodest progeny to the society, the traditions
mention, will get retribution for the sins of the offspring in addition
to the retribution of the perpetrator of the sins himself.

A lady told me once that whenever she wanted to fight with her husband,
she used to leave her children with their maternal grand-parents. After
the fight was over and a truce declared, she used to bring the children
home! What a thoughtful way it is!

Ladies and gentlemen! If you want to fight and abuse each other, please
take the child in the cradle somewhere else so that he doesn't hear your
foul talk! I wish to tell you something. Our ladies, in the days when
they never stirred out of their homes, kept some pebbles in their mouths
when they were required to speak with strange men. The purpose was to
make their voices as unattractive as possible to the strange men! Our
fathers were men who used to recite the Quran and were regular at
offering prayers. But what is our status? What is the status of our
children? Such women have been endowed to the society that they take out
their young daughters without a *chador.* It is a pity that they visit
the mausoleum of *Hadhrat Masoomae Qom* in the same state!

One lady told me that she saw *Hadhrat Masooma* in her dream. *Hadhrat
Masooma* told her that in the past she used to cry about the pitiable
state of others. But now she cries over the state of affairs of our own
people!

Pity the children that in the laps they witness and are raised in an
environment of sexually provocative scenes, provocative songs,
backbiting, slander, abuse, shouting and fights. I appeal to you again
and again! Please have concern for the coming generations! At least
think of your own self. God forbid you are addressed as the murderer of
human beings! You will say that I have never committed such a crime in
the world. He will be answered that you have killed a whole world of
people .as you did not take care of proper upbringing of your children!


