The Tenth Talk
==============

1. The Benefits Of Matrimony
----------------------------

In the previous talk we discussed the advantages of forming families.
One very significant advantage for the partners to establish a family is
the natural satisfaction of the sex instinct. The other, and very
important, advantage is providing virtuous and healthy progeny to the
society. The enemies of humanity always devise stratagems to ensure that
virtuous members are not there in the societies. This is the reason that
the institution of the ‘family’ is attacked by them. This is also the
reason for making immodesty so common. It is your duty to give
importance to the family so that a healthy progeny is turned over to
society. This will help to control the effects of Western Culture.

2. Peace Of Mind
----------------

Today's topic of discussion is about the fact that a decent man and wife
are the source of comfort and contentment for each other. This is
reflected in one of the verses of the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنْ ءَايَتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكمُ مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَجًا
لِّتَسْكُنُواْ إِلَيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And of his signs is this: He created for you helpmates from
yourselves that ye might find rest in them.....*** ***(Sura ar-Rum, 30:
21)***

One of the signs from Allah is that he has created man for woman and the
woman for man! If we analyse the human nature we find that a man without
a woman remains incomplete. Similarly a spinster woman is incomplete
without a man. In fact a man and a woman combine to form a complete
identity i.e. each one is dependant on the other. In the view of the
Holy Quran man is the support for woman, and similarly the woman is a
support for man. In this world everyone needs a confidante. If we
consider human nature, and the guidance given by the Holy Quran, the
best source of comfort for a person in difficult times is his or her
wife or husband! ***Wa ja-ala bainakum mawadda wa rahmat*** *-*Allah has
created wife and husband as well-wishers of each other. By nature, man
and wife love each other.

If we don't destroy this abode of peace, then man and wife are always a
source of comfort and peace for each other. Pity on the home which
offers no peace to the man or wife ! These people are like the
insomniacs who don’t get sleep. Look at a person who doesn't get sleep.
How restless such a person is! He cannot think properly. His body
becomes sick. According to the Holy Quran sleep is the cause of comfort
for the living creatures. Similarly the Holy Quran says that man and
woman are the cause of comfort for each other. Therefore a man who
remains single has no means of comfort. A woman who is a spinster is
like a person who is suffering from insomnia. Man and wife are a source
of comfort for each other. It is our duty to protect and promote the
institution of marriage and formation of families!

3. Man And Wife - Ornaments For Each Other
------------------------------------------

According to the Holy Quran, man and wife are not only the source of
mutual comfort, but are like ornaments for each other. The Holy Book
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَ أَنتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are raiment for you and ye are raiment for them. .....***
***(Sura al Baqarah, 2: 187)***

There are two or three meanings of the word 'raiment' in the verse. One
meaning is that the wife is an ornament for the husband just as a good
raiment is an ornamentation for him. The Holy Quran itself is witness to
this fact that it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَبَنىِ ءَادَمَ خُذُواْ زِينَتَكمُ‏ْ عِندَ كلُ‏ِّ مَسْجِدٍ وَ كُلُواْ
وَ اشرَْبُواْ وَ لَا تُسرِْفُواْ إِنَّهُ لَا يحُِبُّ الْمُسرِْفِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Children of Adam! Put on your adornment on every occasion of
prayer, and eat and drink, but do not waste; indeed Allah does not like
the wasteful.*** ***( Sura al-A’raaf 7:31)***

This means that when you plan to go out anywhere - to the mosque or to a
meeting - dress properly and decently. Here the term 'raiment' connotes
ornamentation and the meaning of the words ***hunna libasun lakum wa
antum libasun lahun*** is that women are their husbands' ornamentation
and they are the ornaments for their wives. The other meaning of the
word 'raiment' here is that a wife is the protection for the man and
prevents him from going astray. The man too performs this task for his
wife. The third meaning of the word 'raiment' is that man and wife are
*satar* or coverings for each other. A man who is single is devoid of
the cover that a wife provides and similarly a spinster too is devoid of
this cover or protection in the absence of a mate. In a nutshell, the
verse says that the man and wife are adornments and covers for each
other. We should therefore take care of our adornments and coverings.

Imam Jafar e Sadiq (a.s.) has said that the husband is like a necklace
for the wife. As the necklace is an ornament for a woman, a husband too
is an ornament for the wife. Then the Imam (a.s.) observed that one
should take care what type of woman one chooses for a spouse. The Imam
(a.s.) further added that if one has a virtuous wife, then he has a big
blessing. A good wife is an invaluable possession. She is worth more
than any amount of gold and silver. If the wife is not good, she is
worthless, even less than a handful of sand! The same is true for a
husband. If he is modest and his wife is pleased with him then it is a
great blessing. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says that if husband and wife are
compatible and are ornamentation for each other, then definitely this is
a great blessing.

4. Man And Wife - Source Of Comfort For Each Other
--------------------------------------------------

In addition to being a source of comfort and protection for each other,
the home is a place of amusement for the man and wife. This is
definitely so if the home is as has been defined and ordained by Islam.
If the wife fits into the definition of a spouse as given by Islam and
the husband fits into the standard fixed for him, then the best place
for amusement is the home itself! It is possible that at this meeting
there are present many husbands whose hearts are with their wives at
home! They would love to reach the comfort of the home after a full day
of toil and hard work! Also it is possible that in the gathering there
are ladies who are eagerly looking forward to their husbands returning
home after performing their duties and business. They look forward to
the husband's familiar knock at the door to welcome him and dispel all
his cares and tiredness with a smile of welcome! The Prophet of Islam
(s) has observed thus on the subject:

*There is no greater blessing for a Muslim man after Islam than a Muslim
wife who causes him joy when he looks at her. (Wasail alShia, Vol 14,
page 23)*

The smile of a man and wife, for each other, is a source of joy and
pleasure. It is mentioned in the traditions that the value of a good
wife is far more than that of gold and silver. In fact if there is
anything that is most valuable after the faith of Islam, it is a good
spouse for a person! The most pleasurable thing for a wife is to
converse happily with her husband. Men should take care to make their
wives happy and the women too should strive towards the same end.

A man came to the Prophet of Allah (s) and said, "O Prophet of Allah! My
wife is so thoughtful that when I reach home, she herself comes to open
the door and receives me with a smile. She gives me attention and
converses with me. Whenever I am unhappy and tired, she humors me to
dispel my unhappiness and tiredness!" The Prophet (s) said, “This woman
is a servant of Allah! She is an angel and will get the same rewards for
her actions as the angels get! Her actions are most valuable!"

Men too can be like that. They should know that it is only their wives
who can provide them comfort. The wife's smile and her talk provide
comfort to the husband. If there is no love and care in a home, the
atmosphere there becomes very unpleasant. Such atmosphere is not only
harmful to the husband and wife, but it badly affects the children as
well. You will notice that children from homes where the atmosphere is
not good have inferior abilities and poor memories when compared with
other children. Remember, the shortcomings in the children are due to
the mistakes of the parents. When there is no atmosphere of love and
affection at home, the man becomes a victim of psychological ailments.
The home then becomes a prison for him.

It happens sometimes that a husband prefers to sitting at the wayside
cafe till late in the night rather than going home. In certain homes the
wife doesn't bother to find out about her husband. It is our own fault
that we have destroyed these abodes of comfort and peace by using harsh
words. This happens even after they have become old or are materially
very well off. Beauty is not just in dressing well but actual beauty is
in the way the eyes if the other person perceives you

Perhaps the fable of *Laila and Majnoon* is only a fiction. But there
are very good lessons in such stories. It is said that the story of the
love of Laila and Majnoon reached the ears of the king of that time. The
king called both of them. When they reached the court, he was surprised
to see that Laila was a bedouin girl, ugly and dark with thick lips! In
surprise he asked Majnoon, “How could you fall in love with this ugly
girl?" Majnoon recited a couplet in reply:

*"If you had seen Laila with Majnoon's eyes, you would have seen nothing
but beauty in her!"*

People used to tell Majnoon that he was running after a dark, ugly
looking girl. He would reply that darker the musk, the more fragrant it
would be!

If a wife loves her husband she will not dwell on his shortcomings. If
someone tells a woman that her husband has some failings, she stands up
in his defence. She does this, even if the complainant is her own mother
or father! If the husband loves his wife, he too will come to her
defence. She may not be very good looking, but for him she is the
fairest of the fair! It is not necessary that women approach sorcerers
to gain the love of their husbands. This is a big sin.

One woman came to the Prophet of Islam (s) and said, "O Prophet of
Allah! I have committed a sin. I tried to win the love of my husband
through sorcery." The Prophet (s) was furious and said, “You have turned
the sky into earth, and the earth to sky! You have rendered your world
dark! Pity on you!" The woman was very penitent and busied herself in
perpetual prayer. The Prophet (s) learned about this activity and said,
“Allah will not pardon her! He will not pardon her!" The meaning of the
Prophet's observation is that the real repentance for the woman should
have been in going home to serve her husband and home i.e. not to
abandon the world while being fully engrossed only in worship. According
to the Holy Prophet (s) if a lady desires the attention of her husband
and wants him to be happy with her, then she should look after her
husband, their house and the children well. He will automatically love
her even if she is not good looking. Similarly if a husband desires to
have the love and affection of his wife, he should treat her with
respect and it is imperative that he does not use foul language. Foul
language is a major cause of termination of love and affection between
people. When he enters home, he should not vent his anger on his wife.
The problems outside have come on him and his wife should not have to
bear the brunt of his problems Upon entering the house do not complain
and wail in front of children nor fight with your wife as these are
great sins that cause *Fishare Qabr* (the squuzing of the grave) when
the person dies!

One of the close companions of the Prophet (s) died. The Prophet (s)
himself attended his burial. The people said that the person was lucky
that he was interred in his grave by the Holy Prophet (s). The Prophet
(s) observed, "The grave has given him so much *fishar* that the bones
of his ribs have shattered!" The companions asked, “O Prophet of Allah
(s)! He was a good man! Why did he suffer this hardship?" The Prophet
(s) replied, “He was a good person but he always fought with his wife
and behaved badly at home!"

A Muslim should not be foul mouthed. If someone uses abusive language,
he is not a Muslim. God forbid! If someone beats his wife! If he does
that, he is a shameless person, he is not a Muslim. However much learned
or “forward-minded” the person might be, he will taste the hardship of
*Fishare Qabr* when he dies. Such persons are not the friends of Allah,
the Prophet (s), and the Imams (a.s.). The Prophet of Islam (s) used to
say that on The Day of Judgment two groups will have such long tongues
that they would be touching the ground and others will trample their
tongues! The companions asked, “Who these people will be?" The Prophet
(s) replied, "The first group will be of the persons who backbite about
others and are always finding faults in others. The other group will
consist of women who misbehaved with their husbands, and the men who
verbally abused their wives!"

Some persons deceptively look very respectable but, in fact, they are so
immature that in the presence of their impressionable children they use
abusive language. For example they address their children as: “the son
of a dog!" or "son of a donkey!". Such people are in fact using foul
language to address themselves; they should realize that the father of a
dog is also a dog. If a person becomes foul-mouthed at home and
irritable, this becomes his habit. His dog-like behavior is clear to
others, but he himself is unaware of his own bad habit. If he had
insight, he would have realized his dog-like behavior.

The persons who call their sons dogs in a rage of anger and use abusive
language against their wives, themselves develop the traits of dogs. If
someone had the vision and insight of Allama Majlisi or Sadr al
Muta'aleheen, he would have seen himself as a dog! Ladies should not get
angry. You may be known in the society for your looks or your
youthfulness, but the angels see you as nothing more than a she-dog.
Perhaps you have a very imposing personality and the society views you
with respect, but because of your foul-mouth you may render yourself
into a virtual dog! When the angels in the skies look at you, you appear
like a dog to them. It has come in the narratives that the misbehavior
at home and use of abusive language or beatings change the status of a
person. When this person dies, his spirit goes to Allah and from there
it proceeds to Heaven or Hell. On the way it passes through all the
stages, and when the spirit of this ill-mannered person reaches the
seventh sky, the inhabitants say that a dog has arrived! Are people with
such bad manners desirous of going to Allah in the form of a dog!

If you heed today's talk, then your home will be a place of peace and
comfort. If a husband and wife become a source of support and comfort
for each other and if they become a beautification for each other, then
when they die, the angels praise them. Allah will be happy with such
persons and, certainly, they will be destined for the Heaven!

O Allah! For the sake of the children of Abi Abdallah al Husayn, make
our homes, our spouses and our children sources of comfort. O Allah!
Give good wives and husbands to our sons and daughters who bring joy in
their lives!


