The Eleventh Talk
=================

1. Training Oneself
-------------------

So far our discussion was on the formation of families and its
advantages. In the previous discussion, the advantages were mentioned.
One of these is the training of the self within the family. Home is a
place for embellishing oneself with noble traits. Within the family, the
husband and wife can train themselves, embellish themselves with noble
traits. They can not only cultivate good habits themselves, but also
motivate other members of the family to follow suit. But in the eyes of
sociologists, achieving these two things - training themselves and
motivating others, is rather difficult. A person needs some effort for
curbing the base traits and planting the sapling of virtue in his mind.
Normally people struggle to make a smooth transformation in their
natures.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا اقْتَحَمَ الْعَقَبَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا أَدْرَئكَ مَا الْعَقَبَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُّ رَقَبَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But he hath not attempted the ascent—***  
***Ah! what will convey unto thee what the Ascent is!—***  
***(It is) to free a slave.*** ***(Sura al Balad, 90: 11-13)***

Expelling undesirable habits from one’s nature is a difficult task. But
one has to get rid of them before they assume stormy proportions. When
one succeeds in this effort, the person plants the sapling of virtue in
his nature. To nourish this sapling one has to make strenuous efforts.
He has to persevere. It is said that the *nafse ammara* (base instinct)
is like an elephant. The trainer of an elephant has to constantly hit on
its head to train it. If there is the slightest negligence on the part
of the trainer, the animal can overcome him. The base instincts and the
mean traits in a person are also like the untrained elephant. Believe
me, all the Prophets (s.a.) came to the world, with their books, for the
sole purpose of guiding the people to curb their *nafse ammara!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِى بَعَثَ فىِ الْأُمِّيِّنَ رَسُولًا مِّنهُْمْ يَتْلُواْ
عَلَيهِْمْ ءَايَتِهِ وَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَ يُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَبَ وَ
الحِْكْمَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is who hath sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of their
own, to recite unto them His revelations and to make them grow, and to
teach them the Scriptures and Wisdom…*** ***(Sura al-Jumu’ah, 62: 2)***

The Prophet of Islam (s) came with the Miracle of the Quran for the
people to reform their psyches. The Prophets (s.a.) have gone through
untold hardships performing this task. But their success was not
commensurate with the toil put in by them. The reason for this was that
the task was very formidable.

The matter that needs our attention, and particularly that of the
ladies, is that they are like a *madrasa* or school at home. They are
the foundation for the establishment of the home and the family and are
the instructors of morality for the members of the family. In a family
the wife is a mentor for the husband, the husband is a mentor for the
wife and both together are mentors for the children.

2. Need of Patience
-------------------

When the husband and wife are intelligent, they serve each other and
spend time in grooming of the children instead of spending time on
unnecessary arguments, bickering and restlessness. These undesirable
traits can totally uproot a person.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْانسَنَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ جَزُوعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذَا مَسَّهُ الخَْيرُْ مَنُوعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الْمُصَلِّين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! Man was created anxious,***  
***Fretful when evil befalleth him***  
***And, when good befalleth him, grudging;***  
***Save worshippers (Sura Ma‘aarij, 70: 19-22)***

The human nature is, no doubt, fickle. Man forgets Allah both when he is
well provided for, and also when he is penniless. He is like the pebbles
on the street. When someone tramples on the pebbles, they scatter here
and there! The fickleness of humankind is such that when they face a
small hardship, they become restless. But when they do well and
progress, they become conceited. Social scientists consider human
fickleness as a negative trait. Such persons get upset by minor things.
There are also persons who have the trait of patience and forbearance.
About them the Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُوَفىَّ الصَّبرُِونَ أَجْرَهُم بِغَيرِْ حِسَاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Verily the steadfast will be paid their wages without stint.***
***(Sura az-Zumar, 39: 10)***

Definitely there is reward for every act of piety like prayer, fasting
etc. But there is one trait in human beings that will be handsomely
rewarded by Allah. That trait is the patience and forbearance that one
exercises in dealing with one’s spouse, in training and educating the
children and dealing with the people in the community. An intelligent
person discreetly tolerates the occasional tantrums of his wife and thus
promotes an atmosphere of peace and tranquility at home. Heaven has
eight entrances and one of them is reserved for the persons who exercise
patience in their lives! They remain patient in difficulties and offer
prayers in that spirit. These persons will enter Heaven through that
door which is at an elevated place and the Immaculate Imams (a.s.) will
use the same door for entering Heaven! Our master Imam Husayn (a.s) and
all the martyrs, who laid down their lives with forbearance in the way
of Allah, will use this threshold to enter the Heaven! When one bears
difficulties with equanimity thinking that they are the forerunners of
better days, will be rewarded amply in this world and the Hereafter. A
woman, who trains herself and her children with patience and equanimity
and discreetly faces the occasional misbehavior of her husband, will
ultimately come out victorious.

The best thing that a person can do is to banish negative traits from
his nature and in its place acquire virtues. This is even better than
Paradise. Cleverness is not acquiring Paradise or avoiding Hell. The
Shia of Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.) will, anyway, ultimately go to Heaven,
although after bearing the hardships of the grave, the *Barzakh* and the
Day of Reckoning. There is very little likelihood of their going to the
Hell. Even if a *mu'min* goes to the Hell, his stay there will be short
and his final destination is Heaven! Cleverness is not avoiding Hell,
because even the mentally handicapped will not go to Hell! Astuteness
does not lie in becoming an inmate of Heaven. Even children who die go
straight to Heaven without any accounting of the deeds! What is so
special if you reach Heaven without accounting for your deeds?
Perfection, for a person, is in achieving Allah’s pleasure through his
good deeds. If a person can achieve Allah’s pleasure, he is indeed wise
and perfect.

A person should do such deeds that his heart becomes the abode of his
Lord. This is indeed a priceless achievement, not acquiring Heaven.
Perfection is not attaining Paradise, but perfection is in making the
heart the abode of the Lord, in this world! It is narrated that the
heart of the *mu'min* is the abode of the Most Merciful. Who can make
his heart the abode of the Lord? It is the person who undergoes the
process of ridding himself of bad qualities and adorning himself with
good qualities. The home is an excellent place for achieving this. To
forgive someone or make sacrifices are virtues possessed even by
animals. The home is the best place to train oneself to acquire these
virtues while ridding oneself of negative traits like narrow-mindedness
and miserliness.

The right way of upbringing is that where no harsh methods are used.
Generally the domination of the stronger over the weak is the law of
nature in animals. If the man is stronger, should he beat his wife? If
you put grass in front of two animals, the stronger will push aside the
weaker and eat the fodder. Similarly the stronger nations today dominate
the weaker! Such domination is inhuman. Similarly if a man beats his
wife at home to get his way, he is not a Muslim, rather, he is not a
human being! Even if a wife is absolutely wrong in her attitude, the
husband should not beat her. If, may Allah forbid, a person slaps his
wife and her face turns red, he shall have to pay *diyat* equivalent to
one *mithqal* of gold. If the man is more aggressive in anger and the
wife develops black marks on her body, then the *diyat* is three
*mithqals* of gold. A husband who abuses his wife will be in a burning
tent on the Day of Reckoning.

Who is the person who develops in himself the trait of forgiveness and
clemency? Who is the person who banishes narrow-mindedness from his
nature? Which wife keeps her cool inspite of the misbehavior of the
husband? Which wife keeps the confidence of her husband and doesn’t
complain about him to outsiders, not even to her own parents? Is there
any wife who bears the harsh treatment of her husband with a smile and
prays to Allah to forgive him and guide both of them and to give them
both a place in Heaven? Such ladies attain the place of honor in the
eyes of Allah! These ladies will rise with Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.)
on the Day of Reckoning.

Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.) was a paragon of virtue, patience and
forbearance. It is narrated that she had cooked five breads, while
fasting, during Ramadan. Just prior to the time for breaking of the
fast, a mendicant came asking for food. Hadhrat Fatima (a.s.) gave all
the bread to him. The entire family broke their fast with water only.
The same thing happened on the second and the third day. Then a verse of
the Holy Quran was revealed in the praise of her family.

Don’t be under the impression that Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.) and her
family had no Need of that food. They were as hungry as any other person
who had fasted the entire day. In addition, it was not that they went
without food for only one day. They bore this hardship for three
consecutive days!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلىَ‏ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَ يَتِيمًا وَ
أَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And, (while needing it for themselves) they give away food, out of
love for Him, to the poor and the orphan and the captive..( Sura Insan,
76: 8)***

The lady who bears hardships with calmness and the man who faces
difficulties with courage will rise on the Day of Resurrection with Amir
al Mu’minin (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ْ وَ يُؤْثِرُونَ عَلىَ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَ لَوْ كاَنَ بهِِمْ خَصَاصَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…. And prefer (the needy) over their own selves, though their own lot
be poverty;… (Sura Hashr, 59: 9)***

The beauty of the revelation of this verse is that it was revealed for
Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.) and Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.) when she was ill
and he was bringing a pomegranate for her. The Imam (a.s.) came across a
blind beggar on the way who was ill too. When Imam Ali (a.s.) inquired
about his health, he said, “O master! It would be fine if I got a
pomegranate to eat!” Imam Ali (a.s.) gave him the fruit, that he was
taking home for his ailing wife, to the blind person! Any person who
wishes to be with Imam Ali (a.s.) on the Day of Judgment has to try to
emulate his quality of sacrifice, patience and forbearance. If you wish
to seek the Intercession of the Ahl al Bayt, then the men should follow
in their lives the example of Ali (a.s.) and the women that of Fatima
Zahra (a.s.).

Life is very difficult for those who are not so well-off. Do you realize
the status achieved by the impoverished man who bears his lot patiently?
Or the wife whose husband cannot meet many of the family's needs, but
she is not disrespectful towards him, instead she is patient and
appreciates him? It is mentioned in the traditions that when such people
will come on the Day of Judgment, Allah (s.w.t) will express His regret.
That is, the man who desires a comfortable life for his wife and
children but cannot fulfill his desire and the wife who desires a
comfortable life for her children but her husband is unable to meet
their expenses but despite this she does not ridicule him, rather bears
it patiently. When such people will come on the Day of Judgment, Allah
(s.w.t) will express His regret. Can there be a more elevated status
than this? When Allah will express His regrets to those people who had
to bear difficulties in the world, they will become so happy, that they
will wish that they had been shredded with scissors while they were in
the world, so that they could have achieved a more elevated status
today. Therefore it is better to learn to be patient in this world.

3. Home, A School
-----------------

The home is a school where one learns to curb the negative human
instincts. The person can nurture the sapling of nobility in this
institution. A wife, who has a disrespectful and rude husband, should
bear with him with patience so that gradually, being patient becomes a
habit with her. If she can cultivate this trait of patience within
herself, it is better than this entire world as well as the Hereafter.
Those men who have disrespectful wives too should deal with them
patiently. Those who can uproot negative traits and in its place
cultivate patience have achieved something better than the world and all
that it contains as well as Paradise and all that it contains. Allah
(s.w.t) bestows His blessings on such people.

4. More Than The Late Night Prayer
----------------------------------

Another advantage of the formation of a family is that the home and the
family are more felicitous than construction of a mosque. A woman’s
reward for serving her husband and a man’s reward for providing for his
wife and children, and for raising the children, is more than every
supererogatory prayer. It is even more felicitous than Salathul Layl.
Salatul Layl is highly meritorious and according to the Holy Quran
brings the person to the elevated place, the *Maqame Mahmood!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنَ الَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسىَ أَن يَبْعَثَكَ
رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا محَّْمُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (in a part) of the night, forsake sleep for prayer, in addition
to (what is incumbent on) thee; Maybe that exalteth thee thy Lord unto a
position praised.*** ***(Sura al-’Isra’, 17: 79)***

No one can understand the *Maqame Mahmood* until a person reaches it
himself**.** But there is more reward than Salatul Layl for the mother
who gets up in the middle of the night to feed her child, and lovingly
put him back to sleep. Similarly a wife giving comfort and satisfaction
to her husband is more felicitous. It has come in the traditions that
when the husband and wife take the Bath of Purification *(Ghusl
al-Janaba),* their major sins too are washed away!

Similarly it is mentioned in the traditions that when a husband and wife
take the Bath of Purification, the drops of water that flow down from
their bodies turn into angels who will remain alive till Doomsday! When
a wife becomes pregnant, each breath that she takes is deemed a prayer.
The difficulties that the mother faces in child bearing too are
considered as prayer. When the child is born, it is innocent and at that
time the mother too is deemed free of any sin! Allah addresses the new
mother thus, *“O lady! Start your life afresh from today! Be careful
that you don’t commit any further sins!"*

The Prophet of Islam (s) one day entered the home of Lady Fatima Zahra
(a.s.). He found Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.) busy cleaning vegetables. The
Prophet (s) said, “O Ali! Do you know how much reward is there from
Allah for helping ones spouse with her chores?" Then he said that the
reward is equivalent to that of a person who has been martyred in the
way of Allah!

A woman once told the Prophet (s), “O Prophet of Allah! I have a
question and it is not only for the women of Medina but for the
womenfolk of all time! The question is that "Why is there a difference
between the status of men and women? Why are men given a higher status
than women?" The Prophet of Islam replied, “Islam doesn’t believe in
giving any special status to men in comparison with women.” The woman
said, “The women, because they have to take care of their children and
the home they cannot attend the Friday congregation, they cannot go to
meetings, call on the sick to express their sympathies, cannot go for
optional Hajj and are sometimes even unable to perform the more
important Hajj Pilgrimage. It seems that our only function is to look
after the home and rear the children!"  
 The Prophet (s) was very happy to hear this. He smiled and said:  
 “This is the reply for the women of Medina and all the women who will
be in the world till the Day of Reckoning: ‘If a woman marries and keeps
her husband happy, then this act is equal to the Friday congregation,
the optional Hajj and other type of worship.’”

This reply of the Holy Prophet is for all wives, irrespective of whether
the lady is the wife of a toiling laborer, a philosopher, a villager or
a city dweller. But today’s women seem to have forgotten this
commandment of the Prophet (s).

It has been mentioned in the traditions that when a housewife prepares
food for the breaking of the fast (*iftar*) and serves it to the
children and other members of the house, her reward will be equal to the
reward of a martyr. Ladies think that there is reward for them only if
they go to Mecca. One lady asked me “O Aga! Please pray for me! I wish
to perform the optional Hajj in Mecca!” I told her, “If you want to
acquire the reward for the optional Hajj you should first spend money on
the beggars, old, infirm and sick persons. Imam Musa bin Jafar (a.s.)
has said that if someone gives food to a deserving family for one week,
the reward for this act will be more than that of performing 70 Hajj
pilgrimages! Hearing this the lady told me with a crestfallen face. “You
may do what you are advising me! As for me, I want to visit Mecca!”

The ladies seem to have forgotten that there is reward for them in
running the household. They have forgotten that there is a reward in the
upbringing of children. A husband working hard on his job to provide a
better living to his wife and children is like a soldier struggling in
the battle field of Jihad. Both are equally rewarding! If the man works
for the welfare of his family, smiles for his wife, thanks her, then
this gets converted into *Hoorul Ein* for him**.** Do not compare
*Hoorul Ein* with the women of this world. If a single *Hoorul Ein*
comes to this world, the people of this world will not need the moon.
The man who smiles at his wife when he enters his home and the woman who
smiles at her husband when he enters the house, have prepared *Hoorul
Ein*s for themselves. One who is desirous of acquiring the *Hoorul
Ein**,*** gardens and palaces, should make efforts to do so in this life
itself!

The Prophet of Islam (s) saw the angels working in the Heavens on the
night of his ascension *(Meraj).* They were working for sometime, then
they stopped working for some time. Jibrael (a.s.) told the Prophet (s),
“The angels here stop working for sometime because the material with
which they build comes from the world. When the material comes, the
angels work. When it stops coming, the angels too stop the work.”


