[The Twelveth Talk
==================

1 Love And Blessings At Home
----------------------------

Our discussion today will be on love, affection and generosity. Perhaps
this is the best topic amongst the topics discussed so far in this
series of talks. Therefore I intend to analyze and discuss this subject
in more detail. I pray to Allah for His help so that I am able to do
justice to the discussion.

In this world love is like the gravitational pull. Just as the world
exists in a stable condition because of the gravitational pull, so do
the families stay together because of the love amongst their components,
the members! In this universe, from small particles to the Milky Way,
all the things are in their places because of the gravitational pull. If
this pull is removed for one moment, the entire solar system will go
haywire! Similarly, if there is no love in a home, it will scatter into
small nondescript entities. We can say that a house where love doesn’t
exist is like a grave, whose dweller is being punished. A house devoid
of love is like an abode of the living dead! Without love, life is akin
to a slow death accompanied by troubles and tribulations. But it is
Allah’s kindness that when a family is formed, He bestows the natural
instinct of love to its members.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنْ ءَايَتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكمُ مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَجًا
لِّتَسْكُنُواْ إِلَيْهَا وَ جَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَّوَدَّةً وَ رَحْمَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And of His signs is this: He created for you helpmates from
yourselves that ye might find rest in them, and He ordained between you
love and mercy……*** ***(Sura ar-Rum, 30: 21)***

The Holy Quran says that among the signs of Allah in this world, one of
the signs is that He has created woman for man, so that they can join
together to establish a family. They also provide comfort to each other.
To help the formation and growth of the family Allah has endowed the
instinct of love and affection to human beings. As you know, for every
foundation there will be the Need of cement and concrete. No building
can be constructed only with stone and steel. With stone and steel the
correct quantities of sand and cement have to be used to provide the
right binding quality to the structure. The matrimonial foundation too
has similar requirements. If you can recall, in one of my earlier talks
I had narrated a tradition of the Prophet (s) in which he has said:

*“In the eyes of Allah, the foundation of matrimonial alliance in Islam
is the most likeable." (Wasailus Shia, Vol 14, page 43)*

The sand and cement to bind this foundation are the instincts of love
and affection between man and wife. If there is no concrete in the
foundation of a building it will be weak, similarly if there is no love
among the inhabitants of a house it will be desolate. Two things require
our consideration in this connection. The first is to find out what is
the thing that is harmful to the formation and growth of the family. The
second thing is the consideration of the factors that promote love and
affection in marital lives of people.

2 Actions That Reduce The Love - Anger
--------------------------------------

The first thing that harms love is misbehavior and anger. If the wife
uses coarse language and gets angry with her husband, then her words
will be like a slap on the husband’s emotions. Similarly, if the husband
is ill-mannered, his initial misbehavior will strike a blow to the love
of the woman. And if the trend continues for long it will destroy the
love between them, and then love will turn into abhorrence and hate. It
is very important that we refrain from tongue-lashing at home to
maintain the atmosphere of love and affection.

3. Abusive Language And Beating
-------------------------------

I have said repeatedly that if a man or a woman has the habit of using
offensive and abusive language, then they have no character. Allah, the
Prophet (s) and the Imams (a.s.) have strongly disapproved of this
habit. One person was a constant companion of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq
(a.s.); wherever the Imam (a.s.) went, the person followed him. One day
the Imam (a.s.) was traveling and the person was with him too. Due to
the fatigue of travel, the person’s slave was falling behind. He called
for the slave, but he didn’t hear the master. Even when he called for a
second time the slave didn’t hear him. Now the person got angry and
shouted profanities at the slave calling him the illegitimate issue of
his parents. When the Imam (a.s.) heard the use of foul language, he sat
down and pressed his hand to his forehead as a mark of displeasure. Then
he said, “You have accused the slave’s mother of adultery! I was
thinking all the time that you are a good person while, in fact, you are
not!” The man said, “O son of the Prophet (s)! The slave’s mother is a
foreign idolatress!” The Imam (a.s.) said, “Every nation has some norms
of matrimony. From today you have no right to be with me or travel with
me!” The narrator said that from that day he never saw the man in the
company of the Imam (a.s.). What lesson do we draw from this narrative?
When someone abuses his child or wife in anger, even if they are at
fault, he will earn the displeasure of Allah. This abuse takes a
terrible human form and will be with the person in the Barzakh, and on
the Day of Reckoning and put him to shame!

Hadhrat Ayesha was once sitting with the Prophet (s). Two or three Jews
came there with the purpose of ridiculing the Prophet (s). One of them
passed near him and mispronounced the greeting as “Asam alaikum!”
meaning***,*** "death on you.” The Prophet (s) replied, “Alaikum!"
Meaning, “I wish the same for you!” Hadhrat Ayesha was upset at the
impudence of the Jew but kept quiet. After a while another Jew came and
repeated the same act. When the third Jew came and did the same thing,
Hadhrat Ayesha lost her cool. When someone gets angry, it becomes
difficult to be patient and just. In her anger she said, “What are you
saying you sons of pigs!” She had remembered from the Holy Quran that
the Jews are the people whose ancestors had become pigs. The Prophet (s)
was angry at her utterance. He said, “Ayesha! What have you done?” She
said, “You are seeing what these mischievous Jews did?” The Prophet (s)
said, “Whatever they said was properly replied to by me. There was no
need to abuse them!” He then added, “Ayesha***!*** Don’t you know that
an abuse, if it takes on a form, it will be a very ferocious thing and
will chase the person in the grave, in Barzakh and on the Day of
Reckoning.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيرٍْ محُّْضَرًا وَ مَا
عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَ بَيْنَهُ أَمَدَا
بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when every soul will find itself confronted with all that
it hath done of good and all that it hath done of evil (every soul) will
long that there might be a mighty space of distance between it and that(
evil) (Sura Ali- Imran, 3: 30)***

This means that all the good deeds that you do during your lifetime will
accompany you on the Day of Reckoning and your bad deeds will accompany
you too, but they will have such terrifying forms, that the person will
be ashamed. The Holy Quran says, on that Day these persons will utter,
“How I wish there was a great distance between me and my foul deeds!”
Therefore, a Muslim has to take care to control his angry outbursts and
abusive language.

Among the maxims of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s) there is one that he has
specifically said about the Shias. He said, “O Shias! Be upright in your
morals! Your behavior should prompt others to say in appreciation that
you are the followers of Imam Sadiq (a.s.)! It is not befitting for a
lady to use abusive language against her children and the husband or
others. Similarly a teacher should always speak softly in the class.
Corporal punishment and beating is such a sin that the Prophet (s) used
to announce from the pulpit that if a person slaps his wife, he will go
to the Hell with shame on the Day of Judgement! The caretaker of Hell
(*Malike Jahannum*) will be ordered to slap the person 70 times with
Hellfire! A good Muslim and a decent person never beats anyone. And if
there is a woman who beats her husband, then she deserves to be called a
witch and not a wife!

4. Insulting Talk
-----------------

Another thing that destroys love is hurting people with ones talk. The
retribution for such acts is so much that Imam Jafar al-Sadiq has said
that Allah says:  
*"A person who insults any of my ‘wali’, wages a war against Me.”*

Everyone knows the consequences one has to face in this world as well as
the Hereafter for waging a war against Allah.

If a husband praises the looks of a stranger woman in front of his wife
and a wife praises the handsomeness of a stranger man in the presence of
her husband, then there is no chance of virtue prevailing in that house.

The Prophet of Islam (s) says that if a woman says to her husband that
she has not found anything good in his house, then all her good deeds
will become null and void. Similarly if a husband tells his wife that he
has found no good in her, his good deeds too will become null and void.

We must take care that we don’t insult or ridicule anyone. The wives
must exercise special care that they don’t talk against their husbands
in front of others. Similarly men should not talk ill of their wives in
front of others, because these acts invite great punishments. Injury
through words is of two types. Some injuries heal quickly. This means
that someone does strike a blow through his tongue, but it does not
injure the heart much. Now this assumes the form of a scorpion, which
goes with that person to his grave, and troubles him for some time. Then
this punishment is withdrawn. However, if the injury inflicted by the
tongue is deeper, it assumes the form of such a scorpion that will not
only trouble him till the Day of Judgment, but also keep stinging him in
Hell.

Someone saw a pious old person in a dream. When asked about his
condition, the old person said that he was very comfortable, he owned
gardens, had palaces and *Hoorul Ein**;*** the angels visited him and he
had many servants to work for him. His only problem was that a scorpion
bit his foot every morning. When asked why he was continuously suffering
this bite, he said that during his life he had hurt someone with his
talk and had not bothered to apologize. He said that he had assumed it
to be a trivial matter and so had not repented (tauba) for it. By not
repenting, he had let the scorpion remain alive. The water of repentance
(tauba) can clean everything and can repel every danger. Unfortunately,
some people actually feel relieved after having insulted someone. Some
people say that they will feel at ease only when they have given a
thorough verbal thrashing to those with whom they have some differences!
What they are actually saying is that they will not be at ease until
they have produced a hoard of scorpions which will keep biting them from
the first day in the grave to the Day of Reckoning.

 Women can hurt people with their tongue-lashing as if it is done with a
sword. Then she says: now I am at peace but she is mistaken. She is not
at peace, because she is unaware of the type of snake her action has
formed. These snakes and scorpions can only be seen by those people who
have the insight to do so; they see these through the eyes of the heart.
That snake has entwined itself around their necks. Do they not see it?
But they will see it before going to the grave when Izraeel comes to
take away their spirits. At that moment, according to the Holy Quran,
their vision will become very sharp. Then the wife and the husband will
see the verbal injuries they have inflicted on the other, in the form of
a black snake which will have wrapped itself around their necks. This
black snake will go with them to their graves and keep biting them till
Qiyamah. Then they will know how dangerous it is to inflict verbal
injuries on others.

The husbands and wives should take care to abstain from tongue-lashing.
They should not belittle each other, particularly in comparison with
others. These acts strike such a blow to love, that sometimes love turns
into hate. Kindness turns into hard-heartedness. Then life becomes a
burden and the home appears desolate like the grave. I appeal to all the
ladies and men to control their tongues and save themselves from such
troubles.

The Prophet (s) once asked his companion about the strongest aspect of
the *Iman* (Faith). What is the thing that can earn deliverance for a
person? One person said, “O Prophet of Allah (s)! It is salah (prayer)!”
Some said it is fasting, others said it is charity, fighting in the way
of Allah, and so on. Everyone tried to mention something or other. The
Prophet (s) said, “Everyone is right in his own way! But the thing that
is very important for the deliverance of a person is that a person
befriends his Muslim brothers for the sake of Allah and is the enemy of
the enemies of Islam, for the sake of Allah! He should befriend his wife
not for any carnal reasons but for the sake of Allah, because she is a
Muslimah! If he befriends her only for his carnal satisfaction, it is
not a sign of his masculinity, because then he is no different from an
animal!

As I have mentioned earlier, carnal satisfaction is a small benefit
among the benefits of marriage. But a man should love his wife because
she is a Muslimah. The wife should love her husband because he is a
Muslim, she should be proud that he is a Muslim. In the same way, the
husband should be proud that his wife is a Muslimah, recites salah and
fasts,

Muhammad ibn Hakim says that he was seated with Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) when an old person, with bent shoulders and a staff in his hand
came there and first greeted the Imam (a.s.) and then greeted every
person present individually. Then he told to the Imam (a.s.), “O Son of
the Prophet (s)! I am desirous of sitting near you!” The Imam (a.s.)
replied, “You may sit!” The person sat down and said, “O Son of the
Prophet! I accept what you have declared legitimate as legitimate; and
the things that you term as forbidden, I consider them forbidden! I
consider your friends as my friends not because they are my relatives,
but only on account of their being your friends. I consider your enemies
as my enemies. Am I among those who will get deliverance?" Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) was very pleased and said, “Definitely! I was once seated
with my father, Imam Sajjad (a.s.) when a person came to him and talked
the same way as you have done today. Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) told him,
‘May your heart always remain happy! At the time of your death the
Prophet (s), Hadhrat Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.), Hadhrat Fatima Zahra
(a.s.) and Hasnain (a.s.) will be there. Then your thirst will be
quenched with the water from the pool of Kauthar. You will be in the
company of these Five Infallible persons!” Muhammad ibn Hakim further
says that when Imam Muhammad Baqir narrated this, the old person started
crying with joy and said, “O Son of the Prophet! Kindly relate the
tradition once again!” The Imam (a.s.) acceded to the person’s request.
Thereafter the old man became restless and fell unconscious. The Imam
(a.s.) revived him. After regaining consciousness the person touched the
body of the Imam (a.s.) as a mark of respect.

The Prophet of Islam (s) used to milk the sheep, sweep the floor of his
house and make bread. We will be truly respected men when we extend a
helping hand to our wives with their chores at home. Similarly the
ladies must take care of the husbands’ comfort when they return home
after a long day’s toil to earn the livelihood for the family in the
highly competitive environment. Earning a livelihood and dealing with
all kinds of people in the workplaces is not easy. When he comes home in
the evening, he needs rest, he needs a peaceful place. Your offensive
language, stern talk, and unethical behavior will not provide him with
the rest he needs. The wife should desire for her husband what she
desires for herself. If the husband becomes irritable, the wife should
respond with a smile.

When a husband returns home and finds that his wife is not dressed in
the apparel of his choice, he should not express his displeasure. If the
wife is short-tempered, despite the tiredness after the day’s toil, the
husband should enter the house with a smile to soothe her disturbed
nerves. You should desire for her what you desire for yourself, and you
should not desire for her what you do not desire for yourself.
Inshallah, Allah’s blessings will be upon you in this world and in the
Hereafter.


