The Thirteenth Talk
===================

1. The Birth Of Imam Hasan (a.s.)
---------------------------------

Today is very auspicious! On this happy day Imam Hasan (a.s.) was born!
Let’s all congratulate Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s) in celebration of the
happy event! I do pray, and hope, that the Prophet (s) will bless this
gathering on the happy occasion! I hope, and pray, that every one of us
goes from this meeting with attainment of our legitimate wishes! To suit
the happy occasion, I shall first narrate a tradition about Imam Hasan
(a.s.). I hope this tradition becomes a beacon of guidance for all of
us.

Once a person came to the presence of Imam Hasan (a.s.) and made a
fervent appeal for help. The Imam (a.s.) came out of his house with the
person. When he found Imam Husayn (a.s.) on the way, he asked the
person, “Why didn’t you approach this brother of mine for help?” The man
said, “O son of the Prophet! I had noticed that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
in the mosque doing his *I'tekaaf* (retirement to the mosque for
continued prayer). At that moment Imam Hasan (a.s.) said the following
words that should be a source of guidance for us:

*“If you had approached Imam Husayn (a.s.) during his I'tekaaf for his
help, and he had fulfilled your need, then the reward for him would have
been more than continuous prayer (I'tekaaf) for one month!”* *(Bihar,
Vol 74, Page 335)*

If someone provides relief to a Muslim, his reward will be more than
that for spending a month in the mosque praying day and night! I,
therefore, appeal to all the believing men and women that, to the extent
possible, they should provide help and assistance to Muslims.

A wife who helps her husband and a husband who takes care of the needs
of his wife too shall earn this reward. .This will be the theme of our
talk today.

2. Conceit
----------

One thing that destroys love and affection is conceit and pride in
persons. If men and women are proud and conceited, then they are exposed
to great dangers. Allah’s Prophets (a.s.) used to object to proud
persons because they used to interfere with the mission of the Prophets.
They were so conceited and proud that they never lent their ears to
anyone. Conceit and pride are so dangerous that the Holy Quran says that
if people acquire these foul traits, then these traits become a part of
their nature and they become rebellious and vain. They become so
rebellious that on the Day of Judgment too, they will remain conceited
and proud in front of Allah. The Holy Quran further says that when these
conceited, proud and vain persons are brought to the grounds of Judgment
on Doomsday***,*** they will learn that, in fact, they are destined for
Hell. Then***,*** they will object to Allah and accuse Him of making a
mistake. They will swear that they are good people and will say that
Allah is making a mistake by unjustly assigning them to Hell!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَبْعَثهُُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا فَيَحْلِفُونَ لَهُ كَمَا
يحَْلِفُونَ لَكمُ‏ْ وَ يحَْسَبُونَ أَنهَُّمْ عَلىَ‏ شىَ‏ْءٍ أَلَا
إِنهَُّمْ هُمُ الْكَذِبُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when Allah will raise them all together, then will they
swear unto Him as they (now) swear unto you, and they will fancy that
they have some standing. Lo! Is it not they who are the liars? (Sura
Mujaadalah, 58: 18))***

The Holy Quran says that even on the Day of Judgment these proud and
conceited persons will behave the same way as they did in this world.
They don’t see anything other than their own point of view. Those who
are proud in this world will be the same in front of Allah. I fervently
appeal to the ladies and the men that they should refrain from becoming
proud. The woman should not think that she is better than her husband.
She should not boast about herself, her parents or other family members
to her husband. She should not be vain about her good looks. If she is
educated, has a diploma, attends *darse kharji,* then she should not
brag about it to her husband. If she becomes proud and develops
self-love, the first person she harms is herself. Such women cannot rule
over the hearts of their husbands. Similarly the husband should not be
proud about his wealth or family. May Allah keep us all away from this
danger. The ladies should be very careful and never consider their
husbands inferior to others. They should not air pride over the
qualities of their fathers, brothers and others. This is wrong, even if
her husband is poor, while her brother is rich. Even if your parents are
rich and influential in the society, your responsibility is to keep your
husband happy at all times, and consider him better than your relatives.

The ladies should always uphold the respect of their parents. They
should be kind to their siblings. But all this should not be at the cost
of the attention that they have to give to their husbands. The husband
should also respect others, but must take special care of his wife.
There are several types of conceit and every type has its own bitter
fruits. One very bitter fruit of conceit is that it destroys love
between people!

3. Types Of Conceit
-------------------

One type of conceit results in argument and quarrel. This means that the
person insists on getting his way and wants others to accept his point
of view. This trait is more pronounced in some persons. They tend to
force their opinions on others. They come up with meaningless arguments
and expect others to agree with them. They interrupt during
conversations and they are very voluble. Being wrongly stubborn is a
sin. Abu Dawood says that he was amongst those two or three persons who
used to argue about certain matters of Islam, each one wanting to
present Islam according to his own opinion. Once, when they were in the
midst of a heated argument, the Prophet of Islam (s) arrived there. He
heard their heated argument. Abu Dawood says that he had never seen the
Prophet (s) so angry. Then the Prophet (s) said, “Quarreling and arguing
is not the way of Muslims. I will not intercede on their behalf on the
Day of Judgment if they indulge in such things." He (s) added, “First
Allah ordered me to stop people from idol worship and polytheism. The
next thing he ordered me to do was to ***stop*** people from argument
and quarrel!”

Ponder upon the severity of this tradition. This is an illness, which
has no cure, but 90% of people suffer from this ailment of arguing and
quarrelling. The Holy Quran says that quarrel and argument is instigated
by Satan.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنَّ الشَّيَطِينَ لَيُوحُونَ إِلىَ أَوْلِيَائهِمْ لِيُجَدِلُوكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***… Lo! The devils do inspire their minions to dispute (Sura al An’aam,
6: 121)***

The *Shayateen* instigate their friends and followers to argue and
quarrel with you. Therefore, every person who argues and fights is a
friend of Satan, and in turn Satan is his friend, because these are
satanic activities, not righteous ones. If a woman creates a hue and cry
in front of her husband just to get her way, or if a husband picks up a
fight with his wife for the same reason, they destroy the roots of love.
Quarrels destroy love. Therefore, I request the ladies, in particular
not to fight or quarrel with their husbands. Don’t try to impose your
way or your opinion on your husband. If the husband is wrongly adamant,
the best course for the wife is to exercise patience. If the wife, in
her ignorance, becomes adamant, the husband should discreetly avoid
argument with her.

The Prophet of Allah (s) has said whoever exercises patience at the time
of an argument, will be rewarded with three gardens in Paradise. Of
these three gardens two are named *Ridwan and Aden.* The third garden
has no particular name.

4. Stubborness
--------------

Another type of conceit manifests itself in stubbornness in behaviour
with others. There are people who are so stubborn that they prefer to
jump into a deep well rather than change their point of view. This is a
very harmful trait. The Holy Quran says that people are of two types.
The first category is that of persons who accept the truth. When they
recognize the truth, their eyes water with sheer happiness.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذَا سَمِعُواْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلىَ الرَّسُولِ تَرَى أَعْيُنَهُمْ
تَفِيضُ مِنَ الدَّمْعِ مِمَّا عَرَفُواْ مِنَ الْحَق
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When they listen to that which hath been revealed unto the messenger,
thou seest their eyes overflowing with tears because of their
recognition of the truth (Sura al Maida, 5: 83)***

On reading the Holy Quran, there is a group of people who recognize the
truth and their eyes water in recognition of this fact. But there is
another group who are not willing to recognise and accept the truth.
They are willing to eat stones, or burn in the Hellfire, but stubbornly
refuse to accept the truth. .

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذْ قَالُواْ اللَّهُمَّ إِن كاَنَ هَذَا هُوَ الْحَقَّ مِنْ عِندِكَ
فَأَمْطِرْ عَلَيْنَا حِجَارَةً مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ أَوِ ائْتِنَا
بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when they said: O Allah! If this be indeed the truth from Thee,
then rain down stones on us or bring on us some painful doom!***
***(Sura al Al-Anfal, 8, 8: 32)***

There was a group of people who refused to accept the truth and said: We
are waiting, send a boulder from Heaven and destroy us, but we will not
accept the truth.

Some ladies are stubborn. They refuse to accept facts and reality;
rather they even refuse to listen. Similarly, some men simply refuse to
listen. The poor wife is talking for the last half hour, but the husband
refuses to listen. He keeps saying “no” to all that she says, but if you
ask him what his wife has just said, he is unable to answer. If she says
that you are saying no, but what did I say, that you have responded with
a “no”, his answer is: “no”.

Occupation and colonization are horrific acts and grave sins because
these things turn individuals or masses into slaves. May Allah curse
those who established the concept of mass slavery. Those countries that
unjustly control other countries are destined to doom. But when a wife
is able to conquer the heart of her husband, it is a virtuous thing. Man
and wife should make efforts to conquer each others’ hearts. But alas,
the wife does not know how to conquer the heart of her husband or rule
over his heart. One of the two things that come in the way of conquering
the spouse’s heart is stubbornness. Those who are stubborn are mentally
ill. If, god forbid, your children are stubborn, you have to gradually
cure them from this malady, but you can do this only if you yourself are
free from this illness.

5. Unrealistic Expectations
---------------------------

Another type of conceit results in excessive expectations. Some women
have excessive and unreasonable demands that their husbands cannot
fulfil. For example, a husband earns 5,000 a month, but the wife demands
a dress costing 5,000 for eid. The husband says that he cannot afford to
buy so expensive a dress. The wife insists that she must have it. Do not
have unrealistic expectations. Even the men should exercise care in this
matter. If you have not bought meat, do not expect to be served
meat-balls.

I appeal to the ladies that if their husbands have limited incomes, they
should not insist on spending money like some of their better placed
friends. Certain women, whose husbands are officers, want to for example
change the carpet. Inspite of the wife repeatedly pleading with the
husband, he maintains that he cannot afford to do so. Expecting too much
is a sin. Ask only for that which your husband can afford. Men should
ask only for what is in the house. If a man taxes his wife with a task
which is beyond her ability then, on the Day of Judgement Allah will
burden him with a thing which will be beyond his capacity.

The fire of Hell is extremely difficult to bear. The destination of
people who expect too much from others is Hell, if they die without
repenting. A wife who knows that her husband cannot fulfil her desire,
and in spite of knowing this embarrasses him by making demands, will be
put to shame by Allah on the Day of Judgement. Self-respect is the most
valuable thing for anyone. A person said that Imam Husayn (a.s.) gave
away everything in the way of Allah excepting two things - his faith and
his self-respect! Self-esteem and self-respect for men, especially in
front of their spouses is of utmost importance. Wives should ensure that
the self-respect of their husbands is not hurt at home in any manner.
They must take care not to make unjustified demands. Similarly wives too
expect to be respected by the husbands. The husbands are requested to
respect their wives. The husband should not wound the personality of his
wife, nor tax her with unrealistic expectations.

House-keeping and caring for the children are difficult tasks. It is the
woman’s responsibility to keep herself and the children clean and tidy,
take care of the house, and be ready to receive the husband when he
returns home in the evening. But if it so happens that tea or food is
not ready when the husband returns home, he should prepare this himself,
instead of complaining. Don’t expect too much from your partner. Don’t
try to dominate your spouse. If a truck has a load-capacity of 5 tonnes,
but you load it with 8 tonnes, it will breakdown after 2 miles. Similar
is the case of the wife who tries to dominate her husband, or vice
versa. If you overload the truck, it will stop working, it will break
down. Pity on the husband who has no tranquillity and happiness. Pity
the husband who is not thoughtful in dealing with his spouse. According
to Imam Musa bin Jaffer (a.s.) such a person has lost his world as well
his Hereafter! Husband and wife trying to dominate each other and
expecting too much from each other are the bitter fruits of the trait of
conceit and pride.

6. Not Accepting Criticism
--------------------------

One of the fruits of conceit is refusing to accept any criticism. The
ladies must consider seriously what I am going to say: Backbiting is
forbidden in Islam but criticism is not! To seek out other peoples'
faults, whether it is meant as a joke or not, done in their presence or
in their absence, is not permitted. But criticism is constructive. Like
a mirror, it acquaints the person with his faults. Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq
(a.s.) has said:

*Amongst my brothers my favourite is one who informs me of my failings
and defects.* *(Bihar, Vol 74, Page 282)*

Criticising people is necessary but more important is to accept and take
constructive criticisms in the right spirit. People face difficulties in
this matter. Sometimes the husband points out to his wife her
weaknesses. But she should accept this criticism. It is not enough to
verbally accept the criticism by saying “Okay, okay”. She must make
practical efforts to bring about changes in her behaviour. When an
ill-mannered husband cannot get along with the children, or addresses
them using foul language, the wife should politely and discreetly point
out that his behaviour will affect the children - they may fall ill. Now
it is the responsibility of the husband to make a serious attempt to
mend his ways. But, generally, in our homes, instead of constructive
criticism, we create a hue and cry, and complain. We don’t accept
criticism; especially the ladies are unwilling to accept any criticism.
This is a very serious issue, because this attitude destroys the love
for the wife in the husband's heart. When a husband repeatedly tells her
something, but the wife pays no heed to his advice and criticisms, he
turns indifferent to her. The end result will be that there will be no
love left between the two!


