The Fourteenth Talk
===================

1. The Causes Of Continued Love And Affection
---------------------------------------------

Our discussion is about love and sympathy. Today we shall talk about the
acts that promote love between man and wife, even if they have grown
very old. They might have children at home; even daughters-in-law etc.
But despite all this, there will be no decrease in the love between the
old couple!

2. Trivial But Important
------------------------

The psychologists talk about “small, but big (important) things”. This
means that there are certain things that, although small in appearance,
might prove very important for making or marring an individual’s
personality.

3. Taking Care Of Cleanliness And Hygiene
-----------------------------------------

One of the most important things stressed by Islam is hygiene. A
Muslim’s house has to be clean, the courtyard, doors and clothes must be
clean and pure. The linen used in the house has to be clean and tidy.
When he goes to a meeting, he should be properly and neatly attired. But
we find that a lot of people don’t take care of their hygiene. They
don’t brush their teeth properly. Their feet stink with sweat. They
seldom wash their socks and the feet, considering it to be something
unimportant. On the face of it, it appears to be a trivial thing, but
plays a big role in disgracing this person. When someone notes foul
smell from someone’s mouth, body or feet: he begins to dislike his
company. Sometimes people silently curse such unhygienic persons. Such
persons even attend the congregations in the mosques and religious
gatherings in their unhygienic state. Some people wear shirts with
soiled collars, and consider it to be a small matter, but this can lead
to their disgrace.

Whenever the Prophet of Islam (s) prepared to go to any meeting, he
always looked at himself in the mirror. He used to take meticulous care
of his person and his dress, making sure these were neat and clean,
before he left home for such meetings. It is not necessary that a
person’s dress be expensive. What Islam stresses on is cleanliness. Some
ladies neglect personal cleanliness while at home. When their husbands
return home after the day’s work, they find the wives shabby with
dishevelled hair and crumpled clothes. Probably because she has to look
after her children, she does not give much importance to such things.
But this amounts to carelessness in acquiring the love of the husband.
It is wrong to take this lightly or treat it as a joke. It may appear
small, but actually it is an important thing. Some men don't brush their
teeth properly, whereas the Prophet of Islam (s) has said that a person
who offers one rakaat of prayer after brushing his teeth will get reward
equal to that for offering seventy prayers.. He (s) also said that if he
did not fear that it would put the Muslims in difficulty, he (s) would
have made it obligatory. If the husband does not brush the first, second
or third time, the wife may bear it, but then it will create a feeling
of aversion in his wife. Even if she doesn’t show her dislike for him,
her heart will no longer love him. Similarly, if the wife’s mouth
stinks, the husband will not like her. It is very unfortunate if a
husband dislikes his wife because her mouth or body stinks. Shame on the
man who is unclean at home. Cleanliness at home and in the society is of
prime importance. The Prophet of Islam (s) gave so much importance to
hygiene that he said, *"Cleanliness is part of Faith"*

If you want to recognize a true Muslim, check whether he observes
cleanliness or not. You should look at his cleanliness and hygiene! If
he lacks in cleanliness, then his faith is defective. If one observes
cleanliness then according to Psychologists, it is a small, but
important thing.

4. Expressing Friendship
------------------------

It has come in the traditions that if you befriend a Muslim, you must
express your friendship to him. It is mentioned in the traditions that a
man should express his love for his wife by telling her that he loves
her. Similarly a wife should express to the husband her love for him.

The Prophet (s) has said that when a husband expresses his friendship
and love to his wife, she will never forget it. In common practice we
consider it unimportant to express our friendship and love to others. If
a husband and wife love each other, they should mention it to the
spouse, at least once a month if not everyday. Not doing this amounts to
carelessness. It is embarrassing for some women to do this, but they
must say it. Words like these or *'Assalamun alaikum'* are an expression
of affection. When you meet others you should enquire about them, and
express your affection for them, because Islam desires Muslims to be
friends with each other. Islam wants us to maintain ties with each
other, and has declared cutting of the ties of kinship a major sin.
Islam does not like those who do not visit others or those who remain
aloof, because these meetings increase our love for each other.

Husbands and wives should express their love for each other. Whenever
they meet, they should have a smile on their faces. This may seem a
small matter, but is very important for gaining love of the spouse. It
has been mentioned in the traditions that the wife should freshen
herself before her husband arrives home after the day’s work. She should
wear the dress of his choice and adorn herself. She should lay the table
for dinner with the cutlery etc. She should quieten the children so that
they do not disturb their father who comes tired from work!

It is also recorded in the traditions that when the husband knocks at
the door on his return from work, the wife herself should open the door
to welcome him and not ask a son or a daughter to attend on him. She
should greet him (say salaam) with a smile. These attentions might
appear trivial, or the women may object that the man is being given too
much importance, but these things go a long way in cementing the love
between the couple. With such an attitude of the wife, even the most
ill-tempered of husbands will, sooner or later, metamorphose into a
loving and caring partner!

5. Giving Gifts
---------------

It has come in the traditions that when a man returns home after a visit
he should carry a gift, though very small, for his wife! Every care,
worry and anger should throw away when he reaches the threshold of his
home. When the wife opens the door and greets him, he should respond
with a pleasant smile. In fact, he should take precedence in greeting
the wife! Then he should offer affectionately the gift he has brought
for her. When dinner is served, he should thank the wife, even if he
does not like the food. Some husbands might think that these
pleasantries are trivial, unnecessary things. But they go a long way in
strengthening the love between the man and wife! A few loving words from
you is all that is required for her worries, anger and tiredness to
disappear. We don’t take care of these small things and therefore the
atmosphere at our homes is cold, devoid of warmth, and dull! When we
investigate, we find that in many a home the cause of this cold
environment is the wife. The husband enters the house and finds his wife
dirty, then she does not even receive him warmly, even if the husband
loves her, his love will gradually wear away. When the husband comes
home and the wife serves him a dish he does not like and says, "This
dish has been cooked by your aunt, eat it if you want you, otherwise
remain hungry” - the result of this attitude is obvious. When the
husband comes home, instead of giving her a gift, shouts at her, then a
fight breaks out and there is a hue and cry all around. If you want to
maintain the cool breeze of love and affection in your house, you must
pay attention to these small but very important matters.

6. Asmayee And The Patient Woman
--------------------------------

Asmayee was Mamoon's vizier. Mamoon was an evil person. Asmayee was a
secretive person. He once went on a hunt and was separated from his
group. Islam prohibits hunting for pleasure, but the Bani Umayya and
Bani Abbas indulged in this act very frequently. They used to hunt and
kill animals for pleasure. Asmayee says that when he lost track of his
group and was trying to find them, he spotted a tent. He went to the
tent and found a young and beautiful woman sitting there. With her
permission, he too sat there. He asked for some water to quench his
thirst. But she said, “I don’t have the permission of my husband!” Then
she added, “I have some milk for *my* breakfast, which I can give you.”
She gave the milk to Asmayee and he drank it. He waited in the tent for
about an hour but the woman appeared restless during all that period.
Then he saw a camel rider arriving near the tent. The person, dark and
old, was the woman’s husband. Asmayee was surprised that the pretty
damsel was married to the ugly old man.

The woman helped her husband to dismount from the camel, helped him to
wash his hands and feet, and very respectfully took him into the tent
and sat in front of him. The old man was very rude and ill-mannered. The
more he got rude, the more polite the woman became. Ultimately the
husband became so rude that Asmayee thought it better to bear the heat
of the sun than sit in the comfort of the tent. He went out of the tent
but the old man didn’t bother about him. Since Asmayee was a guest, the
woman came to the door of the tent to bid him good-bye. Once out of the
tent he mentioned to the woman that, despite her youth and beauty, she
was serving her husband politely, while he continued to be rude to her.
The woman said angrily, “Asmayee! I did not expect you to talk ill of my
husband behind his back and try to create a rift between us!” Then she
added, “I have heard a tradition of the Prophet of Islam (s) and I try
to follow it. Whatever is there in the world is transient. Only the
Hereafter is eternal***.*** We have to go to our graves. We have to face
the Barzakh. Our destiny is either Heaven or Hell. That is eternal! The
transient things of the world, good and bad, will be over in the
twinkling of an eye. I want to act on this tradition to become deserving
of the Heaven. I have heard that the Prophet (s) has said:  
*"Faith has two parts—patience during hardships and gratefulness for the
Bounties.”*

A Muslim must bear hardships with patience, and thank Allah for His
blessings. I serve my husband and bear his rudeness with patience so
that my faith becomes perfect, and it becomes my thanks to my Lord for
giving me youth and beauty.”

This is a truly Islamic lady. Opposed to this, sometimes women use the
foulest possible language. Even a totally mannerless person will not use
such words A few days ago I had told you that husbands and wives should
not insult each other. I had asked the ladies never to compare the
financial status of their husbands with that of other men. The husbands
too should not praise other women in comparison with their wives. Some
men indiscreetly tell their wives that other women are prettier than
them. This one indiscreet utterance will destroy whatever little love
the wife had for the husband. As far as the husband is concerned, it is
a very small sentence, but it is big enough to kill love. On the
contrary, the husband should tell his wife that he has not seen anyone
as pretty as her. Both the man and the woman should serve each other and
pay compliments to each other. One of the situations in which lying is
not *Haram* includes praising the looks of the wife even if she is
actually ugly. Similarly the wives should also sing the praises of the
manliness of their husbands. These small attentions go a long way in
cementing love and affection between the couples.

It has come in the traditions that when a woman perfumes herself and
goes out and *namahram* men smell her fragrance; or if her bangles
jingle and attract the attention of *namahram* men, the angels in the
Firmament will curse the woman. Similarly when a woman wears a perfume
and goes out, the ground on which she walks and everything else on it
curses her. She will be cursed till she returns back home. I appeal to
the ladies that the *chador* that they wear for going out should not
have any fragrance. Again I appeal to the ladies not to perfume
themselves when going out. If *namahram* men happen to smell their
perfume, the angels, the walls, the earth and everything else in the
environment curse them. Don’t be under the impression that the inanimate
things in the environs don’t have any sense.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِن مِّن شىَ‏ْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بحَِمْدِهِ وَ لَكِن لَّا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…..and there is not a thing but hymneth His praise; but ye understand
not their praise…..*** ***(Sura al-’Isra’, 17: 44)***

If man has the faculty of hearing, he can hear the pillars of buildings
saying *Allahu Akbar!* A lady who wears perfume only for her husband is
praised by the angels the whole night till dawn! Allah, the Prophet (s)
the Imams (a.s.) and the angels- all will be pleased with her.

For a wife wearing perfume before retiring to bed might be a very
ordinary thing, but for cementing love with her spouse it is a very
important act. Wearing an expensive *chador* for going out or moving
about in the street dressed in attractive apparel, without wearing a
*chador,* does not enhance the personality of the ladies in the least.
In fact, this will only serve to tarnish their personality! The Holy
Quran ordains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
َّ وَ لَا تَبرََّجْنَ تَبرَُّجَ الْجَهِلِيَّةِ الْأُولى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***….. and display not your finery like the display of the ignorance of
yore…..*** ***(Sura al Ahzaab, 33:*** ***33)***

The Holy Quran addresses the women and says that they are Muslim ladies
and possess a personality of their own. They should not flirt around in
finery everywhere like the women of the days of ignorance. When they go
out on the street their dress should not be such that it attracts
*namahram* men. They should cover their faces with veils so that
*namahram* men cannot see their faces. If a woman has a good personality
and wants to adorn herself, she should adorn herself for her husband.
Similarly, the husband should try to look good for his wife.

No one should be under the impression that expressing ones’ personality
means creating a hue and cry at home, shouting and terrifying others
like wild animals do. Some husbands say that if they don’t do this,
others will dominate them. This is a major flaw in their thinking. They
should try to become men who are soft-spoken. Instead of using harsh
language with the wife, the husband should tell her that he loves her
and likes her and works so hard so that she can have a comfortable life.
He should tell her that it gives him pleasure to see her in comfort.
Creating a furore at home and terrifying the members of the family are
not signs of manhood! Helping the wife, keeping oneself neat and clean,
using a soft and sweet tongue are the signs of manhood.

One day the Prophet of Islam (s) was in the room of Hadhrat Ayesha when
one of his other wives sent some food for him. Seeing this, Hadhrat
Ayesha felt a pang of jealousy and pushed the bowl of food with her
foot. The bowl broke and the food spilled on the floor. Seeing this, the
Prophet (s) asked Ayesha why she behaved in that manner. He pointed out
to her that not only had she wasted good food, but had also broken the
bowl and had also deprived him of his wish to eat the food. The Prophet
(s) told Ayesha softly that she should refrain from such acts in the
future. The Prophet (s) thus set an example for men to behave politely
and with maturity with their spouses.


