The Fifteenth Talk
==================

1. Polygamy And The Reasons Therefor
------------------------------------

Today we shall discuss about the reasons for people opting for polygamy.
This discussion is neither on jurisprudence nor on the cultural aspect
of human life. It pertains only to the morality of polygamy.

2. Need of Having More Than One Wife
------------------------------------

The first category of people who opt for having more than one wife are
those whose first wife is ill and is unable to satisfy their sexual
desires and is also physically incapable of performing the household
chores. In such a situation the husband is forced to marry a second
wife. The institution of marriage is considered to be very important and
necessary in Islam. Christianity strictly enforces monogamy, hence its
followers are facing a lot of problems. The second category is that of
people whose wives are physiologically incapable of bearing children. In
such cases both husband and wife desire a child. But it is very rare
that such wives agree to the husband bringing home another wife to
mother a child. I appeal to such women to arrange a second marriage for
their husbands. They can look for a suitable girl to adjust with the
family and live amicably.

3. Marriage For Carnal Satisfaction
-----------------------------------

Some men opt for polygamy to satisfy their lust. They think that more
than one wife will provide a variety to them. Despite having a wife at
home, they marry a second wife, and then a third. If possible they make
a *harem* for themselves. This attitude arises from a very serious moral
problem. The pursuit of these desires pushes a person into a dangerous
valley because such desires can never be fulfilled; the person always
wants more and more. There is no end to it. If you try to fulfil your
desire, you will never be fully satisfied.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq says that even if a person has a quantity of gold
and silver equal to that of a river, he will not be satisfied. Similar
is the case of the sexual instinct, the more you try to satisfy it, the
more you will crave for it. Thus we find that the caliphs of the Ummayad
and Abbasid clans had made special dens of vice, with hundreds of women,
but they always wanted to add more. The more they tried to satisfy their
carnal lust, the more they craved for it. But, what is the source of
this craving? Psychologists say that when men stare at women, chase
them, when women move around without hijab, boldly look at and talk with
*namahram* men, then the sexual lust is aroused. Once this happens, a
man who has a beautiful and young wife, marries a second and a third;
and even then continues to stare at young girls, and is still not
satisfied! He dreams of setting up a harem like that of Haroun al
Rashid. Similarly, those inappropriately dressed women who talk and
laugh with and pay attention to *namahram* men are, according to the
psychologists, in a very dangerous situation. Once a woman lands in this
condition, she is not shy of exposing even her sensitive body parts like
the hair, bosom and the arms to *namahram* men. For example, we often
find young women going to shops wearing sleeveless shirts, so that the
shopkeeper can see her bare arms.. Similarly some women sit out in the
streets without covering themselves with a *chador.*

Psychologists say that the cause of all these conditions is the craving
of the sex instinct in the human race. We also come across some old men,
who are sexually weak, but stare at young girls with lustful eyes. If
such a person is a shop keeper, he stares at more than a hundred young
girls a day and glances at women with lustful eyes. Islam considers this
to be a very dangerous situation. For a man and especially for a woman
to be lounging in the street is a wrong act, especially when she is
without proper *hijab*. Such a woman has no character. A respectable
woman would not be out in the streets without proper *hijab*. She would
be in her house, caring for her children, and her home. If she has some
free time, she would read a good book, or listen to a religious
cassette. Another problem is that when two or three women get together
they must backbite, and accuse others falsely. Such women should know
that Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (s.a) is not pleased with them. If such women
claim to be the slaves of Hadhrat Zahra (s.a), they are lying because
Hadhrat Zahra (s.a) has nothing to do with such women.

Going back to our topic, the basis of the second type of polygamy is a
craving for sex. When a person practices polygamy only for sexual lust,
he is not only cheating others but is also cheating himself. He says
that he is remarrying for reward. In fact he only exposes himself to
retribution because he wants to attain a reward by lying. He is really
marrying only to satisfy his lust. The moralists condemn such marriages.
Beware and don’t make yourselves the slaves of your desires. Don’t
become engrossed in satisfying your hearts desires. Don’t fill your
stomachs to the full, do not sleep too much, do not be lazy, and do not
become talkative. Keep to the path of moderation; know that marrying for
lust is wrong; the educators of ethics condemn such marriages.

We quote here a remark made by an eminent scholar of ethics. Only the
people who have developed themselves can utter such valuable words. When
we ponder over their utterances, we can’t help but wonder. One of the
senior jurists of Najaf al-Ashraf used to live in Karbala. He was Aga
Sayed Ibrahim Qazwini. He was very erudite and because of his exemplary
manners he was very popular among the students. The daughter of Fath Ali
Shah, Zia al Saltana, took a divorce from her husband. She was a very
pretty and young damsel. After taking the divorce she settled down in a
place near Karbala. Since she was all alone now, she sent word to Aga
Qazwini through someone that she wished to marry him The Aga replied
that his marrying Zia al Saltana was not appropriate. They were
incompatible because while he himself was an old man, she was very
young; she was a princess and he was a poor student of jurisprudence
struggling to make ends meet. The following day a message came to the
Aga from the princess that she would be proud to marry him and that she
wished her name to be joined to his! She said that she didn’t expect any
monetary support from him and, to the contrary, she offered to meet all
his household expenses. When the late Aga Ibrahim saw that the girl was
very determined, he sent word to her that his wife was a middle aged
woman of forty and had adjusted very well with his penury. For many
years she had put up with his penury, and had tolerated enough troubles.
Now by remarrying, he did not want to create further troubles for her;
hence he was not at all inclined towards marrying the princess. She was
happily spending her life with him. He wished not to create any problems
for her bringing home another wife. In these circumstances he forcefully
turned down the proposal of the princess!”

Aga Ibrahim's words may surprise some people. But in my opinion, these
words teach us a lot. I appeal to those who want to remarry for the sake
of getting reward to, instead, bear the expenses of the woman they want
to marry (and her children), this will be a better reward. Imam Musa bin
Jafar (a.s) has said that if he was able to foot the expenses of a needy
family for a week, it would be better than performing 70 hajj.

4 Marriage Of Compulsion
------------------------

The third type of marriage is the marriage of compulsion. Human beings
have certain desires that get satisfied sometimes, and remain
unsatisfied at other times. The unsatisfied desires slowly move from the
conscious to the subconscious mind. According to the psychologists, when
this happens a kind of a knot is formed in the heart which is very
dangerous. If this person has the knowledge and the means, he will set
the entire world on fire.

Sometimes women don’t discharge their responsibilities. As I mentioned
in my previous talk, they are not mindful about the small but very
important things and unable to fulfil their small responsibilities that
assume bigger proportions later on. For example: when the husband
returns home from work, the wife receives him with a glum face instead
of giving him a smiling reception. When such an attitude becomes a
habit, the husband starts thinking that perhaps he will be more
comfortable if he marries a second wife. Thus, he is hurt by his wife
and re-marries, assuming that he will be free of such troubles in his
second marriage. If, unfortunately, he faces the same type of treatment
from the second wife, he might opt for a third marriage. He searches for
peace and comfort by re-marrying. These are the marriages of compulsion.

I want to ask the ladies if a husband marries again and again, who is
really at fault? The wives must admit that they are at fault because
they did not keep their husbands happy. They did not discharge the
responsibility that Islam had given them. They did not heed the advice
of the psychologists. The most important function of a wife is to
provide comfort to her husband. She must be careful about the small
things in the daily life, the neglect of which might bring about serious
consequences for her. What are the things that create trouble and
turmoil for the wife? It is her neglect, her laziness and her lack of
understanding that create such troubles for her.

Here I recount a historical event. There was a woman, Umm Sulaym, at the
time of the Prophet (s). She was the wife of one of the Ansaar. She was
a native of Madina. Her husband was a craftsman and an intelligent man.
Both husband and wife had embraced Islam. Both used to fulfil their
duties. They had a son about two to three years of age. Once, the child
fell ill. One day after the man had left for work, the child died. The
woman sat near the dead child and kept crying. After a while she thought
that the child was dead and cannot come back to life. She decided that
she should not make her husband sad and restless. So she kept the body
of the son in such a place where her husband would not see it, because
she thought that if he receives this sad news as soon as he enters the
house, he will also become very miserable. Then she changed her clothes
and adorned herself for her husband. Upon his arrival, she herself
opened the door, and greeted him. After exchanging pleasantries the
husband inquired about the condition of the child. The wife said,
“*Alhamdu Lillah!* He is well!” They sat down, talked, and relaxed. When
it was time for salah (prayer) they performed the ghusl (bath). The
husband wished to attend the congregational prayer with the Prophet (s).
Before he left home she asked him, “If someone keeps something valuable
with you for safe-keeping and returns to claim it after sometime, and
you refuse to give it back! What will be the consequence of the act?”
The husband said, “That would be very bad, not to return what has been
entrusted for safe-keeping is a big sin!” The wife said “Two years back
Allah had given us something for safe-keeping. Now that the time has
come for us to return it, Allah has taken it back from us. Our dear
child is no more! Therefore go and offer your prayers with the Prophet
(s) and then inform your friends so that they can attend his burial.”
The husband said, “*Alhamdu Lillah*!” I don’t know why the man thanked
Allah at that moment. Whatever he praised Allah for was appropriate, but
he must have praised Allah the most for giving him a good wife.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الَّذِينَ جَهَدُواْ فِينَا لَنهَْدِيَنهَُّمْ سُبُلَنَا وَ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for those who strive for Us, we surely guide them to Our paths,
and lo! Allah is with the good.***  
***Sura al-‘Ankabut, 29: 69)***

The man entered the mosque. It appeared as if the Prophet (s) was
waiting for him. The Prophet (s) congratulated him. The same night the
woman became pregnant. The couple was blessed with a son again. He grew
into a wise, intelligent and learned person. Scholars have written a lot
about him. Allah had blessed the couple with a son better than the one
that was taken away from them!

I ask the ladies, that if they try to emulate Umm Sulaym, will their
husbands continue to shout or hit them? No. It is your own fault that
your husband doesn’t appear happy at home, shouts or becomes violent.
This is because you don’t look after your husband and children properly;
you don’t take care of the house properly. Come morning and the woman is
out in the street, and that too without *hijab*, talking and laughing.
In the afternoon the husband returns home only to find a dirty house, a
dirty wife and dirty children. There is no trace of any lunch. When
faced with this situation, he is forced to consider re-marriage. He
thinks that, perhaps, the second wife will keep his home; the children
and herself clean, and prepare meals on time. When he re- marries, the
first wife starts crying.

Ladies! Don’t become the cause of your own misfortune! If you make
yourself a good housewife, take care of your husband, children and home
properly, there will be no reason for your husband to re-marry. Times
are such that the husband can barely afford one wife, how will he
support the second wife. Inspite of this if he re-marries, it is your
own fault – you neglected to look after him, forcing him to re-marry.
This is termed as marriage of compulsion.


