The Seventeenth Talk
====================

1. Need of A Family
-------------------

Our discussion now is on the needs that a husband and a wife have to
fulfil for each other. Today’s discussion is about the finances of the
family and is an important one.

2. Condemning Stinginess In Material Needs
------------------------------------------

The first need which both the husband and wife have to take care of is
the material needs of each other. The husband must make all possible
efforts to provide material comforts to his family, but if he is miserly
not only does he fail to fulfil that which is obligatory on him but also
becomes the target of those verses of the Holy Quran which condemn
miserliness. The Holy Book says that the miserly person should not think
that stinginess is a virtue, it is an undesirable trait. On the Day of
Judgement, the money that he refused to spend due to his stinginess will
be hung from his neck in the form of a heavy chain, and he will be
brought to the Grounds of Reckoning in this shameful state!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا يحَْسَبنَ‏َّ الَّذِينَ يَبْخَلُونَ بِمَا ءَاتَئهُمُ اللَّهُ مِن
فَضْلِهِ هُوَ خَيرًْا لَّهُم بَلْ هُوَ شرٌَّ لَّهُمْ سَيُطَوَّقُونَ
مَا بخَِلُواْ بِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَمَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And let not those who hoard up that which Allah hath bestowed upon
them of his bounty think that it is better for them. Nay, it is worse
for them. That which they hoard will be their collar on the Day of
Resurrection. …..*** ***(Sura Ali Imran, 3: 180)***

The people who, in their stinginess, don’t spend on their families, on
the society, on the poor and the needy and don’t spend in the way of
Allah, will find their stinginess hung in the form of a collar around
their necks. A stingy man is detested. Miserliness is one of the
negative traits in men. In fact, the miserly man himself condemns it.
The proof of this fact is that when someone reminds such a person that
he is stingy, he doesn’t like the remark! Stinginess is one of the
things that extinguish love, whether it is in the society or in the
house. If a man can afford to keep his family in comfort but refuses to
do so his family will never respect him or love him. A man should, to
the best of his capabilities, fulfil the needs of his family. He should,
at least fulfil their basic needs of food, clothing and shelter, and if
possible get them married etc. It is the man’s duty to arrange for his
daughters marriage and give her some dowry. It is his duty to educate
his children, and choose a good wife for his son. Being miserly and not
fulfilling these needs leads to many difficulties if their material
needs are not met, some children resort to theft and robbery, the woman
starts robbing from her own house. Initially she picks her husbands
pocket, then she begins to shoplift.! All these calamities are the
result of miserliness; hence one should not be miserly.

Similarly the wife too should attend to the material needs of the
husband. She must ensure that the husband gets good food at home. She
must prefer him over herself and the children. If there is food, fruit,
etc in the house, but the wife denies these to her husband, she is not
only stingy, but also *'laeem*'. *Laeem* persons are worse than misers.
A miser is one who does not spend his own money on others, but a *laeem*
is one who cannot bear another eating even what does not belong to the
*laeem*. They stop you from spending your own money (not theirs) on the
deserving and the poor, too. They justify their act by saying that when
you do not spend on your own family and self, why should you spend on
others! By saying such things they weaken your resolve to help the poor.
The extreme case of a *laeem* person is one who envies others using
their own money. Some people neither spend themselves, nor do they allow
others to spend, neither do they allow others to help the needy and the
poor. These persons are degraded and low. *Laeem* is that lady whose
husband gets good food and fruits for the house, but she deprives him of
these. One cannot expect love from such women.

In one of my previous talks I have mentioned some men who expect too
much from their wives. To use a proverb, they don’t get meat, but want
to eat *kebab**!*** But there are other families where the poor husband
does bring the meat, but the wife serves the *kebab* to the children and
the guests, but not to the husband! Such thoughtless women will be
brought to the Grounds of Judgement in the form of the most degraded of
the wild beasts. She will be asked why she denied the husband what
belonged to him. The wife who metes out such treatment to her husband
should not expect any love from him. And if the husband decides to marry
again, the wife should not cry and grumble. Similarly, if a husband does
not fulfil; the needs of the family, inspite of having the means to,
should not expect any love from them. It is very important that the
husband and wife take good care of each other. If the husband has meagre
means, the wife should not embarrass him by making demands on him. She
should be patient and encourage him. The husband, too, should give
preference to fulfilling the needs of the family to other things.
"First, one should light the lamp in his home, then in the mosque!” If a
person’s wife and children are not properly provided for, how can he
help others? His first duty is towards his home - to fulfil the needs of
his family. It is narrated that a person died and left everything he had
in the way of Allah. The Prophet of Allah (s) attended his burial. The
companions met the Prophet (s) in the evening and said, “The dead man's
children are hungry! He was well-off, but at the time of his death he
gave away everything he had in charity.” The Prophet (s) said, “If I was
told about this earlier, I would not have offered the dead person’s
funeral prayer! The husband should have first taken care of his wife and
children before giving any charity.”

3. Need of Satisfying The Sexual Instinct
-----------------------------------------

The sex instinct in the humans has to be satisfied. Just as other
desires are satisfied, this desire, too, must be fulfilled. It is
necessary and obligatory on both the husband and the wife to satisfy
each others sexual instinct. If any couple neglect this important aspect
of their lives, they are committing a grave sin.

The Prophet of Islam (s) has said, “If a husband goes to bed and calls
his wife, and she evades till the husband falls asleep, then the angels
curse her till the morning! This is the natural right of the husband and
the wife over each other!”

Similarly, the Prophet (s) has also said, “If a man neglects to satisfy
his wife’s sexual needs, and the wife indulges in adultery, then the
retribution will be as much for the husband as it is for the wife!”

If a wife is tardy about giving attention to the needs of the husband,
and he falls into sin, that is he views *namahram* women with passion,
then she is as much liable for Allah’s punishment as him. This sin will
be entered in the account of the husband as well as the wife! On the day
of Judgement, when her account of deeds will be given to her, it will be
shown that she had gazed at *namahram* seductively. The wife will plead
with Allah that she never looked at a *namahram!* She will be told that,
“Your husband had done that, but it was because of you. You should have
prevented it. You should have satisfied him sexually, whether it was
before the act by adorning yourself etc. or the actual act itself. If a
man keeps more than one wife and doesn’t satisfy them or give them
equitable treatment, and if one of them gets fed-up and sighs, this sigh
is sometimes back breaking, and is enough to uproot a person.

4. Need of Sympathy
-------------------

The third need is that of sympathy and consideration. This distinguishes
a human being from a brute. The human beings are not inanimate objects
or trees. Even the domesticated animals expect some sympathy from their
masters. When you see a kitten or a lamb or a puppy going near its
mother to feed, the mother views it with warmth. In addition to
satisfying the physical needs of the little one, the mother satisfies
its emotional needs too. She does this by licking the little one, and
rubbing her head on his body. If beasts require warmth and affection,
humans require it more. Even a dog knows that in addition to nutrition,
its puppy needs love and sympathy. Man should know that expressing love
and affection for each other is food for the soul. Food for the soul is
more important than food for the body. God forbid that husband or wife
should have less love for the spouse.

Islam exhorts people to take special care of the orphans and the Holy
Quran says that a society that doesn’t care for the orphans is not a
Muslim society.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ رَءَيْتَ الَّذِى يُكَذِّبُ بِالدِّينِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذَلِكَ الَّذِى يَدُعُّ الْيَتِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the MERCIFUL***  
***Hast thou observed him who belieth religion?***  
***That is he who repelleth the orphan. (Sura Maauun, 107: 1-3)***

'O my Prophet! Should I show you the person who is not a Muslim, who has
no faith in religion? He is the person who has abandoned the orphans.'
Those who do not care about the orphans are not true Muslims. Why does
Islam stress so much on helping and showing affection to the orphans? We
read in the traditions that when an orphan came to the Prophet (s), he
used to make the orphan sit on his lap and stroked the head of the child
with affection. He always gave special care to the orphans. Even Amir al
Mu’minin cared for orphans a lot.

The families of the martyrs are blessed to have the opportunity to raise
orphans. There are ladies whose husbands have died or have been
martyred, and they are raising their orphaned children. These ladies are
earning a great reward. It is narrated in traditions that if someone
caresses the head of an orphan with affection, good deeds equal to the
number of the hair his hand has touched, will be entered in his account
of deeds. He gets a great reward. Dealing with orphans with love and
affection fetches so much reward because they have lost their father.
But the orphan still needs sympathy. Allah wants to fill this void from
other sources. If their emotional needs are not fulfilled, they will
become rebellious. A youth, boy or girl, who has been deprived of love
and affection, might prove to be very dangerous for the society. A
society where there is dearth of affection turns into a society of
criminals. A society lacking in affection will comprise of gloomy
individuals.

If a woman is depressed at heart, she cannot be expected to care for her
husband. She will not be able to care for the house or be a good mother
to her children. Similarly a man who is depressed at heart cannot be a
part of the society; he remains cut off from the society. When does a
person become depressed? When he is deprived of love and affection at
home. Right from the beginning of life, the child has a lot of needs.
Some are dormant. For example his Need of sex is there, but it is
dormant. His love for money is dormant. However there are some needs he
can understand. For example, he knows when he is hungry or thirsty and
when he is satiated. He knows that when he is hungry, he should suck at
his mother's breast. One instinct is that of love. When the mother
nurses her child, she fondly caresses him. The mother caressing her
child with love is more important than the nursing itself. Similarly,
when the father smiles at the child, it is more important than the
mother's milk. A father who fulfils the physical needs of his children
but ignores their emotional needs, is a father only in name. He is an
ignorant, uneducated father. Some fathers are so busy with their work
that they have no time for their children. When the father leaves home
for work in the morning, the child is sleeping. When the father arrives
home late after the days work, the child is sleeping. The father should
play with the children, seat them on his lap, and caress their head
lovingly. A father's smile for his child is very important and valuable.
Similarly his smile for his wife and his love towards his wife is very
important, because human beings crave love.

We read in the traditions that when Pharaoh was killing the male
children, Hadhrat Musa (a.s.) received his upbringing under the roof of
that very tyrant, in the lap of Asiya, the wife of the Pharoah! Allah
put love for Musa (a.s.) in the heart of Pharoah. And he looked after
Prophet Musa like a father. Allah says in the Holy Quran that Musa
(a.s.) was raised in His own care! In addition to this, Musa (a.s.) was
kept under the care of Hadhrat Shoaib (a.s.) for ten years. Under the
care of the Prophet of Allah, he reached perfection and achieved that
stage where he had the privilege of conversing with Allah. When he was
ordained a Prophet Musa (a.s.) was commanded by Allah to make Haroon
(a.s) his vicegerent, so that they could together frighten the Pharoah!
Still Allah instructed them to treat the Pharoah with consideration.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبَا إِلىَ‏ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُولَا لَهُ قَوْلًا لَّيِّنًا لَّعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يخَْشى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Go, both of you, unto Pharoah. Lo he hath transgressed (the
bounds).***  
***And speak unto him a gentle word, that peradventure he may heed or
fear. (Sura Taha, 20: 43-44)***

These verses indicate to us that a human being, whoever he might be, is
thirsty for love and affection. Therefore Islam directs us to kill
tyrants, but does not give us the right to abuse or insult him. It gives
us permission to put the noose around his neck, but stops us from
insulting him. The Judge can punish the person who insults others.

Therefore, the wife expects love from the husband more than anything
else. Similarly the husband too wants love from his wife before anything
else. Your son, your daughter and your wife all expect love from you.
When a man enters his house, he should at least say "*salaamun
'alaykum*". If he does not do this, he should at least meet his family
with a smile. He should not come home with a long face, because it is a
big calamity for the house. Sometimes husbands and wives hurt each other
a lot. If the husband is ill-tempered, he goes to the extent of beating
his wife. This sin will attract grave retribution. There are some
husbands who neither verbally abuse nor beat their wives, but are always
angry and sullen at home. The wife might have preferred to bear a
hundred lashes from the husband than his glum demeanour. Similarly there
are many wives who neither nag the husbands nor fight with them but they
always wear belligerent expressions and look angry. They even refuse to
speak to her husband and are always sullen.

This attitude is worst than lashing the husband a hundred times. This
attitude may lead the husband to get fed-up with his wife. A husband
should not assume that if he has a good tempered wife, she will remain
so forever. If there is a decrease in love from your side, she can
become bad. Similarly if there is a decrease in love for your son or
daughter, it will inevitably lead to disaster. One has always to bear in
mind that for a human being love is a prime need. If the ladies at home
become paragons of love, they will be the most successful homemakers. If
a woman is devoid of feelings of love and compassion for others, if she
doesn’t love her husband or children, then she is a demon! Women, by
nature, are more loving than men. It is the duty of both husbands and
wives to maintain an atmosphere of love and affection in their homes.
May Allah help us succeed in these endeavours! *Aameen!*


