The Eighteenth Talk
===================

1. Spiritual And Intellectual Needs
-----------------------------------

Today’s discussion is about the fourth need - the spiritual need. Just
as a person needs to be physically satisfied, he needs spiritual
satisfaction. This is the main difference between human beings and the
animals. Animals only have instincts and physical needs. At the most
they need love and sympathy. But man has both the physical as well as
the spiritual aspects in his nature. This spiritual aspect has been
endowed to him from the *Aalam e Malkoot*! The human being is so
spiritually developed that Allah has made a special reference to him
highlighting his felicity.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَ نَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِن رُّوحِى فَقَعُواْ لَهُ
سَجِدِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So, when I have made him and have breathed into him of My spirit, do
ye fall down, prostrating yourselves unto him.*** ***(Sura al Hijr, 15:
29)***

Allah ordered the angels to prostrate when He blew His spirit into him.
This privilege is endowed only to man. When we consider the material
aspect of life, we find that animals have very well defined and strong
instincts and needs, which are easily satisfied. Therefore, we can say
that the superiority of man lies in his spiritual aspect. Man has two
aspects, thus he requires two types of nourishment. One is the material
nourishment required for the maintenance of the physical existence.
Similarly spiritual nourishment is necessary for him. If both the
spiritual and material wants are not satisfied, man perishes! The
difference between the two aspects is that when a person dies
physically, it is not so important. But if he dies spiritually,
according to the Holy Quran, he is worse than the lowliest of the
animals and is headed straight for Hell:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِّنَ الجِْنّ‏ِ وَ الْانسِ
لهَُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَّا يَفْقَهُونَ بهَِا وَ لهَُمْ أَعْينُ‏ٌ لَّا
يُبْصِرُونَ بهَِا وَ لهَُمْ ءَاذَانٌ لَّا يَسْمَعُونَ بهَِا أُوْلَئكَ
كاَلْأَنْعَمِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ أُوْلَئكَ هُمُ الْغَفِلُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Already have We urged unto Hell many of the jinn and humankind,
having hearts wherewith they understand not, and having eyes wherewith
they see not, and having ears wherewith they hear not. These are as the
cattle---nay, but they are worse!! These are the neglectful.*** ***(Sura
al-A’raf, 7: 179)***

Allah says that if man doesn’t get spiritual nourishment, then his
destiny is Hell. Such men have eyes, but they don’t see. They don’t
distinguish between good and evil. They have ears, but they don’t pay
any heed to what they hear. They have tongues, but they speak not. They
have hearts, but they don’t think aright! Then Allah adds that such men
are worse than the animals. They are like the silk-worms that produce
the silk thread, wind it around their bodies and perish in the process!

These, according to Allah, are the neglectful men. If someone has not
received spiritual nourishment, his soul is dead. Such people should cry
day and night, because of what the Holy Quran says about them. In
another Verse the Holy Quran is more forceful:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابّ‏ِ عِندَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ
لَا يَعْقِلُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! The worst of beasts in Allah’s sight are the deaf, the dumb, who
have no sense.*** ***(Sura Al-Anfal, 8: 22)***

People with dead souls are worst than animals: they have brains, but do
not think, they have the ability, but do not ponder. There are many such
verses in the Holy Quran. The Prophet (s) has said:

*There are two blessings for men—welfare and peace.*

Truly, these are great blessings for men. When a man is ill, he loses
interest in everything. Sometimes a person is physically well, but his
spirit is ill, as the Quran says, their hearts are sick. This according
to the Quran is a most dangerous state of affairs. When the heart is
sick, the person rises against the Quran, the Prophet (s) and his
vicegerents (a.s). He starts to interpret the verses of the Quran to
suit himself; he distorts their meaning to suit himself. In the
beginning of the Sura Ali Imran there are certain verses indicating that
in the Quran there are *Muhkam* (definitive) verses and others that are
*Mutashabih* (Ambiguous).

Such men pick up ambiguous verses and try to interpret them to suit
their selfish ends. From somewhere they get a tradition and explain it
to suit themselves. They invent the speech of revered people, and
distort it to suit themselves. When the spirit is ill, it is not like
physical illness. This illness has special characteristics. The
spiritually ill person is at war with the Holy Quran. Therefore, the
Quran says it is a cure, but for the spiritually ill, there is nothing
but loss, and more loss!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فىِ قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَبَهَ
مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَ ابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But those in whose hearts is doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is
allegorical (ambiguous)*** ***seeking( to cause) dissensions by seeking
to explain it…..*** ***(Sura Ali Imran, 3: 7)***

Allah’s mercy is nothing save loss for the oppressors and the
spiritually ill. For example, melons and guava are very good fruits. But
they are very harmful to one ailing from inflammation of the intestines.
Eating these will further aggravate the pain or even lead to bleeding
from the digestive system. The verses of the Holy Quran are very useful.
But for the spiritually sick person, they result in losses. This
reaction is somewhat like the effect of the melon on one suffering from
intestinal inflammation!

A person whose spirit is dead is harmful not only to himself, but also
to others in his environment. He is like a cancer in the society. He
will be a source of trouble for his own wife and children. Therefore, we
must give special attention to spiritual needs of our families. Both the
husband and wife should pave the way for the spiritual progress of each
other. Both the mother and the father should look after the spiritual
needs of their children, so that they can make spiritual progress. If
parents cater only to the physical needs of the children and ignore
their spiritual needs or give less importance to their spiritual growth,
it is as if they are raising dogs and beasts. It is as if these parents
are raising a cancer for the society. What is the nourishment of the
spirit? It is salah (prayer), fasting, recitation of the Holy Quran,
remembrance of Allah and remaining awake in the night for prayers, and
communicating with Allah. If a woman doesn’t offer salah, or offers it
incorrectly, then her home and her husband are to be pitied. The Holy
Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيهَُّا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ قُواْ أَنفُسَكمُ‏ْ وَ أَهْلِيكمُ‏ْ
نَارًا وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَ الحِْجَارَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O ye who believe! Save yourselves and your families from the fire
whose fuel shall be men and stones… (Sura Tahrim, 66: 6)***

If a man has strong faith, he will succeed in saving himself and his
family from the Hellfire. This verse indicates that the men and women
should be regular at offering salah. They must establish a strong
rapport with Allah. They must recite the Holy Quran at home. They must
supplicate. They must offer salatul layl (late night prayers). They
should pray as soon as the time for salah sets in. If they fail to do
offer their salah as soon as the time for salah sets, they will
gradually become spiritually dead. If a person does not nourish his
soul, his spiritual condition will be just like the physical condition
of a person who has not eaten for a few days! A person who starves
himself might die physically after a few days of starvation! If the
spirit of a person is deprived of its nourishment, it might die too
after some time! The spiritual needs are not like the material,
emotional and sexual needs of human beings. It is for the fulfilment of
this need that a hundred and twenty four thousand Prophets (a.s.) came
into this world with their books. It is for the spiritual progress of
man that the Prophets (a.s.) and their vicegerents (a.s.) bore untold
hardships.

I draw your attention to the *Ziarat* of Aba Abdallah al Husayn (a.s.)
that reads:

*I bear witness that you established prayer (salah) and gave the zakat
and practiced commanding good (amr bil ma'roof) and forbidding evil
(nahy anil munkar).*

When, on the day of Ashura, most of Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s companions were
already martyred, it was the time for *Zuhr* Prayer. One of his
companions said, “O son of the Prophet! The time for *Zuhr* has arrived.
We wish to offer it behind you!” The Imam (a.s.) smiled and said, “May
Allah place you in the ranks of those who offer prayers!” The arrows
kept raining from the columns of the enemy but the Imam (a.s.) stood
steadfast in the middle of the ground offering salah along with his
companions. God forbid that any house should be without salah; such a
house is filled with animals, not humans. The inhabitants of such houses
may be good looking, but believe me, they are beasts and are destined
for dark places.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فخََلَفَ مِن بَعْدِهِمْ خَلْفٌ أَضَاعُواْ الصَّلَوةَ وَ اتَّبَعُواْ
الشهََّوَتِ فَسَوْفَ يَلْقَوْنَ غَيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Now there hath succeeded them a later generation who have ruined
worship and have followed lusts. But they will meet deception. (Sura
Maryam, 19: 59)***

Those who recite salah but recite it incorrectly, those who are enslaved
by sensual pleasures, desires and passions - these are surely the
misguided ones. *'Ghay'* in Arabic means misguidance. *'Sawfa yalqawna
ghayyaa'* means that they are definitely misguided. These are the men
who have gone astray from the right path. Their final destination is
Hell. *Ghay* is also the name of a well in Hell. If we disregard
*salah*, if someone recites salah but at the very end of the prescribed
time, or recites it in a hurry, he is also misguided and does not have
the shade of the mercy of the Lord over his head. If one is deprived of
the shelter of the Lords’ mercy, he becomes entangled in all sorts of
deviation.

Mulla Fakhruddin Raazi has quoted a tradition in to explain Sura al Asr.
This tradition is very enlightening. He writes that a woman came to the
Prophet (s) in a very disturbed state of mind. She said, “O Prophet of
Allah! I have committed a major sin. I am a married woman. Even then I
was involved in adultery and gave birth to a baby. To hide my sin I put
the baby in a cauldron of vinegar. I have already sold that tainted
vinegar to people."

Imagine what a grave sin the woman had committed. Truly, if a person
does not have Allah’s mercy and grace, he can get totally deviated. He
gets entangled in all sorts of troubles. The Prophet (s) told the woman,
“I think that you have stopped reciting the *Asr* prayers. All this
happened because the shelter of Allah’s mercy was no longer over you,
which was the result of your neglecting salah!” If we become regular at
our prayers, and offer salah at the beginning of its appointed time, we
will be safe from becoming entangled in such calamities. If you want to
become noble, pray regularly at the beginning of the time for prayer,
along with the after-prayer supplications *(Ta'qibaat)*, in
congregation, while observing the etiquette of salah. Women should pray
at a spot in the home earmarked for this purpose. These are the acts of
the truly blessed people!

If there is no atmosphere of spirituality in a house, it will be a
troubled place. Its condition will be like that of a spirit suffering
from an ailment. What makes the soul ill? It is sin! The Holy Quran, in
some places, terms sin as an ailment. This is because sins render a
person’s heart black, make the heart ill and taint the heart with
'rust'. When a person’s heart becomes sick, the first symptom is that he
is unable to derive pleasure from worship. On the contrary it derives
pleasure from sinning. If there is anyone in this audience who doesn’t
enjoy prayers but enjoys sinning, let him know that he is spiritually
ill. He must get himself treated otherwise his heart will turn black!
The Holy Quran pities the person whose heart has turned black on account
of sinning! Sometimes the heart has turned black, but to a lesser
extent. Sometimes the entire heart becomes pitch black. Imam Jafar
al-Sadiq (a.s.) says that such persons will not get deliverance. The
Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ فَمَن شَرَحَ اللَّهُ صَدْرَهُ لِلْاسْلَمِ فَهُوَ عَلىَ‏ نُورٍ مِّن
رَّبِّهِ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلْقَسِيَةِ قُلُوبهُُم مِّن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئكَ فىِ ضَلَلٍ مُّبِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is he whose bosom Allah hath expanded for the Surrender (unto Him),
so that he followeth a light from His Lord,(as he who disbelieveth)?
Then woe unto those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of
Allah. Such are in plain error.*** ***(Sura az-Zumar, 39: 22)***

Fortunate is the heart that has illuminated itself with Allah’s
remembrance. Radiant is the heart that is glowing with the felicity of
prayer and fasting. Shame on the heart that has turned black with sin.
Sins have turned this heart into stone. The Holy Quran says that the
sinning hearts are hardened. Beware of the hardening of the heart. Sin,
however small it may be, plays a major role in hardening the heart. Imam
Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said that when a person commits a sin, a small
dark spot appears on his heart. If he does not repent, the spot
increases in size. This process goes on till the entire heart darkens.
Then the person cannot be reformed. Can you comprehend where those
families have reached who listen to music, where the husband and wife
backbite, accuse others falsely, oppress others and keep a lookout for
faults in others? Their hearts are black; their hearts are brimming with
the prohibited. But worse than sinning is the presence of negative
qualities in people.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said that sins are more harmful for the
heart than piercing a knife in someone’s stomach. But negative traits
are even more dangerous than sins. These traits are present in every one
of us and are difficult to eliminate. One may have to struggle for
twenty years to uproot the tree of negative traits from his heart. After
twenty to thirty years of strenuous efforts one might be able to plant
the sapling of virtue in the same heart and make it flourish to bear
fruit! None can claim that he is totally free of negative traits. It is
our responsibility to fight and vanquish these traits. We have to ensure
that they don’t assume stormy proportions. What happens to towns and
cities when they are flooded? The same thing happens to man when he is
flooded with negative qualities – It completely destroys his
spirituality. When a fire is small, it can be extinguished with some
effort. But when it turns into an inferno, then it goes beyond control.
When the negative traits become like an inferno, it is impossible to
combat it. From the very childhood, children should be trained to combat
these negative traits. Men should exercise total control over their
tongues. Their talk with their wives and the children should be polite
and morally upright.

The ladies must know that jealousy is a very harmful trait. When a
person turns jealous, she starts the Battle of *Jamal* inspite of
knowing the truth.***.*** Who was the cause of this battle? It was a
person with a jealous heart. When she was informed that Uthman was
assassinated, she said, “Praise be to Allah, that *Na’thal* is dead!”
When later on she heard that Imam Ali (a.s.) has become the Caliph, she
said, "How I wish I had died before getting this news. If the skies had
fallen on me, it would have been better than hearing this news!” Thus
the seeds were sown for the Battle of *Jamal*. To quench the fires of
this jealousy about a thousand lives were lost.

Do you know Ali (a.s.)? Who was he? Talha and Zubair knew him better
than you and I. These two men knew that Ali (a.s.) had grown up in the
lap of the Prophet (s). In the Holy Quran more than a hundred verses
have been revealed concerning him. These two persons asked Ali (a.s.) to
give them money from the public treasury. Ali (a.s.) refused. They asked
him to give them positions of power in the government. Imam Ali (a.s.)
did not consider them deserving of this either. They went away
disappointed and started propaganda that became the cause of the Battle
of *Jamal*. The Muslims had to bear much hardship because of this
battle. What hardships were inflicted on the Muslims because of this
battle? If some one asked you about the causes of the Battle of *Jamal*,
your reply should be - the twin causes were jealousy and greed!

When the accursed Ibne Muljim martyred Imam Ali (a.s.) he was under the
illusion that he was doing it to attain nearness to Allah! If you are
asked who martyred Imam Ali (a.s.), you should reply that it was a
stubborn person who committed the heinous act. Imam Ali’s personality
was such, that all knew him. When this same Ibne Muljim was sitting near
the pulpit of the Prophet(s), the Prophet (s) declared, “O Ali! You and
your Shias will emerge successful on the Day of Judgement! O Ali! Only
you and your Shias will be victorious!” Ibne Muljim was sitting nearby
when the Prophet (s) said, “If your Faith and the Faith of all the men,
the angels and the Jinn is compared, your Faith will surmount that of
all of them put together!” The accursed person, even after hearing all
this, martyred the great Imam (a.s.)!

Ladies and gentlemen! Abstain from stubbornness otherwise you too will
end up like this. If you don’t accept criticism and always insist on
only your own point of view, then you refuse to listen to anyone but
your own desires. You will reach a stage when you will act only on
Satan’s instigation. I appeal to every one to take care of the spiritual
needs of your homes. In many situations the man is able to meet the
material needs of the family. He toils to provide comfort for his
family, but his wife becomes his enemy, because his love for her has
decreased. He does not fulfil the spiritual needs of the family. Because
of the paucity of a spiritual atmosphere in their homes, they turn into
dungeons. These homes, in terms of the Quran, have turned dark.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَظُلُمَتٍ فىِ بحَْرٍ لُّجِّىٍ‏ّ يَغْشَئهُ مَوْجٌ مِّن فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِّن فَوْقِهِ سحََابٌ ظُلُمَتُ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْض
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or as darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covereth him a wave,
above which is a wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of
darkness …*** ***(Sura an-Nur, 24: 40)***

The actions of infidels are compared here with the darkness of the deep
seas where wave after wave covers the bottom and makes it dark!


