The Nineteenth Talk
===================

1. Interference Of The Parents
------------------------------

Today we shall discuss about the interference of parents in the lives of
their children. This topic has always been an important matter of
debate. Lots of unnecessary problems crop up because of uncalled for
interference in the affairs of the children by their parents. Many
divorces, too, take place between young couples because of parental
interference. If we really want our children to flourish and progress,
we should refrain from interfering in their affairs. We should not try
to become uninvited judges of their problems. We find that this malaise
is deep rooted in our society. It has gone to such an extent that even
the men of piety, even those who are regular in salah and even those who
are understanding, intentionally or unintentionally, cause problems for
their children by their interference.

We need to learn a lesson from animals. They care for their offspring
only till the time they need it. When they are capable of fending for
themselves, the father and the mother leave them free to go their own
way! We find that certain birds feed grains to their chicks for a few
days only. When they find that the chicks are strong enough to fly, they
teach their chicks to fly. When the chick has learnt to fly, they do not
allow it to remain in the nest! You must have noticed that when a lamb
is born, the mother exhibits a special affection and concern for it. She
feeds it with her own milk for about two months and doesn’t allow it to
eat grass. When the lamb is strong enough to graze and feed itself, a
degree of unconcern for the little one grows in the mother.

This instinct is found in all animals. It is found in humans too. It is
only that we don’t act on it. Our duty is to give a good upbringing to
our daughters in all aspects - material, emotional, and spiritual. Give
her a good Islamic upbringing. When it is time to marry her off, arrange
her marriage so that she can start her future life with her husband.
After this, the parents should refrain from interfering in their
affairs. Now comes the time when the mothers should not be nosey about
the affairs of their daughters. If some differences crop up between the
daughter and the son-in-law, the parents should side with the
son-in-law, instead of siding with their daughter, even if the
son-in-law is at fault. To become an obstacle in the daughters married
life, to plant thoughts in her mind and gain control over her are acts
of oppression. The interference of parents many times becomes the cause
of break-up of marriages of young couples. Even if things don’t reach
the stage of divorce, it will become the cause of reduction in love
between the young couple.

It is our duty, too, to give a proper Islamic upbringing to our sons. We
must take care of their material, emotional and spiritual needs and give
decent men to the society. When this son becomes an adult, it is the
duty of the parents to find a suitable spouse for him, so that he can
start his married life. Now the parents should refrain from interfering
in the matters of the young couple. If it comes to their notice that the
young couples have some differences, they should take sides with the
daughter-in-law even if she is at fault. Later on, point out her mistake
to her and show her the correct way. But right now, it is important to
put out the fire of discord and not fan it. If the parents find that the
newly wedded couple are having a fight, they should wisely try to
diffuse the situation. But generally we find that the parents of married
young men, especially the fathers, side with their sons and thus create
problems in their married life. Mothers in turn expect their sons to do
their bidding. Even if the mother orders her son to divorce his wife,
she expects him to obey her. Only then will she be pleased with him. The
father wants his son to be permanently enslaved to him and do his
bidding. This is completely wrong. Such people deal a terrific blow to
love, create tensions and destroy homes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كانَ عاقِبَةَ الَّذينَ أَساؤُا السُّواى‏ أَنْ كَذَّبُوا بِآياتِ
اللَّهِ وَ كانُوا بِها يَسْتَهْزِؤُن
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then the fate of those who committed misdeeds was that they denied
the signs of Allah and they used to deride them.*** ***(Sura ar-Rum, 30:
10)***

The Holy Quran says that those who trouble the believing men and the
believing women, and don’t express sincere repentance thereafter, will
not only be consigned to Hell but will have to bear the punishment of
fire. Those who sow discord should know that there are two terrible
punishments awaiting them. In this world they too, will become entangled
in discord. A mother-in-law who creates unnecessary problems for her
daughter-in-law should know, the Quran says, that her own daughter might
face a similar situation. Similarly a woman who creates problems for her
son-in-law should be aware that her own son will also have to face
similar problems. In the Hereafter, this discord that she has created
will assume the form of fire and entwine itself around her feet. At
another place, the Holy Quran uses a more stern language:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْفِتْنَةُ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْقَتْل
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…..for persecution is worse than slaughter…..(*** ***Sura al Baqarah,
2: 191)***

Telling tales, creating tensions and finding fault with others are sins
worse that murder. The sin of killing someone is so great that if
someone kills an innocent person, it is equal to killing the entire
mankind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن قَتَلَ نَفْسَا بِغَيرِْ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فىِ الْأَرْضِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…whosoever killeth a human being for other than man-slaughter or
corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he had killed all mankind,
…*** ***(Sura al Maidah, 5: 32)***

Spreading discord and creating bitterness between a husband and wife are
sins worse than killing someone. A foolish old man who had caused
separation between his son and daughter-in-law, came to Imam Husayn
(a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) told him, “I have heard that you have instigated
separation between your son and his wife” When the man nodded his head
in the affirmative, the Imam (a.s.) rejoined, “Do you know what
magnitude of sin you have committed? Instead of causing their
separation, if you had cut their veins your sin would have been lighter
than what you have perpetrated!” If someone cuts off the veins of
another and kills him in this painful way, how big a sin is this? If a
person kills someone and cuts his dead body into pieces, he will rise on
the Day of Judgement in the form of a dog or a beast. Imam Husayn (a.s.)
is telling us that causing separation between husband and wife is a
bigger sin than killing two people. This tradition tells us that making
up tales and creating hatred between people is a sin bigger than taking
human life. In our society fault finding is generally associated with
the mother-in-law. She makes allegations so that her son does not think
well of his wife. What does the mother-in-law achieve by doing this?
Only troubles and problems. The first problem is that her son will
become disturbed. After this, her son will never strive to keep her
happy. Then she will have to face punishment in the hereafter. Some
mothers-in-law are so ignorant that they treat their good and
considerate sons-in-law as beggars. They are so foolish, they do not
ponder upon the outcome of their behaviour. Some mothers-in-law give
preferential treatment to one son-in-law over the other. This happens
when one daughter was married some years ago and the second one very
recently! So the recent son-in-law receives better treatment. These
mothers don’t realize how much they hurt their own daughters.

Sometimes the mothers-in-law use such harsh language, and inflict such
deep wounds that the sons-in-law cannot forget it for the rest of their
lives. People should abstain from polluting their tongues with bad
language; otherwise these will assume the form of scorpions and keep
stinging the person on the day of Judgement! It is a shame for the
mother-in-law that instead of being friendly and affectionate with the
daughter-in-law, she stings her like a scorpion. She should treat her as
she would treat her own daughter, or even better than that. The
father-in-law, who is like her father, should also love her like his
daughter. Instead we find her being treated as an enemy. For example,
she is told that the dowry was insufficient. Shame on the people who
harbour such thoughts. Sometimes a son-in-law doesn’t speak with the
father–in-law because the dowry was less. Is this not a shameful
attitude? The daughter-in-law should treat the mother-in-law with love
and affection because it is the mother-in-law who has brought up her
husband, and then handed him over to her. She should respect and love
her father-in-law because he has undergone a lot of trouble to raise her
husband. I shall quote a parable here. A bitterly cold wind was blowing.
A camel arrived at a hen coop. He put his head inside the coop, asked
for some space and stepped right inside. In doing so, he destroyed the
coop. Neither was he not able to find any shelter for himself, but
instead ended up destroying the shelter of the hen. Many newly-wed
daughters-in-law too are like this. They want to totally dominate their
husbands. They want to drive their parents-in-law out of the house. How
foolish is this attitude! This attitude is inhuman, and such people are
committing a grave sin. What I want to stress here is that the parents
and the children who live and share life amicably are always a blessed
and happy family. They will be together in Heaven congratulating each
other. To the contrary, in families where there are dissensions, hatred,
and differences for small material advantages, they will neither have
peace in this life nor rewards in the Hereafter. When a mother-in-law
nags her daughter-in-law for bringing a meagre dowry, when a
mother-in-law taunts a son-in-law for being poor and unable to meet the
household expenses, they are earning for themselves a place in the Hell
with this attitude. The daughter-in-law will be in Hell, when the
husband will arrive there and curse her. Then the mother-in-law will
arrive and curse her. The daughter-in-law will inturn curse her. Then
the girl’s mother will arrive and curse her daughter, blaming her for
landing them in Hell. I am telling you only what the Quran says. When
all these will have gathered, they will blame each other, for their own
faults. The Quran says that all of these are cursed, because they have
landed each other in Hell. If this is going to be the outcome, why do we
fight at home?

I make a fervent appeal to the daughters-in-law. They should strive to
be loyal to their husbands and his family. They should strive to spend a
happy and contented life with their husbands and other members of his
family. I appeal to the sons, too, to be loyal to their wives and should
not act on the foolish dictates of their mothers. I especially appeal to
the ladies because if the girl remains loyal, her mother-in-law cannot
interfere in their affairs or destroy their home. She should be sensible
and not listen to foolish talk. If the newly wed wife heeds the gossip
mill, her life will be destroyed at the beginning of the married days.
In many a case the result is a divorce!

I know of several cases of divorce. When I ponder over them, I find that
in most instances the mothers-in-law are the cause of the break up. The
fathers-in-law, too, show a lack of understanding. Instead of adopting a
discreet silence, they interfere with the affairs of the young couple.
The parents of the boy should take sides with the daughter-in-law. It is
the responsibility of the girls’ parents to support the son-in-law. When
a small quarrel erupts between the couple, instead of brokering a
compromise, they further fan the flames of discord and thus the couple
starts fighting. It is a terrible thing for the husband and wife to
fight with each other.

If a young wife fights with her husband and goes away to her parents’
home, her mother and mother-in-law should try to cool her down and
convince her to return home. A sensible father will tell her that her
home is where her husband lives and she should go back there. He will
take the daughter to her husband’s home and tell him to let bygones be
bygones. Thus the difference between man and wife can be nipped in the
bud. However angry and excitable the young son-in-law is, if the
mother-in-law takes back her daughter to his home and talks to him for
sometime, he will cool down. If the parents-in-law are good to the
daughter-in-law, treat her with affection and side with her when some
quarrel erupts, the daughter-in-law, however bad she may be, will
reciprocate their love, and there will be no discord in the house.

When a man returns home after the day’s hard work, which according to
the Quran is a place of rest and relaxation, he expects the care and
support of his wife to tide over the tiredness and refresh himself. But
sometimes, instead of comfort, the home becomes a source of torture. The
wife, who has been feeling lonely all day long, starts complaining to
her husband as soon as she sees him. She complains to him about his
parents - today your mother said this to me, your father scolded me like
this. Then as soon as his mother finds him alone, she starts backbiting
about his wife - your wife is stupid, she has no brains, actually she is
not fit for our house. The poor man is already tired after working the
whole day, listening to all this, tires him out. He becomes disturbed.
The home is no longer a shelter for him. Do you realize how great a sin
this is? The retribution for backbiting is more than the retribution for
fornication. According to a tradition of the Holy Prophet (s), if a
fornicator dies without repenting, then as soon as he reaches the gates
of Hell, such an intolerably foul smell will arise out of his private
parts that the inhabitants of Hell will plead will Allah to relieve them
of the foul smell. Fornication is such a grave sin. But a bigger sin is
to backbite about someone and destroy or cause a decrease in the regard
others have for him. If you backbite about your daughter-in-law to your
son, or accuse her falsely, it is a very grave sin. On the day of
Judgement, such people will be dipped in a lake of putrid water and will
stay there as long as everyone is through with giving their account of
deeds. Then, they will be consigned to Hell in the same state. Don’t
backbite because it is a major sin. A newly married girl and her
mother-in-law should refrain from backbiting against each other. Certain
mothers-in-law are so low, that they are always on the look-out for the
faults of their daughters-in-law, so that they can condemn the
daughter-in-law and backbite about her to their sons. If only such
mothers-in-law knew what the Holy Prophet (s) has said. He(s) has said,
“O people who believe. Do not be critical of others nor interfere in the
matters of other people. If you do so, Allah will put you to shame on
the Day of Judgement!” She should realise that tomorrow her daughter can
get the same treatment she metes out to her daughter-in-law today. This
world will pass, but what will happen in the Hereafter? The first day in
the grave is very difficult. The parents-in-law should not be concerned
about the dowry. Only foolish people have such concerns. They should not
be worried that their daughter-in-law has brought less dowry. What they
should be worried and concerned about is their graves. It is a crime for
the mother-in-law to go through the purse of her daughter-in-law.
Similarly the wife should not check her husband’s wallet - these actions
have grave consequences.

I make a fervent appeal to the parents not to interfere in the affairs
of their grown-up children. Leave them free to carve their own futures.
Do not hurt others - worry about your Hereafter.


