The Twenty Second Talk
======================

1. Forgiveness And Forbearance
------------------------------

The topic for discussion today is forbearance and overlooking faults. If
the element of love is lacking in any household, forbearance and
forgiveness can ameliorate the situation. Forgiveness is a divine word.
When a person thinks of forgiving, he feels a radiance around him.
Forgiveness is such a sweet and divine word that it is equal to love.
The Holy Quran speaks highly of forgiveness and overlooking
shortcomings, and divides it into two categories. The first category of
forgiveness is that when a person notices a fault or shortcoming, he
forgives for the sake of Allah or humanity.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذِ الْعَفْوَ وَ أْمُرْ بِالْعُرْفِ وَ أَعْرِضْ عَنِ الجَْهِلِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Keep to forgiveness, and enjoin kindness, and turn away from the
ignorant.*** ***(Sura al-’Araf, 7: 199)***

The Holy Book exhorts Muslims to adopt the habit of forgiveness and
leniency. They should enjoin the inhabitants of their homes to be kind
and merciful with others. Therefore, the first stage of this attitude is
that when one notices a wrongdoing or fault in anyone, he forgives him.

The second stage is higher than the one mentioned above. The Quran wants
us to attain a status where we can see no wrong. A person at this stage
perceives no fault in his wife or other members of the family, so there
is no question of forgiving them. This is called *'forbearance and*
*forgiveness'.*

The Holy Quran expects Muslims and human beings to cultivate the trait
of forgiveness. If one notices a defect in anyone, he should forgive the
person as if he is not aware of the fault! The Holy Quran asks Muslims:
Don’t you want Allah to forgive you on the day of Judgement? Allah
pardons those who practice forgiveness and forbearance. He forgives them
in this world itself. On the Day of Judgement, Allah will not expose the
faults of those who turn a blind eye to the faults of others. You must
have heard that some persons will enter the Heaven without giving any
account of their deeds. Their attitude of forbearance and forgiveness is
the cause of their smooth entry into the Heaven. Some persons will have
to account for their deeds, and then they will be forgiven so that they
can enter Heaven. But some people will not give an account at all. Thus
the Quran states that if you want to be pardoned on the day of
Judgement, you too should pardon others in this world. At home, one
should be a person who forgives and forgets others’ faults. If you do
not want to be questioned about your deeds on the Day of Judgement, then
don’t rebuke anyone when you notice his faults and failings. The husband
should forgive and forget the wife’s mistakes; the wife should have the
same attitude with her husband. In a poem said to be composed by Amir al
Mu’minin (a.s.), he says that he forgave and pardoned a degraded person
who had harmed him. In the closing verses of Sura Al-Furqan, 25, the
Holy Quran describes the qualities of a *mu’min*, and says that pious
souls behave in such a way with the evil, ignorant and foolish persons
as if they were totally unaware of their faults. When a man enters his
house and finds it untidy, the children are not clean, the wife has not
bothered to freshen herself, because he is a good man, he overlooks
these things. He forgives and turns a blind eye to these things. A
husband ill-treats his wife, and behaves irresponsibly but she forgives
him and turns a blind eye to his failures. She is patient and bears with
him. It is these qualities that have been described at the end of Sura
Al-Furqan, 25, but in different words. These verses should be taken to
mean that *Mu’minin* should practice forgiveness, and overlook
shortcomings in others, in the same way they would overlook it if their
one year old were to slap them in the face. According to the Quran, a
*mu'min* should reach this stage. If he expects Allah to forgive him,
and desires to enter Heaven without having to give an account for his
deeds, he should have the qualities of forbearance and forgiveness in
himself. The verse bears witness to the fact that one who doesn’t
forgive, and answers evil with evil, cannot expect Allah to forgive him
on the day of Judgement. Thus the second stage is to forget the evil
done to him. But the Quran does not stop here. It expects more,
especially from the people associated with the pulpit and the prayer
niche, and those who are proud to be Shias. This is the third stage of
forbearance and forgiveness. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ْ وَ يَدْرَءُونَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ السَّيِّئَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…..and they repel evil with good…..*** ***(Sura al Qasas, 28: 54)***

This means that when someone wrongs you, you should do good to them. In
fact this verse has been repeated in the Holy Quran at several places.
When a person tries to harm you, do good to him. The Prophet of Islam
(s) has said that be (particularly) good to a person who has been bad to
you. In Sura Yusuf we have been exhorted to cultivate this trait.

Sura Yusuf is a very interesting Sura. The Holy Quran calls it *Ahsan al
Qasas* or the best of stories. This Sura presents us with a character,
which if we adopt, we can become perfect. In Sura Yusuf several subjects
have been dealt with. One of these concerns our talk. The Holy Quran
says that Zuleikha pestered Yusuf (a.s.) so much that he was forced into
imprisonment, for several years. Even when he was released he refused to
leave the prison and sent a message to the king asking why had the
ladies cut their fingers when they saw him? Why had Zuleikha troubled
him so much? Then a committee was constituted and the women were called
to depose before it. These women bore witness to the innocence of Yusuf
(a.s.). Now Zuleikha too confessed that she was at fault and that Yusuf
(a.s.) was among the truthful. She admitted that Yusuf (a.s.) was
innocent and that she made false allegations against him. It was only
then that Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) came out of the prison. He said that he
had made the women confess their guilt only to prove his innocence. He
said that he now wished to become the *Aziz* of Egypt and hold the reins
of the government in his hands. This would not have been possible as
long as he carried the stain of false accusations on his character. If
it were not for this he would have overlooked the evil of Zuleikha and
the heartache of having to spend ten years in prison.

The Holy Quran says that Prophet Yusuf’s brothers came and felt ashamed
on recognizing their brother. When he found them humiliated, Prophet
Yusuf (a.s.) asked them to forget the past and reminded them that Allah
was the most Merciful, He would forgive them. It is said that Yusuf
(a.s.) even served them dinner and took good care of them. This was
despite their very bad treatment meted out to him. They had tried to
harm the innocent child and pushed him into a deep well. When Prophet
Yusuf (a.s.) was rescued from the well, he was sold as a slave.
Remembering their past ill treatment, the brothers could not eat their
dinner. Hadhrat Yusuf (a.s.) said, “Don’t feel ashamed! It is because of
you that I have reached here. If you had not put me into the well, I too
would have come from Kanaan to Egypt in search of a little quantity of
wheat like you! Today that I am the *Aziz* of Egypt - it is only because
of you!” This was one aspect of the attitude of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.)
with his brothers. The second aspect of the attitude of Yusuf (a.s.), as
narrated by the Holy Quran, was manifested when he went to receive his
parents. He made his parents sit on a throne with due respect and showed
great respect to his brothers as well. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَالَ ادْخُلُواْ مِصْرَ إِن شَاءَ اللَّهُ ءَامِنِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he said, “Come into Egypt safe, if Allah wills!” (Sura Yusuf, 12:
99)***

Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) told his brothers that they had honoured him by
coming to Egypt and that they were welcome to Egypt to live in peace and
comfort. This was Yusuf (a.s)’s second attitude towards his brothers. He
overlooked their faults and rewarded their evil with good. The third
attitude of Prophet Yusuf (a.s) really manifests his greatness. The
excellence of Yusuf (a.s.) manifests from the moment when he made his
father ascend the throne. Elaborate arrangements were made to receive
his father along with the brothers. A tent was pitched and a throne was
placed in it. A retinue went to receive the guests. When his father sat
on the throne and relaxed, Hadhrat Yusuf (a.s.) said, “O my revered
father! This is the outcome of the dream that I had once seen! See the
status we have achieved! The enmity that Satan had created between me
and my brothers has enabled me to acquire this status. Hadhrat Yusuf
(a.s.) wanted to tell his father not to become angry with his brothers
for pushing him into the well. It was not their fault; it was Satan who
was to blame. It was Satan who had put his enmity in the hearts of his
brothers. It was because of his brothers' doings that he acquired this
position. This is the perfect man. Don’t be under the impression that
the Quran just wants to narrate a story. No, the Quran is telling the
Muslims to emulate the character of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.). You should not
stop at forgiving and turning a blind eye to the faults of others. You
should go a step further and return good for evil. At several places the
Holy Quran uses words which can have more than one meaning. The
commentators interpret it differently, while the scholars of ethics and
the moralists give it another meaning. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ جَزَ ؤُاْ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِّثْلُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The guerdon of an ill-deed is an ill the like thereof. …..***
***(Sura al Shuuraa, 26: 40)***

The meaning that is generally attributed to this verse is that, for
example, when a person cuts the hand of another, the judge orders a hand
of the perpetrator cut. The other meaning is that if someone harms you,
you harm him. That is: an eye for an eye. In my opinion the youth prefer
the first meaning over the second. But I am sure you will like the third
interpretation that I am giving here. This interpretation is drawn from
the Sura al Qasas that says “*if someone wrongs you, do good to* *him!”*
The Prophet of Islam (s) stayed in Makka for thirteen long years after
the proclamation of Prophethood and bore immense hardships heaped on him
by his enemies. This is the reason that in that period about forty to
fifty persons accepted Islam. In 8A.H, the Prophet (s), marched to Makka
with a contingent of 12,000 troops, and brought Makka under his control
without spilling a drop of blood. The first thing that the Prophet did
was to enter the Kaaba, purify it by asking Imam Ali (a.s.) to demolish
the 360 idols housed within the Kaaba. Then he came to the door of the
Kaaba, which exists even today, and sat near it. The people assembled
around him, and *Dua-e-Wahdat* was recited. *Masjid al Haram* was full
of people. Who were these people? These were the people who used to
stone the Prophet (s). These were the people who had injured his
forehead. These were the people who had fought nearly 74 small and big
battles with the Prophet (s) and his small band of devoted companions.
While the Prophet (s) was reciting the *Dua-e-Wahdat*, these people were
shaking like leaves, because they were expecting the Prophet to order
Imam Ali (a.s.) to slay them any minute. When the prayer was over, the
Prophet (s) turned towards them and asked, “Tell me! How should I deal
with you?” Abu Sufian, Hinda and their like spoke out, “O Prophet of
Allah! You may punish us the way you wish to! You can kill us and cut us
into pieces!” At this juncture the Prophet (s) said, “Let the past
remain in the past. I have forgiven all of you! May Allah forgive you
too!” When these people declared their faith, the Prophet accepted it
although he knew that some people like Abu Sufian and Hinda were
incapable of accepting the faith. The Prophet (s) knew very well that
they had not really accepted faith, they were only paying lip-service;
still he accepted their proclamation. Even before entering Makkaa, the
Prophet (s) had gone to the extent of declaring Abu Sufian’s house as
the place of security: Anyone taking refuge in Abu Sufian's house would
not be touched. Abu Sufian wanted a position, he was a chief of Makka,
and hence the Prophet (s) gave him such a position.

We read in history that when the Prophet (s) entered Makka, one of his
men went around the city, with a standard in his hand, shouting that
this was the day of battle and that they had come to take revenge
against the enemies! When the Prophet (s) learnt about this, he was very
angry and ordered Hadhrat Ali (a.s.) to go and take away the standard
from the hands of the person and proclaim in the streets of Makka that
today is the Day of Blessing, today is the Day of Kindness.This was the
character of our Prophet (s) and his Holy Descendants (a.s.)!

The Holy Quran wants us to be forbearing. It says that if someone harms
us, we should forget it, and strive to do good to him! The Prophet (s)
used to say that a good neighbour is not the one who is good to his
neighbours – this is the duty of every Muslim. A good neighbour is one
who bears with patience the ill treatment meted out to him by his
neighbours! An elderly person was ill. When his neighbour came to visit
him, he found the old man lying on a moist floor. Half the walls were
also moist. The visitor found that the moisture was seeping into his
neighbour’s house from the wall adjoining his own house. The neighbour
was much perturbed and told the old man, “Why didn’t you tell me. I
could have made you comfortable and got rid of all this moisture seeping
through your walls”. The old man said, “I didn’t inform you because it
would have inconvenienced you!” Islam requires people to have such an
attitude towards others in their neighbourhoods! It expects the
mother-in-law and the daughter-in-law to be more affectionate and loving
than this, rather Islam expects “*Repelling evil with good”* from them.

Friends! Please remember that true happiness doesn’t come from wearing
good clothes and jewellery! Neither do these things dispel sadness, nor
do these create eternal love! It is this verse which dispels sadness and
creates happiness. Write this verse and hang it in the house where the
husband, the wife and the children can see it. Gradually, they will
learn to forgive. Shame on the wife who is misbehaves with her husband
because he got angry with her. It is also a matter of shame for the
husband who fights with his wife because she misbehaved with him. In the
view of the Quran a good wife and a good husband is one who follows
“*Repelling evil with good!”* If someone treats them badly, they repay
them with kindness and mercy. If a fight erupts between a husband and
wife, they hasten to make peace. The Prophet of Islam (s) told a woman,
“If ever there is a fight between you and your husband, it is your duty
to make up with him!” The woman said, “Even if he is cruel? Even if he
is at fault?” The Prophet (s) replied emphatically, "Yes! You must take
the first initiative because you are a woman! A woman has to be the
epitome of love for her husband! She should totally shun any ill
feelings!” In a nutshell, if there is seventy percent compatibility in
our families, we can make it a hundred percent with the adoption of the
attitude of forbearance and forgiveness! In the view of the Holy Quran
the environment at home should be one *"for attaining peace in it"**.***
May Allah make our homes the abodes of peace!


