The Twenty- third Talk
======================

1. Suspicion
------------

Today’s discussion is about misunderstandings. Misunderstandings are
like serious illnesses and play a major role in destroying homes. There
is nothing more lethal in rendering a home barren than the element of
misunderstanding amongst its inhabitants. Families should therefore
abstain from allowing misunderstandings to take roots in their midst.

2. Misunderstandings Crop Up
----------------------------

Misunderstandings crop up because of *waswasa* (repeated, unfounded
doubts or fears). Sometimes Satan gains control of a person's mind,
rendering him worse than a hypocrite or a show-off. In other words he
becomes Satan in the garb of a human being! Satan enslaves his
thought-process, and the person does whatever Satan wants him to do

Sometimes Satan is also able to dominate the hearts of certain people.
According to the Quran, this person then becomes an idol worshipper.
This means that his heart becomes a slave to his desires, rendering him
a *fasiq* and *fajir*. According to the Quran, this person becomes a
Satan worshipper, not a servant of Allah. We read in the Sura Yasin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ لَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَبَنىِ ءَادَمَ أَن لَّا تَعْبُدُواْ
الشَّيْطَنَ إِنَّهُ لَكمُ‏ْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Did I not charge you, O ye sons of Adam, that ye worship not the
devil - Lo! He is your open foe!*** ***(Sura Yasin, 36: 60)***

O children of Adam, did you not promise Allah that you would not worship
Satan? Then why are you worshipping Satan now? This verse shows us that
a Satan worshipper is actually a person whose heart is enslaved by
Satan. Satan eradicates the love of Allah from this person’s heart, and
corrupts his thoughts. This type of a person is a Satan worshipper. When
Satan is able to dominate over a person’s power of thinking, it is known
as *waswasa* (repeated, unfounded doubts or fears), and this person is
called *waswasi*. *Waswasa* is of two types: One of these is the
*waswasa* of thought, which is the topic of today’s discussion. Another
type of *waswasa* is the *waswasa* of action. Sometimes even pious
people are inflicted with *waswasa* of action. They experience *waswasa*
in worship – regarding purity (*taharat*) and impurity (*najasat*),
prayer, fasting etc. We shall talk about this later, inshaallah. Anyway,
when Satan is able to control a person’s power of thinking, he creates
*waswasa* in his mind. The affected individual is then ruled by evil and
wicked thoughts. If a person becomes inflicted with the *waswasa* of
action, the individual comits lewd and wicked acts. *Waswasa* affects
him at the time of action. Both these conditions are fraught with
danger. In both these situations Satan overwhelms the thought-process of
the persons. In the view of Imam Jafar al Sadiq, this condition is
nothing short of madness. A man came to meet Imam Ja’far al Sadiq
(a.s.), and started praising someone. He praised the man for being
intelligent and then mentioned that the man was affected by *waswasa*.
The Imam (a.s.) smiled and said, “This man is a slave of *shaitan*. If
he is asked whether his deeds are godly or evil, he himself will tell
you that his deeds are evil.”

3. Effects Of Waswasa: Negative Thoughts
----------------------------------------

One of the harmful effects of *waswasa* of thought is that the affected
person always takes the negative view of things. Some people don’t see
anything positive about themselves or those around them. They take a
negative and morose view of everything. They never think of the
strengths they or those around them have, but are always complaining
about their failings and weaknesses. These are the persons who are
always pessimistic about themselves, their friends and the society at
large. This is a very harmful condition and, in many people, it is a
result of *waswasa*.

Another harmful effect of always having negative thoughts is that the
individual is unable to progress. He is unable to reach perfection. This
attitude is also a big sin. Negative thoughts are like the flies which
search for some filth to sit upon even in a garden in full bloom. If
your body and the clothes are clean, flies will not sit on them. But if
there is some dirt or a suppurating wound on the body, flies get
attracted to it. Some men, too, are like the flies. They excel in
carrying negative thoughts. .

One should abstain from negative thoughts. The wives should think
positively about their husbands. Similarly men should not allow the
shortcomings of their wives to dominate their thoughts. Don’t be on the
look-out for her flaws; don’t hanker after dirt like flies. Instead you
should always be in search of flowers like a nightingale. You should
search for her positive qualities. On the whole, a human being is
unfaithful. Even if you always treat your wife well, a single episode of
misbehaviour is enough to make her forget your past good behaviour.
Similarly, if a good wife misbehaves one day, her husband forgets all
her past kindness. This shows that humans are not faithful. Even the
Quran complains about this aspect of human nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُتِلَ الْإِنْسانُ ما أَكْفَرَه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Perish man! How ungrateful is he?!*** ***(Sura 'Abasa, 80: 17)***

4. Grief
--------

Another symptom of *waswasa* of thought is that the person gets fed up
with life and remains sad. If the person is pious, he wonders why he has
come into this world. He thinks it would have been better if he had not
come into the world. If this person is not religious and is not afraid
of Allah, then he comits suicide. Such events are more widespread in the
Western world. This is the result of *waswasa* of thought. The affected
individual is always lost in thought, and when he is unable to come to a
conclusion, he becomes fed-up with life and ends up committing suicide.

A question asked, usually by the youth is: why have we come into this
world? According to the psychologists, the source of this question is
*waswasa* of thought. Such questions are asked by unhappy people, who
are fed-up with life. They don’t know the reason for their existence in
the world. If you try to make them understand, their *waswasa* of
thought does not allow them to be satisfied with your replies. If you
present them with proofs and arguments, they will still insist that it
would have been better if they had not been born. I am unable to
recollect the name of the author who wrote that one morning when he got
up, he found the morning to be sad and gloomy. He was still pitying the
day when he happened to glance at the newspaper. He read two news items
which were completely opposite to each other. The first item was about a
man who had slashed his stomach with a knife and had thrown out his
intestines, saying that he wanted to be without his intestines for just
a minute. He died after one minute. The other item in the newspaper was
an article by a lady. She wrote that, by the Grace of Allah, as soon as
she woke up in the morning, she found a pleasant day coming her way. She
thanked Allah for giving her life and yet another opportunity to stand
before Him. The author then began to think about the source of the
lady’s happiness, that man’s suicide and his own grief and depression.
He came to the conclusion that all the negative thoughts had their
source in *waswasa* of thought. In other words, it can be said that
tiredness, lack of understanding and *waswasa* of thought affect our
lives.

5. Suspicion
------------

The worst effect of *waswasa* of thought is that the person becomes
suspicious. First he is plagued with bad thoughts about his own family,
and then gradually this extends to the society. If this malady
progresses further, he starts doubting Allah, the Holy Quran, the
Prophet (s) and his Progeny (a.s.). These doubts ultimately turn him
into an unbeliever. Suspicion is from *shaitan*. *Shaitan* makes a small
beginning, but as soon as man gives him an oppurtunity, he takes man to
the seventh level of Hell. He will not settle for anything less. In
addition, *shaitan* even ridicules man and says, “you have reached the
depths of Hell yourself, what do I have to do with you?" Suspicion,
driven by *waswasa* of thought, starts on a low scale, but soon
escalates to the extent that one even starts suspecting Allah and the
*Ma'soomeen* (the infallible ones.)

6. The Dangers Of Suspicion
---------------------------

The biggest danger of suspicion is that it may lead one to sin. Because
of *waswasa* of thought and suspicion, the affected person sees others
as sinners and bad characters. He, then, wants to punish them. We come
across many youth who are pleasant, and have even participated in the
(Iranian) revolution, but suspicion has turned them into sinners. They
even accuse the scholars and pious people of disbelief (*kufr*). Because
this sin can attract the death penalty, they end up murdering innocent
men of piety and religious scholars. Suspicion can lead man to commit
such sins. Suspicion arises from *waswasa* of thought. Do not
underestimate a sceptic. Sometimes, the sceptic becomes involved in a
strange type of madness. For example, a man suspects his wife. This is a
great sin. Or, for example, when a man enters their path, the husband
tells his wife, “He is making passes at you.” This man talks like insane
people. Sometimes the wife suspects her husband, although he has become
so old, he is devoid of carnal desires. But the moment he steps into the
house, she creates a hue and cry and accuses him of maintaining a second
wife secretly. “Where else could you have gone all this while?” she asks
him.

There is a story making rounds in the society. A husband and his wife
were sleeping on their terrace. As you may be aware, at night, a row of
stars points to the Kaaba. The husband asked the wife,” What is the
significance of this row of stars”. The wife replied, “People say that
it shows the way to the Kaaba. When hajjis loose their way, these stars
guide them to the correct path.” As soon as the man heard this, he
started beating his wife and said, “Now I know why you make me sleep
here. Your intention is to hand me over to the hajjis. After they kill
me, you want to marry again”. This is probably just a story, but a man
once told me about a couple. The husband was a victim of *waswasa* of
thought, and the wife was a victim of *waswasa* of action. When the
couple consulted this man, he turned to the lady who had *waswasa* of
action regarding purity and impurity (*taharat and najasat*), and told
her that your problem is suspicion. If you follow my advice continuously
for six months, you can be cured. It was then that he became aware of
the husband looking at his wife in a strange manner. He even refused to
consult this man and left. After a few days the husband telephoned the
man and said, “I have understood what you were trying to tell my wife.
You were trying to tell her to divorce me, marry you and stay with you
for six months. Then you would cure her”. It is as if the husband was
insane. There are many persons with such disorders. When husbands and
wives doubt each other, they assume their spouse to be a thief. For
example, the husband spends some money and forgets or it falls out of
his pocket, while he was unaware of it. When he can’t find the money, he
pins the blame on his wife and considers her to be a thief. He considers
her to be a thief, an adulteress, a shameless woman. Even the wife can
suspect her husband of these things, if she becomes entangled in
*waswasa* of thought. This is a major sin about which the Holy Quran
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَ الْبَصَرَ
وَ الْفُؤَادَ كلُ‏ُّ أُوْلَئكَ كاَنَ عَنْهُ مَسُْولا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge. Lo! The
hearing and the sight and the heart--- of each of these it will be
asked.*** ***(Sura al-’Isra’, 17: 36)***

O men! Do not talk about matters without knowledge. Don’t assume things.
Don’t suspect others. Your eyes, your ears, and even your hearts will be
questioned on the Day of Reckoning about these suspicions and these
wrong thoughts! On that day, the organs of your body will bear witness
against you. A husband suspects his wife but does not let her know,
neither does he tell anybody, even then, when he will be brought to the
grounds of Judgement, his heart will bear witness against him that he
used to suspect his wife in the world. Islam has strictly forbidden
doubting others. A good Muslim should act on his conviction and not on
doubts. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ْ وَ ظَنَنتُمْ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ وَ كُنتُمْ قَوْمَا بُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***… And ye did think an evil thought, and ye were worthless folk.(***
***Sura al Fath, 48: 12)***

A society where people doubt each other is on its way to destruction.
Their lives in this world and the Hereafter will be bleak. These days
this ailment is very prevalent. May the person die who, like the
silkworm, weaves a cocoon of suspicion and conjecture so that he can
hide within it. I appeal to my audience to remember and recite this
verse whenever any doubts crosses their minds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُتِلَ الخَْرَّصُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ هُمْ فىِ غَمْرَةٍ سَاهُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Accursed be the conjecturers***  
***Who are careless in an abyss! (Sura Zaariyaat, 51: 10 – 11)***

Like the silkworm, a person who remains trapped in the cocoon of his
doubts and wrong thoughts will suffocate to death. According to a
tradition, the Prophet of Islam (s) faced the Kaaba and said, “O Kaaba!
You are much respected! But respect for a believer (*mu’min*) exceeds
the respect for you. Allah has declared only one thing *haram* with
regard to you. But for the *mu’min* He has declared three things
*haram:*

1. He has declared killing an innocent human *haram*.  
 2. Usurping a *mu’min*'s, property is *haram.*  
 3**.** Entertaining doubts about a *mu’min* is *haram.*”

The Prophet (s) has placed murdering people, usurping others’ property,
and suspecting people, on an equal level. If, God forbid, you suspect
your wife and utter even one sentence about it to your innocent wife,
she will never forget this sentence, even if she is always willing to
forgive and forget. If the character of a woman of good character is
suspected, not only will this destroy the love in her heart, but it will
also sow the seeds of hate in it.

It is said that the husband of a suspicious wife came home late. The
wife opened the door and told him to go back to the place where he had
spent his evening. Saying this she slammed the door shut in his face and
went back into the house in a huff. The man went to a hotel, rented a
room, and had his dinner. The next morning he rented a house and married
a second wife. He returned home after about a week. He told his first
wife. “My dear, I have reached the place you had sent me to. From today,
one night is for you, one night is for her – that is if you want it this
way, otherwise one night is for you and two nights are for her.”

Yes! Men toil so hard that sometimes they develop calluses in the soles
of their feet. Still they work to provide the comforts of life to their
wife and children. Even after all this if the wives suspect their
husbands, it goes to show that the suspicion is not a product of their
intelligence, rather it is the work of someone else.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنَّ الشَّيَطِينَ لَيُوحُونَ إِلىَ أَوْلِيَائهِمْ لِيُجَدِلُوكُمْ
وَ إِنْ أَطَعْتُمُوهُمْ إِنَّكُمْ لمَُشرِْكُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! The devils do inspire their minions to dispute with you. But if
ye obey them, ye will be in truth as idolaters.*** ***(Sura al An'am, 6:
122)***

When Satan whispers in the ear of a person, goading her to do wrong, an
intelligent person should not cause the destruction of her house and
loose the love of her husband by paying attention to such senseless
talk. May Allah protect men and women from becoming suspicious of their
spouses. Being suspicious of ones spouse is a very big sin. Usually, the
woman does not suspect her husband of adultery; she accuses him of
re-marrying on the sly. But if the husband suspects the wife of adultery
and tells her so, the jurist can order a punishment of anything between
29 and 79 floggings. Such suspicions are major sins and it is regarding
this that the Quran says: May you die. Therefore it is imperative that
there are no suspicions in the family. One should not be suspicious even
while dealing with persons outside the house.

Sometimes suspicion leads one to spy on others. Spying is such a major
sin that the Prophet of Allah (s) once said, “O those people whose faith
is limited to their tongues and has not reached their hearts, do not
spy! Do not search for defects in others. If you spy on others, Allah
will humiliate you. Even if you are very intelligent, suspecting others
will lead you to spy on them. Inquisitiveness and curiosity can
sometimes become the cause of wrongdoing. For example: a woman standing
at her threshold finds an unfamiliar young man entering the door of the
neighbour's house. If she is a good Muslimah, she should assume that the
young man must be their relation or visiting them for some errand. But
if she spies on her neighbours and, God forbid, spreads it among the
people, it will give rise to innumerable ills. Imam Husayn (a.s.) has
said slitting the throat of a person is a lesser sin than causing
separation between a husband and wife. Some people pretend to be very
religious and pious, and yet they perpetrate such acts. They run the
gossip mill and cause the destruction of happy families. They ruin the
respect and reputation of families and cause divorces. These people want
to do good but end up doing evil.

The Prophet of Islam (s) used to repeatedly say that one should always
have a good opinion about his *mu’min* *brother,* and always be his
well-wisher***.*** One should always try to hide the flaws of his
*mu’min* brother. Try all the possible ways to hide his shortcomings. If
one method does not work, try the second. If it fails try a third, but
don’t give up. Tell yourself: what kind of a Muslim am I that I can’t
even hide the flaws of my brother-in-faith? Do we ever adopt this
method? I appeal to those of you who can understand the message of the
Holy Prophet and his infallible progeny to the pious people; your
Prophet (s) is telling you not to be curious. Gossip mongers flit around
in search of stories about others. Many people are inflicted with this
disease, whether they are businessmen, soldiers, or workers – this
scourge is found in everybody and it is found especially in ladies. This
is a sin which is not just equal to killing someone, it is equal to
taking out all the blood vessels from his body. Then why should we
indulge in this act?

Inquisitiveness and gossip is a major ill, but there is a simple cure
for this as well! This can be done by adopting the dictum of forgive and
forget! Even if one notices a defect in his wife, he should think
positively about it. When he does this, he is literally slapping
*Shaitan*, who then goes away. Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) says, “Slap
him on his impious face! When you slap him, when you refuse to heed to
his whisperings, he will run away. If you give credence to his talk,
then the accursed Satan will gradually overwhelm your thought-process
and turn you insane The ailment is serious, but easily curable. The
ailment will destroy your world and your Hereafter, but each one of us
can easily cure himself. The cure lies in giving no importance to
suspicion and gossip.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الظَّنَّ لا يُغْني‏ مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed conjecture is no substitute for the truth (Sura Yunus, 10:
36)***

The Quran says that suspicion is of no use. Those who are suspicious
aren’t following the Quran.


