The Third Talk
==============

1 Biological Scientists on Matrimony
------------------------------------

The main topic of our discussion during this session is domestic morals.
In this direction whatever we have dealt with in the previous talks was
a sort of preface, although rather inadequate! Today’s talk is on the
importance of matrimony in light of the findings of the biological
scientists.

When the hormones associated with the sexual instinct are released in
the body, they bring about a peculiar revolution in the body and soul of
a person, whether a girl or a boy. The resulting changes are so obvious
that it manifests itself in the appearance of the person. Islam terms
this changed condition as the age of *buloogh.* According to Islam,
*buloogh* is that stage when the hormones associated with the sexual
instinct are released and become strong in a person. In other words, the
person experiences a strange transition. When these hormones are
released, the person automatically experiences an attraction that is
called sexual attraction.

Prior to this the sexual instinct was dormant, but now it begins to
manifest itself. As soon as this happens, the young person must be
handled very carefully. I have previously said that if these
manifestations are not handled thoughtfully, the results could be
serious. We should also bear in mind that the sexual urge is not like
the urge for eating and drinking. Sexual urge is also not like the
desire to amass wealth, acquire property and other similar human
desires. If Freud’s theory has to be accepted, then all the desires have
their root in the sexual desire. His theory seems incorrect. But
romance, poetry and other related instincts can be connected to the
sexual instinct in a person. You very seldom hear that someone has
written a poem on bread or water, for instance. But poetry is mostly
about love and romance. The love of one person for another arises from
the sex instinct that manifests itself in the persons.

Here I would like to make a point to the young sons and daughters! If
two young boys, or two young girls, have unusual love and affection for
each other, then they must watch out, otherwise they might be exposed to
a grave risk. This love must certainly be stopped. They may argue that
they are just friends and the friendship is not because of sex instinct,
but they are lying. If one person has extreme feelings towards another,
it definitely is love. And love is a product of the sex instinct. The
purest form of love, unadulterated with any other instinct, can only be
one’s love for Allah. One may develop love for Imam Hussein (a.s) and
Kerbala, or for Imam Zamana. If one has an unusual love for Allah or
these personalities, it is certainly a blessing. But if this is not the
case, then the affected individual must realise that he is in a very
dangerous situation. Reciting poetry for the beloved or becoming a lover
of someone is because of the sexual urge.

2. Quranic View of Matrimony
----------------------------

The Holy Verse reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُنفِقْ ذُو سَعَةٍ مِّن سَعَتِهِ وَ مَن قُدِرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقُهُ
فَلْيُنفِقْ مِمَّا ءَاتَئهُ اللَّهُ لَا يُكلَِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا
إِلَّا مَا ءَاتَئهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Let him who has abundance, spend of his abundance, and he whose
provision is measured, let him spend of that which Allah hath given him.
Allah asketh naught of any soul save that which He hath given it.***
***(Sura Al Talaaq 65:07)***

This verse pertains to the lives of human beings and this verse is also
about wives. Men and women are absolutely natural and essential for each
other, in the same way that bread and water are essential. If a person
cannot acquire these essentials on his own, others must assist him.
Since the sexual instinct is different from other human instincts, the
Holy Quran has a specific and distinct commandment about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنكِحُواْ الْأَيَمَى‏ مِنكمُ‏ْ وَ الصَّلِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكمُ‏ْ
وَ إِمَائكُمْ إِن يَكُونُواْ فُقَرَاءَ يُغْنِهِمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
وَ اللَّهُ وَسِعٌ عَلِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves
and maidservants. If they be poor, Allah will enrich them of His bounty.
Allah is of ample means, Aware.*** ***(Sura An-Nur 24: 32)***

The importance of matrimony in the society is stressed in this verse.
Here the word ‘*ankihu***’,** meaning marry, is used in a collective
sense hinting at the importance of matrimony in the society. It is the
responsibility of the parents to get their young ones married. If the
parents don’t have the means, then the Islamic government must discharge
this duty. If it is unable to do so, the society has to bear this
responsibility. Quran says that the society has to take the
responsibility of helping the poor boys and girls marry. It also says
that people should have faith in Allah that after matrimony they will
flourish. If you trust in Allah, and believe Him to be the Sustainer,
then marry and do not worry unduly about the future!

If your trust in Allah is firm, if you work hard enough, if you follow
the commandments of Islam, then fear of poverty should not worry you.
Another verse of the Quran exhorts the society to help remove the
poverty and penury of individuals. It urges people to help each other in
the society. Particularly in the matter of matrimony, the Quran exhorts
the society to help those young boys and girls marry, who don’t have the
means to meet the expenses of marriage.

3. Matrimony in the Light of Tradition
--------------------------------------

The author of *Wasail* is one person who has a right over the *Mumineen*
in general and the *Maraji’* in particular. In his invaluable book he
has recorded almost six thousand traditions. He has recorded traditions
that say that there is great felicity for the person who helps a young
man get a bride or helps a young girl get married. When one reads these
traditions, one feels as if there can be no felicity greater than this.

It is narrated from Imam Musa ibn Jafar (a.s.) that on the Day of
Reckoning three types of persons will be under the shade of the
Firmament. One of the groups will consist of the persons who helped
someone to marry. In this tradition the Imam (a.s.) says that on the Day
of Judgment Allah will grant such persons with His Blessings. (Wasail
al-Shia, Vol 14, Page 27)

Similar traditions are recorded in other chapters of the book too. The
author has recorded more than twenty such traditions. One such tradition
is:

“Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) said that a person came to his revered
father. The Imam (a.s.) asked him, “Do you have a spouse?” The person
replied in the negative. (I mention this especially for the benefit of
those young girls and boys who can marry, but won’t) Then the Imam
(a.s.) said, “If Allah gives me whatever is there on the earth and asks
me to remain without a wife, I would turn down the offer!” Here
‘whatever is on earth’ does not mean millions of dollars, it means the
earth and all that it contains. The Imam is addressing girls as well as
boys that if Allah gives him the earth and all that it contains, but if
he is without a spouse even for one night, this wealth has no value.
Then the Imam said to that person, “Let me tell you the difference
between those who have spouses and those who don’t. If a married man or
woman offers two *rakaat* of prayer, it is more felicitous than the
worship of an unmarried person, who prays at night and fasts during the
day.”

It is narrated from the Prophet (s) and the Imams (a.s) that no house is
liked more by Allah than that which is built on the foundation of
matrimony. This tradition points to a very special fact. The fact is
that when you get a young girl and a young boy married, you are helping
to make a home! What is more felicitous - making a home or making a
mosque or a school? The Holy Prophet (s) says that when young couples
marry and make their homes, it is definitely more felicitous!

There are several other traditions stressing the importance of matrimony
in Islam. The least reward is stated in the tradition that says that
when a married man or woman offers the morning prayers, a reward of
forty *rakaats* is entered in their record of deeds*.* It means that the
rewards for all the prayers offered by married persons are enhanced 70
times! This is the importance of matrimony in Islam.

To the contrary, about those young men and women who can marry but won’t
marry, the Prophet (s) and the Imams (a.s.) have made the following
observation: The lowest of the men are those who die single.

There are several other such traditions that severely condemn men and
women remaining unmarried. I am not recounting them here because they
can cause a feeling of depression in the minds of the audience! If the
readers wish to know more about these, they may refer to Volume 16 of
Wasail al Shia*.*

The sayings of the Holy Prophet (s) and the Imams (a.s.) are no
exaggerations. The Shias of the *Ahl al Bayt* have a special belief.
Their belief is that all the Divine Commandments are based on attaining
certain advantages (*Masaleh)* and avoiding certain evils (*Mafasid).*
If Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) has given certain orders, it follows that
there must be some reason for it. If Imam Baqir (a.s.) has asked men to
refrain from certain things, there must be something negative about
them. This is a confirmed belief of the Shias.

4. Importance Of Sexual Instinct In Islam
-----------------------------------------

The instinct of sex is different from other instincts in the human
beings. When other instincts reach a peak and become strong, they make
the person helpless. Sexual instinct is different in this aspect.
Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) could resist all the temptations of Zuleikha and
was able to shake her off. Zuleikha had already made up her mind.
According to the Quran, if it were not for Prophet Yusuf’s infallibility
and his firm determination, he too would have succumbed.

When Hadhrat Yusuf was again confronted with a bevy of beautiful women
at Zuleikha’s chambers, they cut their hands, instead of cutting the
apples. All those beautiful women became attracted to and desired Yusuf
(a.s.). From this very difficult situation too Prophet Yusuf came out
unscathed. Here I would like to quote a verse from the Holy Quran that I
request the young ones and their parents to bear in mind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‏ِ السِّجْنُ أَحَبُّ إِلىَ‏َّ مِمَّا يَدْعُونَنىِ إِلَيْهِ
وَ إِلَّا تَصْرِفْ عَنىّ‏ِ كَيْدَهُنَّ أَصْبُ إِلَيهِْنَّ وَ أَكُن
مِّنَ الجَْهِلِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said my Lord I prefer the prison to them, and if Thou will not
fend off their wiles from me I shall incline unto them and become of the
foolish. (Sura Yusuf, 12 :33).***

Prophet Yusuf says that if Allah had not been merciful, he would have
been trapped by the women and become wretched and helpless. In the
sentence *‘akoon minal jaheleen,’* *jahl* means desire overcoming
intellect. Thus in this verse, Yusuf (a.s.) is quoted saying that O lord
you were merciful, you helped me to overcome my sexual instinct. These
verses pertaining to Prophet Yusuf prove that the sexual instinct is
different from other instincts. If we ponder over the fact, we find that
Islam has a very unique view regarding the sexual instinct. The unique
thing is that it doesn’t ask its followers to suppress this instinct.
People should not do anything that might extinguish this instinct
forever. Therefore, the first commandment is that people should not look
at one another with lust or amorous intent. This is a sort of defensive
measure and is not asking total abstention. Viewing someone with lustful
looks is considered sinful. Looking at someone with desire causes the
person to become wretched, because one glance can be enough to cause
infatuation, which is a disease worse than cancer.

Therefore the Holy Quran addresses every lady and says: “O lady! When
you move with, or talk to a male stranger you must exercise care in
selection of your dress and your behavior. O lady! If you are put in a
situation when you must speak with a male stranger, then talk only to
the extent that it is absolutely essential”.

Even while conversing with someone over the telephone, the talk should
be restricted to the bare necessities. When a woman walks in the lane,
she should ensure that the *chador* is worn properly. Also, the *chador*
should not be of a material that might attract attention of the
wayfarers. The footwear and the posture of walking too should not be
such that men become aware of you. If your *chador* is transparent, this
is oppression because it can arouse passions. If a youth gets motivated
due to the carelessness of women, it might often be difficult for him to
control his sexual instinct.

We conclude from the foregone discussion that the sex instinct requires
the attention of the parents and the young boys and girls. The instinct
will be at its zenith from the age of fifteen or sixteen years to about
28 years. During these twelve to fifteen years one can have the
legitimate pleasures of the sex instinct. After this period the Need of
a wife or a husband starts tapering down. But the society has grown so
callous, that a major part of this prime period is spent by the youth
without matrimony because of economic and other reasons.

5. Moderation In Dowry
----------------------

If we avoid extravagance and luxurious life, then all our social
problems can be resolved. Is it not possible that the excessive dowry
that we give to one daughter be distributed among ten such daughters, so
that ten girls can be married! The ladies and gentlemen in our society
might not agree to such a suggestion. But Islam says this is possible!
Maula Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.) is an example for our society. There is a
couplet written by Imam Ali (a.s.) in which he says that a luxurious
life makes one mentally weak and destroys him psychologically. This is
the thing which causes pride in individuals and the society and makes
man a worshipper of things other than his Lord. Man becomes a slave to
the society. This curse of dowry that the parents have to bear is like a
yoke, breaking their backs. Marrying a daughter is akin to being ground
with a mortar and pestle. We are all neck deep in this morass – you, me,
the villager, the city dweller, the wise, the ignorant, the learned, the
illiterate – all of us are involved in this. If we are contented in the
matter of dowry, we shall be able to marry away several daughters in the
place of one. You might say this frugality is not possible. I insist
that it is possible!

An anecdote reported by Ayatullah Haeri should serve as an example for
all of us. He reports that once, while a Shaykh was seated with a group
of his students, a trader brought a cloak for him. He saw that the cloak
was very good, but wearing it would be unbefitting for him. On the other
hand, refusing a gift, too, would not be correct. Therefore he asked the
trader about the cost of the cloak. The trader did not want to reveal
the price of the cloak. So the Shaykh asked him, how many ordinary
cloaks could be bought for the price of that expensive cloak. The trader
said that about eighteen ordinary cloaks could be bought for that money.
The Shaykh said, I accept this cloak, but is it possible to get this
cloak exchanged for eighteen ordinary cloaks?” The trader agreed to the
suggestion, took away the expensive cloak and returned with eighteen
ordinary cloaks. The Shaykh distributed the cloaks among his students
and draped one over his own shoulder. Then he turned towards the trader
and asked him, “Is this gift from you better or the earlier expensive
cloak that you brought for me? If I had worn that cloak, I would have
been the only person wearing it. But now there are eighteen persons
wearing new cloaks!” You might say that such things are not possible in
our daily lives. I say, they are possible, and should be possible. We
all have to answer to Allah for our deeds. A tradition says: Each one of
you is a ruler, and every ruler will be questioned about the people
under his rule.

Dear young people! If we wish to revolutionize our lives, get rid of
worries and remove the ills from our society, we shall have to take a
second look at our ethics and character! We shall have to reform our
domestic ethics. We should tell our daughters that the heavy dowries
that they carry at the time of their wedding could suffice for giving
dowries to as many as sixteen brides. Thus, she can have the pleasure of
celebrating the wedding of sixteen sisters.

Today’s discussion is incomplete. Inshallah, I shall continue this
discussion in my subsequent talks.


