The Fourth Talk
===============

1. Obstruction To Matrimony
---------------------------

Today’s discussion will focus on the impediments that the present
society wrongly imposes to obstruct matrimony. I shall dwell on these
very briefly. Removing these impediments by delivering one or several
talks on the matter might not be possible. But I am certain my talk will
start the audience thinking!

2. Making Lame Excuses
----------------------

The first impediment in the way of matrimony of young people is the
making of lame excuses, sometimes by the prospective bride and sometimes
by the prospective groom. Sometimes even the parents come up with
illogical excuses for not getting their young children married. These
excuses have, in several cases, resulted in girls of the age of thirty
remaining at home, unmarried. There are also persistent bachelors of
forty plus years of age! When they are asked the reason for not
marrying, they say that they couldn’t find a suitable match! Here I
would like to say something. I shall also dwell on this matter in my
subsequent talks .It is not possible for a girl or a boy to find a match
which is 100 percent to her/his liking. In normal circumstances if
someone fits the bill about fifty percent, it should be fine. If the
requirements are met up to about seventy percent, the match can be
considered excellent.

Many illogical excuses are made even by families who claim to be
religious. The worldly types have different reasons and excuses. For
example, the boy expects a house along with the bride, or considers
beauty to be a must in his future wife, or wants to marry into a family
with a very high status. He is unable to get the bride of his choice
because he himself comes from a family with a lower status. So he keeps
waiting to find such a match. Similarly, girls remain unmarried because
their mothers say that the prospective groom doesn’t own a house, is
short in height or doesn’t have the desired good looks! These are mere
excuses. These are things which the intellect cannot accept as valid
excuses. In this gathering itself, perhaps, there are several girls who
might have received twenty or more proposals that must have been refused
on such flimsy grounds. There must also be such boys in this gathering
who are trying to get married for the last two to three years but have
been unable to get a suitable bride, even while there must be many girls
amongst their relatives or neighbors. But they must have found some flaw
in each one of them, and are still searching. In the end these excuses
will lead them to a very bad wife.

The Prophet of Islam (s.a.) used to say, “O people! When your daughter
reaches the age of consent, get her married. A mature girl is like a
ripe fruit on a tree. If it is not picked on maturity, it will fall and
go waste. Similarly when a girl matures, if she does not get married,
she will waste. Same is true for the sons. If a boy reaches the
marriageable age and does not marry, he too will be wasted. There used
to be several people making such excuses even in the gatherings
addressed by the Prophet (s). Some of them asked, “O Prophet of Allah!
What sort of match we should find for our daughters?” The Prophet (s)
replied, “The *Mu’minin* are matches for each other.” (that is, some
have the same status as some others) Wasail al Shia, Vol 14, Page 39

A *mu’min* is one who has a good character, follows the faith
implicitly, and he is the *kufu* or match for another *mu’min*. If such
a person asks for the hand of your daughter in marriage, agree to the
proposal.

The people asked, “O Prophet (s)! Who is a match?”

The Prophet (s) repeatedly said:

*“If you find a boy whose akhlaq (ethics) are good and follows the Faith
properly, give your daughter in marriage to him. If matches are made
without considering the aspects of akhlaq and faith, it will cause
mischief and disturbance in the Islamic Society.*  
 Wasail al Shia, Vol 14, Page 51

What more mischief and disturbance could there be in the Islamic society
than is prevailing now? The Prophet of Islam (s) said from the pulpit
that one should look for a boy with good moral character and faith as a
match for their daughters. When a mother looks for a match for her
daughter she should check whether the boy is proud, or jealous. She
should check whether the *akhlaq* of the boy is sound. It has been
quoted in the traditions that if someone looks only for the apparent
good looks and the wealth in fixing matches for their children, the
consequences of such marriages are tragic. If wealth is the only
criterion for a match, you will end up with regret, because such a match
will be proud of his wealth or good looks or ancestry, and it is this
pride which becomes a cause for differences and wretchedness later on.
Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Give your daughter to a person who
practices the faith properly. If he likes and loves her, he will respect
her. Even if he doesn’t like her, his faith will not permit him to be
cruel to her.” How felicitous is this tradition of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq
(a.s.)! I suppose there is not even one person in this gathering who has
not made such excuses, even though the Prophet (s) himself has not
attached any importance to them, rather has negated them.

During the times of the Prophet (s), some unusual matches have taken
place so that these flimsy excuses are eliminated. Examples are the
marriages of Juwaybir, Zubair and Miqdad. The Prophet (s) got a
beautiful girl with good akhlaq married using faith as the only
criterion to establish the fact that the basis of marriage should be
religion and *akhlaq*, not good looks or ancestry. I do not say that you
should totally disregard other factors. I say that the criterion for
marriage should be faith and *akhlaq*. If you like a girl seventy
percent, you should not make further excuses in finalizing the match.
You should not take recourse to *istakhara,* which is only meant for
special situations when human wisdom and discretion fail, and it is not
possible to obtain the opinion and advice of other *Mu’minin*. In
situations where confusion prevails, *istekhara* can be resorted to.

But in situations where everything is crystal clear, when the intellect
can guide you, when a proposal has come from a boy who fits well into
the norms of piety and morals, doing an *istakhara* is meaningless.
*Istakhara* in Islam, in fact, means that a person offers two *rakaats*
of prayer and thereafter says the following words a hundred times,
“*Astakhirullaha be rehmateh**”*** (O Allah! Make what I am going to do
felicitous for me!). Thereafter he should busy himself with what he had
planned to do. The work will, God willing, be good for him. This is the
*istakhara* that the author of Kitabe Jawahir has recommended in his
book. It means to ask the best from Allah in your works. Sometimes when
an *istakhara* comes negative, people do it again and again till they
get a positive response. This is absolutely wrong.

In conclusion we would like to say that the excuses made by parents or
the boys and girls for avoiding and postponing matrimony must be
avoided. Instead, we should place trust in Allah. Allah will set the
future right. According to the Holy Quran one should neither grieve over
the past, nor be fearful about the future.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا إِنَّ أَوْلِيَاءَ اللَّهِ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَ لَا هُمْ
يحَْزَنُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! Verily the friends of Allah are (those) on whom fear (cometh)
not, nor do they grieve. ( Sura Yunus, 10: 62).***

The friends of Allah neither grieve over the past nor are they fearful
about the future because they place their trust in Allah. We too should,
in matters of matrimony, stop making excuses and make positive decisions
putting absolute trust in Allah. These excuses have all been rejected
and refuted by the Prophet (s), the Imams (a.s.) and the religious
scholars.

We quote here an incident about Kashif al Ghita***,*** who was a *Marjae
Taqleed.* There are very few examples like him in wisdom, erudition and
chivalry. One day, after the lesson he said to his students, “I have a
daughter who has reached the age of consent. If I find a morally upright
and religious young person, I shall give her in marriage to him.”
Hearing this, one of the students got up and sat down. According to the
custom of that time, this meant that he was offering himself as a match
for the daughter of the eminent cleric. Kashif al Ghita asked the boy to
follow him home and adjourned the class. The student went behind him.
The cleric knew that the boy was morally upright and a good student in
the group. He knew that the boy was a good practitioner of the moral
values of Islam. But neither did he have any wealth nor property. Kashif
al Ghita told his daughter that there was a proposal for her from a boy
who was morally and religiously upright but had no worldly wealth. Would
she be interested in marrying the boy? She told her father that all the
authority vested in him. The contract of marriage was immediately drawn;
the young couple was tied in wedlock. Kashaf al Ghita vacated one room
at his house and settled the couple there. When he got up for the night
prayer, he knocked at the door of the young couple and said, “I have
placed a container of water at the door of such and such room. Go and
offer prayers.” The couple performed ghusl and recited *Salahul Layl.*
The story we have related about Kashif al Ghita, it doesn’t conclude
here because:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الَّذِينَ جَهَدُواْ فِينَا لَنهَْدِيَنهَُّمْ سُبُلَنَا وَ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for those who strive for Us, we surely guide them to Our paths,
and lo! Allah is with the good.***  
***(Sura Ankabut, 29 :69).***

Those who strive in Allah’s cause have been promised help by Him.
Khashif al Ghita’s son-in law, Shaykh Muhammad Taqi, reached such a high
state of learning that he could write a commentary on ‘*Ma-alim**’.***
Even now, after three to four hundred years his commentary is recognized
as very authoritative. All the sons of Kashif al Ghita became
*mujtahids.* His family was so morally upright and religious that all
the scholars of Isfahan were humble before them. The marriage which
takes place according to the wishes of Allah and the Prophet (s) will be
very felicitous. Quran wants us to marry on the basis of Islamic
principles. This is the way of the Prophet (s), the Infallible Imams
(a.s.) and the way of the *mujtahids*.

Allama Majlisi was an erudite scholar but was also very wealthy. To
gauge his learning, a glance at his book *Bihar al Anwaar* should be
sufficient. We can say with confidence that so far, after him, a scholar
of his erudition has not been born. Allama Majlisi had a daughter who
was not only a scholar and a *mujtahida*, but also very beautiful too.
As far as lineage was concerned, she belonged to one of the highly
respected families of the time. Allama Majlisi arranged her marriage to
his student, Sayyid Saleh Mazandarani, who had no name, fame and
property worth a mention. But he was religious, morally upright and a
good student of religion. Allama Majlisi married his daughter to him
because of his good *akhlaq*. It is said that once Mazandarani was
unable to solve a question of jurisprudence. When he came home and
referred it to her, she was able to give a learned reply to the
question! Although the daughter was not an ordinary person, the Allama
selected this youth as a match for her because he found him morally
upright and religious. He was a father who made no recourse to excuses.
He used to say that the Prophet of Islam (s) has said:

*“When a person approaches you for the hand of your daughter, and you
are sure about his good character and practice of the faith, then give
your daughter in marriage to him. If you don’t do this, then there will
be much mischief on the face of the earth!”*

3. Unnecessary Show
-------------------

The second impediment is more important and more difficult to avoid
these days. In the earlier days the bride used to bring a Quran with
her. Gradually a candle holder was added to the list, and all of you
know what the list includes today. The things have reached such a pass
that even if the groom sells himself, he cannot buy the quantity of gold
that he has to give to the bride at the time of the marriage. This
prompts young boys to refuse matrimony. If the bride carries a Quran and
an ordinary mirror with her, can it not suffice? What difference does it
make if the groom brings an ordinary ring for the bride? What calamity
will befall if the bride presents the groom an *Aqeeq* ring? Instead of
this a chain of gold is put in the neck of the groom as if the hanging
noose has been put on his neck! The first problem is that he cannot
offer prayers with gold around his neck! The second problem and
wretchedness is that if at the time of solemnization of *Seegha e
Nikaah* the groom wears a golden ring on his finger and a golden chain
on his neck, sins will be recorded on his book of deeds because
ornamentation of men with gold is forbidden (*Haram).* Gold rings,
watches, chains, spectacle frames and all things which are ornamentation
for men fall under the forbidden category. Now, what difference does it
make if the groom wears a silver chain or a silver ring studded with an
*aqeeq* or even if he wears nothing at all on his finger? Even if people
pass comments, neither will the sky fall on the earth, nor will the
earth rise upto the sky. On the contrary, it is our bad deeds that spoil
the skies and destroy the earth.

Is there anyone bold enough to break these unpleasant practices? But
these practices cannot be done away by the efforts of a few people. All
of us have to work towards it. We know that the city of Qum has certain
distinguishing qualities. Cannot the people of Qum take the lead in
putting an end to these practices? They should stop the practice of
bringing expensive mirrors and candelabra as part of the bride’s
trousseau and conduct simple marriages. Slowly all other places will
follow suit, and a day will come when the Islamic government will
declare that we are the ones who have rid ourselves of this menace.

One person came to the presence of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.). The Imam
(a.s.) asked him if he was married? The man replied in the negative. The
Imam (a.s.) then said that if the entire world and all that it contained
was given to him for remaining without his spouse for a night, he would
not accept it. Then he said that a two-unit salah of a married man or
woman is more felicitous than the entire night worship of a single
person. Wasail al Shia, Vol 14, Page 2

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) gave seven dinars to a person and asked him
to go and get married. Those days the amount was sufficient for a modest
wedding. Nowadays, one may have to sell his house to be in a position to
arrange his wedding! This extravagance is not liked by Allah.

Once the Prophet of Islam (s) was seated with his companions when a
woman came to his presence and said, “O Prophet of Allah! I am not
married. Kindly arrange my marriage.” The Prophet (s) turned towards his
companions and said, “Is any one of you willing to marry this woman?”
One of the companions stood up and gave his consent. The Prophet asked
him what he could offer for the dowry. The man said that he had nothing
except the shirt that he was wearing. The Prophet (s) asked him if he
remembered anything from the Holy Quran. The man said he remembered only
one chapter, *Waqiya**,*** from the Holy Book. The Prophet (s) then
asked the woman if she was willing to accept the chapter as the dowry
for her marriage to the man. When the woman agreed, the marriage was
solemnized. The Prophet (s) used to give lessons to the people that they
should not make excuses for delaying marriages. Today people from all
fields including clerics, traders, the learned, the illiterate, the
rural and the urban populations are involved in this undesirable
practice. Why? The affluent sections are more involved in this than the
poorer sections. Just think why people make excuses for delaying
marriages. Why are they taking shelter behind *istakhara* to invent
excuses for delaying and postponing marriages? The things have reached
such a pass that even while the *Seegha e Nikah* is being recited***,***
the groom is thinking of how and when he will clear the loan he has
incurred for buying the gold for the marriage. Does this not happen? Can
the marriages not be solemnized without giving gold?! People should have
trust in Allah that He will give more in the future! It is not at all
possible that a good act performed in the way of Allah remains without
reward! When you do something for a common person, he thanks you. If you
do something for Allah, do you think Allah will not bless you?

O mothers! Gold can be gifted even after the marriage. Your main concern
should be to find a good groom for your daughter who will love her. Imam
Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) says that even if the husband doesn’t love his
wife, his faith should be such that it does not allow him to be cruel to
her and does not permit him to make her unhappy. However we find that
even if the husband can cover his wife with gold ornaments from head to
toe, he doesn’t do it, because before marriage his feelings were abused,
by your placing obstructions in the path of marriage. O mothers, by
making these excuses you are abusing his feelings and love.

In the days gone by, a custom was that the groom was given some clothes
after the proposal was accepted. Then a box of sweets was added to the
list. Now it is said it doesn’t look nice that only the groom is given
gifts and the mother-in-law is given nothing, so something should be
given to her too. Those who have the means can give and will definitely
give. But what of those who do not have the means? They are forced into
debts. A person who earns on a daily basis, a person who is not in a
position to buy a kilo of apples for his children or a kilo of fruit for
them for *iftar* is expected to also gift something to his
mother-in-law, in order to please her. And if she is not a good woman no
amount of gifts will please her. If she is a good person, she will
always be happy whether you gift her something or nothing because these
things cannot buy love. If someone thinks to the contrary, he is
mistaken. In the *Mathnavi,* Maulavi says that a person went to attend
the nature’s call and recited the prayer that is prescribed for wudhu
(ablution) prior to prayers. When the same person went for doing the
wudhu he recited the prayer meant for reciting at the time of attending
the nature’s call! Maulavi told to the person that he remembered the
prayers very well but forgotten what they were meant for! For marriages
too, people think that the love of the son-in-law is proportional to the
gold given, or that love is in covering the bride in gold. This is a
wrong concept. This can only bring worries, debt and problems for both
the newly-weds! Love is that which is endowed by Allah. In the Holy
Quran He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَ عَمِلُواْ الصَّلِحَتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لهَُمُ
الرَّحْمَنُ وُدًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! Those who believe and do good works, the Beneficent will appoint
for them love. (Sura Maryam, 19: 96).***

The Holy Quran says that if you want your son-in-law to love your
daughter, you must establish a strong connection with Allah. You should
be concerned with what Allah wants from you. Can anyone of you say with
confidence that *Imam Zaman (a.s.)* is pleased with these marriages. Can
we claim that Islam is pleased with our marriages, our excuses, our
extravagance? Imam Wali al-‘Asr (a) is not pleased, The Prophet (s) and
Sayyida Fatima (a.s) are not happy. We should break free from and do
away with these undesirable obstructions to marriage.

4. Excessive Mahr
-----------------

Another big problem is the fixing of *mahr* (dowry)***.*** There was a
time when the non-revolutionary and non-religious types used to quote
one million, two million, and three million. Now, after the revolution,
people say that *mahr* should be equal to the number of the Prophets (s)
– one lakh, twenty four thousand (124,000) units of modern money - at
the mention of which people have to take to their heels. In Qum, another
thing is added to this is the *sheer baha*. Do you know what *sheer
baha* is? It is an evil practice. It means to take money from the
son-in-law for nursing your own daughter (breastfeeding her). The best
thing is that after extracting this amount from the groom, it is not
even given to the mother; it goes into the pocket of the father. What is
*sheer baha*? Are you selling your daughter by charging *sheer baha*?
*Sheer baha* means that you are selling your daughter. The Jurists say
that a person who cannot pay one lakh or 85,000 tumans cannot agree to
pay the same.

Traditions say that a sign of an inauspicious bride is her high *mahr*.
If there is no love, what will the *mahr* achieve? People keep a high
*mahr* to bind the son-in-law to the daughter - when he is unable to pay
the *mahr*, he will not be able to leave her. But what if the boy does
not love the girl? The boy gives enough money in the house, he does not
beat her so you cannot accuse him of being cruel, he does not use bad
language so you cannot accuse him of having bad *akhlaq*. He just
refuses to speak to her. She may bear this for a day or two. In the end,
this house will become worse than a prison for her. After about a year
in this situation the girl starts feeling that not only has she lost her
*mahr* but might even lose her life! So she forgives him the *mahr*. In
short, the *mahr* cannot bind a husband against his will. Some people
have come up with a revolutionary idea that the girls can be married
away without fixing any *mahr.* I don’t agree with them because a
marriage cannot be solemnized without fixing a *mahr.* It is also not
correct when some people fix a copy of the Holy Quran or five coins as
*mahr.* I believe that the *mahr* should be neither excessive nor small.
The middle way should be adopted, and even then the *mahr* should be
fixed keeping in mind the status of the boy and the girl.

5. LavishWalima Or Reception
----------------------------

The fourth impediment and problem in marriages is lavish *walima*.
*Walima* is considered a felicitous custom in Islam, but which *walima*?
The *walima* that the Prophet of Islam (s) held at the wedding of
Hadhrat Fatima Zahra (a.s.). A goat was slaughtered and the poor of
Medina were invited. After the poor of Medina, who could not afford
meat, had eaten the Prophet (s) ordered the leftover food to be
distributed amongst those poor who did not attend the feast or those who
had not eaten the food. After this *walima*, the Prophet (s) led his
daughter to the groom’s house. But today’s *walima* is nothing short of
a headache. We find the father of a girl unwilling to get her married.
On investigation we find that in reality he cannot afford the *walima*,
so he makes all kinds of excuses, even while the daughter is more than
twenty or twenty-five years old. My dear brothers this type of *walima*
is totally wrong. Don’t be under the impression that it will bring
divine rewards. This type of *walima* attracts divine punishment instead
of divine rewards. *Walima* is given to make the marriage felicitous,
but the type of *walima* we give neither makes the marriage nor the
bride felicitous.

A Wrong Practice
----------------

When a person dies, we find that his son and heir is not occupied with
acts that bring Divine Reward for his father, but he is occupied with
footing the bill for the *majlis* (condolence ceremony) of the father.
He is worried about the food to be served after the *majlis*. People
keep coming to give condolences and this goes on for a few days. The son
is forced to sell his house to conduct a majlis for his father, and feed
the people after the majlis.

According to Islam when someone dies, other people should not allow food
to be cooked in this house for three days. Instead they should take food
for the bereaved family, and not go there to eat. To go and eat in a
house where a death has taken place is *makrooh* (abominable). Some days
back a youth had come to meet me. He said that his father had died, and
with great difficulty he had managed to take a loan of 70,000 tumans.
The first calamity is that his father had died, and then he had to feed
people for a week, make arrangements for tea etc. He thought that he had
done something good for his father whereas his father is complaining in
his grave because his son took a loan and is cursing all those who eat
at his house the whole day, because of which his wife, his daughter and
his son are suffering. If you want to hold a *majlis* or a *walima* the
best way is to be concerned about the poor, do not forget them.

It is related that a lady used to cook sweets one day of the week and
ask her son to distribute it amongst the people at the cemetery. One day
the son was very hungry, so instead of distributing it at the cemetery,
he ate it himself and returned home. At night the lady saw her dead
husband in a dream. He informed her that the sweets she had distributed
the entire year had not reached him, but he had received the sweets she
had distributed the day before. On investigation the lady found out that
it was the sweets her orphan son had eaten.

We should be concerned about the children of the dead person. We should
be concerned about the poor, not about those who can afford to eat. It
is not right to stay for weeks at their houses, and become a headache
for them, while they have to worry about getting meat, oil, chairs etc.
Is this not troublesome for them? Islam forbids such things because when
we keep going and eating at their houses they have to keep taking loans.
Loans are, by themselves, enough to kill a person. The type of *walima*
we have for our marriages and kind of *majlis* we hold for the dead are
wrong. We should put an end to these practices, because Allah is not
pleased with us. Our Prophet and the Imams are not pleased with us. Our
Imam is not pleased with us.


