The Fifth Talk
==============

1. The Dowry (From The Bride)
-----------------------------

One of the worst practices of our times is the custom of huge dowries.
By this I mean the dowry which is against the *shariah,* the dowry which
amounts to extravagance, the dowry which poses a hindrance to marriage.
The result is that the girl has reached thirty years of age, but her
father is unable to get her married because he cannot give her the dowry
her friends or neighbors were given. The girl is twenty years old, and
is getting many proposals, but the father is making excuses. He thinks
that if he accepts a proposal, from where he will get the dowry. He is
in such a position that he cannot even give a minimum dowry. Dowry
should be given, but how much and what should be included in the dowry.
The dowry should be given by the father if he can, if he cannot the
Islamic government should give the dowry, failing which it is the duty
of the people to provide the dowry. Only the essentials of life should
be included in the dowry, which was the dowry the Prophet (s) had given
to Sayyida Fatima Zahra (a.s.).

When the marriage of Sayyida Fatima Zahra (a.s.) was fixed, the Prophet
(s) sent out two men and a lady to the bazaar to acquire the necessities
for the dowry. They purchased 17 things costing a total of 63 Dirham.
Included in these 17 things there was a *chador*. We should note that
there was only one *chador* and not many! The *chador* was neither too
expensive nor such that it wouldn’t properly cover a lady’s body. There
was also a *burqa* (clothing worn by ladies over their dress when they
go out of doors) and there was a dress. Hadhrat Fatima (a.s) gave away
this dress to a needy person and went to Imam Ali (a.s.)’s house in the
dress that she was using at home! In the morning the Prophet (s) visited
her. He asked, “What have you done to your new dress?’ She replied, “I
have given it away for the sake of Allah!” The Prophet (s) asked her,
“Why didn’t you give away the old dress in charity instead of the new
one?” She replied, “Allah says that when you want to give something in
charity for my sake, give that which you like, so I gave away my new
dress for the sake of Allah.” As a part of the dowry there was a tanned
skin of a goat to be used as a spread for sitting on the floor and a
comforter filled with the peelings of dates. There were also some
earthen pots and an earthen jug for water. When the Prophet (s) saw the
dowry, there were tears in his eyes.

The ladies are requested to view this dowry with the eyes of their
hearts. Then the Prophet (s) prayed to Allah, “O Allah, make this dowry,
which comprises mostly of earthen products, felicitous.” Dowries should
be according to necessity. How can we rid the society of this evil that
we practice today? If the brides’ suitcase is not overflowing that night
is like the first night in the grave for her mother. On the other hand
when the mother-in-law sees that the brides’ suitcase is not full, she
creates a hue and cry. Sometimes matters reach such a stage that the
dowry is sent back. This is the reason that the daughter is thirty years
old, but is unable to go to her husbands’ house. I appeal to the
well-off people that when they give dowry they should not create
difficulties for the society. There was a time when the television,
washing machine, fridge, and freezer were not a part of the dowry. Then
someone added one item to the list, and another added another item. Now
things are such that it is even difficult to think about marriage. If
you want to give, by all means do so, but only after the girl has
already gone to her husband’s house and do it quietly, so that nobody
comes to know. For Gods’ sake do not give rise to these troubles in the
society. Don’t do things which result in daughters of poor families
remaining unmarried. Let her also see her husband’s house. When you give
such dowries you think it to be good, but neither is it good nor
felicitous. Especially if the bride is stingy, she will allow no one to
use her dowry, with the result that still only the old things are used
in the husband’s house. She creates an uproar if someone even tries to
touch her things, she wants her dowry to be preserved for the next
hundred years, so that they are included among antiques.

Another major problem is a house. These days from the cities to the
villages, we find that the father, son, brother, sister are not willing
to stay together. The daughter-in-law doesn’t want to live under the
same roof with the mother-in-law and the mother-in-law does not want to
live with the daughter-in-law! The house must be separate, even if it is
a rented premise! This is a major deterrent for young men who then avoid
getting married. In most cases their earnings are not sufficient to set
up a separate household. When proposals are received from eligible boys,
the first question that comes up is whether they own a house for
independent living.

The question whether the boy is pious or not is never raised. If the boy
is not pious and has poor *akhlaq,* then tomorrow this very house will
become a prison for the bride. The issue of a house is a major one. In
older days this was never an issue. Four daughters-in-law used to live
together in one house - and happily. Nowadays a separate house is
required, because people want easy comfort. This is one of the problems
of modern age.

One of the leading clerics of Isfahan told me that once a youth came to
him and said that his parents were not getting him married. He requested
the cleric to persuade his parents to consent to his marriage. One early
morning the cleric went to the home of the youth and gave a long sermon
to the parents about the importance of matrimony. In conclusion he very
strongly recommended that they give their consent to their son marrying
and settling down to a happy conjugal life. After hearing the talk the
mother of the youth said, “As long as I am alive, no daughter-in-law
will cross the threshold of this house!” In utter dejection the cleric
turned towards the youth and said, “The only solution for you now is to
pray for the death of this old lady!” The things have reached such a
pass that the mothers don’t want to welcome daughters- in- law in their
homes and the girls are not willing to marry into homes they will have
to share with the mothers-in-law!

Our society is riddled with so many problems. There is one problem
followed by another, and then another. This chain seems never-ending.
Can something not be done about these issues? Can these problems not be
solved?

After overcoming all these hurdles, if a marriage takes place, then
fights erupt between the husband and wife - a major cause of which is a
desire for a luxurious life. When we analyze the causes of differences
between man and wife, we find that the wife expresses her unwillingness
to continue using the dresses available in her wardrobe. She wants to
change her dress every few hours. She refuses to wear the same dress for
two different occasions. If she has to attend more than one function on
the same day, she wants to change the dress before going to the second
party. If there are several functions on the same day, she wants as many
changes of dress as there are parties. Thus starts a fight between the
man and the wife. The husband says, “It would have been better if your
father had given many expensive dresses with the dowry!” The wife
rebuffs, “My father has given me in marriage to you. Now it is your duty
to make dresses for me. Not even a month has passed since their marriage
and the bride is demanding clothes and gold from her husband. Within
this first month of marriage, the girl demands her savings bond
(*Wathiqa)*. She says that she will sell the bond to buy new clothes and
gold. She says that she is the owner of the bond, and thus has the right
to use it as she pleases – and if she wants to sell them in order to buy
articles of beautification, why should her husband object? If the matter
ends with the redemption of the bond, even then it is alright. But the
demands don’t stop here. They just keep increasing. Our day-to-day life
is such that when a person marries, he feels as if burdened with a
calamity. He regrets getting married. What I have presented in front of
you today is just a glimpse of the difficulties we have created in the
society today, which are like a cancer for the society.

The remedy of these evils is simple. There are a couple of verses of the
Holy Quran. If our society follows these, the malady will disappear.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلىَ الْأَرْضِ هَوْنًا وَ
إِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَهِلُونَ قَالُواْ سَلَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The (faithful) slaves of the Beneficent are they who walk upon the
earth modestly, and when the foolish ones address them answer: Peace!***
***(Sura Al Furqaan, 25: 63)***

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُواْ لَمْ يُسْرِفُواْ وَ لَمْ يَقْترُُواْ وَ
كَانَ بَينْ‏َ ذَلِكَ قَوَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor grudging:
and there is ever a firm station between the two(Sura Al Furqaan, 25:
67)***

The selected men of God are those who tread the land with humility! When
the ignorant talk in ignorance, they wish them peace. When they spend,
it is neither with extravagance nor with stinginess. Their expenses are
always moderate. They are the *Mu’minin* who are neither extravagant nor
are they misers!

***‘Wa kaana baina zaalika qawwama’*** *-* If man refrains from
extravagance, if he guards himself against luxuries, then he will be
safe from many a calamity. In such circumstances a youth can get married
while he is still studying, which is not normally the case. This is
because there are a lot of problems in the society. The society is ill
with diseases like extravagance and the like. If there is no
extravagance, no reckless spending, but a middle path of modest spending
is adopted, the youth can pursue a university education and even get
married

2. Miserliness
--------------

People should not be miserly in their expenses. Islam looks down upon
miserly persons with contempt. Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا يحَْسَبنَ‏َّ الَّذِينَ يَبْخَلُونَ بِمَا ءَاتَئهُمُ اللَّهُ مِن
فَضْلِهِ هُوَ خَيرًْا لَّهُم بَلْ هُوَ شرٌَّ لَّهُمْ سَيُطَوَّقُونَ
مَا بخَِلُواْ بِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَمَةِ وَ لِلَّهِ مِيرَثُ السَّمَوَتِ
وَ الْأَرْضِ وَ اللَّهُ بمَِا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِير
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Let not those who act niggardly with any of His bounty God has given
them consider it better for them; rather it will be worse for them: they
will be charged on Resurrection Day with anything they were so niggardly
about. Allah holds the inheritance of Heaven and Earth, and Allah knows
what you do.*** ***(Sura Ali Imran, 3: 178)***

Those who have been bestowed by Allah with some wealth should not be
miserly in spending it. They should not remain under the impression that
their miserliness will do them any good. On the contrary, they will
regret this attitude because on the Day of Judgment, this wealth will be
turned into a noose that will be fastened round their necks. Whatever
wealth exists in the universe belongs to Allah and He is aware of what
men do in this world! The Holy Quran tells us that those who do not
spend their wealth on their family and children, and do not keep them in
comfort are not doing something good. On the contrary they are doing
something bad. It then informs us that the wealth, the miser saves
through his stinginess will be put around his neck in the form of a
noose on the Day of Judgment. He will be brought to the grounds of
Judgment wearing this noose and will have to stand there ashamed, with
this noose around his neck. If, besides this verse of the Holy Quran
there is no tradition condemning stinginess, even then this verse is
deterrent enough. A person should, besides his family, help those in
need in the society. Do we want Allah (s.w.t.) to convert our wealth,
property, and belongings into a noose on the Day of Judgment and put it
around our necks, while we are humiliated? Dear brothers, miserliness is
a bad deed. But, on the other hand luxury and extravagance is also
wrong. The Quran says that a society riddled with unwise spending and
luxury is on its way to destruction and evil.

It is mentioned in the book *Meraj al Sa‘adat* that once there was a
miserly person. He used to tell his children to touch the bread with the
bottle of the clarified butter from the outside and eat it. One day he
traveled out of town and had locked the bottle of the clarified butter
in a closet. The children were about to eat their bread by touching it
to the door of the closet when the father arrived. He picked up a stick
and hit them saying, “Can’t you live without eating the clarified butter
even for a day?!” A miserly person is never at ease. He doesn’t even get
peaceful sleep at night.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذَا أَرَدْنَا أَن نهُّْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُترَْفِيهَا
فَفَسَقُواْ فِيهَا فَحَقَّ عَلَيهَْا الْقَوْلُ فَدَمَّرْنَهَا
تَدْمِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when We would destroy a township We send commandment to its folk
who live at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein, and so
the word (of doom) hath effect for it, and We annihilate it with
complete annihilation.*** ***(Sura al-’Isra’, 17: 16)***

For example there are storms and earthquakes that destroy huge
populations and towns. But the evil of luxurious living that our society
is afflicted with today is more dangerous than these storms and
earthquakes. Reckless spending, according to the Quran, is harbinger of
a sad and bad end!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَصحَْبُ الشِّمَالِ مَا أَصحَْبُ الشِّمَال‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فىِ سمَُومٍ وَ حَمِيم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ظِلٍ‏ّ مِّن يحَْمُوم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا بَارِدٍ وَ لَا كَرِيم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنهَُّمْ كاَنُواْ قَبْلَ ذَلِكَ مُترَْفِين‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كاَنُواْ يُصِرُّونَ عَلىَ الحِْنثِ الْعَظِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those on the left hand: What of those on the left hand?***  
***In scorching wind and scalding water***  
***And shadow of black smoke***  
***Neither cool nor refreshing.***  
***Lo! Heretofore they were effete with luxury***  
***And used to persist in the awful sin.*** ***(Sura al Waqiyah, 56: 41
–46)***

Amongst the people of the past there are those who carry their book of
deeds in their left hands. It is a pity that the people of the left hand
will suffer in the fire of Hell! They will be engulfed with boiling
waters and dense black smoke of Hell. It will neither be cool for them
nor will it be comforting! These are the people who lived in luxury in
the world and indulged in immoral acts. The people of the left hand will
face a painful torment in Hell. Because of their immoral and luxurious
ways, they committed sin after sin. The Holy Quran says that the
Prophets (a.s.) of the past had warned such men against their evil ways.
About such men the Holy Book says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا أَرْسَلْنَا فىِ قَرْيَةٍ مِّن نَّذِيرٍ إِلَّا قَالَ
مُترَْفُوهَا إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُم بِهِ كَفِرُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We sent not unto any township a warner, but its pampered ones
declared: Lo! We are disbelievers in that which ye bring unto us. (Sura
Saba, 34: 34)***

Whenever Allah sent a warner to any people, it was the people who were
indulging in luxuries who refuted the commandments communicated to them.
If there was no other verse condemning extravagance, this verse of the
Holy Quran should be sufficient for people to abstain from their
wasteful ways.

A question then arises as to what constitutes the life of moderation and
equanimity? Such an ideal life is one in which one has enough to eat, he
should have a modest abode and dress to wear. Such a life is really
comfortable. It is narrated that the Prophet (s) was once traveling with
his companions. He came across a shepherd during the journey and asked
for some milk. The shepherd refused to give any milk. The Prophet (s)
said, “May Allah bless you so much that you are not able to account for
your possessions!” When the entourage proceeded further, they came
across another shepherd with his flock. This person, when asked for some
milk, offered all the stock that he had with him. The Prophet said, “May
Allah give you sufficient sustenance that you don’t have to depend on
others for their help!” In surprise the companions asked the Prophet
(s), “O Prophet of Allah! Your prayer for the person who refused to part
with his milk appeared better than the prayer you offered for this
generous shepherd!” The Prophet (s) replied, “No! In plenty there is
nothing more than trouble and headache! A life in which a person is
contented with his modest earnings is better than a life of luxury. Such
people will never have any psychological ailments.” Amir al Mu’minin
(a.s.) has said that life should be one of contentment and not of
opulence. Opulence takes people towards unhappiness and oppression.

3. Summary Of Discussion
------------------------

The summary of our talk is that we have to revolutionize our lives, we
have to bring about a change in our lives. We need to take stock of our
ethics. The first step in this direction is to bring about changes in
our system of marriage so that gradually we can shake off these evil
practices from our society. Our lives should be constructive and
definitely not one of luxury that brings about ruin. When does a Muslim
lead a truly happy life? It is when he has a house of his own, then buys
one for another. When he leads a middle class existence, he helps others
to lead a middle class existence too. Dear brothers! As we are in need
of material things, so do we need spiritual contentment! We should
strive to fulfill our material needs and live happily. But more
important than this is our spiritual needs Spiritual needs are not
satisfied by having good food, good housing or a good spouse. Our
spiritual needs are satisfied by helping the oppressed and helping the
needy. Every individual must give a helping hand in the marriage of at
least one couple in a year. There is the august example of Lady Fatima
Zahra (a.s.) before us - that she preferred to wear a used garment with
patches and gave away the new one to the needy! Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.)
used to continue wearing old dresses and gave away the new apparel to
others. Fatima Zahra (a.s.), despite being the owner of the Garden of
*Fadak**,*** preferred wearing clothes made out of rough yarn.

It is famous that a trader visited Ayatullah Sadr (r.a.) with his
spouse. The trader went to the chambers of the Ayatullah and the wife
went to the ladies’ quarters and knocked at the door. The Ayatullah’s
wife came to the door and opened it. Seeing her in very ordinary
clothes, the trader’s wife thought she must be one of the servants in
the house. She said, “Where is the lady of the house? I wish to meet
her.” The Ayatullah’s wife felt shy to tell that she was the lady of the
house. She said that she was not at home. The trader’s wife went away.
At this moment the Ayatullah came to the ladies’ quarters and found that
his wife was rather upset. When he asked her to tell the reason for her
bad mood she recounted to him what had transpired with the trader’s
wife. The Ayatullah told her, “Yes, when you say you are not a lady, you
are really not one! The real lady was one who wore a shawl of two
patched pieces of cloth and dedicated the produce of the Garden of
*Fadak* for the poor and needy! Similarly, a master is not the person
who spends his life in false luxury but one who helps the persons in
need and clears the debts of others! A true lady is not one who drapes
herself in expensive shawls. A true lady is one who has four or five
shawls out of which she keeps one for her own use and gives away the
rest to needy women who have none to cover their heads!"

For the sake of Allah’s pleasure, for the sake of our children, for the
sake of a better hereafter, for the sake of Islam, for the sake of *Imam
Zamana*, ponder over these points a little. Do not say that the points
are good, but what can I do?

O Allah! Give us better sense and a right spirit for the sake of the
sacrifice of *Bab al Hawaij Hadhrat Abbas (a.s.)* who didn’t quench his
thirst on the bank of the river remembering the thirst of the little
children of Imam Husayn (a.s)! O Allah! Give us the spirit of sacrifice
in our lives! (Ameen)


