The Sixth Talk
==============

1. The Sanctity Of Home
-----------------------

So far our discussions were about domestic morals. Now we shall deal
with the sanctity of the home.

We learn from the Holy Quran and the traditions of the Ahl al Bayt
(a.s.) that a house that promotes love and affection is certainly an
ideal home! The inhabitants of such homes take care of each other. They
are regular in salah (prayers), fasting and are God fearing. They
maintain a rapport with Allah through regular supplication. Such homes
have an elevated position in the view of Allah. Allah desires such homes
to prosper. Such homes appear shining to the inhabitants of the
Firmament as do the stars to the people of the earth. We also learn from
the Holy Quran and traditions of the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) that
a house where people have differences and hatred, where people are not
regular in offering salah or fasting, where people commit sins, are like
ruins. Such homes are not auspicious. Satan frequents such homes, while
angel despise them.  
 The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فىِ بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَن تُرْفَعَ وَ يُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَ الاَْصَال
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In houses which Allah hath allowed to be raised andwhere His name is
remembered He is glorified therein In the morning and evening. (Sura al
An-Nur, 24 : 36)***

Allah says that certain homes are such that He himself wants them to be
exalted, for example when a person tries to raise the spiritual level of
his house. These are the homes where Allah’s name is called out and the
*tasbeeh* is recited. The occupants of these homes remember Allah –
these are the homes that are exalted near Allah. These are the homes
where salah is recited, the zakat is paid, and the occupants of such
homes fear Allah that is they avoid sins.

This verse has an obvious meaning, which I have just mentioned. That is
to say that Allah considers some homes to be as sanctified as masjids or
madressas. Why are they sanctified? Because pious people live in them.
And Allah is remembered in these homes. Salah and fasting takes place
here, there is no sinning, and no differences between those who live
here.

However there is another hidden interpretation of this verse The
Infallible Imams (a.s.) have made a commentary on this meaning of the
verse. They say that there are some persons who are entitled to *azmat*
or greatness. Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) interprets the word *buyuut
(*homes) in the verse as the hearts of the persons and not the homes
built of brick, mortar and wood. These homes, according to him, are the
sanctimonious bodies like that of the Prophet (s) and the Imams
(a.s.)***.***

Once Qatada came in the presence of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). He was
awed with the Imam’s (a.s.) personality. He said, “I have visited many
learned men and had long sessions of discussions with them. But I never
had such feelings as I am having now!” The Imam (a.s.) asked, “Are you
aware with what sort of person you are conversing now? You are in front
of abodes that have been elevated by Allah where He is remembered and
His *dhikr* is done morning and evening! They are the people who cannot
be diverted from Remembrance of Allah by any activity of trade or
playful pastimes.”

The other meaning of this Verse of the Holy Quran is interpretative
*(Taweeli).* This we cannot understand. The Imams (a.s.) are the
interpreters of the Quran, and are entitled to interpret it and do
*tafseer* of the Quran. A part of the Quran is evident and is binding on
all (*Hujjat).* Another aspect of the Book is hidden. Everyone can make
use of this hidden aspect of the Quran according to his own ability.

The summary of this discussion is that the verse tells us about homes in
which there is no strife. These are the homes wherein the housemates
serve each other so that there is comfort. The man works and serves his
children because they are Muslims and should live in comfort The Holy
Quran says that only such a house is held in high respect by the angels.
They are the homes that earn the pleasure of Allah. But those homes
where strife exists, where the wife misbehaves with her husband, where
the husband and wife don’t have love and affection for each other, are,
according to this verse of the Quran, homes which are not exalted.
According to the traditions of the Ahl al Bayt too, such homes are
inauspicious. According to *riwayaat* these homes are the abodes of the
Satans. The Satans frequent these homes. In such homes the inhabitants
don’t offer prayers regularly. They never try to establish rapport with
or supplicate to Allah. They have no care for the Day of Reckoning. Such
homes, according to the Quran and traditions, are abodes of darkness.

Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.) says, “The house in which the Holy Quran is
recited and Allah is remembered, where the inhabitants don’t commit
sins, is an auspicious house. The angels keep visiting such houses. The
Satan keeps away from there. Satan and his cohorts, inspite all their
efforts, cannot have access to such homes.” Amir al Mu’minin further
says, “The house where the inhabitants commit sins, where Satans come
freely, but is despised by angels, is an inauspicious house. The
children who are bred in such houses may not grow into pious persons.
According to scientific and psychological norms too, it is difficult for
such children to be successful in life. A house bereft of love and
affection can offer nothing more than worry and anxiety. It is the
children who are unfortunate in this environment. Such homes are prisons
for the children.

A house where sins are rampant, where strife exists, extinguishes the
inherent abilities of the children who are raised there. The lives of
such parents and the children are always sad. According to traditions,
if you desire your house to be auspicious then salah, fasting,
supplications recitation of Quran should take place in your house. If
you want your children to be auspicious, if you desire your wealth to be
auspicious, then you should make an effort to ensure that your house is
not a place for sinning. Traditions make it very clear to us that if our
homes are abodes of sin, then we should not expect them to be
felicitous. Your life will be wasted in this house; the children born in
this house will be inauspicious. All of us should bear a tradition in
mind, which tells us that:

*“You see the stars twinkling in the sky. Similarly the house where
there is no thought of sin, where the inhabitants offer prayers,
supplications, observe fasts; the angels see such houses as shining
stars.”*

Another tradition says:

*“A house in which dog is kept is not visited by the angels.”*

There are three meanings of this tradition:

--- One meaning pertains to breeding of dogs at home as is done in the
Western Cultures.  
 These people will be grouped with Yazid on the Day of Reckoning because
Yazid   
 used to play with dogs and monkeys!

--- In the second meaning is that 'house' refers to the hearts of men.
If this heart has evil qualities, the light of the Lord cannot shine in
it. It cannot be divinely inspired. The angels inspire man. Angels enter
the hearts of those men who have cleansed their hearts, and do not raise
dogs in their hearts – pride, jealousy, etc. This is the best
interpretation of this tradition

--- The third meaning of this tradition pertains to the subject of our
discussion. A house  
 where there is no goodwill, where the husband behaves with the wife
like a wild animal, where there is constant strife amongst the
inhabitants, is not visited by the angels. Angels do not visit the home
of people who have the qualities of animals. Apparently this meaning is
also correct.

The logical meaning of the tradition fits more into the second and the
third interpretation given above.

If the angels don’t visit our homes, if Allah’s blessings are not
bestowed upon us, then it is a matter of concern for us. But it is more
so for the innocent children who grow in such homes. Remaining on the
right path for children raised in such homes is very difficult.

The Holy Quran says that a home is a place for rest. A husband and wife
are meant to provide comfort to each other. Homes where sins are
committed, where Satan visits freely and where angels are shy of coming
are not places of comfort. On the contrary unrest and hardships prevail
there. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ فَمَنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَنَهُ عَلىَ‏ تَقْوَى‏ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَ رِضْوَنٍ
خَيرٌْ أَم مَّنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَنَهُ عَلىَ‏ شَفَا جُرُفٍ هَارٍ
فَانهَْارَ بِهِ فىِ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ وَ اللَّهُ لَا يهَْدِى الْقَوْمَ
الظَّلِمِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is he who founded his building upon duty to Allah and His good
pleasure better, or he who founded his building on the brink of a
crumbling, overhanging precipice so that it toppled with him into the
fire of Hell? Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk. (Sura Tawbah, 9:
109)***

This verse says that if the walls and pillars of a house are strong,
only then will the roof be permanent. On the contrary, if one builds a
house on land that is prone to floods, it will be carried away by the
flood

The Holy Quran says that your life and home should be based on *Taqwa*
(piety). In such a home the inhabitants are regular at offering prayers;
they recite the Holy Book, observe mandatory fasts, supplicate to Allah
and abstain from sin.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يخََافُونَ يَوْمًا تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَ الْأَبْصَر
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...(Men) who fear a day when hearts and eyeballs will be
overturned.(Sura An-Nur, 24 : 37)***

A home in which the inhabitants have the fear of Allah is a strong home.
The progeny coming out of such a home is always strong and firm.
Spending time in such a home is auspicious. A house in which there is no
fear of Allah, is according to the Quran, a house built on land that is
frequented by floods. Whenever there is a flood, this house will be
washed away into Hell. The people of such homes are bereft of the
blessings and mercy of Allah. There is no felicity in such homes. Angels
don't visit these homes. Instead you will find anger, sadness,
oppression, troubles and tribulation. If you need Allah's succor, it is
imperative that your homes be free of sins. They must be places where
the inhabitants offer prayers. If you visit the mosque for offering the
mandatory prayers in congregation, you must offer optional prayers at
home. The Quran says that you should not be like the Jews and the
Christians who restrict their prayers to the congregations at the
Synagogue and the Church. Islam lays great stress on making your homes
the places of prayer and supplication. Your homes should be the places
of recitation of the Quran, offering of prayers, mutual help and
affection.

2. Household Chores
-------------------

In Islam one of the most important aspects of worship is the man and
wife helping and serving each other. You are aware that martyrdom in the
way of Allah is very blessed. We read in the traditions that a woman who
serves her husband by cooking food, cleaning dishes, making his bed etc.
will get reward from Allah equal to the reward of a martyr. Similarly
traditions inform us that a man who helps his wife at home so that she
is not inconvenienced and strives to provide sustenance to his wife and
family will be eligible for reward equal to that of a martyr.

Serving at home is a great worship. If you wish that your home remains
an auspicious and a blessed place, that angels come to your house, if
you want to live a blessed life, and above all this if you desire that
noble children be turned over to the society from your house, it is
imperative for you to maintain a strong relationship with Allah. One of
the ways to achieve this is to maintain love and affection between the
husband and wife. Lucky are the men who keep their wives contented and
happy. Unfortunate is the lady whose husband is not pleased with her,
Unfortunate are the couples who don't live in peace. Birth of noble
progeny in such homes is impossible!

3. The Effect Of Ill-Gotten Wealth
----------------------------------

If illegitimate income (the income got from charging interest, taking
bribes, cheating, etc.) comes to a family and the sustenance of the
members is drawn from it, then be assured that angels don't enter such
homes. Such homes are surrounded by fire. The angels in the Heavens see
such homes as being engulfed with fire. The Holy Quran says that the
angels pity the innocent children and women who are engulfed by fires in
these unfortunate homes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَلَ الْيَتَمَى‏ ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا
يَأْكلُُونَ فىِ بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا وَ سَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lo! Those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully, they do but
swallow fire into their bellies, and they will be exposed to burning
flame.(*** ***Sura an-Nisa’, 4: 10)***

Here the word "orphans" is used allegorically. The verse means that if a
person consumes ill-gotten wealth, it is tantamount to consuming fire.
Use of ill-gotten wealth is as forbidden as depriving an orphan of his
rights. Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.) says about this verse that those who
don't give *Khums* and *Zakat* and consume the wealth on which *Khums*
and *Zakat* have not been paid, and consume the wealth which has been
accumulated by bribery, interest, cheating, and gambling are eating
fire! When food is laid on the table in a house where *Khums* and
*Zakat* are not paid, a person blessed with the ability to see such
things, can actually see the wife and children consuming fire.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Now we have removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy
sight this day. (Sura Qaf, 50: 22)***

On the Day of Judgment the delicacies that you coveted so much, the
ill-gotten wealth that you collected and consumed will turn into
Hellfire! In Hell this will be the recompense they will get. The women
and children of such homes have to be pitied. It is impossible for the
children of such homes to turn out felicitous. The very same women and
children of this man will be his sworn enemy on the Day of Reckoning!
They will catch him by the scruff of his neck and ask him, "O unjust
person! Why did you feed us fire? Why did you not pay *Khums*? Why did
you feed us your ill-gotten wealth? Because you fed us with wealth that
was forbidden we turned towards sin instead of worship. You have
deprived us of felicity by giving to us ill-gotten sustenance!"

It is mentioned in the traditions that on the Day of Judgment the most
unfortunate person will be the one cursed by his family members although
he toiled hard in the world to provide sustenance to his wife and
children. They will plead with Allah, "He has fed us with wealth on
which *Khums* was not paid and he fed us on the bribes he had taken
forcibly. He made us hard-hearted! O Allah! Put him through a harsh
accounting!"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَدِمْنَا إِلىَ‏ مَا عَمِلُواْ مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَهُ هَبَاءً
مَّنثُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We shall turn unto the work they did and make it scattered
motes.*** ***(Sura Al-Furqan, 25: 23)***

The Holy Quran says in this verse that there is a group of people who
have been regular at prayers, had performed the Hajj and made
pilgrimages to the Holy places, shed tears during the meeting held to
mourn the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) - Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a.s.)
says that these acts of worship are so luminous, that this worshipper
will come in a white dress, shining like a lamp on the grounds of
reckoning - but because he had consumed forbidden wealth and usurped the
wealth of others, all his good deeds will be taken away from him and
turned over to others. At this juncture others will laugh at him in
ridicule and say, “His wife and children have eaten his good deeds” The
ill-gotten wealth was consumed by the wife and children in the world,
now he is the one who has to answer for it. Now he has to turn over his
good deeds to his wife and children and go into Hell, empty handed.

Fulfilling the rights of other people is difficult. Beware and be
assured that if forbidden wealth enters your house, then the mercy of
Allah will surely depart, blessings will flee this house, love and
affection departs from this house. A day comes when the very children
for whom you toiled will on the Day of *Qiyamah* curse you and make you
an inmate of Hell.


