The Making of Early Muslims
===========================

Despite the feverish attempts of the Arab infidels to suppress the call
of truth, the young Muslim community began to grow in numbers, as more
and more people flocked to the call of Islam.

The Prophet's mission in Makkah can thus be classified under the
following two periods:

The Secret Call
---------------

At first the Messenger of Allah called people to Islam secretly. He
began with his immediate kinsmen, the Bani Hashim, explaining to them
his divine mission. For three consecutive days he discoursed with them,
without much success, and only his young cousin Ali (a), stood up every
time saying 'I bear witness Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.' The
other members of his clan either mocked at him or remained silent,
perhaps needing time to ponder over his words.

Without feeling the least discouraged, Muhammad (S) continued his work,
encountering individuals and inviting them to Islam. By and large, the
devoted group of Muslims increased around him, and he selected a secret
secluded spot, to assemble the faithful and teach them the principles of
Islam and the verses of Qur'an as they were gradually revealed. When the
number of Muslims had reached 40, Almighty Allah ordered His Messenger
to shun the garment of secrecy and make public the invitation to Islam.

The Public Call
---------------

As the number of committed Muslims began to grow, Almighty Allah
commanded His Prophet to publicly announce the call to Islam. Some of
the notable converts at this stage included Muhammad's (S) kinsmen such
as Ja'far bin Abi Talib, Ubaidah bin Hareth bin Abdul Muttalib and
etc...

The growing presence of such a strong Muslim community in their midst
naturally annoyed the obstinate polytheists, who felt increasing danger
to their hegemony. The infidels, who had no logic to defend their
worship of manmade objects and stop the awakened masses from flocking
toward the light of Islam, resorted to torture and other methods of
oppression against the fledgling Muslim society. Bilal the Abyssinian,
Suhaib the Roman, Khabab bin Art, and others underwent the most rigorous
forms of torture at the hands of arrogant Jahiliyah.

The Mission Continues
---------------------

Despite the hardships, the infant community of Islam stood steadfast in
its beliefs. The Prophet's wife Khadija bint Khwailid who was blessed
with a large fortune, put all her wealth and property at her husband's
disposal, to help the spread of Islam. The personality of Abu Talib,
Muhammad's (S) uncle, who was respected and admired by the Quraish, was
instrumental in keeping the polytheist Arabs at a distance, and they
were afraid of doing any bodily harm to the Prophet.

The Prophet continued to teach the young Muslim community, the divine
revelations and the basic tenets of Islam. His most enthusiastic
disciple and student was none other than his young cousin, Ali, who was
the closest personality to Muhammad (S).

A point to note is that while all the early Muslims were mature people
and had experienced the fruits and bitterness of growing up among the
idols of Arabia, it was only Ali, who entrusted to his cousin's
guardianship years before the call of Islam, was like Muhammad (S) - of
a pristine pure personality and far removed from contemporary
corruption. Perhaps it was divine providence that Ali should be groomed
personally by the last and greatest Messenger to mankind. Hence, the
young Ali imbibed all the knowledge directly from the Prophet himself.

Consequently the Da'wah (Islamic Call) of the Prophet falls into two
clearly discernible periods as follows:

1. The period in Makkah, beginning with the age of 40 till his
emigration to Madina 13 years later.

2. The period at Madina, beginning with the Prophet's historical arrival
till his sad demise 10 years later at the age of 63.


