The Makkan Period
=================

If the Prophet's emigration to Madina opened new vistas for the message
of Islam and its eventual expansion over the Arabian peninsula,
nonetheless the Makkah period despite the persecution and hardships, was
instrumental in laying the firm foundations of Monotheism, which were to
flower in Madina later on.

Briefly speaking, the major landmarks of the Islamic call in this period
are explained underneath for our readers:

1. The First Revelation
-----------------------

The coming of the Archangel Gabriel with the tidings of Prophethood and
the first revelation, as we have already explained.

2. Da'wat Dhul-Ashira
---------------------

The invitation to his kinsmen the Bani Hashim to accept Islam. The event
known as Da'wat Dhul-Ashira was a formal announcement of Muhammad's (S)
mission and a turning point in the history of the divine message and its
spread. Undeterred it set the tone for the making of the first group of
dedicated Muslims, who despite severe persecution and hardships gathered
around the Prophet to assimilate the teachings and principles of Islam.

3. Isra’
--------

The night journey *Isra’* as described by the glorious verses of the
Holy Qur'an.

***“Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from the
Sacred Mosque to the Remote Mosque of which We have blessed the
precinct...”Holy Qur'an (17:1)***

What is meant by *Isra’* is the bodily ascension of Prophet Muhammad (S)
from the Sacred Mosque (Ka'aba) to the Remote Mosque in Jerusalem[^1]
and thence to the heavens to the very presence of Almighty Allah, and
back to earth in a very short span of the same night.

It is related that Gabriel descended one night with the heavenly mount
*Buraq* whose speed as the name suggests is far greater than the speed
of light, and took the Prophet to the highest and furthest point of the
heavens where no creature has ever set foot, and thence the
wonder-struck Muhammad (S) proceeded alone to the very presence of the
'Magnificent Light', that only a curtain divided him from the Omnipotent
Almighty.

Then Allah spoke with his servant and showed him the signs of His
Majesty. The event also known as Me'raj confirms that no creature ever,
not even the past prophets or any heavenly being either, like the
Archangel Gabriel, had been so near to the Almighty's proximity, as the
*Habibullah* (beloved of Allah) was summoned by Allah that night.

4. The First Martyrs
--------------------

The idolaters maddened at Bani Hashim and other Makkans for accepting
Islam, singled out some Muslims like Bilal the Abyssinian, Ichabab bin
Art and Yasir, his wife Sumaiyya and their son Ammar for severe torture.
Despite the barbarities inflicted, the new Muslims refused to forego
their faith in monotheism and eventually Yasir and his wife Sumaiyya
were savagely martyred at the hands of the infidels.

5. The Emigration to Abyssinia
------------------------------

When the Messenger of Allah felt the growing danger threatening the very
lives of the infant Muslim community and its helplessness against the
infidels, he instructed some of them to migrate to Abyssinia. The
immigrants were led by the Prophet's cousin Ja'far bin Abu Talib, and
upon arrival there, were allowed to settle and practice their faith by
the Abyssinian ruler Negus.

6. Siege and Social Boycott
---------------------------

Alarmed at the growing number of Muslims and fearing to do bodily harm
to the Prophet, because of Abu Talib's towering personality, the Makkan
Jahiliyah devised a plan of social boycott of the whole Bani Hashim
clan. Hence a total boycott was imposed on the Bani Hashim and the new
Muslims to such an extent that all links or contacts whether commercial
or social, including buying or selling of goods and even matrimonial
alliances were severed.

But the faithful Abu Talib was determined to protect his nephew the
Prophet, and together with all his clan members as well as the other
Muslims retired to the valley known as Shi'b Abi Talib on the outskirts
of Makkah, where together, they could easily override the difficulties
and also protect themselves from any incursions. Steadfastly, the
Muslims bore the consequences of the siege, enduring pain, hunger and
other difficulties for three long years, and ultimately frustrated the
infidel's efforts, which forced the Makkan Jahiliyah to lift up the
social boycott.

7. The Year of Great Grief
--------------------------

Shortly after the Bani Hashim and other Muslims emerged from Shi'b Abi
Talib, a double calamity struck the Prophet. Umm al-Mu'mineen (mother of
believers) Khadija al-Kubra who had given her husband unflinching
support, sacrificing her great wealth and property for the cause of
Islam, finally succumbed to the hardships and breathed her last. It was
a great blow to the Prophet to lose his faithful beloved companion and
the mother of his illustrious progeny. But another calamity was in store
for Muhammad (S), and three days later that another great benefactor and
sincere guardian, his uncle Abu Talib passed away from this mortal
world.

These sad events occurred in the holy month of fasting, Ramadhan, three
years before the Prophet's historic migration to Madina. Accordingly the
year is known in the annals of Islamic History as the *'Year of Grief*'.

8. The Retirement to Ta'if
--------------------------

Aggrieved by the double loss of his loving wife and doting uncle, and
faced with the prospect of renewed hostility from the Makkan idolaters,
who were emboldened by Abu Talib's death, the Prophet set out for the
oasis town of Ta'if. But in Ta'if the call to Islam fell on deaf ears.
No one believed in Muhammad's (S) invitation except an old Christian
farmer called 'Adhasu' who embraced Islam.

The Arabs of Ta'if ridiculed the Prophet, encouraging simpletons and
ignorant children to pelt him with stones and obstruct his path,
wherever he moved. The Messenger convinced that his divine mission would
not make much progress with the stonehearted people of Ta'if, returned
back to his birthplace Makkah.

9. Meeting with a Yathrib Delegation
------------------------------------

Even though the arrogantly ignorant Quraishites and other tribes of
Makkah and Ta'if had scoffed at the message, divine providence was
already at work facilitating help and the spread of Islam from hitherto
unknown quarters. In the eleventh year of the Prophetic mission,
Muhammad (S) started contacts with delegations.

He came across a group of people from Yathrib led by As'ad bin Zurara of
the Khazraj tribe and invited them to Islam. His words received an
attentive response, and the group believing in the truthfulness of this
great monotheistic call became very happy. The leader asked the Prophet
to send a Muslim with him to Yathrib to preach Islam, and hoped that the
divine call would unite his tribe with the rival tribe of Aws, knitting
them into a single Muslim people.

10. The First Allegiance of Aqaba
---------------------------------

On returning to Yathrib the group started preaching Islam among the
local people and made some progress. The next year a 12-member
delegation of Yathrib Arabs came to Makkah and met the Messenger of
Allah at a place called 'Aqaba' and swore allegiance to him as Muslims.
On returning to their city they started inviting people towards truth.
Thus Islam began to take roots and spread in Yathrib which was destined
to be the Prophet's seat of power and would eventually become famous as
Madina - the shortened form of Madinat-an-Nabi (city of the Prophet).

11. The Second Allegiance of Aqaba
----------------------------------

During the next year of pilgrimage following the first allegiance, 10
men and 2 women from Yathrib called on the Prophet at the same place of
Aqaba and swore allegiance to him, promising to defend and spread Islam.
The historic meeting was attended by the Prophet's uncle Abbas bin Abdul
Muttalib as a witness to the allegiance. The event was instrumental in
spreading belief among a greater part of Yathrib citizens, who rallied
to the cause of Islam as 'Ansar' (Helpers). Makkan Muslims to protect
their beliefs now gradually started migrating towards Yathrib.

12. Conspiracy to Assassinate the Prophet
-----------------------------------------

The Makkan Jahiliyah alarmed at the growing impact of Islam and their
abject helplessness to contain its radiant rays conspired to assassinate
the Prophet. Moreover, the death of Abu Talib that devoted guardian of
infant Islam had removed an obstacle from their path, emboldening the
haughty ignorants to plot Muhammad's (S) murder. But Makkan arrogance
had reckoned the whole thing without taking into account the Omnipotent
Creator Who is always watching over peoples' words and deeds and is even
aware of the thoughts they entertain.

The Almighty Allah sent Gabriel to inform the Prophet of the dirty plot.
As commanded, the Prophet asked his faithful cousin Ali (a) to sleep in
his bed that night, and himself set out for Yathrib taking along one of
his companions, the aged Abu Bakr, whom for some reasons he considered
it unwise to leave behind at Makkah. That epoch-making night which
marked a turning point in the message of Islam, Imam Ali (a) lay on the
Prophet's bed as calm and composed as ever, that even the scores of
infidels besieging the house and peeping through the windows, not the
least suspected the real identity of the sleeper.

It is related that each Makkan tribe or clan was represented in the gang
of conspirators hovering around the abode of divine revelation in their
vain bid to extinguish the eternal light, even Muhammad's (S) own
infidel uncle Abu Lahab was there claiming to represent the Bani Hashim.

At last before the break of dawn, the unholy gang burst into the
Prophet's house, full of confidence to accomplish their dirty deed. But
their all-night vigil proved as worthless as their stone-made gods, for
to their utter surprise, the figure which calmly emerged from the covers
and stood facing them was the Lion of Allah, Ali (a), and not whom they
were seeking. Frustrated in their ungodly efforts, the infidels asked
Ali the Prophet's whereabouts, to which they received the crisp and to
the point reply: “Did you entrust him to me?” Thus Almighty Allah
protected His Prophet from the evil of the idolaters, and escorted him
safely away from their very midst, without the blind-hearted Arabs
perceiving the least.

The event has another significance, for it brings into sharper focus the
personality of Imam Ali (a) and his selfless devotion to the cause of
Islam and to his cousin's life. He dauntlessly agreed to sleep on the
Prophet's bed risking his life and limbs, If the late Abu Talib's
personality had been until recently, a deterring factor for the Makkan
polytheists from harming the Prophet, now his son the brave Ali had ably
filled up the vacuum, showing readiness to sacrifice his own life for
Muhammad's (S) sake. Almighty Allah rewarded Ali's selfless spirit of
devotion by revealing the following verse of the Qur'an:

***“And among people is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of
Allah...” (2:207)***

Thus the Almighty brought the stratagem of the plotters to nought. By
the time the Makkan infidels recovered from their shock, the Prophet was
safely out of Makkah and on his way to Yathrib. Cautious, not to be
overtaken by the conspirators lest they start the chase, the Prophet
along with his companion Abu Bakr, took refuge in a cave of a mountain
called Thawr, three miles south of Makkah.

The Quraish hastily set out to trace the Prophet, and a party of
unbelievers arrived at the very cave of Thawr. Strangely, just as the
idolaters neared the place, Abu Bakr, perhaps sensing danger suddenly
started crying. His unwarranted cries, had not Almighty Allah descended
tranquillity on him that very moment making him tight-lipped, would have
been enough to lead the Quraish party to the Prophet's hide-out,
periling the whole brave selfless episode.

The polytheists arrived at the cave's mouth with an expert tracker and
looked everywhere around, but by Allah's command a spider had spun a
cobweb over its entrance and a bird had come and laid eggs, presenting
the semblance of an undisturbed virgin spot, where no soul had ventured
of late.

Satisfied that no one was in the cave, the unbelievers turned back
giving up all hope of finding the Prophet. Thus the Prophet safely
proceeded to Madina. The *Hijra* (Migration) to Madina also marks the
start of the Muslim Lunar Calendar and according to historians it took
place on the 1st of Rabi-al-Awwal.

Yathrib - A Brief Description
-----------------------------

It was an old oasis town with plenty of springs and wells and the brush
surroundings abounded with date palms, vineyards and orchards of
pomegranates and other fruits. Situated 450 kilometres north of Makkah
it was inhabited by the idol worshipping Arab tribes of Aws and Khazraj.
Certain Jewish tribes like Bani Quradha, and Bani Mugheer and Bani
Qainqa'e also dwelt in Madina and had migrated to the town centuries
before, to await the last Messenger of Allah, whom they found foretold
in their Scriptures.

Deep enmity and a constant state of internecine warfare had sapped the
energies of the two idolatrous Arab tribes, who had devastated each
others' wealth and properties, in their blind hatred. In addition there
was no love lost between the Arab and Jewish tribes. The Jews flaunting
their sacred books used to mock the pagan Arabs, saying that soon a
Prophet will emerge in Arabia and come to Yathrib and will put an end to
their wicked ways.

But strangely enough when Prophet Muhammad (S) did finally proclaim his
Prophethood and emigrate to Yathrib, it were the Arab tribes of Aws and
Khazraj who renounced idolatry and accepted Islam, while the
chauvinistic Jews, whose forefathers had come to Arabia, for this very
occasion, rejected the Prophet. Their pretext was he was an Arab
descended from Prophet Abraham's (a) elder son Ishmael (a), rather than
Isaac (a) and therefore unacceptable to the racist Jews.

On the other hand, on Prophet Muhammad's (S) historic entrance into
Yathrib, the Aws and Khazraj recalling the Jews' prophecy hastened
towards him and accepted Islam, burying once and for all the bloody
hatchet of tribal rivalry. Almighty Allah filled their hearts with
unity, which Arabia had never known before, and gathered them under
Islam's majestic banner. The Jews, treacherous as ever, turned away from
Prophet Muhammad (S) as they had rejected and betrayed Prophet Jesus (a)
6 centuries ago.

[^1]: Bayt-ul-Muqaddis or simply Al-Quds in today's Zionist occupied
Jerusalem.


