Important Events of Madina
==========================

The Prophet's entry into Madina ushers in a new phase for the divine
message. Islam gaining fresh followers began to assert its strength and
soon started to spread out over the four corners of the Arabian
Peninsula.

In the previous chapters we have already noted that the Prophet was 53
years of age at the time of his auspicious migration. In Madina he spent
the remaining 10 years of his life and it was here that other brilliant
aspects of his immaculate personality became fully manifest. The divine
call now entered a decisive stage and many important events took place
in Madina, which eventually laid a firm foundation for the spread of
Islam to the furthest reaches of the globe. Here we shall study some of
the major landmarks in the life of Prophet Muhammad (S) and Islam at
Madina.

1. The Building of the First Mosque
-----------------------------------

The entry into Madina was followed by the building of the mosque, the
first-ever for the Muslims who had just emerged from years of oppression
in Makkah. It was one of the most important landmarks for Muslims who
now had a centre of their own for open uninhibited gatherings, a school
for learning the Qur'an and a headquarters for receiving necessary
instructions from their leader.

Gone were the days of secret underground meetings in Makkah, where the
fear of persecution had always weighed heavily for the faithful. Yathrib
which from now onwards was Madinat-an-Nabi (city of the Prophet) or
Al-Madina al Munawara (illuminated city), provided a free open
atmosphere for the growth of the true faith.

Makkan immigrants mixed with the local populace, the 'Ansar' (Helpers),
and cheerfully started giving shape to Islam's first-ever mosque which
would be known as Masjid-an-Nabi (Prophet's Mosque). The building was
soon constructed of clay and tree trunks with palm leaves serving as a
thatched roof. The Messenger of Allah himself took part in the
construction and the following year he enlarged its precincts to cover
an area of 2475 square meters.

All Muslims enthusiastically assembled there for the daily prayers,
which were led by the Prophet himself. He used to deliver sermons there,
teach the Qur'an and the laws of Islam to the faithful, discourse with
his companions, prepare them for 'Jihad' (holy struggle) and would look
into their problems and other relevant issues. Thus, the Mosque was
actually the headquarters of the first-ever Islamic State established by
the Messenger. It still stands majestically today, frequently enlarged
and beautified throughout the last fourteen centuries. The tomb of
Prophet Muhammad (S) is situated within its enclosure, and draws
millions of Muslims from all over the world.

2. Fraternization
-----------------

The second important step taken by the Prophet in Madina was the
fraternizing of 'Muhajireen' (Makkan Immigrants) with the 'Ansar'
(Madinite Helpers) in the bonds of Islamic brotherhood. He fraternised
each Muhajir with an Ansar, joining them together as brothers in faith.
And he himself clasped the hand of his beloved cousin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a) as the supreme symbol of brotherhood, fraternity and solidarity in
the Islamic society.

Before proceeding further let us say a few words about the Muhajireen
and the Ansar, who formed the pillars of the Islamic State. Allah, the
Exalted describes them in the Qur'an as follows:

***“And as for the first and foremost of the Muhajireen (emigrants) and
the Ansar (helpers), and those who followed suit in good deeds; Allah is
pleased with them and they are pleased with Him; and He has prepared for
them gardens watered by running streams, therein dwelling forever; that
is a supreme triumph.” (9:100)***

The Muhajireen as the name suggests were the Muslim emigrants from
Makkah who had followed the Prophet of Madina to safeguard their faith
and to escape persecution from the infidels. They had embraced Islam in
its early formative years and most of them had steadfastly endured
severe pain and hardship in the way of liberty, truth and justice.

On the other hand, the Ansar were the indigenous inhabitants of Madina,
who believed in the Message of Islam and rallied to the help of the
Prophet. They welcomed him to their city, and fought alongside him
against the pagans of Arabia. It was their faith and selfless devotion
which cemented Islamic unity and brought many a glorious victory for
Islam.

At the time of the H4ra most of the Muhajireen were poor and possessed
nothing, but the Ansar displaying the finest example of Islamic
brotherhood, provided them with their needs such as houses, money and
food. They lodged them in their own houses, shared their wealth with
them and gave their daughters in marriage to the Makkan Muslims.

Such were the Muhajireen and the Ansar - brothers sharing food, clothing
and residence, and defending and helping each other as ordered by the
Almighty. From them we learn patience, self-sacrifice, fraternity, piety
and devoted zeal to spread the call of Islam to less fortunate people
around the world.

3. The Islamic State
--------------------

The other important event after the Hijra was the establishment of the
Islamic State and Government by the Prophet, who by applying the gradual
unfolding of divine commandments, moulded the hitherto ignorant Arabs
into a real Islamic society. Expounding the eternal miracle of the Holy
Qur'an and setting his own divinely inspired personality as a practical
example, he firmly erected the pillars of justice and virtue. In short,
Prophet Muhammad (S) presented to the dark world seething under tyranny
and oppression, the most perfect ever constitution - spiritual, social
and political and a key to their salvation both in this mortal life and
the hereafter.

4. Jihad
--------

The next stage was Jihad or holy struggle, a thing not known in Makkah.
It was the natural consequence to the setting up of a state.
Unbelievers, ever-intent to stamp out the divine call but seeing Islam
finely knit unto a secure state, resorted to arms, and the Muslims had
to follow suit to defend their faith, and according to Allah's
injunctions went out to do battle with the aggressors.

The first ever battle between Islam and blasphemy occurred in the second
year of the Hijra at a place called 'Badr' in which the new-found
Islamic State, assembling a modest force of only 313 Muslims defeated a
vastly outnumbering army of disbelievers. The victory led to many other
battles and skirmishes with the Makkan infidels, who each time came out
in larger numbers to avenge their previous setbacks, but by Allah's
Grace suffered defeat after defeat at the hands of the faithful.

The victories brought strength and courage to the Muslims and helped
facilitate the spread of Islam and monotheism to the farthest reaches of
polytheist Arabia.

5. End of Jewish Plots and Treacheries
--------------------------------------

Ever since the Prophet's entry into Madina, the treacherous Jews had
vehemently opposed him and his Islamic call, evoking memories of their
hostility to the previous Prophet, Jesus Christ (a), half a millennium
ago. The crafty Jews entered into an alliance with the polytheist
Quraish in a bid to stamp out Islam. They conspired to kill Prophet
Muhammad (S) despite the fact that he was lenient towards them and had
treated them kindly, hoping to convince them of Islam's truth. But
eventually as Jewish plots and aggressions increased, he had no choice
other than to take up arms against them, in order to protect Islam and
the Muslims. At the battle of Khaiber which is famous for Imam Ali's (a)
heroic exploits, the Prophet defeated them ending Jewish intrigues and
conspiracies in Arabia.

6. The Treaty of Hudaibiyah
---------------------------

Another important landmark in the Prophet's life and progress of the
Islamic call was the treaty of Hudaibiyah.

One night Prophet Muhammad (S) had a dream in which he saw that he and
his companions were entering the precincts of the Holy Ka'aba in Makkah
to perform the 'Tawaf' (circumambulation), but the infidel Arabs were
trying to obstruct their entrance. Following the dream, he decided to go
to Makkah with some 1,500 Muslims to perform the pilgrimage. It was in
the sixth year of the Hijra, and when the party arrived at a place
called Hudaibiyah, the infidels confronted them and blocked all routes
to Makkah. After some deliberations the infidels and the Prophet
concluded a treaty, stipulating that the Muslim party would for the
moment go back to Madina, but would return the next year for performing
the pilgrimage. There were some other terms too.

As per the treaty the Messenger and his companions turned back to
Madina, but the next year the Prophet along with a group of Muslims
entered Makkah - 7 years after his historical migration - to perform the
Umrah ritual (the lesser pilgrimage). Thus, his dream came true, and it
was another undeniable proof of his Prophethood.

7. The Conquest of Makkah
-------------------------

Next followed the great event in the history of Islam, that was the
conquest of Makkah, the then bastion of ignorance and disbelief. With
it, idolatry was purged from the greater part of Arabia once and for
all, and Allah's Sacred House the Ka'aba was cleansed of the filth of
man-made objects. The event took place during the month of Ramadhan, in
the year 8 A.H. and Makkah was liberated without a fight. Almighty Allah
instilled the hearts of the idolaters with such fear that when Abu
Sufyan, the leader of the infidels, and his men, saw the Muslim forces
they were struck with awe and meekly surrendered. Thus the Messenger and
his companions entered Makkah triumphantly, smashed the idols, performed
the Tawaf, and returned to Madina.

The conquest of Makkah and the purging of idols from Holy Ka'aba proved
a great victory for Islam. Following the event which is famous for
Muhammad's (S) magnanimity towards his archenemies, the Makkan pagans,
who all accepted Islam, people started embracing the true faith in
multitudes.

8. Monarchs, Heads of State and Tribal Chiefs Invited to Islam
--------------------------------------------------------------

Allah bestowed victory upon His Prophet in his many battles, and the
Muslims were now strong. Since the light of Islam had expelled ignorance
from the greater part of the Arabian Peninsula, the Messenger of Allah
now felt it his duty to enlighten neighbouring people about the truth of
Islam. Accordingly he sent envoys to the Emperors of Persia, Byzantine
and Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and to other heads of state and tribes inviting
them towards guidance and reform. Some accepted, some gave polite
'diplomatic replies', while some others such as Chosroes of Persia were
arrogant enough to betray their ignorance, by haughtily tearing the
letters from the 'Mercy to the Worlds'.

9. Event of Mubahala
--------------------

Among the messages which the Prophet (S) sent to kings and heads of
state inviting them to Islam, was the one addressed to the Christians of
Najran in Yemen. On receiving the letter the Christians refused to
accept Islam but however decided to come to Madina to challenge the
Prophet and to defend their deviated belief in the divinity and
purification of Prophet Jesus (a).

In Madina, the Prophet presented them with proof and facts about Islam's
eternal truth, citing references from the previously revealed
Scriptures, but the Christians' irrational obstinacy prevented them from
seeing the manifest truth. In the end the two parties decided to meet at
an open place and invoke divine curse and punishment upon the lying
side. Allah thereby ordered His Prophet to take along with him his
immediate family to the meeting ground for the Mubahala[^1].

***“And whosoever disputes with you concerning this after the knowledge
that has come to you, say: 'Come now, let us call our sons and your
sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then let us
earnestly pray for Allah's curse upon the ones who lie.'“ (3:61)***

The Christian elders came to the venue with their whole flock, and the
Prophet as ordered by Allah came with his immediate family members,
namely: daughter Fatimah, son in-law Ali and their two children, Hasan
and Husayn. Never had the Christians seen such enlightened visages
before. The moment the Chief Priest beheld Prophet Muhammad (S) and his
noble family, he was filled with awe.

He realised that without doubt truth was with this blessed group of five
and most surely Allah will respond to Muhammad (S) and his family's
invocation if they choose to curse and destroy the Christians of Najran.
Thus the Christians backed away from the challenge of Mubahala, and
wisely came to terms with the Prophet, pledging to pay an annual tribute
to the Muslims.

10. The Farewell Pilgrimage
---------------------------

In the tenth year of the Hijra, the Messenger of Allah (S) performed the
Hajj (pilgrimage), with all his wives and a fairly large number of his
Companions.

He reached Makkah on the 4th of Dhul Hijja and was soon joined by Ali
(a), who hastened back from his successful missionary deputation to
Yemen. During the Hajj ceremonies, the Prophet addressed a great
multitude from Mount Arafat, in words which are eternal to this day in
the hearts of believers. After praising the Almighty, he expounded the
laws and tenets of Islam and abolished all existing practices of the
days of Jahiliyah, charging the gathering to inform those not present
and also to convey to posterity his eternal message.

The famous tradition called 'Thaqalain' was part of this sermon and we
reproduce it below from 'Sahih Tirmidhi' for the benefit of our readers.

“I have been summoned (by Allah) and the moment is near for me to answer
(to die). I leave among you the 'Thaqalain' (two precious things): the
Book of Allah and my progeny; Allah's Book is like a rope extending from
heaven to earth, and my progeny are the Ahlul-Bayt. The Merciful
informed me that the two will not part with each other until they meet
me at the pool (of Kawther in Paradise). I warn you against deserting
them.”

11. Ghadir Khum
---------------

After performing the Hajj, he bade farewell to his native Makkah and set
out for Madina. When the great procession reached the place from where
the routes of the different caravans coming from various points of
Arabia normally parted, suddenly the signs of divine revelation appeared
and he stopped at a place called al-Juhfa near the spring (ghadir) of
Khum. The Archangel Gabriel came with the following verse in order to
impress the urgency of the divine command:

***“O Prophet proclaim what has been revealed to you from your Lord, for
if you do it not, you have not conveyed His message; and Allah will
protect you from the (evil designs of) people...”Holy Qur'an (5: 67)***

At once the Prophet ordered the whole party to be assembled, even
summoning back those who had already left, for he had an important
message to be delivered.

A pulpit made of camel saddles was hastily set-up. Ascending it, he
delivered a sermon asking the people to be witness that he had
faithfully performed the task of Prophethood entrusted to him by the
Almighty.

The multitude cried in one: *“We bear witness O Messenger of Allah.”*

He asked, who in their opinion was more worthy of obedience than their
souls, to which they replied that Allah and His Prophet know better.

Then he said: *“O people! Allah is my Maula (Master) and I am the Maula
(master) of believers.”*

*“Verily O Prophet of Allah”*, came the unanimous reply.

Prophet Muhammad (S) then bent down and lifting up Ali bin Abi Talib (a)
in his hands, showed him to the vast crowd and proclaimed those famous
words, which guaranteed the continuation of divine leadership:

*“For whomsoever I am Maula (master), this Ali is his Maula
(master)...”*

Thrice he proclaimed these words before descending the pulpit, relieved
by having performed the great task which would save the Ummah from going
astray.

The great multitude of Muslims surged towards Ali bin Abi Talib (a),
felicitating him on his divine appointment. According to such famous
scholars as Zamakhshari and Nasai, the first one to congratulate and
swear allegiance (bai'ah) to Imam Ali (a) was Umar bin Khattab, who
later became the second Caliph.

Gabriel descended again with another revelation, showing that the
Almighty was pleased with His Prophet for having excellently performed
the great final mission to mankind.

***“...Today have I perfected unto you your religion and completed upon
you My blessings and approved for you Islam as your religion...”Holy
Qur'an (5:3)***

This most important task ensured the continuity of divine guidance.
Since the Prophets were divinely appointed, so should be the successors
or trustees of the Prophets, especially so in the case of Islam, which
is the final message to the human race.

All scholars and historians have testified that the event of Ghadir
Khum[^2] did take place, and moreover books of Hadith are witness that
on many and occasion, the Prophet had emphasised his cousin's
pre-eminence, over all other Muslims.

12. The Prophet's Death
-----------------------

Two months after his return to Madina, the Messenger of Allah fell ill,
Madina wore a look of gloom, because for a fortnight, the Prophet of
Islam was confined in bed. The dawning of 28th of the lunar month of
Safar proved to be fateful, for on that day the 'Mercy to the worlds'
although weak with fever made his way to the mosque to lead the prayers,
which also proved to be for the last time. Following a brief speech he
returned to the house and after giving necessary instructions to his
divinely ordained successor Imam Ali (a), he breathed no more. The sad
day marked the end of final Prophethood.

Allah, through His last and greatest Messenger has revealed the perfect
and the most comprehensive set of laws for the entire human race, a
constitution, which is capable of catering to the needs of all
generations till doomsday. Now the need for further revelations will no
more arise, for the Almighty in His Eternal Wisdom has embodied each and
everything in the Holy Qur'an and taken upon Himself the responsibility
of guarding it from interpolation. Moreover the Prophet practically
showed the implementation of divine laws.

The Qur'an together with the Prophet's Sunnah (traditions) is to remain
a guiding light for all mankind, and to ensure their correct meaning and
application, Allah granted the leadership of the Ummah to the Prophet's
infallible household, the Ahlul-Bayt, who are the torch bearers of
guidance for all Muslims.

Prophet Muhammad (S) was laid to rest in his mosque, and an aggrieved
Imam Ali (a) performed the last rites of his noble cousin and
father-in-law. He was survived by his daughter Fatimah and her two sons.

Today the grave of the Prophet is the site of pilgrimage and veneration
for Muslims from all over the globe.

[^1]: Mubahala means to invoke Allah's curse upon the lying side when
two parties are contesting for truth.

[^2]: For more details on the historic event of Ghadir Khum refer to
such famous books as: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, Part 1, page 118 & 119,
part 4, page 281-370-372-373, part 5, page 347-370. Sunan bin Maja,
Chapter 'Merits of Ali'. Mustadrik al-Hakim, part 3, page 109. Bin
Kathir's History, part 5, page 210.


