The Makkan Society
==================

The society at obscure Makkah where Prophet Muhammad (S) opened his
eyes, was rife with vices and oppression. It was as barren as the harsh
Arabian landscape, with declining morals, rising perversion, ignorance
and poverty. Like the rest of Arabia it was polytheist in nature, deeply
engrossed in the worship of a multitude of idols.

The Makkan society roughly speaking was divided into three classes as
follows:

1. The Arrogant Wealthy
-----------------------

In their hands was vested the wealth, authority and leadership of
Makkah, and it was this class which vehemently opposed the Messenger of
Allah and his call to Islam. They terrorised and forbade people from
believing him, for fear of losing their unjust hegemony over Makkah. To
this class belonged Abu Jahal, Abu Sufyan, Abu Lahab, Walid bin Mughira,
Uqba bin Abi Moayyit, Aas bin Wael Sahm and others, who had built up
large fortunes by oppression and foul means.

2. The Deprived (slaves and the oppressed)
------------------------------------------

This class was composed of the downtrodden like Ammar and his parents
Yaser and Sumaiyya, Bilal the Abyssinian, Suhaib the Roman, Khabbab bin
Arat etc., who all eagerly hastened towards the call of Islam, because
they found it to be the truth and a way of deliverance from oppression,
slavery and disbelief.

3. The General Public
---------------------

These were neither part of the landed oligarchy nor were subjected to
slavery. They could well be termed the middle class. Affiliated to their
respective tribal chiefs or clan heads they blindly followed the path
chosen by their leaders.

Thus since the Islamic Da'wah (call) strives for justice and equality
among the human race, removing the artificial barriers of class set up
by 'Jahiliyyah', the tyrants and oppressors did all they could to stop
its eventual spread. Sensing that its Monotheist message, preaching
submission to the One and Only Creator and forsaking the worship of
idols and man-made images, would bring an end to their domination over
Makkah, the pagan Quraish, decided to gang up against Prophet Muhammad
(S).


