Birth and Ancestry
==================

Muhammad (S) was born at Makkah in the year 570 AC. known in the annals
of Arabian history as the 'Year of the Elephant' because of a miraculous
event. That year Abraha the Christian governor of the Abyssinian King,
who had already subdued Yemen, marched upon Makkah with a huge army of
elephants.

His intention was to destroy the Ka'aba and shift the centre of
pilgrimage to San'aa, where he had built an imposing church. But the
very moment Abraha's awesome army was poised for the attack, the
Almighty sent a swarm of flying creatures, who blackened the sky pelting
the mighty force with pebbles, and within minutes destroyed elephants
and warriors alike. Thus Almighty Allah humbled the arrogantly ignorant
by means of an obscure creature.

Muhammad (S) was born on the eve of 17th of the lunar month of
Rabi-ul-awwal and according to some versions on the 12th of the same
month. His father was Abdullah the son of Abdul Muttalib the son of
Hashim and his mother, Amina, was the daughter of Wahab. His grandfather
Abdul Muttalib had many wives and children, out of whom Abdullah and Abu
Talib were from the same mother. Thus Prophet Muhammad (S) was a scion
of the noble Bani Hashim clan a sub-division of the large Quraish tribe,
descended from Prophet Ishmael (a) the elder son of Prophet Abraham (a).

He was a posthumous child, as his father Abdullah had died three months
before his birth, while on a visit to Yathrib (Madina). The birth of the
orphan turned the grief of the bereaved family into unbounded joy, and
none were more happy than his mother, Amina and grandfather Abdul
Muttalib, who were in a state of shock at Abdullah's untimely death.

The family burst into happiness, slaughtering sheep and throwing a grand
banquet for the Quraish, to celebrate the auspicious occasion. Makkah
overflowed with joy as throngs of people flocked to Abdul Muttalib's
house to congratulate him on the birth of his grandchild.


