The Prophet's Marriage
======================

Muhammad (S) grew up in his loving uncle's house, blossoming into a
handsome youth of exceptionally good character, which marked him out
from rest of the young Makkans. He soon began to assist Abu Talib in
trade and commerce and once accompanied his uncle's trading caravan to
Syria, ably revealing his talents and integrity. His honesty and
reputation preceded him and sometime after his return to Makkah he took
up a trading job with one of the wealthiest and noblest Quraishite
women, Khadija bint Khuwailid. He accepted to work for Khadija and was
entrusted with some money, with which he busied himself in commerce. He
again travelled to Syria and made great profits for Khadija during the
trip.

Naturally Khadija was pleased and soon came to admire Muhammad's (S)
intelligence and honesty. Eventually she offered her hand in marriage
which was accepted by him. Muhammad (S) thus married Khadija and they
lived a harmonious life full of love, co-operation and sincerity,
sharing each other's joys and sorrows. They formed a perfect husband and
wife pair, the likeness of which is something rare in human history.

When finally the Divine Message was revealed to Muhammad (S), the devout
Khadija at once believed in her husband without ever expressing the
slightest doubt. She was the first among women to accept Islam and
subsequently put all her vast wealth and property at the Prophet's
disposal for the spread of truth and justice.

Khadija bint Khuwailid was from the Quraish tribe and was born and bred
in Makkah. Even in the days of Jahiliyyah she was known among the
Quraish women for her nobleness of character and virtue, that is why she
was called by the Makkans as Tahera 'the pure'. She married Muhammad
(S), 15 years before revelation came to him from Allah.

As long as she was alive the Prophet never took a second wife and even
in later years of his life after numerous marriages, he used to cherish
her loving memory and refer to her as the most beloved of his spouses.
She endured with him hunger, poverty and calamities inflicted by the
Makkan polytheists. She bore Muhammad (S) many children, all of whom
except for Fatima (a) died in infancy, including son Qasim[^1] from whom
the Prophet's kunya (agnomen) 'Abul Qasim' is derived.

Finally in the tenth year of the Prophetic mission, shortly after the
small Muslim community quarantined by the heathens in Shaib Abi Talib
had come out of the valley, Khadija breathed her last. It was a great
tragedy for the Prophet. The year is known as the 'Year of Grief' in
history because the Prophet suffered a further blow that year losing
that other great benefactor, his uncle Abu Talib.

[^1]: Khadija bore the Prophet one more son named Taher; who also died
in infancy. Later in life Prophet Muhammad (S) had another son named
Ibrahim, through his Egyptian wife Maria Qibtia, who also died in
infancy. Hence, the Prophet's progeny survives today through his
daughter Fatima and her two sons Hasan and Husayn who are the ancestors
of all 'Seyyids' (descendants of the Prophet).


