The Beginning of the Prophetic Mission
======================================

Muhammad (S), though endeared and respected by Makkans for his wisdom
and virtues, preferred solitude and kept his distance from the
polytheist society. Disgusted with the corruption all around, he used to
retire to the Cave of Hira, in a mountain a few kilometers from Makkah,
meditating Allah's Majesty and worshipping Him.

Initially he used to remain in the cave for a day or two and sometimes
even 10 nights or more but the next few years saw him spending a whole
month in that cave, praying to Allah and contemplating guidance for the
deviated people.

Finally the day dawned which was change the history of the world. When
he had reached the age of 40 and was engrossed as usual in praying to
Allah at his retreat of cave Hira, suddenly that harbinger of Divine
tidings, the Archangel Gabriel, appeared with the first verses of the
Holy Qur'an:

***“Recite in the name of your Lord Who created. Created man from a
clot. Recite and your Lord is most Generous. Who taught (to write) with
the pen. Taught man what he knew not.”Holy Qur'an (96:1-5)***

With these verses, Gabriel (a) announced to Muhammad (S) that Almighty
Allah had formally chosen him to be His last and final Messenger to
humankind.

Muhammad's (S) heart was filled with joy, and he thanked Almighty Allah
for bestowing this great honour upon him. He hurried to his house to
tell his wife Khadija about his appointment to Prophethood.

Khadija on hearing the event at once believed in her husband's
Prophethood and so did his young cousin Ali (a). Consequently Ali and
Khadija became the first ever male and female Muslims respectively. Thus
started the beginning of a divine mission which was destined not only to
cleanse the Arabian Peninsula of the filth of polytheism but whose
radiance would eventually dispel darkness from all over the world.

Muhammad's (S) formal announcement of his Prophethood had a mixed
reaction on Makkan society. While the oppressed classes hastened towards
the call of Islam, happy that the day of deliverance had finally dawned,
the Makkan oligarchy and those who felt a danger to their vested
interests and hegemony; ganged up to ridicule the Prophet, in their
desperate bid to nip in the bud the final revelation to the human race.

Undeterred by Jahiliyah's arrogant attempts, Muhammad (S) continued to
propagate the great divine mission entrusted to him, and the next 23
years of his lifetime saw the gradual unfolding of the grand miraculous
event; the Holy Qur'an, Allah's own words sent down through the
Archangel Gabriel.[^1]

[^1]: Even today after 14 centuries, Allah's book the Holy Qur'an stands
as a living miracle for humanity. Its revelation was completed a couple
of months before the Messenger's passing away, and besides containing
the 'Shariah' (canonical laws) for the Muslims, it is a source of
knowledge goading man to contemplate and discover the mysteries of
science, inspiring high ethical values and morals in its readers and
showing the perfect path for mankind's happiness both in this world and
the hereafter.


