Section 5: Abraham Argues Against Idolatry
==========================================

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 51 - 52
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَآ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رُشْدَهُ مِن قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا بِهِ
عَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا هَذِهِ التَّـمَاثِيلُ الَّتِي
أَنْتُم لَهَا عَاكِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “And indeed We gave Abraham aforetime his rectitude, and We were
aware of him (his eligibilities).”***  
***52. “When he said to his father and his people: ‘What are these
images (and lifeless statues) unto which you pay devotion’?”***

In previous verses, the statement was upon the Torah and the Qur’an,
while in this verse Allah declares that sending prophets and celestial
Books is not a new matter, and before this, at the time of Abraham (as),
there was the subject of the invitation of the deluded people unto the
Truth.

Therefore, an important part of the life and struggles of Abraham
against idolaters is referred to here.

At first, it says:

***“And indeed We gave Abraham aforetime his rectitude, and We were
aware of him (his eligibilities).”***

Then, the Holy Qur’an points to one of the most important programs of
Abraham (as) where it says:

***“When he said to his father and his people: ‘What are these images
(and lifeless statues) unto which you pay devotion’?”***

The word ‘father’, mentioned in this verse, refers to his uncle, ’Azar,
because in Arabic language sometimes ‘uncle’ is called /’ab/ (father),
too.[^1]

This Abraham’s saying, in fact, is a clear reasoning for making the act
of idol worshipping futile, because what is seen of the idols is their
mere statues and the rest is delusion and conjecture.

The Arabic word /tamail/ is the plural form of /temal/ with the sense of
‘lifeless statues’.

Having a glance over the history of idolatry shows that making statues
had initially been used as a remembrance of the dignitary, which, later,
became gradually as a state of sanctity and turned in the form of
worship.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 53 - 54
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا وَجَدْنَآ ءَابَآءَنَا لَهَا عَابِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَقَدْ كُنتُمْ أَنْتُم وءَابَآؤُكُمْ فِي ضَلاَلٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “They said: ‘We found our fathers worshipping them’.”***  
***54. “He said: ‘Indeed you and your fathers have been in manifest
error’.”***

Abraham told the idol worshippers that both they and their fathers had
been in manifest fault, while they had no proper answer to that clear
logic. They only repelled the proposition from themselves and related it
to their ancestors.

Thus they said that they had seen their fathers and ancestors that they
had been worshipping those idols, and therefore, they were loyal to the
traditional custom of their ancestors.

The abovementioned holy verse says:

***“They said: ‘We found our fathers worshipping them’.”***

Since there is no reason that ancestors might be wiser and more
knowledgeable than the substituting generations, and in most cases the
circumstances prove the reverse, because, with the past of time,
sciences and knowledge develop, so Abraham immediately told them that
not only they but their fathers also were certainly in aberration.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘Indeed you and your fathers have been in manifest
error’.”***

### A Few Traditions Upon Misguidance

1- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

 *“I fear about my Ummah for three (main things) after me: misguidance
after guidance, the seditions which cause aberrations, and the vain
desire of the belly and of pudendum.”*[^2]

2- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

 *“Whoever seeks guidance other than Allah’s guidance will go
astray.”*[^3]

3- Imam Baqir (as) said:

 *“Verily Allah, Almighty and Glorious, appointed Hadrat Ali (as) (to
leadership) to be a sign between Him and His servants.*

 *Then, whoever has known him (his right) is a believer, and whoever has
rejected him is a disbeliever; and whoever has not known him gets
astray, and whoever appoints another (leader) with him is a polytheist,
and whoever has confessed his mastership will enter Paradise.”*[^4]

4- Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

 *“The most polluted deeds is that which causes misguidance.”*[^5]

5- Muhammad-ibn-Muslim said:

 *“I heard that Imam Baqir (as) in a tradition was saying: ‘And do know
O’ Muhammad! Verily the leaders of injustice, as well as their
followers, are far from the religion of Allah. Certainly they have gone
astray and lead astray, and the deeds that they do*

***‘… are like ashes on which the wind blows severely on a stormy day;
they will have no power over any thing out of what they have earned;
that is the very straying, far (and deep)’.”***[^6][^7]

6- Zurarah once said:

 *“I heard that Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition was saying: ‘O’ Allah!
Cause me know You for verily if You do not make me know You I will not
know Your prophet.*

 *O’ Allah! Cause me know Your prophet, for verily if You do not make me
know Your prophet, I will not know Your Hujjah. O’ Allah! Cause me know
Your Hujjah, for verily if I do not know Your Hujjah I will get astray
from my religion (and will be misguided).”*[^8]

7- Imam Baqir (as) said:

 *“Whoever teaches a part of guidance (to any one) will have the like of
the reward of those who act it and there will decrease nothing of the
rewards of them; and whoever teaches a part of aberration (to any one)
the sin of those who commit it will be for him without decreasing
anything from their sins.”*[^9]

8- Yazid-ibn-‘Abdulmalik narrates that Imam Sadiq (as) said:

 *“Visit each other because your visit will cause your hearts to be
enlivened and our sayings to be remembered, and our sayings may make you
kind to each other.*

 *Then if you practically take them (and do accordingly), you will
develop and be prosperous; and if you abandon our sayings you will get
astray and annihilate. Therefore, take them (and do accordingly), for I
stand guarantor of your rescue and prosperity.”* [^10]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 55 - 56
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَجِئْتَنَا بِالْحَقّ‌ِ أَمْ أَنتَ مِنَ اللاَّعِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَل رَبُّكُمْ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ الَّذِي فَطَرَهُنَّ
وَأَنَا عَلَي ذَلِكُم مِنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “They said: ‘Have you brought to us the truth, or are you one of
the triflers’.”***  
***56. “He said: ‘Nay! But your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the
earth Who originated them, and I am unto this (fact) one of the
witnesses’.”***

This statement of Abraham (as) which was accompanied with kinds of
emphasis and was said in a perfect decisiveness, caused the idol
worshippers to come a little to themselves and try to investigate and
research about the truth. They turned to Abraham (as) and asked him
implying whether he had brought them a true matter or he was joking.

The verse in this regard says:

***“They said: ‘Have you brought to us the truth, or are you one of the
triflers’.”***

But, in answer to them, Abraham (as) explicitly said that what he said
was serious and was the exact fact that: their Lord is the Lord of the
heavens and that of the earth.

The above holy verse says:

***“He said: ‘Nay! But your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the
earth Who originated them…”***

Abraham (as) continued that this is the same Lord Who had created them
and he was one of the witnesses of that notion.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and I am unto this (fact) one of the witnesses’.”***

By this sharp statement, Abraham (as) showed that that One is eligible
to be worshipped Who is the Creator of them and the Creator of the earth
and all beings.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 57
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَاللَّهِ لاََكِيدَنَّ أَصْنَامَكُم بَعْدَ أَن تُوَلُّوا مُدْبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “And, by Allah, I will certainly plan against your idols after
you go away turning your backs’.”***

The commentators are divided in having the opinion that how Abraham (as)
stated this sharp statement. Some of them, such as the authors of
Tafsir-us-Safi and Al-Mizan, believe that this sentence was not stated
openly and Abraham (as) said it in secret.

The reason for this is that they believe that the explicit claim of
opposition against the small and big gods of a people, lonely and on the
first day of the call, is opposite to precaution. But it seems that it
is not so, because the accounts of the men of Allah are different from
the ordinary accounts of ours, and nothing can prevent them to pave
their clear way and to perform their Divine mission.

In the previous holy verses, we recited that Abraham (as) explicitly
told his people:

***“…Indeed you and your fathers have been in manifest error.”***[^11]

Did Hadrat Zaynab (as) not say to Yazid, when she was as a captive in
Sham, “I belittle you”, and then she started criticizing earnestly upon
him and his government?

Did the great man of Iran, Imam Khomiyni, not say “The king must go”,
when the king was in the peak of his tyrannical kingdom, and being fully
equipped with kinds of arms, he was supported by all interior and
exterior powers?

Did he not tell the king’s substitute: “I will nock down this
government”? Did he not say to the existing dominant worldly oppressor,
America, that America could do no evil? Truly speaking, to what kind of
current political circumspections and ordinary precautions do these
sentences agree?

Some believe that for conflicting the factors of mischief, those factors
they must be struggled against in a negative manner. For instance, at
the time of the tyrannical king of Iran, when the cinemas of the country
were a serious means of deviation of the young generation, one of the
dignitaries said:

***“If people decide not to go to cinemas, the cinemas will
automatically be suspended”.***

But, the above-mentioned holy verse condemns this kind of thought, and
it persists on the fact that the source of mischief must be eradicated.
The example of it is the act of Moses (as) who burnt the golden Calf,
and the Prophet of Islam (S) ruined the ‘mosque of dissension’ where was
a base for the hypocrites.

Therefore, to prove that this proposition was one hundred percent
earnest, and that he (as) was steadfast in his belief in a manner that
he would accept heartily all its results and consequences in whatever
form they might be, Abraham added:

***“And, by Allah, I will certainly plan against your idols after you go
away turning your backs’.”***

Abraham’s purpose was to make them understand that he would finally use
an opportunity and break the idols entirely.

But, perhaps, the greatness and dignity of the idols in their minds was
so high that they did not take this statement for serious, and they did
not show any reaction.

They might think that it was not possible that a person let himself play
with the sacred things of a people and a tribe whose government was
supporting them, too. With what daring could he do that? By which power
was he able to afford it?

### A Few Traditions Concerning Pictures

1- The holy Prophet of Islam (S) said:

 *“The intensive punishment of the people on the Day of Hereafter
belongs to the drawers of pictures.”*

(Perhaps, the purpose of it is: ‘those who painted the pictures of
gods’.)[^12]

2- Abi Basir has narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

 *“The Prophet (S) said: ‘Gabriel came to me and said: ‘Your Lord sends
you regards and has prohibited you from ‘Tazwiq’ of the houses’.”*

Abu Basir said:

 *“Then I asked what ‘Tazwiq of the houses’ meant; when he (as) said:
‘Painting pictures in the house’.”*

(It should be thought what kinds of picture there were on those days
regarding that the people had the belief of idol worship in them and
every picture must be considered as that.)[^13]

Muhammad-ibn-Muslim said:

 *“I asked Imam Sadiq (as) about the drawing of the pictures of trees,
sun, and moon. Then he (as) said: ‘When there is not a thing (a face) of
an animal, it does not matter’.”*[^14]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 58 - 60
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَجَعَلَهُمْ جُذَاذاً إِلاَّ كَبِيراً لَّهُمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ إِلَيْهِ
يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا مَن فَعَلَ هَذَا بِاَلِهَتِنَآ إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا فَتىً يَذْكُرُهُمْ يُقَالُ لَهُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “So he broke them into pieces, (all) except the chief of them,
that haply they may return to it.”***  
***59. “They said: ‘Who has done this with our gods? Surely he is (one)
of the unjust’.”***  
***60. “They said: ‘We heard a youth making mention of them, who is
called Abraham’.”***

However, without being afraid of the dangers of his action nor scaring
from the harsh blow of the wrath of those people which could be
considered as a result of his deed, in an appropriate opportunity,
Abraham bravely took action and hastened fighting against those
powerless gods which had so many fanatic ignorant advocators in their
support.

The verse in this regard says:

***“So he broke them into pieces, (all) except the chief of them…”***

Abraham’s aim of doing it was that, maybe, the idol worshippers might
come to him and he would say whatever was to say.

The verse says:

***“…that haply they may return to it.”***

It is true that by the word ‘idolatry’ we call in mind mostly the idols
made of stone and wood, but from another point of view, the words idol
and idolatry have a vast meaning which envelops every consideration to
anything besides Allah, in any form and state it may be. According to an
Islamic tradition,

***“Whatever makes man busy to itself, in a way that it makes him far
from Allah, it is his idol.”***

Finally, the idol worshippers entered the idol temple and encountered a
scene that they could not imagine it. Instead of a tidy idol temple,
they faced with an untidy scene, a heap of broken idols. They shouted
asking who had done that wrong to their idols and that whoever had done
it had certainly been one of the oppressors.

The holy verse says:

***“They said: ‘Who has done this with our gods? Surely he is (one) of
the unjust’.”***

By this saying they indicated that the person who had done that action,
in fact, had been unjust both to their gods, and to the society and to
their party, and to himself.

But, a group of people who had the threats of Abraham due to the idols
in mind, and knew this offensive behaviour of his to those artificial
objects of worship, declared their opinion as follows:

***“They said: ‘We heard a youth making mention of them, who is called
Abraham’.”***

According to some narrations, it happened at that time when Abraham was
completely young, and he was probably about sixteen years old.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 61 - 63
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا فَأْتُواْ بِهِ عَلَي أَعْيُنِ النَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْهَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا ءَأَنتَ فَعَلْتَ هَذَا بِاَلِهَتِنَا يَآ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَلْ فَعَلَهُ كَبِيرُهُمْ هَذَا فَسْاَلُوهُمْ إِن كَانُوا
يَنطِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “They said: ‘Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that
they may bear witness’.”***  
***62. “They said: ‘Are you the man that did this with our gods, O
Abraham?’”***  
***63. “(Abraham) said: ‘Nay, it was done by this, the chief of them!
Ask them if they can speak’.”***

Principally, it is usual that when a crime is committed, in order to
find the person who has committed it, the hostile connections with the
matter are investigated about. Certainly, there was no other person in
that locality but Abraham who was objecting to the idols.

Therefore, all attentions turned to him, and some groups of the
idolaters suggested, now that the circumstance was such, Abraham might
be brought in front of the people so that those who knew him and were
acquainted with the proposition could testify to his being criminal.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that they
may bear witness’.”***

The callers cried around the city that those who were aware of the
enmity and ill-speaking of Abraham due to idols should attend to bear
witness.

At last, the court started its job with the presence of the chiefs of
the people. It has also been said that Namrud himself was attending the
court.

The first question which was asked from Abraham was as follows:

***“They said: ‘Are you the man that did this with our gods, O
Abraham’?”***

Abraham answered them in such a way that they felt they were seriously
surrounded, so that they could not save themselves from it.

Here is Abraham’s response:

***“(Abraham) said: ‘Nay, it was done by this, the chief of them! Ask
them if they can speak’.”***

The principals of the job of the specialists of felony indicate that the
accused person is the one who has the effects of the crime with him.
Here, the ‘effects of the crime’ is with the chief idol.

Abraham wanted to say why they went to him, and why did they not accuse
the chief god of theirs? He inquired whether they did not think that the
chief idol probably had considered that other idols were as its future
rival and, therefore, had destroyed them totally.

Since this interpretation, from the view point of the commentators, did
apparently not adapt to the reality, and in view of the fact that
Abraham is a prophet and an immaculate person never tells a lie, there
have been stated different matters upon this Qur’anic sentence.

What seems the best of all is that Abraham (as) decisively attributed
this action to the great idol, but all references testified to the fact
that he did not intended to say it earnestly. He wanted to make the
baseless superstitious notions of the idol worshippers manifest to them.

He decided to make them understand that those soulless pieces of stone
and wood were so feeble that they could not say even a sentence in order
to ask help from their worshippers, much less they wanted them to solve
their problems.

In our daily sayings there are many instances similar to this meaning
when, in order to nullify the speech of the opposite party and to
condemn him, we put his indisputable affairs in front of him in the form
of an imperative, declarative, or interrogative sentence, and this is
not a lie at all. A lie is something that has not a frame of reference
with it.

There has been cited a tradition in the book of Kafi narrated from Imam
Sadiq (as) who said:

 *“He (Abraham) said this:*

***‘Nay, it was done by this, the chief of them’***

 *for he intended to improve their thoughts and to tell them the idols
could not do such an action.”*

Then the Imam added:

 *“By Allah, the idols had not done it nor did Abraham tell a
lie.”*[^15]

However, some commentators also think that probably Abraham (as) uttered
this subject in the form of a conditional sentence, implying that if the
idols can speak, they have done such an action. Certainly the meaning
was not contrary to the actuality, because neither did the idols speak,
nor had they done such a job.

There is also a tradition close to this very commentary cited in Burhan,
Safi, and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 64 - 65
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَجَعُوا إِلَي أَنفُسِهِمْ فَقَالُوا إِنَّكُمْ أَنتُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ نُكِسُوا عَلَي رُؤُوسِهِمْ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا هَؤُلآءِ
يَنطِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. “So they turned to themselves and said: ‘Verily, you yourselves
are the unjust’.”***  
***65. “Then they were made to hang down their heads, (saying:) ‘Very
well indeed you know these (idols) do not speak’.”***

Arousing the inner senses, self finding, returning to one’s self, and
heeding the natural disposition of people are among the main aims of the
divine prophets (as).

Therefore, the words of Abraham (as) moved the idol worshippers and
aroused their sleeping conscience. As a storm which takes the abundant
ash from over the flames of fire and makes its brightness clear, Abraham
made manifest their monotheistic nature from behind the curtains of
their bigotry and ignorance.

During a short and fleeting time, they awoke from that deep and
death-like sleep and returned to their conscience and nature and told
themselves that they were truly unjust to themselves. They were unjust
not only to themselves, but also to the society to which they belonged,
and also to the holy presence of Allah, the Bestower of the
blessings.[^16]

The verse says:

***“So they turned to themselves and said: ‘Verily, you yourselves are
the unjust’.”***

But, the amount of the rust of their ignorance, bigotry and blindly
imitation was more than that it could be completely wiped out and
burnished by the call of this Champion of Monotheism.

Alas! That holy spiritual awakening state did not last long, and there
appeared an opposition against this monotheistic light from the side of
the evil powers, and because of ignorance existed in their dark polluted
innate, everything returned to its first state.

What a beautiful and narrow sense the Qur’an has, where it says:

***“Then they were made to hang down their heads…”***

So, in order to bring an excuse for their deaf and dumb gods, they
announced:

***“…(saying:) ‘Very well indeed you know these (idols) do not
speak’.”***

They wanted to say that their idols are always silent and they never
break the dignity of silence.

The idol worshippers, in fact, wanted to hide the weakness, vileness and
abasement of the idols by this hollow excuse.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 66 - 68
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَفَتَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَالاَ يَنفَعُكُمْ شَيْئاً
وَلاَ يَضُرُّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُفٍّ لَّكُمْ وَلِمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَفَلاَ
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا حِرّ‌ِقُوهُ وَانصُرُوا ءَالِهَتَكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. “(Abraham) said: ‘Do you then worship, besides Allah, that which
profits you nothing, neither hurts you?”***  
***67. “Fie on you and on what you worship besides Allah! Have you then
no sense?”***  
***68. “They said: ‘If you would do aught, burn him, and help your
gods’.”***

The godly men generally always pursue their holy aims in whatever
condition they may be, and they do not stop even for a while, although
their struggles may seem to be fulfilled in different shapes.

Along the way of his messengership, at first, Abraham (as) goes toward
his own uncle and relatives and invites them unto monotheism and Unity,
but when he does not gain any positive result, for the second stage, he
hastens to the idols and breaks them all.

After that, addressing their innate disposition, he tries to awaken
them, and, finally, next to his advice and reprimand, he makes them
contemplate.

He attacks them using his most violent words, and puts their minds under
the frequent logical awakening blames, as the verse says:

***“(Abraham) said: ‘Do you then worship, besides Allah, that which
profits you nothing, neither hurts you?”***

Again, this teacher of monotheism goes on his own speech further than
that, and by striking the whips of scorn upon their painless souls, he
said to them:

***“Fie on you and on what you worship besides Allah! Have you then no
sense?”***

However, in blaming and scorning them, Abraham did not leave clemency,
lest they would become more obstinate.

Thus, by the practical and logical reasoning of Abraham, all of the idol
worshippers were condemned, but their intense obstinacy and bigotry
hindered them to accept the Truth, and that was why they made a very
harsh and dangerous decision about Abraham (as).

As for the reaction of the crowd, the Qur’an says:

***“They said: ‘If you would do aught, burn him, and help your
gods’.”***

Similar to that, they said many vain things about Abraham, and they
incited people to revolt against him in a way that, instead of a few
loads of wood which could be sufficient to burn several persons, the
inhabitants piled thousands of loads of wood over there which made a
mountainous heap of wood, and, consequently, an ocean of fire was
provided.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 69 - 70
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا يَانَارُ كُونِي بَرْداً وَسَلاَماً عَلَي إِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرَادُوا بِهِ كَيْداً فَجَعَلْنَاهُمُ الاَخْسَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “We said: ‘O fire! Be you cold and safety for Abraham!’”***  
***70. “And they intended a device against him, but We made them the
worse losers.”***

The men of Allah are so steadfast in their divine aims that they are
ready to devote their souls. Burning alive a person is the most terrible
kind of slaughter.

There are many matters cited in commentaries about the event of throwing
of Abraham (as) into fire, among which is that: the polytheists, with
the help and guidance of Satan, made a mangonel.

Abraham, with his matchless trust to Allah, did not ask any help from
any of the angels, even from Gabriel, and, at that time, he was busy
praying to Allah in solitude and supplicating to Muhammad (S) and his
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).

At last, with cries of exultation of people and while they were shouting
applauding, Abraham was thrown into the horrible flames of the prepared
fire by means of a mangonel. They were shouting so happily that as if
the breaker of the idols was destroyed for ever and turned to ash.

But Allah, Whose command is obeyed by everything, and Who had even
taught the quality of burning to fire, and Who had taught the secret of
love to mothers, decided to keep safe this sincere believing servant in
the ocean of fire, and to add another proof to the evidences of his
honour, as the Qur’an here says:

***“We said: ‘O fire! Be you cold and safety for Abraham!’”***

Undoubtedly, the command of Allah (s.w.t.) was a genetic command, the
same command that, in the world of existence, He issues for the sun, the
moon, the earth, the heaven, the water, the fire, the plants, the birds
and everything, and without that command no effect comes forth from any
cause.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

 *“When Allah commanded the fire, saying:*

***‘Be you cold…’,***

 *because of the extreme cold (in the midst of Namrud’s fire), the teeth
of Abraham were shivering and hitting against each other, until the time
it was told:*

***‘… and safety’***

 *when its coldness disappeared and caused safety for him.”*[^17]

Then, to draw a conclusion, the Holy Qur’an, in a short sentence,
concisely implies that the polytheists had decided to annihilate Abraham
(as) by this evil plan, but Allah made them the worse losers of people.

The verse says:

***“And they intended a device against him, but We made them the worse
losers.”***

It is evident that by remaining Abraham safe in the middle of that fire,
the scene changed entirely, the cries of joy fell down, and the mouths
were wide open out of surprise, but still bigotry and obstinacy hindered
them to accept the truth perfectly, although the alert hearts (minds)
got their interest from this event and their faith unto the Lord of
Abraham was increased.

However, the Arabic word /’axsarin/ has been applied in the Qur’an for
those who do an indecent action while they think that their action is
good, and therefore, they usually do not comprehend their loss to try to
compensate it.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 71
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَلُوطاً إِلَي الاَرْضِ الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا
لِلْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And we delivered him, and Lot, unto the land which We have
blessed for (all) peoples.”***

The enemy wanted to destroy Abraham (as):

***“…they intended a device against him”***[^18]***,***

but Allah not only saved him but also endowed on him a blessed
generation and made also all of them from among the righteous and
eligible ones:

***“…and We made them all righteous.”***[^19]

The event of burning Abraham alive in the fire and the miraculous safety
of his life from this dangerous stage caused the chiefs of the
government of Namrud tremble.

They thought if he, in that state, remained in that city and in that
country, with that eloquent language, that powerful logic, and his
matchless manliness, certainly he was a source of danger for that
tyrannical egoistic government.

On the other hand, Abraham, in fact, had done his mission in that region
and had sown the seed of faith and awareness in that land.

He ought to migrate into another part of the land and declare his call
there. Therefore, he decided to migrate from that country towards Sham
(Syria) accompanied with Lut, (his brother’s son), Sarah (his wife), and
probably with a small group of the believers.

Thus, the Qur’an says:

***“And we delivered him, and Lot, unto the land which We have blessed
for (all) peoples.”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 72
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً وَكُلاًّ جَعَلْنَا
صَالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob as a further gift, and We
made them all righteous.”***

This holy verse points to one of the most important merits that Allah
had endowed upon Abraham (as). He (as) was having got not only a
righteous child but also a fruitful and worthy generation.

The Qur’an says:

***“And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob as a further gift…”***

Then the holy verse adds that Allah made all of them some righteous,
worthy, and useful men.

The verse says:

***“…and We made them all righteous.”***

In this verse, the name of Isaac (as) was mentioned while the name of
Ishmael (as), who was the first child of Abraham (as), was not referred
to. It is, perhaps, for the attracting of the attentions to the
extraordinary and wonderful birth of Isaac who, by the will of Allah,
was born of a barren mother, i.e., Sarah, in her old age.

By the way, a child is a gift of Allah, but what is more important than
a child is his being righteous.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 73
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَآ
إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَآءَ
الزَّكَاةِ وَكَانُوا لَنَا عَابِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “And We made them leaders guiding (the people) by Our command,
and We revealed to them the doing of good deeds, and the establishing
prayer, and the giving of alms, and they were worshippers of Us
(alone).”***

This verse in a general sense refers to the rank of Imamate and
Leadership of these great prophets as well as a part of their important
and valuable programs.

Here, on the whole, six specialties of these qualities are mentioned, to
which if we add the specialty of being righteous, which was referred to
in the previous verse, they will totally be seven specialties.

At first, it says:

***“And We made them leaders…”***

This means that, in addition to the rank of prophethood and
messengership, Allah gave them the rank of Imamate, too. As it was also
mentioned before, divine Imamate is the last stage of development course
of man which means the absolute leadership of people; whether: material
and spiritual, exoteric and esoteric, physical and mental.

The difference of prophethood and messengership with Imamate lies in
this fact that the divine prophets in the rank of prophethood and
messengership only receive the command of Allah and inform people of it
in order to convey it to them, and this communication is often
accompanied with glad tidings and warning.

While in the stage of Imamate, they put these divine programs into
action, whether it is done by formation of just government or without
it. In this stage they are trainees and they carry the Divine ordinances
and programs into effect, and they foster men so that they provide a
clean environment for them.

In fact, the rank of Imamate is the rank of proving all the Divine
programs to true. In other words, it is the remittance of the quest as
well as both the religious guidance and Divine guidance.

From this point of view, it is just like the sun which fosters the
living creatures by its rays.

Then, next to that stage, the Qur’an reiterates the actuality and
consequence of this rank.

It continues saying:

***“…guiding (the people) by Our command…”***

This guidance is not only in the sense of leading and showing the way,
which exist in the rank of prophethood and messengership, but also in
the sense of succour and gaining the aim (for those who are receptive
and have competency, of courser).

There can be drawn a conclusion from the last part of the verse that
Imam (the immaculate absolute leader of people) must be appointed from
the side of Allah, because, firstly, Imamate is a kind of Divine
covenant, and it is evident that such a person should be assigned by
Allah Who is a side of the covenant.

Secondly: those who have somehow been unjust, and there is a dark point
of injustice in their life, irrespective of injustice to themselves or
injustice to others, or being idol worshipers even for a while, are not
eligible for the rank of Imamate. In other words, Imam should have been
Immaculate in his whole lifetime.

Can any one, save Allah, be aware of the existence of such an epithet in
a person?

So, if we intend to choose the successor of the Prophet (S) through this
criterion there can be none but Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (as).

It is interesting that the writer of Al-Manar narrates from Abi-Hanifah
that he believed that caliphate was exclusively eligible to Alawites,
and for that reason he thought rebellion against the contemporary
government of that time, (Mansur-i-Abbasi), was permissible, therefore,
he did not agree to accept the job of judgment in the government of
Abbasides.

Then, the writer of Al-Manar adds that the four leaders of the Sunnites
were totally antagonist to the governments of their times and did not
assume them as eligible for leadership of the Muslims since they were
some unjust cruel men.[^20]

But it is wonderful that a great deal of our contemporary Sunnite
scholars approve and support some unjust tyrannical governments whose
communication with the enemies of Islam is certain and decisive, and
whose injustice and mischief is not concealed to anyone, and they easily
consider them as ‘the people in authority’ and ‘those to be obeyed’.

### Explanations

1. Similar to prophethood, Imamate should be assigned by Allah. The
Qur’an says:

***“And We made them leaders…”***

2. If Imamate is gained by force and injustice, it is an invitation to
Hell. The Qur’an says:

***“…leaders (who) call to the fire…”***[^21]

But when Imamate is given by Allah, it is blessed and it is in the path
of the Truth.

3. The guidance of prophets is neither from their own accord nor is it
by their own personal tastes, but it is guidance by Allah’s command:

***“…guiding (the people) by Our Command…”***

4. Ritual prayers and almsgiving (zakat) are two basic principles in all
religions, since without prayer and Zakat none reaches the rank of
servitude.

The verse says:

***“…and We revealed to them the doing of good deeds, and the
establishing prayer, and the giving of alms, and they were worshippers
of Us (alone).”***

5. One can comprehend from this verse that religion is not separate from
government.

***“And We made them leaders, guiding (people) by Our Command…”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 74 - 75
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلُوطاً ءَاتَيْنَاهُ حُكْماً وَعِلْماً وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ
الْقَرْيَةِ الَّتِي كَانَتْ تَعْمَلُ الْخَبَآئِثَ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا
قَوْمَ سَوْءٍ فَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَدْخَلْنَاهُ فِي رَحْمَتِنَآ إِنَّهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “And Lot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We delivered him
from the town which were doing abominations. Verily they were evil
people, perverse,”***  
***75. “And We admitted him into Our mercy; verily he was of the
righteous.”***

In view of the fact that Lut was one of the close relatives of Abraham
and was among the first persons who believed in him, next to the story
of Abraham (as), the Qur’an refers to a part of the efforts and
endeavours of Lut (as) in the way of conveying his prophethood and
Allah’s favours unto him.

The verse says:

***“And Lot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge…”***

Hadrat Lut was a great prophet who was contemporary with Abraham and
who, accompanying him, migrated from Babylon to Palestine, and later, he
separated from Abraham and went to Sodom, a city.

The people of this region were completely polluted with vice and sin,
especially with sexual deviations and pollutions. He did his best and
struggled very much to guide this aberrant group, but it affected the
least on those blind-hearted people.

At last, the intensive Wrath and Punishment of Allah, seized them all,
except Lut’s family, with the exception of his wife, and destroyed them
utterly.

Therefore, in the continuation of the holy verse, the Qur’an points to
this favour which Allah bestowed on Lut when it says:

***“…and We delivered him from the town which were doing
abominations.…”***

The reason of the punishment of those people is mentioned as that they
were some bad people and had gone out of the circle of the obedience of
Allah’s command.

It continues saying:

***“…Verily they were evil people, perverse,”***

Then the Qur’an refers to the last Divine favour from this group of
favours which were given to Lut, by saying:

***“And We admitted him into Our mercy; verily he was of the
righteous.”***

Thus, in this holy verse, four important favours of Allah, which were
endowed on Lut (as), are pointed out. They are: wisdom, knowledge,
deliverance and admitting him into Allah’s mercy.

[^1]: For a further explanation about Abraham’s father, see Surah
Maryam. No. 19, verse 42

[^2]: Bihar, vol. 68, p. 269

[^3]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1, p. 461, and vol. 4, p. 228

[^4]: Wasa’il, vol. 18, p. 567

[^5]: Khisal, vol. 2, p. 264

[^6]: Surah ’Ibrahim, No. 14, verse 18

[^7]: Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 184

[^8]: Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 1, p.331

[^9]: Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 35

[^10]: Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 186

[^11]: carrent Surah, verse 54

[^12]: Sahih-i-Muslim, vol. 3, p. 1670

[^13]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 560

[^14]: Ibid, p. 563, and Mustadrak, vol. 9, p. 318

[^15]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn and Burhan, following of the verse

[^16]: Some commentators have also probabled that the objective meaning
of the sentence “So they turned to themselves” is that, as for this
saying, they returned one another and blamed themselves.

[^17]: Kafi, vol. 8, p. 318

[^18]: Verse 70 of the current Surah

[^19]: Verse 72 of the current Surah

[^20]: Al-Manar, vol. 1, pp. 457-458

[^21]: Surah Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 41


