Section 7: The Righteous Shall Inherit the Earth
================================================

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 92 - 94
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَذِهِ اُمَّتُكُمْ اُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَأَنَاْ رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَقَطَّعُوا أَمْرَهُم بَيْنَهُمْ كُلٌّ إِلَيْنَا رَاجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِنَ الصَّالِحَاتِ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَلاَ كُفْرَانَ
لِسَعْيِهِ وَإِنَّا لَهُ كَاتِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “Verily, this Ummah of yours is a single Ummah, and I am your
Lord: so worship Me.”***  
***93. “And they split up their affair among them, (yet, finally,) will
they all return unto Us.”***  
***94. “Therefore, whoever does deeds of righteousness and he is a
believer, there shall not be any rejection of his effort, and verily We
will write (it) down for him.”***

The whole Divine religions have the same aim and lead to the same
destination, and Monotheism and unity of the word are the basis of them.

Those who always cause separation among people must prepare themselves
to respond before the throne of Allah.

However, in view of the fact that the names of some divine prophets, as
well as the name of Mary, the prototype woman, and a part of their
biographies were mentioned in the former verses, in the verses under
discussion, as drawing a general conclusion, it says:

***“Verily, this Ummah of yours is a single Ummah…”***

This holy verse implies that those great prophets, whom were mentioned
formerly, were totally a single Ummah.

Their programs were the same and their final aim and destination were
also the same, though they were in different periods and in separate
environments, and their styles and manner of invitations, having some
particular specialties, were various.

In the ultimate point, all of them were paving their way alongside one
line. They all used to invite the people of the world to the way of
monotheism and struggle against polytheism. They were wholly on the path
of Unity, divine truth and justice.

This oneness and unity, which was in their programs and their aims, was
for the sake that all of them were originated from one source, from the
Will of Allah, the One.

Therefore, the Lord, immediately after that, says:

***“…and I am your Lord: so worship Me.”***

In fact, the prophets’ monotheism in ideology and deeds originates from
the Oneness of the source of revelation.

This statement is similar to the words of Hadrat Ali (as) recorded in
his testament to his son, Imam Mujtaba (as), who said:

*“…know, O’ my child, that if there had been a partner with your Lord,
his messenger, too, should have come to you and you would have seen
signs of his authority and power and you should have known his deeds and
qualities.…”*[^1]

The Arabic word /ummah/, according to Mufradat by Raqib, means any group
or nation that a common cause joins them to each other, such as being
common in religion and creed, being in the same time or Age, and being
in one definite place, whether this unity is optional or non-optional.

Some commentators have considered the phrase: ‘single Ummah’, mentioned
here, as ‘a single religion’.

Some others have said that the objective meaning of ‘Ummah’, in this
verse, is the whole mankind in all ages and times.

In this case, it means: O’ human beings! All of you are one Ummah, your
Lord is One, and the final destination of all of you is a single
destination. But the most appropriate meaning of all of them is that:
this sentence is a hint to the prophets and messengers whose biographies
were mentioned in the former verses.

Then, in the next holy verse, the Qur’an, pointing to the deviation of a
large group of people from this single principle of Monotheism, says:

***“And they split up their affair among them…”***

Their affair reached a point that they stood against each other and
every group used to curse another group, and repudiated that party. They
did not suffice to that and they made use of weapon against each other
and, consequently, many people were killed. And, that was the result of
the deviation from the basic principle of monotheism and the religion of
the truth.

The Arabic phrase /taqatta‘u/ is derived from the word /qat‘/ which
means to separate some pieces of an inter-chained and connected subject;
and regarding to the fact that the word in Arabic is in a construction
that has been applied in the sense of acceptance, the sentence means:
they surrendered in the fact of disunion and hypocrisy, and they
accepted separation and alienation from each other.

They put an end to their natural and theistic union and, as a result of
it, they encountered those abundant failures, miseries, and
wretchedness.

So, at the end of the holy verse, it adds:

***“…(yet, finally,) will they all return unto Us.”***

This separation, which is not substantial, will be removed and they all
will go toward unity again in the Hereafter. This fact has repeatedly
been emphasized in different verses of the Qur’an that one of the
specialties of the Resurrection is the absence of dissension and being
gathered in unity.

Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 48 says:

***“…unto Allah is the return of you all, and then He shall inform you
of that in which you used to differ.”***

This meaning is found in a lot of verses of the Holy Qur’an.[^2]

In the last verse of the verses under discussion, the result of
accompanying with the ‘single Ummah’ alongside the path of worshipping
Allah, or deviation from it and paving the way of disunion, is said as
follows:

***“Therefore, whoever does deeds of righteousness and he is a believer,
there shall not be any rejection of his effort…”***

Then, in order to emphasize more on the matter, the Holy Qur’an adds:

***“…and verily We will write (it) down for him.”***

It is worthy noting that in this verse, like many other verses of the
Qur’an, Faith and righteous deeds have been mentioned as two essential
principles for the prosperity of human beings; but by adding the Arabic
preposition /min/ (of), which is used in Arabic for distinction, the
verse adds this matter to it indicating that the accomplishment of all
these righteous deeds is not the necessary condition, and if the
believing individuals do even a part of the righteous deeds they will
also be among the prosperous people while the degrees of persons are
different.

In any rate, this verse, similar to many verses of the Qur’an, considers
Faith as the condition of the acceptance of the righteous deeds.

The statement of the sentence:

***“…there shall not be any rejection of his effort…”***

is for the sake of mentioning the reward of such persons and it is a
sense which is mingled with the utmost grace, love, and magnanimity,
because Allah, in this verse, thanks and praises His servants when He
approves their effort and endeavour.

This meaning is also similar to what is said in Surah ’Isra’, No. 17,
verse 19 where it says:

***“And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it as he ought to
strive, and he is a believer, (as for) these, their striving shall be
thanked.”***

The promise of reward, recompense, and wage has been pointed out in the
Qur’an by different forms of meaning.

Once it says:

***“…and We do not waste the reward of the righteous.”***[^3]

In another occurrence it says:

***“…(as for) these their striving shall be thanked.”***[^4]

And also the Qur’an says that Allah is thankful:

***“…then verily Allah is Grateful, All-knowing.”***[^5]

Somewhere else, it says:

***“…He will not diminish aught of your deeds;…”***[^6]

And, therefore, if you do a small amount of good you will see it.

The Qur’an says:

***“So whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall behold
it.”***[^7]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 95 - 97
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَرَامٌ عَلَي قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهآ أَنَّهُمْ لاَ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّي إِذَا فُتِحَتْ يَأْجُوجُ وَمَأْجُوجُ وَهُم مِن كُلّ‌ِ حَدَبٍ
يَنسِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاقْتَرَبَ الْوَعْدُ الْحَقُّ فَإِذا هِيَ شَاخِصَةٌ أَبْصَارُ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يَاوَيْلَنَا قَدْ كُنَّا فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَذَا
بَلْ كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. “And there is a ban upon (the people of) the towns which We
destroyed: that they shall not return.”***  
***96. “Until, when Gog and Magog are let through (the way), and they
hasten forth from every elevation.”***  
***97. “And the true promise has drawn nigh; then behold, staring wide
(in terror), the eyes of those who disbelieve! (They say:) ‘Alas for us!
We were heedless of this (Day); nay; we were unjust ones’.”***

In the explanation of the former verses, the words were about the
righteous believers. Now, here, in the first holy verse mentioned in the
above, the Qur’an points to those persons who are in the opposite side,
those who go on their aberration and do mischief until the last moment
of their life.

The first verse of this group of verses says:

***“And there is a ban upon (the people of) the towns which We destroyed
that they shall not return.”***

In fact, they are those who desire to come back to this world again to
compensate their whole faults after that they have actually observed the
Divine punishment, or after their destruction and going into the
purgatory world, where the curtains of pride and negligence go aside
from before their eyes.

But the Holy Qur’an explicitly announces that their return to this life
again is absolutely forbidden, and there is no way or chance for them to
make amends.

This meaning is just like that which we read in Surah Al-Mu’minun, No.
23, verse 99, which indicates that this situation of theirs continues
until when their death comes and they ask Allah to return them back to
the world in order that they do those righteous deeds that they had
neglected to do; but they receive naught save a negative answer.

The verse says:

***“Until, when death comes unto one of them, he says: ‘My Lord! send me
back again.”***

However, these unaware people are always in pride and negligence, and
the continuation of this misfortune will last until the end of the
world, as the Qur’an says:

***“Until, when Gog and Magog are let through (the way), and they hasten
forth from every elevation.”***

There have been mentioned some discussions in Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18,
from verse 94 on about Gog and Magog, saying who and from what tribe
they were, where they were living, and, finally, what they are doing and
what they will do.

There have also been discussed in details there about the barrier which
Zul-Qarnayn built in a narrow valley in order to prevent their
influence.

Is the purpose of the phrase ‘these two tribes being let through (the
way)’ as ‘their barrier to be broken, and their influence into other
lands of the world thereby’? Or that the objective meaning is their
influence, in general, throughout the world and from every side?

The abovementioned holy verse has not explicitly stated anything
regarding this matter. It only contains a hint to their spread
scattering them in the globe as a sign of the end of the world and a
preliminary event for the Resurrection and Hereafter.

However, the Late author of the Commentary of Atyab-ul-Bayan[^8] cites
as follows:

*“This verse is one of the evidences of ‘return to life’, which is
necessary in Shi‘ism, and some widely transmitted narrations testify
it.*

*Some Islamic traditions indicate that those who return to life of this
world during the course of the second coming will be those believers who
had been steadfast in their faith, and also those who had been steadfast
in disbelief but had not been annihilated by the worldly chastisement.*

*This matter is for the reason that the believers benefit from Divine
bounties at the presence of the immaculate Imams (as), and the
disbelievers may be chastised by the worldly chastisements.”*

*“In other words, this holy verse implies that those absolute
disbelievers who will ‘return to life’ in the course of ‘the second
coming’ are the disbelievers who were not annihilated by means of the
Divine punishment but passed away by the natural death.*

*Thus those disbelievers who were annihilated by means of the Divine
punishment, like the peoples of Noah, Hud, Salih, Lut, Shu‘ayb,
Pharaohs, and the like, will not return during the course of ‘the second
coming’, because they had tasted the worldly chastisement. They will
have their resurrection only on the Hereafter Day in order to be given
the punishment of that world.”*[^9]

Then, in the next verse, the Qur’an immediately says:

***“And the true promise has drawn nigh;…”***

The disbelievers will be involve in such a horror that their eyes stop
moving and will be gazing that scene.

The verse continues saying:

***“…then behold, staring wide (in terror), the eyes of those who
disbelieve!…”***

At this time, the curtains of pride and negligence will go aside from
before their eyes, and they will cry:

***“…(They say:) ‘Alas for us! We were heedless of this (Day);…”***

And, since they cannot cover their sin with any pretext and acquit
themselves, they will explicitly say:

***“…nay; we were unjust ones.”***

In principle, how may it be possible that with the existence of these
numerous Divine prophets and the heavenly Books they remain in
negligence while there have been many shaking events for them and the
life in this world has taught them different lessons as warnings?
Whatever they have done is fault and injustice to them as well as to
others.

The Qur’anic word /hadab/ means: the elevations which are surrounded by
some low lands. It is also sometimes called to the outgrowth of the
man’s back.

The Arabic term /yansilun/ is derived from /nusul/ which is applied in
the sense of ‘going out swiftly’.

The Qur’anic sentence concerning Gog and Magog which says:

***“…They hasten forth from every elevation”***

refers to their extraordinary influence all over the earth.

The term /šaxisah/ is derived from /šuxus/ which originally means ‘going
out from home’ or ‘going out from a city toward another city’.

And, since at the time of surprise and gazing the man’s eyes are in a
state as if they are coming out from the pupil, this status is also
called /šuxus/. This is the status that the sinners will have in the
Hereafter. They will be gazing so much that as if their eyes are about
to come out from the pupil of the eyes.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 98 - 100
-----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دوُنِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ أَنتُمْ
لَهَا وَارِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كَانَ هَؤُلآءِ ءَالِهَةً مَّا وَرَدُوهَا وَكُلٌّ فِيهَا
خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ فِيهَا زَفِيرٌ وَهُمْ فِيهَا لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. “Verily you and what you worship besides Allah shall be the fuel
of Hell; you shall go down to it.”***  
***99. “If these had been (real) gods, they would not have gone down
thither, but all will abide therein.”***  
***100. “There shall be sighing for them therein, and they therein shall
not hear (any answer).”***

Following the discussions of the former verses which were about the fate
of the oppressive disbelievers, here the Qur’an, addressing them,
illustrates their future destiny and their gods as follows:

***“Verily you and what you worship besides Allah shall be the fuel of
Hell;…”***

You yourselves and your artificial gods are the fuel of Hell and the
material that forms its flames, and you will be thrown into Hell like
some worthless pieces of wood.

Then, the verse adds:

***“…you shall go down to it.”***

At first, the false gods will be thrown into the Fire, and then the
polytheists, who used to worship them, will enter to them. It seems that
their false gods entertain them by the fire which raises from their
entity.

If this question arises inquiring what is the philosophy of throwing the
idols into the Hell Fire, the answer of it can be this that when the
idol-worshippers see that they are burning in the fire that comes from
their idols, this circumstance is a kind of punishment for them.
Besides, it can be also a humiliation for their thoughts that they used
to refuge to such worthless beings.

In other words, the advantage of the fact that Allah has put the idol
worshippers with their idols and has mentioned them with together is
that the opposite case of their expectation has occurred here, because
they had imagined that their false gods might intercede for them before
the Lord but now, with the chastisement that Allah has assigned for
them, the conditions are contrary to it.

Therefore, there will be nothing worse than these false gods for the
idol worshippers then.

Question: This verse indicates both the idol worshippers and their idols
shall be the fuel of Hell. Are some persons, such as Hadrat Messiah
(as), who have been objects of worship, also counted in this formula, or
are they exceptions?

Answer: These objects of worship have been counted as exceptions, for:
firstly, the Qur’an has referred to the deities as some irrational
beings where it uses ‘what’ in the phrase which says: ‘what you
worship’. Hence, the holy Messenger of Allah (S) in answer to the
abovementioned question said:

*“The Arab’s custom is that they use the word ‘what’ for irrational
beings and (the phrase) ‘what you worship’ means the idols made of stone
and wood.”*[^10]

Secondly: The addressees of this holy verse were the idol worshippers of
Mecca who used to worship idols made of stone, wood, and so on. Thirdly:
in some verses of this very holy Surah, which will orderly be commented
later, this fact has been stipulated that those ones whom have been
promised good by Allah (such as Hadrat Messiah (as)) are aloof from
Hell.

Then, in the next verses, as a general conclusion, the Holy Qur’an
concerning the idols announces as follows:

***“If these had been (real) gods, they would not have gone down
thither…”***

But beware that the idol worshippers not only will enter the Hell but
also will remain in it forever. The holy verse continues saying:

***“…but all will abide therein.”***

For further explanation about the painful situation of these ‘misguided
worshippers’ who used to serve those worthless objects of worship, the
Qur’an says:

***“There shall be sighing for them therein…”***

These sighs and sad moans may not be only related to those worshippers,
but the Satans, whom were their objects of worship, also accompany them
in this deed.

The next sentence refers to one of other painful punishments, they will
have in Hell, where it says:

***“…and they therein shall not hear (any answer).”***

This sentence may point to this matter that they will not absolutely
hear anything which causes them to become happy. They will be only the
hearer of the wearing moans and the call of the angels of chastisement.

Some commentators have said that the purpose of it is that they will
hear no voice of anyone at all, as if they are alone in punishment,
which itself is the source of further chastisement upon them.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 101
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ سَبَقَتْ لَهُم مِنَّا الْحُسْنَي اُوْلَئِكَ عَنْهَا
مُبْعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***101. “Verily those for whom the good (promise) has already gone forth
from Us, they will be kept far off from it (Hell).”***

This holy verse reiterates the qualities of the true believers, as well
as the believing men and women in order to compare them with each other
and specify the situation of both of them.

At first, it says:

***“Verily those for whom the good (promise) has already gone forth from
Us, they will be kept far off from it (Hell).”***

This meaning refers to the fact that Allah will fulfill all of the
promises that He has promised the true believers in the life of this
world, one of which is keeping them far off the Fire of the Hell.

In Tafsir-ul-Burhan, according to some narrations, there have been
recorded a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“The objective of the word /husna/, mentioned in the above verse, is
Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) and Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) and the followers of
him.”*[^11]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 102
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ حَسِيسَهَا وَهُمْ فِي مَا اشْتَهَتْ أَنفُسُهُمْ
خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***102. “They will hear the slightest sound of it, and they, in what
their souls desire, shall abide.”***

However in welfare a man may be in this world, desired or undesired, he
may hear some unwholesome information and bitter news which decrease his
pleasure and happiness. But in Hereafter, the people of Paradise will be
far off of any bad news, coarse noises and the moans of those who are
badly situated. They will be busy enjoying of full pleasure.

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

*“…He has honoured their ears (the people of Paradise) so that the sound
of Hell Fire may never reach them (nor the moans of the people of
Hell)…”*[^12]

The Arabic word /hasis/ is used in the sense of a particular and
sensible sound (from Fire).

However, this holy verse points to a couple of great Divine bounties
bestowed on this prosperous group.

The first of them is that:

***“They will hear the slightest sound of it…”***

Since the true believers are far from Hell, they will never hear the
horrible sounds of it. The next divine bounty is that: whatever they
desire and wish to obtain they will enjoy of them eternally.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and they, in what their souls desire, shall abide.”***

That is, in that world, there is not any limitation of the kind of this
world for them. They can have any sort of material and spiritual
bounties they desire without any exception. They are available for them
not only for one or two days, but also for their eternal life.

In conclusion, there are different verses in the Qur’an concerning the
quality and quantity of the divine blessings of Paradise.

In one verse, it says:

***“…and therein shall be what their souls yearn after and (wherein) the
eyes shall delight…”***[^13]

Here, in the current verse, it says:

***“…and they, in what their souls desire, shall abide.”***

And somewhere else, the Qur’an describes it like this:

***“So no soul knows what is hidden for them…”***[^14]

A tradition narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) denotes that
neither has any ear heard nor has any eye witnessed the quality of the
bounties of Paradise.[^15]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 103
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَحْزُنُهُمُ الْفَزَعُ الاَكْبَرُ وَتَتَلَقَّاهُمُ الْمَلآَئِكَةُ
هَذَا يَوْمُكُمُ الَّذِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “The Great Terror (of that Day) shall not grieve them, and the
angels shall receive them (saying): ‘This is your day, which you were
promised’.”***

Basing on some Islamic traditions, the addressees of this verse are
those who, besides having correct notions, run along the path of the
leaders who have been appointed by Allah and His Messenger. The Qur’anic
phrase /faza‘-i-’akbar/ means ‘a Great terror’ which refers to the
horrors of the Day of Hereafter.[^16]

Hence, this verse says:

***“The Great Terror (of that Day) shall not grieve them…”***

Some commentators have considered the meaning of the phrase ‘the Great
Terror’, mentioned in this holy verse, as a hint to the horrors of the
Hereafter Day, which is greater than any horror.

Finally, the last grace of Allah, relating to those whom have been
referred to in the abovementioned verses, is that the angels of grace
will haste to receive them and will say to them congratulation and good
tidings.

The verse says:

***“…and the angels shall receive them (saying): ‘This is your day,
which you were promised’.”***

In Nahjul-Balaqah we read that Ali (as) said:

*“…you should therefore be quick in performance of (good) acts so that
your way be with His neighbours in His abode, where He has set His
messengers their friends, and made the angels to visit them. He has
honoured their ears so that the sound of Hell Fire may never reach
them.”*[^17]

By the way, there have been recorded some narrations from the holy
Prophet (S) and Imam Sadiq (as) in Tafsir-ul-Burhan and Safi under this
verse indicating that this verse is about the rank of the holy Prophet
(S), Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) and the followers of
him.

There are also some narrations recorded in the book of ’Amali and
Bisharat-ush-Shi‘ah, with the same content.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 104
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَطْوِي السَّمآءَ كَطَيّ‌ِ السّـِجِلّ‌ِ لِلْكُتُبِ كَمَا
بَدَأْنَآ أَوَّلَ خَلْقٍ نُعِيدُهُ وَعْداً عَلَيْنَآ إِنَّا كُنَّا
فَاعِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***104. “The Day when We will roll up the heaven as the rolling up of
the scroll for writing; as We originated the first creation, (so) We
shall get it return. (This is) a promise binding on Us; (and) surely We
are to perform it.”***

We understood in the previous verse that the true believers will not be
grievous because of the ‘Great terror’. This verse describes ‘that Day
of terror’, and in fact, it illustrates the cause of that horror.

Concerning the time of its occurrence, it says:

***“The Day when We will roll up the heaven as the rolling up of the
scroll for writing;…”***

There is a delicate simile in this verse about the destruction and
rolling up of the scroll of the world of existence at the end of the
world. At the present time, this scroll has been opened and all its
designs and lines can be read and each of them has been settled in a
proper place.

But when the command of Resurrection comes, this scroll, with all its
lines and designs, will be rolled up. Then the verse adds implying that
there is no problem and hardship for the Great Power of Allah to return
it and He will do it in the same way that He originated it at the
beginning.

The verse says:

***“…as We originated the first creation, (so) We shall get it
return.…”***

Then, at the end of the verse, Allah says:

***“…(This is) a promise binding on Us; (and) surely We are to perform
it.”***

However, some of the authentic Islamic narrations indicate that the
objective meaning of ‘return’, in this verse, is the return of creation
in its first form so that human beings will return to life, barefooted
and naked, in the same shape that they were at the beginning of their
creation; and this is one of the features of the return of creation in
its initiating form.

Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Man will be raised bare in Resurrection”; and then he (as) recited
this verse, which says:*

***“…as We originated the first creation, (so) We shall get it
return.”***[^18]

The Arabic word /sijill/ originally was applied for a piece of stone on
which something was written; but later gradually it has been used for
the sheets of paper on which some materials are written.

The sign of the appearance of Resurrection with the initial creation of
the world has repeatedly referred to in the Holy Qur’an.

Once it says:

***“…As He brought you forth in the beginning so shall you also
return.”***[^19]

In another verse it says:

***“And He it is Who originates the creation, then reproduces it, and it
is easier to him;…”***[^20]

The objective of ‘the heaven’, mentioned in this verse, is all the
heavens, because in another occurrence the Qur’an has said:

***“…and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand;…”***[^21]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 105
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذّ‌ِكْرِ أَنَّ الاَرْضَ
يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***105. “And We have written in the Psalms (Zabur), after the Reminder
(the Torah), ‘My righteous servants shall inherit the earth’.”***

The Qur’anic word /zabur/ in the Arabic language means: ‘any writing and
book’.

The noble Qur’an says:

***“And everything they have done is in the writings”***[^22]***,***

but by the frame of reference of the verse which says:

***“…and to David We gave ‘Zabur’”***[^23]

it seems that the objective is the Book specialized to David (as), which
contains the whole supplications, prayers, and advices of that prophet.
This Book was sent down after the Torah; and the purpose of the holy
word /ŏikr/ (reminder), mentioned in the verse, is also the very Torah.

Its reference is the content of verse No. 48 of the current Surah which
indicates that the Torah is /ŏikr/ (reminder) where it says:

***“And indeed We gave Moses and Aaron the Furqan (criterion) and a
Light and a Reminder for the pious ones.”***

Some Islamic commentators have said that the purpose of mentioning
/zabur/ in this verse is all the Divine Books and the objective of
/ŏikr/ is the Holy Qur’an, and the phrase /min ba‘d/ also means ‘in
addition to’; then, in this case, the verse means: ‘in addition to the
Qur’an, We have written in all the heavenly Books that verily the
inheritors of the earth will be My righteous servants’.

Therefore, in this verse, the Qur’an refers to one of the most clear
worldly rewards of the righteous servants, which is the possession of
‘the government of the earth’. The Qur’an has pointed to it, with a nice
statement, where it says:

***“And We have written in the Psalms (Zabur), after the Reminder (the
Torah), ‘My righteous servants shall inherit the earth’.”***

The Arabic word /’ard/ is called to the whole globe of the earth which
envelops the world thoroughly.

Question: Who are the righteous servants of Allah when He says:

***“My righteous servants”?***

Answer: The Qur’anic word /salihun/ (the righteous), mentioned here, has
a vast scope of meaning by which, besides faith and Monotheism, all
eligibilities will be reminded: eligibility from the point of action and
piety, eligibility from the point of knowledge and awareness,
eligibility from the point of ability and power, and eligibility from
the point of management, regularity, and social apprehension.

Some Islamic narrations have explicitly commented this verse upon the
followers of Hadrat Mahdi (may Allah hasten his auspicious advent). This
meaning is the statement of a high and clear aspect of it which does not
confine the generality of the concept of the verse.

The system of creation is a manifest reference for the acceptance of a
proper social system of the world of humanity in future. This meaning is
the same thing which is understood from the verse under discussion and
the traditions concerning the advent of ‘the Worldly Great Reformer’,
Hadrat Mahdi, (may our souls be sacrificed to him).

Finally, once Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about the commentary of the
Qur’anic words /zabur/ and /ŏikr/ when he said:

*“(The reality of) /ŏikr/ is with Allah and /zabur/ is the Book sent
down to David, and all the Books which have been sent down are with the
people of knowledge, and they are we, the Ahl-ul-Bayt.”*[^24]

As it was mentioned aforetime, there are many narrations which indicate
that those righteous servants who will be the inheritors of the earth
are the followers of Hadrat Mahdi (as).[^25]

Also, some Islamic narrations denote that the Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet
of Islam (S) will be the inheritors of the earth and they will return to
life again.[^26]

Majma‘-ul-Bayan, concerning this verse, narrates a tradition from Imam
Baqir (as) implying that those righteous servants, whom Allah points to
in this verse as the inheritors of the earth, are the followers of Mahdi
(as) in ‘the end of the Time’.

Again, upon the explanation of this holy verse, it is cited in
Tafsir-i-Qummi that the objective meaning of the fact that the righteous
servants of Allah will inherit the earth is Mahdi, the Qa’im, and his
followers.

In addition to the abovementioned narrations, which are upon the
commentary of this verse, there have been recorded a great many other
traditions from the way of Shi‘iet and Sunni about Hadrat Mahdi (as)
narrated from the holy Prophet of Islam (S) and Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) all of
which signify that at last the government of the world will be in the
hand of the righteous ones.

Then, a man from the household of the Prophet (S) will rise and will
establish justice throughout of the world after that it has been filled
with injustice and cruelty.

Among them is this famous holy tradition, which has been narrated from
the Prophet (S) recorded in most of the Islamic sources.

It says:

*“If there is not remained from the (life of the) world but a day, Allah
will prolong that day so that He raises a righteous man from my
household by whom the earth will be filled with justice thoroughly the
same as it has been filled with injustice and oppression.”*[^27]

This holy tradition, with the same meaning or with a little difference,
has been mentioned in many books of Shi‘ah and Sunni.

It was said in the commentary of verse 33 from Surah Al-Taubah No. 9
that a group of outstanding scholars of Islam, whether from ancient and
modern times, Shi‘ah and Sunni, have clearly certified in their books
that the traditions concerning the rising of Mahdi (as) are nearly at
the level of ‘wide scale’ so that his rising can never be deniable.

There are some reputable books available particularly written in this
regard, including:

Abu-Na‘im in ‘’Akhbar-ul-Mahdi’; Ibn-Hajar-Heythami in
‘Al -Ghaul -ul -Mukhtasar -fi -‘Alamat -il -Mahdi -Al -Muntazar’;
Showkani in ‘At-Taudih fi Tawatur-i-Ma-Ja’a fi-l-Muntazar wad-Dajjal
wal-Masih’; ’Idris-i-‘Araqi Maqribi in the book of ‘Al-Mahdi’. And the
news about Mahdi (as) narrated from the Prophet (S), which have been
testified and witnessed by the Companions of the Prophet, have been
mentioned in a lot of famous Islamic books as well as the main texts of
traditions irrespective of ‘Sunan’, ‘Ma‘ajim’ and ‘Masanid’ among which
we may point to: ‘Sunan - i - Abu - Dawood’, ‘Sunan - i - Tirmithi’,
‘Ibn - i - Majih’, Ibn - i - ‘Amr - id - Dawani, ‘Musnad - i -’Ahmad’,
‘Ibn - i - Ya‘la’, ‘Bazzaz’, ‘Mustadrak - i -Hakim-i-Neyshaburi’,
‘Ma‘ajim-i-Tabarani’ (the Great and the Moderate), ‘Ruyani’,
‘Dar-Ghutni’, and Abu-Na‘im in ‘Akhbar - ul - Mahdi’, Khatib in
‘Tarikh - i - Baqdad’, Ibn - i - ‘Asakir in ‘Tarikh - i - Damishgh’, and
so on.

Again, the traditions concerning Mahdi (as) have been narrated by many
of the companions of the Prophet, among them are: ‘Uthman - ibn -
‘Uffan, Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as), Talhat-ibn-‘Ubayd-i-llah,
‘Abd-ur-Rahman-ibn-‘Uf, Qurrat-ibn-’Asas Mazni, ‘Abdullah - ibn -
Harith, ’Abu - Hurayrih, Khuthayfat - ibn-Yaman, Jabir - ibn -
‘Abdillah, Abu -’Umamah, Jabir-ibn-Majid, ‘Abdillah - ibn-‘Umar,
’Anas-ibn-Malik, ‘Imran-ibn-Hasin, and ’Umm-as-Salamah.

These are twenty persons out of all those who have narrated the
traditions about Mahdi (as). Therefore, there are so many others,
besides them, who have narrated the traditions regarding him (as).

There are a lot of reliable statements recorded from the source of the
companions of the Prophet themselves in which the discussion of the
reappearance and advent of Hadrat Mahdi (as) is seen and which can also
be set in the row of the Prophet’s traditions.

This subject is not among the subjects about which can be said some
things by means of ‘individual reasoning’. (Therefore, naturally they
have also heard this subject from the Prophet (S).)

Also, among those scholars who have declared explicitly that the
traditions concerning Mahdi (as) are at the level of ‘wide scale’ are:
As-Sakhawi in the book entitled ‘Fath-ul-Muqith’, Muhammad - ibn -
Ahmad - Safawini in ‘Sharh - ul -‘Aghidah’, ’Abul - Hassan - il - Abari
in ‘Manaqib - i-Sh-Shafi‘i, Ibn - Tayyimmiyah in his book of Fatawi
‘Pronouncements’, ‘Suyuti’ in Al-Hawi, Idris-i-‘Araqi in his book upon
Mahdi (as), Showkani in the book named ‘At-Toudih - fi - Tawatur -
i -Maja’a-fil-Muntazar’, Muhammad Ja‘far Kanani in ‘Nazm-ut-Tanathur’.

You may see the commentary books of Shi‘ah, upon the verses of the
Qur’an where the narrations about Mahdi (as) are fully available, among
them are: Tafsir - ul - Burhan, Safi, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Atyab - ul -
Bayan, Nur-uth - Thaqalayn, the books like Al - Kafi, Bihar, Tibyan,
Muntakhab-ul-’Athar, Nur-ul-’Absar, and the like.

Thus, the belief in the advent of Mahdi (as) is incumbent (for every
Muslim), and this is considered as a part of the doctrine of Men of
Tradition and community, and the sect of twelve-Imam Shi‘ism.

### A Few Traditions Upon Expecting For Mahdi

1. Someone once asked Imam Sadiq (as) about his opinion concerning the
one who believes in guardianship (Wilayah) of the Imams (as), and
expects the advent of the government of Justice while, in this case, he
dies.

The Imam (as) said:

*“He is like the one who is with the leader of this revolution in his
camp, (his army group).”*

Then, after a pause, he (as) said:

*“He is like the one who is with the messenger of Allah (in his
struggles).”*[^28]

This meaning, with a little difference, has been cited in many Islamic
narrations.

2. In some narrations it has also been said:

*“He is like a sword striker in the way of Allah.”*

3. In some others, it has been said:

*“He is like the one who strikes on the enemy’s head by his sword with
the Messenger of Allah.”*

4. Some other narrations say:

*“He is like the one who is under the flag of Qa’im ‘the Upholder’.”*

5. Some of them say:

*“He is like a struggler who fights (in the cause of Allah) before the
Messenger of Allah.”*

6. Some others say:

 *“He is like the one who suffers martyrdom with the Messenger of
Allah.”*

These six similes, which have been narrated upon the expectation of the
advent of Mahdi (as), make this fact clear that there is a kind of
relation and similarity between the subject of ‘expectation’, on one
side, and ‘the Holy Struggle’ which is combating against the enemy of
Allah in its latest form, on the other side.

7. So many narrations indicate that having an expectation of such a
government has been introduced as the most elevated worship. In some
traditions, this meaning has been narrated from the Prophet (S) and in
some others from Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as).

In a tradition we read that the Prophet of Islam (S) said:

*“The most excellent deeds of my Ummat is the expectation of deliverance
from the side of Allah, Almighty and Glorious.”*[^29]

Another tradition narrated from the Messenger of Islam (S) says:

*“The most excellent deed is the expectation of deliverance.”*[^30]

Whether, we consider ‘the expectation of deliverance’ in the sense of
its vast meaning or in its peculiar meaning, i.e., in the sense of
‘expecting for the advent of ‘the great worldly reformer’, this
tradition makes the importance of the act of expectation clear regarding
to our discussion.

These concise expressions wholly denote that having the expectation of
such a revolution is always coupled with a vast and extensive Holy
Struggle. Having this idea in mind, you may pay attention to the concept
of expectation, and then we can conclude from all of them.

The state of ‘expectation’ is usually used for the one who is
inconvenient from the existing condition and struggles for creating a
better circumstance.

For example, the sick person who waits for becoming better, or a father
who waits for his son to come back from abroad, both of them are
worried, one from sickness and another from the separation of the child,
and they try for a better situation.

Also, a merchant, who is worried about the bad state of the market and
waits for the economic crises to become normal, has two moods:
‘estrangement with the existing situation’, and ‘struggle for a better
situation’.

Therefore, the subject of expectation (or waiting) for the government of
justice and probity ruled by Mahdi (may Allah hasten his advent), and
the rising of the worldly reformer, in fact, are defined in two
categories: the negative element, and the positive element.

The negative element here is that very ‘estrangement with the existing
situation’ and the positive element is ‘the desire for a better
situation’. If these two aspects influence deeply in the soul of man,
they will become the source of two branches of vast and extensive deeds.

These two branches of deeds consist in abandoning any competition and
harmony with the factors of injustice, vice, mischief and even
struggling against them all, from one side, and self-improvement,
self-support, attracting the physical and mental preparations, as well
as both material and spiritual preparations for the auspicious formation
of that single worldly government, on the other side.

If we take care well we can see that both of those two branches of deeds
not only are constructive, but also are the factors of movement,
cognizance, and awareness.

Regarding the essential concept of this ‘expectation’, the meaning of
the numerous narrations, which were mentioned in the above, about the
reward and the result of those who ‘expect’, may be understood
manifestly.

It is now that we understand why the true expectants sometimes have been
counted as those who are in Mahdi’s tent or are under his flag, or like
the one who fights in the cause of Allah, or his blood is poured, or has
suffered martyrdom.

Do they not hint to the different stages and degrees of struggle in the
way of truth and justice which are proportional to the quality of the
preparation and the level of persons’ expectation!

That is, as the amount of self-sacrifice of the strugglers of the way of
Allah and their functions are different with each other, expectation,
self-improvement and preparation are also completely different in
degrees, each of which from the point of preliminary situation and
consequence has similarity with one of them.

Both of them are Holy struggles and both of them require preparation and
self-improvement. The person who is in the camp of the leader of that
kind of government, i.e. he is in the center of command of an army of a
worldly government, cannot be a negligent and an unaware individual.

That position is not the place for any ordinary person. It is the place
of some equipped persons who are really worthy of that significant
position.

To be more and well acquainted with the true effects of the expectation
for the reappearance of Mahdi (as), you may notice the following
explanations:

### Expectation Means ‘Full Prepared’

If I am unjust and oppressive, how can I be waiting for the one the prey
of whose sword is the blood of the unjust?

If I am really polluted and impious, how can I wait for a revolution
whose flame initially seizes the skirt of the polluted ones?

The army which is awaiting for a great Holy War, increases the
preparation of its personnel, blows a spirit of revolution in them, and
improves any weak point therein.

The reason of it is that the quality of ‘expectation’ may always
proportionate to the goal and destination which we are expecting for:

The expectation of coming an ordinary traveler from the voyage.

The expectation of the return of a very dear friend when he is going to
come back.

The expectation of the arrival of the season of harvest and picking up
fruits from trees.

Every one of these expectations is allied with a kind of preparation. In
one of them the house must be prepared and the means of entertaining
must be made ready; in another one its necessary tools must be brought
forth,…

Now you may think of those who are expecting for a great worldly
reformer. They are, in fact, expecting a revolution, shifting, and
transformation which is the vastest and the most fundamental revolution
among the revolutions of humankind throughout the history of man.

It is a revolution which, contrast to the former revolutions, is not
provincial. Not only it is common and general, but also involves all the
affairs and necessities of the lives of human beings. It is a political,
cultural, economical and ethical revolution.

Before anything else, such a revolution is in need of some prepared and
eligible men who can carry the heavy load of that vast improvement of
the world on their backs; and this, at first stage, needs that the level
of thought, cognizance, and mental and spiritual preparation of people
be promoted for the cooperation in actualization of that great program.

Insularities, narrow scope in minds, ill-thoughts, jealousies, childish
and unwisely discords, and, in general, any kind of hypocrisy and
dissension do not agree with the position of the true expectants of
Mahdi (as).

The important matter is that the true expectant of that significant
program can never have the role of a mere spectator. He must certainly
join the row of revolutionists from just now.

The belief in the good results and the end of this shifting may never
let him be in the row of the opponents of that revolution, and being in
the row of the adherents of it needs having pure and pious deeds either,
as well as leading a more pious soul with the possession of ‘courage’
and sufficient ‘awareness’.

If I am corruptible and vicious, how can I be waiting for a system of
government in which the corruptible and vicious individuals have no
function? They will be rejected and hated therein.

Is this expectation enough for purifying one’s soul and mind, and wiping
out both the body and spirit from the dirt of pollutions in his life?

The army that waits for the Holy Struggle of liberty, will surely be in
the state of being full ready and will equip itself with a weapon which
is suitable for such a battle-field.

It will make the necessary fortresses ready, will elevate the epic
preparation of its personnel, will strengthen their courage, and keep
the flame of love and eager in the hearts of its soldiers alive, one by
one, for such a struggle. The army, which lacks such a preparation, does
not live in ‘expectation’, and if it demands it, it tells a lie.

The real expectation for a worldly reformer means a full mental,
ethical, material and spiritual readiness in people for the improvement
of the world entirely. You may consider how constructive such a
preparation can be.

### The First Philosophy, Personal Self-Improvement

The improvement of the world thoroughly, and putting an end to all
injustices and ruins, is not so easy and it cannot be a simple job. The
preparation for such a great aim should be symmetrical with it, i.e., it
must be similarly with the same expansion and depth that it is.

For actualizing such a revolution, some very great men, who are always
decided, very powerful, without defeating, extraordinarily pure and
liberal, completely prepared, and with deep insight, are needed.

Self-improvement for this aim requires the application of the best
ethical, mental, and social programs. This is, in fact, the meaning of
‘the true expectation’. Can anyone say that such an expectation is not
constructive?

### The Second Philosophy, Social Succours

At the same time, the true expectants are dutiful not only to be careful
to their own selves, but they also must be careful of the circumstance
of each other, and, besides improving their own selves, try to improve
others, too.

The heavy and great program, which they are waiting for, is not a
personal one; it is a program that all the elements of the revolution
must take part in it. The job is encompassing and it must be
accomplished by all members.

The efforts and endeavours must, indeed, become harmonized and the depth
and expansion of this harmony must be as great as that worldly
revolution which they are expecting for.

In a vast field, where a group of strivers are totally busy striving,
usually no individual can remain neglectful of the circumstances of
others.

On the contrary, he ought to amend any weak point that he sees
somewhere, and he must improve any situation which may be damageable,
and strengthen any weak and inconvenient part he finds.

For, without the active and harmonized participation of all the members
of strivers, the actualization of such a program is impossible.

Thus, the true expectants, in addition that they always try to improve
themselves, should consider their own duty to improve others, too.

This is another constructive effect of the expectation for the rising of
a worldly reformer; and this is the philosophy of all those virtues
which have been enumerated for the true expectants (of Mahdi).

### The Third Philosophy: True Expectants May Not Assume the Corruption of The Environment

Another important effect that lays in the expectation for Mahdi (as) is
the lack of being changed into the mischief of the environment and the
absence of any submission to the pollutions.

Its explanation is that when corruption covers everywhere, and it gets
the majority or a great many of the people of the society involved into
that pollution, sometimes the pious ones may find themselves in a very
narrow and difficult blind psychological status. It is a blind situation
which originates from the despair of improvements.

Sometimes they think that the dice has been cast and there is no hope
for its improvement, so the effort for keeping pure oneself is of no
avail.

This hopelessness and despair may take them gradually toward corruption
and being of the same nature of he environment in a manner that they
cannot preserve themselves as a righteous minority contrast to an
impious majority; and think of not being alike the community as the
cause of their defame.

The only thing that can blow hope in them and invite them to resistance
and self-control, so that they do not assume the nature of the
corruptive environment, is the hope to the final improvement.

It is only in this case that they do not abandon the effort and
endeavour for preserving their own purity and improving others.

So, we see in the Islamic instruction that the despair of divine
forgiveness has been considered as one of the greatest sins, and some
unaware persons may surprise why despair from the mercy of Allah has
been counted so important, even more important than many other faults,
its philosophy is this very fact that the sinner who is despair of the
mercy of Allah (s.w.t.) may find no reason to decide to recompense, or
at least stops committing that sin.

His logic is: ‘In for a penny, in for a pound’; ‘Black will take no
other hue’; ‘It’s end is Hell’; and the like of these logics.

But, as soon as the window of hope will be opened to him – the hope for
Allah’s forgiveness, the hope for the change of the existing situation –
there can be a turning point in his life which invites him to stop
committing sin and return towards piety and improvement.

It is for this very reason that ‘hope’ can be recognized as an effective
factor in training the corrupt persons, as well as those good doers who
are captured in the corrupt environment, and cannot protect themselves
without hope.

The conclusion is that: the much impious and vicious the world becomes,
the more the expectation of the advent of a reformer increases and it
has an increasing spiritual positive effect in the believers. It
guarantees them against the powerful waves of mischief.

They not only will not despair with the expansion of the range of
mischief in the environment, but also behold nigh, in front of them, the
approach of gaining the goal; and their effort for struggling against
corruption or their self-protection will be pursued by an increasing
desire and love.

From the totality of the aforementioned discussions, it can be concluded
that if expectation, with its real meaning, be actualized in both the
society and individuals, it will be an important factor from the point
of training, self-improvement, and movement.

Among clear references which certify this subject is that, upon the
commentary of the verse which says:

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do righteous
deeds that He will most certainly make them rulers in the
earth…”***[^31]***,***

there has been narrated from some great leaders of Islam that the
purpose of this verse is ‘Mahdi (as) and his followers’.[^32]

Another tradition indicates that ‘this verse has been sent down about
Mahdi (as)’.[^33]

In this recent verse he (as) and his followers have been introduced as
‘those of you who believe and do righteous deeds’.

Thus, the actualization of this worldly revolution is impossible without
a firm belief which repels any kind of weakness, despicableness, and
feebleness, and without the righteous deeds that pave the way for the
improvement of the world.

So, those who are waiting for such a program not only must increase the
standard of their awareness and faith, but also ought to try to improve
their actions.

These are only those who can give the glad tidings of association with
his government to themselves, not those who are accomplice with
injustice and cruelty, nor those who are far from Faith and righteous
deeds.

Nor those coward and despicable persons who, as a result of the weakness
of their Faith, have always scare from everything, even from their own
shadow.

Nor those listless, idle, and inattentive persons who remain silent in
front of the corruptions of their environment and their society, and
show the least challenge and effort in the way of struggle against
corruption. This is the constructive effect of the rising of Mahdi (as)
in the Islamic society.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 106
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي هَذَا لَبَلاَغاً لِقَوْمٍ عَابِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***106. “Verily in this is a (great) message for a people (who)
worship.”***

We were acquainted by the previous verse that the heritage and the
government of the righteous ones on the earth will, in fact, actualize
with two conditions. One of them is the pure servitude before Allah,
which was referred to with the word ‘My servants’; and the second
condition of it is earning the eligibility of being ‘righteous’.

The abovementioned verse again implicitly emphasizes on the fact that
the servants must receive this message that they must both become pure
in servitude, and elevate themselves from the stage of general and
common ‘worshipping’ to the stage of especial submission (My servant),
and try to create eligibility in them.

The verse says:

***“Verily in this is a (great) message for a people (who) worship.”***

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

 *“(Fear) Allah (and) keep Allah in view in the matter of the Qur’an. No
one should excel you in acting upon it.”*[^34]

Therefore, the good servants of Allah should receive the message of
Allah before any other persons.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 107
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلاَّ رَحْمَةً لِلْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***107. “And We sent you not save a Mercy for (all) the worlds.”***

The government of the righteous servants of Allah over the earth is a
merit reflected from the grace and mercy of Allah (s.w.t.) which can be
received in the light of messengership. And whatever of the prophetic
mercy will be bestowed upon the individuals both in this world and
Hereafter is a ray from the Divine Mercy.

All of the Divine ordinances, even the Holy Struggle, fixed punishments
for certain crimes, retaliation, and other retributions and the penal
laws of Islam are also mercy for the Society of Human beings. Allah is
‘The Lord of the worlds’ and His Messenger is ‘a Mercy for (all) the
worlds’. That is, the true training is possible to occur under the
shadow of the prophets’ guidance.

In all ages, and in all localities, and for all human beings, the
Prophet of Islam (S) is ‘a mercy’ and there is no need of any other
prophet, as the abovementioned holy verse announces:

***(… a Mercy for (all) the worlds).***

So, in this holy verse, the Qur’an points to the general mercy of the
personality of the Prophet (S), where it says:

***“And We sent you not save a Mercy for (all) the worlds.”***

This statement means that all mankind in the world, believers and
disbelievers in general, are totally in pawn of the Prophet’s mercy,
because he undertook the propagation of a religion which was the cause
of deliverance of the whole.

The Prophet of Islam (S) is a mercy even for the divine near-stationed
angels, too. In a tradition we read that Gabriel told the Prophet (S)
that his mercy covered him (Gabriel), too.[^35]

There is an interesting tradition cited here which verifies this
generality of mercy. It says when this verse was revealed, the Prophet
(S) asked Gabriel:

*“Did anything of this mercy reach you?”*

Gabriel in answer said:

 *“Yes. Verily I had frightened about the end of my affair, but because
of the verse revealed to you I became certain, where Allah praised me
with His word, (saying): “Gabriel is in a high position with Allah, the
Creator of ‘Arsh.”*[^36]

However, in the world of today where kinds of mischief, corruption,
oppression and injustice are seen everywhere, the fire of war is burning
in every direction, and the claws of the cruel authorities are pressing
the throats of the oppressed; in the world where ignorance, impiety,
treachery, vice, injustice, despotism, and unjust discrimination have
brought thousand kinds of distortions into existence; yes, in such a
world, the concept of being ‘a Mercy for (all) the worlds’ is more clear
due to the Prophet of Islam (S) than any other time.

What a mercy can be higher than this that he has brought a program whose
practicing puts an end to all these failures, miseries, and ignominies.

Yes, he, his orders, his program and his manner all are mercy. A mercy
for all, and in the meantime, the continuation of which will lead to the
faithful righteous ones’ government throughout the earth.

By the way, the Arabic word /‘alamin/ (all the worlds) has such a vast
meaning that its concept encompasses all human beings in all ages. That
is why this holy verse has been considered for a hint to the Prophet of
Islam (S) as a seal of the Divine prophets.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 108 - 109
------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا يُوحَي إِلَيَّ أَنَّمَآ إِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَهَلْ
أَنتُم مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن تَوَلَّوْا فَقُلْ ءَاذَنتُكُمْ عَلَي سَوَآءٍ وإِنْ أَدْرِي
أَقَرِيبٌ أَم بَعِيدٌ مَا تُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***108. “Say: ‘It is revealed to me that your God is One God; do you
then surrender?’”***  
***109. “Then if they turn back, say: ‘I have warned you equally, and I
know not whether nigh or far is that which you are promised’.”***

In view of the fact that the most important manifestation of mercy, and
its firmest foundation is monotheism, by the above verse the Prophet (S)
was commanded as follows:

***“Say: ‘It is revealed to me that your God is One God; do you then
surrender?’”***

The Prophet (S), addressing the idolaters, said in implication whether
they were ready to surrender to this very principal, the monotheism, and
to abandon idols.

There are stated, in fact, three fundamental points in this verse. The
first is that the main basis of mercy is monotheism. Truly, the more we
contemplate, the more will become the existence of this strong
connection clear.

It is the monotheism in belief, the monotheism in action, the monotheism
in the ‘word’, the monotheism in the rows, the monotheism in law, and
the manifestation of monotheism in everything.

Another point is that in relation to the Qur’anic word /’innama/, which
refers to the existence of restriction here, the whole invitations of
prophets concentrate in the principle of monotheism.

Exact researches also show that the theological principles, and even the
fundamental principles of ordinances, finally return to the principle of
monotheism.

For this very reason, as we have also reiterated formerly, Monotheism is
not a mere principle of the principles of Faith, but it is a strong
string that joins the beads of a rosary to each other; or, in a more
proper word, it is a soul blown in the body of the religion.

The last point is that the essential problem of all societies and
nations is their pollution with polytheism in different forms, because
the Qur’anic phrase which says: /fa hal ’antum muslimun/

***(do you submit to this principle?)***

indicates that the main difficulty is the act of coming out from
polytheism and its manifestations and lacking in the action of breaking
idols, not merely breaking the wooden and stone idols, but all kinds of
idols and human deities in particular.

When Hadrat Imam Rida (as) was in the middle of thousands adherents in
Neyshabur, in answer to the demand of the people, he stated his holy
tradition known as ‘Silsilat-uth-Thahab’ implying that Monotheism is the
firm fortress of Allah and whoever enters it will have immunity and will
be safe completely.

Then he (as) added that the condition of this monotheism is the
acceptance and subordination of the alive Imam.[^37]

Then, in the next verse Allah recommends to the Prophet (S) that if,
with all these matters, they do not pay attention to the Divine
invitation and Message, and they turn back, he should tell them that he
had warned them equally of the punishment of Allah.

The verse says:

***“Then if they turn back, say: ‘I have warned you equally…”***

The Qur’anic word /’aŏantu/ is derived from /’iŏan/ in the sense of
‘announcing coupled with threat’, and sometimes it has been applied with
the sense of ‘declaration of war’, too.

But, in view of the fact that this Surah was revealed in Mecca, where
there was neither the preparation of the Holy War nor was the command of
Holy War sent down, it seems very improbable that this phrase could here
be in the sense of ‘declaration of war’.

On the contrary, the apparent of the statement is that by this saying,
the Prophet (S) intends to declare hatred and separation from them and
to show that he has given up hope of them totally.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase /‘ala siwa’/ (equally) is either
a hint to the fact that due to the Divine punishment he warns them all
equally, lest they would suppose that the people of Mecca or Quraysh
were different from others and they had a privilege and superiority with
Allah; or a hint to the fact that he has conveyed his message to all of
them without any exception.

Then he (S) states this threat more clearly and says:

***“…and I know not whether nigh or far is that which you are
promised’.”***

Do not suppose that this promise is very far to happen; it may be nigh,
and very nigh, either.

This punishment by which they have been warned here may be the
punishment of the Hereafter, or the chastisement of the world, or both
of them. In the first case, its knowledge is with Allah and no one is
properly aware of the date of its happening, even the prophets of Allah.

And in the second and third case, it may refer to its details and its
time, meaning that he (S) is not aware of its details, because the
Prophet’s knowledge upon these kinds of happenings has not always the
aspect of action, but sometimes it has the voluntary aspect, that is, he
does not know unless he wills.

Note the following question and answer:

Question: It is understood from many verses of the Qur’an and Islamic
traditions that the Prophet of Islam (S) had a vast portion of the
‘knowledge of hidden things’.

In Nudbah Supplication we recite:

*“(O’ Allah!) You taught him (The Prophet (S)) the knowledge of the past
and the future of the world.”*

But in a few verses, like the above one, we encounter some sentences
which show the lack of knowledge in the holy Prophet (S). Do these
verses and traditions contrast each other? Or, is there a positive
relation between them?

Answer: The knowledge of hidden things is of two kinds. A part of it
belongs to the Pure Essence of Allah and there is no way for anyone into
it, including the time of the occurrence of Hereafter.

We say in some supplications:

*“O’ Allah! We call You by the knowledge which You have specialized for
Yourself.”*

But there is another part of it which Allah bestows upon His prophets,
saints and whoever else He wills, like what is in the verse where He
says:

***“This is of the news of the Unseen which We reveal to you;…”***[^38]

Many of the Qur’anic matters are among the Unseen things, like the verse
which says:

***“The knower of the Unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets to
any,”***

***“Except to him whom He chooses as a Messenger…”***[^39]

Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

 *“…By Allah, if I wish, I can tell every one of you from where he has
come, where he has to go, and all his affair, but I fear lest you
abandon the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) in my favour. I shall certainly convey these things to
the selected ones who will remain safe from that fear…”*[^40]

In another tradition, also he (as) said:

*“…O’ people! A time will come to you when Islam would be capsized as a
pot is capsized with all its contents.…”*[^41]

Again, Imam Ali (as) said:

*“A time will come to you when there would be nothing concealed more
than the truth and more manifest than the wrong, and more current than
forging lies to Allah, the Exalted, and His Messenger (S).”*[^42]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 110 - 111
------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ الْجَهْرَ مِنَ الْقَوْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْتمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنْ أَدْرِي لَعَلَّهُ فِتْنَةٌ لَّكُمْ وَمَتَاعٌ إِلَي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***110. “Verily He knows what is spoken aloud and He knows what you
conceal.”***  
***111. “And I know not haply this (respite) may be a trial for you, and
an enjoyment for a while.”***

In this holy verse the Qur’an implies that you should never think that
if there is a delay in your punishment it is for that Allah is not aware
of your deeds and words. Nay! He knows everything. He knows both your
manifest statements and what you conceal.

The verse says:

***“Verily He knows what is spoken aloud and He knows what you
conceal.”***

In principle, the quality of being concealed and manifest is meaningful
for you who are limited in knowledge. For Allah, Whose knowledge is
infinite, both the Unseen and the visible are the same, and there is no
difference between secret and manifest therein.

Then, the second holy verse implies that if you see that the Divine
punishment does not meet you quickly, it is not for the reason that He
is not aware of your affair.

So, the verse says:

***“And I know not haply this (respite) may be a trial for you…”***

He desires that you enjoy the pleasures of this world for a while and
then He will seize you violently and punish you.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and an enjoyment for a while.”***

In fact, there are two philosophies stated here for the delay of the
Divine punishment. The first one is the subject of trial; for Allah does
not haste in punishing wrong doers in order to test them enough and to
complete the argument to them.

The second philosophy is that there are some people whose trial has
ended and their punishment has been decided, but for the sake that they
receive their chastisement fully, He spreads the bounties for them so
that they become completely drowned in them, and just at the same time
that they are busy enjoying themselves, He strikes the lash of
punishment over them to be more painful for them, and they feel the pain
of the deprived and oppressed well.

The Qur’an says:

***“…We give respite to them only that they may increase in
sin;…”***[^43]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 112
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‌ِ احْكُم بِالْحَقّ‌ِ وَرَبُّنَا الرَّحْمَنُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ
عَلَي مَا تَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***112. “He said: ‘O my Lord! Judge You with truth! And our Lord is the
Beneficent, Whose help is sought against that which you ascribe (unto
Him)’.”***

In this verse, which is the last verse of Surah Al-’Anbiya’, similar to
the content of the first verse of this Surah, the words are upon the
negligence of the unaware people.

As reiterating the statement of the Prophet (S), in a curse-like phrase,
the Qur’an reflects his worriment from all those prides and negligence
they had. After observing their whole aversion and turning back, the
holy Prophet (S) invoked his Lord to judge over that disobedient group
and punish them with justice.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘O my Lord! Judge You with truth!…”***

In the second sentence he (S) addresses the opponent of Islam and says:

***“…And our Lord is the Beneficent, Whose help is sought against that
which you ascribe (unto Him)’.”***

In fact, the verse, by the application of the Qur’anic word /rabbana/
(our Lord) attracts their attention to this fact that we all are
creatures and are under His Lordship and He is the Creator and the Lord
of us totally.

The usage of the Qur’anic holy word /’arrahman/ (the Beneficent) in the
verse, which refers to the general Mercy of Allah, reminds them that the
whole entity of their existence thoroughly is encompassed by the Divine
Mercy; then why do they not always contemplate about the creator of all
these bounties and mercy?

And the Qur’anic holy phrase /’almusta‘anu ‘ala ma tasifun/

***(… whose help is sought against that which you ascribe (unto Him))***

warns them that they should not imagine that the Prophet (S) and the
believers are alone before their opponents, and they should not consider
that their whole accusations, lies and undue taunts fabricated against
the Pure Essence of Allah and against Muslims will remain with no
answer.

Nay! It will never be such, because He is the support of us all and He
is able to defend the believers against any kind of lies and
accusations.

O Lord! as You did not leave alone Your Messenger and his few companions
before their mass of enemies, leave us not alone before the enemies in
the East and in the West who have decided to abolish us!

O Lord! In this blessed Surah, You have specially stated Your particular
mercy unto the prophets when they were at hard and difficult times and
were involved in the crises of their lives. O Lord! At this time, too,
we are involved in the same crises and we expect the same mercy and
particular relief. Amin, O the Lord of the worlds!

**The End of Surah Al-’Anbiya’**

[^1]: Nahjul-Balaqah, letter 31

[^2]: Surah Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 55; and Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6,
verse 164

[^3]: Surah Yusuf, No. 12, verse 56

[^4]: Surah ’Isra’, No. 17, verse 19

[^5]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 158

[^6]: Surah Al-Hujurat, No. 49, verse 14

[^7]: Surah Al-Zilzal, No. 99, verse 7

[^8]: Atyab-ul-Bayan, vol. 9, p. 242

[^9]: Similar to this meaning is found in the commentaries of
Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Atyab-ul-Bayan, Tafsir-us-Safi, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, and
Tafsir-ul-Burhan following the verse.

[^10]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 9, p. 282

[^11]: Burhan, vol. 3, p. 72

[^12]: Nahjul-Balaqah, sermon 183

[^13]: Surah Az-Zukhruf, No, 43, verse 71

[^14]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 17

[^15]: Al-Faghih, vol. 1, p. 295

[^16]: Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan

[^17]: Nahjul-Balaqah, sermon 183

[^18]: Nahjul-Balagah, sermon 111

[^19]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 29

[^20]: Surah Ar-Room, No. 30, verse 27

[^21]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 67

[^22]: Surah Al-Qamar, No. 54, verse 52

[^23]: Surah ’Isra’, No. 17, verse 55, and Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse
163

[^24]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 225

[^25]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^26]: Tafsir-i-Qummi, vol. 2, p. 297

[^27]: Sunan-i-Tirmathi, vol. 4, p. 505; Zakha’ir-ul-‘Ughba, p. 136;
Al-Bayan Gangi, Shafi‘i, p. 141; Muntakhab-ul-’Athar fi
Sharh-i-Hal-i-Imam-uth-Thani-‘Ashar, p. 161

[^28]: Mahasin Barghi, Narrated from Bihar, old edition, vol. 13, p. 136

[^29]: Kafi, adapted from Bihar, vol. 13, p. 137

[^30]: Ibid, p. 136

[^31]: Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 55

[^32]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 13, p. 14

[^33]: Tafsir-us-Safi and Tafsir-i-Burhan, under the holy verse

[^34]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, Letter No. 47

[^35]: Tafsir-us-Safi, p. 359

[^36]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, and Tafsir-us-Safi, under the verse

[^37]: Bihar, vol. 3, p. 7

[^38]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 44

[^39]: Surah Al-Jinn, No. 72, verses 26 and 27

[^40]: Nahjul-Balaqah, sermon 175

[^41]: Ibid, sermon 103

[^42]: Al-Kafi, No. 8, pp. 387, 586

[^43]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 178


