Section 1: The Awful Day of Judgment
====================================

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 1 - 2
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّ زَلْزَلَةَ السَّاعَةِ
شَيْءٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَرَوْنَهَا تَذْهَلُ كُلُّ مُرْضِعَةٍ عَمَّآ أَرْضَعَتْ
وَتَضَعُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ حَمْلٍ حَمْلَهَا وَتَرَي النَّاسَ سُكَارَي
وَمَاهُم بِسُكَارَي وَلَكِنَّ عَذَابَ اللَّهِ شَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “O Mankind! Be in awe of your Lord! Verily the earthquake of the
Hour (of doom) is a grievous thing.”***  
***2. “On the Day you shall behold it, every suckling mother shall
forsake her suckling babe, and every pregnant woman shall lay down her
burden, and you shall see the people (as) intoxicated, yet they are not
intoxicated, but the chastisement of Allah is severe.”***

This Surah begins with two shaking and exciting verses concerning
Resurrection and its preparations. These are verses that may take the
reader involuntarily out from this material fleeting life and make him
mindful of the dreadful future which he waits for.

At first, the Holy Qur’an addresses the whole human beings, with no
exception, and says:

***“O Mankind! Be in awe of your Lord! Verily the earthquake of the Hour
(of doom) is a grievous thing.”***

The Qur’anic phrase /ya ’ayyuhannas/ (O mankind) is a clear evidence
upon this fact that there is no exception and difference in this idea
from the point of: races, languages, nations, tribes, ages, places, and
geographical regions, whether they are believers, disbelievers, young,
old, man and woman. All of them, who live at the present time and in the
future, are addressed totally.

This verse has illustrated some examples of the great terror of the Day
of Resurrection in a few sentences.

It implies that, on that Day, you will observe, by your own eyes, that
every suckling mother shall forget her little child and every pregnant
woman, who attends in that scene, shall face with abortion, because, as
a result of the earthquake of the Resurrection, horror and fear will
encompass all people thoroughly.

The verse says:

***“On the Day you shall behold it, every suckling mother shall forsake
her suckling babe, and every pregnant woman shall lay down her
burden…”***

The third illustration of the verses, which is visualized, is the
circumstances that people shall be in it on That Day.

It says:

***“…and you shall see the people (as) intoxicated, yet they are not
intoxicated, but the chastisement of Allah is severe.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 3
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَيَتَّبِعُ
كُلَّ شَيْطَانٍ مَّرِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. “And among people there are such as dispute about Allah without
knowledge, and follow every rebellious Satan.”***

Since, in the former verse, there was an illustration of the general
fear of people which will occur at the time of the earthquake of the
Resurrection, this verse speaks about the circumstances of some unaware
group of people who are neglectful of such a great event, the
Resurrection.

The verse in this regard says:

***“And among people there are such as dispute about Allah without
knowledge…”***

Sometimes there are some people who dispute against the principle of
monotheism, the Oneness of the Truth, and about the subject of
polytheism, and sometimes they dispute about the Power of Allah in
giving life to the dead and making them alive again for the
Resurrection. In any case, they have no proof for their sayings.

Then, the verse adds that such people, who follow no logic and
knowledge, obey every rebellious and disobedient Satan.

It says:

***“…and follow every rebellious Satan.”***

They follow not only one Satan, but also they follow all Satans whether
they are human or jinn, each of which have a different plan, program,
plot, and device by itself.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 4
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ مَن تَوَلاَّهُ فَاَنَّهُ يُضِلُّهُ وَيَهْدِيهِ
إِلَي عَذَابِ السَّعِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “About whom (Satan) it is decreed that whosoever takes him for
friend, then verily he will mislead him and will guide him unto the
torment of the burning Fire.”***

The Arabic word /sa‘ir/ is derived from /sa‘ara/ which means ‘flaming of
fire’, and here it refers to the Hell Fire which is more blazing than
any fire.

Qur’anic term /hada/ has been used here in the sense of ‘leading,’ that
is, Allah leads the servants to Paradise, happiness, and prosperity by
means of sending down Books, messengers, and legitimate creeds so that
they may have good deeds, admirable moral qualities, and proper faith,
while the Satans, from among human and jinn, lead man to Hell and the
Divine punishment by means of following the low desires, lust appetites,
vicious qualities, and sinful deeds.

Thus, the noble Qur’an, in this verse, indicates that it has been
considered and necessitated in ‘the book of fate’ that whoever loves
Satan and chooses him as his leader, Satan will mislead him and will
lead him to the punishment of Hell Fire.

The verse says:

***“About whom (Satan) it is decreed that whosoever takes him for
friend, then verily he will mislead him and will guide him unto the
torment of the burning Fire.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 5
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِن كُنتُمْ فِي رَيْبٍ مِنَ الْبَعْثِ فَإِنَّا
خَلَقْنَاكُم مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ عَلَقَةٍ ثُمَّ
مِن مُّضْغَةٍ مُّخَلَّقَةٍ وَغَيْرِ مُخَلَّقَةٍ لّـِنُبَيّـِنَ لَكُمْ
وَنُقِرُّ فِي الاَرْحَامِ مَا نَشَآءُ إِلَي أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّي ثُمَّ
نُخْرِجُكُمْ طِفْلاً ثُمَّ لِتَبْلُغُوا أَشُدَّكُمْ وَمِنكُم مَّن
يُتَوَفَّي وَمِنكُم مَّن يُرَدُّ إِلَي أَرْذَلِ الْعُمُرِ لِكَيْلاَ
يَعْلَمَ مِن بَعْدِ عِلْمٍ شَيْئاً وَتَرَي الاَرْضَ هَامِدَةً فإِذَآ
أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْهَا الْمَآءَ اهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ وَأَنْبَتَتْ مِن
كُلّ‌ِ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “O, people! if you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then
(consider that) verily We created you from dust, then from sperm, then
from a clot, then from a lump of flesh, partly formed and partly
unformed, that We may manifest (Our power) to you. And We cause what We
will to remain in the wombs for an appointed time, then We bring you out
as babes, then that you may attain your maturity, and some of you are
called to die, and some of you are kept back to the*** ***worst part of
life so that they know nothing after having known (much), and you see
the earth dried, dead, but when We send down the water on it, it stirs
and swells and brings forth every kind of attractive herbage (in
pairs).”***

### Resurrection in the World of Fetus and Plants

In view of the fact that the discussion in the previous verses was about
the doubt of the opponent concerning the origin and the end
(Resurrection), in this holy verse, the ‘Resurrection of the body’ has
been reasoned and proved by two firm and logical evidence.

One of them is the transformations of embryo during its fetal course,
and the other is proved through the way of earth transformations when
the plants grow.

At first, the Holly Qur’an addresses all human beings and says:

***“O, people! if you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then
(consider that) verily we created you from dust, then from sperm, then
from a clot, then from a lump of Flesh, partly formed and partly
unformed…”***

All these are for the sake that He makes it manifest to you that Allah
is powerful over everything.

The verse continues saying:

***“…that We may manifest (Our proper) to you.…”***

Allah keeps the embryos that He wishes in the wombs of mothers until a
fixed time in order that they pass their evolutionary periods, but He
may cause some of them, which he desires, to fall from their circle in
the midway. After that, a new revolutionary course begins and He brings
it out in the form of a babe from mother’s womb.

The verse says:

***“…And We cause what We will to remain in the wombs for an appointed
time, then We bring you out as babes…”***

Thus, the limited period and dependant course of your life in the
mother’s womb naturally ends and you arrive in a vast environment, full
of light, serenity, and with much more potentialities.

Yet, the evolutionary wheels of your development do not pause. They
ceaselessly continue going forth in this way.

The verse says:

***“…then that you may attain your maturity…”***

Here, the ignorance changes into wisdom, the weakness into strength, and
the dependence into independence.

But this wheel of movement does not stop, though some of you, in this
course, may die while some others may live a very long life that they
reach the worst stage of life, so that they know nothing of what they
knew.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and some of you are called to die, and some of you are kept back to
the worst part of life so that they know nothing after having known
(much)…”***

The weakness, disability, and melancholy are the reason for the
appearance of the stage of a new transformation. This stage is like the
stage that a fruit has when it becomes lose from the branch of the tree
and which indicates that it has become ripe enough and must be separated
from its position.

Then the Qur’an refers to the second statement, i.e., the life of the
plants, where it says:

***“…and you see the earth dried, dead, but when We send down the water
on it, it stirs and swells and brings forth every kind of attractive
herbage (in pairs).”***

The Arabic word /hamidah/ is originally called to the fire which has
been extinguished and also to the land the plants of which have dried
and remained motionless. [^1]

Some other Islamic commentators have said that /hamidah/ is applied for
a state between life and death.[^2]

The Arabic term /’ihtazzat/ is derived from /hazz/ in the sense of
‘moved, aroused’.

The Arabic word /rabat/, here, is derived from /rubuww/ (rhymed with
/‘uluww/) in the sense of growth and increase, and the Arabic word
/riba/ is also derived from the same root.

The Qur’anic word /bahij/ means: ‘beautiful, attractive, and
pleasurable.’

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 6 - 7
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِاَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّهُ يُحْيِ الْمَوْتَي
وَأَنَّهُ عَلَي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ ءَاتِيَةٌ لاَّ رَيْبَ فِيهَا وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
يَبْعَثُ مَن فِي الْقُبُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “This is because verily Allah, He is the Truth, and because verily
He gives life to the dead, and because verily He is All Powerful over
everything.”***  
***7. “And verily the Hour (of Resurrection) is coming: There is no
doubt therein and that verily Allah will raise up whoever is within the
graves.”***

Through these couple of verses, as a general conclusion, the Qur’an
explains the purpose of stating these two reasons in the form of five
points. 1) At first, it implies that what was said in the previous
concerning different stages of the life of man and the world of plants
was for the sake that you should know that Allah is the Truth.

The verse says:

***“This is because verily Allah, He is the Truth…”***

And, since He is the Truth, then the system that He has created is the
Truth, too. Therefore, it can not be aimless and be in vain, as in
another occurrence of the Qur’an He says:

***“And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them in vain; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve…”*** [^3]

And since this world is not aimless, and, on the other hand, we do not
find the main aim inside of it, we will be certain that there is a
resurrection in question.

2) This very system, dominating the world of life, tells us that it is
He who causes the dead to be quickened.

The holy verse says:

***“…and because verily He gives life to the dead…”***

He is the One Who gives life to the dust, changes the worthless
life-germ into a complete man, makes the dead lands alive, and gives a
new life to the dead. Can we be doubtful yet in the occurrence of
Resurrection with this constant program of life giving in this world?

3) Another aim is that we recognize this fact that Allah is powerful of
doing everything and there is nothing to be considered for His Power to
be impossible.

The verse says:

***“…and because verily He is All-Powerful over everything.”***

The One Who is able to alter the lifeless soil into life- germ and
causes the worthless sperm to go forth in different stages of life,
covers it a new clothing of living every day, and causes the dry,
lifeless lands so green and beautiful that the sound of life is heard
from it thoroughly. Is such a One not able to return man to a new life
after his death?

4) And, again, all of these are for that we know there is no doubt in
the existence of the last hour of the life of this world and the
beginning of the next world.

The verse says:

***“And verily the Hour (of Resurrection) is coming: There is no doubt
therein…”***

5) And all these are as a preparation for the last result, and that fact
is that Allah will bring to life all those who are within the graves.

The verse concludes:

***“…and that verily Allah will raise up whoever is within the
graves.”***

These five points, of course, which consist of different nature, are all
complementation of each other and all of them end to one point. This
factual point is the fact that not only the occurrence of Resurrection
and raising of the dead is possible, but also it certainly will happen.

Those who are doubtful about the existence of life after death can
observe its similar scene in the lives of men and plants which are
always before their eyes and every year and even every day, they occur
again and again.

If they are skeptic in the power of Allah, this is the thing that they
can see its clear examples by their own eyes.

Was human not created from dust at the beginning? So, how may it be
surprising that they raise again from the soil?

Are the dead lands not quickened every year before our eyes? How can it
be wonderful that the dead, after many years, become alive and raise
from the earth?

And, if they are skeptic in the occurrence of such a thing, they must
know that the system governing over the creation of this world shows
that there is an aim in it, else all things would be in vain. This
fleeting life, which is filled with these masses of miseries and
wretchedness, is not something to be worthy to form the final aim of the
world of the creation.

Thus, there must be another world existing, a vast and eternal world,
which is worthy to be counted as the aim of the creation.

Note the Following Points:

### Man’s Seven Stages of Life

In order to make clear the phenomenon of Resurrection and its
possibility of occurrence, the afore-mentioned verses have explained the
status of man in course of seven stages. The first stage is the time he
was dust.

The purpose of dust mentioned here might be the dust from which man was
created. It may also be a hint to this fact that, besides this, all men
are from dust, because all the food staff and the nutritious materials,
which form the life-germ, are wholly taken from soil.

No doubt, of course, a considerable part of man’s body is formed of
water, and a part of it from Oxygen and Carbon which are not taken from
soil; but since the main part of the limbs of the body are formed from
the materials taken from the earth, this meaning is completely true that
man is originally from the earth.

The second stage is the stage of life- germ. Soil, which is apparently a
simple and ordinary element, has not any sense, movement, and life, but
it can be changed into life germ. Life- germ is formed mainly of some
living things which are very little and mysterious.

In men, it is called ‘sperm’ and in women it is called ‘ovule’. These
floating tiny creatures are so little that there may exist some millions
of sperm in a man’s sperm drop.

It is interesting that, after birth, a babe has usually a slow and
gradual development which is mostly in the form of quantitative
evolution, while its development in the womb is accompanied with some
quick transformations which are qualitative.

The consecutive and amazing transformations of embryo in the womb are so
much wonderful that, for example, a simple small pin to be changed into
an airplane after a few months.

Today, the branch of embryology has been expanded into a vast science,
so that its concerning scholars have succeeded to study embryo in its
different stages and to discover many secrets of this mysterious
phenomenon of the world of existence and introduce a great deal of
wonders about it.

In the third stage, the life germ reaches the state of congealed blood
and its cells gather together beside each other in the shape of a berry
of mulberry which technically is called ‘mudola’.

After a short time, the division hole appears. This is the beginning of
the division of the parts of embryo. The embryo has a particular name in
this stage.

In the fourth stage, little by little the embryo gets the form of a lump
of flesh to itself without that the different limbs of the body being
distinguished in it.

Then, suddenly there appear some changes in the skin of the embryo, and
its shape alters appropriate to the action it must do; and the limbs of
the body gradually begin to be distinguished. But those embryos, which
do not pass this stage and still remain unchanged in their former forms,
may be aborted.

The Qur’anic phrase saying:

‘***partly formed and partly unformed***’

may refer to this stage of embryo which means: ‘completely formed’ and
‘un completely formed.’

It is interesting that, after mentioning these four stages, the Qur’an
has stated the sentence saying that:

***“We may manifest (our power) to you,”***

indicating that these rapid and wonderful changes in which a little
sperm drop develops into a complete man, is a manifest reason to the
power of Allah (s.w.t.) over everything.

Then the Qur’an points to the three remaining stages of the embryo which
happen after delivery or birth, consisting of the stage of childhood,
the stage of puberty, and the stage of senility.

It is also necessary to be mentioned that birth of man originally from
dust in the form of a living creature, itself is a great transformation;
and the different stages of the embryo are all counted as successive
transformations. Also, the birth of man from mother is itself a very
important transformation. Thus, the stages of puberty and senility are
considered as transformations, too.

The application of ‘raise up’ in the sense of Resurrection, used in the
above mentioned verse, seems to be a hint to the concept of this very
transformation which will also occur in Hereafter.

This point must also be noted that the explanation of the Qur’an about
these different stages of the embryo, specially in those days when
neither the science of embryology had come into being nor people had had
any notable knowledge about man’s courses of embryo, itself is a living
evidence to the fact that this great book has originated from the world
of revelation and from the world of beyond nature.

### Resurrection of the Body

No doubt, whenever the Holy Qur’an has pointed to the resurrection and
the return of men, it means the return of the humankind with both the
spirit and the body to the next world.

So, those who have limited the occurrence of resurrection to only its
spiritual aspect and believe in only the survival of the souls have
never verified the whole verses of the Qur’an.

It is clear that, as an instance, they have not kept in mind the verses
like the above one, which explicitly speak about the bodily
resurrection, else what similarity has the spiritual resurrection to the
foetal course and bringing life to the dead lands by the growth of the
plants?

The last sentence of the verse under discussion, in particular, as a
conclusion proves clearly this matter, where it says:

***“…and verily Allah will raise up whoever is within the graves.”***

We know that a grave is the place of the body, not that of the soul.

In principal, the entire astonishment of the disbelievers arises from
this very problem that how a man, who has become dust, can return to
life again, else, the survival of the soul not only was not a surprising
thing, but also had been accepted by the people of ignorance, too.

### What Does “the Worse Part of the Life” Mean?

The Arabic word /’arŏel/ is derived from /raŏl/ in the sense of ‘a low’
and ‘unpleasant’ thing. The objective of the Qur’anic phrase
/’arŏal-il-‘umur/ is the most unpleasant period of the man’s lifetime
when he reaches to the utmost point of senility, and as the Qur’an says,
it is the time when he forgets all he had learnt and becomes just as a
child from the point of having knowledge.

From the point of impudence, he is usually like a child, because like a
child, he easily becomes worried by a slight thing and or becomes very
happy and content by a small and an ordinary affair. He often loses his
patience and sometimes his manner is rather childish.

There is a difference, of course, that people do not expect intelligible
things from a child, but they usually expect them from him.

Moreover, in respect to the children, there is a hope that, by the
growth of the bodies and spirits, all these deficiencies remove, but
there is not such a hope in respect to the old and feeble individuals.

There is also another difference that; a child has not had anything to
lose, but this aged man has lost all the vital capitals of his life.

Thus, the state of old men, in comparison with children, is much more
pitiable and unwholesome.

In some Islamic narrations, the Qur’anic phrase /’arŏal-il-‘umur/ has
been rendered into the age of being one hundred years old, or more than
that.

This condition may depend on the kind of persons. There are some
persons, of course, who reach this stage of weakness and forgetfulness
when they are less than one hundred years old, while there exist some
people who are more than one hundred years old and are completely
intelligent and aware.

In respect to the great scholars and scientists, in particular, who are
always busy studying the scientific discussions, this status is rather
rarely seen. However, for this part of the lifetime, we must refuge to
Allah.

By the way, the remembrance of such years can be a factor to bring us
out from pride and negligence and to make us contemplate what we were at
the beginning, what we are just now, and what we will be in future.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 8 - 10
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَلاَ هُدًي
وَلاَ كِتَابٍ مُنِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَانِيَ عِطْفِهِ لِيُضِلَّ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا
خِزيٌ وَنُذِيقُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَذَابَ الْحَرِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاكَ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ لَيْسَ بِظَلاَّمٍ
لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “And among the people there is such a one that disputes about
Allah without knowledge, without guidance and without any enlightening
Book.”***  
***9. “Turning away in pride to lead (men) astray from the path of
Allah: for him there is disgrace in this world and We shall make him to
be on the Day of Judgment the punishment of the burning (Fire).”***  
***10. “(And unto him it will be said): ‘This is for that which your two
hands have sent before, and that (verily) Allah is not unjust to His
servants’.”***

If disputation is based on knowledge, it does not matter.

The discussion in these verses is upon some people who disputed about
the origin and the end without having any fundamental knowledge.

At first, it says:

***“And among the people there is such a one that disputes about Allah
without knowledge, without guidance and without any enlightening
Book.”***

The first sentence of this verse contains exactly the same meaning which
was mentioned in the former verses, and its repetition here shows that
the previous verse points to one group while this second one refers to
another group.

Some Islamic commentators have considered the difference between these
two groups in that former verse states the status of the followers of
the unaware misleading group.[^4]

The Qur’anic phrase /liyudilla ‘an sabil-il-lah/ (to lead (men) astray
from the path of Allah) shows that the program of this group is to
mislead others and this is counted a clear frame of reference upon that
difference.

This is exactly like the sentence which was recited in the former verse
saying:

***“…and follow every rebellious Satan.”***[^5]

It speaks about the following of the Satans and which makes this meaning
more clear, too.

In relation to the difference between the meanings of the terms
‘knowledge’, ‘guidance’, and ‘enlightening Book’, the commentators have
also offered some discussions, among which the one that seems closer to
the mind is: ‘knowledge’ refers to intellectual reasoning, ‘guidance’
refers to the leading and guiding of the Divine leaders, and
‘enlightening Book’ refers to the heavenly Books.

In a simpler style, it reiterates the same three known reasonings,
consisting of: ‘Book’, Sunnah (practice), and ‘intellect’; and regarding
to the fact that according to the researches of the scholars, consensus
returns to ‘practice’, all four evidences are gathered in this phrase.

Some other commentators also believe that ‘guidance’ may refer to the
spiritual guidance which can be obtained under the light of
self-improvement, virtue, and purification of the carnal soul. (This
meaning, of course, can be gathered with what was said in the above.)

In fact, a scientific discussion or disputation can be useful when it is
based on one of these reasonings: the reason of intellect, the reason of
the Book, or the reason of Sunnah (practice).

Then, in the next verse, the Holly Qur’an refers to one of the causes of
the aberration and mislead of the leaders of the misguidance in a short
and expressive sentence, where it says:

***“Turning away in pride to lead (men) astray from the path of
Allah:…”***

The Arabic term /ani/ is derived from /anaya/ in the sense of ‘to turn’;
and the word /‘itf/ means ‘side’, so, ‘turning the side’ here is an
implicit declaration of pride and their heedlessness, that they hinder
people from the path of truth.

In any rate, the Qur’an explains their intensive retribution in this
world and the Hereafter as follows:

***“…for him there is disgrace in this world and We shall make him to be
on the Day of Judgment the punishment of the burning (Fire).”***

And then he will be told this is the consequence of what his hands have
sent before for him.

The verse says:

***“And unto him it will be said: ‘This is for that which your two hands
have sent before…”***

It is in case that Allah is never unjust to the servants. He neither
punishes anyone unduly, nor does He increase the chastisement of anyone
unreasonably, and His manner is absolute justice and absolutely just.

This verse is one of the verses that not only negates the school of
Fatalist, but also proves the principle of Justice with respect to
Allah’s deeds.

### A Few Traditions

1- Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, Ali (as) said:

*“Whoever seeks guidance other than the guidance of Allah, goes
stray.”*[^6]

2- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, Ali (as) said:

*“Whoever obeys his Lord, fears his sin, is guided.”*[^7]

3- Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The guidance of Allah is the best guidance.”*

And he (as) also said:

*“He who is in the clothing of religion is guided.”*[^8]

[^1]: Mufradat-i-Raqib

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Fi-Dalal

[^3]: Surah Sad, No. 38, Verse 27

[^4]: Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan, and Tafsir-i-Kabir by Fakhr-i-Razi, under the
verse

[^5]: Current Surah, verse 3

[^6]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1, p. 461, and vol. 4, p. 228

[^7]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 5, p. 193

[^8]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 6, p. 192 Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 6, p. 192


