Section 7: The Enticement by Satan
==================================

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 49 - 51
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّمَآ أَنَاْ لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُم مَّغْفِرَةٌ
وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ سَعَوْا فِي ءَايَاتِنَا مُعَاجِزِينَ اُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “Say: ‘O people! I am only a plain warner unto you.”***  
***50. “Then those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them is
forgiveness and an honourable sustenance.”***  
***51. “And those who strive against Our signs (to reject them), they
shall be the inhabitants of Hell.”***

The Divine prophets (as) do not say anything from their own accord.

In the previous verses, the words were about the haste of the pagans for
the Divine punishment. This matter is something which depends on the
Will of Allah, the Pure Essence, and even the prophets (as) have no
authority in it.

The first verse of the above verses announces as follows:

***“Say: ‘O people! I am only a plain warner unto you.”***

But this does not relate to the Apostle that His punishment may come to
you soon or late when you disobey His commandment.

No doubt, the Prophet (S) is both a warner and a bearer of glad tidings.
But, the emphasis on the subject of ‘warning’ here and the absence of
mentioning ‘glad tidings’ is because of the addressees of the verse
under discussion, who were some obstinate pagans, those who used to mock
even the Divine chastisement.

Through the next couple of verses, the Qur’an illustrates a feature from
the subject of the glad tidings and the concept of ‘warning’, and since
the All-Embracing Mercy of Allah always precedes His punishment, at
first it speaks of glad tidings.

The verse says:

***“Then those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them is
forgiveness and an honourable sustenance.”***

Such persons are washed and purified with the water of forgiveness, at
first and, when they find a relaxed mind and a calm conscience in them
from this point of view, they will be included in kinds of graces and
favours of Allah.

Regarding the fact that the Arabic word /karim/ means every honourable
and worthy being, the phrase /rizq-un-karim/ (an honourable sustenance)
has a vast meaning which encompasses all the valuable blessings,
irrespective of spiritual and material.

Yes, the Generous Lord in that generous world will bestow the kinds of
generous blessings to His believing righteous servants.

Raqib in his book, Mufradat, says: the Arabic word: /karam/ is usually
applied for some good and worthy things that are very considerable.
Therefore, the small good actions are not called /karam/ (generosity).

Some commentators have meant the Qur’anic phrase: /rizqun karim/ as ‘a
ceaseless sustenance without blemish’, and some others have said it
means as ‘a worthy sustenance’ which all are inside that consistent and
universal meaning, that is, the worthy and considerable things.

Then, in the next verse, the holy Qur’an adds implying that those who
tried to ruin the verses of Allah or wanted to wipe them out, imagined
that they could overcome the assured will of Allah, but they are
dwellers of Hell-Fire.

The verse says:

***“And those who strive against Our signs (to reject them), they shall
be the inhabitants of Hell.”***

The Arabic word /sa‘au/ is derived from /sa‘y/ which originally means
‘to run’, and here it means effort and endeavour in the way of ruining
and wasting the verses of Allah.

The Qur’anic word /mu‘ajizin/ is derived from /‘ijz/ which here means
someone who wants to overcome the infinite Power of Allah.

The Qur’anic word /jahim/ is derived from /jahm/ which means the
violence of the flame of fire. It is also applied for the violence of
wrath. Thus, the term ‘jahim’ is somewhere which has a flaming fire,
and, here, it means Hell.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 52
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رَّسُولٍ وَلاَ نَبِيٍّ إِلآَّ إِذَا
تَمَنَّي أَلْقَي الشَّيْطَانُ فِي اُمْنِيَّتِهِ فَيَنسَخُ اللَّهُ مَا
يُلْقِي الشَّيْطَانُ ثُمَّ يُحْكِمُ اللَّهُ ءَايَاتِهِ وَاللَّهُ
عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “And We did not send before you any messenger or a prophet but
when he desired, the Satan threw (some vanity) into his desire; but
Allah will cancel anything (vain) that Satan throws in, then Allah does
establish His signs, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.***

There are some believers with whom Satan contacts but they immediately
understand it and banish him, while there are some others that Satan is
always with them, as the Qur’an says:

***“…for him a Satan, so he becomes his associate.”*** [^1]

In view of the fact that in the former verses the speech was about the
effort and endeavour of the pagans to wipe out the religion of Allah and
they used to mock and ridicule it, too, in the verses under discussion
the Qur’an warns that these plots of the opponents are not something new
and these satanic vain temptations have ever existed in the way of the
prophets.

It says:

***“And We did not send before you any messenger or a prophet but when
he desired, the Satan threw (some vanity) into his desire;…”***

But Allah never left His Messenger alone with the rush of these satanic
vain temptations, and He vanished them all, and then, He strengthened
His signs.

This deed is very easy for Allah to do, because He is All-Knowing,
All-Wise, and He is completely aware of all these plots and plans, and
He knows well how to nullify them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…but Allah will cancel anything (vain) that Satan throws in, then
Allah does establish His signs, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 53
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَجْعَلَ مَا يُلْقِي الشَّيْطَانُ فِتْنَةً لّـِلَّذِينَ فِي
قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ وَالْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ
لَفِي شِقَاقٍ بَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “So that He may make what the Satan casts a trial for those in
whose hearts is disease and those whose hearts are hard, and verily the
unjust are in a deep opposition.”***

Satan’s temptations are as a means for testing the hard-hearted and
sick-hearted persons. The spiritual sickness and hard-heartedness are
usually some suitable grounds for falling into the snare of seditions
and temptations. These satanic plots of the opponents are always used
for the examination of both the aware believers and the obstinate
disbelievers.

That is why the Qur’an says:

***“So that He may make what the Satan casts a trial for those in whose
hearts is disease and those whose hearts are hard…”***

Then the Qur’an implies that the cruel oppressors have abided in a
serious hostility and opposition while they are far from reality and the
Truth.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and verily the unjust are in a deep opposition.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 54
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ اُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَبّـِكَ
فَيُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ فَتُخْبِتَ لَهُ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَهَادِ
الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا إِلَي صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And that those who have been given the knowledge may know that
it is the truth from your Lord, so they may believe in it and their
hearts may be lowly before it, and verily, Allah guides those who
believe unto a straight path.”***

The true knowledge is that which gives man the ability of recognizing
right from wrong (and it must not be some imitative and superficial
matters learnt by heart).

So, the Qur’an in this holy verse implies that the purpose of this event
is that those who are aware and knowledgeable can recognize right from
wrong and be able to separate the Divine programs from the satanic
temptations and, comparing them with each other, know that the religion
of Allah is the truth and has come from the side of your Lord, and,
consequently, they believe in it and make their hearts humble before it.

The verse says:

***“And that those who have been given the knowledge may know that it is
the truth from your Lord, so they may believe in it and their hearts may
be lowly before it…”***

Of course, when some dangerous thing come in the way of these believers
who are truth seekers, Allah does not leave them alone, but He guides
those who believe toward the straight way. In other words, because of
their Faith, He guides them to Paradise which is that very straight
path.

The verse says:

***“…and verily, Allah guides those who believe unto a straight
path.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 55
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَزَالُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي مِرْيَةٍ مِنْهُ حَتَّي
تَأْتِيَهُمُ السَّاعَةُ بَغْتَةً أَوْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمٍ
عَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt
concerning it (Qur’an) until the Hour (of Resurrection) overtakes them
suddenly, or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day.”***

Whoever accepted the line of disbelief and combating against the Truth,
he will encounter any reality suspiciously and with doubt and
hesitation.

So, following the discussion stated in the previous holy verses about
the effort and endeavour of the opponents for wiping out the signs of
Allah, here, this verse points to the continuation of the same kind of
efforts which are from the side of some fanatic and stubborn persons.

This verse indicates that the disbelievers are always in doubt about the
Qur’an and the monotheistic religion of the Prophet (S) until when the
Day of Resurrection suddenly comes, or the punishment of the barren day
comes upon them, the day when they cannot make amends their past.

The verse says:

***“And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt concerning it
(Qur’an) until the Hour (of Resurrection) overtakes them suddenly, or
there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day.”***

It is clear that the objective of mentioning: ‘***Those who
disbelieve***’, here, is not all of them utterly, because many of them
awoke in the continuation of the way and joined to the holy Prophet (S)
and the firm rows of his followers. The purpose of it is their chiefs
and those obstinate and extraordinary fanatic persons who hostilely
never believed.

However, it has been cited in the commentary of Majma‘-ul-Bayan and also
in the commentary of Jawami‘-uj-Jami‘ that the purpose of ‘a barren day’
is the Day of Hereafter, and the reason why that Day has been counted as
‘barren’ is that no night will come after it.

The ‘barren day’, of course, has also been rendered into the ‘day of the
Battle of Badr’.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 56 - 57
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلَّهِ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ فَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِاَيَاتِنَا فَأُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ مُهِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “On that Day the Sovereignty will be Allah’s; He will judge
between them; and those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in
gardens of bliss.”***  
***57. “And those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, these, for them,
shall be a disgraceful chastisement.”***

The criterion of Allah’s Judgment on the Day of Hereafter will be the
belief and the disbelief of human beings. There, the retribution of
those who arrogantly have not accepted the Truth will be a humiliating
punishment.

Here, the holy Qur’an points to the absolute Sovereignty of Allah on the
Resurrection Day, where it says:

***“On that Day the Sovereignty will be Allah’s;…”***

This, of course, does not allocate to the Resurrection Day, but today
and always the absolute Sovereignty belongs to Allah, yet, since there
are some other kinds of owners and rulers in this world, too, (though
the realm of their authority is very limited and weak with an apparent
and formal aspect), there may arise this thought that there are some
rulers and owners other than Allah; but on the Day of Hereafter, where
all these matters are absent, this fact will be made manifest more than
any other times, and all will understand that the Ruler and the Owner is
Only the One, Allah.

In other words, here there are two kinds of sovereignty and ownership:
the first is the true sovereignty which is the sovereignty of the
Creator over the creatures, and the second is the nominal and
conventional sovereignty, which is current among people.

These two both exist in this world while in the Hereafter all the
nominal and conventional sovereignties will be dismissed and there will
remain only the true sovereignty of the Creator of the worlds.[^2]

However, since the true owner is Allah, He will be the true Ruler, too.

Therefore, He will govern over and judge between all human beings
whether they are believers or disbelievers, the consequence of which is
the same thing that the Qur’an has stated at the end of this very verse,
where it says:

***“…He will judge between them; and those who believe and do righteous
deeds will be in gardens of bliss.”***

They will abide in some blessed gardens where all merits are found, and
whatever goodness and blessing they desire they will find available
therein.

Then, in the next verse, it says:

***“And those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, these, for them,
shall be a disgraceful chastisement.”***

What an expressive and lively meaning it is! There will be disgraceful
chastisement then for them as a result of those obstinacies, conceits
and arrogances they wrongfully had against the servants of Allah.

These qualities cause them to fall to the lowest degree of degradation
and humiliation; and we know that when, in different verses, the Qur’an
qualifies the Divine punishment as to be: ‘painful’, ‘great’, and
‘disgraceful’, each of them is appropriate with the kind of the sin that
such people have committed.

It is interesting that, when speaking of the believers, the Qur’an
points to two things: the Faith and the righteous deed, and, on the
contrary, when speaking of disbelievers, it points to two other things:
‘disbelief ‘ and ‘their rejection of the Divine verses, each of which,
in fact, is a combination of their internal belief and their external
practical effects, since the man’s deeds often originate from a mental
and ideological source.

[^1]: Surah Az-Zukhruf, No. 43, verse 36

[^2]: Al-Mizan, vol. 14, p. 433


