Section 9: Allah’s Will Alone is Done
=====================================

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 65 - 66
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ سَخَّرَ لَكُم مَّا فِي الأَرْضِ وَالْفُلْكَ
تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِاَمْرِهِ وَيُمْسِكُ السَّمآءَ أَن تَقَعَ عَلَي
الاَرْضِ إِلاَّ بإِذْنِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بِالنَّاسِ لَرَؤُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَحْيَاكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ إِنَّ
الإِنسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “Have you not seen that Allah has made subservient to you
whatever is in the earth and the ships running in the sea by His
command, and He withholds the heaven from falling on the earth, save
with His permission? Verily, Allah is, for mankind, Full of Pity,
Merciful.”***  
***66. “And He it is Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die,
and then will give you life (again). Verily man is ungrateful.”***

The study of divine creation produces both faith and love in the
believers.

The subservience of the world of existence is in authority of Allah

***(“…Allah has made subservient to you…”).***

In this holy verse again the Qur’an has pointed to another example of
this infinite Power concerning the subservience of the beings for
humankind.

It says:

***“Have you not seen that Allah has made subservient to you whatever is
in the earth…”***

He has let all the merits and potentialities of the world at your
disposal in order that you utilize them in what manner you wish. Then
the verse continues implying that He also made the ships subservient to
you while they run in the seas, going forth on the water towards
different destinations by the command of Allah.

The verse says:

***“…and the ships running in the sea by His command…”***

Besides that, He withholds the heavens in their positions not to fall on
the earth save with His command.

From one side, He has caused that each of the celestial bodies rotates
in its orb, and has adjusted the repelling force resulted from the
‘centrifugal force’ just equal to the gravity force therein, so that
each of them moves in its orbit without that there happens any change in
their proper distances or there occurs any crash between those globes.

On the other side, He has created the atmosphere of the each in such a
way that it does not let the wandering aerolites hit the earth and cause
some troubles and destructions for its habitants.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and He withholds the heaven from falling on the earth, save with
His permission?…”***

Yes, it is His Grace, Mercy and Kindness towards the servants that have
caused such a safe and secure cradle to be prepared for the humankind to
live on it easily, calmly and comfortably without any danger. He has
created the earth in a manner that neither any aerolite falls on it nor
does any other globe crash it.

Therefore, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…Verily, Allah is, for mankind, Full of Pity, Merciful.”***

Finally, in the next verse, the Qur’an, after speaking about the Power
of Allah, refers to the most important matter of the world of existence,
i.e., the subject of life, where it implies that you were a lifeless
dust when He covered you with the clothes of life, then after passing
the course of life He causes you to die and He retunes you to the same
dust from which you came into being.

It says:

***“And He it is Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die…”***

And again, in the Resurrection, He will give you a new life and you will
come out from the dead soil and will attend the court of Reckoning and
retribution.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and then will give you life (again).…”***

Yet, this man is ungrateful in spite of these plenty of blessings that
Allah has given him, both for his soul and his body, in the earth and
the heaven, and he rejects His Pure Essence while he manifestly sees all
these clear signs.

The verse concludes:

***“…Verily man is ungrateful.”***

### Some Points

**The First Point:** In these recent verses, there have been regularly
mentioned fourteen parts of Allah’s Attributes, (at the end of each
verse two attributes), as follows:

“All-Knowing, Most Forbearing”, “Pardoning, Forgiving”, “All-Hearing,
All-Seeing”, “The High, The Great”, “All-Subtle, All-Aware”, “The
Self-Sufficient, the Praised”, “Full of Pity, Merciful”.

Every part of these divine attributes agrees with and is complementary
of each other in every couple. For example, Allah’s forgiveness is
complementary of His Pardoning, All-Hearing is complementary of
All-Seeing, His being High agrees with His Greatness, His being
All-Subtle adapts with His being All-Aware, His being the
Self-Sufficient with His being Praised and, finally, His being Full of
Pity with His being Merciful.

All of these attributes are in agreement and, in the meanwhile, they are
just appropriate with the same subject which is stated in the concerning
holy verse. Since we have explained them following each verse, their
repetition is not necessary here.

**The Second Point:** The verses under discussion were both as an
evidence for the Power of Allah and an emphasis on the promises of
Divine help upon the believers and as a sign for the rightfulness of His
Pure Essence, which have been referred to in the former verses.

They are also counted as a reasoning for Monotheism and as a reasoning
for Resurrection, because the phenomena of the dead lands being
quickened by having green plants and by means of rain, and also the life
and the death of the first human being are some witnesses for the fact
that He is capable to restore man again to life and this meaning has
been taken in many verses of the noble Qur’an as a reasoning to the
existence of Resurrection, too.

However, regarding that the Qur’anic word /kafur/, in Arabic,
grammatically is a form of the word with the exaggeration meaning, the
Qur’anic sentence:

***“…Verily man is ungrateful”***

points to the obstinate persons who, even with observing these signs of
the grandeur of Allah, they pave the way of denyance. Or it points to
the ungratefulness of such persons, those whose selves are surrounded by
His blessings and yet neither do they try to thank Him nor recognize
Him.

**The Third Point:** The subservience of the beings of the earth and the
heaven:

As it has been pointed out, making these things subservient for man is
from this viewpoint that Allah has assigned them as the servants of man
so that they are along the way of the benefit of him.

Among all the benefits of the earth, the movement of the ships on the
seas and oceans is particularly mentioned here, it is for the reason
that these ships have been the most important means of communication and
transportation for passengers and goods from one place to another place,
so that no other vehicle could have succeeded to occupy the place of
ships in this regard.

Admittedly if one day all ships stop moving on the seas and oceans, the
life of men will be entirely disturbed, because the roads on land have
not the potentiality of transportation of so much oil, as well as other
loads, from one point to another.

Thus, the importance of ships, this divine blessing, becomes more
manifest when we see more than ten thousand lorries cannot carry the oil
that even one huge ship can sometimes carry; and transition of oil by
the pipelines is also possible for only some limited places of the
world.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 67
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ جَعَلْنَا مَنْسَكاً هُمْ نَاسِكُوهُ فَلاَ
يُنَازِعُنَّكَ فِي الاَمْرِ وَادْعُ إِلَي رَبّـِكَ إِنَّكَ لَعَلَي
هُدًي مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “To every nation have We appointed rites which they are to
perform, therefore they should not dispute with you about the matter,
and you do invite (the people) unto your Lord; verily, you are upon a
straight guidance.”***

Allah does not leave any nation without any school of thought. A
religion must be introduced from the side of Allah, and people should go
on the path of Allah.

The prophets’ duty is to guide their nations, and they must resist in
this way.

Through former discussions, we stated some points about polytheists. The
polytheists, in particular, and the opponents of Islam, in general, had
some disputations with the Prophet of Islam (S) about the problems and
the ordinances in the religions of old, and they considered them as a
weak point for the religion of Islam, while those changes not only were
not weaknesses, but also were counted as one of the programs of the
development of religions.

So, the verse implies that there has been appointed a worship for every
nation by which they would worship Him.

The verse says:

***“To every nation have We appointed rites which they are to
perform…”***

The Arabic word /manasik/ is the plural form of /mansak/ in the sense of
‘worship’ absolutely. Here, it may envelop all religious and Divine
programs. Therefore, the verse expresses this fact that each of the
former nations had a separate program particular to them.

From the viewpoint of time, place and other respects in those
circumstances, it had been the most complete program for them, but
certainly with the change of conditions it was necessary that some new
ordinances would substitute them.

That is why, following that statement, it adds:

***“…therefore they should not dispute with you about the matter, and
you do invite (the people) unto your Lord; verily, you are upon a
straight guidance.”***

The Qur’anic word /hudan/ (guidance) which is qualified by /mustaqim/
(straight) is either for emphasis, or it may point to the fact that a
‘guidance’ toward a ‘destination’ may be performed in different ways.
These ways can be: near, far, straight, and crooked; while the Divine
guidance is toward the nearest and the straightest way.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 68 - 69
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِن جَادَلُوكَ فَقُلِ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيامَةِ فِيمَا كُنتُمْ فِيهِ
تَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “And if they dispute with you, say: ‘Allah knows best what you
do’.”***  
***69. “Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment concerning
that in which you used to differ.”***

The Divine prophets, with having those plenty miracles and logic, were
still confronted with some obstinate persons. Then, this verse indicates
that if they continue conflicting and disputing with the Prophet (S) and
his words do not affect their hearts, he is to answer them that Allah
knows best about the deeds they do.

The verse says:

***“And if they dispute with you, say: ‘Allah knows best what you
do’.”***

Some of the commentators have said that it means that if they dispute
with him (S) about sacrifice and cancellation of their religion, he
should tell them that Allah knows best their rejection and He will give
them their chastisement.

Then in the next verse, the Qur’an announces that Allah will judge
between them about what they used to differ, and in Hereafter, where
everything returns to unity and oneness and the differences will be
removed, He will make the facts manifest for all of us. Thus, the Faith
in the Hereafter is the best thing for bringing the disputations and
differences under subjugation.

The verse says:

***“Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment concerning that
in which you used to differ.”***

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 70
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَآءِ وَالأَرْضِ
إِنَّ ذَلِكَ فِي كِتَابٍ إِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَي اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***70. “Do you not know that Allah knows what is in the heaven and the
earth? Verily this is (recorded) in a Book; verily this is easy for
Allah.”***

Allah’s Knowledge is the same with respect to all the world of
existence; and since the judgment in Hereafter upon the deeds of the
human beings and their discords needs a vast knowledge unto all of them,
in this verse the Qur’an, hinting to the infinite knowledge of Allah,
says:

***“Do you not know that Allah knows what is in the heaven and the
earth?…”***

Yes, everything is recorded in a Book. This is the book of the infinite
knowledge of Allah. It is the book of the world of existence and the
world of ‘cause and effect’, a world wherein nothing will be lost or
perished, but the things always change in forms, even the waves of the
weak sound which a mortal did produce thousands of years ago have not
been annihilated or extinguished completely and they exist in the
atmosphere.

This is a very minute and consistent book in which everything has been
recorded.

In other words, all these things are found in the ‘Protected Tablet’,
the tablet of the knowledge of Allah, and all these beings with all
their characteristics and details are present with Him.

That is why, in the last sentence of this verse, the Qur’an announces
that this is easy for Allah (s.w.t.), because all beings entirely and
with all their qualities attend before Him.

The verse says:

***“…Verily this is (recorded) in a Book; verily this is easy for
Allah.”***

### Some Traditions Concerning Knowledge

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Having knowledge to Allah is the best of deeds; for knowing Him will
benefit you whether the deed is scanty or abundant; and verily ignorance
will not benefit you whether the deed is scanty or abundant.”*

2. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“The finite of knowledge (to Allah) is being in awe of Allah, the
Pure.”*[^1]

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 71
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزّ‌ِلْ بِهِ سُلْطَاناً
وَمَا لَيْسَ لَهُم بِهِ عِلْمٌ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِن نَّصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And they worship, besides Allah, things for which He has sent no
authority, and of which they have no knowledge, and for the unjust there
shall be no helper.”***

The viewpoint of the pagans was that Allah had given the ability of
contrivance and decision to some things and the idols while He is above
all. They imagined that the world was under the control of gods and
considered Allah as the Lord of lords. This verse implies that Allah has
given no authority to any of their gods and the world of existence is
under the control of Allah, the One.

Appropriate to the content of the previous verses which were about
Monotheism and polytheism, in this holy verse the words are again upon
the polytheists and their wrong manner.

And, in view of the fact that one of the most manifest reasons of the
invalidity of polytheism and idolatry is that there is no rational and
traditional evidence to indicate to permissibility of this action; the
abovementioned verse says:

***“And they worship, besides Allah, things for which He has sent no
authority…”***

In fact, this verse is the nullification of the belief of idolaters who
believed Allah had allowed them idolatry and those idols were some
intercessors to Him.

Then the Qur’an adds:

***“…and of which they have no knowledge…”***

This means that neither by means of Allah’s commandment nor by means of
intellect they have absolutely any proof and evidence for their action.

It is evident that he who has no clear reason for his belief and deeds
is unjust. He has been unjust both to himself and others, and when he
inflicts in Divine punishment none can defend him.

Thus, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…and for the unjust there shall be no helper.”***

Some of the commentators have said that the Qur’anic word /nasir/,
mentioned here, means: ‘reason and evidence’, because the real helper is
the same.[^2]

There is another probability that says the objective of the word /nasir/
is a guide, and this is a complement for the previous discussion, that
is, they have neither an evidence from Allah, nor a rational proof that
they themselves have obtained it, nor a leader, a guide, and a teacher
who can help them in this way, because they are unjust and do not submit
the truth.

These three commentaries do not contrast each other, though the first
commentary seems better.

### A Few Traditions Concerning Polytheism

1- The Holy Prophet (S) told Ma‘ath:

*“Whoever dies while he has never associated anything with Allah, will
enter Paradise.”*[^3]

2- Jabir, May Allah be pleased with him, said:

*“Once a man came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and said:*

*‘O’ Messenger of Allah! What are the deeds which cause (a man) to enter
Paradise or Hell?’*

*He (S) said:*

*‘Whoever from among my Ummah dies and has not associated anything with
Allah, will enter Paradise, and whoever dies while he has been
associating things with Allah will enter Hell’.”*[^4]

3- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Once a man said to the Holy Prophet:*

*‘O’ Messenger of Allah! Bequeath me!’*

*He (S) said:*

*‘I bequeath you that you never associate anything with Allah even if
you are to be torn to pieces and to be burnt in fire; and that you
should not repulse your parents (from yourself) either…’.”*[^5]

4- The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“There are two bad qualities above which there is no other bad quality:
associating something with Allah, and to cause damage against the
servants of Allah.”*[^6]

5- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“…you should know that even the smallest hypocrisy is like believing in
more than one God, and keeping company of people who follow their low
desires is the key to obliviousness from religion, and is the seat of
Satan.’…”*[^7]

6- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The one who has associated a partner with Allah will be told to get
his reward from whom he has acted for.”*[^8]

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 72
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَا تُتْلَي عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَاتُنَا بَيّـِنَاتٍ تَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا الْمُنكَرَ يَكَادُونَ يَسْطُونَ بِالَّذِينَ
يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَاتِنَا قُلْ أَفَأُنَبّـِئُكُمْ بِشَرٍّ مِن
ذَلِكُمُ النَّارُ وَعَدَهَا اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَبِئْسَ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “And when Our clear signs are recited unto them, you recognize
repugnance in the faces of those who disbelieve; (so that) well-nigh
they rush upon those who recite to them Our Signs. Say: ‘Shall I inform
you of what is worse than this? The Fire, Allah has promised it to those
who disbelieve; and an evil destination it is!”***

In conflicts between paganism and Faith, pagans usually concentrate
their harsh invasions upon the spiritual and cultural centers and
personalities.

They sometimes take the temples and centers of worship as their target,
which was referred to in verse 40 of the current Surah where it says:

***“…certainly there would have been pulled down cloisters and
churches…”;***

and sometimes they attack the preachers of the religion or their
audience.

Through this holy verse, in a short sentence, the intensity, obstinacy
and bigotry of the idolaters against the verses of Allah have been
referred to.

It says:

***“And when Our clear signs are recited unto them, you recognize
repugnance in the faces of those who disbelieve;…”***

In fact, when hearing these clear verses, the understanding of which is
easy for any intellectual, there appears a contrast between the lively
logic of the holy Qur’an and the ignorant bigotries of the disbelievers,
and since they are not ready to accept the truth, involuntarily its
signs are recognized in their faces in the form of rejection and
repugnance.

Their manner is so that, not only the effect of inconvenience and
repugnance is seen in their features, but also, as the result of their
immense bigotry and obstinacy, they are about to stand and attack those
who recite the Divine verses to them.

The verse says:

***“…(so that) well-nigh they rush upon those who recite to them Our
Signs.…”***

The Arabic word /yastun/ is derived from /satwat/ which means ‘to lift
one’s hand to rush against the opposite party’. As Raqib cites in
Mufradat, it originally means: ‘the raise of a horse on its feet; and
lifting its hands’, and then, it has been used with the above meaning.

If a person habitually thinks logically, when he hears a wrong statement
he will neither frown, nor does he answer it with tied fist; on the
contrary, he may honestly reject it with logical statement. These wrong
reactions of the disbelievers are themselves as clear evidences that
they follow no reason and logic and only ignorance and bigotry dominate
them, their entity.

It is not worthy that the Qur’anic phrase: /yakaduna yastuna/ is formed
by two simple verbs in future tense which in Arabic work as the
constancy of the action, and here they denote the existence of the
status of rushing in them, and sometimes the circumstances required that
they would practically make it appear, and when the circumstances did
not allow, often the feeling of readiness for attack appeared in them
and they displayed signs of uneasiness why they could not rush and beat.

As for these illogical persons, the Qur’an commands the holy Prophet (S)
to do as follows:

***“…Say: ‘Shall I inform you of what is worse than this? The Fire…”***

This means that if you think that these clear verses are some evils,
since they do not agree with your wrong and deviated thoughts, I may
introduce worse than them which is the Divine painful punishment that
will finally encompass you for this obstinacy and enmity of yours. It is
the same blazing Fire that Allah has promised to the disbelievers.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…Allah has promised it to those who disbelieve;…”***

And the blazing Fire of Hell is the worst abode! The verse concludes:

***“…and an evil destination it is!”***

In fact, there is no response save the Hell Fire for these rude fiery
persons inside whom the flames of bigotry and obstinacy is always
enlightened. As a fact, the Divine chastisement is always closely
appropriate to the quality of the same sin and disobedience that people
commit.

[^1]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 10926

[^2]: Al-Mizan and Tafsir-i-Fakhr-i-Razi, following the verse

[^3]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 1, p. 65

[^4]: Sahih-i-Muslim, vol. 1, p. 94

[^5]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 74, p. 134, Al-Mizan, vol. 3, p.176

[^6]: Tuhaf-ul-‘Ughul, p. 34

[^7]: Nahjul-Balaqah, Sermon 86

[^8]: ’Ihya’-i-‘Ulum, vol. 4, p. 2723


