Section 10: The Muslims, Chosen By Allah Himself
================================================

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 73 - 74
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ ضُرِبَ مَثَلٌ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ لَن يَخْلُقُوا ذُبَاباً وَلَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا
لَهُ وَإِن يَسْلُبْهُمُ الذُّبَابُ شَيْئاً لاَّ يَسْتَنقِذُوهُ مِنْهُ
ضَعُفَ الطَّالِبُ وَالْمَطْلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “O people! A parable is struck; so listen to it. Verily, those
whom you call upon besides Allah can never create (even) a fly, though
they should all gather for it; and should the fly snatch away anything
from them, they could not take it back from it. Feeble are (both) the
seeker and the sought!”***  
***74. “They have not estimated Allah with the estimation that is due to
Him. Verily Allah is Strong, Mighty.”***

We must always take the parables of the Qur’an under careful
consideration.

The person who is helpless when he confronts a single fly is not
eligible to be worshipped.

This verse illustrates an interesting and lively picture of the
situation of the artificial idols and deities and explains their
weakness and inability. It makes manifest the falsehood of the pagans’
belief very clearly.

It addresses the common people and says:

***“O people! A parable is struck; so listen to it. Verily, those whom
you call upon besides Allah can never create (even) a fly, though they
should all gather for it;…”***

If all their idols, all the objects of their worship, and even all the
scientists, the mindful ones, and inventors from among human beings
gather with together and try to create a fly they will not be able to
create it.

Thus, how can you consider them in a row with the Great Lord Who is the
Creator of the heavens and the earth and thousands of thousand living
creatures in the seas and on the lands, in forests, and in the depths of
the ground; the Lord Who has assigned the life and living in different
shapes and various kinds, each of which causes man to wonder and to
admire them.

How far and different are those weak objects of worship and this
Almighty Wise Creator!

Then the Qur’an adds that not only they are not able to create a fly,
but also they are unable to stand against a fly, because as the verse
says:

***“…and should the fly snatch away anything from them, they could not
take it back from it.…”***

A weak and feeble being that fails even in standing against a fly, how
is it worthy that they consider it as a manager of their fate and
remover of their difficulties?

Yes, both ‘the seekers’, and the worshippers, and those objects of
worship, ‘the sought’ are feeble!

The verse says:

***“…Feeble are (both) the seeker and the sought!”***

Some Islamic narrations indicate that the idolaters of Quraysh used to
plaster the idols that they had gathered and arranged around the Ka‘bah,
with musk, ambergris and saffron mixed with honey, and around them they
used to loudly say some words similar to the term ‘labbayk’ (here am I)
of the monotheists which indicated their polytheism and idolatry as well
as the distortion of the saying of monotheists, and they used to imagine
these worthless and low objects as the partners of Allah.

But flies came sitting on them, ate the honey, saffron, musk and
ambergris thereover while the idolaters had not the power to take them
back from the flies.

Taking this scenery as an example, the Qur’an reiterates the feebleness
and inability of the idols and the weakness of the logic of the
polytheists and implies that the idolaters can see carefully how their
objects of worship are under the feet of flies and they are not able to
show the least defence from themselves.

These are some worthless and incapable objects of worship that the
polytheists demanded them to solve their various problems!

By the way, the objective of the Arabic words /talib/ (the seeker) and
/matlub/ (the sought) is just the same thing which was said in the
above: the former is the worshippers of the idols and the latter is the
idols themselves both of which are weak and incapable.

Some commentators have also said that probably here the term /talib/
refers to ‘fly’ and /matlub/ refers to ‘idols’, (since the flies seek
the idols in order to enjoy of the food stuff over them).

After stating the above lively parable, in the next verse the Qur’an
concludes that they have not recognized Allah so that they must know
Him.

The verse says:

***“They have not estimated Allah with the estimation that is due to
Him.…”***

They are so weak and feeble in knowledge of Allah and theology that they
degraded Allah, the Exalted, to the level of their weak and worthless
objects of worship, those that they counted as partners of Allah.

If they had the least amount of knowledge about Him they would certainly
laugh at their own comparison.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an states:

***“…Verily Allah is Strong, Mighty.”***

Allah is not like the idols that are not able to create a small creature
such as a fly, and they are not able even to defend themselves against a
fly. Allah is powerful over everything, and none is able to resist
before Him.

### A Point Concerning Theology

If we deal with the books written about physiology of the living
creatures and study carefully the biological activities of a small
insect, such as a fly, we will see that the structure of the mind of a
fly, its system of nerves, and its digestion organs are more complicated
than the structure of the most equipped aeroplanes, or they can not be
comparable with each other at all.

In principle, the problem of life and the senses and the motion of the
living creatures, as well as their growth and procreation, have remained
as a secret before the scientists; and the details and delicacy used in
the structure of these creatures are in turn some other secrets, the
ones which have not been answered yet.

According to the statements of the scientists of natural science, the
extraordinary small eyes of some of these insects are composed by about
one hundred eyes. That is, the same eye that we can hardly see, and
perhaps is as small as a needlepoint, is made up of several smaller
eyes, the collection of which is called ‘a compound eye’.

Supposing that man can produce a living cell from some lifeless
substance, who can arrange hundreds of small eyes, each of which in turn
has a delicate camera, layers, and systems, beside each other and join
their branches and lines of communication to the brain of the insect and
transfer the outward information to the brain of the insect by them so
that the insect can react unto the events happen around it?

If all human beings gather and assist, can they create such an
apparently small being which is in fact very complicated and mysterious?

Again, if supposedly a man can solve all these problems, can this be
called as creation? Or it is a combination of the existing means and
tools in this very world of creation. Are those persons who mount the
ready-made parts of a car called as inventors, and can their action be
called invention?

Surah Al-Hajj – Verses 75 - 76
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَصْطَفِي مِنَ الْمَلآَئِكَةِ رُسُلاً وَمِنَ النَّاسِ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَإِلَي اللَّهِ
تُرْجَعُ الاُمُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “Allah chooses messengers from among the angels and from among
the men. Verily Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.”***  
***76. “He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and unto
Allah are returned all affairs.”***

### The Occasion of Revelation

As some of the commentators have said: when the Prophet of Islam (S) was
appointed, a group of pagans, such as ‘walid-ibn-Muqayrah’, (who was
counted as their minded one), with wonder and denial said:

*“Was the Reminder sent down to him (Muhammad, the poor and orphan one)
from among us?”*

Then the first abovementioned verse was revealed and answered them that
choosing the prophets and angels for His messengership is based on their
eligibility and spirituality.[^1]

The Arabic term /’istafa/ is derived from /safwah/ which means: pure and
noble, and choosing the pure and clear ones shows that some of persons
and angels have the eligibility and they are pure and noble.

Regarding the fact that in the previous verses the speech was about
monotheism, polytheism, and the imaginary deities of polytheists, and
regarding the fact that there were some people who chose the angels and
some of the prophets for worshipping, the Qur’an, through verses under
discussion, implies that the Divine messengers entirely are the obedient
servants of Allah.

Yet, as the verse says:

***“Allah chooses messengers from among the angels and from among the
men.…”***

There are some messengers among the angels, like Gabriel, and there are
some messengers from among human beings; like the great Divine
messengers.

The application of the word /min/ (some) in this verse, indicates that
the entire Divine angels were not the messengers toward humankind, but
some of them were given this rank to. This meaning does not contrast the
content of the verse which says:

***“…Who made the angels messengers…”,***[^2]

because the purpose in this verse is the statement of ‘gender’ not the
statement of the generality of members.

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“…Verily Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.”***

This means that it is not such that, like human being, Allah is unaware
of His Messengers in their absence, on the contrary, He is always aware
of their circumstances, He hears their words and sees their deeds.

Then, in the next verse, the noble Qur’an points to the responsibility
of the messengers in conveying their prophecy, from one side, and the
Divine protections due to them, on the other side. The verse says:

***“He knows what is before them and what is behind them…”***

Allah is aware of both their future affairs and those of their past that
they have put in behind.

Then, the verse continues:

***“…and unto Allah are returned all affairs.”***

This fact has been stated in order that people know that the angels and
Divine prophets are also some obedient servants who have
responsibilities before Him, and they have nothing from their own selves
except for what Allah has bestowed on them, and they should not be taken
as gods and objects of worship besides Allah.

Therefore, the above sentence which says:

***“He knows what is before them…”***

in fact is an indication to the duty and responsibility of the Divine
messengers and that their deeds will be controlled from the side of
Allah. It is similar to what Surah Al-Jinn, No. 72, verses 27 and 28
say.

They announce:

***“Except to him whom He chooses as a messenger, for surely He makes a
guard to march before him and after him,”***

***“So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of
their Lord, and He encompasses what is with them…”***

However, it became clear that the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase:
/mabayna ’aydihim/ is the future events, and the purpose of /maxalfahum/
is the past events, and, in any case, the knowledge of Allah does not
increase or decrease. He has been aware of all the creatures and their
deeds, whether they are exterior and interior.

The noble Qur’an, in this regard, says:

***“…the Knower of the unseen, it shall certainly come upon you; not the
weight of an atom becomes absent from Him, in the heavens or in the
earth, and neither less than that nor greater, but (all) is in a clear
book,”***[^3]

Of course, the cognizance to this vast knowledge of Allah has an
extraordinary educational effect in man. It warns him that whoever he
may be and whatever rank and position the one may gain He knows, and He
is aware of the belief we have in our minds and the intentions we bear
in our hearts and whatever kind of manner we are qualified by.

All of these are manifest in His infinite knowledge. It is certain that
taking note to this fact is very effective in man’s training. These are
some instructions that make man prepared for reaching the goal of
creation and the law of development.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 77
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا ارْكَعُوا وَاسْجُدُوا وَاعْبُدُوا
رَبَّكُمْ وَافْعَلُوا الْخَيْرَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves and worship
your Lord, and do good; that you may be prosperous.”***

The ritual acts of ‘bowing’ and ‘prostration’ are among the examples of
worship, yet in this holy verse these two acts are mentioned beside the
Qur’anic word /wa‘budu/ (worship) which indicates both the importance of
prayer and these two elements of prayer.

By the way, divine salvation or prosperity is the last stage of
perfection of which we must be hopeful when we have fulfilled our duties
of worships and benefactions.

This holy verse, addressing the believers, states some general and
inclusive instructions which protect their religion, worldly affairs,
and succession in all circumstances, and by this beauty of conclusion
Surah Al-Hajj ends.

At first, the verse points to four important instructions by saying:

***“O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves and worship
your Lord, and do good; that you may be prosperous.”***

Stating the bowing and prostration, two elements from among all elements
of prayer, is for the sake of their extraordinary importance in this
great worship. The instruction of absolute servitude, which has been
stated after these two elements, encompasses every worship and devotion.

The application of the word /rabbakum/ (your Lord) is, in fact, an
indication to His eligibility for being worshipped and the lack of
eligibility of other than Him, because He is the only Owner, Master and
Lord.

The instruction of ‘doing good’ envelops any good deed without any
condition and reservation. It has been narrated from Ibn-Abbas who said
its objective is ‘union of kindred’ and ‘nobility of character’.[^4]

Tafsir-ul-Burhan narrated from Hadrat Musabn-i-Ja‘far, the seventh Imam,
who said that the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase /waf‘al-ul-xayr/ (and
do good) is the act of obedience from Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as)
next to the Prophet (S), and it is, indeed, the statement of a lively
aspect from this general concept.

Surah Al-Hajj – Verse 78
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَاهِدُوا فِي اللَّهِ حَقَّ جِهَادِهِ هُوَ اجْتَبَاكُمْ وَمَا جَعَلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الدّ‌ِينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ مّـِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ مِن قَبْلُ وَفِي هَذَا لِيَكُونَ
الرَّسُولُ شَهِيداً عَلَيْكُمْ وَتَكُونُوا شُهَدَآءَ عَلي النَّاسِ
فَاَقِيمُوا الصَّلاَةَ وءَاتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِاللَّهِ
هُوَ مَوْلاَكُمْ فَنِعْمَ الْمَوْلَي وَنِعْمَ النَّصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***78. “And strive hard in (the way of) Allah as you ought to strive for
him. He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any hardship in
religion; the faith of your father Abraham (is yours). He*** ***named
you Muslims, both before and in this (Book), that the Messenger may be a
witness over you and you may be witnesses over the people; therefore
establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and hold fast to Allah! He is
your Guardian, how excellent the Guardian and how excellent the
Helper!”***

We know that bearing witness needs awareness and justice, while the
totality of people as a whole are neither just nor aware so that they
can be witnesses over others.

Therefore, the purpose of Muslims being witness, mentioned in this holy
verse, refers to some of the Muslims who not only are aware of the deeds
and behaviour of people but also are both just and trust-worthy, and, as
the Islamic traditions indicate, such persons can be the Prophet’s
Ahl-ul-Bayt, the Immaculate Imams, to whom our deeds and behaviour are
exposed.

This verse issues a command in the field of Holy Struggle with the vast
meaning of the word when it says:

***“And strive hard in (the way of) Allah as you ought to strive for
him.…”***

The majority of the Islamic commentators have not taken the concept of
Holy Struggle here in the particular sense of fighting with gun against
the enemy.

On the contrary, as it is understood from the lexicographical concept of
the word itself, they have considered it with the meaning of any
struggle and effort in the way of Allah and doing benefactions,
combating against low desires (the greater warfare), and striving
against the cruel unjust enemies (the lesser warfare).

The Late Tabarsi, in Majma‘-ul-Bayan, narrates from the majority of the
commentators that the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase /haqqa jihadihi/
(as you ought to strive for Him) is the sincere intention and
accomplishing the acts for the cause of Allah.

There is no doubt that the Qur’anic phrase /haqqa jihadihi/ has a vast
meaning which envelops all the concepts from the viewpoint of quality,
quantity, place, time and the like.

But since the stage of sincerity is the most difficult stage in
struggling against one’s self, the Qur’an has emphasized on this stage.
The penetration of evil thoughts and motivations into man’s heart (mind)
and deeds are so hidden, narrow, and concealed that none can relieve him
from them save the selected servants of Allah.

In these five instructions, in fact, the Qur’an has begun from the
simple stage up to the last and highest stages of servitude. The
beginning words are about bowing and then, superior to it, about
prostration, and next to it the statement is about any worship in
general.

The fulfilment of good deeds, irrespective of worships and other than
them, comes later, and in the last stage, the Qur’an refers to Holy
Struggle and effort and endeavour, whether they are done individually or
socially, interior or exterior and related to behaviour, speech, ethics,
and intention.

This is a conclusive instruction which, no doubt, leads to salvation and
prosperity as its consequence.

### Some Traditions About Holy Struggle

1- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Now then, surely Holy Struggle is one of the doors of Paradise which
Allah has opened for His chief friends. It is the dress of piety and the
protective armour of Allah and His trustworthy shield.…”*[^5]

2- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Holy Struggle is the most superior things next to the canonical
obligations.”*[^6]

3- The same Imam (as) said:

*“The alms (zakat) of the body is Holy Struggle and fasting.”*[^7]

4- Again, he (as) said:

*“The alms (zakat) of bravery is Holy Struggle in the way of
Allah.”*[^8]

5- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Holy Struggle accompanied with a just leader is obligatory.”*[^9]

6- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The peak of Islam is Holy Struggle in the way of Allah which is not
gained save by the best of them (Muslims).”*[^10]

7- The Messenger of Allah (S) also said:

*“Fighting in the way of Allah is more beloved with me than forty Hajj
pilgrimages.”*[^11]

8- The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“Verily Holy Struggle in the way of Allah is of the best deeds of the
believers.”*[^12]

9- The Messenger of Allah (S) in his testament to Ali (as) said:

*“O’ Ali! The best Holy Struggle (for a striver) is that he spends the
time while he does not try to be unjust to any one.”*[^13]

10- The Messenger of Allah (S) again said:

 *“Verily a believer strives with his sword and his tongue.”*[^14]

In view of the fact that there may arise this thought that how it is
that these heavy commandments, each of which is vaster and more
conclusive than the other, have been laid upon us, the weak servants,
there are some other statements in the continuation of the verse which
indicate that these things are some evidences for the Grace of Allah
unto the believers, and also they are the signs of the grandeur of the
rank of their personality, the believers, with Him.

The verse continues saying:

***“…He has chosen you…”***

If you were not chosen by Allah you would not be given so many
responsibilities.

Then, in the next sentence, the Qur’an says:

***“…and has not laid upon you any hardship in religion;…”***

That is, if you think properly these commandments are not some hard
duties. On the contrary, they adapt to your pure nature and are
consistent to it, and principally, since they are as some means for your
perfection and every one of them has a philosophy and some clear
benefits which finally reach you, they will not be bitter in your soul’s
taste, and they are completely sweet and wholesome.

In the third stage of statement, it implies that this is the same
religion of your father, Abraham.

The verse says:

***“…the faith of your father Abraham (is yours).…”***

The reason why Abraham has been called ‘father’ is either because the
Arabs and Muslims of that day were mostly from the seed of Ishmael (as),
or it is for the sake that they all considered Abraham very great and
they respected him as a spiritual father, though his pure religion had
been polluted by kinds of superstitions.

Then the Qur’an gives another idea in this field when it says:

***“…He named you Muslims, both before and in this (Book)…”***

And a Muslim is the one who has this honour that he is submissive to the
whole commandments of Allah.

The commentators are divided in defining the antecedent of the Arabic
pronoun /huwa/. Some of them have said that it returns to Allah. In this
case it means that Allah has called you by this honourable name both in
the former books and in the Qur’an.

Some others believe that it returns to Abraham, because we recite in
Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 128 that, after finishing the structure
of Ka‘bah, Abraham asked Allah for some things, including this:

***“Our Lord, make us submissive (Muslims) to You, and of our progeny an
Ummah (a nation) submissive to You…”***

But the first interpretation seems more correct, because it adapts the
words next to it in the verse, where it says:

***“…He named you Muslims, both before and in this (Book)…”,***

and this meaning does not fit Abraham but it concerns Allah.[^15]

At last, the fifth and the last encouraging meaning about the Muslims
has been stated here, when it introduces them as the example and
paradigm of nations.

It says:

***“…that the Messenger may be a witness over you and you may be
witnesses over the people;…”***

The Arabic word /šahid/, in the sense of witness, is derived from
/šuhud/ with the meaning of ‘cognizance accompanied with presence’.

This statement means that the Messenger (S) being witness over all
Muslims refers to his cognizance about the deeds of his Ummah. This
commentary quietly adapts to the Islamic narrations concerning the
‘exposition of deeds’, and some verses of the Qur’an which refer to it.

According to these narrations the deeds of all the members of Ummah are
exposed to the Prophet (S) during every week, and his pure soul will be
informed of all these things. Therefore, he is the witness over this
Ummah.

And this Ummah being witness, according to some Islamic narrations,
means the Immaculate ones of this Ummah, the Imams, who are also the
witnesses over the deeds of people.

A tradition narrated from Ali-ibn-Mus-ar-Rida (as) indicates that he
said:

*“We are Allah’s authorities among His servants and we are the witnesses
of Allah and His signs among people.”*[^16]

In fact, the addressee in the Qur’anic phrase /li takunu/ is apparently
the whole Ummah, but, indeed, they are some of the chiefs and nobles of
them. Addressing ‘the whole’ for a part of them is very common in the
daily applications.

For example, we recite in Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 20 that, Allah,
counting His blessings upon the Children of Israel, addresses them:

***“…and made you kings…”***

while we know that only a few of them were bestowed on this rank.

The Arabic term /šuhud/ has also another meaning which is a ‘practical
witness’; viz. the criterion of measurement for the deeds of others is
an example person’s actions.

In this case all the true believing Muslims are of this kind, because
they are an ‘example Ummah’, or a model, with the best religion, Islam,
who can be a measure and an example for measuring the personality and
virtue among all nations.

A tradition from the holy Prophet (S) indicates that Allah has bestowed
several virtues and superiorities on the Ummah of Islam. One of them is
that in each of the former nations, their prophet was a witness over his
own people, but in Islam, He has appointed all the Ummah as a witness
over people.

The verse says:

***“…and you may be a witness over the people.…”***

This means that: as the Prophet (S) is an example for his own Ummah, you
are also examples for the people of the world.[^17]

In the meanwhile, this commentary does not contradict the former
interpretation. It is also possible that all Ummah to be witnesses and
the Immaculate Imams to be some model and outstanding witnesses.

At the end of this verse again the five former duties, as an emphasis,
are reiterated in three concise expressive sentences, where it implies:
now that the case is as such, and you have these privileges and honours,
you should keep up prayer and give alms (zakat) to the due people and
hold fast the religion of truth under the grace of Allah, because He is
your Master, your Guardian, and the One Who succours you.

The verse says:

***“…therefore establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and hold fast to
Allah! He is your Guardian…”***

Then the Holy Qur’an adds:

***“…how excellent the Guardian and how excellent the Helper!”***

In fact, the Qur’anic phrase which says:

***“…how excellent the Guardian and how excellent the Helper”***

is a reason on the Qur’anic sentence which says:

***“…and hold fast to Allah! He is your Guardian…”.***

That is, you have been commanded to hold fast the truth only under the
grace of Allah, and this is for the sake that He is the Supreme and the
best Guardian, the worthiest Helper.

Concerning the phrase:

***“…and hold fast to Allah…”***

in another occurrence the Qur’an says:

***“Then as for those who believe in Allah, and hold fast to Him,
shortly He will admit them to Mercy from Him and Grace; and will guide
them toward Himself through a straight way”.***

There is a tradition narrated from Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) who said:

*“In all your affairs hold fast to Allah. It is in this case that you
can protect yourself by Him, the Pure, through a Strong Power.”*[^18]

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) also said:

*“Whoever holds fast to Allah, He will save him.”*[^19]

Again, it is narrated from the same Imam (as) who said:

*“Whoever holds fast to Allah, never can Satan harm him.”*[^20]

Supplication
------------

*O’ Lord! Give us success and felicity so that to be an example people
by means of holding Your Pure Essence and associating with people in a
manner that we can be considered as models and witnesses to others.*

*O’ Lord! As You called us Muslims in the holy Qur’an and in Your former
Heavenly Books, bestow on us success to be submissive to Your Command
thoroughly.*

*O’ Lord! Make us victorious over the enemies who, here and there, try
to attack the Qur’an and Islam, and do set us among those who do not
rely on the mere name of Islam and Muslim alone, but help us to guard
this honour by establishing prayer, paying the poor-rate, Holy Struggle,
and holding fast to You, because You are the Excellent Guardian, the
Excellent Helper.*

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Qartabi, Tafsir-i-’Abul-Futuh-i-Razi,
Tafsir-i-Fakhr-i-Razi, and Tafsir-i-Rauh-ul-Ma‘ani, following the verse

[^2]: Surah Fatir, No. 35, verse 1

[^3]: Surah Saba, No. 34, verse 3

[^4]: Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘, following the verse; and Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol.
3, following the verse.

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, Sermon 27

[^6]: Sahih-I-Muslim, No. 1910

[^7]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 5452

[^8]: Ibid, 5455

[^9]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 11, p. 35

[^10]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 4, p. 298

[^11]: Ibid, p. 304

[^12]: Ibid, p. 286

[^13]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 6, p. 123

[^14]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 4, p. 357

[^15]: In the Holy Qur’an, Surah Al-Ma’idah, verse 3 He has explicitly
called this religion Islam, where it says: “… and completed My favour on
you, and I have chosen for you Islam as a religion, …”

[^16]: Taken from the book by Kamal-ud-Din, Saduq, according to the
quotation of Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 526. There have also been
narrated other narrations with the same content in this field.

[^17]: Tafsir-i-Burhan, vol. 3, p. 105

[^18]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 2390

[^19]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 7826 and, Mizan-ul-Hikmah, vol. 8, p. 3802

[^20]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 8035, and Mizan,ul-Hikmah, vol. 8, p. 3803


