Section 1: Judgment Getting Nigh
================================

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 1
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مُّعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Nigh unto mankind has drawn (the day) of their Reckoning, while
they turn away in heedlessness.”***

This Surah begins with a vigorous warning unto all people, a shaking and
an awakening warning.

It says:

***“Nigh unto mankind has drawn (the day) of their Reckoning, while they
turn away in heedlessness.”***

The people’s daily action shows that this negligence has occupied their
whole entity; else, how is it possible that a mortal believes in the
fact that Reckoning is nigh, a reckoning done by an extraordinary exact
Performer, and yet he takes all the matters perfunctorily so that he
pollutes himself with any kind of vice?

The purpose of “nigh is the day of Reckoning and Hereafter’ is that the
remaining life of this world, in comparison with that which has passed,
is a little time, therefore, Resurrection is nigh. It is a relative
nearness, in particular that once the Prophet (S), pointing to his two
fingers in one hand, said that his auspicious advent and the Day of
Hereafter were like those two fingers.

There arises a question here that, regarding to the fact that
‘Negligence’ is ‘to be inattentive to something’, and /’i‘rad/ (to turn
away) is an action which is done with attention, then how is it that
‘negligence’ and ‘turning away’ are usually referred to beside each
other?

The answer to this question is that negligence is of two kinds:

1) The negligence that the person may become aware by a warning.

2) The negligence which is a preparation for desertion. Such a negligent
person does not desire to be aware; like a person who pretends to be
asleep and does not open his eyes even when he is called.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 2 - 4
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَأْتِيهِم مِن ذِكْرٍ مِن رَّبّـِهِم مُّحْدَثٍ إِلاَّ اسْتَمَعُوهُ
وَهُمْ يَلْعَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَهِيَةً قُلُوبُهُمْ وَأَسَرُّوا النَّجْوَي الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا هَلْ
هَذَآ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مّـِثْلُكُمْ أَفَتَأْتُونَ السّـِحْرَ وَأَنتُمْ
تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّـِي يَعْلَمُ الْقَوْلَ فِي السَّمَآءِ وَالاَرْضِ وَهُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “Never comes to them a new reminder from their Lord, but they
listen to it while they play.”***  
***3. “Their hearts trifling, and those who did wrong (to themselves)
counsel together in secret (saying): ‘Is this (man) other than a human
being like yourselves? Will you then go to sorcery while you see
(it)?’”***  
***4. “He said: ‘My Lord knows (every) word (spoken) in the heaven and
the earth, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-knowing’.”***

One of the signs of their turning back from the Truth has been pointed
out in this verse, where it says:

***“Never comes to them a new reminder from their Lord, but they listen
to it while they play.”***

But, if, even for one time, they take it earnestly, the path of their
life may change at the same time.

Again, for a more emphasis, the verse implies that their hearts have
sunk in vanity and ignorance.

The verse says:

***“Their hearts trifling…”***

The reason of it is that they have outwardly taken all the earnest
matters in play and joke; therefore, it is natural that such people will
never find the way of felicity and prosperity.

Then, the Qur’an points to a part of their satanic plans, when the verse
continues saying:

***“…and those who did wrong (to themselves) counsel together in secret
(saying): ‘Is this (man) other than a human being like yourselves?…”***

They say to each other now that he is not more than an ordinary human
being, then these extraordinary actions that he does and the penetration
of his speech cannot be any thing but sorcery. If so, do you go toward
sorcery?

The verse says:

***“…Will you then go to sorcery while you see (it)?’”***

In their saying, the disbelievers emphasized on two things: the first
was that the Prophet (S) was a human being, and the second matter was
the accusation of sorcery. Besides them, they accused him with some
other false things, too, which will be rejected by the Qur’an through
later verses.

The Qur’an, from the tongue of the holy Prophet (S), answers them in a
general form, as follows:

***“He said: ‘My Lord knows (every) word (spoken) in the heaven and the
earth, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-knowing’.”***

They should not imagine that their hidden plans and their concealed
words are not revealed to Allah. It is not such, but

***“He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing”.***

Thus, He knows everything and is aware of all deeds. Not only He hears
the words but also He is aware of the thoughts which pass through the
minds and the decisions that are concealed in the hearts.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 5
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ قَالُوا أَضْغَاثُ أَحْلاَمٍ بَلِ افْتَرَاهُ بَلْ هُوَ شَاعِرٌ
فَلْيَأْتِنَا بِاَيَةٍ كَمَآ اُرْسِلَ الاَوَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “‘Nay!’, They say: ‘(These are) medleys of dreams! Nay! he has
forged it! Nay! he is a poet! Let him then bring us a sign like the ones
that were sent unto (the prophets) of old.”***

After referring to two pretexts of the opponents, the Qur’an points to
four other subjects they used to apply. They said that whatever
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah (S), had brought were not revelations,
but they were some confused dreams that he considered as truth and
reality.

The verse says:

***“‘Nay!’, They say: ‘(These are) medleys of dreams!…”***

Sometimes they change their saying and say that he is a liar who has
forged these words to Allah.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Nay! He has forged it!…”***

And sometimes they say that he is a poet, and those verses are some
poetic imaginations made by him.

The verse says:

***“…Nay! He is a poet!…”***

And, finally they say that, passing by these things, if he is true, and
he is a messenger of the Lord, he should bring a miracle for them as the
former messengers had been sent with miracles.

The verse says:

***“…Let him then bring us a sign like the ones that were sent unto (the
prophets) of old.”***

Considering these contradictory attributions they attributed to the
Prophet (S) it shows as a good reason that these people were not the
seekers of the Truth. Their aim was to find pretexts in order to send
the rival out of the scene in any rate and any form they could.

### Explanations

The Arabic term /’adqa/ is the plural form of /diq/ in the sense of ‘a
group’, or ‘a collection’; and the Qur’anic word /’ahlam/ is the plural
form of /hulm/ with the sense of ‘dream’. Thus, the holy phrase /’adqau
’ahlam/ means ‘a selection of confused dreams’.

Those disbelievers wanted the Prophet of Islam (S) to bring some
miracles like those of Moses (as) and Isaac (as), but their real aim was
to seek pretexts, because taking the sort of miracle depends on Divine
Wisdom, not on the desires of people.

The enemy is not satisfied with striking one accusation. He attacks from
every side by means of frequent accusations, and this is one of the main
styles of the enemy.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 6 - 7
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَآ ءَامَنَتْ قَبْلَهُم مِن قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَآ أَفَهُمْ
يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَسْاَلُوا أَهْلَ الذّ‌ِكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “There did not believe before them any town which We destroyed;
will these (now) believe?”***  
***7. “And We sent none before you, but men to whom We made revelation.
So ask the people of ‘Thikr’(the Reminder) if you do not know.”***

Former verses denoted that the disbelievers said:

***“Is this man other than a human being like yourselves?”***

In this verse, the Qur’an implies that not only this Prophet (S) but
also the former Divine prophets were human beings to whom the revelation
was made. And this, the descent of revelation to them, does not contrast
with being a human being.

In the previous holy verses, there were mentioned six contradictory
pretexts that the opponents of Islam sought unto the holy Prophet (S).
Here by this verse, the Qur’an answers them.

At first, it refers to the miracles that they demanded as their pretext,
and that the people of the towns, whom were destroyed before them,
sought for such miracles, but when their suggestions were fulfilled they
did not believe.

The verse says:

***“There did not believe before them any town which We destroyed; will
these (now) believe?”***

In the meantime, the holy verse warns the disbelievers that if their
demand concerning the miracles are responded and they do not believe,
their destruction is certain.

Then the Qur’an answers their first rejection about the Prophet (S) as a
human being. It implies that all the Messengers sent before the Prophet
of Islam (S) were totally human beings and from the sort of humankind.

The verse says:

***“And We sent none before you, but men to whom We made
revelation.…”***

This is a clear historical reality with which everybody is acquainted.
Therefore, if you do not know it, ask other people.

The verse continues saying:

***“…So ask the people of the Reminder if you do not know.”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلْنَاهُمْ جَسَداً لاَّ يَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَمَا كَانُوا
خَالِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “And We did not make them (such) bodies not eating the food, nor
were they immortals.”***

Among the secrets of the succession of a leader is that he always lives
among the people, and in the affairs of his natural life he is generally
like them so that, by seeing him and by means of his conduct, people
might be practically constructed properly.

From the point of material and human necessities, prophets are never
different from other people. Therefore, no one should expect prophets,
reformers and teachers to be some angels; because it is an undue
expectation. That is why this verse gives a further explanation about
the Divine prophets that they are of humankind.

It says:

***“And We did not make them (such) bodies not eating the food, nor were
they immortals.”***

The leader of a group should be from among those people themselves, with
the same instincts, temperaments, emotions, feelings, necessities, and
interests, so that he can feel their pains and problems.

It is in that case that, by being inspired with his instructions, he can
choose the best way of healing them; and become an example and a good
pattern for other human beings, too.

However, asking from the people of thikr (the reminder) and referring to
the experts is a principle approved by wisdom. Some commentators have
said that the purpose of ‘the people of the Reminder’ is the scholars of
the Jews and Christians.

But there are a great number of traditions, narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt
(as), which indicate ‘the people of the Reminder’ are the Immaculate
Imams (as). One of them is the following tradition.

It is narrated from Imam Ali-ibn-Musar-Rida (as) who, in answer to the
question about the abovementioned verse, said:

*“We are the people of Reminder, and we must be asked.”*[^1]

Another tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as) denotes, that, on the
commentary of this verse, he said:

*“The Qur’an is the Reminder, and the Ahl-ul-Bayt of the Prophet (S) are
the people of the Reminder, and they must be asked.”*[^2]

Some other traditions indicate that /ŏikr/ (reminder) is the Prophet
himself (S), and his Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) are ‘the people of the
Reminder’.[^3]

There have been recorded many other traditions which, on the whole,
announce the same meaning. In numerous books and commentaries compiled
by the scholars of the Sunnites, too, we are faced with some traditions
containing the same concepts, including in twelve well-known commentary
books of the Sunnites.[^4]

There has been narrated from Ibn-‘Abbas who, upon the commentary of this
verse, said:

*“It (means) Muhammad, Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and Husayn (as). They are
the people of the Reminder, and intellect, and statement.”*

Again, a holy tradition has been recorded in the book of Tha‘labi,
narrated from Jabir-i-Ju‘fi, who says:

*As soon as this verse was revealed, Ali (as) said: ‘We are the people
of the Reminder’.”*[^5]

This is not the first time that, in the traditions concerning the
commentary of the verses of the Qur’an, we confront the statement of
some definite extensions which never confine the vast concept of a
verse.

As it was mentioned before, the Qur’anic term /ŏikr/ is applies for any
cognizance, remembrance, and information. Thus the phrase /ahl-uŏ-ŏikr/
(the people of the Reminder) envelops all the aware and the informed
persons in all fields.

But, in view of the fact that the Qur’an is the clear example of
remembrance, knowledge and awareness, it has been called /ŏikr/
(Reminder). The Prophet (S) himself is also the manifest extension of
/ŏikr/, and such are the Immaculate Imams (as) who are his Ahl-ul-Bayt
and the heirs of his knowledge.

But, the acceptance of this matter does not oppose the generality of the
concept of the verse and the occasion of its revelation which concerns
the scholars of ‘the People of the Book’.

It is for this reason that the scholars of theology, and the experts of
Muslim law, attach to this verse when speaking about /’ijtihad/
(discretion), and that those who are unaware of the religious ordinances
should follow a religious jurist.

However, the abovementioned holy verse expressed a fundamental Islamic
principle, which covers all the material and spiritual subjects of the
life. It warns all the Muslims that they ought to ask the people of
Reminder whatever they do not know, and they should not interfere in the
fields they are not acquainted with.

Thus, not only in all religious laws and Islamic affairs the subject of
specialism is formally accepted, but also it is emphasized on in all
fields. It is such that all Muslims, in all ages, should have some
expert and aware persons available in all subjects of life so that, if
there are some people who do not know how to solve their own problems,
they can easily refer to them.

It is also necessary to mention that we must refer to those experts and
clear-sighted persons whose truthfulness and veracity have been proved
and who are rather matchless. Do we ever refer to a physician who is
specialist in his branch but we are not certain of his truthfulness and
uprightness in that job which the physician has?

That is why, in connection with jurisprudence and following a religious
leader, the epithet of ‘justice’ has been put beside both /’ijtihad/
(discretion) and /’a‘lamiyyat/ (being the most learned). In other words,
the imitated authority should not only be both knowledgeable and aware
of the Islamic affairs, but he must also be pious and God-fearing.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 9
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ صَدَقْنَاهُمُ الْوَعْدَ فَاَنجَيْنَاهُمْ وَمَن نَّشَآءُ
وَأَهْلَكْنَا الْمُسْرِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “Then We fulfilled the promise unto them. So We delivered them and
whomever We would, and We destroyed the extravagant ones.”***

Then, as a threat and a warning, the Qur’an says to the obstinate and
pertinacious rejecters of the Truth that Allah had promised the prophets
to relieve them from the grips of their enemies and make their enemies’
plans futile.

It says:

***“Then We fulfilled the promise unto them. So We delivered them and
whomever We would, and We destroyed the extravagant ones.”***

Yes, alike the Allah’s way of treatment, which was choosing prophets,
the leaders of humankind, from among human beings, this was also the
Allah’s way of treatment that He would support His Messengers against
the plots of their opponents.

And, if their frequent advices did not affect on them, He would clear
out the surface of the ground from the dirt of their beings.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 10
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكُمْ كِتَاباً فِيهِ ذِكْرُكُمْ أَفَلاَ
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “We have sent down to you a Book wherein is your Reminder. Have
you then no sense?”***

This holy verse, in an expressive short sentence, again answers the
majority of the objections of the polytheists.

It says:

***“We have sent down to you a Book wherein is your Reminder. Have you
then no sense?”***

Whosoever studies the verses of this Holy Book, which are the means of
reminding, awakening the hearts, exciting the thoughts, and purifying
the societies, he knows well that this Book, the Qur’an, is a clear and
eternal miracle.

The signs of inimitability of the Qur’an are seen in it from different
points of view: from the view point of extraordinary attraction, from
the point of contents, such as ordinances and religious laws, beliefs,
theology and so on. With the existence of this clear miracle, do they
expect the appearance of another miracle?

The quality of being awakening of the Qur’an is not a compulsory aspect;
but it is conditioned to man’s will and that he opens the windows of his
heart to it.

### Explanations

The Qur’anic phrase /ŏikrukum/ means either ‘the means of remembrance’,
or ‘the cause of honour and dignity of your name’. In philology, the
Arabic term /ŏikr/ has been meant into ‘fame’, and ‘nobility and
honour’, too.[^6]

Concerning the commentary of this holy verse, Imam Kazim (as) said:

*“The purpose of the phrase ‘wherein is your Reminder’ is that: it is
mentioned in the Book that the obedience, after the Prophet (S), should
be paid to Imam; that is, your nobility and honour lies in the obedience
from (immaculate) Imam after the Prophet.”*

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3 pp. 55 and 56

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: The objective meaning of ‘twelve well-known commentary books of
the Sunnites’ is: the commentary books of ’Abu-Yusuf, Ibn-i-Hajar,
Mughatil-ibn-i-Sulayman, Waki‘-ibn-i-Jarrah, Yusuf-ibn-i-Musa, Ghutadah,
Harbut-Ta’i, Suday, Mujahid, Mughatil-ibn-i-Hayyan, Abu-Salih,
Muhammad-ibn-Musal-Shirazi.

[^5]: ’Ihghagh-ul-Haghgh, vol. 3, p. 482

[^6]: Ghamus-ul-Muhit


