Section 3: Every Soul Shall Taste Death
=======================================

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 30
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَ لَمْ يَرَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضَ
كَانَتَا رَتْقاً فَفَتَقْنَاهُمَا وَجَعَلْنَا مِنَ الْمَآءِ كُلَّ
شَيْءٍ حَيٍّ أَفَلاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “Do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth
were joined together before We clove them asunder, and We made from
water every living thing? Will they not then believe?”***

Here, there have been stated a few signs of Allah in the system of the
world of existence and its regular order, which is an emphasis on the
previous discussions regarding the reasons of Monotheism.

At first it says:

***“Do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were
joined together before We clove them asunder, and We made from water
every living thing?…”***

Then, the Qur’an questions that, after having seemed these clear signs,
do they not believe yet?

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…Will they not then believe?”***

There are some different ideas offered by the commentators about the
purpose of the words /ratq/ (joining) and /fatq/ (separation) mentioned
in the above verse, which concern the heavens and the earth. Among them,
three interpretations seem more appropriate, and, as it will be
explained, all of them may be found in the concept of the verse.[^1]

1. Attaching the heaven to the earth refers to the beginning of the
creation.

According to the attitudes of some scientists, this world had been in
the form of a single great unit of blazing vapor that, as a result of
some different inward explosions and movements, it gradually divided
into parts and the stars and planets, including the solar system and the
earth, came to being, and still the world is expanding.

2. The purpose of this attachment is the monotony of the substances of
the world so that all of them were gathered in one another and formed
apparently a single matter. But, as the time passed, the substances
separated from each other, and some new compounds appeared.

Thus many kinds of plants, animals, and other creatures existed in the
heaven and the earth. These beings are in a condition that each of them
has a special system and some effects and properties particular to
itself. Every one of them is a sign for the infinite Knowledge, Glory
and Might of Allah.[^2]

3. The objective of the attachment of the heaven is that at first it did
not rain, and the attachment of the earth is that at that time there
grew no plant at all over it, but Allah started both of them. He caused
to rain from heaven and He caused plants to grow on the earth.

There are numerous traditions narrated from the Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) which
refer to the latter meaning while some of them point to the first
commentary.[^3]

No doubt that the latter commentary is something which is visible by the
eyes that how it rains and that the lands cleave asunder and plants
grow. This is completely adapted with the sentence saying:

***“Do not those who disbelieve see”,***

and it also harmonizes with the sentence declaring:

***“…and We made from water every living thing”.***

But the first and the second above commentaries do not contradict the
vast meaning of these sentences, because the word ‘see’ sometimes is in
the sense of ‘knowledge’. True is that this knowledge and cognizance is
not available for all.

It is only the scientists who can give others some information about the
past of the earth and the heaven and their attachment and, then, their
separation, which may lead human beings throughout the whole centuries
of the life.

It is for this reason that it has such a deep comprehensive content that
can be applied by all groups of people in all times. And that is why we
think there is no obstacle that this verse can embrace the whole three
commentaries, each of which is correct and perfect in its own place.

We have frequently reiterated that the usage of one word, with more than
one meaning, not only is not wrong but sometimes is also the reason for
a high eloquence. So, some Islamic traditions indicate that the Qur’an
has different layers of meaning. This may refer to this concept, too.

Concerning the Qur’anic meaningful idea, cited at the end of the
abovementioned holy verse, indicating that all living things have been
created from water, here we introduce two known commentaries:

1. The life of all living things, irrespective of plants and animals,
depends on water; this very water that originates the descent of rain
from the heaven.

Another matter is that the Arabic word /ma’/, mentioned here, refers to
the drop of seed from which the living creatures are usually produced.

It is interesting that the scientists of today believe that the first
gemma of life has been found in the depth of the seas, and that is why
they think that the life has begun by means of water. And when we see
that the Qur’an considers the creation of man out of /tin/ (mud), it is
because this substance is a mixture of water and dust.

This subject is also noteworthy that the main part of man’s body, as
well as that of many animals, mostly consists of water, (about seventy
percent).

Some have objected that the creation of the angels and jinn both is
certainly not from water, though they are some living creatures. The
answer of it is clear, because the purpose in this context is those
living creatures which are tangible for us.

An Islamic tradition indicates that once a person asked Imam Sadiq (as)
about the taste of water.

The Imam (as) at first said:

*“Ask with the aim that you learn something, not with the purpose of
seeking pretext.”*

Then he (as) added:

 *“The taste of water is the taste of life. Allah, Be He Glorified, has
said: ‘And We made from water every living thing’.”*[^4]

In the summer, in particular, when a person, tolerating continued
thirst, reaches some wholesome water in that hot weather, after drinking
the first gulps of it, he feels that a spirit of life is blown into his
body. The Imam, in fact intends to clarify the relation and dependence
of life and water by this beautiful expression.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 31
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا فِي الاَرْضِ رَوَاسِيَ أَن تَمِيدَ بِهِمْ وَجَعَلْنَا
فِيهَا فِجَاجاً سُبُلاً لَّعَلَّهُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “And We set in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with
them (people), and We set therein broad high ways that they may be
guided.”***

This holy verse has pointed to another part of the signs of Monotheism
as well as the great bounties of Allah.

It says:

***“And We set in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with
them (people)…”***

As a shield, mountains have embraced the earth, and this causes that
they prevent the intensive shakes of the earth on a large scale which
appear as a result of the pressure of the inner gases of it.

Moreover, this very arrangement of the mountains usually decreases the
movements of the crust of the earth against the low tides and high tides
of the moon to the least.

On the other hand, if there were not any mountains, the surface of the
earth would not have any peace because of the hurricanes, as it is seen
in the dry hot deserts as well as salt deserts. Mountains are good
places for preserving snow to store water in them for the summer.

They are often good and appropriate environments for the growth of
plants and animals. The kinds of stone, which are used in buildings, are
taken from mountains, and there are cited some other advantages counted
among the benefits of the mountains.

Then the Qur’an points to another bounty, which is also one of the signs
of the greatness of Allah, when it says:

***“…and We set therein broad high ways that they may be guided.”***

Verily if these valleys and gaps were not, the great series of mountains
existing on the crust of the earth, would so separate the different
regions of the land that the joint of them was utterly broken, and this
shows that all these phenomena have been arranged according to a proper
program.

### Explanations

1. The Arabic word /rawasi/ is the plural form of /rasiyah/ which means:
‘fixed’ and its objective in this holy verse is the ‘steadfast
mountains’. The term /fijaj/ is also called to the wide roads between
two mountains, while the narrow roads between mountains, in Arabic, are
often named: /šu‘ab/.[^5]

2. How can it be believed that Allah, the Wise, has set the mountains in
order to prevent from numerous earthquakes, but He has not assigned the
patient and powerful leaders to prevent mankind from slipping in events.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 32
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا السَّمَآءَ سَقْفاً مَّحْفُوظاً وَهُمْ عَنْ ءَايَاتِهَا
مُعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “And We set up the heaven as a roof well-protected, and yet they
turn away from its signs.”***

In view of the fact that the mere stillness of the earth is not enough
for the comfort of human’s life and he must also be secured from the
upward, in this verse the Qur’an adds:

***“And We set up the heaven as a roof well-protected, and yet they turn
away from its signs.”***

The objective of ‘the heaven’ here is the atmosphere which has
encompassed the earth from every side. According to the researches of
the concerning scientists, the depth of this atmosphere reaches to
hundreds kilometers.

This depth of weather, which apparently is tender, is composed of oxygen
and different gases, is so firm and strong that no disturbing thing that
comes toward it can destroy it. It protects the earth against aerolites
which continuously fall down, day and night, and are more dangerous than
any bullet.

Moreover, the harmful parts of the sunrays are taken by it. Thus, it
guards the earth against the fatal outside rays that comes towards it
from cosmos.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 33
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ
كُلٌّ فِي فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “And He it is Who created the night and the day and the sun and
the moon. They float, each in an orbit.”***

how do you say soul mate in farsi? This verse has referred to the
creation of the night and the day as well as the creation of the sun and
moon.

It says:

***“And He it is Who created the night and the day and the sun and the
moon. They float, each in an orbit.”***

The commentators of the Qur’an have different opinions upon the
interpretation of the sentence:

***“They float, each in an orbit”.***

But what agrees with the conclusive researches of scholars is the fact
that: the purpose of the motion of the sun, in the abovementioned verse,
is either a circular motion rotating around itself, or the motion it has
in the whole solar system.

It is also necessary to be mentioned that the Arabic word /kull/ (each),
mentioned in the verse, may refer to the moon, the sun, and also the
stars all together. This meaning is understood from the word /layl/ (the
night) recited in this holy verse.

Some great commentators have also said that mentioning ‘the night’, ‘the
day’, ‘the sun’, and ‘the moon’ in the verse may refer to the four
seasons. For, the night, which is in fact the conical shadow of the
earth, has also an orbit for itself.

If a person from outside of the atmosphere looks from a distance at it,
he will see that this conical dark shadow is constantly running around
the earth. He will also see that the light of the sun, which shines upon
the earth and produces the day, is like a cylinder that ceaselessly
rotates around this glob. Therefore, the day and the night each has a
line and place for itself.

Some others have said that the objective of the motion of the sun, here,
is the motion created by our feeling, for, to the consideration of the
observers of the earth, it seems that the sun and the moon both are
moving.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 34 - 35
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلْنَا لِبَشَرٍ مِن قَبْلِكَ الْخُلْدَ أَفإِيْن مّـِتَّ
فَهُمُ الْخَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَآئِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ وَنَبْلُوكُم بِالشَّرّ‌ِ وَالْخَيْرِ
فِتْنَةً وإِلَيْنَا تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “And We appointed immortality for no man before you. Then if you
die, can they be immortal?”***  
***35. “Every soul shall taste of death; and We try you with evil and
good for a testing, and unto Us you shall be returned.”***

Through a part of the previous verses, we were acquainted with the fact
that some polytheists objected about the Prophet (S) as why he was a
human being. This verse refers to some other objections that they had.
Sometimes they said that the fame that the Prophet (S), or as they
called him ‘that poet,’ had got was not lasting and everything would be
vanished by his death.[^6]

Sometimes they thought such that since this man believes that he is the
seal of the prophets, he should not die in order to protect his
religion, and, therefore, his death in future will be the reason for the
falseness of his claim.

The Qur’an answers them for their false imagination in a short sentence.
It says:

***“And We appointed immortality for no man before you.…”***

This is the invariable law of creation that no one has an eternal life.
Besides that, do these people, who are happy for your death just now,
live immortally after your death?

The verse says:

***“…Then if you die, can they be immortal?”***

The duration of a religion, creed, and a sacred law does not need the
ever permanence of its bringer. His successors may continue his line
after him.

Then the Holy Qur’an states the general law of death for all souls, with
no exception, as follows:

***“Every soul shall taste of death;…”***

After mentioning the general law of death, there will arise this
question that: What is the aim of this ephemeral life, and what is the
use of it?

In the continuation of this holy verse, the Qur’an states as follows:

***“…and We try you with evil and good for a testing, and unto Us you
shall be returned.”***

The Divine trial is harder when it is done by means of afflictions.

Your main abode has not been assigned in this world. It is somewhere
else. You have come here only for taking examinations, and after the end
of the examination and gaining the necessary development, you will go to
your main abode, the world of the Hereafter.

By the way, Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), concerning the Qur’anic
sentence, saying:

***“…and We try you with evil and good for a testing…”,***

said:

*“Health and self-sufficiency is ‘good’, and sickness and poverty is
‘evil’ and both of them are for trial.”*[^7]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 36
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَءَاكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِن يَتَّخِذُونَكَ إِلاَّ هُزُواً
أَهَذَا الَّذِي يَذْكُرُ ءَالِهَتَكُمْ وَهُم بِذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَنِ هُمْ
كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “And when those who disbelieve see you, they take you not but for
mockery; (saying each other): ‘Is this the one who makes mention of your
gods?’ And (while) they, at the mention of the Beneficent (Allah), are
themselves disbelievers.”***

Blasphemy takes man to a point that he mocks the strong logic and the
statement of the Immaculate Imam, while he is not ready to show the
least disrespect to the piece of wood and stone, the idol.

Its example is that if there is a malodorous corpse in a pool, when it
rains its putrefaction and fetid smell will increase. Blasphemy is like
a corpse of carrion in man’s soul. He brings forth some more obstinacy
by seeing the Prophet (S).

So, in this verse, the Qur’an encounters the disbelievers in connection
with their evil situation against the Prophet of Islam (S) which shows
their wrong doctrine in some fundamental subjects. At first, the holy
verse implies that they disrespectfully point to the Prophet (S) and say
whether this man is the same who mentions their gods and idols
maliciously.

The verse says:

***“And when those who disbelieve see you, they take you not but for
mockery; (saying each other): ‘Is this the one who makes mention of your
gods?’ And (while) they, at the mention of the Beneficent (Allah), are
themselves disbelievers.”***

It is surprising that when a person frankly says something
disrespectfully about these idols, which are made of wood or stone, and
tells the truth by saying that these are some soulless, senseless, and
worthless beings, they wonder; but when a person denies the Merciful,
Beneficent Allah, Whose impacts of favour have covered all the world,
and everything is a reason for His Greatness and Mercy, it will not be
wonderful for them.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 37 - 38
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُلِقَ الإِنسَانُ مِنْ عَجَلٍ سَأُوْرِيكُمْ ءَايَاتِي فَلاَ
تَسْتَعْجِلُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَي هَذَا الْوَعْدُ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “(The nature of mortals is such that as if) man has been created
of haste; soon (enough) I will show you My signs, so do not ask Me to
hasten (them) on.”***  
***38. “And they (the disbelievers) say: When will this promise (be
fulfilled) if you are truthful?”***

This holy verse points to one of the heinous and irrelevant deeds of
those immethodical libertines.

It says:

***“(The nature of mortals is such that as if) man has been created of
haste;…”***

There are various opinions cited upon this sentence, but it is clear
that the purpose of ‘man’ here is the whole mankind, (those untrained
people, of course, who are out of the realm of the leadership of the
Divine leaders).

As it is also testified by the later holy verses, the objective meaning
of the Qur’anic term /‘ajal/, here, is ‘haste’ and ‘precipitance’.

The Qur’an in another occurrence says:

***“…and man is ever hasty.”***[^8]

In fact, the sense of ‘Man has been created of haste’ is an emphasis,
which means ‘man’ is so hasty that as if he has been created out of
precipitancy and his whole entity has been made up out of it. And,
truly, a great deal of common people are such.

They are hasty both in good deeds and evil acts, so that even when they
are told if they pollute themselves with blasphemy and sin the Divine
punishment will seize them, they say why it does not come soon.

Then, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…soon (enough) I will show you My signs, so do not ask Me to hasten
(them) on.”***

The Qur’anic phrase ‘***My signs***’ here may refer to the verses and
signs of punishment, calamities and chastisement by means of which the
Prophet (S) threatened them. Yet, those empty-minded people repeatedly
asked for the afflictions that the Prophet (S) had promised them.

The Qur’an, in this verse, says that they should not haste, because they
will visit them soon.

This holy phrase may also refer to those miracles which prove the
veracity of the Prophet (S). In this case, the phrase means that if you
wait, sufficient miracles will be shown to you.

These two commentaries do not contradict each other, because the
disbelievers were hasty for both of them, and, finally, Allah gave both
of them to them. Yet, the first commentary seems closer to the concept
of the verse and is more appropriate to the later verses.

Again, in the next verse, the Qur’an points to one of their requests
that they hastily asked.

It says:

***“And they (the disbelievers) say: When will this promise (be
fulfilled) if you are truthful?”***

They were impatiently waiting for the event of the Hereafter to happen.
They were unaware of the fact that, as soon as the Hereafter happens
their full helplessness and misfortune begin. But what can be done; the
hasty man makes also haste even for his own misfortune and destruction.

The application of the phrase ‘if you are truthful’, which is in the
plural form, though the Prophet of Islam (S) was the addressee, is for
the reason that they addressed his true followers in this expression,
too. They wanted to say that the absence of the Hereafter was the reason
for that they all were liars.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 39
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ يَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا حِينَ لاَ يَكُفُّونَ عَن وُجُوهِهِمُ
النَّارَ وَلاَ عَن ظُهُورِهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “If those who disbelieve but know the time when they will not be
able to ward off the Fire from their faces and from their backs, nor
shall they be helped, (they would not hasten about the
Resurrection).”***

This holy verse points to one of the examples of the man’s haste. The
disbelievers repeatedly asked the Prophet (S) what time was the time of
the promised Hereafter when they would be punished for their disbelief;
and thereby they caused his annoyance.

Allah soothes the holy Prophet (S) by implying that if they were aware
of the day when the Fire will encompass them not only from their fronts
but also from their backs and they will have no way to run away, they
would not haste to reach it. Yes, the haste of man is for his ignorance,
since if he knew he would not make haste.

The abovementioned holy verse says:

***“If those who disbelieve but know the time when they will not be able
to ward off the Fire from their faces and from their backs, nor shall
they be helped, (they would not hasten about the Resurrection).”***

The application of the words: ‘faces’ and ‘backs’ in the above holy
verse refers to the fact that the Hell Fire is not in a state that it
comes towards them from one side, but, on the contrary, it covers both
the front parts of them and their backs, so that it seems they are in
the middle of the Fire and they are buried in it.

And the Qur’anic sentence /walahum yunsarun/ (nor shall they be helped)
refers to the fact that these idols, which they imagine they will
intercede them and help them, can do nothing for them.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 40
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ تَأْتِيهِم بَغْتَةً فَتَبْهَتُهُمْ فَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ رَدَّهَا
وَلاَ هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “Nay, but it (the Fire) will come to them all of a sudden and
make them confounded, so they will neither be able to repel it, nor will
they be respited.”***

Through this holy verse, the noble Qur’an implies that this Divine
punishment and the blazing Fire will come to them suddenly so that it
will make them astonished.

The above holy verse says:

***“Nay, but it (the Fire) will come to them all of a sudden and make
them confounded…”***

They will be so confused that they will have no power to repel their
punishment. And, even if they ask for respite, in spite of their haste
until then, they will not be respited.

The verse continues saying:

***“…so they will neither be able to repel it, nor will they be
respited.”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 41
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدِ اسْتُهْزِئَ بِرُسُلٍ مِن قَبْلِكَ فَحَاقَ بِالَّذِينَ
سَخِرُوا مِنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِءُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. “And indeed Messengers before you were (also) mocked, but that
whereat they mocked encompassed those who scoffed at them.”***

In previous verses, it was said that the idolaters and disbelievers used
to mock the holy Prophet of Islam (S). Then, in order to soothe the
Prophet (S) and console him, this verse implies that it is not only you
whom have been mocked at, but those prophets who were before you were
also ridiculed.

The verse says:

***“And indeed Messengers before you were (also) mocked,…”***

Yet, finally, whatever of the Divine punishments they used to mock at
visited them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…but that whereat they mocked encompassed those who scoffed at
them.”***

Therefore, O Prophet Muhammad! Do not be grievous, and these kinds of
acts, which are ignorantly done, should not have the least impact on
your soul, or influence in your strong will.

[^1]: Tafsir-ul-Kabir, by Fakhr-i-Razi

[^2]: Al-Mizan

[^3]: Tafsir-us-Safi, and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^4]: Tafsir-us-Safi, and Tafsir-i-Burhan, below the holy verse

[^5]: Taken from Ghamus

[^6]: Surah At-Tur, n. 52, verse 30

[^7]: Mustadrak, vol. 2, p. 149

[^8]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 11


