Section 4: The Divine Mercy
===========================

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 42 - 43
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَن يَكْلَؤُكُم بِالَّليْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ مِنَ الرَّحْمَنِ بَلْ
هُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ رَبّـِهِم مُّعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَهُمْ ءَالِهَةٌ تَمْنَعُهُم مِن دُونِنَا لاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
نَصْرَ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَلاَ هُم مِنَّا يُصْحَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “Say: ‘Who guards you by night and by day from (the Wrath of) the
Beneficent (Allah)?’ But (yet) they turn away from the remembrance of
their Lord!”***  
***43. “Or have they gods that can protect them from (the wrath of) Us?
They are not able to help themselves nor can they be defended from
Us.”***

The common powers cannot protect man from different gangers. Man is
always in need of the protection and support of Allah, because
protection is always of the dignity of Allah’s Lordship. Thus, this holy
verse implies that not only in the Hereafter no one defends you against
the Divine punishment, but also in this world the case is the same.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Who guards you by night and by day from (the Wrath of) the
Beneficent (Allah)?’…”***

In fact, if the Lord of heaven had not set the atmosphere of the earth
as a protective canopy for it, only this would have been sufficient that
you had to be the target of the aerolites to be bombarded every day and
night.

It is noteworthy that instead of the application of Allah, the holy word
‘the Beneficent’ has been used in this verse. This means that: you
should see how much sin you have committed that you have caused the
wrath of Allah, Who is the source of general Mercy and favour.

Then, it adds:

***“…But (yet) they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord!”***

They hearken neither to the advices of His prophets, nor do they let
Allah’s remembrance and His blessings move their hearts, nor may they
use their contemplation in this way.

Again, as a question, the holy Qur’an asks: to what have these unjust
and sinful disbelievers pleased themselves against the Divine
retributions? Do they have gods who can defend them before the Wrath of
Allah?

The verse says:

***“Or have they gods that can protect them from (the wrath of) Us?…”***

These artificial gods of theirs cannot even assist themselves nor can
they defend themselves, nor does Allah help them by means of His Grace
and spiritual power.

The verse continues saying:

***“…They are not able to help themselves nor can they be defended from
Us.”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 44
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ مَتَّعْنَا هَؤُلآءِ وءَابَآءَهُمْ حَتَّي طَالَ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْعُمُرُ أَفَلاَ يَرَوْنَ أَنَّا نَأْتِي الاَرْضَ نَنقُصُهَا مِنْ
أَطْرَافِهَآ أَفَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. “Yet, We gave provision to these and their fathers until life
grew long for them. Do they not see that We come to the land, curtailing
it of its sides? Are they then the victors?”***

This holy verse has pointed to one of the main reasons of the
disobedience of the faithless persons.

It says:

***“Yet, We gave provision to these and their fathers until life grew
long for them.…”***

But, this long life and abundant divine blessings did not move the sense
of gratitude in them so that they might humble themselves in worshipping
Him. On the contrary, those divine blessings caused their pride and
disobedience.

Do they not see that this present world and its gifts are not durable?
Do they not see that Allah is constantly watching the land, decreasing
its sides and its inhabitants?

The verse says:

***“…Do they not see that We come to the land, curtailing it of its
sides?…”***

They see that tribes and nations come and go one after another, in a
manner that even the scientists, dignitaries, and scholars, who are the
managers of the affairs of the earth, have passed away. Then, who is the
victor, they or the Lord?

The verse continues:

***“…Are they then the victors?”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 45
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَآ اُنذِرُكُم بِالْوَحْيِ وَلاَ يَسْمَعُ الصُّمُّ
الدُّعَآءَ إِذَا مَا يُنذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “Say: ‘Verily I warn you only by the revelation. But the deaf do
not hear the call when they are warned.”***

The glad tidings and warnings of Divine prophets are not based upon
personal decisions, imaginations, conjectures and guesses, but they are
wholly based on the Divine conclusive revelation.

Therefore, this fact is reiterated in this holy verse that the mission
of the Prophet (S) is that he should warn people by the way of Divine
revelation.

So, addressing the holy Prophet (S), it says:

***“Say: ‘Verily I warn you only by the revelation.…”***

And, he should tell them he does not say anything from his own self, but
if it does not affect their hard hearts, it is not so surprising, nor
does it show any reason for the deficiency of the revelation. On the
contrary, it is for the fact that when the warnings are said to the deaf
persons, they cannot hear.

The verse says:

***“…But the deaf do not hear the call when they are warned.”***

They should have receptive ears so that they hearken the word of the
Truth. The ears, which the different curtains of sin, negligence, and
pride have covered, have utterly lost the ability of hearing the Truth.

Thus, those who do not utilize the divine blessings properly, it seems
that they are deprived of those blessings.

That is, if a person has apparently ears, but he does not hear the
Truth, or he has eyes but he does not see the facts, he is indeed deaf
and blind. Sometimes, of course, preaching is not effective because
individuals are not eligible and receptive; then it does not mean that
there is a deficiency in the preacher or his style of preaching.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 46
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن مَسَّتْهُمْ نَفْحَةٌ مِنْ عَذَابِ رَبّـِكَ لَيَقُولُنَّ
يَاوَيْلَنَآ إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “And if a blast of the punishment of your Lord touches them, they
will certainly say: ‘Woe unto us! Verily we were unjust’.”***

Those persons who do not awake by the warnings of divine prophets, will
surely be awaken by the lashes of the divine punishment. By confronting
the simplest danger, all claiming vanities will be destroyed and the
sleeping consciences will awaken.

This holy verse implies that these unaware proud people, who never
obeyed the Lord when they were in peace and affluence, will be so
worried when a little punishment of Allah visit them that they cry that
they were all oppressors and unjust.

The verse says:

***“And if a blast of the punishment of your Lord touches them, they
will certainly say: ‘Woe unto us! Verily we were unjust’.”***

But, what is the use of it? This constrained awareness does not benefit
them.

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 47
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ فَلاَ تُظْلَمُ
نَفْسٌ شَيْئاً وَإِن كَانَ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ أَتَيْنَا
بِهَا وَكَفَي بِنَا حَاسِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “And We shall set up the balances of justice for the Resurrection
Day, so that no soul shall be wronged anything; and even if there be (an
action) of the weight of grain of mustard seed, We will bring it (into
account), and sufficient are We (as) reckoners.”***

This holy verse points to the exact and just Reckoning of the deeds on
the Resurrection Day and the precise and just rewards of the Hereafter
in order that the disbelievers and oppressors know, supposing that the
punishment of this world does not encompass them, the chastisement of
the Hereafter is certain, and their entire acts will minutely be
reckoned.

Allah in this holy verse says:

***“And We shall set up the balances of justice for the Resurrection
Day…”***

The available Islamic traditions indicate that: on the Day of
Resurrection, the scales of measurement of people’s deeds are prophets
(as), the immaculate Imams (as), the sanctified, and the righteous,
those near stationed ones in whose record of deeds there is not any dark
spot.

These scales of measurement are so exact and regular that as if they are
the justice themselves. For this reason, the verse immediately adds:

***“…so that no soul shall be wronged anything;…”***

That is, neither the divine reward of the righteous will be decreased,
nor the proper punishment of the wrong doers will be added to.

This negation of ‘being wronged anything’ does not mean that there will
not be exactness in Reckoning. On the contrary, the case will be such
that the least thing of good and bad will be made present and will be
measured.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and even if there be (an action) of the weight of grain of mustard
seed, We will bring it (into account)…”***

And, this alone is enough that Allah is the Reckoner of the deeds of the
servants.

The verse says:

***“…and sufficient are We (as) reckoners.”***

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verses 48 - 49
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَي وَهَارُونَ الْفُرْقَانَ وَضِيَآءً وَذِكْراً
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُم بِالْغَيْبِ وَهُم مِنَ السَّاعَةِ
مُشْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “And indeed We gave Moses and Aaron the Furqan (criterion) and a
Light and a Reminder for the pious ones.”***  
***49. “Those who fear their Lord in secret and they dread the Hour (of
doom).”***

There are stated some outstanding points from the lives of the Divine
prophets in this verse and the following ones, which have fairly been
enlightened with some very instructive matters.

These explanations make more clear the former discussions upon the
messengership of the holy Prophet of Islam (S) and his conflicts with
the opponents, and with regard to the existing principals among them.

In this verse, it says:

***“And indeed We gave Moses and Aaron the Furqan (criterion) and a
Light and a Reminder for the pious ones.”***

Then, in the next verse, the Qur’an introduces the pious as having the
following qualities.

The verse says:

***“Those who fear their Lord in secret and they dread the Hour (of
doom).”***

Their dread is a kind of fear which is mingled with respect and
glorification to Him.

The pious, in fact, are very interested in the Resurrection Day, since
it is the center of the reward and grace of Allah; yet they are also
frightened of the Reckoning of the Lord.

### Explanations

In the same way that the general aims of the prophets are alike, the
qualities of their celestial Books are also similar. Those qualities
which are mentioned in this verse about the Torah, in some other verses
of the Qur’an, they are attributed to the Qur’an, too, such as Furqan,
Light, Reminder.

 **1- Furqan:**

***“Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan upon His servant…”***[^1]

The Qur’anic term /furqan/ is called to a news by which ‘right’ is
recognized from ‘wrong’.

**2- Light: /diya’/**

***“…and We have sent down to you a manifest Light.”***[^2]

 **3. The Reminder: /ŏikr/.**

***“Verily, We (Ourself) have sent down the Reminder (the
Qur’an)…”***[^3]

Surah Al-’Anbiya’ – Verse 50
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَذَا ذِكْرٌ مُّبَارَكٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ أَفَاَنتُمْ لَهُ مُنكِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “And this (Qur’an) is a blessed Reminder which We have sent down
(for you). Do you then deny it?”***

Concerning the Qur’an being blessed, this is sufficient to know that, in
a short time, it could turn many people from polytheism to monotheism,
from separation to unity, from ignorance to knowledge, from wildness to
civilization, from captivity to government, from pollution to purity,
from poverty to richness, from stagnation to running, from superstitions
to facts, from disgrace to glory, from following the false deities to
obeying the immaculate Imams (as), from negligence to awareness, from
instability to steadfastness, from disbelief to faith, and, concisely
speaking, from darkness to light.

So, this holy verse, comparing the Qur’an with the former Divine Books,
says:

***“And this (Qur’an) is a blessed Reminder which We have sent down (for
you). Do you then deny it?”***

Is there any room for denying such a Book? The reasons of its legitimacy
are found inside of it, its luminosity is manifest, and its followers
are prosperous and victorious.

The sanctity of the Qur’an is not deniable; and it is such a Book that
its admonitions can attract millions of hearts to itself in different
ages and out of many generations.

To be acquainted with the extent that how much this holy Qur’an is the
cause of cognizance and source of beatitude, it is quite enough to
consider the status of the residents of Arabian Peninsula before the
descent of the Qur’an when they used to live in wildness, ignorance,
poverty, misery and dispersion, comparing with their status after the
descent of the Qur’an, when they became an example for others.

We may also consider the condition of some nations before and after that
the Qur’an went among them.

[^1]: Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 1

[^2]: Surah An-Nisa, No. 4, verse 174

[^3]: Surah Al-Hijr, No. 15, verse 9


