A Bitter Fact
=============

We, the Shi'ah Muslims, must confess that we have been unjust in regard
to our duty with respect to the man whom we, more than others, take
pride in following; or, at the very least, we must admit falling short
in our duty towards him. In substance, any kind of failure in fulfilling
our responsibility is an act of injustice on our part. We did not want
to realize the significance of 'Ali ('a), or we had been unable to. All
our energy and labour were devoted to proclaiming the Prophet's
statements about 'Ali and to denouncing those who ignored them, but we
failed to pay attention to the intellectual side of Imam 'Ali's
personality.

Sadi says:

The reality of musk lies in its scent, Not in the perfumer's advice.

Applying Sa'di's words to our attitude regarding Imam 'Ali's
personality, we did not realize that this musk, recommended by the
Divine Perfumer, itself carried its pleasant aroma, and before
everything else we should have tried to know its scent and become
familiar with it. That is, we should have familiarized ourselves and
others with its inner fragrance. The counsel of the Divine Perfumer was
meant to acquaint the people with its pleasant redolence, not for the
purpose that they may believe that it is musk and then devote all their
energies trying to convince others by arguing with them, without
bothering to acquaint themselves with its real fragrance.

Had the Nahj al-balaghah belonged to some other people, would they have
treated it in the way we treated this great book? The country of Iran is
the centre of Shi'ism and the language of its people is Persian. You
have only to examine the translations and commentaries on the Nahj
al-balaghah to make a judgement about what our accomplishment amounts
to.

To take a more general case, the Shi'i sources of hadith (tradition)
and texts of du'a' (prayers) are incomparable to the texts of the
non-Shi'i works in the same field. This is also true of Divine teachings
and other subjects. The problems and issues discussed in works like
al-Kulayni's al-Kafi,

or al-Shaykh al-Saduq's al-Tawhid, or al-'Ihtijaj of al-Tabarsi are
nowhere to be found among the works of the non-Shi'is. It can be said
that if occasionally similar issues are dealt with in the non-Shi'i
books, the material is unmistakably spurious, for it is not only opposed
to the prophetic teachings but is also contradictory to the Quranic
fundamentals. There is a strong smell of anthropomorphism which hangs
around them.

Recently, Hashim Ma'ruf al-Hasani, in his book Dirasat fi al-Kafi li
al-Kulayni wa al-Sahih li al-Bukhari, which is an original but a brief
comparative study of al-Sahih of al-Bukhari and al-Kulayni's al-Kafi,
has dealt with the traditions related to the problems of theology.


**Shi'i Rationalism**

The discussion of theological problems and their analysis by the Shi'i
Imams, of which the Nahj al-balaghah is the earliest example, was the
main cause of the emergence of rationalistic approach and philosophic
outlook in the Shi'i intellectual world from the earliest days of Islam.
This cannot be labelled as an innovation in Islam; rather, its basis was
laid down by the Quran itself. It was in accordance with the approach of
the Quran and for the purpose of its interpretation that the Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) expounded such issues. If anybody can be reproached
in this matter, it is those who did not adopt this method and abandoned
the means to follow it.

History shows that from the earliest Islamic era, the Shiah, more than
any other sect, were interested in these problems. Amongst the Ahl
al-Sunnah, the Mu'tazilites, who were nearer to the Shi'ah, did possess
similar inclinations. But, as we know, the general view predominant
among the Ahl al-Sunnah did not welcome it, and as a result the
Mu'tazilite sect became extinct about the end of the 3rd/9th century .

Ahmad Amin, the Egyptian writer, confirms this view in the first volume
of his Zuhr al-'Islam. After discussing the philosophic movement in
Egypt during the reign of the Fatimids, who were a Shi'ah sect, he
writes:

Philosophy is more akin to Shi'ism than it is to the Sunni Islam, and
we witness the truth of this in the era of the Fatimid rule [in Egypt]
and in that of the Buyids [in Iran]. Even during the later ages Iran,
which is a Shi'ite country, has paid more attention to philosophy than
any other Islamic country. In our own times, Sayyid Jamal al-Din al
Asadabadi, who had Shi'ite inclinations and had studied philosophy in
Iran, created a philosophic movement in Egypt when he arrived here.

Curiously, Ahmad Amin in his explanation of why the Shi'ah showed more
inclination towards philosophy, commits an error, willfully or
otherwise. According to him, "the reason for greater inclination on the
part of the Shi'ah towards rational and philosophical discussions is to
be found in their esotericism and their flair for ta'wil. [^1] They were
compelled to seek the assistance of philosophy for defence of their
esotericism. That is why the Fatimid Egypt and Buyid Persia, and Iran
during the Safawid and Qajar periods, were more disposed towards
philosophy than the rest of the Islamic world."

This is sheer nonsense on the part of Ahmad Amin. It was the Imams ('a)
of the Shi'ah who for the first time introduced philosophical approach,
and it was they who introduced the most profound and intricate concepts
with regard to theological problems in their arguments, polemics,
sermons, ahadith, and prayers, of which the Nahj al-balaghah is one
example.

Even with regard to the prophetic traditions, the Shi'ah sources are
far more sublime and profound than the traditions contained in the
non-Shi'i sources. This characteristic is not confined to philosophy
only, but is also true of kalam, fiqh, and usul al-fiqh, in which the
Shi'ah enjoy a position of distinction. All this owes its origin to one
and same source: stress on rationalism.

Some others have tried to trace the origin of this difference [between
the Shi'i and the Sunni intellects] in the concept of "the Shi'ite
nation". According to them, since the Persians are Shi'ite and the
Shi'ah are Persian, and as the Persians are a people with a
philosophical temperament, fond of the intricacies of speculation and
pure thought, with the help of their rich and strong philosophical
tradition, they succeeded in raising the level of Shi'a thought and gave
it an Islamic colour.

Bertrand Russell, in A History of Western Philosophy, expresses a
similar view based on the above-mentioned argument. With his habitual or
inherent impoliteness he puts forth this opinion. However, Russell lacks
the capacity of vindicating his claim, since he was totally unfamiliar
with Islamic philosophy and basically knew nothing about it. He was not
qualified to express any informed opinion about the origins of Shi'ah
thought and its sources.

Our rejoinder to the upholders of this view is: first of all, not all
Shi'ah were Iranian, nor all Iranians were Shi'ah. Were Muhammad ibn
Ya'qub al-Kulayni, Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayh al-
Qummi and Muhammad ibn Abi Talib al-Mazandarani Persian, but not
Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud al-Sijistani and Muslim ibn
Hajjaj al-Nishaburi?

Was al-Sayyid al-Radi, the compiler of the Nahj al-balaghah, of Persian
origin? Were the Fatimids of Egypt of Persian descent? Why was
philosophic thought revived in Egypt with the inception of Fatimid rule
and why did it decline with their fall? And why was it revived later,
after a long interval, only through the influence of an Iranian
Shi'ah?

The truth is that the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) were the only real
dynamic force behind this mode of thinking and this kind of approach.
All scholars of the Ahl al-Sunnah admit that among the Prophet's
Companions only 'Ali ('a) was a man of philosophic wisdom, who had an
altogether distinct rational approach. Abu 'Ali ibn Sina is quoted as
having remarked:

'Ali's position among the Companions of Muhammad (S), was that of the
"rational" in the midst of the "corporeal."

Obviously, the intellectual approach of the followers of such an Imam
as 'Ali ('a) should be expected to be radically different from that of
those who followed others. Moreover, Ahmad Amin and others have been
susceptible to another similar misunderstanding. They express doubts
with regard to the authenticity of ascription of such philosophic
statements [as exist in the Nahj al-balaghah ] to 'Ali ('a). They say
that the Arabs were not familiar with such kind of issues and such
arguments and elaborate analyses as are found in the Nahj al-balaghah
before their acquaintance with Greek philosophy, and evidently,
according to them, these discourses should have been composed by some
later scholars familiar with Greek philosophy, and were attributed to
Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib ('a).

We also accept that the Arabs were not familiar with such ideas and
notions. Not only the Arabs, the non-Arabs, too, were not acquainted
with them, nor were those notions familiar to the Greeks and Greek
philosophy. Ahmad Amin first brings down 'Ali ('a) to the level of such
Arabs like Abu Jahl and Abu Sufyan and then he postulates his minor and
major premises and bases his conclusion on them: The Arabs were
unfamiliar with philosophical notions;

'Ali was an Arab: therefore 'Ali was also unfamiliar with philosophical
notions. One should ask him whether the Arabs of the Jahiliyyah were
familiar with the ideas and concepts that were propounded in the Quran.
Had not 'Ali ('a) been brought up and trained by the Messenger of Allah
himself? Didn't the Prophet (S) introduce 'Ali ('a) to his Companions as
the most learned and knowledgeable amongst them? Why should we deny the
high spiritual status of someone who enriched his inner self by drawing
on the bounteous wealth of Islam in order to protect the prestige of
some of the Prophet's Companions who could never rise above the ordinary
level?

Ahmad Amin says that before acquaintance with Greek philosophy the
people of Arabia were not familiar with the ideas and concepts found in
the Nahj al-balaghah.

The answer to this is that the Arabs did not become acquainted with the
ideas and notions propounded in the Nahj al-balaghah even after
centuries of familiarity with Greek philosophy. Not only the Arabs, even
the non-Arab Muslims were not acquainted with these ideas, for the
simple reason that there is no trace of them in Greek philosophy itself!
These ideas are exclusively special to Islamic philosophy. The Islamic
philosophers gradually picked these ideas up from the basic Islamic
sources and incorporated them in their thought under the guidance of
revelation.


