Philosophical Notions Concerning Metaphysics
============================================

As mentioned before, the Nahj al-balaghah adopts two kinds of approach
to the problems of theology. The first kind of approach calls attention
to the sensible world and its phenomena as a mirror reflecting the
Knowledge and Perfection of the Creator. The second approach involves
purely rationalistic and philosophical reflections. The latter approach
accounts for the greater part of the theological discussions of the Nahj
al-balaghah. Moreover, it is the only approach adopted in regard to the
discussion about the Divine Essence and Attributes.

As we know, the value of such discussions and the legitimacy of such
reflections have been always questioned by those who consider them
improper from the viewpoint of reason or canon, or both. In our own
times, a certain group claims that this kind of analysis and inference
does not agree with the spirit of Islam and that the Muslims were
initiated into such kind of speculations under the influence of Greek
philosophy and not as a result of any inspiration or guidance effused
from the Quran.

They say that if the Muslims had adhered closely to the Quranic
teachings they would not have entangled themselves with these tortuous
clebates. For the same reason, they view with suspicion the authenticity
of such speculations found in the Nahj al-balaghah and their ascription
to Imam 'Ali ('a).

In the second and third centuries a group of people opposed such kind
of discussions and questioned their legitimacy, raising doctrinal
objections. They insisted that it is obligatory for Muslims to be
satisfied with the literal and commonly understood meaning of the words
of the Quran, and regarded every kind of inquiry into the meaning of the
Quran as an innovation (bid'ah) in religion. For instance, if someone
inquired about the meaning of the Quranic verse "The All-compassionate
sat Himself upon the Throne " [20:5], he was confronted by the
displeasure of those who regarded such questions as not only improper
but distasteful. He would be told: "The exact meaning is unknown and
questioning is heresy". [^2]

During the 3rd/9th century, this group, which later came to be called
Ash'arites, overwhelmed the Mu'tazilites, who considered such
speculations to be within the bounds of legitimacy. This victory of the
Asharites delivered a severe blow to the intellectual life of Islam. The
Akhbaris, who were a Shi'i school which flourished during the period
between the 10th/16th and the 14th/20th centuries-and particularly
during the 10th/16th and 11th/17th centuries-followed the Asha'irah in
their ideas and beliefs. They raised doctrinal objections against
ratiocination. Now we shall proceed to discuss the objections raised
from a rationalist point of view.

As a result of the triumph of the empirical and experimental method
over the deductive approach in Europe, especially in the physical
sciences, the view began to prevail that rational speculation was
unreliable not only in the physical sciences but also in all scientific
disciplines and that the only reliable method was that of empirical
philosophy. The result of it was that tne problems of theology were
viewed with doubt and suspicion, because they lay beyond the domain of
experimental and empirical observation.

The past victories of the Ash'arites, on the one hand, and the amazing
triumphs of the empirical method, which followed one another in quick
succession, on the other hand, drove some non-Shi'ite Muslim writers to
the extremes of excitement. The outcome was the eclectic opinion that
from the religious (Shar'i) as well as the rational point of view the
use of deductive method even in problems of theology should be
discarded. From the Shar'i viewpoint,

they made the claim that according to the outlook of the Quran the only
approach valid in theology was the empirical and experimental method and
the study of the natural phenomena and the system of creation; the rest,
they declared, is no more than an exercise in futility. They pointed out
that in scores of its verses, the Quran in most unequivocal terms has
invited human beings to study the phenomena of nature; it considers the
keys to the secrets of the origin and workings of the universe to be
concealed within nature itself. In this way they echoed, in their
writings and speeches, the ideas expressed by the European proponents of
empirical philosophy .

Farid al-Wajdi in his book 'Ala atlal al-madhhab al-maddi (On the Ruins
of Materialism), and Sayyid Abu al-Hasan al-Nadawi, in his Madha khasira
al-'alam bi-inhitat al-Muslimin ("What the World Lost Through the
Decline of Muslims") and the writers belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood
(Ikhwan al-Muslimin) such as Sayyid Qutb and others, have supported this
view, vehemently attacking the opposite viewpoint.

Al-Nadawi, in his above-mentioned book, says:

The prophets informed men about the existence of God and His Attributes
and informed them about the origin and beginning of the world and the
ultimate destiny of man, putting this free information at his disposal.
They relieved him of the need to understand and discuss these problems
the basics of which lie beyond our reach (because these problems belong
to the sphere of the supra-sensible and our knowledge and experience is
limited to the physical and the sensible). But men did not value this
blessing and entangled themselves in debates and speculations about
these problems, and strode into the dark regions of the hidden and the
unknowable. [^3]

The same author, in another chapter of the same book, where he
discusses the causes of the decline of Muslims, under the heading "The
Neglect of Useful Sciences," criticizes the muslim 'ulama' in these
words:

The Muslim scholars and thinkers did not give as much importance to
practical and experimental sciences as they gave to debating about
metaphysics, which they had learnt from Greek philosophy. The Greek
metaphysics and theology is nothing more than Greek's polytheistic
mythology presented in a philosophical outfit, and is no more than a
series of meaningless conjectures expressed in an absurd jargon. God has
exempted Muslims from debate, speculation and analysis in these matters,
which are not much different from the analytic pursuits of the
Alchemists. But out of ingratitude for this great blessing, the Muslims
wasted their energy and genius in problems of this sort. [^4]

Without doubt, the views of the like of Farid al-Wajd; and al-Nadawi
should be regarded as a kind of return to Ash'arism, though dressed in
contemporary style akin to the language of empirical philosophy.

Here, we cannot enter into a philosophic discussion about the value of
philosophic reflection. In the chapters entitled "The Value of
Information" and "Origin of Multiplicity in Perception" of the book The
Principles and Method of Realism, we have discussed the matter in
sufficient detail. Here, we shall confine ourselves to the Quranic
aspect of this problem, and investigate whether the Holy Quran considers
the study of nature to be the only valid method of inquiry into
theological problems, or whether it allows for another approach besides
the above-mentioned.

However, it is essential to point out that the disagreement between the
Ash'arites and the non-Ash'arites is not about the legitimacy of the use
of the Book and the Sunnah as sources in the problems of theology;
rather, the disagreement concerns the manner of their utilization.
According to the Ash'arites, their application should not exceed mute
acceptance.

According to them, we assign the various Attributes like Unity,
Omniscience, Omnipotence and the rest to God because they have been
ascribed to Him by the Shar'iah, otherwise we would not know whether God
is such or not, because the basic principles and essentials dealing with
God are beyond our reach. Therefore, according to them, we are forced to
accept God as such, but we cannot know or understand that God is such.
The role of the religious texts is that they prescribe for us the way we
ought to think and believe so that we may follow it in our thought and
beliefs.

According to the contestants of this view, these issues are amenable to
human understanding, like any other rational concept or idea. That is,
there exist certain principles and essentials which if known properly
enable man to understand them. The role of the religious texts lies in
their capacity to inspire,

motivate, and guide human reason by putting understandable principles
and essentials at its disposal. Basically servitude in intellectual
matters is absurd. It is like ordering one to think in a certain
fashion, and asking him to derive certain prescribed conclusions. It is
like ordering someone to see a thing in a certain fashion and then
asking him, "How do you see it? Is it big or small? black or white?"
Servitude in thinking does not mean anything other than absence of
thinking and acceptance without reflection.

In short, the question is not whether it is possible for man to go
beyond the teachings of the Revelation. God be our refuge, there is
nothing that lies beyond them; because that which has reached us through
Revelation and the Household of the Revelation (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt
[A]) is the utmost limit of perfection concerning knowledge of the
Divine. Here our debate centres upon the capacity of human thought and
reason, whether it can, when supplied with the basic principles and
essentials, undertake an intellectual journey through the world of
theological problems [^5] or not.

As to the invitation of the Quran to study and inquiry about the
phenomena of creation, and its emphasis on nature as a means for
attaining the knowledge of God and the supra-natural, it should be said
that it is, indubitably, a basic principle of the Quranic teachings. It
is with extraordinary insistence that the Quran asks human beings to
inquire into the nature of the earth, the sky, the plants and animals,
and man himself, and urges them to study them scientifically.

It is also indubitable that the Muslims did not take enough worthy
steps in this direction. Perhaps the real reason behind it was Greek
philosophy, which was deductive and based on pure speculation, and they
used this approach even in the field of the physical sciences.
Nevertheless, as the history of science bears testimony, the muslim
scientists did not altogether abandon the experimental method in their
studies like the Greeks. The Muslims were the pioneers of the
experimental method, not the Europeans, as is commonly thought, who
followed on the tracks first laid by the Muslims.


