The Value of Study of the Natural Phenomena
===========================================

Aside from all of this, the question worthy of consideration is whether
the Quran, besides its emphasis on the study of the creatures of earth,
water, and air, allows other ways of approaching the issue, or if it
closes all other doors. The question is whether the Quran, even as it
invites people to study the signs of God (ayat), also welcomes other
modes of intellectual endeavour. Basically, what is the value of inquiry
into the works of creation (an inquiry which the Quran urges us,
explicitly or implicitly, to undertake), from the viewpoint of
initiating us into the awareness and consciousness which this heavenly
Book aims to cultivate?

The truth is that the measure of assistance provided by the study of
the works of the creation in understanding the problems explicitly
pointed out by the Holy Quran is quite restricted. The Quran has
propounded certain problems of theology which are by no means
understandable through the study of the created world or nature. The
value of study of the system of creation is limited only to the extent
to which it proves that the world is governed by a Power which knows,
designs, plans, and administers it. The world is a mirror, open to
empirical experiment, only to the extent that it points towards
something that lies beyond nature and discloses the existence of a
Mighty Hand which runs nature's cosmic wheels.

But the Quran is not content that man should only know that a Mighty,
Knowing, and Wise Power administers this universe. This may perhaps be
true of other heavenly scriptures, but is by no means true of the Holy
Quran, which is the final and ultimate heavenly message and has a great
deal to say about God and the reality transcending nature.


**Purely Rationalistic Problems**

The most basic problem to which the mere study of the world of creation
fails to provide an answer is the necessity of existence and
uncreatedness of the Power which transcends nature. The world is a
mirror in the sense that it indicates the existence of a Mighty Hand and
a Wise Power, but it does not tell us anything more about Its nature. It
does not tell us whether that Power is subservient to something else or
not, or if it is self-subsisting. And if it is subject to something
else, what is that?

The objective of the Quran is not only that we should know that a
Mighty Hand administers the world, but that we may know that that
Administrator is "Allah" and that "Allah" is the indefinable: (There is
nothing like Him), whose Essence encompasses all perfection, or in other
words, that "Allah" signifies Absolute Perfection and is the referent
of, (His is the loftiest likeness). How can the study of nature give us
an understanding of such notions and concepts?

The second problem is that of the Unity of God. The Quran has stated
this issue in a logical form and used a syllogistic argument to explain
it. The method of argument it has employed in this regard is what is
called 'exclusive syllogism' or 'reductio ad impossible' (burhan
al-tamanu'). On occasion it eliminates the possibility of multiplicity
in the efficient cause as in the following verse: [^6]

If there had been (multiple) gods in them (i.e. the earth and the
heaven) other than God, they would surely go to ruin ... (21:22)

At other times it argues by eliminating the possibility of multiplicity
in the final cause:

God has not taken to Himself any son, nor is there any god besides Him;
for then each god would have taken off that he created and some of them
would have risen up over others ... (23:91)

The Quran never suggests that the study of the system of creation can
lead us to the knowledge of the Unity of the Godhead so as to imply that
the essential knowledge of the transcendental Creator be considered
attainable from that source. Moreover, such a suggestion would not have
been correct.

The Quran alludes to various problems as indicated by the following
examples:

No thing is like Him ... (42:11) And God's is the loftiest likeness ...
(16:60) To Him belong the Names most Beautiful. (20:8) And His is the
loftiest likeness in the heavens and the earth ... (30:27) He is God,
there is no god but He. He is the King, the All-holy, the All-peaceable.
the All-faithful, the All-preserver, the All-mighty, the All-compeller,
the All-sublime ... (59:23) And to God belong the East and the West;
whither so ever you turn, there is the Face of God ... (2:115) And He is
God in the heavens and the earth; He knows your secrets, and what you
publish ... (6:3) He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the
Inward; He has knowledge of everything. (57:3) He is the Living, the
Everlasting ... (2:255) God, is the Everlasting, [Who] has not begotten,
and has not been begotten and equal to Him is not any one. (112:2-4)

Why does the Quran raise such issues? Is it for the sake of propounding
mysterious matters incomprehensible to man, who, according to al-Nadawi,
lacks the knowledge of its essential principles, and then asking him to
accept them without comprehending their meaning? Or, the Quran actually
does want him to know God through the attributes and descriptions that
have come in it? And, if this is true, what reliable approach does it
recommend? How is it possible to acquire this knowledge through the
study of the natural phenomena? The study of the creation teaches us
that God has knowledge of the things; that is, the things that He has
made were created knowingly and wisely. But the Quran expects us not
only to know this, but also stresses that:

Indeed God has the knowledge of everything. (2:231) And not so much as
the weight of an atom in earth or heaven escapes from thy Lord, neither
is aught smaller than that, or greater, but in a Manifest Book. (10:61)
Say: "If the sea were ink for the Words of my Lord, the sea would be
spent before the Words of my Lord are spent, though We brought
replenishment the like of it. " (18:109)

This means that God's knowledge is infinite and so is His power. How
and wherefore is it possible through perception and observation of the
world of creation to reach the conclusion that the Creator's Knowledge
and Power are infinite? The Quran, similarly, propounds numerous other
problems of the kind. For instance, it mentions al-lawh al-mahfuz (the
Protected Tablet), lawh al-mahw wa al-'ithbat (The Tablet of Expunction
and Affirmation), jabr and ikhtiyar (determinism and free will), wahy
(revelation) and ilham (intuition), etc.; none of which are susceptible
to inquiry through the empirical study of the world of creation.

It must be admitted that the Quran, definitely, has raised these
problems in the form of a series of lessons and has emphasized their
importance through advice and exhortation. The following verses of the
Quran may be quoted in this connection:

What, do they not meditate in the Quran? Or is it that there are locks
upon their hearts? .... (47:24) (This is) a Scripture that We have
revealed unto thee, full of blessing, that they may ponder its
revelations, and that men of understanding may reflect. (38:29)

Inevitably, we are forced to accept that the Quran assumes the
existence of a reliable method for understanding the meaning of these
truths, which have not been revealed as a series of obscure
incomprehensibles which lie beyond the reach of the human mind.

The scope of problems propounded by the Quran in the sphere of
metaphysics is far greater than what can be resolved or be answered
through the study of physical creation. This is the reason why the
Muslims have pursued these problems, at times through spiritual and
gnostic efforts, and at other times through speculative and rational
approach.

I wonder whether those who claim that the Quran considers the study of
nature as the sole, sufficient means for the solution of metaphysical
problems, can give a satisfying answer in regard to the multifarious
problems propounded by it, a characteristic which is special to this
great heavenly Book.

'Ali's sole source of inspiration in his exposition of the problems
mentioned in the previous chapters is the Holy Quran, and the sole
motive behind his discourses is exegetical. Perhaps, had it not been for
'Ali ('a) the rationalistic and speculative aspects of the Quran would
have forever remained uninterpreted.

After these brief introductory remarks on the value of these issues, we
shall go on to cite some relevant examples from the Nahj al-balaghah.


