The Nahj Al-balaghah and Western Philosophic Thought
====================================================

The Nahj al-balaghah has played a great role in the history of Eastern
Philosophy. Mulla Sadra, who brought a revolution in theological thought
(al-hikmat al-'ilahiyyah), was under profound influence of 'Ali's
discourses. His method of argument with regard to the problems of tawhid
is the method of inferring the Essence from the Essence, and also
deducing the Attributes and Acts from the Essence, and all these
arguments are based on the belief that there exists the Necessary Being
only. These arguments are based on radically different general
principles, which are elaborated in his system of metaphysics.

Eastern theological thought (al-hikmat al-'ilahiyyah) attained fruition
and strength from the sources of Islamic teachings and was firmly
established on unviolable foundations. However, theological philosophy
in the West remained deprived of such source of inspiration. The
widespread philosophical malaise of inclination towards materialism in
the West has many causes whose discussion is outside the scope of our
discourse. But we believe that the major cause of this phenomenon is the
weakness and insufficiency of theological conceptions of Western
religious thought. [^10]

Anyone interested in making a comparative study of the approaches
pointed out in these chapters, should first study the arguments advanced
by Western philosophers such as Anselm, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz,
Kant and others for proving the existence of God and their discussions
about acceptance or rejection of various arguments, then he should
compare them with the burhan al-siddiqin argument advanced by Mulla
Sadra under the inspiration of 'Ali's words. He would see for himself
the wide chasm that separates the one from the other.

Reference: The Glimpses of Nahj al Balaghah; Murtadha Mutahhari -
Transl. from Persian by Ali Quli Qara'i

[^1] The term ta'wil has been defined variously, but generally when used
in the opposition to tafsir (which is applied to the explanation of the
literal and explicit meanings of the Quranic texts) it is applied to
interpretation of the Quranic verses which goes beyond their literal
meaning. According to Imamiyyah Shi'ah, no one except the Prophet (S)
and the twelve Imams (A) is entitled to draw tawil of the Quranic
verses. To illustrate what is meant by ta'wil consider these examples:
(1) According to Shi'ah hadith, the verse 2:158, Where ever you maybe,
God will bring you all together', pertains to the 313 companions of al
Imam al Mahdi (A) whom God will gather in a certain place from various
parts of the earth in a single night.

(2) According to another hadith the verse 67:30, 'Say: What think you?
If your water (in wells) should have vanished into the earth, then who
would bring you running water?' pertains to the ghaybah (occultation) of
al Imam al Mahdi (A). Such interpretations, which obviously go beyond
the apparent meaning of the Quranic verses, are called ta'wil.

[^2] Allamah S.M.H Tabatabai, Usul e falsafah wa rawish e riyalism (The
Principles and Method of Philosophy of Realism), Introduction to vol.
I

[^3] Muhammad Sulayman Nadawi, Madha khasara al alam bi inhitat al
Muslimin, vol. IV, p. 97

[^4] Ibid., p. 135

[^5] Allamah Tabatabai, op. Cit

[^6] Ibid, vol. V

[^7] Maktab e tashayyu, No. 2 p. 120

[^8] Ibid, p. 126

[^9] Ibid, p. 157

[^10] See Murtada Mutahhari, Ilal e garayesh beh maddigari (The causes
of inclination towards Materialism), under the chapter: Naresa iha ye
mafahi me falsafiI (The inadequacies of [Western] Philosophical Ideas)


