Introduction
============

The economics of religion is gradually attracting economists' interest.
Now some economists are found to believe that religious activities are
also based on economic rationality; otherwise, these could not have been
undertaken. According to a study in 1998, about 200 papers on economics
of religion were available written by economists and other social
scientists (Iannacconne, 1998).

Although Adam Smith wrote on importance of religion in his economics,
yet very significant contribution on this subject appears to be of
Christian and other economists such as Azzi and Ehrenberg (1975) and
Iannaccone 1984, 1988, 1990, and later.

Some other studies such as Mack and Leigland (1982), Barro 2003 also
created intellectual curiosity leading to subsequent research in this
filed till recently when a formal framework titled 'Divine Economics'
appeared in early 2000.

Although, no work yet seems to be available directly about the use of
natural resources in perspective of religiosity levels among individual
households or community.

However, the viewpoint of the economists who worked with reference to
religion guides one to realize that there might exist a systematic
relationship between religiosity and use of natural resources.

As according to such economists, all the activities are chosen in the
same way as people choose other commodities of choice in order to gain
utility. Iannaccone (1990) states that "The neoclassical account of
self-interested, gain-seeking individuals is incapable of describing the
behavior of Christians who are trying to live according to the
stewardship principle.

Furthermore, since all humans are created in the image of God, and
hence are by their very nature religious and moral beings, the
neoclassical model fails to capture an essential dimension of human
behavior."

Individuals are endowed by nature with the instincts to serve their
self-interests, which may or may not be in conformity with societal
interests at large. It is not difficult to see that many things
individuals do are the result of self-interest. This behavior leads to
efficient allocation of resources. Chapra (1992) notes that any efforts
to prevent an individual from serving self-interest, is bound to fail.

However, individuals are motivated by family and fellow companions or
other factors that their self-interests make allowance for the interest
of others' too [Schwartz (1966) and Zaman (1992)]. This type of belief
may result in restructuring of resource allocations in such a way that
social interest becomes possible to be served along with
self-interest.

In religious societies, such altruistic behavior is common. In a truly
religious society, the amount of contribution for other person's utility
may be affected by many factors including the following: a) high degree
of faith in afterlife may reduce self-centered consumption making room
for sharing with others, b) Religious teachings and temptations for kind
and caring attitude can lead to higher level of time and monetary
contributions for others. These ideas have been dealt in economics of
religion and particularly in Divine Economics.

A step further is to explore whether religiosity or a particular type
of religiosity plays any role in management of natural resources, such
as water when it is scarce? Because in times of scarcity peoples selfish
motives may become more stronger than their altruistic motives.

The objectives of the present paper are 1) To further extend the
faith-based analytical framework of natural resource use, 2) To analyze
one of the predicted problems before the appearance of Imam Mahdi, that
is water scarcity and elaborate the a model of individual behavior in
this context, 3) To modify and extend the empirical model for future
analysis of interrelationships among religiosity and natural resource
use behavior, and 4) To explore how closely the Mahdvi doctrine affects
the theoretical basis as well as practical aspects of natural resource
use patterns.


