The Doctrine of Mahdism and Microfoundations For Nrm
====================================================

The doctrine of Mahdism is known both as a belief, concept or
philosophy and as (The Encyclopedia of Religion), 'tenet', 'teaching',
and 'dogma'. or a practical futuristic aspect of Islam Despite the
difference between two main branches of Islam i.e. Sunnites and Shiites
on Caliphate, the faith in Mahdism remains almost the same in both
schools, and it also conforms with the concept of a savior in other
religion . (,,,,,,) has noted that "It is in conformity with
'Soteriology', 'Salvation', and 'Millenarianism', presented in other
religions.

The notion of salvation and Mahdvi global government are the matter of
concordance among the whole Islamic sects, and their authentic books of
traditions, such as Sihah al-Sittah ("Six Correct Books"), refer to them
under four titles: 1. Al-Mahdi's Book; 2. Al-Fitan Chapter ("The
Calamities"); 3. Al-Malahem Chapter ("The Disturbances"); 4. Ashrat
al-Sa\`ah ("The signs of the End Times").

Although there may exist some slight differences among the Islamic
sects on the conditions of Mahdism, yet none of them feel doubt about
its principals and certainty". This indicates the significance of this
doctrine. It's believed that social and individual problems can be
solved with the help of this doctrine.

The rapidly growing unrest on the earth is creating a rapid demand for
a change that may promote, truth, justice, love, peace and compassion,
which according to the believers of the doctrine, is possible only under
the rule of a perfect leadership which shall be available in the era of
the Hidden Imam.

Since, from the point of view of those who perceive in some sort of a
savior, or who wait for second coming of Jesus or who clearly believe in
Mahdi's appearance, a righteous path, the path of the Prophets, the path
of monotheism and the path of global justice, would be the path that
goes through the doctrine of a savior.

This provides a theoretical justification why the doctrine of any
savior can not be neglected in any impartial social research. Therefore,
a researcher can derive a religiosity indicator from one's love and
devotion to the cause of savior.

In particular, since Muslims believe in appearance of Imam Mahdvi
because of the outcomes of his appearance, therefore, in the list of
Islamic religiosity indices, there has to be another set of indices
which originates from the Mahdvi perspective. For example, there is
complete consensus in both major schools of Islamic thoughts that
Mahdi's purpose (and achievement) will be, "...Implementing the laws of
Islam, establishing justice and fighting heresy and oppression" then an
individual shall be classified as more religious if, among other good
deeds, he also has deeper devotion with these acts.

The Mahdvi perspective enters into the analytical discussion from three
dimensions; one, for believers of Mahdism, natural resource use patterns
of individuals and communities demand for obeying the Islamic principles
of justice, benevolence, sacrifice, economy simplicity.

Two, before the re-appearance of Imam Mahdi, a terrible era of
disasters, violence, and destruction has to pass when among other
things, safe water and other natural resources shall be very scarce and
according to believers, shall be restored during Imam's era. Three, the
economists, scholars and others who don't believe in the doctrine of
Mahdism, perhaps can hardly avoid studying how any such perception about
future affects the present day decisions.

Therefore, in perspective of Mahdism doctrine, an alternate theoretical
model for analyzing natural resource use can be thought of logically. It
would emerge from some issues usually neglected by the conventional
economics and propositions offered by the divine economics (Hamdani,
2002, Hamdani and Ahmad 2002).

- Water is a natural public good, and as with all public goods there
tend to be unequal distribution in the end.

- Normally the cost of extraction is taken as the cost of production
and forgets that nature had planned to offer its treasures for all the
humankind and not only for the profits of those who could extract them,
so pricing issues need to be reviewed.

- Keeping the above in mind, placing price mechanism for optimal and
competitive use of water, which has no substitute at all, could be a bad
mechanism, as normally price works for either non-essential items or in
a substitutable economy.

- Religion provides that institutional mechanism (through
self-accountability and fear of God) that cannot be ensured up to 100%
vigilance for corruption except with a very hi-tech monitoring
systems..

- It provides the necessary religious human capital required for
optimal utilization of such natural public goods on which others are
dependent as a necessary part of life.

- Religious human capital is that kind of Human capital which solves
for the problems of social welfare which otherwise markets have failed
to provide worldwide, both from the supply side and the demand side.

Any divine religion such as Islam makes its followers to believe that
serving social interest also serves self-interest. To serve
self-interest in the afterlife perspective means that individual has to
please Allah through certain ordained actions that include, for example,
serving the parents, teachers and neighbors, helping the needy,
transferring knowledge to others and restraining from prohibited acts
like theft, murder, and cheating etc.

In a truly religious society, a person does not live in social
isolation and that his/her personal pleasure/displeasure and the
pleasure/displeasure of others are mutually interdependent. In other
words utility of one individual depends, among other things, on utility
of some other person(s). This leads us to the following proposition.

**Proposition 1:**

Among religious people, others' welfare is an argument in their own
utility function. Hence other things held constant, less religious
person will serve his/her self-interest in each market in less
altruistic manner and a more religious person will serve his/her
self-interest in each market in a less selfish manner.

**Proposition 2:**

Other things held constant, a more religious person will forego his/her
own consumption to give proportionately more donations for enhancing
others' consumption, as compared to a less religious person. Moreover,
the effects of a change in commodity prices and wage/income level on the
monetary donations will be systematically different between more
religious and less religious persons.

From the preceding discussion we conclude that it is very much
'economic' to remain social, voluntary actor, donor, honest and just in
a society for one's selfish and selfless interests and for economic and
non-economic motives. If the conventional economic man who aims to
maximize his/her pecuniary benefits, is replaced by the real man who
aims to maximize pecuniary plus other (e.g. social spiritual) benefits,
then both individual justice as well as social justice will become
integral part of the consumer behavior for their implied economic
rationality. And the individual's objective function will coincide with
the social or global welfare function, as is claimed to happen during
the era of Imam Mahdi or the second coming of Jesus (Tabbassi, 2006).

**Natural Resource Model (NRM) in Divine Economics**

Hope for an afterlife reward (divinely promised benefits in heavens) is
central to consumer behavior in divine religions including Islam. Some
other religions too have similar belief. Some empirical studies indicate
that people do various activities in the hope of afterlife consumption
(see for example Azzi and Ehrenberg; 1975).

In particular religious and altruistic activities of individuals have
some expected stream of benefits in an afterlife based on pattern of
their lifetime allocation of time.

Since the model of a Muslim's behavior who is to maximize his/her
lifetime utility, where life means life here and hereafter through
allocation of total time (24 hours a day), a rational individual will
take 'afterlife' as a factor in economic decision making e.g. allocation
of time and goods.

The Divine Economics postulates that such consideration of individual
will result a systematic change in his/her economic choices, religious
practices, social habits, personal thoughts, and conviction etc. which
is likely to vary with individual's religiosity level. Therefore, a more
religious individual would be less likely to choose activities which are
prohibited and abominable ones.

Hence under Divine Economics Model or 'Faith Model' individuals would
be more likely to use natural resources in a way such that their acts
are not harmful for other fellow human being, or nature. So the point of
departure from conventional economics comes when a truly religious
individual reveals not choosing using too much water even if it is
abundant (Hadith of the Holy Prophet, PBUHAP).

Similarly he will not be polluting water even when nobody is watching
his behavior (Nobody can be Muslim unless his fellows are safe from his
verbal and physical acts - Hadith). The very famous event in Islamic
history explains the behavior modeled in the divine economics that is
when at the end of a battle, a number of companions of the prophet were
about to die of thrust and a single glass of water was available,
everyone passed it on to the next one to save him at the cost of own
life. This is so because he has to choose acts of greater goodness much
the same way as he chooses a commodity having greater utility in a given
conditions. .


