Extension in the Model With Mahdism Perspective
===============================================

A model of natural resource use under Divine Economics has been
presented by Hamdani 2007 and further elaborated in Hamdani and Freeman
2008 based on the above mentioned arguments. The model provides a
general framework of natural resource use analysis that can be
considered in perspective of Mahdism doctrine. The next section presents
the modified empirical model.

The holy books of divine religions contain many commandments regarding
the use of God's blessings on earth. There are numerous references to
water and related phenomena in the Divine books e.g. Qur'an and Bible
such as the word "water" has been mentioned in Qumran 63 times. The
other water related words river, fountains, springs, rain, hail, clouds
also occur many times in these books causing an influence on the
reader's perception and behavior about water use.

As regards, use of natural resources, the following model for
pedagogical purpose was presented in the aforementioned studies; The
Original Model: Wig =Water Scarcity level, Time cost, Religious human
capital, Environment (technology, others' behavior and infrastructure),
other conventional economics variables}

This model can be modified and extended as under to incorporate the
Mahdvi perspective.

The Mahdvi Model: Wi =Water Scarcity level, Time cost, Religious human
capital, Environment (technology, others' behavior and infrastructure),
the knowledge about Mahdism, the attachment and devotion with Mahdism,
other conventional economics variables} A more elaborate functional
relationship can be written as under;

Where Wi is the average consumption of water by ith individual
including the water wasted or polluted by individual due to habits and
attitudes. The variables used in this model are elaborated below much in
the same way as defined in Hamdani (2007);

Ta = Productive Time available with the individual at particular place
and time [Total time 24 hrs - committed (biologically needed) time for
leisure, volunteering, home and religious activities]

wij = average water consumption need that depends on a number of
socioeconomics, demographic and religious variables.

W = Total quantity of water in given space and time that is fixed in
the religious sense of Takween and Tashreeh. In other words, it partly
depends on Divine will and partly on human deeds, actions, knowledge (or
discoveries, renewing formulae, industrial production) etc.

Tp = Time cost of using the water (see footnote above) MPGS = Market
purchased intermediate or final goods and services involved in
consumption of water e.g

B1 = Belief that some sort of water-use is obligatory (Wajib) or
desirable (Mustahab) and some other type of uses is strictly prohibited
(haram) or at least un-desirable (Makrooh).

B2 = Knowledge and belief that donating water to a needy person is
appreciable and wasting especially when it is so scarce to have life
implication for some section of population is prohibited (haram) in
Islam Note' 'B1' and B2 implies that price of water is less significant
or in some cases insignificant.

SC = Level of spiritual capital i.e personal experience of, say, using
legitimate water for ablution (wuzoo) has physical and spiritual
benefits thus leading to more consumption of water whereas .

Q = Quality of fellow worshipers (truly religious, hypocritically
religious, opportunistically religious, habitually religious,
imitatively religious etc.)

C = Knowledge and understanding that religion requires from one to be
altruist rather than being greedy and selfish.

E = Environmental factors such as quality of water or intensity of
community problems to which non-wasteful or minimal usage behavior may
contribute.

MK = Knowledge about Mahdism doctrine (situation before appearance of
Mahdi or coming of Jesus, predicted disasters, water crises, wars and
violence, earthquakes, accidental deaths, global unrest etc. and
situation after the appearance of the saviors i.e. peace, justice,
prosperity, and abundance of natural resources etc. as reported in
religious books).

MD = Mahdvi devotedness (loving benefits of larger community, believing
in justices, benevolence, sacrifice, self-accountability, contentment
and other practical aspects of this doctrine).

Z = Other standard variables

For a better understanding of natural-resources-use patterns, the
Divine Economics puts forward an example (Hamdani and Freeman 2008) that
has been constructed with hypothetical data in table below.

Source: Hamdani,Syed Nisar Hussain and Richard B. Freeman (2008), "Do
People Systematically Differ in Natural Resource Usage Behavior?, (Some
micro foundations)", discussion draft, London School of Economics (Labor
Markets)

**Notes and Definitions:**

A, b Individuals or households wa , wb Average need of safe water by
individual or household a and b respectively.

TW Total water produced in a space and time (around a, b) by Divine and
human sources Percentage of total water that becomes unusable due to
development and expansion (industrial and technological), wars,
violence, explosions destruction of water supply systems etc; is
determined, among others, by religiosity levels. Percentage of water
that becomes unusable due to household activities, carelessness, and
attitude; is determined, among others, by religiosity levels..

SW = (1-a)TW) AW = wSW)

Indicator of Scarcity of water as deviation from nature or intensity of
difference from total water and available safe water. It is calculated
as ratio of average water needed by 2 household a and b to safe water
available for final use. And average consumption of each individual at
time period t is dependent on his own average consumption need as well
as others' need and the total endowment of available safe water in given
space and time. ? = 1 if total safe water available within given space
and time is equal to wa+wb; a case of no scarcity f = (wa+wb)/AW

Assumptions If own need and other's need is equal, then wa/wb = 1

For simplicity we assume that in a given space and time, household
activities pollute 10 % water, industrial expansion pollutes 20 % water,
wars and violence pollutes another 10 % and technological/nuclear
advancement pollutes another 30% water.

\* World war-1
\*\* World war-2
\# Total (Absolute) quantity of water may be increased by scientific
developments ^ Total (Absolute) quantity of water may be increased by
supplications, thanksgiving, and repentance on sins (see Qur'an and
Bible) ^^ Total (Absolute) quantity of water may be increased by sadaqah
(see Qur'an; see â€¦in Bible) Mahdvi religiosity applies to the last three
notes above. It is observable among devoted ones in Mahdism that they
pray a special form of prayer or Istighasa for solving this type of
problems.

There are 12 general and specific phenomenon have been outlined in our
earlier paper (Hamdani and Freeman, 2008) that can be explained under
the Divine Economics Model of Natural Resource Management. Besides
those, with the addition of Mahdism perspective in the model, the
following behaviors can also be studied under this framework.

o The data used to elaborate the Divine Model of NRM is hypothetical.
The next research can undertake the task of estimating true parameters
of this model using the real world data.

o The relationship of natural resource use patterns with parameters
indicating knowledge or devotedness with Mahdism doctrine.

o The Effects of Mahdism doctrine on sacrificing behavior of
individuals during crises and disasters (A Harvard University research
indicates that there exists a significant relationship between these two
variables)


