Concluding Remarks and the Direction of Future Research
=======================================================

The present paper is a further extension in an earlier paper on
religiosity and natural resource management (Hamdani and Freeman). It is
advocated that, among other standard economic factors, religiosity also
affects the pattern of natural resource use. As also explained in an
earlier study (Hamdani and Freeman, 2008) that religiosity is likely to
affect the behavior regarding use of natural resources.

The people with high religiosity have been observed avoiding water
wastage, polluting public water, and creating other forms of negative
externalities (as this has been condemned in religions). The present
study postulates that this effect of religiosity is likely to be more
stronger in the presence of the Mahdvi religiosity. Similarly that study
also mentioned with reference to religious resources that supplications
and sadaqah can result in increased water quantities.

The author is witness to more than hundreds of events when people
prayed in a prescribed manner and soon after the pray finished, there
was raining. The future research agenda can include data collection on
these aspects and empirical analysis not because of proving the truths
of religion with the help of empirics but providing the researchers and
learners a ground for diverting some of their energies to the scientific
study of religion.

Construction of religiosity with special reference to Mahdism doctrine
is also a great job yet to be done. It is also need of the time to
include special questions in national surveys about Mahdism where it may
have an effect on human behaviors (as observed).

Supporting the earlier recommendations that 'if justices, peace and
fairness in use of water and other natural resources is considered to be
a need of the globe these days, then investment in religious human
capital seems to be a strong candidate for contemporary budget
allocations'.

It is suggested that enough resources should be allocated for research
and surveys that explore relationships between material and non-material
variables and such as economic variables, religiosity, human values,
futuristics and in particular, the belief in second coming of Jesus and
appearance of Imam Mahdi (Ajj.).

Water-stressed countries are those with annual water resources of
between 1,000 and 1,700 cubic meters per person, shown in italic.
Countries suffering from water scarcity are those with annual supplies
of less than 1,000 cubic meters per person, shown in dark type.

TFR = Total Fertility Rate
aIn cubic meters per year

Source: Gardner-Outlaw & Engelman, Sustaining water, easing scarcity: A
second update, Washington, D.C., Population Action International, 1997
(69). Gardner-Outlaw and Engelman base their calculations on UN
Population Division population estimates. The growth rate and TFR data
come from: Populatoin Reference Bureau, World Population Data Sheet,
1998, Wahsington, D.C., 1998.

**REFERENCES**

Layard, Richard (2005), Happiness: Lessons from a New Science, Journal
of Bioeconomics, Penguin Group USA.

Inglehart, Ronald and Wyne Baker. (2000), 'Modernization, Cultural
Change and Persistence of Traditional Values, American Sociological
Review, Feb. 19-51,

Al-Qur'an (translation and commentaries by Maoulana Maudoodi, Abdullah
Yousaf Ali, Imdad Hussain Kazmi, Ahmad Raza Khan Brelvi, and Nasir
Makaram Shirazi).

Al-Hadith (Si'ha-e-Sitta'h of Sunni sources and Kutub-e-Arba'h of
Jaffaria sources).

Alim (2002), The World's Most Useful Islamic Software, Version 4.51
(contains Sunnites' version of Qur'an translation and commentary by
Abdullah Yousaf Ali and Pickthal; includes Maudoodi's writings and many
other useful Islamic material).

Azzi, Corry, and Ehrenberg, Ronald. (1975, February). "Household
Allocation of Time and Church Attendance. Journal of Political Economy
83(1), 27-56.

Becker, Gary. (1976). "The Economic Approach to Human Behavior," in The
Economic Approach to Human Behavior (Chicago and London: The University
of Chicago Press), pp. 3-14.

Bible (revised Urdu version 1993), Pakistan Bible Society, Lahore.

Cohen, J. (1995), How many people can the earth support? W. W. Norton &
Co., New York

Frank, Robert H. (1987, September). "If Homo Economics Could Choose His
Own Utility Function, Would He Want One with a Conscience?" American
Economic Review 77(4), 593-604.

Frank, Robert H. (1997). Microeconomics and Behavior (3rd ed.). (New
York: McGraw-Hill).Tiemstra (1994)

Faruqui, Naser I., Biswas, Asit K., and Bino , Murad J. (ed), (2001),
Water management in Islam, United Nations University,
http://www.idrc.ca/openebooks/924-0/

Green, Steven L. (2002), "Rational Choice Theory: An Overview, Baylor
University Faculty Development Seminar on Rational Choice Theory.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2003a), "Poverty, Charity and Religion in
Perspective of Divine Economics", Kashmir Economic Review, Vol. 1,
UAJK

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2003b), "A Divine Economics Framework for
the Study of Time Allocation Behavior and Religiosity", the Kashmir
Economic Review, Vol. II, UAJK

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2004), "Religious Orientation as a Factor
in Time Allocation", Ph.D. Dissertation submitted to the Department of
Economics, QAU, Islamabad.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2007), "Issues of Measuring Religiosity
for Empirical Studies on Doctrine of Mahdism", 3rd International
Conference on Doctrine of Mahdism, Tehran

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Ahmad Dr. Eatzaz, (2002a), "Towards
Divine Economics: Some Testable Propositions", Pakistan Development
Review (PDR), Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 607-26.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Ahmad Dr. Eatzaz, (2002b), "Optimizing
Human Resources in Islamic Management", paper presented at 2nd Congress
on Islamic Management, IA University Tehran, May 2002.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Ahmad Dr. Eatzaz, (2002c), "Religiosity
and Time Allocation Behavior" paper presented at Asia & Southeast Asia
Econometric Society Meeting, December 2002, Lahore University of
Management Sciences, Lahore.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Ahmad Dr. Eatzaz, and Mahmood
Khalid(2004), "Study of Philanthropic Behavior in Divine Economics
Framework", Pakistan Development Review (PDR), Vol. 43, No. 4, pp.
875-894.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain, and Akhtar Hussain Shah (2006), "Loss of
Human Capital" paper published in book about earthquake 2005 by Fatima
Jinah University.

Hrung, Warren B. (2004), "After-life consumption and charitable
giving", American Journal of Economics and Sociology,
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi\_m0254/is\_3\_63/ai\_n6142204

Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1984). "Consumption Capital and Habit
Formation with an Application to Religious Participation." U. Chicago
Ph.D. Dissertation.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (1990). "Religious Practice: A Human Capital
Approach." Journal of the Scientific Study of Religion 29(3), 297-314.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (1998, September). "Introduction to the Economics
of Religion." Journal of Economic Literature XXXVI, 1465-96.

Javaid Sumaira (2007), "Religiosity & Wastage of Water: An Application
of Divine Economics Framework on Cross -Section Data." Unpublished M. Sc
Thesis, Kashmir Institute of Economics, University of Azad Jammu and
Kashmir, Muzaffarabad, Pakistan

Kirmani, Syed Mohammad Ghiasi, (1999), The Government of Imam Mehdi and
the Last Era (of the universe), Intisharaat e Noorguster, Iran

Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue (2002) , Water Water & the Future of
Life on Earth, Simon Fraser University, Canada

Nehjul Bilaghah (Peak of Eloquence), The famous collection of
traditions of Ali AS, translated in Urdu by Syed Razi, published in 1974
and English by Syed Ali Raza.

Qadri, Tahir-ul, (1994) Tabqat-ul-Ebaad (Categories of Men),
Minhaaj-ul-Qura'n Pakistan.

Tiemstra, John P. (1994, December). "Christianity and Economics: A
Review of the Recent Literature." Christian Scholar's Review XXIV(2),
227-49.

Tabatabai, M. H. (1973), Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Kor'an [the Commentary
on Qur'an], vol. 16, Al Alami Library, Beirut.

Thomas Homer Dixon (1999), Environment, Scarcity, and Violence,
Princton.

Varian, Hal. (1997). "How to Build an Economic Model in Your Spare
Time." In Szenberg, Michael, Economists at Work (Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press). (The quotation in the paper is taken from
the paper as presented on Varian's web site at
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/Papers/how.pdf.)

Weeramantry, C. G. (1988), Islamic Jurisprudence: An International
Perspective, St. Martin's Press, New York.


