2.4 Divine Economics Framework
==============================

Religion plays a key role in formulating individual's behavior, which
govern the whole economic system of decision making in the economy.
Hence the impact of religion on human behavior as an individual, or as a
group is now considered to be an important area for extension to
traditional economic models (Iannaconne 1991, 1992).

Since all divine religions teach its followers the concept of life
hereafter (after death) which is a compulsory part of the faith. The
departure of the analysis of divine economics from conventional
economics is the concept of two lives, the first one the life on earth
and the second the life after death (Nadvi, 1995). In all the divine
religions the code of life, belief in life after death and the Day of
Judgment will have significant impact on economic decision making of
individuals.

According to this the economists believe that expected stream of
benefits does not terminate at the time of death. Hence there remains
scope for a divine economics that may represent consumer behavior in
divine religion's perspective, by Hamdani (2002). The new emerging
discipline i.e. Divine Economics as proposed by Dr. Hamdani has wider
scope as compared to conventional one, in which religious behavior also
play a vital role in the decision making of economic agent for rational
choices.

"Divine economics is a science which studies human behavior directly or
indirectly to achieve an optimal degree of Falaah from God given
resources" (Tashfeen, 2001). The conventional economics studies only
welfare of a man in the life on the earth while divine economics studies
welfare of a man in the life on earth but also the eternal welfare of
the life after the death. In all divine religions, people believe in one
God i.e. Almighty Allah and the Day of Judgment (the life here after).

The Reward and Punishment of one's deeds in the shape of the Heaven and
Hell are admitted facts of all sects of Divine religions. It is also
believed that all the material and immaterial goods in the universe have
been gifted by Allah to man, and is accountable the deeds on the earth
Dr. Hamdani One of the contemporary proponents of framework defines
Divine Economics as "the study of economics and religion in each other's
perspective using scientific process".

This framework incorporates standard variables and also some additional
social, psychological, environmental and religious variables in the
economic analysis, which were previously neglected by economists. Hence
this framework allows one to study human behavior with reference to
Mahdavi Doctrine and can estimate various socio economic relationships
of current and future importance.

**3. Economics of Future**

Economics of the future is newly emerging subject, which deals with the
economic analysis of the current and future scenarios having some future
importance. The economic theories / laws which are used for the economic
planning and policies of the economies related with the economics of
future. Conventional economics uses empirical evidence on past to
predict about future economic outcomes while Divine Economics uses all
the three methods such as divine revelation, experience / perceptions
made by wise men as well as empirical methods.

1. Divine Revelations
2. Experience / perception of wise men in the society
3. Empirical analysis


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Source: Divine Economics

The conventional economists formulate the theories/laws of economics on
the basis of trends using past data. The 2nd technique ( wisdom /
experience / perception ) commonly known as deductive method was being
used up to the publication of the General Theory of Employment by J. M.
Keynes. Later on the 3rd method i.e. empirical analysis known as
scientific technique is used. Different approaches such as Lucas's
misperception theory, adaptive / rational expectations, Game theory and
regression analysis are used for the solution of the economy's problems
and predictions are made accordingly for policy making.

Conventional economics uses empirical evidence on past values to
predict the future economic outcomes that may be true or false so the
policies implemented on the basis of these economic outcomes may not be
fruitful. On the other hand in divine economics above cited three
methods such as divine revelation, experience / perceptions made by wise
men as well as empirical methods so predictions made by the divine
economics will be true in all respects and the policies can be used for
research. In general the followers of all the divine religions (Jews and
Christians) and in particular the followers of Islam firmly believe on
divine books (Bibal), Qura'n and Hadiths.

**Source: Divine Economics**

The above figure shows that economics of the future can be seen from
two distinct views; traditional view and divine view. Under traditional
view past data is used to forecast the future. In divine view, the
divine revelations have also some importance in shaping a future
perception about which further investigation can take place using past
data.

The divine view of the future of the globe can be derived from divine
religions; Christianity, Judaism and Islam. In former two religions, it
is believed that Jesus will come again and establish 'Kingdom of God' on
earth. In Islam it is believed that Imam Mahdi (A.S.) will appear and
fill the earth with justice and peace as it would be filled with
injustice and cruelties. In religious literature, a number of evidences
in the support of Imam's arrival can be found. Based on such
predictions, the subsequent sections of this paper will present how
economics of future can be developed?

How that fulfills the requirements of conventional empiric-based
scientific research process more credibly than conventional one? This
version of economics can easily incorporate the economic systems of the
era of Imam Mahdi (A.S). Ideal level of welfare at globe may be achieved
with equitable resource distribution. A number of strategic resources
may be exploited to achieve higher level of welfare for average
individual. A sketchy view of world economic growth and population
increase is given. The analysis shows relationship between demand for
resources and increase in number of individuals.

**World Resources**

Whole the nature has been created by the All Mighty Allah; a man is His
vice-regent on earth. "Seek the other world by means of what Allah has
bestowed upon you, and do not be negligent about your share in this
world". And do good as Allah have done well by you, and do not seek to
spread disorder on the earth". The Holy Qura'n [28:77]. , Islam follows
divine guidance on economic activities. Human authority cannot remove
these controls imposed by Islam. The prohibition of Rib 'a, gambling,
hoardings, introduction of Zakah, dealing in unlawful goods or services,
short sales and speculative transactions are some examples of divine
restrictions.

**World GDP**

According to the statistics the world GDP (comprising180 countries) has
reached a sum of US $46,747 billions. The main contributors to the world
GDP are USA, Japan, Germany, China, UK, France, Italy, Canada, Spain,
Brazil, Russia, Korea, India, Mexico and Australia. Percentage share of
USA to the total world GDP is 28.3. While both the emerging economies
such as India and China have a share of 1.82 and 5.41 respectively.

**Source: International Monetary Fund and World Economic Outlook
Database**

The reports of IMF and World Bank shows that more than three fourth
world resources are owned by the developed countries having less than
one fifth world population while 80% rest of the world population has
one fifth world resources. 3.2 World Population. In the last few
centuries, the number of people living on earth has increased many times
over. By the year 2000, there will be 10 times more people on Earth than
there were 300 years ago.

**3.3.2 Trend of Per Capita World Product.**

The product per head, normally defined as the world total GDP divided
by the world population

While examining schedule and graph of the world per capita GDP growth
rate, apparently it seems that per capita is increasing at increasing
rate with slight variation. It has been reported by OECD (1999), that
there would be long run boom in the global economy and that would be
manifold increase in the world resources. On the other hand the
population growth rate is slowing down. Throughout the 1960s, the
world's population was growing at a rate of about 2% per year.

By 1990, that rate was down to 1.5%, and by the year 2015, it is
expected to drop to 1%. Observing both the growth rates per capita as
well as population, the expected conclusion of the above data refutes
the Malthusian theory of population that "population increases by
geometric progression and will be double after 25 years.

The wealth resources increase by arithmetic progression". This pattern
of population and per capita growth rate shows positive results for
welfare of global economy. These indicators provide foundation to
optimistic future of global economic growth. If there is equitable
distribution of resources among world population the existing resources
can fulfill wants/needs of people of whole of the globe.

The trends of the world per capita and population may continue,
provided, good governance prevails. At macro level global economy is
growing positively but at micro level it shows a number of inequalities.
This inequality has different causes including lack of good governance
at global level. An ideal type of good governance is expected in the era
of Imam Mahdi that may peruse global welfare. Contrarily in the world,
the governance system is not supportive for ideal governance that keeps
welfare level of human beings below desired level.


