Translator’s Introduction
=========================

Imam Zayn al-'Abidin's \`Treatise on Rights' is the only work attributed
to him other than supplications or relatively short sayings and letters.
The fact that it was a written document from the first may support the
suggestion that at least some of the supplications were originally
written compositions.

The \`Treatise on Rights' elaborates on a well-known saying of the
Prophet, which has been transmitted in a rather large number of
versions, no doubt because he repeated it in many different contexts. A
typical version can be rendered as follows: \`Surely your Lord has a
right against you, your self has a right against you, and your wife has
a right against you.'

Other versions of the *hadith* add guest, body, eye, and friend to those
who have rights. In some of the versions, another clause is added: ‘So
give to everyone who possesses a right (*kull dhi haqq*) his right’.[^1]
Another *hadith* tells us that \`God has given to everyone who possesses
a right his right.'[^2]

Shi'ite sources provide many relevant *hadith*. For example, the Prophet
said:

God has made seven rights incumbent upon the person of faith
(*al-mu'min*) toward the person of faith: To respect him in his person,
love him in his breast, share with him in his property, consider
backbiting against him unlawful, visit him in his illness, escort his
coffin, and say nothing but good about him after his death.[^3]

Zayn al-'Abidin's \`Treatise on Rights' seems to have been written at
the request of a disciple, since, in one of its two versions, it is
prefaced by the words: \`This is the treatise of 'Ali ibn al-Husayn to
one of his companions.' In it the Imam explains in more or less
exhaustive fashion what is meant by \`everyone who possesses a right' as
mentioned in the above *hadith*. Throughout he provides specific
examples, basing himself upon the Qur'an, the *sunna*, and the actions
and sayings of the earlier Imams.

Though in the present context the word *haqq* translates best as
\`right', it has a number of closely related meanings which should be
kept in mind, such as suitableness, justice, truth, reality,
correctness, properness, appropriateness, necessity, incumbency,
obligation, due, and duty.

A glance at the \`Treatise on Rights' will quickly show that the word
\`rights' might better have been translated as duties, obligations, or
responsibilities, since the treatise is not directly concerned with the
rights of the individual, but rather with the rights of others which the
individual must observe. Nevertheless, I think it is important to
preserve the term \`rights', if only to show that in considering human
rights primarily in terms of responsibilities, Islam diverges profoundly
from most modern Western views, though it has deep kinships with other
religious traditions of East and West.

Islam views the individual in his total context, which means that it
considers first his relationship with God, then his relationship with
God's creatures. What is important for the individual in his
relationship with God is that he attain to salvation, or in other words,
that he follow God's guidance, which is based upon mercy and directed
toward his own best interest.

In short, Islam devalues the individual's perspective, since human
beings on their own can see no further than their immediate interests
during life. But this devaluation of individualism is not a devaluation
of the individual; on the contrary, it raises him to the ultimate
pinnacle of importance, since everything is directed toward his
happiness in the next world.

Islam merely recognizes the ignorance of human beings and their
inability to perceive their own ultimate good without divine guidance.
Then it sets about to undermine and destroy individual ignorance, a
process which involves deflating the ego and eliminating all
self-centred desires. As a result, the human self or soul (*nafs*) has
few \`rights', but many duties and responsibilities. Or rather, the soul
has only one true right - the right to salvation.

The individual's right to salvation follows naturally upon God's right,
which is to be worshiped without any partner (i.e., *tawhid*). The way
to salvation is to obey God, and hence it is the soul's right to be
employed in obedience toward Him. By His very nature since \`His mercy
precedes His wrath' - God displays compassion and guidance, and through
obedience the servant opens himself up to the full range of this
compassion.

In other words, partaking of God's mercy and compassion depends upon
following His guidance, and following His guidance means following the
*Shari'a* as revealed through the Qur'an and the *sunna*. Hence the Imam
speaks of \`being employed in obedience' as the self's key right, since
only that can bring about its deliverance.

As soon as this wide context for attaining to the right of the self is
envisaged, dozens of duties become obligatory upon the individual. The
Imam makes clear that the primary duties are toward the various organs
and activities of the self, since these determine man's relationship to
God. The organs have \`rights' because they share in the individual's
destiny; the \`resurrection of the body' is taken for granted (cf.
Supplication 31.22).

Activities have rights because they shape the destiny of the soul. And
other human beings have rights because they form the context within
which activity occurs. Human actions can only be correct if the rights
of all of God's creatures are observed. This, in short, is the theme of
the \`Treatise on Rights', a theme which is reinforced by many of the
supplications of the *Sahifa*, number 24 being a prime example.

The treatise has been transmitted in two versions, one in *Al-Khisal*
and *Al-Amali*, both by Shaykh al-Saduq (d. 581/991), and the other in
*Tuhaf al-\`uqul*, by his contemporary Ibn Shu'ba. Perhaps one half of
the text of the two versions is identical, but Ibn Shu'ba's version adds
a good deal of material that shows it to be a later recension, perhaps
by the Imam himself, or more likely by a later author trying to clarify
the meaning. The translation follows the earlier version, with a minor
addition from the second version which seems to be demanded by the
context.[^4]

[^1]: Bukhari, Sawm 51. Cf. Wensinck, Concordance, I, 487, under inna
‘alayka haqqan.

[^2]: Abu Dawud, Wasaya 6, Buyu’ 88; Tirmidhi, Wasaya 5; Ibn Maja,
Wasaya 6, etc.

[^3]: Shaykh Saduq, Al-Khisal, II, 6; and Al-Amali, p.20 (quoted in
Bihar, LXXI, 222). For other relevant hadith, see Bihar, LXXI.

[^4]: Both versions are provided in Bihar, LXXI, 2-21 (where they have
been collated against the printed versions in Al-Khisal and Tuhaf
al-‘uqul). A far less satisfactory edition, with a number of errors and
with a mixing of the two texts so that neither is complete nor clearly
separated from the other, is given by al-Amin in A’yan al-Shi’a, V,
215-30.


