Lesson Thirteen: The Demand of the Qur’an for a Direct Confrontation
====================================================================

The Noble Qur’an was revealed in the Arabic language, one of the richest
languages in the world from the point of view of firmness of structure
and abundance of vocabulary. It descended like a flash of lightning in
the darkness of the Age of Ignorance, and in the manner in which it
conveyed various types of subject matter in the most concise of
sentences it had nothing in common with the conventional language of the
Arabs.

At the time that the Qur’an was revealed, the literary talent and
eloquence of the Arabs was at its peak. Works created by poets and
orators commanded the attention and admiration of everyone, and
literature constituted the only art cultivated by the Arab elite.

The Qur’an, which constituted the documentary proof of the messengerhood
of the Prophet of Islam and the raw materials of which its constituent
letters and words was revealed over a period of twenty-three years in
accordance with the particular needs that emerged over time. Thus it
guided the Prophet and his companions step by step toward their exalted
goals.

The words and expressions of the Qur’an are harmonious and its words are
set together pleasingly and with the utmost beauty, and in complete
accord with the subtle meanings they express. This unique combination of
wording and meaning is a special feature of the Qur’an and another
aspect of its miraculousness.

With the revelation of the Qur’an, the Arabs made the acquaintance of a
fresh and new form of speech which was neither prose nor poetry, but the
melody of which was more beautiful and attractive than that of poetry
and the discourse of which was more eloquent and effective than that of
prose. Whoever heard it was drawn toward it and transformed by it. It
was utterly different from all forms of human speech by virtue of the
superiority of its concepts, the eloquence of its style and outward
form, and its exposition of meanings in the most concise way.

The firm laws and clear logic of the Qur’an showed human beings the way
to correct religion and living, and inspired them with the determination
to create an epic unparalleled in history. The Qur’an destroyed utterly
the superstitions that the oppressors and their helpers had elaborated
throughout history.

The Qur’an established a mode of thought leading to the truth, which is
identified as thought that eschews all obstinacy, caprice and
fanaticism. From the very first day that the Prophet began preaching his
message of monotheism, he summoned people also to a realistic vision of
the world. When inviting them to faith, he addressed their wisdom and
intelligence and called on them to use their eyes and their ears to
perceive the truth.

He unshackled them from custom and usage, from obstinately clinging to
ancient heritages, and strove to convince them that they should not
perversely insist on retaining the beliefs and loyalties that had been
born of polytheism. Although these efforts earned him bitter harassment,
he was not dismayed, and he did not give up before fulfilling the role
that the Creator had given him in improving men's lives.

Many of the polytheists did not permit themselves to listen to the
Qur’an for they were well aware of its remarkable effect and afraid that
its profound and astonishing influence might conquer their hearts as
well, drawing them ineluctably towards it.

Ibn Hisham writes in his life of the Prophet: "So strong was the
heartfelt desire of the people to hear the Qur’an that even some of the
unbelievers of the Quraysh would stealthily go near the Prophet's house
at night, remaining there until dawn, in order to listen throughout the
night to the pleasing melody of the Qur’an as recited by the Messenger
of God. This happened many times.”[^1]

When the revelation of the Qur’an began, the Most Noble Messenger
clearly proclaimed the Qur’an to be the Word of God, and said it was
impossible for any human being to duplicate it; if anyone disagreed, he
ought to make an attempt to copy it, and should feel free to seek help
from any source in doing so. None was able to take up this challenge and
produce even a short surah similar to the Qur’an.

Still more remarkable is the fact that the utterances of the Prophet,
whose tongue would recite the Qur’an, bore no resemblance whatsoever to
the Qur’an. This is in itself a convincing proof that the Qur’an
originated from a source other than the mind of the Prophet.

The Qur’an Modifies the Conditions of its Challenge
---------------------------------------------------

The Qur’an issued a challenge not only to the contemporaries of the
Prophet but also to men in all ages. In order to demonstrate the
incapacity and impotence of people to imitate it, it issued the
following universal proclamation:

***"Were all of mankind to come together and wish to produce the like of
the Qur’an, they would never succeed, however much they aided each
other." (17:88)***

It then modifies the challenge and reduces its scope by saying:

***"Do people imagine that this Qur’an is not from Us, and that you, Oh
Prophet, are falsely attributing it to Us? Tell them that if they are
speaking truly they should produce ten surahs resembling the Qur’an, and
that they are free to call on the aid of anyone but God in so doing."
(11:13)***

Then, at a third stage, the scope of the challenge is reduced still
further: the deniers are called on to produce only a single surah
resembling the Qur’an:

***"Oh people, if you doubt the heavenly origin of this Book which We
have sent down to Our servant, the Prophet, produce one surah like it."
(2:23)***

Since we know that some of the shorter surahs consist only of a few
brief sentences, this final challenge constituted a definitive proof of
the human being's inability to imitate the Qur’an.

It is remarkable that the Prophet who thus challenged the Arabs to a
kind of literary contest, despite all their literary resources, was
someone who had never in the course of the forty years of his life
participated in any of their literary competitions or acquired any
superiority in eloquence over this own people.

Let us not forget that this challenge was issued to a people whose
leaders were threatened by the devastating attacks of the Qur’an, their
lives, their property, their ancient customs, their ancestors, their
whole social position. If it had been at all possible for the Arabs to
respond to the challenge of the Qur’an, they would have taken it up
immediately, with the unstinting aid of the masters of eloquence that
were by no means rare in that age. Thus they would have invalidated the
proofs of the Qur’an and won an everlasting victory.

Furthermore, as a matter of general principle, if one consistently
follows and studies the style of a certain form of speech, he will
ultimately be able to imitate it. But the Qur’an forms an exception to
this rule: however much one tries to practice the use of the Qur’anic
style, he will never be able to create something resembling the Qur’an.

This reveals to us a significant truth: mere learning and study can
never give us the capability to imitate the Qur’an. History has not a
single instance to show in which this particular aspect of the
miraculousness of the Qur’an has been negated; it cannot point to a
single book comparable to the Qur’an. Even among the speeches and
sayings of the Prophet, nothing can be found which resembles the Qur’an
from the point of view of style and eloquence.

If the forces opposing Islam, with all of their skilled rhetoricians,
had been able to create works capable of competing with the Qur’an,
there would have been no need for them to endure losses and casualties
by going to war, to suffer hardship and expend material resources. They
could have won an easy victory by means of propaganda, a kind of cold
war, and put paid to the rise of Islam within itself, its place of
origin.

They called into play all their resources in an effort to meet the
challenge of the Qur’an, but all their efforts came to naught. They were
unable to point even to a single error or defect in the Qur’an and were
obliged to admit that its words were situated on a higher plane than the
thought and speech of the human being. The verses of the Qur’an
penetrated the depths of human beings' hearts with such unprecedented
swiftness that all people of sound mind and heroic disposition eagerly
embraced its message.

By contrast, the devotees of ignorance and mental stagnation, people who
assigned little value to wisdom and thought, and whose lives were spent
in the swamp of neglect and lack of awareness, were the principal
element in opposing Islam and urging others to do so.

In order to conceal from people's view the miraculous nature of the
Qur’an, they attributed the Qur’an to the workings of magic, seeking
thus to explain the extraordinary attraction exerted by its verses and
its unique influence.

Sometimes they would also subject the converts to Islam to harassment
and a hail of contempt and ridicule, or through force and coercion they
would attempt to prevent the people from thinking freely. Their whole
method of struggle against Islam was, in fact, childish, and it betrayed
their weakness and utter helplessness.

For example, they instructed a group of people to go and make a noise,
to whistle and clap their hands, while the Prophet was reciting the
verses of the Qur’an, so that the people would not fall under the
influence of its eloquence and power to attract.

The methods followed by the leaders of Quraysh and their insistence on
preventing the message of the Qur’an from reaching the ears of the
people showed that a deadly serious struggle between truth and falsehood
was not indeed underway.

The Qur’an itself unmasks the methods they followed and the negative
role that they played:

***"The polytheists said: 'Do not listen to the verses of the Qur’an,
and make a noise while they are being recited; perhaps you will thus
triumph.'" (41:26)***

But this attempt forcibly to sever the connection between people's minds
and the Qur’an did not last long. As soon as the shackles of coercion
and fear were loosened from the minds of people, even some of the
leaders of the polytheists who were firmly attached to the rites and
customs of the Age of Ignorance would conceal themselves behind the
coverings of the Ka'bah not far from where the Prophet was sitting, in
order to listen to him reciting the verses of the Qur’an in prayer.

This shows how deeply the image the Qur’an had traced of itself was able
to penetrate deep into the souls of the people, so that the polytheists
were ultimately unable to accomplish anything effective against the
message of the Qur’an, although it represented a call to battle fatal to
their interests.

This impotence on the part of the enemies of Islam belongs to the dawn
of Islam: the masters of eloquence were unable to imitate or compete
with the Qur’an.

Now that we are in the fifteenth century since the Qur’an first laid
down its challenge, a time when the progress of learning has opened up
new horizons of thought in front of us, we can appreciate the Divine
origin of the Qur’an and its infinite values by reference to other
matters, quite apart from the unique and inimitable structure and
eloquence of the Qur’an.

We can perceive the Qur’an to be an everlasting miracle, because the
position of revelation vis-a-vis its deniers remains firmly the same,
and the challenge of the Qur’an still resounds to all of mankind:

***"If you doubt the heavenly origin of this book, produce one surah
like it." (2:23)***

Can the person of today take up the challenge of the Qur’an and produce
a surah like it, thereby conquering the stronghold of Islam and
invalidating the claims of its Prophet?

Both in past and present times, there have been obstinate and impudent
enemies of Islam among the experts on Arabic language and literature. If
it had been possible for them to meet the challenge of the Qur’an, that
eternal miracle of harmony and symmetry, and produce a single surah like
it, they would certainly have devoted themselves fully to such a
destructive undertaking.

Islam has proposed, then, a very simple challenge to those who oppose
it. Why then do the deniers of prophethood choose roundabout ways,
avoiding this direct method of confronting and defeating Islam? Is it
not because the door is firmly closed on meeting the challenge posed by
the Qur’an?

Gibb, a certain Christian scholar, says: "Even if we attempt to reorder
the words of the Qur’an, we will not be able to put them in a new and
meaningful order; we must replace them exactly where they were before."

Despite the passage of time, historical documents and evidence still
provide such a clear picture of the Prophet of Islam and his
characteristics that all historians are unanimous that the Prophet was
an unlettered man who had never known books or teachers and never
learned how to write.

The Qur’an itself addressed him as follows, proclaiming his
characteristics to the members of Meccan society who were acquainted
with all the stages of his life:

***"Before this, you did not read any book, nor did you write***
***anything with your hands." (29:48)***

The Divine nature of the Prophet's message is thus demonstrated.

Is it at all possible that someone should proclaim to the members of his
own society, in utter contradiction of the truth, that he is unlettered
and has never studied, without anyone voicing an objection? The dark
cultural environment of that day was, in any event, a stranger to
scholars and teachers; nothing existed that the Prophet might have
studied. Those people who knew how to read and write were few and far
between and none of the historians records a single instance of the
Prophet having read a single line or written a single word before the
beginning of his prophetic mission.

How remarkable it is that such a man who had never studied became the
standard-bearer of a movement calling for science and free thought! With
the beginning of his messengerhood and his entry on the stage of human
history, mankind entered a new stage of progress. With the suddenness of
a flash of lightening, he introduced his people to the world of learning
and writing and laid the foundations of a movement that transformed the
degenerate society of Arabia into the nucleus of a great world
civilization. A few centuries later, that civilization could boast of
the most splendid scientific accomplishments and the greatest scholars
and researchers.

A consideration of these facts concerning the phenomenon of Islam,
particularly as they are judged by non-Muslim scholars, helps us to
understand better the profoundly miraculous nature of the Qur’an. The
author of ‘Muhammad, the Prophet Who Must Be Examined Anew’, writes as
follows: "Although he was unlettered, the very first verses that were
revealed to him contain mention of the pen and of knowledge, of learning
and teaching. There is no other religion that places such emphasis, in
its very origin, on knowledge and learning.

"If Muhammad had been a scholar, the revelation of the Qur’an in the
cave of Hira would not have been surprising, for a scholar knows well
the value of learning. But he was unlettered and had never studied with
any teacher. I congratulate the Muslims that the acquisition of
knowledge was so highly valued at the very inception of their religion."
[^2]

Laura Veccia Vaglieri, professor at the University of Naples, has the
following to say: "The heavenly book of Islam is miraculous and
inimitable. Its style is totally unprecedented in Arabic literature, and
its peculiar impact on the spirit of the human being derives from its
special and superior characteristics. How is it possible that such a
book should be the work of Muhammad, an Arab who had never studied?

"We find in this book a treasury of knowledge beyond the capacity of the
greatest philosophers and statesmen, and for this reason it is also
impossible to regard the Qur’an as the work of an educated person."

Smith writes in his book, Muhammad and Islam: "I boldly assert that one
day the loftiest of human philosophers and the most veracious principles
of Christianity will confess and bear witness that the Qur’an is the
Word of God and that Muhammad is the Messenger of God. An unlettered and
unlearned Prophet was chosen by God to bring the Qur’an to mankind, a
book that has in the course of history produced thousands of other books
and treatises, brought libraries into being and filled them with books,
and placed before mankind laws and philosophies and educational,
intellectual and ideological systems.

"He arose in an environment where there was no trace of learning and
civilization. In the whole of Medina, there were only eleven people who
knew how to read and write, and in all the branches of the Quraysh, in
Mecca and its environs, not more than seventeen people were literate.

"The teachings of the Qur’an, which mentions knowledge and the pen in
its opening verses, brought about a tremendous transformation. Islam
proclaimed study to be a religious duty, and made the black ink of the
scribe and the scholar to be superior to the red blood of the martyr.

"Thanks to the teachings of the Qur’an and its emphasis on the
cultivation of knowledge, countless scholars made their appearance and
wrote innumerable books. Different scientific disciplines were derived
from the Qur’an and spread across the world by Muslim thinkers. The
world was illumined with the light of the Qur’an and the culture of
Islam."

[^1]: Sirat ibn Hisham, Vol. I, p. 386.

[^2]: Muhammad, Payghambari ki az nau bayad shinakht, p. 45.


