Lesson Sixteen: Prediction of the Defeat of a Great Power
=========================================================

The beginning of the mission of the Most Noble Messenger came in the
year 611 AD, and thus fell in the reign of Khusrau Parviz.

At that time, two great and powerful states, Eastern Rome or Byzantium
and Iran, ruled over the greater part of the civilized world. They had
for long been going to war with each other in order to expand the area
under their control. [^1] These lengthy battles between the Byzantines
and the Iranians had begun in the reign of Anushirvan and had continued
into the reign of Khusrau Parviz.

Encouraged and egged on by his advisors, Anushirvan had disregarded the
peace treaty existing with Byzantines and attacked them. Within a short
period, the Iranians succeeded in conquering Syria and Antioch,
advancing as far as Asia Minor itself. Antioch was burned to the ground
and Asia Minor was plundered. Twenty years later, when the military
power of both sides was crumbling, a new peace agreement was signed, and
the forces of both states returned to their previous borders.

After the death of Anushirvan and its aftermath, Khusrau Parviz
ultimately came to the throne. In 614 AD he attacked the Greeks again,
gaining control of Syria, Palestine and North Africa.

He sacked Jerusalem, set fire to the Holy Sepulchre, and destroyed
numerous cities. The war ended in a clear victory for Iran.

News of the defeat of the Byzantine worshippers of God, at the hands of
the fire-worshipping Iranians, was received with satisfaction by the
idolators of Mecca and with grief and sadness by the Muslims. In the
course of this bloody struggle, Jerusalem had come into the possession
of the Iranians, which was taken by the polytheists as a good omen for
their own struggle against the Muslims, foretelling victory and triumph
over them.

This interpretation made by the Meccans was grievous to the Muslims and
caused them much anxiety about the future course of events. It was then
that a revelation came foretelling the renewed triumph of the
Byzantines, worshippers of God, over the Iranians; it disclosed the
secret that the Byzantines would make good their defeat in less than ten
years and carry off a definitive victory. These are the relevant verses
of the Qur’an:

***"The Byzantines have been defeated in a land near the Hijaz, but in
the future they will triumph over their enemies, in a period of less
than ten years. All affairs, both earlier and later, are in the hands of
God, and on the day when the Byzantines triumph, the believers and the
followers of Islam will rejoice. God assists whomsoever He wills, and He
is powerful and compassionate. This is the promise of God, a promise
which cannot be violated, but most of the people know not." (30:2-6)***

The prophecy of the Qur’an was fulfilled in the year 625 AD,
corresponding to year 2 AH. Less than ten years had passed since the
previous battle between the two powers, and the Byzantines were able to
occupy Iran. It was so definite and certain for the Muslims that this
event would take place that some of them placed bets on it like Abu Bakr
who took out a bet against Ubayy bin Khalaf. [^2]

How can we explain the confident and categorical prediction of the
victory of a defeated people over a victorious people, in the absence of
any factors pointing to the likelihood of such an event?

A realistic approach to the state of society and the course of events
would definitely have contradicted this prophesy.

The Prophet of Islam foretold a definite military victory at a certain
point in the future; how did he know it was going to occur?

Would it be fair to put it on the same level as the predictions made by
politicians and political commentators? Could the application of any
criteria have made it possible to calculate that people, defeated,
exhausted and demoralized in the course of a trying war, should within a
given space of time, triumph definitively over the erstwhile victor? It
should be remembered, after all, that many factors play a role in
military victory and that the slightest error in tactics or
miscalculation can change the whole course of battle.

Surely the explanation is that some unaccountable element is contained
in the unfolding of events, which permits the prediction of an
occurrence like a great military victory. It is unrealistic to attempt
to analyze these matters from a purely materialistic point of view.

The Prediction of Other Events
------------------------------

The Qur’an has also foretold other events. Let us give a few examples.
One is the conquest of Mecca and the triumph of the Muslims over the
polytheists, described by the Qur’an as follows:

***"That which God inspired in his Prophet by means of a dream is true
and veracious: without any doubt, you will enter the Sacred Mosque in
safety and security. You will shave your heads and shorten your hair
without any fear or anxiety. God knows what you do not know, and you***
***will win a victory near at hand before your conquest of Mecca."
(48:27)***

This verse informs the Muslims that they will enter the Sacred Mosque
and perform the ceremonies of the lesser pilgrimage ('umra) without any
fear, and that the polytheists will be defeated and their power will
vanish. It also assures them that in the near future they will enjoy
another victory. These predictions were made at a time when no military
expert or adviser could have predicted the occurrence, given the
difficult circumstances of the Muslims and the unfavorable situation in
which they found themselves.

In reality, then, it was not the outer beings of the Muslim warriors,
the physical strength and weaponry they possessed, that were victorious;
it was God's aid, joined to their strenuous efforts, that gave rise to
victory .

The repeated statement in the Qur’an that all miracles and victories
take place with the permission of God indicates how limited is the role
played by personalities in history despite their power of choice and the
dimensions their creative activity may assume.

The Prophets represent the most important of the factors necessary for
destroying existing social realities and bringing about social changes
at a given point in history. With their luminosity, they penetrate the
darkness surrounding society that is an obstacle on the path to God.
They create a distinctive set of values, and with God's permission, they
guide men to righteousness and salubrity.

It is precisely within the growing darkness that the evolutionary course
of history causes the emergence of exalted personalities. Their
appearance is one of the basic factors in bringing about fundamental
social change and one of the undoubted necessities of history.

A careful examination of history will show that the Prophets appeared at
decisive turning points in time, playing a fundamental role in conveying
human societies from a lower stage to a higher one. It is then up to the
human being himself firmly to base his orientation to the world on an
awareness of the constant evolution of all phenomena and the movement of
all of being toward its lofty aims, as well as on faith and belief in
the source of creation and worthy action that brings him into harmony
with the universal proclamation of God's glory by all things.

Only then will his true human visage as the vicegerent upon the earth
become apparent This proper orientation toward existence and the
phenomena of nature will determine for him the values of his earthly
existence.

History bears witness that human beings have joyously abandoned
everything for the sake of the Divine teachings brought by the Prophets,
in order to gain, thereby, that which is both everything and higher than
everything.

Let us return to our previous topic.

The Qur’an mentions the future occurrence of another historical event,
namely the triumph of the Muslim warriors at Khaybar and their conquest
of its formidable fortresses. Hard blows had been inflicted on the
Muslims from Khaybar, but in the end the army of Islam triumphed over
the Jews, and the prediction of the Qur’an was completely fulfilled.

Would it have been possible to speak of victory, at a time of the utmost
weakness, without utter confidence in the content of Divine revelation?
Can we ascribe this precise knowledge of the future to the knowledge and
perspicacity of the Prophet of Islam?

Knowledge cannot permit one to speak of an ineluctable future, to make
categorical predictions; this is something in which only the true
Prophets and friends of God can engage.

In these victorious wars, Islam triumphed not only materially over the
forces of unbelief; it also subjected its opponents and enemies to its
ideological and spiritual power.

When the Prophet was still living in Mecca and propagating Islam on a
limited scale in extremely difficult and tiring circumstances, and when
the future of Islam was still uncertain, the Qur’an predicted the
ultimate fate of Abu Lahab to be inevitable entry to hellfire on account
of his obstinate enmity to the Prophet of Islam.

Although many of the relatives of the Prophet pined the ranks of his
opponents at the beginning of his mission, their innate ability to
perceive and accept the truth gradually emerged from the darkness of
ignorance and obstinacy, so despite their obduracy and perversity of
mind, they changed their beliefs and joined the ranks of the Muslims.

At that time of feverish cries, nobody knew who would ultimately join
the ranks of the believers and which opponents of the truth would
maintain their erroneous attitudes until death. After all, the passage
of time, the occurrence of certain events and the emerging of new
conditions can bring about new insights in the human being, with the
result that he changes his beliefs an opinions; no one can foretell with
certainty what the future beliefs of a person will be.

Nonetheless, the Qur’an predicts with clarity the final outcome of the
life of a given individual, Abu Lahab, the obstinate enemy of Islam. It
proclaims categorically that he will refuse the religion of monotheism
until the very end of his life, and that for this reason his painful
destiny will be to enter the fire of God's wrath. These are the verse of
the Qur’an:

***"May Abu Lahab, who was constantly vexing and opposing the Prophet,
perish, and may his two hands be cut off! The wealth he accumulated to
destroy Islam has not availed him or saved him from destruction; he will
soon fall into the flaming fire of Hell." (111:1-3)***

All historians are agreed that Abu Lahab closed his eyes on this world
as an unbeliever and that he persisted in his obstinate hostility to the
Prophet of Islam until the final moments of his life.

The verses revealed concerning the events mentioned above constitute a
further proof that the sacred book of Islam is from God, and that it is
linked, in a profound and exclusive way, with the supra-natural realm.

Other verses of the Qur’an also predict certain future events, such as
the preservation of the Prophet from physical harm throughout the period
of his messengerhood and his inhumanity from the evil deeds of his
enemies. At the time this was predicted, the third year after the
beginning of his mission, there was no indication that he would remain
unharmed by his enemies throughout the period of his mission, and yet
the passage of time proved this to be the case.

In Surah Kawthar, the Qur’an informs people that the descendants of the
Prophet will ultimately be numerous - this despite the fact that in his
lifetime his enemies were hopeful that he would die without issue, since
all the sons of the Prophet had died in infancy and only one of his
daughters survived. Given this, was it possible for any other than God,
that eternal reality and fixed pivot of truth, to predict that matters
would unfold in a sense completely opposed to existing circumstances?

Likewise, the prediction that the Prophet would return to Mecca, his
home, made at a time when he abandoned it for Medina because of the
pressures of the polytheists, is also an indication of a higher
consciousness:

***"God*** ***Who made incumbent on you the recitation of the Qur’an
will return you to your birthplace." (28:85)***

In Surah Nasr, the Qur’an also predicts the definitive conquest of Mecca
by the Muslims with numerous different groups of people joining the
ranks of the Muslims. All these predictions of future events are
inexplicable unless they be ascribed to the source of revelation, to the
infinite knowledge of God.

It should also not be forgotten that in all the wars and battles they
waged and all the victories they won, the Muslims behaved toward the
defeated with the utmost generosity and compassion.

In this, they were guided by the inspiration they received from the
Qur’an, an inspiration that took shape in the very midst of the battles
and clashes in which they were engaged. Since the war waged by Islam was
a war for the sake of God and the establishment of monotheism and
justice, they never lost sight of the purpose of fighting even in the
midst of battle and the clanging of swords.

Although military victory might have appeared to be the best possible
opportunity for the Muslims to take revenge on the polytheists for all
the pain and torture they had suffered at their hands for years, the
Muslims restrained their anger and desire for revenge so that the sacred
aim of their struggle should not be sullied or obscured by their
personal desires and wishes.

[^1]: Tarikh-i Ulum va Adabiyat dar Iran, pp. 3-4.

[^2]:  Majma al-Bayan, Vol. VIII, p. 295


