Lesson Twenty: The Sealing of Prophethood
=========================================

The sealing of prophethood has always been regarded as one of the
fundamental components of belief in Islam; it negates the possibility of
the emergence of any Messenger after the Prophet of Islam.

In any discussion of Islam, we cannot overlook the role played in it by
the sealing of prophethood with the Prophet Muhammad.

What Muslim is there who does not immediately think of the Prophet's
aspect as seal whenever he call him to mind, or who has any doubt that
the Qur’an is the final revealed message of God?

No religion is known to us that like Islam proclaims the sealing of
revelation, nor any heavenly personality who has claimed eternal
validity for his message.

More than fourteen centuries have passed since the rise of Islam, and
throughout this period the Prophet of Islam has always been regarded as
the Seal of the Prophets. He perfected existing laws, and with the rich
content of his own logical and thorough program of action, he
demonstrated the ultimate value inherent in all the prophetic missions.

By contrast with other schools of religious thought, the validity of
which was restricted to a certain time or place, Islam represents a
comprehensive summation of all prophetic messages, and it recognizes no
boundaries, whether spatial or temporal.

The Qur’an itself also depicts the brilliant visage of Muhammad, upon
whom be peace and blessings, as the one by means of whom the gate of
prophethood has been closed.

How can we solve the apparent contradiction between the need for
Prophets as the condition for the vitality of human existence, on the
one hand, and the permanent sealing of prophethood, on the other? How
can we reconcile the principle of the immutability of the ordinances of
Islam with the principle of social development and the everlasting
search for new concepts and norms?

Industrial and technological developments have turned the human being
into a creature always desiring novelty, and wishing to connect every
aspect of his life to new principles and institutions.

How can such a human being organize his social life and development on
the basis of a religion that originated more than fourteen centuries ago
and summons the human being to recognize a series of fixed and
unchanging values? Having expounded the doctrine of the sealing of
prophethood, Islam itself provides the answers to these questions.

One of the reasons for the sending of new Prophets was the corruptions
and distortions that had crept into the teachings and books of their
predecessors, with the result that they lost their efficacy in the
guidance of the human being.

But once the human being reaches a stage in his growth where he can
preserve the norms and teachings of religion from corruption or change
and propagate them in their authentic form, the most fundamental reason
for the sending of new Prophets disappears.

The age in which the Prophet of Islam made his appearance thus differs
completely from the ages in which earlier Prophets had emerged: the
human being had reached a level of intellectual maturity which permitted
the sealing of prophethood.

The attainment of maturity by society, the rise of science and learning,
and the human being's acquisition of the ability to preserve and
propagate heavenly religion - all this meant that an essential
precondition for the sealing of prophethood had been met. It was now
possible for the duty of propagating religion and guiding people to be
entrusted to scholars and learned persons.

From now on, it was up to the human being to preserve his historical
heritage and spiritual achievements and to protect the final revelation
from corruption by seeking aid in the Qur’an itself and drawing on his
cultural and social maturity. Instead of the responsibility being placed
on a single individual, the message was now entrusted to a collectivity.
As the Qur’an says:

***"There should be a group among you who summon to virtue and enjoin
good upon them and restrain them from evil." (3:104)***

In his social development, the human being reaches a stage where he no
longer stands in need of repeated surgical intervention and is instead
ready for a form of permanent prophethood where human beings shape their
own destiny on the basis of clear vision, correct choice and reflection
on the contents of revelation.

Under such conditions, a social and intellectual order is needed that
will free the thoughts and acts of human beings from the wearying and
stultifying burden of attachment and give shape and direction to their
constant exertions in the realm of both thought and action. The eternal
miracle that is the Noble Qur’an sets forth the main principles of such
a system by following which human being is able to advance.

Among all the heavenly books the Qur’an is the only one to have
withstood the ravages of time so that we have in our possession a
complete and uncorrupted text clearly reflecting its abundantly creative
teachings . The Qur’an itself proclaims:

***"We it is Who have sent down this Qur’an and We it is Who will
protect it." (15:9)***

This verse indicates that the most important reason for the sending of
new Prophets no longer obtains.

In addition, we should be aware that belief in all the Prophets
signifies belief in a continuous historical process, one which began
with history itself and the origins of human society has expressed
itself in a struggle between truth and falsehood and will continue until
the final triumph of the former over the latter. In each age, the
Prophets have advanced the awareness and maturity of human beings in
accordance with the circumstances and capacities of society.

Differences with respect to certain laws and ordinances do not touch on
the fundamental principles and nature of religion because this apparent
lack of harmony relates to subsidiary matters, not fundamental concern
connected with the very nature of religion.

To correct deviations in thought and belief is possible, in fact, only
if a variety of programs of action, each congruent with a set of
objective realities, are adopted. If an apparent lack of harmony can be
observed in the methods followed by the Prophets in the course of their
continuous efforts, this has no connection with their fundamental aim.

There is no contradiction among their missions with respect to the
principal goal - changing and forming anew the thoughts of human beings
who had lost touch with reality and were living in darkness, both
culturally and socially. The Glorious Qur’an says:

***"After earlier Prophets, We sent Jesus, son of Mary; he confirmed the
Torah brought by Moses." (5:46)***

The Qur’an Confirms the Mission of Previous Prophets
----------------------------------------------------

Not only does the Qur’an not negate and invalidate previous revelations,
it positively confirms the messengerhood of all previous Prophets and
true guides, and praises those great men for their efforts and
exertions.

In the Qur’an, the names of those revered by Jews and Christians as
their leaders have been mentioned repeatedly and with respect. Does this
praise and veneration of those figures not indicate the veracity,
truthfulness and trustworthiness of the message of the Qur’an, as based
on revelation? After all, the followers of Judaism and Christianity were
intensely hostile to the new religion of Islam, and the fact that the
Qur’an praises the figures sacred to those two religions proves how far
removed the Qur’an is from all petty rivalry and how alien to it are all
kinds of power seeking.

The Qur’an proclaims:

***"We have sent this book down to you in truth, confirming, verifying
and protecting the previous heavenly books." (5:48)***

Since religion is rooted in the essential disposition of the human
being, as one of his fundamental impulses that find expression in his
view of the world and his deeds, it is basically one and unvarying. The
Noble Qur’an says:

***"Turn directly towards*** ***religion, for God has created the human
being's fundamental disposition in accordance with it." (30:30)***

So although the human being is subject to the norms that prevail in the
phenomenal world and gains meaning by entering into relationship with
those phenomena and the law of growth toward perfection that governs
them, his path to happiness is single and unique. It is religion alone
that can show him the specific path to a specific goal.

Montesquieu says: "It is in the very nature of human laws that they obey
events and occurrences. That is to say, events influence them. By
contrast, heavenly laws do not change on the basis of events or the
changing will of the human being. Human laws always aim at attaining the
best of solutions; heavenly laws actually discover the best of
solutions.

Virtue and goodness have, no doubt, many different aspects and
varieties, but the best of all solutions is necessarily unique and also,
therefore, immutable. The human being can change human laws because it
is possible that a given law be beneficial in one age but not in
another. Religious systems always offer the best laws and because they
cannot be improved upon, they are unchangeable." [^1]

If we turn our backs on Divine Laws and have recourse to manmade
regulations, we have, in fact, abandoned the broad and open plain of the
universal law of religion for the narrow and uneven alley that is the
limited mind of the human being.

The fundamental difference between the mission of the Prophet of Islam
and that of the other Prophets lies in the fact that their revelation
served as the basis for a temporary program of action.

Once Islam made its appearance and earlier religious systems had begun
to weaken and crumble, it was no longer possible to adhere to those
religions and systems of belief.

The value-system of Islam, by contrast, completes the whole structure of
prophethood: its logical coherence and unshakable firmness embrace all
the extensive dimensions of prophethood, and it includes within itself
all that the preceding Prophets put forward to satisfy the human being's
needs for social regulation, as well as all other moral and material
needs.

The role that the Prophets played in correcting the errors and
deviations of society and establishing a correct mode of thought and
action is now to be assumed by the religious leaders who draw on the
inexhaustible resources of Islam. The Qur’an, the value system of which
nurtures the whole of Islam and endows it with validity, also determines
the direction in which the Muslims are to advance and serves as the
source of comprehensive laws which leave nothing beyond their
all-embracing purview. In addition, the Qur’an contains the essence and
fundamental meaning of the teachings proclaimed by all the bearers of
God's word.

Once the human being reaches a stage in his development where he is able
to comprehend universal truths and Divine teachings and laws, the
scholars and the learned emerge as successors to the Prophets, with the
function of firmly implanting the authentic criteria of religion in the
minds of people.

In pursuit of the exalted ideals of their religion, they take on the
tasks of investigation and research and struggling against distortion of
religion; they propagate the teachings of God in their true form.

In many verses of the Qur’an, human beings are invited to study natural
phenomena with care, in order to perceive by way of deduction the spirit
that rules over the scheme of creation.

The constant attention paid by the Qur’an to reason and experience and
their utility and the significance it accords to nature and history as
sources for the attainment of knowledge, are connected them with the
sealing of prophethood by the Qur’an and the Prophet of Islam. They
indicate the prevalence of a new worldview in the history of mankind.

Abstract goals must inevitably be transformed into objective realities
if they are to have validity. We see, indeed, that for almost fifteen
centuries the human being has proven his ability to assume these heavy
but fruitful responsibilities by preserving his religious and scientific
heritage and exhibiting both profundity and realism in analyzing and
interpreting it.

This is in itself an indication of the human being's attainment of
independence and his readiness to preserve the Divine verses with utmost
care and his ability to assume the duty of propagating, interpreting,
teaching and disseminating religion.

Once the final Divine Command had reached the human being, there was no
possibility for the coming of a new Messenger.

The sealing of revelation may be compared to the case of a certain piece
of land where all necessary archaeological excavations have been carried
out with the utmost care to unearth ancient artifacts.

There is nothing left hidden in the earth to justify new research and
digging.

Once prophethood has passed through different stages to reach its final
degree of perfection and exaltedness, and from the point of view of
revelation all the dark and obscure matters that lie within the range of
human thought and comprehension have been clarified, there is no road
left to be traveled, no explanation to be made. Prophethood has
fulfilled its role and reached its final destination. Nonetheless, its
life continues by means of the inexhaustibility of revelation, which
provides a single social, cultural and value system beyond the confines
of time.

The Prophet of Islam proclaims, in a clear and pleasing fashion:
"Prophethood is like a house, the building of which has now been that
brick in its place."[^2]

Although the mission of the Prophets to proclaim the Divine message and
aid humanity came to an end with the blossoming and maturity of human
thought, the spiritual relationship between the world of the human being
and the world of the unseen has never been severed. The human being's
path to exalted station necessarily continues to pass through the
purification of the spirit and the cultivation of sincere devotion to
God.

The human being has numerous creative dimensions, and it is only through
sustained spiritual effort that he will be able to actualize his
potential capacities. He will then enter into communication with the
world of the unseen and see and know what those who are absorbed in the
outer appearances of the material world cannot see and know. It is again
such spiritual effort that gives the human being a truly human aspect,
enables him to appear as God's viceregent on earth, and grants him
access to values that give his life meaning and content.

Numerous, therefore, are those persons who have a high degree of
religiosity and abundant spirituality without attaining the lofty degree
of prophethood and the religious leadership of mankind.

The doors of illumination and inspiration are open to all those who wish
to purify their inner beings of the pollution and darkness of sin and
who turn their hearts toward the life-giving breeze of Divine knowledge.

Spiritual grace is never cut off from the human being, nor does it
suffer any decrease. The degree to which the human being may benefit
from it, in a direct and profound way, depends only on his spiritual
capacity and abilities. These determine the extent to which he may draw
on the unceasing and limitless favor and grace of God.

[^1]: L'esprit des lois (Persian translation), p. 725.

[^2]: Majma al-Bayan on Ahzab, 40.


