Lesson Three: A Rich and Fruitful School of Thought
===================================================

The first condition for attaining the true goals of life, the lofty rank
of happiness, and not least, a comprehensive and authentic system of
governance, is to appreciate, in a precise and scientific way, the
necessity for a message and a Messenger. This recognition will enable us
to conquer new horizons and journey toward undiscovered and virgin
territories of human thought.

The human being has extensive resources at his disposal and he may enter
a network of guidance, both within his own being and within the world
where he lives, through the laws that God has laid down for him. That
guidance is protected against all deviation and error, and its bearer is
preserved, through the inerrancy bestowed on him by the Creator, from
all sin, error, and forgetfulness in the receipt, promulgation and
implementation of revelation. Therefore, for those who draw their
inspiration from sound thought, no doubt will remain that a system based
on such guidance is able to secure the true interests, moral and
material, of mankind.

The efforts of the Prophets in their summons to the human beings are
directed to giving shape to God's rule over mankind, this being the most
just form of rule conceivable. In such a system, the domination of the
human being over the human being and his imprisonment in the grasp of
demonic oppressors will be fully negated. The intrinsic value and force
of the words of the Prophet derive from the fact that he is the bearer
of God's message.

The knowledge of the true human being and of human reality forms the
basis of the worldview and the planning of all Divine schools of
thought. A school of thought that is based on the very creation of the
human being, that is aware of all the dimensions of his existence, and
that supervises with infinite knowledge all of his natural properties,
is well able, in the course of its planning and elaboration of laws, to
take into account all the fundamental and authentic concerns of the
human being.

Setting itself against all ego worship, all desire for fame, all search
for mastery over the powers of nature, the movement of the Prophets
derives its substance from the Divine will; it is God Who is the source
of their actions. If the Prophets come into conflict with the human
beings, it is fundamentally because of the limited ideas of the human
beings; the Prophets attempt to bring to an end the narrow and limited
vision of the human beings and to introduce them to a more productive
mode of thought.

The distinctive feature of the system of governance established by the
Prophets is the realization of justice in the true and comprehensive
sense of the word. By virtue of the principles underlying the movement
of the Prophets, the most just social relations come into existence in a
way that edifies the human being's inner being. The equality of the
human beings on a basis of brotherhood is translated into reality. It is
therefore impossible to ensure social justice in the true meaning except
by way of God's message.

At the same time, the schools of thought established by the Prophets
give positive answer to the human being's profoundly felt need for
freedom, and thereby break all the inner chains that fetter the human
being's capacities, energies and will, and transform his vitality into
stagnation. Parallel to this inner liberation of the human being, the
Prophets also endow his outer life with freedom, setting him free from
servitude to the tyrants of his age.

Under such conditions, there is no longer any question of laying down
laws that are inadequate and erroneous, nor of rulers coercively
enforcing their arbitrary will. For then, the legislator is God, God Who
has created the world and all its inhabitants and knows in a precise and
perfect fashion how to meet all the needs of the human beings in their
various dimensions.

Similarly, there is no question of ignorance or imperfect knowledge or
of the slightest degree of oppression and injustice; selfishness and
self-interest do not exist. These are realities that deserve our deepest
attention, and we must recognize the objective effect of all those
ordinances which God has promulgated for the sake of social life and the
resurrection of the human being. The Qur’an says:

***"Who can rule better than God?" (5:55)***

***"God it is Who determines our social relations and rules over our
deeds and conduct; He is the best of all rulers." (7:87)***

***"Do they desire the rule of ignorance, whereas there is no ruler
better than God?" (5:50)***

One of the distinguishing characteristics of the school of thought
founded by the Prophets is that according to their teachings, the
interests of society also benefit the interests of the individual,
because the life of the human being never terminates, his interests
being ensured by a long line that continued after his death.

Wherever the laws of heaven make their appearance and a prophetic
mission, appearing as a Divine phenomenon, takes on the responsibility
of responding to the intellectual, spiritual and material needs of the
human being, as well as reforming both the individual and society -
wherever this occurs, nothing will be reflected but reality. With
respect to God, the question of environmental conditions and
susceptibility to the concepts prevailing in society and culture does
not even arise; there is also no question of the effect of change giving
thought a new direction. The factors that cause the human being to lose
faith in his ability to attain the truth and perceive his true interests
are thus totally negated.

In the Divine school of thought, it is faith, the symbol of the human
being's intellectual ascent, which functions as a powerful support for
ensuring the implementation of the law. This is another advantage of
systems of governance based on religion, as well as being a gushing
spring from which the reality of existence flows forth.

In societies that are founded by Prophets, the human being is commonly
entrusted with the supervision of his own person; he relies on his own
findings, acquisitions and efforts. At the same time that the human
being is thus free, he feels an intense sense of responsibility toward
God. He measures every act he wishes to undertake and every position he
wishes to take up against the criteria of religion, and then personally
assumes the responsibility for that act and position.

He knows that to act on the basis of duty will bring numerous fruitful
results, and that if he turns his back on his duties, he must be ready
to face harmful effects and to endure evil consequences. A sense of duty
vis-à-vis the Divine laws that embrace all dimensions of human life
causes the human being to submit to the will of God with all of his
being.

The training of the human being in the school of the Prophets takes
place in such a way that gradually his passionate inclinations gradually
yield to truly human and Divine desires, permitting him ultimately to
rise to the glorious station of servitude to God and being His
representative on earth, this being the true nature of the fully evolved
human being.

By contrast, in legal systems of human origin, where there is no
question of religious belief in a legislator, law lacks moral
underpinning and the ability to influence the human beings profoundly
and comprehensively.

Everyone is constantly thinking how he might best shake off the
constraints of the law, with the result that the implementation of the
law faces all kinds of difficulty. Various coercive forces must be
broadly deployed in order to ensure it.

If the law contradicts the desires of the people, the task of its
implementation becomes particularly complex and difficult. When such a
law is enforced, it will be met with a storm of anger, dislike and
repulsion, and it is only pressure that can then impose it.

No Guarantee for the Implementation of Human Law
------------------------------------------------

It is, of course, possible to find people in society who believe in and
adhere to laws and regulations of human origin, but it must be affirmed
that such individuals are extremely rare and form the exception. They
certainly do not represent the average member of society and cannot be
regarded as a principal support of the social order. The practical
effectiveness of a conscience that is not guaranteed by religious faith
or principle is, moreover, very slight when compared to effectiveness of
religious beliefs.

It must, therefore, be accepted that this advantage deriving from the
teachings of the Prophets is restricted to the heavenly religions. If
the spirit of people is nurtured with faith in God and religious belief
serves as a support for legal principles, law takes on a universal
aspect, and its implementation is guaranteed to a degree superior to the
ability of human laws to influence the human beings.

Since belief has its roots in the activity of the existential mechanism
of the human being and since it plays a basic role in the structure of
human personality, profoundly altering the conditions of the soul, the
human being comes to believe in and adhere to the laws of religion not
only with his brain but with the entirely of his being. The certainty
that religion shines like a light in the depths of the human being's
being, illumining it and warming it at the same time.

The impetus that religion can create in the human being cannot be found
in any non-religious school of thought. Experience has shown that other
schools of thought are unsuccessful in this respect, because it is
religion alone that relies on the heart, and the more firmly rooted
faith becomes in the heart, the more it will serve as a source of
dynamic activity.

The human being witnesses today the elaboration and ratification of laws
on the part of societies that officially recognize all the human beings,
irrespective of racial, national, religious or geographical differences,
as possessing certain rights and values.

Nonetheless, although scientific advances have created today more
suitable conditions for the acceptance of reality, the attitude of
different groups to the laws that represent their own accomplishment is
entirely negative and denies those laws any influence or value.

What people accept in theory they do not observe in fact.

Whenever the law concerns them directly and their interests and desires
are threatened, they will not hesitate to cross the boundaries of the
law, to perform inhuman acts, and to engage in trickery and sabotage. It
is obvious that the attitude of others towards laws of this nature will
also not be one of positive acceptance.

This disregard for the value of the human being, this violation of law
and the expansion of political struggle and conflict, the unhealthy
economic rivalries of powerful states with most countries in the world,
the tempestuous waves of social crisis and moral corruption - all this
shows clearly how shaky and un-firm is the position of man-made laws,
how slight are their influence and standing from the point of view of
implementation, and how limited is the sphere of their rule.

A brief look at the manner in which the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has been observed and implemented suffices to show that the only
effect this declaration has had consists of the celebration of
festivals, and the delivery of empty, meaningless lectures.

If we follow, step by step, the development of religious ideas among the
masses of humanity, will this not cause us to conclude that
non-religious principles, which do not derive from exalted concepts, are
weak and inadequate? Will it not bring us to believe firmly in the
veracity and truthfulness of religious systems which are nurtured with
the power and majesty of the Lord of all creation and the influence of
whose culture and ideology on the entire cultural life of the human
being becomes more fully known every day through the researches of
thinkers?

We must look at results, at the fruits that different schools of thought
have borne in human society. Is not the reason for the failure of human
laws in ensuring the human being's progress and happiness not to be
sought in their having remained ignorant of the true nature of the human
being and their neglect of his real needs and creative abilities?

All of this serves to elucidate a single truth: that belief in the
school of thought of the Prophets is a guarantor for the life of
society, a support for all healthy relationships among the human beings,
and a protector for the oppressed masses, and it has always bestowed the
gift of freedom and brotherhood on mankind.

Whatever society, group or system does not set its face on this path and
does not respond affirmatively to the liberating summons of God's
Messengers to a more elevated life, will never experience true
prosperity and salvation.

The school of thought of the Prophets has provided penal laws for those
persons who may exceptionally transgress against God's law. These laws
weigh the offense carefully and specify a punishment corresponding to
the degree of seriousness of the crime and take into consideration the
situation of the criminal.


