Lesson Eight: The Inerrancy of the Prophets
===========================================

Taking on the grave and sensitive responsibilities of prophethood and
the guidance of society requires the possession of a whole series of
exalted and previous qualities, without which a person will never be fit
to assume a position of leadership.

One of the exceptional qualities required in a Prophet is that there
should exist within him a restraining force that, arising from the
perfection of his faith and the intensity of his piety, protects him
against not only the commission of sins and acts of moral corruption but
also from considering them or intending to commit them, so that
throughout the entirety of his life, both before and after the beginning
of his mission, all dimensions of his being should be free of the dark
blemish of sin.

There can be no doubt that the more crucial the position of an
individual in society, the deeper is his need for public trust and
confidence. Now can any position be graver and carry more responsibility
than that of the Prophet who is to guide society, exercising his
guidance in all affairs of life, both spiritual and material?

The supreme purpose and aim of the mission of God' s Messengers is to
guide and educate human beings across the world by means of a series of
Divine teachings and ordinances. It is, at the same time, the religious
duty of mankind to submit to all the sublime injunctions of religion
that the Prophet has presented as revelation and Divine law. Naturally,
humans will implement those teachings with all their heart and soul and
accord absolute value to them only when they are thoroughly convinced
that those teachings do indeed emanate from the source of all being.

What authority or person can earn such universal trust that whatever he
says will earn sincere and unquestioning acceptance so that human beings
submit to his commands? Can anyone deserve that trust unless he is armed
with the weapon of inerrancy and virtue is manifest in him in all its
dimensions?

Were it not possible to trust completely a Messenger of God in his
receiving and conveying the revelation, the aim of prophethood - which
is the perfection of humanity - could not be ensured; were the Prophets
to lack inerrancy in conveying the Commands of God, society would
inevitably deviate from its true course.

Were the Prophets not to be protected from pollution by sin and
infection by moral disease, and were they not to gain immunity from all
kinds of impurity, the possibility would always exist that they would
stumble when confronted with the deceptive allure of the material world
and pursue personal goals such as wealth and power.

This would be true even if they had lofty human attributes to a superior
degree. It is obvious that the existence of such a possibility would
cause their followers to hesitate before implementing the commands and
pronouncements.

The one who claims prophethood and the right to lead human beings, whom
human beings must follow in order to attain the pinnacle of perfection
in all aspects of their life - if such a one were to have the slightest
record of deviance, dishonesty and inclination to sin, could it be
totally excluded that he would never again live, betray or speak an
untruth? Could he be accepted as a model of virtue and purity?

Without doubt, intelligence and logic compel us to answer this question
in the negative. No one could accept with complete confidence as
revelation and the Command of God the words of someone whose life did
not shine with purity, who had fallen into the whirlpool of sin and
openly engaged in corruption and moral turpitude before claiming
prophethood, even though later a spiritual revolution and transformation
had occurred in him. No one could accept his teachings as an
unquestionable message from heaven, particularly with regard to matters
that lie beyond the experience of the human being.

The Prophets must also be completely removed from anything that causes
doubt to arise or impairs the completeness of God's proof. The Qurâ€™an
proclaims:

***"Before this, you were unable to read or to write; this was lest the
deniers should doubt concerning your prophethood." (29:48)***

***"Say: God is the best and most eloquent proof." (10:47)***

***"We sent the Prophets as givers of glad tidings*** ***and warnings so
that no excuse should remain thereafter for human beings." (4:165)***

Therefore the first necessary condition for the appearance of revelation
is the absolute sincerity and inner purity of the Prophets.

The burning love of human beings for the Prophets and their devotion to
them which arises from the deepest layers of their inner being as well
as their belief in absolute values, in God, and the guardians of
religion - all of this is made possible by the inerrancy and perfection
of those Divinely guided personages.

The effectiveness of conduct and mode of action is infinitely greater
than that of mere words. The behavior and attributes of a teacher plays
a fundamental role in the instruction of those for whom he is
responsible, action have a far-reaching effect in building the character
of an individual that cannot in any way be compared with the mere effect
of speech.

It will be a disaster for humanity if the one who assumes a lofty
position of spiritual guidance in society is himself immersed in a
whirlpool of pollution and evil. If he lacks true awareness and piety,
can he create an appropriate environment for the fostering of virtue,
and can he bring about an inward transformation and revolution in the
human being that will have a lasting effect? Will he have the capacity
to train human beings and be their moral guide? Can he implant piety and
virtue in their minds and their thoughts?

The commission of even a single sin by the Prophets would render
fruitless their attempts at nurturing human beings to attain perfection,
which is the goal of their mission. How can one who is himself polluted
with sin purify others of their sins? One who is not himself morally and
spiritually perfect cannot possibly succeed in training human beings to
perfection.

We cannot take into consideration only the deeds and conduct of the
Prophets during the period of their mission, and treat them separately
from the spiritual and ethical characteristics they display during the
rest of their lives. A more comprehensive investigation must be carried,
for it is not enough that Prophets turn to purity only at the beginning
of their missions.

The firm and continuous link of the Prophets with the source of
existence and the complete absence of pollution by sin throughout all of
their lives constitute an absolute necessity. Divinely guided
personalities must never have been polluted by sin. Any prior record of
sin on their part will form a great obstacle in the path of their
heavenly mission which is to guide human beings to God and call them to
purity and the avoidance of all abomination.

One who until yesterday stood in the ranks of the impure, those polluted
by corruption, and who devoted a whole segment of his life to sin, will
inevitably have his evil record remembered by others; it will be vividly
present in their minds, and they cannot overlook it as they analyze and
sit in judgment on his past life. The beginning of a profound spiritual
transformation cannot by itself wash away all previous corruption and
remove it from the minds of human beings.

When studying the histories of the Prophets, one should never content
oneself with a superficial listing of events. The perceptive researcher
must investigate all the different dimensions of the lives of the
Prophets before their assumption of the prophethood. Then only will they
be able to understand why the obstinate sworn enemies of the Prophets,
in their conspiratorial efforts to prevent the dissemination of the
heavenly message, do not shrink even from attributing madness to the
Prophets, but never dare to accuse them of moral corruption.

The character and personality of the Prophets were so well known and so
brilliant to their contemporaries that such an idiotic accusation on the
part of their enemies would have caused people to reject their other
accusations as well and thus nullified all their long-standing efforts.

If the Prophets had been sullied by even as much as a single sin, this
would have been used as an effective weapon to destroy their social
standing and prestige. It is obvious that point out weaknesses in the
past lives of the Prophets and recalling their previous errors and sins
would have been a most effective weapon for destroying the repute of the
Prophets and shaking people's trust and belief in them. This in itself
constitutes vital and eloquent proof that they had already acquired a
certain sanctity which characterized both their way of viewing things
and their actions.

In the story of Moses we read that Pharaoh, the oppressive tyrant,
immediately reminded Moses of his past when he was confronted by him. He
addressed him critically as follows: "'Are you not that child whom we
reared and who spent years of his life in our presence? Did you not kill
a man and did you not deny our Divinity?' Moses answered: 'I did indeed
commit that act, but not intentionally. I was acting only with the
intent of saving one who had been wronged, and the result was an
accidental killing. Then I fled because of my fear of you until God
taught me knowledge and wisdom and made me one of the Prophets.' "
***(26:18-21)***

Let us recall that the environment in which the Prophets were raised was
encircled by all kinds of darkness and corruption. It was not an
environment in which purity, innocence, and piety might flourish, or the
inner nature of the human being, with its predisposition to the truth,
might be nurtured. Such an unfavorable environment ought surely to have
caused the Prophets also to become polluted by conforming to the social
conditions that surrounded them.

However, we see that true awareness, virtue and honor came into being in
precisely the most corrupt of environments, shinning like so many jewels
over the heads of human beings. This in itself is clear testimony to the
different dimensions and aspects of the personality of the Prophets, the
nature of their inerrancy and their complete moral immunity.

It can also be clearly deduced from the Qurâ€™an that attaining the lofty
station of prophethood (as well as that of imamate) is possible only
through being free of all contamination by sin and spiritual evil.

When Abraham addresses the Divine Presence with the petition that He
appoint his descendants as leaders and guides, God responds by making
the avoidance of oppression an explicit condition of prophethood:

***"My covenant and the station of prophethood are given only to those
who have not committed any oppression (whether toward themselves or
others)." (2:123)***

***"He knows the unseen dimensions of this world, whereas none knows His
world of the unseen except those He has chosen from among the Prophets,
to protect whom He sends angels from in front and behind. Thus He may
know that the Messengers have fully conveyed the messages of their
Creator to mankind." (72:26-28)***

So from the point of view of the Qurâ€™an, which describes the Prophets by
the use of various attributes, it is an essential condition of
prophethood that the Prophet possess inerrancy and never have been
polluted by any act of oppression, for this counts as an encroachment on
God's sanctity. God does not permit the reins of guidance for humanity
to fall into the incompetent hands of one whose heart is blackened by
sin and whose hands are stained by cruelty and oppression.

The question of the apparent attribution of sins to the Prophets by the
Qurâ€™an can be understood when we examine the type of sins at issue, for
there are differences of degree among sins. Veritable and absolute sin
lies in rebelling against the commandments of God; the commission of
this sin brings punishment and retribution, and God's Messengers are
absolutely protected against it.

Another kind of sin is relative; if a human being commits a sin of this
category, Divine Law does not provide for punishment or retribution.
However, acts of this type would detract from the loftiness of the
Prophets and would be totally irreconcilable with their vision and moral
refinement.

In social and religious matters, the expectations that are had of
different personages are not uniform. The level of expectations depends
on the capacities of individuals, together with the position they hold,
the knowledge they have, and other matters.

If an illiterate person delivers an eloquent and powerful speech, it
will be a matter for congratulation, even though the content of the
speech, deriving from the thoughts of an undeveloped mind, may be
insignificant. But if a serious scholar, whose words ought to create a
storm and to leave an impress on the mind, delivers the same kind of
speech, it will be regarded as deficient and open to objection.

Let us now draw an analogy with the sublime and majestic personalities
of the Prophets. They have vast resources of knowledge and faith, as
well as direct access to reality and the richest and most abundant
source of awareness and knowledge.

Considering this, if for an instant they are neglectful of God -
something which would not earn a reproach for others - it will count as
a manifest error on their part. The brilliant visage of their
prophethood will be clouded and sin will be ascribed to them, for that
instant of neglect was not compatible with their lofty personality.

In addition, the position of prophethood and the guidance of mankind is
of such crucial importance that if the Prophet commits any error, the
honor of the community he leads will also be affected; society will also
carry the stain of his shame.

Inerrancy Does Not Negate Free Will
-----------------------------------

Here the following question arises. If inerrancy is a gift from God,
resulting in the protection of the Prophets when faced with abomination
and sin, their abstention from sin cannot be conscious and deliberate,
nor be regarded as a proof of their superior status or a source of pride
for them. For their mental constitution is such that God has guaranteed
them immunity from sin.

This objection would be justified if inerrancy were the result of
pre-determination, with the commission of any kind of sin being
impossible for the Prophets, and the Prophets being compelled to obey
God's Commands and acquire virtues and purity of soul. But this is not
the case; the inerrancy under discussion is founded on perfect faith and
awareness. It demonstrates itself clearly in action, and in no way
negates free will and choice.

All the deeds of the leaders of religion, like those of other human
beings, arise from free will and consciousness. Why should it be
necessary for an external coercive force to push them in the direction
of inerrancy? Will any difficulty remain if their vision of the world is
seen to play this role? With their profound vision, the Prophets
perceive the majesty and splendor of the Supreme and Absolute Power,
manifest across the limitless plain of existence, at so sublime a level
that their heart and their mind overflow with the love of God. How could
it be believed that such highly conscious and excellent beings should
stain their hearts with sin and disobey the commandments of their God
and Beloved? Furthermore, they are profoundly aware of the severe
consequences of sin, given which it would be impossible for them even to
consider committing sins and evil acts.

It is true that knowledge of the evil consequences of sin does not in
itself provide immunity against it. However, the inerrancy of the
Messengers of God arises from so powerful and realistic a form of
knowledge that they are able clearly to see with the eye of their heart
the requital that sin brings. It is this that makes it quite impossible
for them to commit any sin.

A doctor will never drink from a vessel that is contaminated by a
microbe because he knows the dangerous consequences this would entail.
Mountaineers spend a whole life climbing mountains, but their
intelligence and awareness never allow them even to conceive of the
possibility of deliberately falling vertically, let alone undertaking
such an act.

Do the doctor and the mountaineer in these two examples have some kind
of built-in and involuntary immunity against these irrational acts? Do
they avoid these fatal acts without exercising free choice? To drink
from the contaminated vessel or not to drink, to fall or not to fall -
both alternatives are possible for them, but their conceptualizing of
the results and consequences of the fatal acts reduce to near zero the
likelihood of their undertaking them

Here we can grasp dearly the link between knowledge, which is the very
kernel of awareness, and action, which is the external manifestation of
awareness. We can see how profound and exact mental awareness
objectifies itself, and how the human being is situated between cause
and effect, between subjective and objective action and reaction.

Similarly, inerrancy in the Prophets proceeds from their profound
awareness of the effects of sin, of Divine anger and punishment. Their
awareness of these is so clear and complete that the abolition of
spatial and temporal distance would not have the slightest effect on
their profound and categorical faith.

Furthermore, the Prophets acquire a steely determination as a result of
their strivings and unstinting self-sacrifice and their continuous
orientation to the origin of being; they have no fear of the problems
and difficulties that confront them on the road to establishing justice
and truth, and they devote their entire beings to winning the
satisfaction of God. This, too, is a powerful factor in bestowing
inerrancy on those men of God and protecting them from making use of
their ability to sin and even from allowing the idea of sin to enter the
pure sanctuary of their minds.

This comprehensive protection against sin is, then, the direct result of
their encompassing knowledge of the requital that evil deeds earn and
their perfect awareness of the exalted station of the Lord. It is, too,
an indication of their lofty, proud spirituality which harnesses all the
rebellious inclinations of their being as that they never step beyond
the bounds that have been set.

Let us set aside for the moment the case of the Prophets. In every age
there have been persons of pure heart who as a result of a fundamental
change in their manner of thought and constant struggle against various
forms of captivity, have torn apart the chains of attachment and
liberated their thoughts and their deeds from the entrammeling prison of
enslavement to the world. For human beings such as these, the only
source of value in life has been their love for God, their determination
to do His will and to advance towards Him. Their burning love, arising
from their purity of mind and their belief in the primacy and
authenticity of religion, gives them a certain kind of protection
against many forms of sin and moral corruption.

In many cases, they may not be fully aware of the harmful consequences
of sin, but their sense of obedience to God creates such a
transformation in their consciousness that it functions like an
impenetrable barrier interposed between them and sin. So firm and
unbreakable is that barrier that instinctual desire and arbitrary
inclination are unable to breach it.

Muhammad bin Umary relates the following: "I asked Hisham, the
outstanding student of Imam Sadiq, peace be upon him, whether the Imams
have the station of inerrancy. He answered that they do. I then asked
him to explain for me the nature of their inerrancy. He replied as
follows: 'There are several qualities that give rise to sin and vice:
greed, envy, lust and anger, and none of these can penetrate the beings
of the Imams. How might they experience greed, considering the abundant
resources they have at their disposal, including the public treasury of
the Muslims?

Similarly, why should the Imam be envious? The envious person is the one
who cannot endure the thought of someone being higher than him, and the
imamate is assuredly the highest of all stations.

As far as worldly matters are concerned, it is impossible for the Imam
to be angry because he has been entrusted with the implementation of the
penalties God has decreed. As for anger in matters touching on the
hereafter, which is a praiseworthy form of anger, it is impossible for
the Imam to fall prey to lust and desire, for he is well aware that the
pleasures and desirable things of this world are transitory and totally
insignificant when compared to the Divine reward and bounty which are
reserved on the Day of Judgment for the pure and the worshippers of
God." [^1]

There are then two basic sources for the commission of sin: a failure to
recognize the ugliness of sin, and a defeat of the intelligence when
confronted by the power and pressure of lusts. So if a person be fully
aware of the corrupt and ugly nature of all sin and if he can bring his
desires fully under control, it is impossible that he should pollute his
hands with the commission of sin.

Imam Sadiq, upon whom be peace, says: "God extends His aid and
assistance to human beings in proportion to their will, determination
and choice, so that whoever makes a correct choice and a firm
determination will receive the full aid of God, and he who falls short
in his choices will find God's aid withheld from him in due proportion."
[^2]

But as for total protection from error and sin, this is possible only
through the special favor of God . The Qurâ€™an says:

***"Were God 's mercy and favor not to embrace you, a group of enemies
would have attempted to turn you aside from the right path. But through
God's favor, they were able only to turn themselves aside from the right
path, and they could not harm you in any way. God has bestowed on you
this book and the station of wisdom and prophethood and taught you what
you knew not, because God's favor and grace toward you are infinite."
(4:113)***

In addition, it can perhaps be said that the Prophets participated
directly in the unfolding of realities and when the human being
confronts objective realities in accordance with a certain particular
sense, error and sin can have no meaning for that person.

It is only when the human being attempts to transpose mental forms into
objective reality that error can arise, not when the person is inwardly
linked with the reality of being, a condition which makes it impossible
for mistakes to occur. Thus it is that the Prophet is immune against
error when guiding human beings and summoning them to God. Were it to be
otherwise, you would look with doubt and hesitation on whatever the
Prophet said in promulgating the commandments of God and you would not
regard yourself as obliged to obey them.

Inerrancy applies to the receipt of revelation, the preservation of
revelation, and the promulgation of the message. All three aspects are
contained in this verse of the Noble Qurâ€™an:

***"In order that God might know that the Messengers have fully conveyed
to mankind the messages of their Lord, that He be fully aware of what
the Messengers possess and that He know full well the numbering of all
things in this world..." (38:28)***

In addition, as far as the receipt of revelation is concerned, we know
that all things are at the disposal of God; there is no question of any
personal view being intermingled in it. We know that the infinite
knowledge and power of the Creator are utterly removed from the
possibility of error, and that God's complete vigilance in ensuring the
propagation of His message removes the possibility of all error and
mistake. So just as the receipt of God's commandments takes place
beneath His vigilance, so too does the propagation of the message.

Comprehensive inerrancy, with respect to thought, word and deed, is then
indispensable for undertaking the mission of guidance and leadership. It
is inconceivable that God should send Messengers subject to error who
would thwart the whole purpose of the message they bear.

Freedom from various bodily defects and spiritual inadequacies also
forms part of the conditions of prophethood and the receipt of
revelation. Contagious diseases, belonging to a family of ill-repute, a
harsh and abrasive character, are some of the factors that might arouse
repulsion and cause people to shun the Messenger and become disinclined
toward him. Thus the aim of the Prophet's message, the training and
edification of the human being, would receive a setback.

Given the fact that the Prophet is the bearer of a Divine message, the
doctrines he presents must not contradict the firm principles of human
logic and knowledge. Were this not to be the case, the message brought
by a claimant to prophethood would not be worth studying, nor would it
be necessary to demand miracles and proofs in support of it. We see,
however, that the Prophet is described in certain religious traditions
as 'the external intellect', i.e. the intellect external to one's own
being.

Of course, the principle we have put forward concerns the firm rules and
established laws of reason and science, a category that does not include
hypotheses and theories. The teachings of the Prophets are none other
than that system of law laid down by the Creator, and the universal
order of creation consists of scientific principles and laws. Since both
orders derive from the same source, they must everywhere preserve their
harmony.

It is impossible that a Prophet be chosen by God and then propagate his
message something contrary to rational laws, for God Who Himself
established reason as a criterion for distinguishing between the true
and the false will never promulgate a commandment contradicting it. It
is likewise impossible that the ordinances of heaven should contradict
science, which is, in its essence, the order that God causes to rule
over things.

However, it should be borne in mind that if science posits a way for
reaching the goal, this does not mean that the way of science is the
only way available or that all others are closed.

In matters that are apparently opposed to science, one should always be
cautious and avoid hasty judgments aimed at reconciling religious
ordinances with scientific concerns. Science still has an infinite road
to travel and there is always the possibility that scientific theories
will fall subject to doubt as a result of more extensive and
comprehensive research.

[^1]: Amali as-Saduq, page 376.

[^2]: Â Bihar al-Anwar, Volume LXX, page 211.


