Section 7 : Ministry of Lot Commentary : Verse 69
=================================================

The Angels sent by Allah first meet - Abraham Abraham's wife given the
glad tidings of Isaac and - Jacob Abraham pleads for the people of Lot
but asked to leave the people to have their own earning - The Angels
appear to Lot - Lot admonishes his people who reject the warning and
thus were destroyed.

(69) وَ لَقَدْ جاءَتْ رُسُلُنا إِبْراهيمَ بِالْبُشْرى‏ قالُوا سَلاماً
قالَ سَلامٌ فَما لَبِثَ أَنْ جاءَ بِعِجْلٍ حَنيذٍ

69. " And certainly Our messengers(the angels)came to Abraham with glad
tidings. They said 'Peace! ' He answered 'Peace! ' and he did not delay
to bring a roasted calf. "

**Commentary :**

Now is time to focus on one of the highlights of the life of Abraham,
the iconoclastic champion. Of course, only that part of his story, which
deals with the story of the people of Lot and punishment of this unruly
people is being discussed here. The Qur'an says that Allah's
messengers(angels)came to Abraham, bearing good tidings, though they had
come to deliver a message to Abraham(a.s.) before. The verse says:

" And certainly Our messengers(the angels)came to Abraham with glad
tidings. ..."

There are two hypotheses incompatible with each other, as to what
message those angels were carrying:

First; the message relates to tidings regarding the birth of Ismail and
Isaac which were great good tidings for him.

Secondly, Abraham, who was tired of the unruliness and corruption of
the people of Lot, became happy on hearing of the mission of the angels
to destroy them.

When the messengers arrived they gave him the greetings of 'Peace' and
he answered them likewise. Before long he had brought them a roasted
calf. The verse says:

"... They said 'Peace! ' He answered 'Peace! ' and he did not delay to
bring a roasted calf. "

The inference drawn from the sentence is that one of the rules of
hosting a guest is that a meal should be prepared for him at the
earliest possible time, after his arrival, for he can be both tired and
hungry, especially when he is a traveler.


**Commentary : Verse 70**

(70) فَلَمَّا رَأى‏ أَيْدِيَهُمْ لا تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِ نَكِرَهُمْ وَ
أَوْجَسَ مِنْهُمْ خيفَةً قالُوا لا تَخَفْ إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنا إِلى‏ قَوْمِ
لُوطٍ

70. " But when he saw their hands extended not towards it, he
mistrusted them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: 'Fear not; we
have been sent against the people of Lot'. "

**Commentary :**

Abraham's(a.s.) fear is different from the kind of fear and weakness
found in ordinary men when facing problematic situations, for he was the
archetypical iconoclast in history who was never afraid of anything.
Nevertheless focusing one's attention on possible dangers and on being a
possible target is another matter.

The verse says:

" But when he saw their hands extended not towards it, he mistrusted
them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: 'Fear not; we have been
sent against the people of Lot'. "

At any rate, since Lot(a.s.) and his tribe was one of the groups under
Abraham's command, he had to be briefed before their annihilation.


**Commentary : Verse 71**

(71) وَ امْرَأَتُهُ قائِمَةٌ فَضَحِكَتْ فَبَشَّرْناها بِإِسْحاقَ وَ
مِنْ وَراءِ إِسْحاقَ يَعْقُوبَ

71. " And his wife was standing(by)and she laughed when We gave her the
glad tidings(of the birth)of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob. "

**Commentary :**

There are several possibilities mentioned as to the reasons for the
standing by of Abraham's wife; when the verse says:

" And his wife was standing(by)and she laughed when We gave her the
glad tidings(of the birth)of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob. "

a- for worshipping

b- for serving the guests

c- for witnessing the comings and goings of individuals and the
discussions.

Her laughter was either because she understood that their abstinence
from eating was not a sign of danger for Abraham, or, as has been
pointed out in some commentaries, Sarah, Abraham's wife, was an elderly
woman who had long passed her child bearing days when she suddenly heard
this unbelievable news. However, while in this mood, she realized that
the Divine Will was that she would have a child.

However, each group of the Divine angels were commissioned to
accomplish a particular affair. These group of angels followed two
objectives. One of which was the extermination of the corrupt people of
Lot, and the other was to give the good tidings of a child to be
bestowed upon Abraham(a.s.) and Sarah.


(72) قالَتْ يا وَيْلَتى‏ أَ أَلِدُ وَ أَنَا عَجُوزٌ وَ هذا بَعْلي‏
شَيْخاً إِنَّ هذا لَشَيْ‏ءٌ عَجيبٌ

72. " She said: 'Voe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old
woman, and this my husband is an old man Verily this is a wonderful
thing! '"

**Commentary :**

Sarah, who had given up hope of having children, with a tone of
tremendous wonder, exclaimed implying that alas for her. Might she give
birth to a child despite her old age and despite the fact that her
husband too was old That was a truly amazing matter.

The verse itself says:

" She said: 'Voe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman,
and this my husband is an old man Verily this is a wonderful thing! '"

That same Allah Who had made the fire cold for Abraham(a.s.) and had
made him win over the idol- worshippers, is definitely able to make an
infertile old woman fertile and an old man sire a child.


**Commentary : Verse 73**

(73) قالُوا أَ تَعْجَبينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ رَحْمَتُ اللَّهِ وَ
بَرَكاتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَميدٌ مَجيدٌ

73. " They said: "Do you wonder at Allah's decree The grace of Allah
and His blessings on you, O people of the House! Verily He is Praise
worthy, Glorious. "

**Commentary :**

One day, Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali(a.s.) gave greetings to a group of
people which returned his greetings, saying: "Our greetings to you and
may Allah's favor and blessings be with you, the Ahl- ul- Bayt, and may
His forgiveness and His paradise also be upon you as well. " Ali(a.s.)
said: "Do not add anything to what the angels said to Abraham(a.s.) ,
therefore, the phrase 'And may Allah's favour and blessings be with you'
would suffice. " The verse says:

" They said: "Do you wonder at Allah's decree The grace of Allah and
His blessings on you, O people of the House! Verily He is Praise worthy,
Glorious. "

Question: Considering the fact that in the above verse, the angels
addressed Abraham's wife using the phrase Ahl- ul- Bayt, and since,
naturally, everyone's wife is considered as part of one's household, why
is it then that in the verse of Tathir in the Sura Al Ah zab, No. 33,
verse 33,(1) the wives of the Prophet Muhammad(p.b.u.h.) are not
included in his household?‏

Answer: Regarding only the literal meaning of the word, it would be
natural for the word Ahl- ul- Bayt to include reference (1) It says:
"... Verily Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House and to purify you a(thorough)purifying. "

to one's wife. However, we have firm grounds regarding the fact that
someone can be excluded from this denotation even when normally they
would be included in its purview, like in the verse saying: "Verily he
is not of your household" where Noah's son is not counted as a member in
Noah's household. Sometimes it also happens that there could be a reason
to include someone who would normally not be considered as a member of
the household, as has been said of Salman: "Salman belongs to our
household(Ahl- ul- Bayt)"

There are numerous narrations concerning the verse of Tathir which say
that the blessed Prophet(p.b.u.h.) had taken certain people under his
cloak calling them his Ahl- ul- Bayt, while he did not allow his wife,
the pious Umm- us- Salamah, to enter.

This Divine favor and blessings were not confined to that time and
place. It has continued in this family, too. What Divine blessing can be
superior to that bestowed upon the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) and the Immaculate
Imams(a.s.) who have emerged from this household?

(1) Sura Hud No. 11, verse 46


