Commentary : Verse 89
=====================

(89) وَ يا قَوْمِ لا يَجْرِمَنَّكُمْ شِقاقي‏ أَنْ يُصيبَكُمْ مِثْلُ ما
أَصابَ قَوْمَ نُوحٍ أَوْ قَوْمَ هُودٍ أَوْ قَوْمَ صالِحٍ وَ ما قَوْمُ
لُوطٍ مِنْكُمْ بِبَعيدٍ

89. " And O My people! Let not(your)breach with me cause you to sin,
lest befalls you the like of what befell the people of Noah, or the
people of Hud or the people of Salih; and the people of Lot are not far
off from you. "

**Commentary :**

Shu'ayb advises his opponents that they should not burn their bridges
behind themselves, i. e., because of their hostility to one person they
should not destroy the destiny and happiness of themselves and their
society. They should stop thinking that the tragic stories of their
ancestors were simplistic and parochial in nature. The histories of many
people are similar and correspond with each other.

We must note that Allah's hands are always capable of meting out
punishment. He can annihilate any nation anywhere regardless of what
form they might take any time He wants. Just as He drowned the people of
Noah(a.s.) , swept away the people of Hud by storm, blasted the people
of S alih(a.s.) to extermination, and annihilated the tribe of Lot(a.s.)
by assailing them with stones and overturning the land with them. The
verse says:

" And O My people! Let not(your)breach with me cause you to sin, lest
befalls you the like of what befell the people of Noah, or the people of
Hud or the people of Salih; and the people of Lot are not far off from
you. "


**Commentary : Verse 90**

(90) وَ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ إِنَّ رَبِّي
رَحيمٌ وَدُودٌ

90. "(Then come)and ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him(in
repentance): Verily my Lord is Merciful, Loving. "

**Commentary :**

‏The dissidents and unbelievers must not only be warned and informed of
the punishment to come, but they must also be shown the method by which
they can reform themselves and the course of action that may attract
Divine mercy. They must be notified that in order to receive Allah's
favor and friendship(1), they must follow the path of the prophets and
the leadership of the Sinless Ones. If they repent and reconstruct their
lives, they will receive positive answers from Allah. The verse says:

"(Then come)and ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him(in
repentance): ..."

Allah's(s.w.t.) favor is not a passing affair, rather it is a
continuous process and possesses numerous signs and characteristics, He
does not only accept repentance, but He also loves those who repent. It
says:

"... Verily my Lord is Merciful, Loving. "

(1) The term/ wadoud/ refers to that kind of friendship which is
everlasting.


**Commentary : Verse 91**

(91) قالُوا يا شُعَيْبُ ما نَفْقَهُ كَثيراً مِمَّا تَقُولُ وَ إِنَّا
لَنَراكَ فينا ضَعيفاً وَ لَوْ لا رَهْطُكَ لَرَجَمْناكَ وَ ما أَنْتَ
عَلَيْنا بِعَزيزٍ

91. " They said: 'O Shu'ayb! We do not understand much of what you say;
and most surely we see you weak among us. Were it not for your family,
we would certainly stone you; and you are not mighty against us'. "

**Commentary :**

The prophets and the divine preachers have had to bear the utmost
contempt and humiliation in the course of their mission in leading
mankind on to the Right Path. Shu'ayb(a.s.) is one of those examples,
for they did both to him. They ridiculed and belittled his words and saw
him as someone weak and insignificant. They denigrated his family,
threatened him with death, and did not give due regard to his honor. The
verse says:

" They said: 'O Shu'ayb! We do not understand much of what you say; and
most surely we see you weak among us. Were it not for your family, we
would certainly stone you; and you are not mighty against us'. "

The idol worshippers told Shu'ayb(a.s.) that they did not grasp the
meaning of his words. But what was his speech about which they claimed
they did not understand Was it not but the following

1- I am empowered to perform miracles and to offer you valid proofs.
"If I be upon a clear proof ..."

2- I have no financial difficulties and I am not in need of your
assistance.

3- I practice what I preach.

4- I intend to reform the society. "I desire naught save reform ..."

5- I struggle with all my might. "... so far as I am able ..."

6- I put all my hopes and trust in Allah. "... On Him do I rely ..."

7- I warn you of the consequences at the end of time and the actions of
past generations. "... The like of what befell the people of Noah,
..."


**Commentary : Verse 92**

(92) وَ يا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُوا عَلى‏ مَكانَتِكُمْ إِنِّي عامِلٌ سَوْفَ
تَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ يَأْتيهِ عَذابٌ يُخْزيهِ وَ مَنْ هُوَ كاذِبٌ وَ
ارْتَقِبُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقيبٌ

92. " He said: 'O my people! Is then my family more esteemed with you
than Allah And you cast Him behind your back, with neglect. Verily my
Lord encompasses what you do'. "

**Commentary :**

We should not give priority to the rights of the people, or of groups,
parties, or even of international law over Divine rights. We must stop
excluding Allah's role in the political and social domains and not let
it be dominated by any other matter. According to the verse, these
people refrained from doing harm to Shu'ayb because of the fear of
retaliation from his tribe. The verse says:

" He said: 'O my people! Is then my family more esteemed with you than
Allah? ..."

Shu'ayb's response was why could they not accept his words simply for
Allah's sake Given that Allah was infinitely more powerful than his
tribe, they did not give any importance to Him at all ignoring Him and
violating His commandments. It continues:

"... And you cast Him behind your back, with neglect. ..."

In fact they should stop thinking that Allah was not seeing what they
did and did not hear what they said, for one can be sure, that the Lord
is aware of all of our deeds. The verse concludes:

"... Verily my Lord encompasses what you do'. "


**Commentary : Verse 93**

(93) وَ يا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُوا عَلى‏ مَكانَتِكُمْ إِنِّي عامِلٌ سَوْفَ
تَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ يَأْتيهِ عَذابٌ يُخْزيهِ وَ مَنْ هُوَ كاذِبٌ وَ
ارْتَقِبُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقيبٌ

93. " And O my people! Act according to your ability. I will do(my
part). Soon you will know on whom comes the Penalty disgracing him, and
who it is a liar. And watch you; Verily I(too)am watching with you. "

**Commentary :**

As the disbelievers of the people of Shu'ayb threatened to stone him to
death while giving him their last words, Shu'ayb, declaring his stand in
the face of these threats did not flinch from the threat and issued a
challenge to them, instead he said that they would do whatever they
could, and might not spare anything. He should do what is in his power
as well. The verse says:

" And O my people! Act according to your ability. I will do(my part).
..."

However, you will soon realize who will be the one suffering a
humiliating punishment, and who is a liar. So, wait and see and I will
do the same. The verse continues saying:

"... Soon you will know on whom comes the Penalty disgracing him, and
who it is a liar. ..."

You try to win me over with your power, numbers, wealth, and your
influence and I shall also wait and see how the Divine punishment will
soon entangle you and your misguided population, exterminating you from
the face of the earth. The verse says:

"... And watch you; Verily I(too)am watching with you. "


**Commentary : Verse 94**

(94) وَ لَمَّا جاءَ أَمْرُنا نَجَّيْنا شُعَيْباً وَ الَّذينَ آمَنُوا
مَعَهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنَّا وَ أَخَذَتِ الَّذينَ ظَلَمُوا الصَّيْحَةُ
فَأَصْبَحُوا في‏ دِيارِهِمْ جاثِمينَ

(95) كَأَنْ لَمْ يَغْنَوْا فيها أَلا بُعْداً لِمَدْيَنَ كَما بَعِدَتْ
ثَمُودُ

94. " And when Our Command came, We saved Shu'ayb and those who
believed with him by a mercy from Us, and the(heavenly)Blast overtook
those who were unjust, so they become motionless corpses in their
abodes. "

95. " As if they had never dwelt there. Behold! Away with(people of)
Madyan, even as were cast away(the people of)Thamoud. "

**Commentary :**

Ultimately, the final stage did come. The Qur'an implies that when
Allah's Command for the punishment of this misguided, oppressing and
obstinate people was issued, after Shu'ayb and those who believed with
him were saved by Divine favor and blessings, the terrible sound from
the skies and the great death- dealing blast came over the people of
Madyan and took them all by the throat. The verse says:

" And when Our Command came, We saved Shu'ayb and those who believed
with him by a mercy from Us, and the(heavenly)Blast overtook those who
were unjust, ..."

In the aftermath of the blast, the Qur'an indicates that the people of
Shu'ayb lay face down on the earth, they had died in their houses as a
result of this great blast, and their corpses were left there to provide
others with didactic lessons. Their lives were terminated in such a way
that it was as if they had never existed there before. The verse
continues saying:

"... so they become motionless corpses in their abodes. "

The Divine outrage is far superior in destruction than any other form
of devastation, in the case of bombardment, for example, some people may
have the chance to escape more or less unharmed, and some would remain
alive after the event. However, when the time for Allah's anger and
punishment comes, it wipes the evildoers away in such a way that it is
as if no one had ever lived there. The verse says:

" As if they had never dwelt there. ..."

Eventually, as was explained at the end of the stories of the peoples
of 'Ad and Thamoud, Allah's favor and blessings were removed from the
people of Madyan as they had been removed from the people of Thamoud. It
says:

"... Behold! Away with(people of)Madyan, even as were cast away(the
people of )Thamoud. "


