Commentary : Verse 103.104
==========================

(103) إِنَّ في‏ ذلِكَ لَآيَةً لِمَنْ خافَ عَذابَ الْآخِرَةِ ذلِكَ
يَوْمٌ مَجْمُوعٌ لَهُ النَّاسُ وَ ذلِكَ يَوْمٌ مَشْهُودٌ

(104) وَ ما نُؤَخِّرُهُ إِلاَّ لِأَجَلٍ مَعْدُودٍ

103. " Surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement in
the Hereafter, that is a Day(when)mankind are to be gathered to, and
that Day witnessed(by all). "

104. " And We do not postpone it, but to an appointed term. "

**Commentary :**

In the previous noble verses, it was explicitly stated that as a
general rule those who deny the truth will be dealt with accordingly,
and will receive their deserved punishment.

This subtle verse of the holy Qur'an also states that these instructive
accounts and the awful, painful events which our predecessors
experienced, are some signs toward the path of truth for those who fear
the punishments of the Hereafter to seek the truth and follow Divine
guidance. The verse says:

" Surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement in the
Hereafter, ..."

In every aspect, this fleeting world is very insignificant as compared
to the Hereafter even in punishment and reprisal. The next world is much
more expansive in extent, and those who believe in the Resurrection will
be trembling when they confront these worldly Signs.

Towards the end of the verse, the Qur'an refers to two characteristics
of the Day of Resurrection, by saying that it is the Day which is going
to be witnessed by all, in such a way that all human beings will be
present and see it for themselves. The verse says:

"... that is a Day(when)mankind are to be gathered to, and that Day
witnessed(by all). "

In view of the fact that some persons may claim that such a Day is a
remote probability and it is not clear as to when it will arrive, so the
Qur'an hastens to add that that Day will not be postponed except for a
limited amount of time. This will be only done for the sake of
expediency so that the people of the world may apprehend those scenes
elucidated in the Qur'an for their education and that the programs of
the prophets can be implemented as far as possible. The verse says:

" And We do not postpone it, but to an appointed term. "


**Commentary : Verse 105.106.107**

(105) يَوْمَ يَأْتِ لا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِهِ فَمِنْهُمْ
شَقِيٌّ وَ سَعيدٌ

(106) فَأَمَّا الَّذينَ شَقُوا فَفِي النَّارِ لَهُمْ فيها زَفيرٌ وَ
شَهيقٌ

(107) خالِدينَ فيها ما دامَتِ السَّماواتُ وَ الْأَرْضُ إِلاَّ ما شاءَ
رَبُّكَ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ فَعَّالٌ لِما يُريدُ

105. " The day(when)it comes, no soul shall speak but by His leave.
Then some of them shall be wretched, and some happy. "

106. " Then as for those who are wretched(they)shall be in the Fire,
for them therein will be moaning and sighing. "

107. " They will abide therein so long as the heavens and the earth
endure, except as your Lord pleases. Verily your Lord is the(Mighty)Doer
of what He intends. "

**Commentary :**

On the Day of Resurrection, the Reckoning Day, silence will prevail
everywhere except for those who are permitted to speak.

In the foregoing verses, allusion was made to the Day of Resurrection
and the general assembly of people in that great Court. Here, the Qur'an
informs us of a part of the fate of people on the Day of the Judgment.

At first it implies that when the Day comes, no one can speak without
Allah's permission. The verse says:

" The day(when)it comes, no soul shall speak but by His leave. ..."

On that Day, people will go through various stages, each one having its
own specifications. In some stages no questions are to be asked, even
our mouths will remain shut, only those organs which have been involved
and have been imprinted by the performance of their owners would bear
testimony by a mute tonge. However, in other stages, the silence imposed
upon the mouths would be removed and mankind will start speaking with
Allah's permission, confessing their sins. The guilty will blame each
other, and try to attribute their own sins to others, holding them
responsible for their deeds.

Towards the end of the verse, the Qur'an divides all people into two
categories, saying that some people are stone hearted and some are soft
hearted, some are happy while others are unhappy. The verse continues
saying:

"... Then some of them shall be wretched, and some happy. "

This toughness and stone heartedness, on the one hand, and the
contentment and happiness on the other, are no more than the
consequences of individual behaviors, words, deeds and intentions in
this world.

It then expounds upon the state of the wicked, stone hearted and
vicious as well as the state of those prosperous and happy individuals
in a concise, self explanatory sentence by saying that those who became
wicked and stone hearted will be in agony, moaning and crying all the
time. These reflect the conditions of those who are deeply regretful,
the kind of crying which saturates them to the point that shows their
utmost discomfort because of the severity of their punishment. The verse
says:

" Then as for those who are wretched(they)shall be in the Fire, for
them therein will be moaning and sighing. "

It adds further that they will permanently stay in the Hell Fire until
the heavens and the earth endure or unless Allah wishes otherwise, for
Allah does whatever He wishes. The verse says:

" They will abide therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure,
except as your Lord pleases. Verily your Lord is the(Mighty)Doer of what
He intends. "


**Commentary : Verse 108**

(108) وَ أَمَّا الَّذينَ سُعِدُوا فَفِي الْجَنَّةِ خالِدينَ فيها ما
دامَتِ السَّماواتُ وَ الْأَرْضُ إِلاَّ ما شاءَ رَبُّكَ عَطاءً غَيْرَ
مَجْذُوذٍ

108 " And as for those who are happy, they shall be in Paradise,
abiding therein, so long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as
your Lord pleases: a gift without a break."(1)


**Commentary :**

**The means of Happiness and Wretchedness:**

Happiness, which is considered as a lost paradise for man, results from
the provision of the means of development for an individual or a
community. The opposite of it is wretchedness in which the conditions
conducive to progress, development and victory are unfavorable.

However, one must keep in mind that the primary source of happiness and
prosperity as well as wretchedness lies in man's own will. It is he who
can provide the means necessary for his own self actualization as well
as that of his community. And it is he who can fight the causes of
wretchedness or submit to it completely.

The logic of the prophets proclaims that the two are not inherent in
man's nature and even the shortcomings of environment, family and
heredity can be transformed through one's own determination. If, on the
other hand, we deny the (1) Although Allah's Will has no limits even to
expel the people in paradise, if we focus our attention on the climactic
highlight of the last verse and the promises given in other verses, we
can conclude that He would not do such a thing and when one enters
Paradise he will remain there permanently.

principle of man's free will and take a deterministic approach in our
attitude towards him, we will have to consider his happiness and
wretchedness as inherent in him or as the effects of determinism which
is definitely condemned in the literature of the prophets as well as in
the school of rationalism.

Interestingly, in narrations attributed to the holy Prophet(p.b.u.h.)
and the Imams of the Ahl- ul- Bayt(a.s.) , one reads that the means
which provide grounds for one's happiness or wretchedness have been
indicated. The study of these Islamic narrations leads man to
contemplate the Islamic way of thinking about this important problem,
and gives him guidelines to help him seek objective realities and the
true means of happiness instead of taking recourse in superstitious
beliefs and wrong traditions.

Imam Sadiq(a.s.) , quoting his great grandfather, Amir- ul-
Mu'mineen(a.s.) says: "The truth of the matter regarding prosperity is
that the last stage of man's life ends with righteous deeds, and the
fact of the matter concerning wretchedness is that the last stage of
one's life comes to an end with a vicious act. "(1)

And again the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) declares: "Four conditions, if
fulfilled, result in happiness and four conditions pave the way for
wretchedness. The former consists of a wife with decent conduct, a
spacious home, a worthy neighbor, and a good horse, while wretchedness
consists of an evil doing wife, a bad neighbor, an awfully small house
and a bad horse. "(2)

The Messenger of Allah(p.b.u.h.) said: "Perfect happiness comes about
when one's whole life is spent serving Allah. "(3)

(1) Bihar ul 'Anwar, vol. 68, p. 364

(2) Bihar ul 'Anwar, vol. 104, p. 98

(3) Nahj ul Fas ah ah, p. 375

‏Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali(a.s.)said: "The faithful who are wise are the
happiest ones(on the earth). "(1)

The Messenger of Allah(p.b.u.h.) said: "The most fortunate of people
are those who associate with brave godly men.(2)

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali(a.s.) said: "A good temper is one of the prime
sources of one's happiness. "(3)

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali(a.s.) remarks that one's happiness lies in his
attaining religion and the practice of it for the Hereafter.(4)

The Prophet of Allah(p.b.u.h.) says:

"Verily a Muslim man's happiness lies in his child resembling him,
having a beautiful and God- fearing wife, a large house and a good
horse( to ride). "(5)

As for wretchedness, Imam Rid a(a.s.) in a tradition says: "Allah has
allocated wretchedness for liars and culprits. "(6)

Amir- ul- Mu'mineen Ali(a.s.) once was asked: "Who is the worst villain
and the most vicious person ?" To which he answered: "He who exchanges
his religion for another person's worldly life. "(7)

The holy Prophet(p.b.u.h.) said: "Shall I not tell you who the most
vicious villain is ?"

They answered: "Yes, O' Prophet of Allah! ". He said: "He who is empty
handed in this world together with the punishment of the Hereafter.
"(8)

(1) Ghurar ul Hikam, vol. 2, p. 397

(2) Madinat ul Balaqah, vol. 2, p. 462

(3) Nahj ul Fas ah ah, p. 57

(4) Ghurar ul Hikam, vol. 4, p. 144

(5) Bihar, vol. 73 p. 149

(6) Bihar, vol. 5, p. 154

(7) Bihar, vol. 72, p. 270

(8) Bihar, vol. 100, p. 70

We would like to take refuge in Allah from such a villain age.

Comparing the paths shown towards one's happiness and wretchedness in
the above quotations and their objectivity, with the superstitious
beliefs which still attract large numbers of people in this era of the
atom and space travel, one is led right away to the reality that Islamic
instructions are quite logical and extremely well calculated. And what a
great number of people have there been who have become entangled in the
complications arising from such superstitions preventing them from
effectively living their daily lives bringing them only misfortune and
pain.

Regarding happiness and wretchedness, Islam obliterates all
superstitious beliefs, and guides us in everything that we do
strengthening and clarifying our ethical responsibilities, attitudes,
conduct, and way of thinking.


**Commentary : Verse 1109**

(109) فَلا تَكُ في‏ مِرْيَةٍ مِمَّا يَعْبُدُ هؤُلاءِ ما يَعْبُدُونَ
إِلاَّ كَما يَعْبُدُ آباؤُهُمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَ إِنَّا لَمُوَفُّوهُمْ
نَصيبَهُمْ غَيْرَ مَنْقُوصٍ

109. " So be not then in doubt as to what these(men)worship. They
worship nothing but what their fathers worshipped before(them), and
verily We shall pay them back(in full)their portion undiminished. "

**Commentary :**

One result which can be inferred from the stories of the previous
generations is that the prophets and those following them, those who
were truly faithful, should not fear the abundance of the enemies and
with no hesitation try to defeat the unjust idol worshippers they are
confronted because the helps of Allah are certain.

Therefore, He says to His Prophet that he should not have the shadow of
a doubt as to what these people worship for they only follow in the
footsteps of their ancestors and do not, in fact, really worship
anything at all. Thus their destiny is no better than that of their
forefathers. They shall be compensated in full and Allah will not give
them short of what is their due(of punishment ). And were they to return
to the true path, their share of Allah's reward will be preserved. The
verse says:

" So be not then in doubt as to what these(men)worship. They worship
nothing but what their fathers worshipped before(them), and verily We
shall pay them back(in full)their portion undiminished. "

In actual fact, this verse depicts that whatever we have read about
past generations had not been fairy tales or myths and their realities
have not been confined to only the previous generations. They constitute
eternal examples for all men, past, present, and future, though they may
take place in different circumstances and with different forms.

In the meantime, though this sublime verse is addressed to the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) , it targets the people so that they may not be in
doubt or be hesitant.


