Section 2 : Patience and Good Deeds Commentary : Verse 9
========================================================

earn pardon from Allah

The common nature of the people who rejoice and get proud when blessed
by Allah and whenever any blessings is justly withdrawn, man gets
dejected and becomes ungrateful - The infidels challenged to bring some
chapters like those of the Qur'an is they be truthful - Tyrants cursed
by Allah.

(9) وَ لَئِنْ أَذَقْنَا الْإِنْسانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً ثُمَّ نَزَعْناها
مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ لَيَؤُسٌ كَفُورٌ

9. " If We make man taste mercy from Ourselves,(and)then take it off
from him, verily he is despairing ungrateful. "

**Commentary :**

Allah's blessings do not always reflect His compassion; nor does
usually the withdrawal of His blessings signify His punishment and
anger. Many a time, they could mean that He might be putting someone
through a special test. The verse says:

" If We make man taste mercy from Ourselves,(and)then take it off from
him, verily he is despairing ungrateful. "

As man does not understand the Divine wisdom and his own good, he tends
to jump to conclusions, feels desperate and becomes ungrateful. However
faith in Him is not based upon what we perceive to be our happiness in
life. Allah's blessings are the consequences of His judgment and His
grace, not the results of our merit. Therefore, despair of Allah's
blessings leads to ungratefulness. In this regard, the verse says:

"... verily he is despairing ungrateful. "


**Commentary : Verse 10**

(10) وَ لَئِنْ أَذَقْناهُ نَعْماءَ بَعْدَ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ
لَيَقُولَنَّ ذَهَبَ السَّيِّئاتُ عَنِّي إِنَّهُ لَفَرِحٌ فَخُورٌ

10. " And if We make him taste(Our)favors after adversity has afflicted
him, he will say, 'The evils have departed from me'. Verily he is
joyous, boastful. "

**Commentary :**

All the blessings which are handed down to man after hardships and
sufferings must serve as a source of thanksgiving and remembering
Allah(s. w. t.)and not as a means of arrogance, boasting and self
satisfaction.

There are two risks to one's joy, one is making a wrong analysis of
events, and the other is that this joy would result in a person's
arrogance.

Worldly affairs do not always take the same path, on the contrary, as
some Islamic traditions testify to, they have two sides to them;
sometimes they run in your favor, at other times, they run against you.
Once they are in your favor, you must not become arrogant, and once they
are otherwise, you must keep your patience because, at any rate, you are
the focus of the Divine attention, and you are in the course of Allah's
trial. The verse says:

" And if We make him taste(Our)favors after adversity has afflicted
him, he will say, 'The evils have departed from me'. Verily he is
joyous, boastful. "


**Commentary : Verse 11**

(11) إِلاَّ الَّذينَ صَبَرُوا وَ عَمِلُوا الصَّالِحاتِ أُولئِكَ لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَ أَجْرٌ كَبيرٌ

11. " Except those who are patient and constant, and do deeds of
righteousness; for them is forgiveness and a great reward. "

**Commentary :**

All cases dealt with in the Qur'an concerning good conduct are
mentioned along with faith except in this verse which, says: "Except
those who are patient and constant". In this verse, too, 'the patient'
refers to the true believers compared with those who behave with
intolerance.

‏Patience is not confined only to cases of frustration and bitter
events. On the contrary, in cases of abundant welfare and happiness, one
must keep patience, otherwise, it will lead man to unruliness as the
Children of Israel were when they were liberated from the yoke of
Pharaoh and gained a more comfortable life and independence they went
the path of aberration. They then started worshipping cows and when
confronted by the protests of Harun, they went so far in their rudeness
that they were about to kill their prophet. The Qur'an in this regard
says: "Verily the people judged me weak and had well nigh slain me.
"(1)

Therefore, being patient in times of joy and sorrow is one of the best
examples of good conduct. A true believer is an integrated person who
never despairs, neither is he blasphemous, happy- go lucky, nor
arrogant. On the contrary, he is patient and persevering.

(1)- Sura 'A'raf, No. 7, verse 150


**Commentary : Verse 12**

(12) فَلَعَلَّكَ تارِكٌ بَعْضَ ما يُوحى‏ إِلَيْكَ وَ ضائِقٌ بِهِ
صَدْرُكَ أَنْ يَقُولُوا لَوْ لا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ كَنْزٌ أَوْ جاءَ
مَعَهُ مَلَكٌ إِنَّما أَنْتَ نَذيرٌ وَ اللَّهُ عَلى‏ كُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ
وَكيلٌ

12. " So perhaps you may(be inclined)to give up a part of what is
revealed unto thee, and your breast becomes straitened by it lest they
say, 'Why has not a treasure been sent down unto him or an angel not
come with him ' Verily you are only a warner, and Allah is custodian
over everything. "

**Commentary :**

Once the unbelievers asked the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) to turn the mountains
of Mecca into gold through a miracle or they wished that an angel come
to him, thus confirming him. Others, on the contrary, owing to their
grudge and hatred, wanted him to say something related to Had rat
Ali(a.s.)and whenever he would say something, they would reject all of
it. Therefore, the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) felt a strain in his heart, and
consequently, he delayed conveying the messages.

Incidentally, his delay did not intrude upon his infallibility nor was
it incompatible with it, for at that time, there was no urgency to
convey Allah's message. Thus, owing to considerations which were not
personal but based upon expediency, he could postpone conveying the
verses. With the revelation of this verse, those considerations were set
aside and the message had now to be conveyed without delay. The verse
says:

" So perhaps you may(be inclined)to give up a part of what is revealed
unto thee, and your breast becomes straitened by it lest they say, 'Why
has not a treasure been sent down unto him or an angel not come with him
? "

Perhaps, the delay in conveying the revelations had been confined
solely to a few obstinate people, of whose guidance the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) had despaired. However, Allah ordered that although
they might not become believers, it was the duty of the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) not to abandon them. The verse continues saying:

"... Verily you are only a warner, and Allah is custodian over
everything. "

Therefore, a leader and an authority in propagating the message of
Islam must be always decisive in propagating and conveying the word of
Allah, remaining undaunted by the people's words and pretexts, for Allah
is the guarantor of a prophet's duty and prophets are not responsible
for the consequences. They must act according to their duty and leave
the rest to the Almighty.

The unbelievers used to put pressure upon the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) under
various pretexts. It was in addition to the physical tortures that they
used to inflict upon him.


**Commentary : Verse 13**

(13) أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَراهُ قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِعَشْرِ سُوَرٍ مِثْلِهِ
مُفْتَرَياتٍ وَ ادْعُوا مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ صادِقينَ

13. " Or do they say: 'He has forged it' Say, 'Bring you then ten suras
forged, like unto it, and call(to your aid)whomsoever you can, other
than Allah, if you are truthful! '"

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an is not only a miracle of eloquence in itself, it is also a
miracle from the view point of its wisdom and ideology, its admonitions,
its reasoning, the news it gives of the invisible world and its
legislations. The sentence, "and call to your aid whomsoever you can" is
a call addressed to everyone, and not only to those Arabs who could
comprehend the eloquence and the fluency of the noble Qur'an. In this
regard He elsewhere reiterates: "Were men and jinn to combine together
to bring the like of this Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it,
"(1)

The miraculous nature of the Qur'an is multi- faceted. It is found in
the sweetness of its words when read, the harmony of its content, etc.
Although it had been revealed over a period of 32 years, it had revealed
scientific knowledge which had been non- existent at that time. It
foretold affairs that eventually took place in the future. It provided
information concerning the nations of antiquity which had left no trace
from themselves. It stated comprehensive laws governing all dimensions
of the individual and social life of man. And it has remained intact

(1) Sura Al- 'Isra', No. 17, verse 88

throughout the ages free of all distortions, changes, and of becoming
out- dated and forgotten.

‏Despite making it easy for them and all these challenges, mankind is
still rendered impotent. The Qur'an elsewhere says: " to bring the like
of this Qur'an ".(1) In the verse under discussion, it says: "Bring you
then ten suras forged like unto it". In another place it makes it even
easier by saying: " then bring one Sura the like thereof ".(2) In
addition to this, the Qur'an issues thought- provoking challenges.
Elsewhere it says: "Were men and jinn to combine together to bring the
like of this Qur'an. "(3)

Elsewhere it implies that if they call on all the think- tanks of the
whole globe; they cannot produce anything like the Qur'an. Here is the
text: " they could not bring the like of it, though some of them were
aiders of others. "(4)

History has also clearly proven that enemies have waged numerous wars
against Islam, they have planned conspiracies and yet they have never
been able to produce even one Sura like that of the Qur'an. Can any
miracle performed be better than this?

However, instead of using their reason, the unbelievers, accused the
Prophet(p. b. u. h.)of fabricating the Qur'an, saying that it is not the
word of Allah, while the Qur'an is the eternal miracle of history. The
verse says:

" Or do they say: 'He has forged it' Say, 'Bring you then ten suras
forged, like unto it, and call(to your aid)whomsoever you can, other
than Allah, if you are truthful! '"

(1) Sura Al- 'Isra', No. 17, verse 88

(2) Sura Al- Baqarah, No. 2, verse 23

(3) Sura Al- 'Isra', No. 17, verse 88

(4) Ibid


**Commentary : Verse 14**

(14) فَإِلَّمْ يَسْتَجيبُوا لَكُمْ فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّما أُنْزِلَ
بِعِلْمِ اللَّهِ وَ أَنْ لا إِلهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ
مُسْلِمُونَ

14. "If then they do not answer your(call), know that it is sent down
by the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no Allah but He! Will you
then submit(to Islam)"

**Commentary :**

The unbelievers accused the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) of having learned the
Qur'an from someone. The Qur'an answers them that the source of this
Book is Divine Knowledge and nothing other than that. Sometimes they
also said that he had written the Qur'an while receiving help from
others. This verse provides a firm answer to all those accusations. It
says:

"If then they do not answer your(call), know that it is sent down by
the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no Allah but He! Will you then
submit(to Islam)"?

The noble Qur'an is not a product of man's conjectural suppositions,
imaginations, or contemplations, it is based upon Allah's Omniscience,
recognizing no spatial, temporal, or racial boundaries and is not
specific to only one particular generation for it is based on Allah's
Knowledge.

Similar to the infinite knowledge of Allah, the secrets of the Qur'an
are infinite. Therefore, we must not waver in our opinion concerning the
authenticity of the holy Qur'an and in monotheism with regards to Allah
because of infidelity and hesitation of disbelievers.


**Commentary : Verse 15.16**

(15) مَنْ كانَ يُريدُ الْحَياةَ الدُّنْيا وَ زينَتَها نُوَفِّ
إِلَيْهِمْ أَعْمالَهُمْ فيها وَ هُمْ فيها لا يُبْخَسُونَ

(16) أُولئِكَ الَّذينَ لَيْسَ لَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ إِلاَّ النَّارُ وَ
حَبِطَ ما صَنَعُوا فيها وَ باطِلٌ ما كانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ

15. " Whoever desires the life of this world and its adornment, We
shall pay them in full(the recompense for)their deeds therein, and they
will not be defrauded therein. "

16. "(But)these are they for whom there is naught in the hereafter but
the Fire: and what they have wrought in it shall fail, and vain shall be
what they were doing. "

**Commentary :**

Their reward for their good conduct will be delivered to them without
any diminution in this world and they will be amply rewarded, which is
healthy and favours gifted to them, but there would be no rewards for
them in the Afterlife, for they had no intention of meriting Allah's
approbation in their deeds and expected no compensation in the
Hereafter.

They had only intended to have what they gain in this world and this
they have obtained. The verse says:

" Whoever desires the life of this world and its adornment, We shall
pay them in full(the recompense for)their deeds therein, and they will
not be defrauded therein. "

The foregoing holy verses present adequate proofs to the unbelievers
and deniers by mentioning the reasons for the miracle of the Qur'an.

After the truth has been well- expounded and made crystal clear, some
people abstain from submitting to it for their own material benefits.
The Qur'an refers to the fate of such people in this verse and in the
one following by saying that those whose aims are simply to have a good
and luxurious life are given their complete reward in this world without
losing anything.

However, if their intention is to please Allah, they will be rewarded
abundantly both in this world and in the next.

One could easily find examples of the above facts in his environment.
The Western world, in its unceasing efforts, has split the unknown
secrets of many sciences, thus controlling and dominating various forces
in nature. It has attained affluence as a result of its unity and its
continuous struggle and resistance against difficulties. Thus, they will
evidently reap the fruits of their labor and attain the fruits of
victory. However, as their aim is solely confined to the worldly life,
the natural consequences of such acts will be only limited to the
provisions of this material world.

Therefore, in this verse the Qur'an explicitly states that whatever
they have done in this world(which are rewarded here)will be obliterated
in the next world and they will get no rewards for whatever they have
performed for all they have done for other than Allah will become null
and void. The verse says:

"(But)these are they for whom there is naught in the hereafter but the
Fire: and what they have wrought in it shall fail, and vain shall be
what they were doing. "


