Commentary : Verse 17
=====================

(17) أَ فَمَنْ كانَ عَلى‏ بَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَ يَتْلُوهُ شاهِدٌ
مِنْهُ وَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ كِتابُ مُوسى‏ إِماماً وَ رَحْمَةً أُولئِكَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَ مَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزابِ فَالنَّارُ
مَوْعِدُهُ فَلا تَكُ في‏ مِرْيَةٍ مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّكَ
وَ لكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا يُؤْمِنُونَ

17. " Is he then(like unto him)who has a clear proof from his Lord and
follows him a witness from Him, and before it(is)the Book of Moses, a
guide and a mercy(testifying it)These believe in it; but whoever of
the(different)parties disbelieves in it, the(Hell)Fire is the promised
place; so be you not in doubt of it; verily it(the Qur'an)is the truth
from your Lord, but most of the people do not believe. "

**Commentary :**

Allah has offered more than adequate reasons as to why people must be
believers. The Qur'an is a miracle on its own and, at the same time, a
person like Ali- ibn- Abi- Talib(a.s.), is also a witness which
testifies to its authenticity. Moreover, the Torah had also provided
good tidings as to the emergence of the Qur'an long before it was
revealed.

Therefore, the Qur'an inquires whether he who brings clear evidence
from his Lord, who is supported by a testifying witness, who is
commissioned by Allah, and before whom the Book of Moses(Torah)had come
bringing revelations as the forerunner of future blessings to come and
heralding his magnitude to be regarded as equal to those who lack all
these qualities, signs, and proofs. The verse says:

" Is he then(like unto him)who has a clear proof from his Lord and
follows him a witness from Him, and before it(is)the Book of Moses, a
guide and a mercy(testifying it)"?

He is no one but the Prophet Muhammad(p.b.u.h.) and/ bayyinah/ or the
clear evidence he offers, is the glorious Qur'an, and his witness, who
testifies as to the truthfulness of his prophecy amongst the believers
is none other than that righteous believer, Ali(a.s.), whose signs and
characteristics had been depicted in the Torah long before his
historical appearance. Therefore, the authenticity of his mission has
been verified in three ways:

First, the Qur'an which is a clear evidence in his hands.

Secondly, the previous holy Books which have precisely explained his
signs, and whose adherents were very familiar with those signs during
the era of the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) .

Thirdly, faithful followers, the leading figure of whom is Ali- ibn-
Abi- Talib(as.)who testifies as to the truthfulness of his call and his
words.

Can one still doubt the authenticity of his call or compare him with
others who claim to be 'prophets' Then, it makes an allusion to truth-
seeking individuals and calls on them to become believers, telling them
to adhere to such a prophet who carries so many clear proofs. It says:

"... These believe in it; ..."

Following this statement, the Qur'an mentions the fate of the
unbelievers saying whichever of the various groups denies him, will meet
the Fire of the Inferno, as there is its meeting place. It continues
saying:

"... but whoever of the(different)parties disbelieves in it,
the(Hell)Fire is the promised place; ..."

As is the case with the style of the holy Qur'an in most situations, it
addresses the people through addressing the Prophet(p. b. u. h.), at the
end of the verse as a general lesson it teaches that since the
circumstances are as such and the authenticity of his call has been
confirmed by so many witnesses, there should not be the least shadow of
doubt cast as far as his mission is concerned, for this is a truthful
word on the part of Allah though many people, because of their
ignorance, fanaticism and ego- centrism would remain unbelievers in his
mission. The verse says:

"... so be you not in doubt of it; verily it(the Qur'an)is the truth
from your Lord, but most of the people do not believe. "

In summary, the verse refers to the privileges of Islam and the
Muslims, the righteous ones, and their reliance upon sound reasoning for
choosing this divine school of thought, while, simultaneously, it also
explains the wicked and evil destiny of the arrogant unbelievers.


**Commentary : Verse 18**

(18) وَ مَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرى‏ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِباً أُولئِكَ
يُعْرَضُونَ عَلى‏ رَبِّهِمْ وَ يَقُولُ الْأَشْهادُ هؤُلاءِ الَّذينَ
كَذَبُوا عَلى‏ رَبِّهِمْ أَلا لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمينَ

18. " And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah?(On
the Day of Resurrection)these will be presented before their Lord and
the witnesses( the prophets and angels)will say: 'These are those who
lied against their Lord! ' Beware! the curse of Allah is on the unjust.
"

**Commentary :**

The Court of the Resurrection contains many witnesses:

A)The Lord who is a witness to all of our conduct:

"Verily, Allah is a witness for everything. "(1)

B)The Blessed Prophet(p.b.u.h.) :

"How will it be then when We bring from every People a witness, and We
bring you a witness over those witnesses?(2)

**C)The Immaculate Imams(a.s.)**

"And thus have We made you an Ummah of middling stand that you may be
witnesses over mankind, "(3)

According to some Islamic traditions, what is meant by
Ummah(nation)here are the Immaculate Imams, for other individuals in the
nation are not eligible for serving as witnesses on that Day owing to
their lack of knowledge and their not being infallible.

(1) Sura Hajj, No. 22, verse 17

(2) Sura Nisa, No. 4, verse 41

(3) Sura Al- Baqarah, No. 2, verse 143

**D)The Angels, "And every soul shall come forth, with each will be a
driver, and a witness. "(1)**

On the Day of Resurrection every person will be accompanied with two
angels; one of them drives him and the other is a witness over him.

‏**E)The Earth: "On that Day, she(the earth)will recount(all)her news.
"(2)**

F)Conscience: "Read your book; your own self is sufficient as a
reckoner against you this Day. "(3)

G)One's Bodily Organs: "On the Day(of Resurrection), their tongue, and
their hands, and their feet shall bear witness against them as to what
they used to do. "(4)

H)Time: Imam Sajjad(a.s.)states in the sixth prayer of the Sahifa
that:

"Today(on the Day of Resurrection)is a new day which will testify as to
the kind of conduct we have had. "

I)Performance: " and what they had done they shall find present(there),
"(5)

Question: The Qur'an has employed the word/ 'az lamu/ when referring to
many sins while the utmost oppression must be one and not more than one.
Why is it so?

Answer: This inference is used in 51 cases, all of which are concerned
with spiritual mental deviations irrespective of polytheism, false
accusations, covering up the truth and withholding it, and obstruction
of the way and of the remembrance of Allah. Therefore, the most
important of the oppressions is intellectual, cultural, and
ideological.

(1) Sura Qaf, No. 50, verse 21

(2) Sura Zilzal, No. 99, verse 4

(3) Sura Al- 'Isra', No. 17, verse 14

(4) Sura Nour, No. 24, verse 24

(5) Sura Kahf, No. 18, verse 49

The Qur'an in this verse, as well as in a few verses which come later,
explains the situation, profile, and the fate of those who falsely
accuse Allah as follows: The most oppressive individual is he who is
deprived of Divine favors, denies the Day of Resurrection, distorts
facts, obstructs the way of Allah and is neither able to escape Allah's
domination in this world nor to seek assistance on the Day of
Resurrection.

He is the one whose punishment is multi- fold, his life has gone with
the wind, his endeavors have become null and void, and his life and soul
have become lost.

Therefore, false accusations against Allah are the greatest of the
unjust. Writers and preachers of religion must be on guard against wrong
words and their writings and keep in mind the fact that there are many
witnesses who will testify as to what they have said and written on the
Day of Resurrection. The verse says:

" And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah?(On the
Day of Resurrection)these will be presented before their Lord and the
witnesses(the prophets and angels)will say: 'These are those who lied
against their Lord! ' Beware! the curse of Allah is on the unjust. "


**Commentary : Verse 19**

(19) الَّذينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبيلِ اللَّهِ وَ يَبْغُونَها عِوَجاً وَ
هُمْ بِالْآخِرَةِ هُمْ كافِرُونَ

19. " Those who hinder(people)from the path of Allah and seek to make
it crooked, and they are themselves unbelievers as to the hereafter. "

**Commentary :**

Enemies obstruct the Path of Allah through various methods including
heresy, false accusations, personal interpretations, forging traditions,
provoking skepticism, emptying mosques, abandoning and neglecting the
teaching of Ahl- ul- Bayt, standing in the way of good conduct,
fabricating pretexts to justify immoral entertainment, setting forth
insignificant issues of hero worship, recommending and propagating
falsehood, humiliating faithful believers, forbidding what has been
allowed by religion, giving undue appreciation and recommendation of
what is not appropriate, glorifying despots, etc.

Among the clear examples of obstruction of Allah's Path, one may cite
closing the gate of the 'House of Allah', closing the 'House of the men
of Allah, ' and the 'House of the Ahl- ul- Bayt of the Prophet(p.b.u.h.)
' as well as that of the immaculate and just leaders.

The enemy obstructs the Path first, and if he is unable to do so, he
diverts the course leading to the Path. The verse says:

" Those who hinder(people)from the path of Allah and seek to make it
crooked, and they are themselves unbelievers as to the hereafter. "


**Commentary : Verse 20**

(20) أُولئِكَ لَمْ يَكُونُوا مُعْجِزينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَ ما كانَ لَهُمْ
مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مِنْ أَوْلِياءَ يُضاعَفُ لَهُمُ الْعَذابُ ما كانُوا
يَسْتَطيعُونَ السَّمْعَ وَ ما كانُوا يُبْصِرُونَ

20. " They will in no wise frustrate(His design)on the earth, nor shall
there be for them any protectors besides Allah! The penalty will be
doubled for them. They could not bear to hear(the truth), and they used
not to see(it). "

**Commentary :**

How can one reconcile the issue of the manifestation and multiplication
of Allah's punishment with Divine justice which seem to be incompatible
with each other Answer: He who misleads others, owing to his power and
position, naturally must be held responsible for their faults.

Thus, the sin committed by knowledgeable people, because of their
social function, is manifold when compared to that committed by ordinary
people and this is identical with justice. Any way, the oppressors are
under the yoke of the Divine wrath and power, and will meet their own
doom. The holy verse says:

" They will in no wise frustrate(His design)on the earth, nor shall
there be for them any protectors besides Allah! The penalty will be
doubled for them. They could not bear to hear(the truth), and they used
not to see(it). "

Those who make false accusations must forget and give up the idea that
being the support of despots and being among their entourage will save
them.


**Commentary : Verse 21.22**

(21) أُولئِكَ الَّذينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَ ضَلَّ عَنْهُمْ ما
كانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ

(22) لا جَرَمَ أَنَّهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ هُمُ الْأَخْسَرُونَ

21. " These are they who have lost their own selves, and that which
they used to invent has failed them. "

22. " Assuredly, they will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter. "

**Commentary :**

In Islamic culture, the world is compared to a marketplace where people
are salesmen and the purchasing group consists of Allah, the Satan,
one's passionate self, etc., the number of which is numerous. The
merchandise is the soul, property and performance. This merchandise is
on offer at an expensive or cheap price. Hence the words/
'ajr/(recompense),/ awab/(reward),/ d i'f/ and/ 'id 'af/, are used
frequently in the Qur'an to mean recompense; while the terms/
xusr/(loss)and/ xusranun mubin/(manifest loss)and/ axsarin/(the most
losers)are used about damage. The important warning is that we know that
every loss can be compensated except the passage of one's lifetime which
cannot be redeemed. The holy verse says:

" These are they who have lost their own selves, and that which they
used to invent has failed them. "

Sometimes, wealth and property, position and power or one's social
status are lost. At other times, man himself and his humanity are lost
which is the greatest of all losses.

Therefore, worldly losses can be compensated but losses incurred in the
Hereafter cannot be replaced. The verse says:

" Assuredly, they will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter. "


**Commentary : Verse 23**

(23) إِنَّ الَّذينَ آمَنُوا وَ عَمِلُوا الصَّالِحاتِ وَ أَخْبَتُوا
إِلى‏ رَبِّهِمْ أُولئِكَ أَصْحابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ فيها خالِدُونَ

23. " Verily those who believe and work righteousness, and humble
themselves before their Lord, they will be Companions of the
Garden,(paradise), they will abide therein for ever. "

**Commentary :**

The Qur'anic word/ axbatou/, is derived from/ xabt/ which means both
submission and humility as well as comfort and confidence.

Reward and encourage have also been mentioned along with warnings and
threats.

Following the aforementioned verses which explained the fate of those
who are involved in giving false accusations, this verse exposes the
profile of those involved in righteous deeds. It implies that those who
believe and perform righteous acts and behave well, who submit
themselves before Allah and are confident of His promises, will be among
the Companions of Paradise, remaining there forever. The verse says:

" Verily those who believe and work righteousness, and humble
themselves before their Lord, they will be Companions of the
Garden,(paradise), they will abide therein for ever. "


**Commentary : Verse 24**

(24) مَثَلُ الْفَريقَيْنِ كَالْأَعْمى‏ وَ الْأَصَمِّ وَ الْبَصيرِ وَ
السَّميعِ هَلْ يَسْتَوِيانِ مَثَلاً أَ فَلا تَذَكَّرُونَ

24. " The similitude the two parties is like the blind and the deaf,
and the seeing(ones)and the hearing(ones). Are they equal in likeness
?Will you not then admonish ?"

**Commentary :**

As one's body has eyes and ears, one's heart also has eyes and ears and
as the blind and the deaf do not perceive the sensations of the world
and do not enjoy them, obstinate individuals also stop enjoying the
Divine acquaintance and do not enjoy it. Therefore, the Qur'an inquires
whether the deaf and the blind are equal to the hearing and the seeing
in the eyes of a wise man. And as they are not equal, the faithful and
the unbeliever are not identical either. Do you not meditate in this
matter so as to attain to the truth ?The verse says:

" The similitude the two parties is like the blind and the deaf, and
the seeing(ones)and the hearing(ones). Are they equal in likeness ?Will
you not then admonish ?"


