Section 3 : the Ministry of Noah Commentary : Verse 25.26
=========================================================

Noah exhorts the people believe in and worship only the One Ture God -
Noah is rejected and charged the people and as imposter - Noah warns the
people of the punishment from Allah

(25) وَ لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنا نُوحاً إِلى‏ قَوْمِهِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذيرٌ
مُبينٌ

(26) أَنْ لا تَعْبُدُوا إِلاَّ اللَّهَ إِنِّي أَخافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذابَ
يَوْمٍ أَليمٍ

25. " And verily, We sent Noah to his people,(saying:)'I am a plain
warner for you'. "

26. " That you serve none but Allah; verily, I do fear for you the
penalty of a painful day. "

**Commentary :**

Had rat Noah is the first prophet among those possessors of
determination/ 'ulul 'azm/ i. e., among the major prophets, who stood up
against polytheism and idol worship, and as the human generation traces
its genealogy back to him after the drowning of the unbelievers, he is
addressed as the second Adam and, since his life- time was longest
comparing that of other prophets, he is called Master of the Prophets.
Allah, the Gracious, has told the story of the prophets of the past to
warn the unbelievers and to soothe the Prophet(p. b. u. h). Taking up
the story of Noah, the Qur'an says that he was sent to his people so as
to warn them against worshipping other than Allah. The verse says:

" And verily, We sent Noah to his people,(saying:)'I am a plain warner
for you'. "

He started His call in a sincere manner inviting them to accept
monotheism because it was the most supreme ideal, for no other act of
worship would be accepted before the All- knowing Allah, the sole and
only Creator of the world. The verse says:

" That you serve none but Allah; verily, I do fear for you the penalty
of a painful day. "


**Commentary : Verse 27**

(27) فَقالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ ما نَراكَ إِلاَّ
بَشَراً مِثْلَنا وَ ما نَراكَ اتَّبَعَكَ إِلاَّ الَّذينَ هُمْ أَراذِلُنا
بادِيَ الرَّأْيِ وَ ما نَرى‏ لَكُمْ عَلَيْنا مِنْ فَضْلٍ بَلْ
نَظُنُّكُمْ كاذِبينَ

27. " Then the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said:
'We do not see(in)you but a man like ourselves, nor do we see that any
follow you but those who are the meanest among us, at first thought, nor
do we see(in)you any excellence over us; nay, we think you are liars!
'"

**Commentary :**

The opponents of the truth sometimes belittle and endeavor to weaken
the Divine leaders. They claim that prophets are men like others and not
superior to them. The verse says:

" Then the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said: 'We
do not see(in)you but a man like ourselves, ..."

At other times, humiliating the prophets' followers, they claim that
they are some unimportant and insignificant people. The verse continues
saying:

"... nor do we see that any follow you but those who are the meanest
among us, at first thought, ..."

At other times, they despise the entire school claiming that the
adherents of this school are naive and superficial who lack any depth of
vision. The verse says:

"... nor do we see(in)you any excellence over us; nay, we think you are
liars! '"

Arrogant people often detest being equal with the masses, especially
with those who are deprived. Usually, the aristocrats have always allied
themselves with the opponents of the prophets but those who take less
interest in worldly affairs, become believers more quickly and are more
decent.

Therefore, the opponents of the prophets lack reasoning and whatever
they claim is based on conjecture, speculation and on hallucinations.


**Commentary : Verse 28**

(28) قالَ يا قَوْمِ أَ رَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُ عَلى‏ بَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ
رَبِّي وَ آتاني‏ رَحْمَةً مِنْ عِنْدِهِ فَعُمِّيَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أَ
نُلْزِمُكُمُوها وَ أَنْتُمْ لَها كارِهُونَ

28. " He said: "O my People! Bethink you, if I be upon a clear proof
from my Lord, and He has grant me mercy from His Presence, but has been
obscured for you; shall we compel you to(accept)it while you are averse
to it ?"

**Commentary :**

This holy verse provides answers to two objections of the unbelievers
which were raised in the foregoing verse.

The unbelievers used to say that Noah(a.s.)was a man like themselves.
This verse answers that although in appearance the prophets are like the
unbelievers, they have merited Allah's particular approbation since they
receive revelations and perform miracles.

The unbelievers would say that the followers of Had rat Noah(a.s.)were
some simple minded, short sighted, and naive people. The verse answers
that such was not the case, although apparently they were weaker than
the unbelievers, they had become believers through witnessing the proofs
shown to them by their prophet. Their conviction, indeed, was not
baseless and without reason.

Despite all the false accusations and groundless protests, the prophets
have always displayed a tolerant attitude towards their foes and they
still took recourse to logic, reasoning and appeal to their emotions.

Of all the things required of the prophets, offering proofs to the
people and performing miracles combined with decisive reasoning leave no
room for any excuses. Nothing must withhold people from exercising their
free choice. Once they stick to their beliefs, they will prosper and
once they refuse to do so they will be tormented. There is no compulsion
in that. The verse says:

" He said: "O my People! Bethink you, if I be upon a clear proof from
my Lord, and He has grant me mercy from His Presence, but has been
obscured for you; shall we compel you to(accept)it while you are averse
to it ?"


**Commentary : Verse 29**

(29) وَ يا قَوْمِ لا أَسْئَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مالاً إِنْ أَجرِيَ إِلاَّ
عَلَى اللَّهِ وَ ما أَنَا بِطارِدِ الَّذينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّهُمْ مُلاقُوا
رَبِّهِمْ وَ لكِنِّي أَراكُمْ قَوْماً تَجْهَلُونَ

29. " And O' my People! I ask you no wealth for it. My reward is only
upon Allah, and I will not drive away those who believe,(for)verily they
shall meet their Lord, but I see you are an ignorant people. "

**Commentary :**

The secret of a preacher's success is his lack of over expectation with
regard to people and not letting himself be stymied by the objections of
the wealthy corrupt classes.

If the prophets were seeking illegitimate profits, they would call on
the aristocrats and not the poor, on the princes not on the paupers. The
followers of the prophets are the oppressed people and they never
neglect them.

The prophets are never greedy for the people's property. Their sole
purpose, according to their mission is to save the people from their
ignorance and from the Divine punishment. The verse says:

" And O' my People! I ask you no wealth for it. My reward is only upon
Allah, and I will not drive away those who believe,(for)verily they
shall meet their Lord, but I see you are an ignorant people. "


