Commentary : Verse 30
=====================

(30) وَ يا قَوْمِ مَنْ يَنْصُرُني‏ مِنَ اللَّهِ إِنْ طَرَدْتُهُمْ أَ
فَلا تَذَكَّرُونَ

30. " And O my people! Who will help me against Allah if I drove them
away Will you not then reflect ?"

**Commentary :**

The Qur'an further explains the situation in this verse, and from the
tongue of the prophet to his people, it implies that if he cast out this
group, who in this world can come to his assistance in that great Court
of Justice ?The verse says:

" And O my people! Who will help me against Allah if I drove them away
? ..."

Driving out the righteous and faithful believers is no easy matter.
They can bear witness against the prophet on the Day of Resurrection and
no one will be able to defend him then, while, at the same time, the
Divine punishment might also face him in this world. And contemplating
this would lead to knowledge that whatever the prophet said was
identical with the truth. The verse says:

"... Will you not then reflect ?"


**Commentary : Verse 31**

(31) وَ لا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِنْدي خَزائِنُ اللَّهِ وَ لا أَعْلَمُ
الْغَيْبَ وَ لا أَقُولُ إِنِّي مَلَكٌ وَ لا أَقُولُ لِلَّذينَ تَزْدَري
أَعْيُنُكُمْ لَنْ يُؤْتِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ خَيْراً اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِما في‏
أَنْفُسِهِمْ إِنِّي إِذاً لَمِنَ الظَّالِمينَ

31. "And I do not say to you(that)Allah's treasures are with me; nor do
I know the Unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say, about
those whom your eyes do despise,(that)Allah will never grant them any
good. Allah is well aware of what is in their hearts;(for)verily then I
should be of the unjust. "

**Commentary :**

‏Knowledge of Unseen, regarding anything and every condition, is
absolutely with Allah. The Qur'an says: "And with Him are the keys of
the Unseen. None but He knows them "(1) which means that the keys to the
invisible world are in His Own authority. However, due to Divine
Providence and according to the Divine Will, men of Allah will sometimes
find windows opened up for them. The Qur'an in regard to this fact says:
"These are of the tidings of the Unseen which We reveal unto you. "(2)

Therefore, Allah's prophets are knowledgeable about the invisible world
as the Qur'an states: "The Knower of the Unseen! So He does not reveal
His secrets to any, " "Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle "(3)
. This verse means

(1) Sura Al- An'am, No. 6, verse 59

(2) Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 49
(3) Sura The Jinn, No. 72, verses 26, 27


that He is knowledgeable about the invisible world, and no one is aware
of this knowledge of the invisible except those whom He has selected
from among His prophets.

‏Not only the knowledge of the invisible world is His own prerogative
but the power to perform extraordinary works also rests with Him, though
Allah can and will bestow something of whatever aspect of His power
which He deems worthy upon anyone He chooses and to the extent that He
wishes. For example, it is mentioned in the Qur'an that death and life
are in His Power: "Verily, it is He who makes one die and live".(1)
However, the Qur'an also says that Had rat 'Isa(a. s.) made the dead
live with His permission "I make the dead live with His permission.
"(2)

Although Allah takes lives "Allah takes the souls "(3) yet angels take
lives with His permission: "The angel of death shall cause you to die,
"(4) And although He is the sole Creator of all, "Allah is the Creator
of every thing "(5) , But Had rat 'Isa creates, however, with His
permission: " and when you did make of clay a thing like the shape of a
bird, by My leave, "(6)

Theological research has shown that no one individual existing among
the jinn and mankind can have access to the science of the invisible
world apart from a limited amount of it which depends upon their
potentialities. This type of knowledge in relation to them is not a
science of the invisible after it is bestowed on them although it might
be so for others. On the other hand, Allah has made the prophets and the
Imams

(1) Sura An- Najm, No. 53, verse 44

(2) Sura 'Al- i- 'Imran, No. 3, verse 49

(3) Sura Az- Zumar, No. 39, verse 22

(4) Sura As- Sajdah, No. 32, verse 11

(5) Sura Ar- Ra'd, No. 13, verse 16

(6) Sura Al- Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 110

‏knowledgeable about the invisible world and aware of the past and
future. For example, the blessed Prophet(p.b.u.h.) had foretold the news
of the 'Imamat' of twelve persons, the sufferings inflicted on them, the
intentional disappearance of Had rat Mahdi(a.s.)and his reappearance,
the events occurring during the last days, the establishment of his
government, and the resurrection of the dead on the Day of Judgment,
other similar matters have also been passed down to us from the other
Imams(a.s.). Without doubt whatever has not been given to us in this
respect is due to the lack of capacity on the part of the average man or
has been withheld for reasons known only to Allah.(1)

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an goes back to the subject of
oppressed believers, emphasizing that the prophet cannot say that those
whom the disbelievers despise will not be rewarded by Allah. On the
contrary, the blessings of this world and those of the next belong to
the oppressed even though they are empty handed in this world.

It is the wrongdoers who in their infatuation with the world consider
goodness to be confined to wealth, position, youth, and the like,
demonstrating their lack of knowledge of the truth and its true meaning.
Even if one assumes that the oppressors are right and that the oppressed
are indeed wretches, still Allah is more aware than us of what is in
their minds, for we know nothing about them except what is indicative of
their good faith and sincerity, and thus we are obliged to accept them.
I am only required to judge and relate with men based on their outward

(1) Refer to Bihar- ul- 'Anwar, vol. 35 p. 420, 'Usoul ul Kafi, vol. 1,
p. 225 Yanabi' ul Mawaddah, vol. 1, p. 605; Kashf- ul Ghumma, vol. 3, p.
340, Safinat- ul- Bihar 'Uyoun Akhbar- ur- Rid a, vol. 2, p. 237; Kitab
al S irat ul H aqq, vol. 3 p. 340, 'Uyoun- i- Akhbar- ur- Rid a, vol. 2,
Nahjul Balaqah and H aqayiq by Ibn Shahr- 'Ashoub, and other books
regarding the 'Knowledge of the Imams.

behavior, judging a man on the basis of his inward nature belongs to
Allah alone, and if I act otherwise, I will certainly be among the
oppressors. The verse says:

"And I do not say to you(that)Allah's treasures are with me; nor do I
know the Unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say, about
those whom your eyes do despise,(that)Allah will never grant them any
good.Allah is well aware of what is in their hearts;(for)verily then I
should be of the unjust."


**Commentary : Verse 32**

(32) قالُوا يا نُوحُ قَدْ جادَلْتَنا فَأَكْثَرْتَ جِدالَنا فَأْتِنا
بِما تَعِدُنا إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقينَ

32. " They said: 'O' Noah! You have disputed with us and multiplied
disputation with us. Bring us then what you have promised us(of divine
punishment), if you are truthful. '"

**Commentary :**

‏Disputes are only valuable whenever they are honestly in pursuit of
the truth and done in a respectful and polite manner; as the Qur'an
says: " and argue with them in the best manner. "(1)

If the dispute is based on what is wrong, it is of no value, as the
holy Qur'an says: " and they disputed by means of the falsehood in order
to stamp out the truth thereby. "(2)

Thus, as the unbelievers did not have logic on their side and accepted
no logical arguments, they sought to bring the debate to and end by
telling him to bring unto them what he had promised. The verse says:

" They said: 'O' Noah! You have disputed with us and multiplied
disputation with us. Bring us then what you have promised us(of divine
punishment), if you are truthful. '"

Therefore Had rat Noah(a.s.)cursed them after they had made their
declaration that they wanted him to send down their destruction.

(1) Sura An- Nahl, No. 16, verse 125

(2) Sura Ghafir, No. 40, verse 5


**Commentary : Verse 33**

(33) قالَ إِنَّما يَأْتيكُمْ بِهِ اللَّهُ إِنْ شاءَ وَ ما أَنْتُمْ
بِمُعْجِزينَ

33. " He said: 'Verily Allah will bring it to you, if He wills, and you
will not be able to frustrate(it). '"

**Commentary :**

Noah replies that the realization of the punishment for their
heedlessness and obstinacy is not up to him but it is dependent upon the
Will of Allah. He himself is only a messenger and a sincere servant of
the Almighty.

They should beware, however, that when the command for the punishment
is issued they cannot escape His power for they are at His mercy and
they will not be able to take refuge anywhere. The verse says:

" He said: 'Verily Allah will bring it to you, if He wills, and you
will not be able to frustrate(it). '"


**Commentary : Verse 34**

(34) وَ لا يَنْفَعُكُمْ نُصْحي‏ إِنْ أَرَدْتُ أَنْ أَنْصَحَ لَكُمْ إِنْ
كانَ اللَّهُ يُريدُ أَنْ يُغْوِيَكُمْ هُوَ رَبُّكُمْ وَ إِلَيْهِ
تُرْجَعُونَ

34. " And my advice will not profit you, should I intend to give you
advice, if Allah wills to lead you astray. He is your Lord and unto Him
you will be returned. "

**Commentary :**

Noah said that his advice would have been of no use to them even though
he sincerely wished to counsel them.

The punishment and retribution of the evildoers is up to Allah, and
prophets are nothing but agents for conveying the Divine message and
admonishing the people.

There is no way for man to resist or escape Divine justice and
punishment, for Allah's Will overcomes all other wills. Even if one is
not punished in this world, Allah will deal with him on the Day of
Resurrection, and then he will see the final result of his deeds.

However, the Arabic word/ nush/ refers to the saying or deed by which
sincere reformation is achieved, and the Arabic word/ qayy/ is called to
that kind of ignorance which has its roots in corrupt and evil
convictions. The difference between/ 'id lal/ and/ 'iqwa/ is that the
doer of the former knows the destination but he has lost the way, while
with respect to/ 'iqwa/ the aim and intention are both unknown.
Attributing the actions of/ 'id lal/ and/ 'iqwa/ to Allah is in the way
of punishing those who are misled because of the obstinacy and
corruption of their character. It does not mean that from the beginning
and without prior premise Allah goes on leading one astray.


**Commentary : Verse 35**

(35) أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَراهُ قُلْ إِنِ افْتَرَيْتُهُ فَعَلَيَّ
إِجْرامي‏ وَ أَنَا بَري‏ءٌ مِمَّا تُجْرِمُونَ

35. "Or they say: 'He has forged it. ' Say: 'If I have forged it, upon
me is my sin, and I am quit of the sins you commit'. "

**Commentary :**

Some of the unbelievers among the Quraysh claimed that these stories of
the prophets had been fabricated by the Prophet himself(p.b.u.h.) which
he then attributed to Allah. The Almighty instructs him to tell them
that if he had fabricated them, it would be he alone who would suffer
the consequences and they would not be held responsible, but the
converse is also true with respect to their transgressions, that he is
just as free of responsibility for their sins and offences. His duty is
only to convey the message and nothing else, whether or not they
accepted or rejected it. The verse says:

" Or they say: 'He has forged it. ' Say: 'If I have forged it, upon me
is my sin, and I am quit of the sins you commit'. "

Apparently because of the Qur'anic word/ qul/, which means 'say', and
owing to the news about the unbelievers of Mecca and the Prophet of
Islam, the verse relates to the Apostle of Islam(p.b.u.h.) . Anyway, he
who commits an act will only be held responsible and it is no one else's
fault. The Prophet(p.b.u.h.) will not be involved in their sins either.
The fact that they did not accept the faith and attributed false
accusations to the Qur'an, calling the Prophet a liar, all together
resulted in grievous consequences while on his part, he had performed
his mission in admonishing and conveying the message to them.

The Arabic term/ 'ijram/ and/ jurm/ mean the picking of unripe fruits
and which thereafter have been referred to whatever indecent behavior or
offence or sin.


