Section 4 : the Fate of Those Who Disbelieved Noah Commentary : Verse 36
========================================================================

Noah directed to make an Ark - People of Noah scoff at Noah - The
Deluge - Noah's people drowned - Noah and his companions in the Ark
saved.

(36) وَ أُوحِيَ إِلى‏ نُوحٍ أَنَّهُ لَنْ يُؤْمِنَ مِنْ قَوْمِكَ إِلاَّ
مَنْ قَدْ آمَنَ فَلا تَبْتَئِسْ بِما كانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ

36. " And it was revealed unto Noah: 'None of your people will believe
except those who have already believed, so do not grieve as to what they
used to do'. "

**Commentary :**

The previous holy verses thoroughly covered the stage of inviting the
people to the religion on Divine unity and Noah's indefatigable
propagation and dissemination of the Divine message which he
accomplished using all the devices he had available. This verse deals
with the second stage of the campaign; the final stage of the
propagation phase.

Here, the second phase of the campaign has not been dealt with, it is
the end of the propagation stage, and the second stage is the
preparation for the Divine purge.

At first, we read that it was revealed to Noah that no one else except
those who had already adhered to him would become believers. The verse
says:

" And it was revealed unto Noah: 'None of your people will believe
except those who have already believed, ..."

Reference is here made to the fact that alignments had already been
made and finalized and no further call or reformation would have been
useful, hence a state of readiness for the upheaval and the purge must
be declared.

Towards the end of the verse, consoling Noah, the Qur'an implies that
he should not despair at all despite whatever wrongful deeds they used
to do. The verse says:

"... so do not grieve as to what they used to do'. "

In the meantime, one can infer from this verse that Allah made those
aspects of the knowledge of the secrets of the Unseen that He had deemed
necessary, accessible so that His prophet should know.


**Commentary : Verse 37**

(37) وَ اصْنَعِ الْفُلْكَ بِأَعْيُنِنا وَ وَحْيِنا وَ لا تُخاطِبْني‏
فِي الَّذينَ ظَلَمُوا إِنَّهُمْ مُغْرَقُونَ

37. " And make you the Ark under Our eyes, and as We reveal; and
address Me not about those who are unjust; verily they shall be drowned.
"

**Commentary :**

At any rate, this unruly and obstinate group must be punished with the
kind of punishment that would remove their polluting existence from the
entire world, thus liberating the faithful believers from their yoke.

At first, the Qur'an implies that Allah commanded Noah to build an Ark
according to His order and in His presence. The verse says:

" And make you the Ark under Our eyes, and as We reveal; ..."

Towards the end of the verse, Noah is warned against any form of
mediation on behalf of the oppressors. Saying to him that he should not
ask for any amnesty or clemency for they are certainly condemned to
chastisement and to be drowned as soon as they are convicted. The verse
says:

"... and address Me not about those who are unjust; verily they shall
be drowned. "

One can very easily infer from this sentence that taking up the act of
mediation requires certain preconditions which, when they are lacking in
someone, even Allah's prophet is not rightful to mediate on his
behalf.


**Commentary : Verse 38**

(38) وَ يَصْنَعُ الْفُلْكَ وَ كُلَّما مَرَّ عَلَيْهِ مَلَأٌ مِنْ
قَوْمِهِ سَخِرُوا مِنْهُ قالَ إِنْ تَسْخَرُوا مِنَّا فَإِنَّا نَسْخَرُ
مِنْكُمْ كَما تَسْخَرُونَ

38." And he began making the Ark; and whenever the chiefs of his people
passed by him they scoffed at him. He said:'If you scoff at us,
we(too)shall surely scoff at you, as you scoff '."

**Commentary :**

Let us briefly discuss the situation of Noah's People. Instead of
taking Noah's call seriously for a moment, and allowing some room for
accepting the probability of the truth of his repeated calls which might
have had their origins in Divine Providence and that the subject of
punishment through storms might be serious, Noah's people went on
mocking and ridiculing as is the case with all arrogant and vainglorious
people, however he went on building the Ark. Whenever some of his people
passed by him they would watch Noah and his companions struggle to
prepare the timber, nails and other ship- building instruments, and they
would laugh and ridicule them. The verse says:

" And he began making the Ark; and whenever the chiefs of his people
passed by him they scoffed at him. ..."

However, Noah pursued his goal with an extraordinary persistence whose
origins lay in his faith, and paying no attention to what they said, he
made rapid progress in his efforts. Day after day, the structure of the
ship came closer and closer to completion. Noah would sometimes raise
his head, and told them this short out expressive statement: "You
ridicule us today, but we will surely do the same thing to you soon, the
day when you are caught, lost and wandering in the storm, terrified,
running in all directions with no shelter, crying in the midst of the
waves, begging for mercy, the believers then and there will laugh at
your negligence, and ignorance. " The verse says:

"... He said: 'If you scoff at us, we(too)shall surely scoff at you, as
you scoff '. "


**Commentary : Verse 39**

(39) فَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ يَأْتيهِ عَذابٌ يُخْزيهِ وَ يَحِلُّ
عَلَيْهِ عَذابٌ مُقيمٌ

39. " So you shall know soon to whom a Penalty(that)will confound him
comes, and upon whom there shall fall a lasting Penalty. "

**Commentary :**

The meaning of the punishment which is modified by the term/ yuxzihi/
is the devastating worldly punishment, i. e. their being drowned which
would humiliate and belittle them, whilst the meaning of the term/ 'a
abun muqim/ is the punishment to be imposed on the Day of Resurrection.
The verse says:

" So you shall know soon to whom a Penalty(that)will confound him
comes, and upon whom there shall fall a lasting Penalty. "

In some Islamic narrations, one reads that forty years prior to the
appearance of the storm, a type of disease had spread among the women of
the People of Noah which had prevented them from giving birth to
children. This event, in fact, marked the beginning of their
punishment.

**Noah's Ark:**

Noah's Ark, undoubtedly, was not an ordinary ship and its manufacture
in those days with the technology of the time was not easily
accomplished. It was a large vessel which, in addition to the believers,
accommodated pairs of an extremely wide variety of animals, it also
carried a large amount of food supplies for the human passengers, as
well as food for the animals which was unprecedented for that time. In
particular, this ship had to be safely navigated through a sea that
covered the entire world with mountain- sized waves and still remain
intact. In their commentaries, some Qur'an commentators have expressed
their admiration for the magnitude of the ship. Refer to the comments of
Majma'- ul- Bayan for further information.


**Commentary : Verse 40**

(40) حَتَّى إِذا جاءَ أَمْرُنا وَ فارَ التَّنُّورُ قُلْنَا احْمِلْ فيها
مِنْ كُلٍّ زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَ أَهْلَكَ إِلاَّ مَنْ سَبَقَ عَلَيْهِ
الْقَوْلُ وَ مَنْ آمَنَ وَ ما آمَنَ مَعَهُ إِلاَّ قَليلٌ

40. "(Thus it was)till, when Our Command came, and the oven gushed
forth( water)! We said: "Embark therein, of each kind a pair, and your
family(apart from your wife and a son)except for those him against whom
the Word has already passed and whoever believed. But there believed not
with him but a few. "

**Commentary :**

**The Onset of the Flood:**

In the previous verses, we noted how Noah and the true believers became
occupied in building the Ark of Salvation and, while subjected to all
kinds of difficulties and sarcasms of the arrogant unbelieving majority,
they prepared themselves for the flood. Here, the Qur'an expounds upon
the third highlight or the climax of the story which relates to the
punishment inflicted upon this oppressive nation. First of all, it says
that this situation continued until Allah's command was issued and the
dawning of the divine punishment appeared, and waters of the earth
gushed forth. The verse says:

"(Thus it was)till, when Our Command came, and the oven gushed
forth(water)! ..."

Those people who were inattentive and unaware probably noticed the
bubbling water in their wells, but, as usual, they did not heed these
Divine warnings much less try to understand their meaning. They probably
did not pay any attention to it at all to see if a cataclysm was about
to occur, and maybe to at least entertain the possibility that Noah's
warnings might be real.

At this time, the Command was issued to Noah that he should put a pair
of each animal on the Ark so that they would not be exterminated in the
flood. And that he, his family, except those for whom word had already
had been marked for their punishment, and the believers should board the
Ark of Salvation. However few were those who had believed in him. The
verse says:

"... We said: "Embark therein, of each kind a pair, and your
family(apart from your wife and a son)except for those him against whom
the Word has already passed- and whoever believed. But there believed
not with him but a few. "

This verse, on the one hand, refers to the wife of Noah and his son
'Kan'an', who, deviating from the path of belief and being in
collaboration with the sinners, had broken off their relationship with
Noah and were not entitled to embark on the Ark.

On the other hand, it refers to the limited success that Noah(a.s.)had
had in persuading people to follow his way of life during his long years
of continuous struggle that had resulted in getting only a small number
of believers.


**Commentary : Verse 41**

(41) وَ قالَ ارْكَبُوا فيها بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْراها وَ مُرْساها إِنَّ
رَبِّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحيمٌ

41. " And he(Noah)said: 'Embark in it! In Allah's Name shall be its
sailing and its berthing. Verily my Lord is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
'"

**Commentary :**

Noah assembled his relatives and companions quickly and as the time of
the devastating storm and the striking Punishment approached, he ordered
them to embark in the name of Allah and to remember Allah both when the
Ark was in motion or standing still for He is the All Forgiving, the All
Compassionate. The verse says:

" And he(Noah)said: 'Embark in it! In Allah's Name shall be its sailing
and its berthing. Verily my Lord is the Forgiving, the Merciful. '"

Owing to His blessings, Allah had made these instruments available to
you, His faithful servants, and because of His forgiveness, He may
pardon your offences.


