Commentary : Verse 42
=====================

(42) وَ هِيَ تَجْري بِهِمْ في‏ مَوْجٍ كَالْجِبالِ وَ نادى‏ نُوحٌ
ابْنَهُ وَ كانَ في‏ مَعْزِلٍ يا بُنَيَّ ارْكَبْ مَعَنا وَ لا تَكُنْ مَعَ
الْكافِرينَ

42. " So, it sailed with them amid waves like mountains. And Noah
called out to his son and he was aloof: 'O my son! Embark with us and be
not with the unbelievers. '"

**Commentary :**

At long last, the final moment arrived and the Command for the
punishment of this unruly nation was issued. Dark and ominous clouds
darker than the darkest night covered the entire sky, massing on top of
each other in an unprecedented manner. There was the terrible clap of
thunder and the flash of lightning ceaselessly filled up the sky. They
informed of a great disaster mounting in magnitude and terrible in
character.

It started raining. The droplets grew bigger and bigger in size. The
level of underground water rose and gushing fountains emerged
everywhere.

The surface of the earth was soon turned into an ocean, and with the
wind howling, mountain- like waves raged over this ocean, rising over
each other, to come crashing down upon the surface of the stormy sea.
Noah's Ark parted the mountain- like waves and made headway. The verse
says:

" So, it sailed with them amid waves like mountains. And Noah called
out to his son and he was aloof: ..."

Addressing his son, who was standing on the side and not far from him,
Noah shouted:

"... 'O my son! Embark with us and be not with the unbelievers. "

However, his son's companionship and association with evil company had
overtaken him to such an extent that his father's compassion against
annihilation made no impact upon him.


**Commentary : Verse 43**

(43) قالَ سَآوي إِلى‏ جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُني‏ مِنَ الْماءِ قالَ لا عاصِمَ
الْيَوْمَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِلاَّ مَنْ رَحِمَ وَ حالَ بَيْنَهُمَا
الْمَوْجُ فَكانَ مِنَ الْمُغْرَقينَ

43. " He said: 'I will take refuge in a mountain; it will save me from
the water. ' Said he(Noah): 'Today, there is no protector from Allah's
decree but( of whom)He has mercy. ' And the waves came between them, and
he was among the drowned. "

**Commentary :**

This obstinate and shortsighted son, thinking that he could escape
Allah's anger, shouted implying that his father should not be worried
about him. He would take to the mountain which could never be overtaken
by flood- waters, and it would shelter him. The verse says:

" He said: 'I will take refuge in a mountain; it will save me from the
water. ' ..."

Noah still did not despair. He advised his son once more, so as to lead
him onto the True Path and overcome his son's shortsightedness and
arrogance. He said to him that no power was able to save anyone from
Allah's command. The only hope of being saved remained for him who was
covered by Allah's blessing. The verse says:

"... Said he(Noah): 'Today, there is no protector from Allah's decree
but(of whom)He has mercy. ' ..."

At this time, a wave, coming between them, overwhelmed his son,
uprooting him as if he was a straw, and placed him among the drowned
ones. The verse continues saying:

"... And the waves came between them, and he was among the drowned. "

**The Educational implications of Noah's Flood**

As we notice, the main aim of the Qur'an is to teach us lessons by
recounting the didactic teachings of past history, from which one can
draw the following inferences:

1- Purging the face of the earth: It is true that Allah is
Compassionate and Kind. However, one must not forget that He is at the
same time Wise. Whenever a nation becomes corrupt and does not answer
the call of His messengers He judges it appropriate that that nation has
no right to continue to live. Ultimately, their system will be
overthrown through some natural or social revolutions.

This has not been confined to the Noah's nation, nor has it been
confined to a particular time and place. As a result of the Divine
Providence this has taken place throughout all ages and among all
nations up to our time. The first and the second World Wars might be
regarded as examples of such a purge.

2- Why Punishment was inflicted by a flood. It is true that a corrupt
nation must be exterminated, but their means of annihilation can vary.
The holy verses of the Qur'an provide evidence that punishments are
commensurate with sins of the nations punished.

The Pharaoh relied on the River Nile which was the backbone of his
power, and, interestingly, it became the source of his annihilation.

The People of Noah was an agricultural and a livestock- breeding
nation. That ungodly nation had relied upon rainfall for everything, and
ultimately that very nation was wiped out by rainfall.

If we notice that our contemporary fellow human beings are being
devastated with their most modern arms and ammunitions, we must not be
surprised, for the advanced industries which they relied upon for the
exploitation of oppressed nations, would be eventually used for their
own destruction.

3- Unreliable shelters of straw. It is usual for everyone to take
shelter to something when in need. Some take refuge in their wealth,
some find shelter in their position, some rely upon their bodily
strength, and finally, some rely upon their power of thinking. However,
as the above verses show, and as history has demonstrated for us, none
of these can resist the command of the Almighty, and they will easily
disappear just like a spider's web standing in the storms.

The ignorant and stiff- necked son of the prophet Noah committed the
same fault. He thought that the mountains could protect him from Allah's
Wrath. But, what a grave mistake! The sweep of a wave put an end to his
life.

4- The Ark of Salvation. As it has been quoted from the blessed
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) which is found in Shi'ah and Sunni books, the
Prophet's family, which are the Imams and Ahl- ul- Bayt(a.s.), as well
as the content of the school of Islam, have been designated as 'the Ark
of Salvation'. That is, when tremendous changes occur in the mental,
ideological, and social spheres of the Islamic community, the only means
of salvation is to take refuge in the School of the Ahl- ul-
Bayt(a.s.).

The tradition which talks about this 'Ark of Salvation', the tradition
of/ safinah/(ship)has been generally accepted by the consensus of the
Imamiah scholars and by more than 001 Sunni scholars as well. It has
been narrated as follows: "Abouthar, the great companion of the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) , while holding the knob of the door of the Ka'bah,
said with a loud voice: 'O you people! I heard the Prophet(p.b.u.h.)
saying with my own ears, that the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) said 'The similitude
of my Ahl- ul- Bayt(family)is like Noah's Ark; he who embarks upon it is
rescued, and he who distances himself ‏from it, will perish. '
Certainly, other great personalities at the dawn of Islam like Abou
Sa'id Khedri, Ibn Abbas, Abdullah- Ibn Zubayr, and Anas Ibn- Malik have
also quoted this tradition of the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) which has been
mentioned in the known books of the Ahl al Sunna.(1)

If we place this sequential 'Hadith"(tradition)alongside another
sequential 'Hadith' which says: "The Muslims will be divided into 37
sects, out of which only one will be saved, " it would become evident
that the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) himself considered this sect to be the one
that follows the Ahl- ul- Bayt,(a. s.)and where he says 'He who embarks
upon it will be saved, ' he means the same term/ najiyah/(saved).

\* \* \* \* (1) Refer to Tabari's Al Mu'jam al Kabir, Hakim Neyshabouri
in Al- Mustadrak, Ibn- Kathir in his Commentaries; Suyuti's Tarikh- ul-
Khulafa; Ibn Qutayba's Uyoun- ul Akhbar; Tabari's Zakha\`ir- ul 'Uqba,
Khatib ul Baghdadi in Tarikh ul Baghdad, Abou Na'im in Hilyat ul
'Auliya'; Ibn Abil Hadid in Sharh Nahj ul Balaqah, 'Alousi in Rouh ul
Ma'ani; and other detailed books which have been mentioned in Ih qaq ul
H aqq(vol. 9)from P. 270 onwards. See also Nafahat ul Azhar fi Khulasah
'Abaqat ul Anwar, Part 4 P. 370.


**Commentary : Verse 44**

(44) وَ قيلَ يا أَرْضُ ابْلَعي‏ ماءَكِ وَ يا سَماءُ أَقْلِعي‏ وَ غيضَ
الْماءُ وَ قُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ وَ اسْتَوَتْ عَلَى الْجُودِيِّ وَ قيلَ
بُعْداً لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمينَ

44. " And it was said: 'O earth! Swallow down your water, and O sky!
Withhold(your rain)! ' And the water abated, and the matter was ended,
and it(the Ark)rested on the(Mount)Judi, and it was said: 'Away with the
unjust people! '"

**Commentary :
The End of an Adventure**

Noah left the ship up to Allah to take the rudder in His own hands. The
waves had taken the ship in an undesignated direction. It has been
quoted that the ship drifted for six months, passing by various places,
including Mecca and the area surrounding the House of the Ka'ba.

Eventually, the decree ending the punishment and the return of the
earth to its original state was issued. This verse explains the details
and the conditions as well as the ensuing consequences in a concise, and
at the same time, extraordinarily beautiful and eloquent manner in a few
sentences. The earth was commanded to absorb all its water and the sky
was ordered to stop raining; the water subsisted and the work was
accomplished. The verse says:

" And it was said: 'O earth! Swallow down your water, and O sky!
Withhold(your rain)! ' And the water abated, and the matter was ended,
..."

The ship came to rest on the slopes of Mount Judi, which is a famous
mountain near Mosul and it was at this time that it was proclaimed that
off with the oppressors! The verse says:

"... and it(the Ark)rested on the(Mount)Judi, and it was said: 'Away
with the unjust people! '"

According to a number of Arab men of knowledge this verse is counted as
the most eloquent and the most fluent of the Qur'anic verses. According
to the narrations and the books of Islamic history it is said that some
unbelievers of the Quraysh, starting a campaign against the Qur'an,
decided to fabricate verses like those of the Holy Book. Their
supporters provided them with the best food and drink for forty days
including the kernel of a particular type of wheat, mutton, and old
wine, so that their minds would be free of every kind of anxiety in
order to compose the verses. However, when they arrived at the above
verse, they were so moved by it that they gazed at one another in
surprise, saying: "These are words unsurpassed and unequalled by all
means, and they do not resemble those made by human beings. " Saying
this, they abandoned their decision and dispersed in despair.


**Commentary : Verse 45**

(45) وَ نادى‏ نُوحٌ رَبَّهُ فَقالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ ابْني‏ مِنْ أَهْلي‏ وَ
إِنَّ وَعْدَكَ الْحَقُّ وَ أَنْتَ أَحْكَمُ الْحاكِمينَ

45. " And Noah called unto his Lord, and said: "O my Lord! Verily, my
son is of my family, and certainly Your promise is true and You are the
Most just of Judges. "

**Commentary :

The Tragic Story of Noah's Son:**

In the foregoing verses, we noted that Noah's son did not listen to his
father's advice, and did not stop being obstinate and stiff- necked to
the last moment.

Another part of this same story is being dealt with here. That is, when
Noah noticed his son buffeted by the waves, his fatherly emotions were
provoked and he was reminded of Allah's promise that his family would be
saved. Facing Allah's sanctuary, he cried: that his son was a member of
his family and He had promised him that He would save his family from
the storm and His promises are always true. Allah is superior to all
rulers, and He is a staunch keeper of His promise. This promise refers
to the same subject that was discussed in the fortieth verse of this
Sura. The verse says:

" And Noah called unto his Lord, and said: "O my Lord! Verily, my son
is of my family, and certainly Your promise is true and You are the Most
just of Judges. "


**Commentary : Verse 46**

(46) قالَ يا نُوحُ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَهْلِكَ إِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ
صالِحٍ فَلا تَسْئَلْنِ ما لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنِّي أَعِظُكَ أَنْ
تَكُونَ مِنَ الْجاهِلينَ

46. " He(Allah)said: 'O' Noah! Verily he is not of your family. Verily
he is(of)conduct other than righteous. So do not ask of Me that of which
you have no knowledge! I admonish you, lest you should be among the
ignorant. '"

**Commentary :**

However, the thought provoking answer was provided, recalling a stern
reality and the secondary status of the family relationship as separated
from religious school of thought. Allah tells Noah that he was not of
his kind, on the contrary, he was an evil doer; a man of misdemeanor,
whose family relationship was of no value and kinship of no avail owing
to the fact that he was cut off from Noah's school of thought, as such
Noah should not make any requests about which he had no knowledge and
therefore he should not be among the ignorant. The verse says:

"He(Allah)said: 'O' Noah! Verily he is not of your family. Verily he
is(of)conduct other than righteous.

So do not ask of Me that of which you have no knowledge! I admonish
you, lest you should be among the ignorant. '"

Imam Rid a(a.s.)has been quoted as saying that one day he asked his
friends: "How do the common folk comment on this verse, which says: '
Verily he is(of)conduct other than righteous. ' " One person from among
the audience replied: "Some believe that it means that he who is
referred to as Noah's son, that is, Kan'an was not his real son. " The
Imam(a.s.)said:

"No it is not so, he was his real son, though Allah refused him his
kinship when he committed sins and disobeyed, leading himself astray.
Those who also belong to our school but refuse to obey Allah should not
be considered as of us. "


**Commentary : Verse 47**

(47) قالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَسْئَلَكَ ما لَيْسَ لي‏ بِهِ
عِلْمٌ وَ إِلاَّ تَغْفِرْ لي‏ وَ تَرْحَمْني‏ أَكُنْ مِنَ الْخاسِرينَ

47. " He(Noah)said: 'O my Lord! Verily I seek refuge in You, lest I
should ask You(for)that of which I have no knowledge. And unless You
forgive me and have Mercy on me I should be of the losers'. "

**Commentary :**

Noah discovered that his request for Allah's sanctuary had been out of
the question, and that he should have never considered the salvation of
such a son as being covered by Allah's promise to save his family
members. Therefore, turning to Him, he said that he would do seek refuge
in Him for whatever good and evil he had no knowledge of, and so of
making wrong requests. And unless He forgive him for having made such a
request, and pardon him, he would be among the losers, indeed. The verse
says:

" He(Noah)said: 'O my Lord! Verily I seek refuge in You, lest I should
ask You(for)that of which I have no knowledge. And unless You forgive me
and have Mercy on me I should be of the losers'. "


**Commentary : Verse 48**

(48) قيلَ يا نُوحُ اهْبِطْ بِسَلامٍ مِنَّا وَ بَرَكاتٍ عَلَيْكَ وَ
عَلى‏ أُمَمٍ مِمَّنْ مَعَكَ وَ أُمَمٌ سَنُمَتِّعُهُمْ ثُمَّ يَمَسُّهُمْ
مِنَّا عَذابٌ أَليمٌ

48. " It was said: 'O Noah! Debark in peace from Us, and blessings upon
you and on the nations of those with you; and nations whom We shall
afford provision, then there shall afflict them from Us a painful
chastisement'. "

**Commentary :**

Noah disembarked from the Ark safely. In this verse allusions are made
to Noah's disembarkation, as well as to the regeneration of the earth.

Firstly, the holy Qur'an implies that Noah was addressed saying: that
he should disembark from the Ark safely with Blessings from Allah to him
and to those with him. The verse says:

" It was said: 'O Noah! Debark in peace from Us, and blessings upon you
and on the nations of those with you; ..."

Obviously, the storm had devastated all signs of life, it destroyed
cultivated lands, green pastures, and the orchards that had once
flourished, and everything had been rendered infertile and arid. At this
time, Noah and his companions were in grave narrowness as far as their
lives and nutrition were concerned. However, Allah reassured this group
of believers that the Divine blessings would not be withheld from them
and therefore, they should stop worrying about their livelihood because
an appropriate and a blissful environment awaited them.

Then it adds that there would descend from this faithful group, nations
of people on whom We Allah would bestow different kinds of Blessings
although some of them would become arrogant and negligent, and
consequently a grave punishment would be inflicted upon them. The verse
says:

"... and nations whom We shall afford provision, then there shall
afflict them from Us a painful chastisement'. "


**Commentary : Verse 49**

(49) تِلْكَ مِنْ أَنْباءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحيها إِلَيْكَ ما كُنْتَ
تَعْلَمُها أَنْتَ وَ لا قَوْمُكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ هذا فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ
الْعاقِبَةَ لِلْمُتَّقينَ

49. "(O Prophet!)these are of the tidings of the Unseen which We reveal
unto you. Before this, neither you nor your people knew them. Therefore,
be you patient, verily the end is for the pious ones. "

**Commentary :**

This verse, by which ends the story of Noah in this Sura, sums up what
had been covered previously. It implies that all this comes from the
world beyond your powers of perception that Allah has revealed to the
Prophet which neither he nor his people knew of before. The verse
says:

"(O Prophet!)these are of the tidings of the Unseen which We reveal
unto you. Before this, neither you nor your people knew them. ..."

The gist of what was revealed to the Prophet(p.b.u.h.) about Noah was
that amidst all those difficulties he had encountered in the course of
his calling, still he persevered. The Prophet too, should persevere
because the final victory is reserved for those who are pious. The verse
says:

"... Therefore, be you patient, verily the end is for the pious ones.
"

One can infer from this verse that contrary to what some people think,
the prophets were aware of the invisible world with condition that their
knowledge had its source in the Divine will, and was confined to the
extent that Allah wanted.

We shall now leave the story of Noah at this point, despite all the
wonders and didactic lessons that can be drawn from it, and take up
another great prophet, that is Hud, in whose name this Sura has been
entitled.

**The feature of Noah in the Qur'an:**

The story of Noah(a.s.)is mentioned in six of the suras of the Qur'an:
Al- A'raf, Hud, Mu'minoun, Shu'ara, Qamar, and Nouh but, it is most
extensively discussed in the current Sura, Hud. The appointment of Noah
to prophecy was made after Adam(a.s.)and during the time of the spread
of unbelief, idol worship and oppression, his agenda consisted of
enforcing and spreading monotheism and the daily prayers, encouraging
people to decent conduct, dissuading them from committing the forbidden,
and preaching justice, honesty and remaining faithful to one's own
words.

The duration of Noah's prophecy extended for 059 years. When, at the
end of his period, Allah told him that no one would accept his faith, he
was discouraged and cursed the people. As a result, his wife and son,
who did not belong to his school of thought, were drowned along with the
other unbelievers.

He was the first prophet with a universal mission, a Book and a
shari'ah(a specific religious law). The story of Noah(a.s.)has also been
mentioned in the Torah, as well in the Books of the Chaldeans, the
Hindus, the Chinese, the Greeks and the Zoroastrians. They have all
regarded the Flood of Noah as a sign of Allah's anger because of
people's oppression and corruption.

Noah's mission was universal. As the planet earth cannot remain without
a savior, the drowning of all the people was due to Noah's(a.s.)curse
when he said: " My Lord! Leave not upon the earth any dweller from among
the unbelievers. "(1)

(1)- Sura Nouh, No. 71, verse 26

The holy Qur'an testifies to the fact that the flood did occur. On the
other hand, if that great man's mission had been regional and the area
where the flood occurred was also limited to that region, there would
have been no need for putting a pair of each animal onto the Ark in
order to preserve generations of the animal kingdom on the earth.

The Story of Noah(a.s.): Noah's story is that of a life spanning a one
thousand year history embodying the story of a world- devastating flood,
the account of the extermination of an entire generation of man and the
beginning of a new chapter in human history on this earth. It reflects
the victory of truth against 'untruth' and Allah's acceptance of the
prophets' curses.

It is an example of how the relationship between a father and son can
be broken for ideological reasons and it is a sign of the submission of
existence in its entirety with respect to Allah's command. It shows the
importance of the conservation and preservation of animal life and also
indicates the extent to which man may be so despicable that he may not
be moved by the admonitions of the prophets, on the contrary, he can
disrespect their followers as villains, and think he could escape
Allah's wrath by taking refuge in physical structures like mountains.


