Prologue
========

A figure more legendary than that of the Mahdi, the Awaited Saviour, has
not been seen in the history of mankind. The threads of the world events
have woven many a fine design in human life but the pattern of the Mahdi
stands high above every other pattern. He has been the vision of the
visionaries in history. He has been the dream of all the dreamers of the
world. For the ultimate salvation of mankind he is the Pole Star of hope
on which the gaze of humanity is fixed.

The Qur'anic prophecy of the inevitable victory of Islam will be
realized following the advent of the Mahdi who will fight the wrong,
remedy the evils and establish a world order based on the Islamic
teachings of justice and virtue. Thereafter there will be only one
religion and one government in the world.

It may be mentioned here that the movement for the establishment of a
world government is already afoot and this point is engaging the
attention of many prominent intellectuals. The setting up of the United
Nations is a step in this very direction. In spite of the growing
consciousness of its desirability, the unification of the world is still
a distant dream.

The vested interests and the mutual rivalries of the regimes in the
various countries and the mutual animosities of the divergent blocs
constitute a big hurdle in the way of its materialization. Hence, its
consummation cannot be expected to come off automatically. It will need
the active struggle of a world reformer in the person of Mahdi. Anyhow,
a start has been made and the things are gradually turning out exactly
as predicted by Islam fourteen centuries ago.

The belief in an expected reformer and a saviour of humanity is not
peculiar to the Shi'ah School of Islam. It is common not only to all the
Muslim sects, but is also shared by all the great religions such as
Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism and Zoroastrianism.

In this quest for the truth about the Mahdi there is no distinction of
any caste, creed, or country. The quest is universal, exactly in the
same way as the Mahdi himself is universal. He stands resplendent high
above the narrow walls in which humanity is cut up and divided. He
belongs to everybody. For all that and much more, what exactly is the
Mahdi? Surely that is the big question which the thinking people all
over the world would like to ask.

It is only Islam that has given this concrete shape to an abstract idea.
The Mahdi is not to be born in the distant future. He is already living
amongst us and shares our joys and sorrows:

His appearance will mean not only the materialization of an Islamic
aspiration, but will also be the realization of a hope cherished by the
entire humanity.

Prof. Henry Corbin of Sorbonne University, says:  
 "To my mind the Shi'ite is the only sect which has preserved and
perpetuated the link of Divine guidance between man and God through its
belief in the Imamate. According to the Jews the Prophethood, a real
link between man and God, came to an end with Moses. They do not believe
in the Prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad. The Christians too, do not go
beyond Jesus. The Sunnite sect has also stopped at the Prophet Muhammad
and believes that the link between man and God has been severed with the
end of the Prophethood".

It is only the Twelver Shi'ah who believe that the link still exists
through the Mahdi and will continue to exist forever.

It is hardly necessary to give an explanation as to why the Mahdi
disappeared immediately after assuming the Imamate. Let it suffice to
say that Allah in His Divine Wisdom ordained so.

In the meantime it is the duty of all the Muslims, especially the
Shi'ah, to strive steadfastly for the creation of the proper atmosphere
and the right climate for the establishment of a world order based on
justice, virtue and piety. They should not only mould their individual
lives according to the teachings and high ideals of Islam, but they
should also bend their efforts to set up the Islamic order on the
collective and communal level. They should devote themselves to the
service of the faith and be prepared to receive the Awaited Saviour.
That is what was meant by the Imams when they exhorted the Muslims to
keep on waiting for the Mahdi.

An authentic and universally accepted *Hadith* (tradition) reports the
holy Prophet of Islam (Peace and benediction be upon him and his
infallible progeny) to have said explicitly on several occasions that he
would be followed by twelve *Amirs,*[^1] (according to another version,
twelve caliphs) the first of them being Ali and the last Mahdi. [^2]

According to another reliable tradition he pinpointed the personality to
Imam Mahdi when he said that the Mahdi would be a descendant of Imam
Husayn in his ninth generation.[^3]

In certain other traditions the holy Prophet referred, in clear terms,
to the last Imam's mission and narrated the events connected with his
occultation and reappearance.

In this connection it is interesting to note, as pointed out by the
famous historian Tabari, that the reports about the occultation of the
Mahdi were recorded in their books by the Shi'ah traditionalists during
the lifetime of Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq i.e. long before Imam Mahdi
was born. This fact alone is enough to vouch for their genuineness.

The Sunnite scholars have also mentioned and recorded hundreds of
traditions about the Mahdi in more than seventy books by their own
valued and dependable authorities of which we shall mention a few
examples.

• *Musnad -* Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 A.H.)

• *Sahih Bukhari -* Muhammad b. Ism'ail Bukhari (d. 256 A.H.)

• *Sahih Muslim* -Muslim b. Hajjaj Nishapuri (d.261 A.H.)

• *Sunan Abi Dawud -* Sulayman b. Ash'ath Sijistani (d. 275 A.H.)

• *Sahih Tirmizi* -Muhammad b. Isa Tirmizi (d. 279A.H.)

The authors of the above books, each one of them, died either before or
shortly after Mahdi's birth.[^4]

The other facts which can be gleaned from the prophecies of the holy
Prophet about the Mahdi are briefly stated below:

a. He will bear the same nomenclature as the holy Prophet.

b. He will not be bearing allegiance to any tyrant.

c. He will fill the earth with justice and fair play after its having
been filled with injustice and tyranny.

d. At the time of his advent he will be found leaning against the wall
of the Ka'bah. He will call together his 313 supporters who will respond
to his call and gather around him. Then he will lead the congregational
prayers.

e. He will establish Islamic law in the whole world.

f. On his second advent Jesus will offer prayers behind him.

According to the Islamic traditions Jesus will descend from the heaven
and espouse the cause of the Mahdi. The Christians and the Jews will see
him and recognize his true status. The Christians will abandon their
faith in his godhead. The holy Qur'an says:

***"There shall be none among the People of the Scripture, but will
believe in him (Jesus) before his death; and on the Day of Resurrection
be will be a witness against them"*** **(Surah al-Nisa, 4:159)**

Evidently at that time Jesus will not be following the Christian law
which has already been repealed. He will be following the Mahdi, the
master of the time, and that is why he will be offering prayers behind
him.

According to a tradition recorded in the celebrated books of the
tradition, including the Sahih Bukhari and the Sahih Muslim, the Prophet
is reported to have said:  
 "How about you, when Mary's son will descend into your midst, while
your Imam will be from among you?".

Here the word Imam refers to Imam Mahdi. This tradition clearly shows
that Jesus at the time of his second advent, will be a follower of the
Mahdi.

According to these and many other prophecies handed down by the holy
Prophet and the great Imams to the succeeding generations, Imam Mahdi
was born in the city of Samarrah (Iraq) in the middle of the month of
Sha'ban in *255* A.H. His mother's name was Narjis.

He succeeded to the Imamate at the early age of five on the death of his
father, Imam Hasan al-Askari, the eleventh Imam.

Soon afterwards he went into occultation from the scene of life but
retained contact with his followers through his vicegerents. This period
which spreads over 70 years is known as *al-Ghaybat al-Sughra,* the
period of minor occultation.

During this period the people could refer their problems to him and
receive his replies through his vicegerents. The minor occultation was
followed by *al-Ghaybat al-Kubra,* the major occultation which still
continues. During this period direct contact with him had been
severed.  
 Anyhow, those who are aware of the historical conditions prevailing at
the time of his occultation know well that the Abbasid rulers regarded
the Mahdi as the biggest potential threat to themselves and their
dynasty and were determined to remove him from their way. at any cost.
Hence, to foil an attempt on his life, it was advisable for him to go
into occultation. Several sayings of the Imams expressly refer to this
situation.

\*\*\*

The Mahdi is alive. He visits different places and takes an intelligent
interest in world events. He often attends the assemblies of the
faithful but does not disclose his true identity.

He will reappear on the appointed day, and then he will fight against
the forces of evil, lead a world revolution and set up a new world order
based on justice, righteousness and virtue as you will read in detail in
this book.

The holy Qur'an has clearly promised that a day is to come when truth
will prevail and the righteous will come to power. We quote here a few
verses:

***"Indeed We have written in the Psalms after the Torah bad been given:
The earth will be inherited by Our righteous servants"*** **(Surah
al-Anbiyah, 21:105)**

***'Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good deeds that
He will surely make them successors on the earth as He made those who
were before them and that He will surely establish their religion which
He has chosen for them".*** **(Surah al-Noor, 24: 55)**

***"They wish to put out the light of Allah with their breaths
(propagation) but Allah will perfect His light, howsoever much the
disbelievers may be averse. It is He who has sent His messenger with the
guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over every other
religion, howsoever much the disbelievers may be averse"*** **(Surah
al-Tauba, 9:32 33)**

It is clear from these verses that ultimately the righteous will take
the world administration in their hands and Islam will be victorious
over all the religions.

**Shaykh Yusufali Nafsi**

\*\*\*

This book contains two articles by two great scholars known for their
learning, erudition and convincing style. The first valuable article by
Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr refutes all the doubts and
objections raised by the sceptics in connection with the Mahdi's
existence, his role, his early Imamate and his occultation. The second
article by Ayatullah Shaykh Murtaza Mutahhary deals with the
philosophical aspects of the Mahdi's mission and removes a grave
misconception about the circumstances in which he will reappear.

It is hoped that the scholarly treatment of the subject will augment the
faith of the readers and at the same time fully satisfy their
intellectual curiosity.

**Publishers**

 

[^1]: Sahih Bukhari, p.175, Egypt; Sahih Tirmizy, vol.2, p.45, Dehli.

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 2, p. 191, Egypt; Sahih Abi Daud, vol. 2, p.
207 Egypt; Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.5, p. 106 Egypt; Mustadrak
al-Hakim, vol.2, p.618 Hyderabad; Taysir al-Wusul 'ala jame' al-Usul,
vol.2, p.34 Egypt. Tarikh al-Baghdad, vol.14, p.353; Yanabi'
al-Mawaddah, p. 445 Istanbul; Muntakhab Kanz al-'Ummal, vol.5; p. 312.

[^3]: Kifayat al-Athar, Allamah Abu Abdillah b. Muhammad Yusuf al-Kanji
al-Shafi'I; Bihar al-Anwar, Allamah Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi; Al-Amali,
Abu Abdillah Muhammad b. Nu'man alias Shaykh al-Mufid; Yanabi
al-Mawaddah, Shaykh Sulayman b. Ibrahim al-Qandozi.

[^4]: Masabih al-Sunnah, al-Baghwi (d. 516 A.H.); Jame' al-Usul, Ibn
Athir (d. 606 AH.); al-Futuhat al-Makkiyyah, Muhyuddin ibn al-Arabi (d.
638 A.H.); Tazkirah al-Khawas, Sibt ibn al-Jawzi (d. 654 A.H.); Fara'id
al-Simtayn, al-Hamawi (d. 716 AH.); al-Sawa'iq, Ibn Hajar Haythami
al-'Asqalani (d. 973 A.H.); Yanabi al-Mawaddah, Sulayman al-Qandozi (d.
1293 A.H.) Some of the Sunnite scholars have written books especially
about the Imam of the Age. (i) Al-Bayan fi Akhbar al-Sahib al-Zaman,
AIlamah Abu Abdillah b. Muhammad Yusuf al-Kanji al-Shafi'i. (ii) Iqd
al-Durar fi Akhbar al-Imam al-Muntazar, Shaykh Jamaluddin Yusuf
al-Damishqi. (iii) Mahdi Ale Rasul, Ah ibn Sultan Muhammad al-Harawi
al-Hanafi. (iv) Kitab al-Mahdi, Abu Daud. (v) Alamat al-Mahdi,
Jalaluddin Suyuti. (vi) Manaqib al-Mahdi, Hafiz Abu Na'im al-Isfahani.
(vii) Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi 'alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntazar, Ibn Hajar
Haythami. (viii) Al-Burhan fi 'alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman, Mulla Ali
al-Muttaqi. (ix) Arba'in Hadith fi'l-Mahdi, Abul Ala' al-Hamadani.


