Who and What of The Mahdi
=========================

The Mahdi is not only an embodiment of the Islamic belief but he is also
the symbol of an aspiration cherished by mankind irrespective of its
divergent religious doctrines. He is also the crystallization of an
instructive inspiration through which all people, regardless of their
religious affiliations, have learned to await a day when a heavenly
mission, with all its implications, will achieve their final goal and
the tiring march of humanity across history will culminate
satisfactorily in peace and tranquillity.

This consciousness of the expected future has not been confined to those
who believe in the supernatural phenomena but has also been reflected in
the ideologies and cults which totally deny the existence of what is
imperceptible. For example, dialectical materialism which interprets
history on the basis of contradictions believes that a day will come
when all contradictions will disappear and complete peace and
tranquillity will prevail. Thus we find that this consciousness
experienced throughout history is one of the widest and the commonest
psychological experience of humanity.

The religion, when it endorses this common consciousness and stresses
that in the long run this world will be filled with justice and equity
after having been filled with injustice and oppression, gives it a
factual value and converts it into a definite belief in the future
course of humanity. This belief is not merely a source of consolation,
but it is also a source of virtue and strength. It is a source of virtue
because the belief in the Mahdi means the total elimination of injustice
and oppression prevailing in the world. It is a source of inexhaustible
strength because it provides hope which enables man to resist
frustration, howsoever, hopeless and dismal the circumstances may be.

The belief in the appointed day proves that it is possible for the
forces of justice to face the world filled with injustice and
oppression, to prevail upon the forces of injustice and to reconstruct
the world order. After all prevalence of injustice, howsoever dominant
and extensive it may become, is an abnormal state and must in the long
run be eliminated. The prospect of its elimination after reaching its
climax, infuses a great hope in every persecuted individual and every
oppressed nation that it is still possible to change the state of
affairs.

Although the concept of the Mahdi is more wide spread than the Muslim
community, yet its detailed features, as determined by Islam, meet more
fully all the aspirations attached to it since the dawn of history. They
are in greater conformity with the feelings and sentiments of the
oppressed and the persecuted of all times. It is Islam which has given a
concrete shape to an abstract idea. It is no longer necessary to look
forward to an unknown saviour who may come into the world at a distant
future.

The saviour is already here and we simply have to look for the day when
the circumstances are ripe for him to appear and begin his great
mission. The Mahdi is no longer an idea. He is no longer a prophecy. We
need not wait for his birth. He already exists actually and we only wait
for the inauguration of his role. He is a specific entity living among
us in his real human form and shares our hopes and disappointments and
our joys and griefs. He witnesses all the acts of oppression and
persecution which are perpetrated on the face of the earth and, somehow
or another, he himself is affected by them. He is anxiously awaiting the
moment when he will be able to extend his helping hand to everyone whom
any wrong has been done and be able to eradicate injustice and
oppression completely.

Although this Awaited Saviour is living among us, waiting for the
appointed moment for his advent, yet he is ordained not to proclaim
himself nor to disclose his identity.  
 It is evident that the concept of the Mahdi, with its Islamic features,
shortens the gap between the oppressed and the expected saviour. It
spans the bridge between them, howsoever long the period of waiting may
be.

When we are asked to believe that the Mahdi is a particular person
already living a normal life, we are also expected to believe that the
idea of absolute eradication of every kind of injustice and oppression
by the Mahdi has already been embodied in the person of the Awaited
Saviour who will reappear while he will be, as the tradition says,
'owing no allegiance to any tyrant'. The belief in him means the belief
in eradication of all evils in a concrete form.

The tradition urges the believers in the Mahdi to keep on waiting for
him and to continue looking forward for solace. The idea is to establish
a close spiritual and intuitive link between the believers, on the one
hand, and the Mahdi and all that he stands for, on the other. It is not
possible to establish such a link without believing that the Mahdi has
already been born and is a living and a contemporary personality.

Thus we find that the concept of the living Mahdi has given a new
impetus to the idea of an expected saviour. It has made it a source of
effective strength and consolation to every person suffering from
deprivation and injustice, a person who rejects all forms of tyranny
because he feels that his Leader, being a contemporary and a living
personality and not a future idea, shares his sufferings and feels his
misery.

Yet this concept, being beyond the imagination and comprehension of a
number of people, has led them to adopt a negative attitude towards the
very idea of the Mahdi.


