Replies To The Objections
=========================

(a) Longevity
-------------

Is it possible for any human being to continue to live for many
centuries, as is presumed in the case of this Awaited Saviour who has
already lived for more than 1145 years? This long life is about 14 times
the life of an ordinary man who passes through all stages of life from
infancy to old age.

The impossibility of such a long life is the objection. Let us have a
close look at the objection. The word impossibility here (like any other
truth) is relative. It has meaning only in relation to some person,
place and time.

What is impossible for one person need not be so for the others. Then
what is impossible in one place may be quite possible in another place.
Again what is not possible at one time may be quite possible at another.
There is no dearth of illustrations to prove how impossibility is a
relative term.

In other words, the possibility of a thing may be of three categories
viz. factual possibility, scientific possibility and logical
possibility. To journey across the ocean, to reach the bottom of the sea
and to travel to the moon are practical possibilities. There are people
who have accomplished these tasks in one way or another.

By a scientific possibility we mean that there may be certain things
which may not be practicable in the present circumstances but there
exists no scientific reason to justify the denial of their
practicability in favourable circumstances and the scientific trends
indicate that they will be feasible sooner or later. For example, there
exists no scientific reason to deny the possibility of man's travelling
to Venus. Although, it has not been possible for anyone to go to that
planet so far, yet we know that there is only a difference of degree
between man's landing on the moon and his landing on Venus.

It is only a question of surmounting additional difficulties because of
the greater distance. Hence, it is scientifically possible to go to
Venus, though practically it is still impossible. In contrast, it is
scientifically impossible to go to the sun in the sense that science
does not hope that it will ever be possible to manufacture a protective
shield against the heat of the sun which is virtually a huge furnace
blazing at the highest imaginable degree of temperature.

By a logical possibility we mean that, on the basis of self-evident
laws, reason does not regard a thing impossible. For example, it is
logically impossible to divide three oranges into two equal parts
without cutting anyone of them. It is self-evident that, three being an
odd number, it is not divisible into two whole numbers.

Only an even number can be so divided and the same number cannot be both
odd and even simultaneously, because that will mean self-contradiction
which is impossible. But a man's entering into fire without being hurt
or going to the sun without being affected by its heat is not logically
impossible, for it is not self-contradictory to suppose that heat does
not pass. from a body having a higher temperature to a body having a
lower temperature. Only experience has proved that if two bodies are
mixed or put together, heat passes from a body having higher temperature
to a body having lower temperature, till the temperature of both the
bodies is at par.

Thus, we know that the scope of the logical possibility is wider than
that of the scientific possibility and the scope of the scientific
possibility is wider than that of the practical possibility.

There is no doubt that a person's remaining alive for thousands of years
is not logically impossible, for there is nothing irrational or
self-contradictory about it. Life itself does not imply the sense of
quick death.

Admittedly, such a long life is not as practical as descending to the
bottom of the sea or ascending to the moon. Notwithstanding the present
scientific facilities it has not so far been possible to prolong human
life to hundreds of years. Even those who have all the modern facilities
at their disposal and are the keenest to continue to live cannot have
more than the normal span of life.

As for the scientific possibility there exists nothing to justify its
denial from a theoretical point of view. In fact this question is
related to the physiological explanation of senility. The question is,
whether there exists a natural law according to which human tissues and
cells, after attaining the stage of full development, automatically
begin to stiffen and degenerate, till they cease functioning at a
particular moment or the senile degeneration is caused by some external
factors, such as microbes and poisons infiltrating into the body through
polluted food, unhealthy jobs or some other causes.

It is a question with which science is grappling at present and is
earnestly trying to find an answer to it. For the present there is more
than one scientific explanation of senility. Anyhow, if we accept the
view that senile degeneration is caused by external influences, it means
that if the tissues of the human body are secluded from these particular
influences it is theoretically possible to prolong life, to delay
senility and even to control it eventually.

The other view tends to suppose that living cells and tissues are
governed by a natural law according to which they carry within
themselves the seeds of their complete exhaustion. They, in their
natural course, pass through the stages of old age and senility and
eventually cease to function.

Even if we accept this view it does not mean that this natural law is
not flexible. In fact it is supposed to be a flexible law, for we see in
our ordinary life, and it has been confirmed by scientific laboratory
observations also, that senility is an untimely physiological phenomenon
in the sense that sometimes it appears early and sometimes very late.

It is a common experience which has also been confirmed by the
observations of the physicians, that many a man of advanced age still
possess a supple body and do not suffer from any old age ailments. It is
because of the flexibility of this natural law that the scientists have
already succeeded in prolonging the life of certain animals, hundreds of
times beyond their normal span of life by artificially creating
conditions conducive to the delay of senility.[^1]

They have falsified the law of natural senility by acquiring brilliant
successes and have made it clear scientifically that to postpone
senility or to provide opportunities and specified factors therefore is
possible and if present day science is not able to enforce this
programme in the case of phenomena like human beings it is on account of
the fact that more difficulties are involved in the matter with regard
to man as compared with other animals.

In a nutshell, it is logically and scientifically possible to prolong
life, though it is still practically impossible to do so. Anyhow,
science is endeavouring to make it practical also.

If we consider the question of the Mahdi's age in this light there
appears to be nothing strange or surprising about it, for it has been
proved that such a long life is logically and scientifically possible
and the scientists are working to turn its possibility into a reality.
All that appears to be surprising is that the Mahdi has attained such a
long life before the scientists have been able to turn its theoretical
possibility into a practical one. This phenomenon can be compared to the
discovery of a cure for cancer or brain haemorrhage before science can
make such a discovery.

If the question is how Islam, which planned the age of the Awaited
Saviour, could anticipate science in this field the answer is simple.
This is not the only field wherein Islam has anticipated science. The
Islamic *Shari'ah* as a whole anticipated the scientific movement and
the natural development of human thinking by several centuries. Islam
had already presented, for practical application, the laws which science
has taken hundreds of years to discover.

It has propounded doctrines, the wisdom of which has been corroborated
by science only recently. It disclosed such secrets of the universe
which none could think of at that time and the truth of which was later
confirmed by science. If we believe in this, then it is not too much for
Allah, the Exalted, to anticipate science in planning the age of the
Mahdi. We have talked of only those aspects of anticipation which we can
see directly. We can add other instances about which Qur'an has told us.

Here we have talked of only those aspects of anticipation by Islam
vis-Ã -vis science which we can observe directly. It is, however,
possible for us to add some other instances of anticipation about
matters which it has not been possible for science to comprehend so far.
For example, Qur'an tells us that the holy Prophet was carried one night
from Masjid al-Haram (at Mecca) to Masjid al-Aqsa (at Jerusalem).

If we try to perceive the quality of this journey within the framework
of natural laws it points to the application of laws which govern nature
in this sense that science has not yet been able to understand them and
it will take it hundreds of years more to specify their quality. The
same Divine Knowledge, which granted the holy Prophet this high speed
long before science could consider it to be possible, also granted long
life to his last Divinely appointed successor, long before it could be
achieved by science.

(b) Suspension of laws
----------------------

It is true, as far as common experience and the experiments carried out
so far by the scientists are concerned, this long life granted by Allah
to the Awaited Saviour appears to be very unusual. But his role of
revolutionizing the world order and rebuilding the entire system on the
basis of justice and truth is also so extraordinary that neither are the
people familiar with it nor has it ever been experienced in history. So
it should not be surprising if at the preparatory stage also his role is
preceded by some unusual and extraordinary events, like his long life.

Howsoever, unfamiliar these events may be, they are not more unusual
than the great role to be performed by the Mahdi on the appointed day.
If we can relish that role, having no precedent throughout history,
there is no reason why we should not relish his long life unprecedented
in our ordinary life.

We wonder if it is a mere chance that each of the only two persons who
undertook to purify the human civilization of all its impurities and to
reconstruct the world should have had a very long life span, several
times that of a usual one. One of them played his role in the past. He
was Noah, about whom the holy Qur'an has expressly said that he lived
among his people for 950 years. He reconstructed the world after the
Deluge.

The other is to play his role in the future. He is the Mahdi who has
already lived among his people for more than a thousand years and is
destined to play his role on the appointed day and build the world anew.

How is it then that we accept the longevity of Noah who lived at least
for about a thousand years and deny that of the Mahdi.

We have learnt that a long life is scientifically possible but let us
suppose that it is not so and the law of senility is inexorable and
cannot be defied either today or in future. Then what does this mean? It
means only this that to live for centuries, as is the case with Noah and
the Mahdi, is contrary to the natural laws established by science
through modern methods of experimentation and investigation.

In this case a long life may be accepted as a miracle which suspends a
natural law in particular circumstances to preserve the life of a
particular person entrusted with a celestial mission. This miracle is
not unique in its kind, nor is it alien to the Muslim belief derived
from the text of the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

The law of senility is not any the more relentless than the law of the
exchange of heat, according to which heat passes from a body having a
higher temperature to a body having a lower temperature. This law was
suspended to protect Abraham when he was thrown into the burning fire,
for this was the only way to preserve his life. The holy Qur'an says:

***"We said: O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham".*** **(Surah
al-Anbiaâ, 21:69).**

Accordingly, he came out of the fire unscathed.

In many other cases also natural laws were suspended to protect the
prophets and other Divinely appointed people.

The sea was parted for Moses. It appeared to the Romans that they had
captured Jesus whereas they had not. Muhammad got out of his house while
it was surrounded by a mob of the tribe of Quraish, waiting for an
opportunity to assassinate him. Allah concealed him, so that the
Quraishites could not see him when he walked out through their midst. In
all these cases natural laws were suspended for the protection of the
people whose lives the Divine Wisdom wanted to preserve. The law of
senility too, can be bracketed with these cases of suspension.

From the above discussion we can arrive at a general conclusion and say:
Whenever it is necessary to preserve the life of one of the chosen
servants of Allah to enable him to accomplish his mission, the Divine
Grace intervenes to protect him and one of the natural laws is
suspended. On the contrary if the period of his appointment comes to an
end and the task entrusted to him by the Almighty is accomplished he
meets death in accordance with the natural laws related to life or is
martyred.

In this connection we are usually confronted with the following
questions.
How can a natural law be suspended and the compulsory relationship
existing between the various phenomena be severed?

Will such a suspension not be in contradiction with science which has
discovered that law determines the compulsory relationship on the basis
of experimentation and investigations?

Science itself has provided an answer to this question. It has already
given up the idea of compulsion in respect of natural laws. It only says
that these laws are discovered on the basis of systematic observation
and experiment. When it is observed that one phenomenon invariably
follows another, this invariability is treated as a natural law.

But science does not claim that there exists a binding and compulsory
relationship between any two phenomena, because compulsion is a factor
which cannot be proved by experiment and scientific methods of
investigation. Modern science confirms that a natural law as defined by
it, speaks only of an invariable association between two phenomena and
is not concerned with any compulsory relationship between them.[^2]

Hence, if a miracle takes place and the natural relationship between two
phenomena breaks down it does not amount to the breaking down of a
compulsory relationship.

In fact, a miracle in its religious sense has become more comprehensive
in the light of modern scientific theory than it was when the classical
view of casual nexus prevailed. According to the old theory it was
presumed that the phenomena invariably associated with each other must
have an inevitable relationship between them and this inevitability
meant that their separation from each other was inconceivable. According
to modern scientific thinking, however, this relationship has been
transformed into a law of association or invariable succession.

Thus, a miracle need not come into clash with inevitability any longer.
It is only on exceptional state of the invariability of association and
succession.

We agree with the scientific view that modern scientific methods cannot
prove the existence of an inevitable relationship between any two
phenomena. Anyhow, we are of the view that there must still be some
explanation of the invariability of association and succession. As it
can be explained on the basis of the theory of intrinsic inevitability,
it can also be explained if we assume that it is the Wisdom of the
Organizer of the universe which requires a particular phenomenon to be
invariably related to some other phenomenon and that in certain cases
the same wisdom may require that there should be an exception. Such
exceptional cases are called miracles.

Now let us take up the question as to why Allah is so keen to prolong
the Mahdi's life that, even natural laws are suspended for his sake. Is
it not advisable to leave the leadership of the appointed day to a
person to be born in the future and brought up according to the needs of
that time? In other words, what is the justification for this long
occultation?

Most of the people who ask this question do not want an answer simply
based on belief. It is not enough to say that we believe it to be so.
What the interrogators really want is a social explanation of the
position in the light of the tangible requirements of the great change
expected to be brought about by the Mahdi.

Hence, we leave aside for the time being the qualifications we believe
the infallible Imams to have possessed and take up instead the following
question:
Is it likely, in the light of the past experience, that such a long
life of the leader-designate will contribute to his success and will
enable him to play his role better?

Our reply to this question is in the affirmative. Some of the reasons
are given below:
The proposed great revolutionary change requires that its leader should
possess a unique mental calibre. He should be conscious of his own
superiority and the insignificance of the knotty system he has to
overthrow. The more conscious he is of the insignificance of the corrupt
society he has to fight against, the more prepared he will be
psychologically to wage a war till victory is won.

It is evident that the size of his mental calibre should be
proportionate to the size of the proposed change and the size of the
social system required to be eliminated. The more extensive and
deep-seated this system is, the greater should be the psychological push
required.

The mission being to revolutionize the world, full of injustice and
oppression, and to bring about a radical change in all its cultural
values and diverse systems, it is but natural that it should be
entrusted to a person whose mental calibre is higher than that of anyone
in the whole of the existing world and who may not have been born and
brought up under the influence of the society required to be demolished
and replaced by another culture of justice and righteousness. One
brought up under the shadow of a deep-seated and world-dominating
culture is naturally impressed and overawed by it, that being the only
culture which he has seen and by which he has been influenced from a
tender age.

But the case should be different with a person who has a long historical
background, who has witnessed several great cultures successively grow
and decline, who has seen the big historical changes with his own eyes
and has not read about them in books, who has been a contemporary of all
the stages of the development of that culture which happens to be the
last chapter of the human history before the appointed day and who has
seen all its ups and downs. Such a person, who himself has lived through
all these stages very carefully and attentively, is competent to look at
the culture he has to grapple with in its historical perspective and is
not daunted by its magnitude. He does not regard it as an unalterable
destiny. His attitude to it will not be like that of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1712-1778) to the French monarchy.

It is reported that Rousseau, in spite of being a great champion of
political revolution from an intellectual and a philosophical point of
view, shuddered at the very thought of there being a France without a
king, the reason being that he was born and brought up and had always
lived under the shadow of monarchy. But the man having a long historical
background and being fully aware of the historical factors knows
perfectly well how and when the prevailing culture and the prevailing
system came into being and developed. He knows that the historical age
of the cultures and systems, howsoever long, is very limited.
Have you read the Surah al-Kahf (Chapter 18 of the holy Qur'an) and
have you gone through the story of the youths who believed in Allah and
were virtuous, but had to face an idolatrous system which was dominant
at that time and which ruthlessly crushed every idea of Monotheism? They
felt greatly distressed and lost all hope. In utter despair they took
refuge in a cave, for they were at their wits' end and did not know what
to do. They prayed to Allah to resolve their difficulty.

They thought that the then existing unjust system would continue to
prevail for ever and would liquidate all those whose hearts throbbed for
the truth. Do you know what Allah did? He sent them to sleep in the cave
for 309 years. Then He awakened them and sent them back to the scene of
life. By then the unjust regime, the power and tyranny which had dazzled
them, had completely collapsed and become a part of past history.

This arrangement was made to enable those young men to see themselves
the downfall of falsehood, the power and grandeur which had overawed
them. The people of the cave achieved moral uplift and sublimation
through this unique experience which extended their lives for three
hundred years. The same privilege will be enjoyed by the Awaited Saviour
through his long life which will enable him to see the giant dwindling
into a dwarf, a lofty tree shrinking to become a mere seed leaf and a
tornado turning into a mere whiff of the wind.

Furthermore, the experience gained through the direct and close study of
so many successive cultures will widen the mental horizon of the person
designated to lead the revolution and will prepare him better for the
accomplishment of his mission. He will have benefited by the experience
of others, knowing their strong and weak points, and will be in a better
position to assess social developments correctly in their true
historical context.

As the revolution to be brought about by the Awaited Saviour is to be
ideological and based on the message of Islam, the very nature of his
mission requires him to be close to the early Islamic sources and to
have a personality built independently of and detached from the
influences of the culture he is destined to fight. A person born and
brought up under the shadow of a particular culture cannot in all
probability, escape its effects totally, even if he leads a campaign
against it. To ensure that the leader-designate is not himself
influenced by the culture he is expected to change, his personality must
be built fully at a cultural stage closer in its general spirit to the
system he wants to establish.

(c) His training for the mission
--------------------------------

Now we come to the third question as to how the preparation of the
Awaited Saviour for his mission was completed, as he was only about five
years old when his father, Imam Hasan al-Askari died. This age is the
time of early childhood and the child is not old enough for the
development of the personality of a leader. Then how did his personality
develop?

The answer is that several of his forefathers also assumed the Imamate
at an early age. Imam Muhammad ibn Ah al-Jawad assumed it when he was
only eight years old and Imam Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi when he was only
nine.

It should be observed that the phenomenon of the early Imamate reached
its zenith in the case of the Imam Mahdi. We call it a phenomenon,
because it assumed a tangible and practical form as in the case of Imam
Mahdi's forefathers. It was felt and experienced by the Muslims coming
into contact with the Imam concerned. Experience of the people being the
best proof of a phenomenon, we cannot be asked to give a more tangible
or a more convincing proof of it. The following points will elucidate
what we mean:

(i) The Imamate of an Imam belonging to the Holy House was not a centre
of hereditary power and influence, nor did it have the backing of any
ruling regime, as was the case with the Imamate of the Fatimid caliphs
and the caliphate of the Abbasid caliphs. The extensive popular support
and allegiance which the Imams enjoyed was due only to their spiritual
influence and the conviction of their followers that they alone deserved
the leadership of Islam on spiritual and intellectual grounds.

(ii) The popular bases supporting the Imamate had existed since the
early days of the Islamic era. They expanded further during the time of
the Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq. The school set up by them assumed the
form of an extensive intellectual movement which included among its
ranks hundreds of legists, scholastic theologians, exegetes and others
learned in various fields of Islamic scholarship and the humanities
known at that time. Hasan ibn Ali Washsha, when visiting the Masjid of
Kufah, found there 900 scholars all repeating the traditions narrated to
them by Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq.[^3]

(iii) The qualifications which an Imam possessed, as believed in by this
school and the popular bases represented by it, were very high. The Imam
was judged by the standard of these qualifications to find out whether
he was really fit to be an Imam. They believed that the Imam must be the
most learned and wise man of his time.

(iv) The school and the popular bases had to make great sacrifices for
the sake of their belief in the Imamate which the contemporary
governments regarded as a hostile line, at least from the ideological
angle. This attitude led the then authorities to the persecution of the
followers of the Imams. Many people were killed. Many others were thrown
into dungeons. Hundreds died while in detention. Their belief in the
Imamate of the Prophet's House used to cost them dear. The only
attraction was their conviction of gaining the favour of Allah.

(v) The Imams, whose Imamate these popular bases acknowledged, were not
living like the kings in high towers isolated from their followers. They
never segregated themselves, except when imprisoned, exiled or forcibly
kept aloof by the ruling juntas. This we know for certain on the
authority of a large number of reporters who have narrated the sayings
'and deeds of each of the first eleven Imams. Similarly, we have a
record of the correspondence exchanged between the Imams and their
contemporaries.

The Imams used to make journeys to various places and appointed their
deputies in different parts of the Muslim world. Their supporters also,
while visiting the holy places during Hajj, made it a point to call on
them at Madina. All this meant a continuous contact between the Imams
and their followers scattered all over the Muslim world.

(vi) The contemporary caliphs always regarded the Imams and their
spiritual leadership as a threat to themselves and their dynasty. For
this reason, they did all they could to disrupt this leadership and in
pursuance of their nefarious ends, they resorted to many mean and
arbitrary actions. Occasionally their behaviour was too harsh and
despotic. The Imams themselves were continuously chased and kept in
detention. Such actions were painful and disgusting to all the Muslims,
especially to the supporters of the Imams.

These six points comprise historical facts. If we take them into
consideration, we can easily come to the conclusion that the early
Imamate was a real fact and not a fiction. It is certain that an Imam
who appeared on the scene at a very early age, who proclaimed himself to
be the spiritual and intellectual leader of the Muslims and who was
acknowledged to be so by a vast cross-section of the people must have
had great knowledge, competence and mastery over all branches of
theology. Otherwise, the popular bases could not be convinced of his
Imamate.

We have already said that these bases had continuous contact with the
Imams and were in a position to judge their personalities. It is not
conceivable that so many people should have accepted a boy to be their
Imam and should have made sacrifices for his sake without ascertaining
his real worth and assessing his competence. Even if it is presumed that
the people made no immediate efforts to ascertain the position, still
the truth could not remain unknown for years in spite of the continuous
contact between the child Imam and the people. Had he been childish in
his knowledge and thinking, he would certainly have been exposed.

Even if it is supposed that the popular bases of the Imamate could not
discover the truth, it was easy for the government of the day to expose
the child, if he had been really childish in his thinking and cultural
attainments like all other children. It certainly would have been in the
interest of the government of the day to bring him before his supporters
and others to prove that he was not fit to be an Imam and a spiritual
and intellectual leader.

It might have been difficult to prove the incompetence of a man of 40 to
50*,* but it would have been quite easy to prove the incompetence of an
ordinary child, howsoever intelligent he might have been. Evidently this
would have been much simpler and easier than the complex and risky
policy of suppression adopted by those in power at that time. The only
explanation for why the government kept quiet and did not play this card
is that it had realized that the early Imamate was a real phenomenon and
not a concoction.

The fact is that the government did attempt to play that card but did
not succeed. History tells us of such attempts and their failures, but
it does not report any occasion on which the child Imam vacillated or
showed signs of such embarrassment as could shake the confidence of the
people believing in his early Imamate.

That is what we meant when we said that the early Imamate was really a
phenomenon and not a mere presumption. This phenomenon has deep roots,
for there exist parallel cases throughout the history of the heavenly
mission and Divine leadership. We cite just one instance.

***We commanded John; Zachariah's son, to follow the guidance of the
Lord with due steadfastness. To John We gave knowledge and wisdom during
his childhood',*** **(Surah Maryam, 19.12)**

After it has been proved that the early Imamate had been a real
phenomenon already existing in the life of the people of the Prophet's
House, no exception can be taken to the Imamate of the Mahdi and his
succession to his father while he was still a child.

(d) Reasons for his continued existence
---------------------------------------

Now we come to the fourth question. Even if it is presumed that
theoretically the existence of the Mahdi, with all its implication
including the long life, the early Imamate and the complete occultation
is possible, how can we believe that he actually exists, for a mere
possibility is not enough to prove that. As the concept of the Mahdi is
unusual and extraordinary, the existence of a few sayings of the holy
Prophet, which are enshrined in the books, is not enough to prove that
the existence of the Mahdi is a historical fact and not a mere
presumption which has seized the imagination of a large number of people
for certain psychological reasons.

The answer to this question is this that the concept of the Mahdi as the
Awaited Saviour who is to change the world for the better has been
mentioned in the traditions of the holy Prophet generally and in the
sayings of the Imams particularly. It has been emphasized in so many
passages that there is no reason to doubt it. The number of the reports
on this subject found in the books of our Sunni brethren comes to
400,[^4] and the total number of the reports found in both the Shi'ah
and the Sunni sources comes to more than 6,000.[^5] This is a colossal
figure, unparalleled in the case of most of those Islamic issues which
are not usually doubted by any Muslim.

As for the embodiment of this concept in the person of the twelfth Imam,
there exists enough justification to believe that. This justification
can be summarized in two arguments, one being Islamic and the other
scientific.

By the Islamic argument we prove the existence of the Awaited Saviour
and by the scientific argument we prove that the Mahdi is not a mere
myth but his existence is a fact proved by historical experience.

As for the Islamic argument, it is represented by hundreds of traditions
which have come down from the holy Prophet and the Imams of his House.
They specify that the Mahdi will belong to the Prophet's House, will be
descended from his daughter Fatimah-tuz-Zehra and will be the descendant
of Imam Husayn in the ninth generation.

The traditions also say that the total number of the caliphs will be
twelve. Thus, the traditions give a specific shape to the general idea
of the Mahdi and determine that he is none other than the twelfth Imam
of the Prophet's House. The number of these traditions is very large in
spite of the fact that the Imams were very reserved on this subject, for
fear of an attempt on the life of the Mahdi.

It is not only because of their number that we have to accept these
traditions, but there are also other indications of their authenticity.
According to the different versions of a tradition of the holy Prophet,
he has to be succeeded by twelve caliphs, by twelve Imams, or by twelve
commanders.

The total number of reports about this saying as counted by some writers
exceeds 270 and they are found in the most celebrated Shi'ah and Sunni
books, such as Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sahih Tirmizy, Sunan Abu
Dawud, Ahmad's Musnad and Hakim's Mustadrak. It may be noted that
Bukhari, who has quoted this tradition, was a contemporary of Imam
Muhammad bin Ali al-Jawad, Imam Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi and Imam Hasan
al-Askari.

This fact has great significance, for it proves that the tradition was
recorded before its contents could materialize. Hence, it cannot be
suspected that it is a possible reflection on the actual number of the
Imam, as believed by the Twelver Shi 'ah to reinforce their belief in
the twelve Imams. This is because the spurious sayings attributed to the
holy Prophet refer to the events which take place earlier and the saying
comes afterwards. Such sayings do not precede the events nor are they
recorded in the books of tradition earlier.

So long as we possess material evidence of the fact that the tradition
was recorded before the number of the Imams was actually completed we
can safely say that it is not a reflection on an accomplished fact. It
is only an expression of a divine truth, expressed by him who never
spoke whimsically, and a prophecy which was subsequently fulfilled by
the actual number of the Imams beginning with Imam Ali and ending with
Imam Mahdi.

As for the scientific argument, we have to state that it consists of the
experience of a large number of people for a period covering about
seventy years. This period is known as that of minor occultation. To
elucidate the point we propose to explain minor occultation briefly.

The minor occultation represents the first stage of the Imamate of the
Awaited Saviour who was destined to keep himself physically absent from
the public scene, from the very inception of his Imamate, though he
still continues to take an intelligent interest in what happens around
him. Had this occultation come suddenly it would have been a great shock
to his supporters, for they had been accustomed to be always in contact
with the Imam and to consult him on their divergent problems.

His sudden disappearance would have caused a big vacuum which might have
absorbed and even destroyed the whole organisation, for his supporters
would have felt that they had been cut off from their spiritual and
intellectual leadership. In order to familiarize them with the idea of
occultation and to. enable them to adapt themselves to the new situation
it was felt necessary that a preparatory stage should precede the final
occultation.

This stage was that of minor occultation during which the Imam
disappeared from the public scene, but maintained his contact with his
followers through certain representatives who formed a connecting link
between him and those who believed in his role as an Imam. During this
period four persons, whose piety and impeccability was recognized by
all, occupied the position of the vicegerents of the Imam. They are as
under:

1. Uthman ibn Sa'id al-'Amravi

2. Muhammad ibn Uthman 'Amravi

3. Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti

4. Abu'l Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al-Simmari

These four persons performed the duties of his vicegerent in the above
order. As and when one of them died, another was duly appointed by the
Mahdi to succeed him.

The vicegerent was in contact with: the Shi'ah. He carried their
questions to the Imam and submitted their problems to him. He also
conveyed the Imam's replies to his followers. The replies used to be
mostly in writing and were occasionally verbal. The people who missed
the sight of the Imam, found consolation in correspondence and indirect
contact. All the letters received from the Imam during the tenure of his
four vicegerents, which lasted for about seventy years, Were in the same
hand-writing and in the same style and bore the same signature.

Al-Simmari was the last vicegerent. He announced the end of the stage of
the minor occultation, the distinctive feature of which was the
appointment of the particular vicegerent. It was turned into the major
occultation after its object had been achieved and the Shi 'ah had
gradually adapted themselves to the absence of the Imam.

They had been immunized against the shock and the vacuum. Following the
major occultation, instead of being represented by a specially appointed
vicegerent, the Imam is now represented in a general way by the
qualified *mujtahids* (eminent legists, capable of arriving at an
independent decision on issues of religious law) having a keen insight
into both the spiritual and temporal affairs. Now, in the light of the
foregoing, it can easily be inferred that the existence of the Mahdi is
a. fact which was experienced by a larger number of the people.

He was represented by his vicegerents for seventy long years during.
which they dealt with so many people but no one observed any
inconsistency in what they said, nor discovered any signs of deception
in their conduct. Is it conceivable that a fraud could be continued for
seventy years by four persons, one after the other, without giving rise
to the least suspicion? These four persons had no special link with each
other and no collusion between them could be suspected. Their conduct
was above reproach. They gained the confidence of all and everyone
believed in the genuineness of their claim and the reality of their
experience.

An old proverb says that truth will always come but. Events of practical
life also prove that a fraud has no chance to last for such a long time
in such a way. It is not possible to deal with so many people
fraudulently and at the same time to gain their confidence.

Thus we know that the minor occultation is tantamount to a scientific
experiment to prove the facts about the Awaited Saviour including his
birth, life and occultation and the general proclamation of his major
occultation, according to which be retired from the scene of life and
does not now disclose his identity to anyone.

(e) Reasons for his delay in appearance
---------------------------------------

Why did the Saviour not appear during all this period when he had
already prepared himself for the intended task? What prevented him from
reappearing on the scene of life during the period of the minor
occultation or immediately thereafter, instead of converting it into the
major occultation? At the time it was simpler and easier to bring about
the required change.

He had a good opportunity at that time to mobilize his forces and to
start his work forcefully because he already had contact with the people
through the organization which existed during the period of the minor
occultation. Moreover, at that time the ruling powers were not so
powerful as they subsequently. became as a result of the scientific and
industrial development.
The successful execution of a revolutionary order depends on certain
pre-requisites and on the existence of a particular atmosphere. Unless
these conditions are fulfilled and that atmosphere is created, it cannot
achieve its object.

As regards the Divinely ordained shape of things it has two aspects. As
far as its missionary aspect is concerned it, being Divinely ordained,
does not depend on any congenial atmosphere, but, as far as its
operational side is concerned, its timing and success is linked with the
conducive circumstances.

The same was the reason why the pre-Islamic period of five centuries had
to elapse before the Last Divine Message came to Prophet Muhammad,
though the world had been in dire need of it since a far earlier time.
It was delayed only because its successful completion was linked with
certain suitable circumstances.

The conducive circumstances, which affect the accomplishment of the
change, include those which create a suitable atmosphere for it and
those which determine the right moment for the beginning of the
operation. For example, the revolution which was successfully led by
Lenin in Russia was linked with certain factors, such as the out-break
of the First World War and the decline of the Czarist regime. In
addition, there were some minor factors also. For instance, Lenin's safe
journey during which he secretly slipped into Russia. If he had met with
some accident which might have impeded his entry into that country at
that time, the revolution would possibly have been delayed.

It has been the unalterable practice, decreed by Allah, that the actual
implementing of a Divine revolution is linked up with such objective
circumstances as create the right climate and general atmosphere for its
success. That is why there was a long gap of a several hundred of years
before the appearance of Islam during which period no prophet was
raised.

No doubt Allah is All-powerful. He can miraculously remove in advance
all difficulties and obstacles impeding a Divine Mission. But He does
not do so, because the tests, trials and tribulations through which man
gains perfection require that a Divine revolution should come about in a
natural and normal manner. This does not mean that occasionally Allah
does not intervene in arranging certain details not related to the
creation of the right atmosphere but which tend to give an impetus to
the revolution. The Divine help rendered by Allah to his friends at
critical junctures for the purpose of protecting their mission was of
this nature.

The fire set alight by Nimrud did no harm to Abraham; the hand of the
treacherous Jew who had drawn his sword to kill Muhammad was paralysed
and, a strong wind hit the camp of the infidels who had besieged Madina
during the Battle of the Ditch and demoralized them. In all these cases
help was rendered at a critical juncture, but only after the right
atmosphere for the desired change had already been created in a natural
manner.

On this basis, when we study the position of the Imam Mahdi, we find
that the revolutionary task which has been entrusted to him like any
other process of a social change is linked with certain circumstances
which will provide the right climate for its success. Hence, it is
natural that is should be timed accordingly. It is known that the great
task, for which Imam Mahdi has prepared himself, is not of a limited
nature nor is it confined to any particular region.

His mission in fact is to revolutionize the world order in its entirety.
It is to rescue mankind from the darkness of vice and to usher in an era
of light and guidance. For such a gigantic revolution the mere existence
of a task and a leader is not enough, otherwise it would have been
accomplished during the period of the holy Prophet himself. Such a
revolution requires specific climate and a general atmosphere conducive
to the fulfilment of all the prerequisites.

From man's viewpoint the frustration and disillusionment of a man of
culture may be considered to be the basic factor in creating the right
climate. This feeling stems from the failure of diverse cultural
experiments. Only then does a man of culture feel that he is in need of
help and turns to the unknown. From the material angle the modern
conditions of life may be regarded as more suitable for the fulfilment
of a mission on world level than the conditions which prevailed at the
time of occultation, for now the distances have been shortened, the
chances of contact between various people of the world have been
improved and better facilities for a central organisation to enlighten
mankind on the basis of the new message have become available.

It is true, as pointed out in the question, that the military power and
the war equipment which the Awaited Leader would have to face have
enormously grown, but it is to be remembered that material power is of
no consequence when man is moralized and is determined to fight against
injustice.

Many a lofty civilization in history has collapsed at the first touch of
an invader, because it was already dilapidated and lacked the power of
resistance.

(f) His superhuman role
-----------------------

Now we come to another question of the above-mentioned series. The
question is whether a single individual, howsoever great he may be, can
accomplish such a great task, when it is known that a great man is only
he whom the circumstances bring forward to be in the forefront of the
events.

This question is based on a particular viewpoint about history which
explains historical developments on the basis that man is only a
secondary factor, whereas the main factor consists of the forces which
work around him. Man at the most can be described as an intelligent
interpreter of the inter-play of these forces.

It is evident that history has two poles, one of them being man and the
other the material forces around him. Just as the material forces
influence man like the conditions of production similarly man also
influences the material forces around him. There is no justification for
supposing that action always begins with matter and ends at man. The
opposite can also be as true. In history, man and matter have always
been interacting. If the interacting force of man is celestial then his
role in life will also assume the celestial hue. Then it is the Divine
force which directs the course of history.

This is a fact which is abundantly proved by the history of the mission
of the Prophets and especially by the life history of the last Divine
Messenger, for Muhammad (P) assumed the control of the course of history
and created a culture which could not be created by the external
circumstances around him.[^6] Hence, what was possible to be
accomplished by the greatest of the Prophets can also be accomplished at
the hands of the Awaited Saviour of his Family - The Leader whose
appearance has been predicted by the holy Prophet and about whose great
role he has already informed mankind.

(g) His modus operandi
----------------------

Now we come to the last question which is about the method which the
Mahdi is likely to adopt to achieve his objective of the final victory
of justice and of the complete eradication of injustice.

A definite answer to this question depends not only on the knowledge of
the timing and the stage at which the Mahdi will reappear but also on
the possibility of imagining what particular circumstances will be
prevailing at that time. It is only in the light of these circumstances
that a picture of his possible strategy can be drawn. So long as we do
not know at what stage the Mahdi will reappear and what will be the
prevailing circumstances at that time, it is not possible to make any
prediction on scientific lines. Any presumptions made in this connection
will be based mostly on fiction and not on facts. Anyhow, there is one
basic presumption which can be accepted in the light of the traditions
and the historical experience of the great changes.

This much can in any case be predicted safely that the Awaited Saviour -
will appear when the stage for his appearance is set, neither earlier
nor later. Let us be clear as to the meaning - of this stage for his
appearance. This stage means the conditions prevailing in the world and
in the human society. It means the decline in man's moral life, when
oppression and tyranny will be rampant and when mankind will have fallen
into the abyss of crime and immorality.

In addition, this stage for his appearance means that the conditions
then prevailing would create the necessary psychological atmosphere for
the reception of a saviour. Mankind would be dead tired and fed up with
the shape of things and would quite naturally look forward to a saviour
for its liberation. This will happen when wickedness will reach its
climax. There will be a great upheaval, a great conflagration, that will
send this universe to its doom. In the darkness that will then prevail,
there will dawn a new Sun in the form of the Mahdi, spreading light and
lustre. Having liberated mankind from its misery and curse, the Mahdi
will then bring about a transformation of life in which justice, peace,
virtue and righteousness will abound. Thus will the Awaited Imam
accomplish his mission.

Certain Islamic traditions speak of a government of the virtuous which
is to continue until the appearance of the Mahdi (May Allah hasten his
advent) and, as we know, some Shi'ah scholars who held a high opinion
about a certain number of their contemporary rulers have hinted at the
possibility of the continuance of their dynasties until the appearance
of the Mahdi.

On the whole, it is derived from the Qur'anic verses and the Islamic
traditions that the rising of the Mahdi will be the last in the series
of fights between the good and the evil which have continued from the
very inception of the world. It will be the Mahdi who will give a
concrete shape to the ideal of all the Prophets, the saints and the
fighters in the way of Allah.

During the period of the occultation it is our duty to be expecting the
Awaited Imam. We must devise a sound and judicious system of social
development based on the holy Qur'an and present it to the world. We
must prove the excellence and efficacy of Divine laws to the people and
attract their attention to the Divine system we must fight superstitions
and false beliefs and pave the way for the establishment of Islamic
world government. In the light of the teachings of the holy Qur'an and
traditions of the holy Prophet we must chalk out a programme for solving
the world problems and put it at the disposal of world reformers. We
must enlighten the thoughts of the people of the world and at the same
time, prepare ourselves to receive the Awaited Imam and the emergence of
a just world government.

[^1]: For thousands of years man has been aspiring to delay death which
is a predestined phenomenon. During the past centuries the efforts of
the alchemists to find out an elixir of life ended in fiasco. At the end
of the nineteenth century scientific advancement revived the hope for a
long life and it is possible that in the near future this sweet dream
may turn into a reality. In this connection the scientists have resorted
in the first instance to experiments on the animals. For example, McKee,
a distinguished expert of the Cornell University and Alex Komfort of
London University have conducted experiments about the connection
between food and senility. Alex Komfort was able, in the course of his
experiments, to increase the age of a group of mice by fifty per cent.
The results of the studies spread over four years conducted by Richard
Rothschild, another American expert, regarding increase in the life of
mice by the use of Methyl aminoethynol were published in the spring of
1972. This scientist and his associate Akeep arrived at the conclusion
that the use of Methyl aminoethynol during the period of the experiment
increased the life of the mice between 6 to 49 per cent. The experiment
conducted on the mosquitoes increased their life upto 300 per cent.

[^2]: It is not possible to ascertain directly that one phenomenon is
the cause of the appearance of another phenomenon (like the rising of
the sun being the cause of the earth becoming hot). We understand only
this that one phenomenon (rising of the sun) is continually followed by
another viz. the surface of the earth becoming hot. It has also been
observed that some events always taking place in succession to others is
not limited to a special relationship of the phenomena but is a special
feature of nature. However, neither the relationship of one single cause
with its effect nor the generality of this relationship throughout
nature is visible automatically and does not form an essential part of
our thinking. (David Hume).

[^3]: The number of Imam Sadiq's pupils has been reported upto four
thousand, some of the well-known among them are: Abu Hanifah al-Nu'man
b. Thabit, Abu Basir Yahya b. al-Qasim, Aban b. Taghlab, Ali b. Yaqteen,
Abu Ja'far alias Mu'min al-Taq, Hisham b. Hakam, Harith b. Mughira,
Hatim b. Isma'il, Jabir b. Hayyan, Malik b. Anas, Mufazzal b. Umar
al-Kufi, (For details see: Al-Imam al-Sadiq wa'l mazahibul arba'ah, Asad
Haydar, (Darul Kitab al-Arabia Beirut).

[^4]: Al-Mahdi by Ayatullah Sayyid Sadruddin Sadr.

[^5]: Muntakhab al-Athr fi Imam al-Thani 'Ashr by Lutfullah Safi.

[^6]: Al-Fatawa al-Waziha 'by Ayatullah Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr.


