The Final Victory
=================

The idea of the final victory of the forces of righteousness, peace and
justice over those of evil, oppression and tyranny, of the world-wide
spread of the Islamic faith, the complete and all-round establishment of
high human values, the formation of a utopian and an ideal society and
lastly the accomplishment of this ideal at the hands of a holy and
eminent personality called, according to the Islamic traditions, Mahdi
is a belief which, of course with variations in details, is shared by
all the Muslim sects and schools of thought.

Basically this is a Qur'anic concept and it is the holy Qur'an which in
very clear terms, predicts:

**1. The final victory of Islam.**

***It is He who has sent His messenger with the guidance and the
religion of truth to make it prevail over every other religion. However
much the disbelievers may dislike it.*** **(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:33 and
Surah As-Saff, 61:9)**

**2. The absolute supremacy of the good and the pious.**

***Indeed We have written in the Psalms after the Torah had been
revealed: The righteous among My slaves shall inherit the earth*****".
(Surah al-Anbia. 21:105)**

**3. The final collapse of the oppressors and the tyrants.**

***We willed to show favour to those who were persecuted in the earth
and to make them leaders and masters. It was also Our will to give them
power in the earth and to show Pharaoh, Haman*** ***and their hosts to
experience from their victims what they feared most.*** **(Surah
al-Qasas, 28:5-6)**

**4. A bright and happy future for humanity.**

***Moses told his people to seek help from Allah and exercise patience.
The earth belongs to Him and He has made it the heritage of whichever of
His servants He chooses. The Final Victory is for the pious.*** **(Surah
al-A'raf 7:128)**

This idea is not an outcome of any wishful thinking, but it emanates
from the total working of the system of nature, the evolutionary process
of history, man's confidence in the future and the total rejection by
him of pessimism about the destiny of mankind, which is extraordinarily
bleak, according to certain theories.


