Expectation of Solace
=====================

Aspiring for the realization of this human ideal has, in the Islamic
traditions, been termed as 'Expectation of Solace'. Its underlying idea
is substantiated by the Islamic and Qur'anic principle of the
prohibition of despair of Allah's Mercy.

Those who believe in Allah's universal Kindness can never lose hope,
whatever be the circumstances, and can never submit to despair and
despondency. Anyhow, it must be borne in mind that the principles of the
expectation of solace and non-despair of Allah's Mercy have no personal
or group application. They simply refer to Allah's general Benevolence
and Kindness to the entire man kind. As for the exact nature of solace,
it is determined by certain other Islamic traditions and prophecies.

Expectation of solace or cherishing of a hope for the future is of two
kinds. One is constructive and dynamic. It is an act of virtue. The
other is destructive and paralysing. It is a sin and should be taken as
a sort of licentiousness.

These two kinds of expectations are the direct result of the two
divergent notions of the appearance of the promised Mahdi which in turn
have emanated from two different approaches to historical changes and
revolutions. Hence, it would not be out of place here to refer briefly
to the subject of historical changes.

Let us examine whether the historical developments are a chain of
accidental occurrences or a sequence of natural events. In nature there
is nothing really accidental.

These two kinds of expectations are the direct result of the two
divergent notions of the appearance of the promised Mahdi which in turn
have emanated from two different

Expectation of solace or cherishing of a hope for the future is of two
kinds. One is constructive and dynamic. It is an act of virtue. The
other is destructive and paralysing. It is a sin and should be taken as
a sort of licentiousness.

In other words, no phenomenon can come into existence casually and
without a case, though, relatively speaking, there are incidents which
may be regarded as taking place accidentally and just by chance.

If, one morning, you leave your house and run into a friend whom you had
not seen for years and who is passing by your house at that particular
moment, such a meeting will be considered accidental. Why? Because there
exists no natural law that you leaving your house will essentially be
followed by such a meeting or else such a meeting would have taken place
everyday. How ever, it is also true that such a meeting is an essential
consequence of this particular departure at a particular moment in
specific circumstances.

When we see that no binding and invariable sequence exists between a
cause and its effect we call the resulting event an accident. Accidental
occurrences are not governed by any universal or general rule, nor do
they come within the purview of any scientific law, for a scientific law
is concerned only with an invariable sequence between specific
conditions and a specific phenomenon.

One may say that the historical developments are nothing more than a
series of accidental occurrences, not governed by any universal or
general rule. To support his view, he may argue that a society is a mere
collection of individuals. Everyone of them has his own personal traits
and individual character. Personal whims and individual motives produce
a set of incidents, which lead to a series of accidental occurrences and
it is these happenings which constitute a historical development.

But that is not the real story. According to another point of view a
society has its own personality, independent of the individuals, and it
acts as demanded by its own nature. The personality of the society is
not identical with that of the individuals. It comes into being through
the combination of individuals and their cultural actions and reactions.

Thus, the society has its own nature, its own character and its own
rules. It acts according to its own genius and its actions and reactions
can be explained through a set of universal and general laws.

We have to admit that a society has its own independent personality,
because only then can we say that history has a philosophy and is
governed by norms And rules. It is only then that history can be a
subject worthy of deep study and a source for learning lessons.

On the contrary, if it is assumed that history has no personality then
only the life of the individuals can be studied and not the collective
life of nations and peoples. In that case the scope of taking lessons
and drawing morals will also become limited to the individual's life. As
mentioned above, there are two contrary notions of history and
historical developments, which, in fact, revolve around the main
question whether a society has a personality or not.

The Qur'an and history
----------------------

The expectation of solace, which forms the subject of the present study,
is a question which is philosophical and social as well as religious and
Islamic. As mentioned earlier, it has a Qur'anic basis. Hence, before an
attempt is made to describe the nature of this expectation, it will be
in the fitness of things to throw some light on the Qur'anic view
regarding society and the ever-changing course of its life i.e. history.

It is undeniable that the holy Qur'an looks at history as a lesson, a
precept, a source of knowledge and a subject worth contemplation and
deep thinking. Now the big question is whether the Qur'an looks at
history from an individual angle or a collective one; whether it puts
forth only the life of the individuals for persuading others to emulate
the example of the good and to abstain from the ways of the wicked, or
it has an eye only on the collective life, or at least on the collective
life too. In the latter case, is it possible to infer from the Qur'an
that the society, as distinct from the individuals, has a personality, a
life and even consciousness and feelings? Similarly, is it possible to
deduce that groups and nations are governed by definite rules which are
equally applicable to all of them?

Due to lack of space it is not possible here to discuss these questions
in detail, but it may be stated briefly that the answer to all three
questions is in the affirmative.[^1]

The holy Qur'an, while relating the stories of the past for the purpose
of reflection and instruction, puts forth the life of the past nations
as an admonishing material for the benefit of other people:

***That nation is gone. They have reaped what they sowed, and the same
applies to you. You are not responsible for their deeds. You are
responsible for your deeds only".*** **(Surah al-Baqarah 2:134-141)**

The holy Qur'an repeatedly refers to the subject of the existence of the
nations and their duration. For example,

***Every nation can only live for an appointed time. When its term ends,
it will not remain (alive) even for a single hour, nor will they die
before the appointed time.*** **(Surah al A'raf 7:34 and Surah al-Nahl
16:61)**

It emphatically refutes the idea that destiny can in any way be affected
by the blind forces of fate. It clearly states that the destiny of
nations is subject to and governed only by the firm and consistent laws
of nature. It says

***Are they waiting for the punishment which has been the lot of the
earlier people. You will not find any change in Allah's way (of dealing
with such people).*** **(Surah al Fatir 35:43)**

It also draws attention to a point which is of vital importance. It
points out that the people, by looking at their deeds and behaviour, can
find out for themselves whether a good or a bad destiny awaits them, for
the forces which determine the destiny are just a sequence of reactions
set in motion by their own deeds. In other words, particular acts are
always and invariably followed by particular reactions.

Thus, though the course of history is ordained by the Divine Will, the
role of man as a free agent is not eliminated. There are many passages
in the Qur'an which refer to this subject. We quote just one verse here.

***Surely Allah does not change the condition of a people unless and
until they change their own conduct, behaviour, customs and manners.***
**(Surah al-R'ad 13:11).**

[^1]: See Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, Tafsir al-Mizan
(vol. 4, p. 102 - vol. 7, p. 333 - vol. 8, p. 85 - vol. 10, pp. 71 to 73
and vol. 18, p. 191)


