Interpretation of the Evolution of History
==========================================

If it is admitted that a society has its own nature, character and a
living, growing and developing personality then the next question is,
how is its evolution to be interpreted i.e. how does it strive for a
state of perfection?

We have already seen how the holy Qur'an lays stress on the genuineness
of society's personality and its evolutionary progress. We also know
that there have been, and still are, other schools holding a similar
view. Now we must find out how, from the viewpoint of the holy Qur'an
and from these other schools of thought, history develops. What are the
responsibilities of man in this respect and what part is he supposed to
play? What form should "The Great Expectation" assume is another closely
related subject which must be explored simultaneously.

Historical evolution is interpreted in two different ways. One method is
known as the materialistic or dialectic and the other is called human or
natural. In other words, in respect of historical evolution there exist
two different approaches and two different ways of thinking.
According to each of them the great expectation assumes a different
form and a distinctive nature. We propose to explain these two ways of
thinking, but only to the extent that they are related to the question
of the expectation and hope for the future.

Dialectic Approach
------------------

Some people interpret history from the angle of transformation of one
contradictory into another. Not only history but the evolution of the
entire nature is also interpreted by them on this basis. Hence, before
explaining the materialistic interpretation of history, we propose to
explain briefly the dialectic interpretation of nature, which is the
basis of the materialistic interpretation of history.

Firstly, according to this doctrine, everything in nature is constantly
moving and striving to reach the next stage. Nothing is static or
motionless. Therefore, the correct approach to nature is to study things
and phenomena while they are moving and changing and to realise that
even our thinking, being a part of nature, is constantly undergoing a
change.

Secondly, every part of nature is influenced by other parts and in turn
influences them. The whole universe is bound by a chain of actions and
reactions. Nevertheless, a complete harmony exists among all parts of
nature. Hence, the correct approach is to study everything in nature as
it is related to other things and not in isolation.

Thirdly, motion originates from contradiction. It is contradiction which
is the basis of every motion and change. As the Greek philosopher,
Heracleitus, said 2,500 years ago, struggle is the mother of all
progress. Contradiction in nature means that everything is inclined to
its opposite and it nurtures its antithesis within itself. Along with
everything that exists, factors which tend to destroy it, also set off
factors those which tend to preserve the existing state and those which
tend to transform it into its antithesis.

Fourthly, this internal struggle continues to intensify and grow till it
reaches a point where a sudden revolutionary change takes place. There
the struggle culminates in the triumph of the new forces and the defeat
of the old ones with the result that the thing is transformed into its
antithesis completely.

Following this transformation the same process begins anew, because this
phase again nurtures its opposite within it, and a further internal
struggle leads to a fresh transformation. Anyhow, this time the thing
does not revert to its original state, but is transformed into a state
which is a sort of combination of the first and the second phases. This
third state is known as synthesis. Thus, nature moves from thesis to
antithesis and then finally to synthesis and after completing one cycle,
again starts following the same evolutionary course.

Nature has no ultimate goal and is not striving to a state of perfection
but is rather inclined towards self destruction. However, as every
antithesis tends towards its own antithesis, this process perforce takes
the shape of synthesis, resulting in compulsory evolution. This is what
is called the dialectic interpretation of nature.

History being a part of nature, the same law of evolution applies to it
also, the only difference being that, its components are human. History
is a continuous process and is influenced by inter-relations between man
and nature and between man and society. There is a constant conflict and
confrontation between the progressive groups and others which are in a
state of decay.

This struggle, which in the final analysis may be described as the
struggle of contradictories, after going through a violent and
revolutionary process, ends to the benefit of the progressive forces.
Every event in the course of this struggle is followed by its antithesis
and the process goes on until the evolution is completed.

The basis of human life and the motive force of history is the function
of production which at every stage of its development creates
particular, political, judicial, domestic and economic conditions
necessitating the development of relations among individuals.

But the function of production does not remain static at any particular
stage. It continues to develop, for man is a tool-making creature. With
the gradual development of tools the production goes up and with that
new men with a fresh outlook and a more developed conscience appear on
the scene, for not only does man make the tools but the tools also make
the man. The development of productions and the increase in its quantum
create new economic equations which bring about a set of new social
conditions.

It is said on this account that economy is the understructure of a
society and all other affairs are subservient to it. Whenever it
undergoes a change as a result of the development of the means of
production and the going up of production level, it becomes necessary to
change the superstructure also.

But that stratum of the society which depends upon the old economic
system regards this change as being against its interests and endeavours
to maintain the status quo. In contrast the newly up-coming stratum
attached to new means of production, considering a change in the
situation and in the establishment of a new system to be in its interest
tries hard to change and push the society and all its affairs forward to
bring them into harmony with the newly developed means of production.

The intensity of the struggle and the conflict between these two groups,
one decrepit and reactionary and the other progressive and
forward-looking, continues to grow until it reaches an explosive point
and the society with a revolutionary group steps forward and undergoes a
complete change. The primitive system gives place to the new and thus
the process ends in the complete victory of the new forces and defeat of
the old ones. Thereafter a new phase of history begins.

This new phase again faces a similar fate. With the further development
of the means of production fresh men come into the field. With the
increase in the quantum of production the current system loses its
capability of solving social problems and the society once again faces a
deadlock. There again appears the need of a big change in the economic
and social systems. This phase also gives place to its antithesis and a
new phase begins. And thus the process of change and development goes on
steadfastly.

History, just like nature itself, passes through contradictories, i.e.
every stage of it harbours the germs of the next stage within itself and
gives place to it after a series of struggles and conflicts.

This mode of thinking in respect of nature and history is called
dialectic and according to it, all the social values throughout history
have been subservient to this means of production.

Chief Characteristic
--------------------

Now let us see as to what is the chief characteristic of the dialectic
thinking which distinguishes it from what is termed as the metaphysical
thinking. The exponents of dialectic thinking mention four principles as
the distinctive features of their doctrine. Let us take them one by one.

Firstly, they maintain that all things are constantly moving and
progressing whereas, as they assert, according to metaphysical thinking,
things are static and motionless.

This imputation has no basis. The upholders of metaphysical thinking do
not believe that things are static . They use the term "Unchangeability"
relatively. Otherwise they also believe that all physical things are
subject to change. It is only metaphysical things which may be described
as static.

Unfortunately the supporters of dialectic logic, being the adherents of
the maxim that the end justifies the means, concentrate their attention
on achieving their objectives and in doing so, ignore the correctness or
other wise of what they attribute to others. Anyhow, the principle of
motion is not a distinctive feature of dialectic thinking.

The second principle is that of correlation and interaction of things.
This, too, cannot be considered to be a characteristic of dialectic
thinking. Though the supporters of this doctrine allege that the rival
theory of metaphysical thinking does not believe in this principle, yet
the fact is not so.

The third principle is that of contradiction. But the question is
whether it is the characteristic only of the dialectic thinking. Is it a
fact that the upholders of metaphysical thinking totally deny the
existence of contradiction in nature? On this point the supporters of
dialecticism have unnecessarily raised such an uproar.

They base their arguments on the existence of the principle known in
logic and philosophy as the law of non contradiction and assert that as
the supporters of metaphysical thinking believe in this principle, they
must naturally deny the existence of all sorts of contradiction. But the
dialecticians conveniently forget that this logical principle is not
even remotely connected with the existence of contradictions, in the
sense of conflict between the various elements of nature or the elements
of the society or history.

Anyhow, the dialecticians go a step further and assert that the
supporters of the metaphysical thinking because of their beliefs that
all parts of nature, including such obviously divergent things as fire
and water, are in a state of mutual harmony and compatibility call upon
the various elements of that society to be at peace and on this basis
urge the persecuted not to resist oppressors and adopt a policy of
appeasement and surrender.

We again emphasize that all this is a distortion of the truth. According
to the supporters of metaphysical thinking contradiction in the sense of
divergence and mutual competition of the various elements of nature does
exist and it is necessary for the continuity of Allah blessings.

The fourth principle of mutation in nature and of revolution in history
is also not a basic characteristic of dialectic thinking. It was never
mentioned as a dialectic principle by Hegel, the father of the modern
dialectic method of reasoning, nor by Karl Marx, the hero of dialectic
materialism. It was recognized as a biological principle of evolution in
the 19th century and was later introduced into dialectics by Frederick
Engels, a disciple of Karl Marx. Today it is an accepted principle of
biology and is not the exclusive monopoly of any particular school of
thought. Then what is the basic characteristic of dialectic thinking?

In fact, the distinctive feature and the real basis of this school is
two fold. One is the doctrine that not only external realities but ideas
also have a dialective nature i.e. the ideas are subject to the above
mentioned four principles. In this respect no other school of thought
shares the views of this school. (This point has been discussed in
detail in the 1st volume of the book 'The Principles of Philosophy and
the Method of Realism').

The other distinctive feature of this school is that it interprets
contradiction to mean that everything necessarily nurtures its
antithesis within itself and subsequently gets transformed into it and
that this anti thesis itself passes through the same process. This
doctrine is claimed to apply to both nature and history both of which,
as they put it, pass through contradictories. According to this school
evolution means the combination of two opposites, one of which is
transformed into the other.

The doctrine of contradiction in the sense of conflict between different
parts of nature and their occasional combination is quite old. What is
new about dialecticism is the claim that, besides contradiction and
conflict between different parts of nature, contradiction also exists
within each part of itself and this contradiction takes the form of a
battle between the new progressive factors and the old decadent ones and
culminates in the final triumph of the progressive ones. These two
features are the corner stone of the dialectic way of thinking.

Hence, it is entirely wrong to consider every school upholding the
principles of motion and contradiction to be dialectic. Such a mistake
has been committed by those who, having come across the principles of
motion, change and contradiction in Islamic teachings, have drawn the
conclusion that Islamic thinking is also dialectic. The fact is that
according to the dialectic thinking all truths are transient and
relative, whereas Islam believes in a series of permanent and eternal
truths.

Further, to believe that nature and history move in a triangular form
(thesis, antithesis and synthesis) and pass through contradictories is
an essential characteristic of the dialectic way of thinking. Islamic
teachings do not approve of this belief.

The fact is that this misconception has been created by the supporters
of dialectic materialism. They, in their discourses, which are never
free from an element of propaganda, give all non-dialectic thinking the
name of metaphysical thinking according to which, as they allege, all
parts of nature are motionless, unrelated to each other and free from
all sorts of contradiction. They accuse the Aristotelian logic of being
based on these very principles. They assert this view with such force
that those who have little direct knowledge are often misled.

Not only that, but also those who are impressed by such statements, if
lacking in the knowledge of Islam, easily come to the conclusion that
the principle of immobility, unrelatedness and absence of contradiction
must form the basis of Islamic thinking. They base their arguments on
the premises that Islam, being a religious creed, has a metaphysical
basis and therefore, its thinking must also be metaphysical and that
metaphysical thinking being based on the above-mentioned three
principles the belief in them must be a part of the Islamic way of
thinking.

Another group, which is somewhat acquainted with Islamic teachings,
presume that Islamic thinking, not being metaphysical, must be
dialectic. As this group recognizes no third alternative, naturally it
comes to this conclusion.
All this misunderstanding and confusion is the result of undue reliance
on what the supporters of dialectic materialism attribute to others.
Anyhow, as already mentioned, truth is quite different.

From the above discussion we may draw the following conclusions:

The new and old ideology
------------------------

In the present context the young and the old do not refer to the younger
and the older generation and the conflict between them has nothing to do
with the problem of the so-called generation gap. It does not mean that
the younger generation always supports a revolutionary movement, or that
the older generation is necessarily conservative. Similarly,
confrontation between the new and the old has no cultural implications
either. It does not mean a confrontation between the educated and the
illiterate. Its significance is purely social and economic and it simply
means a conflict between those classes which are the beneficiaries of
the existing order and those which are dissatisfied with it and being
inspired by new means of production, are keen to bring about a change in
the existing social structure.

In other words it means a struggle between the progressive and the
liberal minded elements of society favouring evolution and those that
are decrepit and narrow-minded and tend to maintain the status quo.

Consequent to the fact that social conscience and the social attitude of
man are inspired by his class position and environmental conditions the
privileged classes, being the beneficiaries of the existing order,
necessarily become obscurantist, whereas the exploited and deprived
classes are stirred to action. This is entirely different from the
question or having or not having a formal education. Mostly the
evolutionary movements are launched by those who are educationally
backward but, owing to their class position, are forward-looking and
liberal minded.

Logical continuity of history
-----------------------------

Evolutionary stages of history are linked with each other by a natural
and logical bond. Each stage has its own place and cannot be moved
forward or backward. For example, capitalism is the middle link between
feudalism and socialism and it is impossible for a society to pass
directly from feudalism to socialism without passing through capitalism.
Such a happening will be in a way similar to what was termed by ancient
philosophers as "abrupt jump" i.e. passing from one point to another
without passing through any of the routes connecting them.

This will be as if the human seed, without passing through the foetus
stage, reaches the delivery stage, or a new-born child, without passing
through childhood, becomes a fully grown-up youth, or that "B" who is
the son of "A" should take birth before "A" comes into the world.

That is why the supporters of this logic gave the early socialists, who
wanted to lay the foundation of socialism merely on ideology, ignoring
the compulsion of history and logical continuity of its stages, the name
of idealists and called their socialism fantastic. Contrary to early
socialism, Marxism is based on the logical continuity of historical
stage.

Not only is an abrupt transition and traversing several stages in one
leap not possible, but it is also essential that every phase reaches its
natural climax before the evolutionary process takes the final form. For
instance, feudalism, or for that matter capitalism, has its definite
course which must run gradually so that, at a historical moment, a
change may come about. To expect any stage to come, before the stage
prior to it attains its climax, is tantamount to expecting a child to be
born before completing its foetal stages. In such a case the result may
be an abortion, not the delivery of a healthy child.

The fight between the new and the old is the basic condition of the
transition of history from one stage to another and is an essential
factor in the evolution of human society. Such a fight is always sacred.
Similarly, the extermination of the old elements is lawful, even if they
do not commit any act of aggression, because without doing so the
society cannot be pushed forward towards evolution. On the basis of this
logic lawful fights need not necessarily be defensive, or with a view to
forestalling an aggression.

Not only is the struggle against the old by the new lawful and sacred
but every other action also, which paves the way for a revolution and
accelerates the evolutionary process, is equally lawful. Thus, all
subversive and disruptive activities, with a view to creating
dissatisfaction and unrest, widening the split and deepening the
conflict, are sacred.

As stated earlier, evolution depends on a revolutionary and violent
change of one contradictory to another and such a change does not
materialize unless and until the internal conflict reaches its boiling
point and the breach becomes the widest. Therefore, anything which
widens the gulf accelerates the transition of the society from lower
stage to a higher stage. As unrest and discord may play such a role,
they are also lawful and sacred, according to this logic.

In contrast, such measures as partial reforms, appeasing and pacifying
action and redress of grievances are considered to be wrong and
improper. They are supposed to serve as an anaesthetic and are,
therefore, tantamount to a betrayal of the cause. Such actions obstruct
the way of evolution as they, at least, temporarily narrow the split and
thus delay the revolution. These are the conclusions which may be drawn
from the materialistic approach to history.


