The Human or Natural Approach
=============================

The human approach to history is just the opposite of the materialistic
approach. It gives basic importance to man-and human values, both in
relation to the individuals and the society. From the psychological
point of view it considers itself to be composed of a set of animal
instincts which are common to both man and beasts and the other set of
higher instincts, religious, ethical, inquisitive and aesthetic which
are peculiar to man and distinguish him from the animals.

From the philosophical point of view it considers a society to have two
aspects. Firstly, it is composed of individuals, each of them having a
mixture of high and low qualities. Secondly, as a whole, it has its own
variety of attributes which are the eternal characteristics of man in
general. A Persian poet expresses this fact thus:  
*"This sweet water and this saltish water in every vein of creatures
will flow till the Day of Resurrection. "*

Here a vein refers to the veins of the society i.e. man in an indefinite
and general application. In some individuals sweet water flows i.e. good
qualities dominate and in others saltish water flows i.e. bad qualities
are more numerous and remarkable. This position will continue so long as
man exists on the face of the earth. The death of individuals makes no
difference to it. Anyhow, with the evolution of man and human society
the position will certainly improve a great deal.

According to this approach history, like nature itself, is developing
and progressing towards a state of perfection. The development of
history is neither confined to the technical nor the cultural aspects,
nor to the growth and improvement of the means of production. It is an
all-round and all pervading process and extends to all human affairs.
Man, as a result of his comprehensive evolution, is moving towards
liberation from environmental and social bonds and is gradually throwing
off the shackles which bind him to his environment.

At the same time his adherence to an ideology and faith is growing. In
the future he is expected to secure complete emancipation and with that
to reach the stage of complete adherence to faith and ideology. In the
past when man was less able to exploit natural resources he was a slave
to nature. In the future, with more and more exploitation of natural
resources, he will not only be free from the bonds of nature but will
also gradually bring it under his domination and control.

It is erroneous to say that evolution follows the development of the
means of production. Those who say so confuse the cause with the effect.
In fact, the development of the means of production is the result of
man's natural craving for perfection, expansion and diversification. It
originates from his power of invention which has, with the passage of
time grown and is still growing. According to this approach one of the
characteristics of man is the internal and individual contradiction
between his terrestrial and celestial aspects, i.e. between those
instincts which are inclined down wards and aim only at the individual,
limited and temporary gains and those which are inclined upwards and
want to encompass the whole of humanity and aim at achieving the moral,
religious, scientific and intellectual objectives. The famous Persian
poet, Mawlawi says:

The soul inclines to wisdom and science,  
 The body inclines to gardens and fruits,  
 The soul inclines to progress and honour,  
 The body inclines to property and chattels,  
 The body inclines to greenery and flowing water,  
 because it originates from them,  
 The soul inclines to life and the living;  
 because its origin is divine,  
 Allah also inclines to soul,  
*So say that He loves them and they love Him.*

The internal conflict of man, which the ancients called the fight
between reason and passion, automatically leads to the conflict between
different groups of human beings, the elated and morally liberated
beings on the one side and the nasty and brutish beings on the other.

This approach accepts the existence of a conflict as a part of the
development and evolution of history, but not in the form of class war
between those attached to the old means of production and old social
system and those attached to the more modern means of production.  
 It claims that a conflict has always existed between men with mature
faith who are free from the captivity of nature and the environment of
animal instincts and have an object in view and the degraded and brutish
persons and it has played a very effective role in the evolution of
history.

To interpret all the wars in history as class wars is tantamount to
closing the eyes to the most beautiful and the brightest manifestations
of human life all along.

Throughout history many battles have been fought to secure material
needs like food, clothing or housing, or on questions connected with
sex, power and prestige. But there have definitely been certain battles
which can be described as fights between the right and the wrong and the
good and the evil. They represented a struggle between the human motives
and the animal propensities, between the common good and the individual
interests, between the high human values and the base desires and
between the progressive and the elated man and the low and the perverted
man.

In the words of the holy Qur'an they were fights between the troops of
Allah and the troops of the Devil. The supporters of this theory
strongly censure the attempts of the materialists to interpret all
religious, ethical and human movements on the basis of class struggle
and regard such attempts as a distortion of history and an insult to
human dignity. Historical events show that many movements which were
initiated for securing the primary material needs were led and guided or
at least supported by individuals who themselves were well-off and
well-placed.

Contrary to the claim of the materialists that all progressive campaigns
are waged by the oppressed and the deprived classes wanting to displace
the existing system and to replace it by another system which may ensure
their material needs in conformity with the developed means of
production there exists historical evidence to prove that progressive
movements have not always been confined to the oppressed classes.  
 They have occasionally been led by the individuals belonging to the
privileged classes who thrust their dagger into the heart of the ruling
system.

The risings of Abraham, Moses, Muhammad and Husayn were all of this
nature. It is also misleading to suggest that the progressive movements
have always aimed at material objectives. The movement of the early
Muslims bears witness to the fact that this is not so. Ali identifying
the nature of this movement said: "They were given permission to defend
their faith with the help of their swords".[^1] Similarly, progressive
movements have not always been the result of the development of the
means of production.

During the past two centuries a number of freedom movements were
launched both in the East and the West. One such movement was the
movement for securing a constitutional government in Iran, known as the
Mashruta Movement. In this case it cannot be claimed that the
development of the means of production had created a crisis in Iran.

It is also not true that unrest in the society has always been caused by
the unsuitability of the legal provisions of the existing system. In
certain cases the provisions as such were quite acceptable, but a
campaign had to be waged to secure their effective enforcement and the
Alawi uprisings during the Abbasid period had this nature. Human
conscience is not so depraved that people cannot be inspired by anything
higher and nobler than their basic material needs.

From the above the following conclusions may be drawn:

**1.** Evolutionary battles: Battles in history have been of divergent
forms, nature and causes: But those which contributed to the development
of history and humanity have been only those which were fought between
the men of high ideology, free from selfishness and greed and the men of
selfish and beastly nature lacking in aspirational and intellectual
life.

The nature of the wars which have contributed to the advancement and
evolution was not that of a class war nor that of a confrontation
between the new and the old in the sense mentioned earlier during the
course of the discussion on the materialistic theory. Wars have, by and
by acquired an ideological aspect and from the viewpoint of human values
man is gradually coming closer to perfection i.e. to the stage of an
ideal man in an ideal society. He will continue to advance on this path
till a world government, having full regard for all human values is
established and that will be the end of all the evil forces and selfish
wars.  
 According to the Islamic terminology this government is called the
Mahdi Government.

**2.** Absurdity of logical continuity: A logical continuity of the
historical stages as described by the materialists is baseless.
Historical events, especially those of the past one century, prove the
absurdity of this theory. During this period only such countries have
gone over to communism as had never passed through the stage of
capitalism. The Soviet Union, China and the East European countries are
a conspicuous example of it.

On the other hand the countries with a highly developed capitalistic
system like the United States, Great Britain and France are still
maintaining their old systems and a century old prediction of the
protagonists of materialism concerning the workers revolution in the
heavily industrialized countries like Britain and France has turned out
to be mere illusion.

It is evident from the above that there is no such thing as a historical
compulsion. It is quite possible that in a capitalistic society the
proletarian class attains such a state of prosperity and well being that
it may totally reject all ideas of revolution. Similarly, it is also
possible that with appearance of a clear and convincing ideology and an
elevation of religious and social conscience a nomadic society may reach
the highest stage of human culture in one leap. The renaissance of the
early Islamic era bears witness to this fact.

**3.** Sanctity of an armed struggle: The lawfulness and sanctity of an
armed struggle does not mean an encroachment on any individual's rights
or aspirations. The struggle becomes lawful and sacred whenever anything
sacred to humanity is in danger. Whenever any right, especially that
which pertains to the entire society, is threatened an armed struggle is
allowed. Freedom is one such right. A struggle for the liberation of the
oppressed, as specifically mentioned in the holy Qur'an, is another
instance.

If the belief in the Oneness of Allah, which is the greatest asset of
humanity, is in danger then a fight is naturally lawful.

**4.** Reforms: There is no reason why partial or gradual reforms should
be condemned. History does not compulsorily pass through contradictions
and the transformation of one contradiction into another is not a
universal truth. Hence, it is not correct to say that partial and
gradual reforms prevent an explosion and block the way to evolution.

Even partial and gradual reforms do encourage and help those who fight
for a rightful and just cause and bring the chances of their final
success closer. In contrast corruption, turmoil and perversions help the
hostile forces and slow down the movement of history in favour of the
righteous people. According to this approach, what is required is a sort
of development which precedes the ripening of the fruit on the tree and
not an explosion. The better the care, anti pest protection and watering
of a tree, the better, healthier, and sometimes earlier is the fruit it
produces.

**5.** Disorders: The same reasons which justify partial and gradual
reforms also make unlawful subversion and sabotage with a view to
creating deadlock and crisis, which is recommended by the materialistic
theory.

**6.** Vacillations of history: Although, on the whole, history moves
towards evolution, yet contrary to the materialistic view, such a
movement is neither compulsory nor inevitable. It is also not essential
that every society in any stage of its history should be more perfect
than it was in the preceding stage.

The prime mover of history is man who is free and the master of his
actions. Hence, history fluctuates in its movements. Sometimes it goes
forward and sometimes backward.

It sways now to the right and now to the left. Some times it moves fast
and sometimes slow and occasionally stands still. A society continues to
rise and fall. The history of human civilization is nothing but a series
of rises, falls and extinctions. As the famous historian, Toynbee, has
pointed out, decline of every single civilization is inevitable, though
on the whole, human history continues to advance steadily along a line
of evolution.

**7.** The evolutionary march of humanity towards freedom from the
restrictions imposed by natural environments, economic conditions and
individual and group interests has on the whole, been guided towards a
purposeful life, a better ideology and a deeper faith.

The will of a primitive man is mostly conditioned by his natural and
social environments and his animal impulses, whereas a culturally
advanced man with his broad outlook has gradually attained a great deal
of freedom from such restrictions and has consequently, to a large
extent, brought his environments and his impulses under his control.

**8.** The jihad and the efforts to persuade others to adopt the
righteous path are quite different from a class war, for they have a
humanitarian basis.

**9.** The power of conviction and reasoning is genuine, natural and
effective. A conviction enables the human conscience to overcome
material urges.

**10.** The Hegelian and Marxian triangle of thesis, antithesis and
synthesis is neither applicable to history nor to nature and
consequently it is a false presumption that history passes through
contradictories or that historical stages are a series of
contradictories derived from each other and transformed into one
another.

The triangle of thesis, antithesis and synthesis is based on two
transformations and one combination i.e. the transformation of a
phenomenon into its antithesis, then its transformation into the
antithesis of antithesis and the combination of these two forms at the
third and last stage viz. the synthesis.

But, in reality, nature does not work in this manner. What actually
exists in nature is either a combination of two contradictories without
transformation, or transformation of one contradictory into another
without any combination. The third form which is met with is evolution
without either transformation or combination.

Many elements which are somewhat contradictory to each other combine
together but are not transformed into each other. For instance, water is
a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen. In such cases there is a combination,
not transformation. There are other cases where nature gradually tilts
from one excessive state to the opposite state and in the process
strikes a balance between the two. In such cases there is a
transformation, but no combination. There are still other cases where a
third thing comes into being as a result of the combination of the two
things. Of course, there is no harm if we call the resulting third thing
synthesis and the two original ones thesis and antithesis respectively,
but that means nothing more than the use of common and familiar terms.

The same is the case with the use of the word "dialectic". It is a
beautiful and well-sounding word and no writer would like to be deprived
of it. Therefore, there is no harm if it is used in connection with any
idea that combines the principles of motion and contradiction though it
may not have those distinctive features of dialectic thinking to which
we have referred before.

[^1]: See: Sermon 154, Peak of Eloquence, Nahjul Balaghah, ISP 1979.


