Foreword
========

Since the departure of Rais\`ul-Mubaligheen Allamah Al-Haj Sayyid Saeed
Akhtar Rizvi (r.a.) from this earthly abode in 2002, the Mission is
grateful to Hujjatul Islam wal Muslimeen Al- Haj Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi
(d.z.) for his wise guidance and advice.

The Mission is grateful to Maulana Rizvi for his valued contribution.
This is not the first book by Maulana Rizvi, we are printing. We have
already published three of his most valuable studies in the past two
years and we hope he will, by will of Almighty Allah, be able to send us
more.

A sinful person, a transgressor of moral laws or a man dubious morality
or respectability cannot be trusted and/or believed, as his own
character is questionable. It is very pertinent, therefore that a
prophet or Imam should be sinless and his character impeccable.

Our holy Prophet Muhammad (S) proved himself as as-Sadiq and al-Ameen
among his people i.e. “truthful” and “trustworthy.”

History has recorded that he asked his people that 'if I tell you that
there is an army beyond these mountains who are about to attack you,
would you believe me?' they all replied in unison “Yes we believe you
because you have proved yourself as-Sadiq and Al-Ameen.

His enemies called him a magician and gave him all other names but they
could never call him a liar, as he had proved himself a man of integrity
and trustworthiness.

Allah (s.w.t.) in the Holy Qur'an eulogises his Prophet (S) in the
following words ”***Verily there is for you in*** ***the Messenger of
Allah an excellent pattern (of conduct”)***, 33:21; the real excellence
and the matchless beauty of his divinely moulded conduct and character.

“*The Infallibility of the Prophets in the Qur'an*” by Hujjatul Islam
wal Muslimeen Al-Hajj Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi is an elaborated and serious
treatise based on lectures he had delivered to the weekly classes on
Islamic Theology.

I trust that the readers will benefit very much on the concept of
”***Ismah***” in the light of the Qur'an.

F. H. Abdullah  
 Founding Member & Trustee  
 Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania


