The Case of Prophet Musa (a.s.)
===============================

Chapter 28 (al-Qasas) Verses 15-16
----------------------------------

And he entered the city at a time when its people were not aware [of his
presence], and found therein two men fighting: one was from his party
and the other was from his enemies. [When] the one who was his follower
[saw Músa, he] cried out to him for help against the one who was from
his enemies. So Músa [went and] struck him with his fist and killed
him.  
 [Then Músa] said, “This is Shaytan's deed (عمل الشيطان); surely he is
an open enemy who leads [others] astray.” [Músa] said, “My Lord! I
surely have been (ظلمتُ نَفسي) unjust to myself; therefore (فاغفر لي)
forgive me.” So [Allah] ( غَفَرَ) forgave him; He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.”  
 The common translation of the last verse combined with the statement
about the Shaytan creates conflict with the concept of ***'ismah,***
infallibility. When reading these verses, keep the following points in
mind:

What Músa did was not a crime; he went to help an oppressed person and,
in the process, struck a blow with his fist at the oppressor. This
ended, unexpectedly, in the death of the oppressor. Helping an oppressed
person is a praiseworthy act in itself. The death of the oppressor, at
most, can be labeled as accidental death that is not a crime or a sin.

Músa's words that “This is Shaytan's deed” does not necessarily refer to
his own action. Remember that the Shaytan himself knew his limits; he
says to Allah,

***“…I will certainly mislead them all together except the devoted
servants of Your's from among them.” (38:82-83)***

And Allah says to the Shaytan,

***“…As for my servants, you have no power over them except those who
follow you from among the misled people….”*** **(15:41)**

And Músa surely was not among the misled servants of Allah!

So the sentence that “this is Shaytan's deed” refers to the mischief
started by the oppressor himself.  
 As for the sentence that “My Lord I have surely been unjust to myself,”
this must be interpreted in light of the meaning of ***dhulm***
explained in the case of Prophet Adam (a.s.). Its correct translation
would be: “My Lord I surely have put myself into harm” — after the
accidental death of the oppressor, Músa was pursued by the people of
Fir'awn.

Then how do you explain the sentence after that which says that
***“ighfir li”*** which means “forgive me” and ***“ghafara”*** which
means that Allah “forgave him”?

Again, the common meaning of ***ghafara*** (forgiving) is not applicable
here. The word ***“ghafara”*** also means “to watch over someone” or “to
guard someone” or “to cover something [i.e., protect it]”. This second
meaning does not imply any sin; it just means that by accidentally
killing the oppressor, Músa found himself in harm and trouble from the
people of Fir'awn; and, therefore, he prays ”…therefore, guard me and
Allah guarded him.”

This meaning of the last sentence is also supported by another verse of
the Qur'an which quotes Allah saying to Músa that, “…when you killed an
[Egyptian] man [accidentally and were being pursued by Fir'awn's
people], We delivered you from the worry…” (20:40) So the ***dhulm*** is
explained in this verse as “worry”; and ***“ghafara”*** is explained as
“delivered”.


