The Definition of ‘Ismah
========================

The word ***'ismah*** literally means “protection”. In Islamic
terminology, it means “infallibility”. Infallibility is defined as “a
spiritual grace ***(lutf)*** of Allah to a person which enables him to
abstain from sins by his own free will.”[^1]

A person who has been given that grace of God is called a ***ma'sum*** ,
infallible, sinless.

This power of ***'ismah*** does not make the ***ma'sum*** person
incapable of committing sins. A ***ma'sum*** refrains from sins and
mistakes by his power and will. If it were otherwise, then there would
be no merit in being ***ma'sum***! A ***ma'sum*** is able to abstain
from sins because of (a) highest level of righteousness, and (b)
ever-present consciousness and love for God, and (c) certain knowledge
about the consequences of committing sins.

We come across some ordinary people who are very upright in their
character and would not even dream of committing certain sins or crimes.
The strength of their character makes them ***relatively*** an
infallible person.

For example, it is within the power of any person to go naked on the
streets. But would a person who was brought up as a good Muslim, ever
think of doing so? No, because it is far below his dignity to behave in
this way. It is not impossible for him to do so, but he will never even
imagine of doing so. Why? Because he has been taught and brought up with
the idea that such behaviour will tarnish his honour and is beneath the
dignity of a civilized human being.

Similarly, though a ***ma'sum*** has the ability to commit sin, he never
even imagines of committing a sin because (a) the love for God in his
heart leaves no room for displeasing Him by committing sins, and (b) he
is full aware of the consequences of committing sins.

[^1]: Al-Mufid, Tashihu 'l-I'tiqad, p. 128 (in vol. 5 of Musannafatu
'sh-Shaykhi 'l-Mufid, Qum, 1413 AH); al-Hilli, al-Babu 'l-Hadi 'Ashar,
p. 179 (Qum: Nashr Navid Islam, 1367 {solar}with Persian translation by
A.R.A. Bakhshaishi); also see its English by W.M. Miller (London: Luzac
& Co, 1958) p. 58-59.


