Why ‘Ismah?
===========

The prophets have to be ***ma'sum*** for the same reason for which they
were sent: to guide and lead the people towards God. God, who decided to
guide mankind, also intended to send immaculate and perfect human beings
as models and examples.

If they were not ***ma'sum***, then it would have been extremely
difficult even to believe in the message let alone the example they
present to us. There would be no trust or confidence in whatever they
say: it could be true; it could be false.

Sending fallible prophets would have defeated the very purpose for which
they were sent: for the prophets to lead and guide, for the people to
follow and obey.

**\* \* \***

The Qur'an also supports this reasoning.

The 1st Verse
-------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا لِيُطَاعَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not send any prophet, except so that he may be obeyed by the
will of Allah.”*** **(4:64)**

The verse very clearly presents the divine social order: the sole
purpose of the prophets on this earth is to be obeyed by their
followers, not that the followers are to check every action and
statement of their prophet and then decided whether they should obey or
not.

Such absolute obedience cannot be possible unless the prophets were
***ma'sum***, free from sins and mistakes.

The 2nd Verse
-------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe!*** ***Obey Allah and obey the Messenger…”***
**(4:59)**

In this verse, Allah is ordering us to obey Him and the Messenger. There
are at least ten other verses where Allah has used imperative forms to
order the believers to obey the prophets and messengers. Besides these
verses, there are also many verses where Allah describes the virtue of
obeying the prophets, and the dire consequences of disobeying them.[^1]

**Secondly, in most** such verses, Allah has mentioned obedience to
Himself alongside with the obedience to His messengers. Actually, in one
verse, obedience to the messenger is made synonymous with the obedience
to Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever obeys the Messenger has actually obeyed Allah.”***
**(4:80)**

Such assertion on part of Allah would have been impossible if the
prophets and the messengers were not ***ma'sum*** and infallible.
Otherwise, we would have found ourselves in an impossible situation: a
non-***ma'sum*** prophet or messenger exhorts us to do something which
is wrong—should we follow or not. In both cases, we would be doomed. If
we obeyed the prophet and committed the sin, then we would be guilty of
disobeying Allah who has told us not to commit sins. If we disobeyed the
prophet and refused to commit the sin, then we would be guilty of
disobeying Allah who has told us to obey the prophets and messengers in
an absolute way!

The 3rd Verse
-------------

To the above verses, add those verses in which Allah forbids you to obey
certain types of people who commit sins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا تُطِعِ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ وَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ وَلَا
تُطِعْ كُلَّ حَلَّافٍ مَهِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So do not obey those who accuse you of lying…& do not obey any mean
swearer…forbidder of good, one who steps beyond the limits, a
sinner.”*** **(68:8-10)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُطِعْ مِنْهُمْ آثِمًا أَوْ كَفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not obey among them a sinner or an ungrateful person.”***
**(76:24)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not obey the command of the prodigals…”*** **(26:151)**

When you put these verses alongside the previous verses, you will get
the complete picture:

a) The prophets are to be obeyed unconditionally.  
 b) The sinners and wrongdoers are not to be obeyed.  
 c) The only logical conclusion is that the prophets are not in the
categories of the sinners or the wrongdoers.

[^1]: See the following verses of the Qur'an: 4:14; 48:7; 33:66.


