Humanism & Infallibility
========================

A few Muslims intellectuals, swayed by the idea of humanism, relativity
and pluralism, wish to present the prophets and messengers of God as
fallible in order to justify the moral weaknesses found among ordinary
people.

This motive can also be observed in the early history of Islam when the
scholars attached to the political establishments tried to water down
the infallibility of the Prophet (S) in order to explain away the moral
weakness and ethical wrongdoings of the rulers of their time. We have
such examples in the modern era also.

Malcolm X, when he was a Minister in the Nation of Islam movement,
describes how he attempted to justify the adultery of the
self-proclaimed prophet, Elija Muhammad. He says:

“I thought of one bridge that could be used if and when the shattering
disclosure should become public. Loyal Muslims could be taught that a
man's accomplishments in his life outweigh his personal, human
weaknesses. Wallace Muhammad [Elija's son] helped me to review the
Qur'an and the Bible for documentation. David's adultery with Bathsheba
weighed less on history's scales, for instance, than the positive fact
of David's killing Goliath.

Thinking of Lot, we think not of incest, but of his saving the people
from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Or, our image of Noah isn't
of his getting drunk—but of his building the ark and teaching people to
save themselves from the flood. We think of Moses leading the Hebrews
from bondage, not of Moses' adultery with the Ethiopian women. In all of
the cases I reviewed, the positive outweighed the negative.”

When he described his damage control strategy to Elija Muhammad, the
leader said, “Son, I am not surprised…You always have had such a good
understanding of prophecy, and of spiritual things. You recognize that's
what all of this is—prophecy. You have the kind of understanding that
only an old man has. I am David…When you read about how David took
another man's wife. I'm that David. You read about Noah, who got
drunk—that's me. You read about Lot, who went and laid up with his own
daughters. I have to fulfill all of those things.”[^1]

Tom Harpur, a theologian, an ex-Minister of the Church, and a columnist
of the religious column of the ***Toronto Star***, wrote the article
“Not even Jesus claimed infallibility” on 2nd May 1993. Once Jesus was
stripped of infallibility, I was not at all surprised to see Harpur
taking the second step of publishing another article a year latter
entitled as “Gospels could support speculation that Jesus might have
been gay.”[^2]

This is what happens when you take away the infallibility from the
prophets and the messengers of God! Instead of looking up to them as
models and guides, people —especially those in position of power—
justify their own immoral behaviour and lifestyle by presenting the
prophets as fallible and sinners.

[^1]: A. Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (NY: Ballantine Books,
1964) p. 297-299.

[^2]: See The Toronto Star, May 2, 1993, p. B5; May 15, 1994, p. A13


