The Allegorical Verses of the Qur’an
====================================

After explaining the meaning and importance of ***'ismah*** for the
prophets and messengers of Allah which is also supported by the Qur'anic
verses we quoted above, some people become confused when they come
across verses which give an impression that Adam and other prophets
committed some sins.

This confusion will only be clear if we realize that the Qur'anic
verses, according to the Qur'an itself, are of two types:  
**He is the one who sent upon you the book: some of its verses are
clear** ***(muhkamât)*****—these are the basis of the Book, while others
ar**e allegorical ***(mutashâbihât)*****.**

***“As for those in whose hearts is*** ***perversity, they follow the
allegorical verses, seeking to mislead and seeking to give (their own)
interpretation. None know their (i.e., allegorical verses')
interpretation except Allah and those who are firmly rooted in
knowledge…” (3:7)***

Those who do not differentiate between the clear and the allegorical
verses will surely get confused when they apparently find two
conflicting messages from the verses of the Qur'an. The issue of
***'ismah*** is one of those issues in which people have become victim
of confusion.

**\* \* \* \* \***

The situation, at this stage of our discussion, is as follows:

Our earlier discussion concluded that the divine guides must be
immaculate and above reproach.  
 Many verses of the Qur'an support this view, as mentioned above.

But there are some verses of the Qur'an that apparently attribute sins
and wrongdoings to some prophets.

What should be done?
--------------------

We must accept those verses that are supported by our reason as the
clear ***(muhkamât)*** verses. And the other verses should be considered
allegorical ***(mutashâbihât)*** and their true meaning must be sought
in the light of the ***muhkamât,*** the teachings of the Prophet, and
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt who are the twin of the Qur'an by virtue of the
famous saying of the Prophet that “I am leaving two precious things
among you [for guidance]: the Book of Allah and my Ahlu 'l-bayt.”[^1]

In the next lesson, we will study those verses and see how can we
interpret them and, at the same time, hold on to our belief in the
infallibility of the prophets.

[^1]: Ibn Hajar al-Makki, as-Sawa'iqu 'l-Muhriqah, chapter 11, section
1.


