The Case of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.)
==================================

There are some verses in the Qur'an that apparently attribute sins and
wrong doings to Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.). We shall look at the three most
important such examples.

Chapter 6 (al-An'am) verses 75-80
---------------------------------

***[Remember] when Ibrahim said to his uncle, Azar, “Do you take idols
for gods? Surely I see you and your people in manifest error.” Thus We
were showing Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth so that he
might be of*** **(al-muqinin)** ***those who are sure [of their
faith].***

***So when the night outspread over Ibrahim, he saw a star; he said,
“This is my Lord.” But when the star set [in the morning,] he said,
”[This cannot be my Lord because it has passed away,] I do not like the
transitory [gods].”***

***[On the next night,] when he saw the moon rising, he said, “This is
my Lord.” But when the moon set he said, “If my Lord had not guided me,
then I shall surely be of*** **(adh-dhaliyn)** ***the people who have
gone astray.”***

***[In the morning,] when Ibrahim saw the sun rising, he said, “This
must be my Lord [because] this is greater [than the star and the moon!]”
But when the sun set, he said, “O my people, surely I am free from what
you associate [with Allah.] I have sincerely turned myself to Him who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not one of the
polytheists.”***

Many historians of religion take Ibrahim as the founder of the
monotheistic idea. This definitely goes against the Islamic view that
monotheism was the original faith of mankind from the days of Adam
(a.s.), and that later on people became polytheists.

The Qur'anic statements quoted above have been used as a proof of the
evolutionary phases in Ibrahim from polytheism to monotheism. This is,
obviously, an incorrect reading of the Qur'an.

1. This entire passage quoted above actually shows that Prophet Ibrahim
was actively engaged in combating idol - and nature-worshipping. Reading
the whole passage does not raise any problem about the ***'ismah*** of
Prophet Ibrahim. He did not raise the possibility of the star, the moon
and the sun being gods as a fact; it was raised only as a part of his
method of disproving such a possibility. In debates, it is quite common
to initially accept the view of your opponent in order to lead him to
your own view.

If you read the first part of the passage where Ibrahim is disputing
with his own uncle[^1] against idol-worshipping and also Allah's
statement that “We were showing…so that he might be of those who are
sure [of their faith],” it shows that he was a true believer before he
engaged in debate with the idol- and nature-worshippers.

2. Even the passage where he says, **“*****If my Lord*** ***had not
guided me, then I shall surely be of the people who have gone
astray*****,”** is a conditional statement. It says “if” and “then”. And
since the first part did not take place, therefore the second part is
not relevant.

Chapter 21 (al-Anbiya') verses 62-63
------------------------------------

In pursuant of his mission against idol-worshipping, Ibrahim one day
smashed all the all idols of the temple except the big one. Then the
Qur'an says:

***[The idol-worshippers] said, “Who has done this to our gods? He
surely must be one of the unjust people.” [Some of them] said, “We have
heard a youth speaking [ill] of them, and he is known as Ibrahim.”…***

[When Ibrahim was brought to the king,] he said, “Rather it was this
their leader that has done it— ask the [smashed idols] if they can
speak.”

The objection against ***'ismah*** is that if Ibrahim was ***ma'sum,***
how could he lie? Again, if we look at the entire passage, we see that
Ibrahim wanted to make his people realize that idols are not worth
worshipping—if they cannot defend themselves or even talk, then how can
they help you.

Secondly, Ibrâhím's answer is conditional: ”…if they can speak.”
Ibrâhím's answer was rhetorical and intended to force the people to
think. This becomes clearer from the following verse: 21:65-66

***…They said, “You know that the idols do not speak.” Ibrahim said,
“Well then, do you worship, besides Allah, [the idols] that neither
benefit you in any way nor harm you.”***

Chapter 2 (al-Baqarah) Verse 260
--------------------------------

***And [remember] when Ibrahim said, “My Lord! Show me how You give life
to the dead.” Allah said, “What, do you not believe [in resurrection]?”
He answered, “Certainly [I believe, I am asking this] so that my heart
may be at ease.”***

Allah said, “Take four of the birds….”

Some people use this incident as a proof that Ibrahim did not believe in
resurrection. This is absolutely incorrect. The question and answer are
themselves very obvious that he believed. “Certainly [I believe].”

Then why did he ask for a demonstration of resurrection?

Firstly, Ibrahim surely believed in God's power of giving life to dead.
However, this was a belief based on the revelation of Allah just as we
believe in it based on the information reached to us through the
prophets and the Imams.

Secondly, Ibrahim wanted to elevate the level of his belief from
“information” to “demonstration”. According to traditions, one day
Ibrahim saw a dead fish, half in the water, the other half outside the
water. He also saw that sea creatures were eating away one half of the
fish and land animals were eating away the other half. This incident
made Ibrahim wonder about the issue of resurrection. We are using the
word “wonder” not “doubt”. This is when he had the desire of seeing a
demonstration of Allah's power of resurrection, and this also explains
the way Allah asked him to kill and mix the parts of the four birds.

In conclusion, Ibrahim believed in resurrection before as well as after
this event. The difference is that his belief prior to this event was
based on the information about the future revealed to him by God;
whereas after this event, his belief in resurrection was based on visual
demonstration done by him with Allah's permission. This is similar to a
Muslim who has been to hajj: before his journey, he believed that the
Ka'bah existed; but the basis of his belief changed after his
journey—now he has seen the Ka'bah with his own eyes.

[^1]: The Qur'an uses the word “ab” for Azar who was an idol-worshipper.
He was not father of Ibrahim; he was his uncle. Look at the following
verse where he eventually disassociates himself from Azar: 9:114. On the
other hand, we see that Ibrahim, at the last stage of his life, prays
for his “walid,” a word that is used for the real father. See verse
14:41.


