Zakat (Part I of II)
====================

**Issue 1861:** \* It is obligatory to pay Zakat on the following
things:

1. Wheat

2. Barley

3. Dates

4. Raisins

5. Gold

6. Silver

7. Camel

8. Cow

9. Sheep (including goat)

10. As an obligatory precaution, upon the wealth in business

And if a person is the owner of any of these ten things he should, in
accordance with the conditions which will be mentioned later, put their
fixed quantity to one of the uses as prescribed.

**Issue 1862:** On the basis of obligatory precaution, Zakat should be
paid on Sult, which is a soft, grain like wheat with the property of
barley and on 'alas, which is like wheat, and is the food of the people
of San'a (Yemen).

**Issue 1863:** \* Payment of Zakat becomes obligatory only when the
property reaches the prescribed taxable limit, and if the owner of the
property is a free person.

**Issue 1864:** If a person remains the owner of cow, sheep, camel, gold
and silver for 11 months, the payment of Zakat becomes obligatory for
him from the first of the 11th month; but he should calculate the
beginning of the new year after the end of the 12th month.

**Issue 1865:** \* The liability of Zakat on gold, silver and
merchandise is conditional to its owner being sane and Baligh. But in
the case of wheat, barley, raisins, camel, cow and sheep, being sane and
Baligh is not a prerequisite.

**Issue 1866:** \* Payment of Zakat on wheat and barley becomes
obligatory when they are recognised as wheat and barley. And Zakat on
raisins becomes obligatory when they call them grapes. And Zakat on
dates becomes obligatory when Arabs call it Tamar. However, the time for
determining the taxable limit, and payment of Zakat on wheat and barley
is when they are threshed, and grains are separated from chaff; and the
time for payment of Zakat on raisins and dates is when they are plucked.
This is also known as the time of drying up.

**Issue 1867:** \* For establishing the liability of Zakat on items like
wheat, barley, raisins and dates, it is not a prerequisite that they
should be in the control of their owner, so that he can dispose it or
have a discretion over it. If the owner is absent, and the goods are
neither in his control nor in that of his agent , like, when it has been
usurped, even than the liability of Zakat remains.

**Issue 1868:** \* For establishing the liability of Zakat on items like
gold, silver and merchandise, it is necessary that their owner is sane.
If the owner remained insane throughout a year, or part of it, Zakat
will not be obligatory upon him.

**Issue 1869:** If the owner of cow, sheep, camel, gold and silver
remains intoxicated or unconscious during a part of the year, he is not
excused from payment of Zakat, and the position is the same if at the
time of Zakat becoming Wajib on wheat, barley, palm-dates and raisins,
he is intoxicated or unconscious.

**Issue 1870:** \* For establishing liability of Zakat on items other
than wheat, barley, raisins and dates, it is necessary that the owner
has a discretion over their disposal etc. And if he is prevented from
that control because of usurpation, Zakat will not be wajib.

**Issue 1871:** If a person borrows gold, silver or any other thing on
which it is obligatory to pay Zakat, and it remains with him for a year,
he should pay Zakat on it, and the lender has to pay nothing.

Zakat of Wheat, Barley, Dates and Raisins.
------------------------------------------

**Issue 1872:** \* Zakat on wheat, barley, dates and raisins becomes
obligatory when their quantity reaches the taxable limit which is 300
saa' and it is said that it equals 847 kg.

**Issue 1873:** If a person and members of his family consume the
grapes, dates, barley and wheat, on which payment of Zakat has become
obligatory, or if, for example, he gives these things to a poor person
without the intention of paying Zakat, he should give Zakat on the
quantity used.

**Issue 1874:** If the owner of wheat, barley, dates and grapes dies
after Zakat on it has become obligatory, that quantity of Zakat should
be paid from of his estate. However, if he dies before Zakat becomes
obligatory, each one of his heirs, whose share reaches the taxable
limit, should pay Zakat from his own share.

**Issue 1875:** \* A person, who has been appointed by the Mujtahid to
collect Zakat, can demand it at the time of harvest when wheat and
barley are threshed and chaff is separated from grains, and when the
dates and grapes become dry. And if the owner of these items does not
give Zakat, and they perish, the owner should compensate for it.

**Issue 1876:** If payment of Zakat becomes obligatory on date tree and
grapes or the crop of wheat and barley after one becomes its owner, one
should pay Zakat on them.

**Issue 1877:** If a person sells the crop and trees after Zakat on
wheat, barley, palm-dates and grapes becomes obligatory, the seller
should pay the Zakat on them, and if he pays, it will not be obligatory
on the buyer to pay anything.

**Issue 1878:** \* If a person purchases wheat or barley or dates or
grapes, and knows that the seller has paid Zakat on them, or doubts
whether or not he has paid it, it is not obligatory on him (i.e. the
buyer) to pay anything. But if he knows that he (the seller) has not
paid Zakat on them, he should pay Zakat himself. But if the seller
cheats him by telling him that he has not paid Zakat, he can reclaim
from the seller the Zakat, if he has paid it.

**Issue 1879:** \* If the weight of wheat, barley, dates and grapes is
about 847 kilogrammes when they are wet, and reduces when they become
dry, payment of Zakat on it is not obligatory.

**Issue 1880:** \* If a person disposes of wheat, barley and dates
before the time of drying up, and if they reach the taxable limit after
they have dried up, he should pay Zakat on them.

**Issue 1881:** There are three kinds of dates:

(i) Those which are dried up. Rules regarding the Zakat payable on them
have already been explained above.

(ii) Those which are eaten when they are ripe.

(iii) Those which are eaten before they are ripened.

As for the second kind, if its weight comes to 847 kilogrammes after
having dried up, Zakat on it becomes obligatory as a recommended
precaution. And as for the third kind, Zakat on it is not obligatory.

**Issue 1882:** If a person has paid Zakat once on wheat, barley, dates
and raisins, no further Zakat is payable on it, even if they remain with
him for a few years.

**Issue 1883:** If wheat, barley, dates and grapes are watered with rain
or river, or if they benefit from the moisture of the land, like in the
case of Eygptian crops, the Zakat payable on them is 10% and if they are
watered with buckets etc. the Zakat payable on them is 5%.

**Issue 1884:** If wheat, barley, dates and grapes are watered with both
rain water as well as water supplied with buckets etc. and if it is
commonly said that they have been irrigated with bucket water etc. the
Zakat payable on them is 5% and if it is said that they have been
irrigated with river and rain water, the Zakat payable on them is 10%;
and if it is commonly said that they have been irrigated jointly with
both, the Zakat payable on them is 7.5%.

**Issue 1885:** If a person doubts about the common impression, not able
to determine whether the crop was watered by rain alone, or by rain and
buckets together, it will be sufficient for him to pay 7.5% Zakat.

**Issue 1886:** If a person doubts and does not know whether it will be
customarily held that the land was irrigated both ways, or that it has
been watered with buckets etc. it will be sufficient for him to pay 5%.
And the position will be the same if the common opinion would probably
be that it was irrigated with rain water.

**Issue 1887:** If wheat, barley, dates and grapes are irrigated with
rain and canal water and, although they did not need bucket water, yet
it was also supplied, with no helpful result for the crop, the Zakat on
them is 10%. And if they are watered with bucket water, without having
any need of canal and rain water, but are also supplied with canal and
rain water without being helpful to the crop, the Zakat on them is 5%.

**Issue 1888:** \* If a crop is watered with bucket etc. and in the
adjoining land he raises a crop which benefits from the moisture of that
land (which is irrigated with bucket water etc.) and does not need extra
watering, the Zakat of the crop which is watered with bucket is 5% and
the Zakat of the crop in the adjoining land, as a precaution is 10%.

**Issue 1889:** \* A person cannot deduct the expenses incurred by him
on the production of wheat, barley, dates and grapes from the income
obtained from them, in order to determine the minimum taxable limit.
Hence if the weight of any one of them, before calculating the expenses,
was about 847 kilogrammes, he should pay Zakat on it.

**Issue 1890:** A person who has used seeds for farming, whether he
owned them or he bought them, cannot deduct their value from the total
harvest for calculating the minimum taxable limit. Rather, he should
calculate the taxable limit taking into account the entire crop.

**Issue 1891:** \* It is not obligatory to pay Zakat on what government
takes away from the goods or wealth itself. For example, if the harvest
is 2000 kilogrammes, and government takes 50 kilogrammes from it as
taxation, it is obligatory to pay zakat on 1950 kilogrammes only.

**Issue 1892:** As an obligatory precaution, a person cannot deduct from
the harvest the expenses incurred by him before Zakat became due, paying
Zakat on the balance only.

**Issue 1893:** \* As for the expenses incurred after Zakat becomes
obligatory, a person cannot deduct them from the amount of the Zakat
liable on him, even if, as a precaution, he may have sought permission
from the Mujtahid or his Wakil.

**Issue 1894:** \* It is not obligatory for a person to wait till wheat
and barley pile up for threshing,and the grapes and dates become dry,
before paying Zakat. It is permissible that as soon as payment of Zakat
becomes due, he should calculate the amount of Zakat and pay.

**Issue 1895:** After Zakat becomes payable, a person can handover the
standing crops, or dates or grapes, before their being harvested or
picked, to the deserving poor, or to the Mujtahid or his Wakil, on the
basis of joint ownership, and then make them share the expenses.

**Issue 1896:** When a person handovers Zakat of crops or dates or
grapes in their essential forms to the Mujtahid or his Wakil, or to the
deserving poor person, it is not necessary for him to look after those
things as a joint owner, free of charge. He can charge them rental as
long as these things remain on his land for harvesting and drying up.

**Issue 1897:** \* If a person owns wheat, barley, dates and grapes in
various cities, where the time of ripening of crops and fruits differ
from one another, and they are not all received at one time, if all of
them are considered to be the harvest of one and the same year, and if
the thing which ripens first reaches the taxable limit i.e 847
kilogrammes (approx), he should pay Zakat on it at the time of its
ripening and should pay Zakat on the remaining crops when they are
received . But if the crop which is ready first, does not reach the
minimum taxable limit, he should wait till other crops are ready. If
they totally reach the taxable limit, Zakat on them will be obligatory,
otherwise Zakat will not be obligatory on them.

**Issue 1898:** If a date tree or vine bears fruit twice in a year, and
when combined they reach the minimum taxable limit, it is obligatory as
a precaution, to pay its Zakat.

**Issue 1899:** If a person has a quantity of dates or grapes which have
not dried up, and which would reach the taxable limit when dried up, he
can replace them with fresh fruits (i.e. dates and grapes) with the
purpose of giving Zakat, provided that, if they were dry they would be
equal to the obligatory amount of Zakat.

**Issue 1900:** If it is already obligatory on a person to pay Zakat on
dry dates or raisins, he cannot replace it with fresh, green dates or
grapes. And, if he calculates the value of Zakat and gives green grapes
or dates or other dry raisins or dates against that value, it is a
matter of Ishkal. Also, if it is obligatory on a person to pay Zakat on
green dates or grapes, he cannot pay it with dry dates or raisins, And,
if after calculating the value of Zakat, he pays it from other dates or
grapes, it will be a matter of Ishkal even if the other dates and grapes
were green and fresh.

**Issue 1901:** If a person dies with a debt, and has a property on
which Zakat has become due, it is necessary that, in the first instance,
the entire Zakat should be paid out from that property, and thereafter
pay his debt.

**Issue 1902:** \* If a person dies with a debt and also has wheat,
barley, dates or grapes,and, before Zakat on these things became
obligatory, his heirs paid his debt from other property, the heir, whose
share equals to 847 kilogrammes (approx) should pay Zakat. And if the
debts of the deceased was not paid before Zakat on these things became
obligatory, and if his estate just equals his debt, it is not obligatory
for the heirs to pay any Zakat. And if the property of the deceased is
more than his debt, and if the debt calls for payment from a quantity of
wheat, barley ,dates and grapes, then whatever is paid towards the debt
will have no liability of Zakat. In the residue, whoever from the heir
receives a share equal to the minimum taxable limit, should pay Zakat.

**Issue 1903:** If wheat, barley, dates and raisins on which Zakat has
become obligatory, are of good quality and inferior quality, the
obligatory precaution is that Zakat for each of the two categories
should be given separately from its respective type.

Minimum Taxable Limit of Gold
-----------------------------

**Issue 1904:** There are two taxable limits of gold: The first limit is
20 mithqals (Sharee'), one mithqal being equal to 3.456 gms. Hence when
the quantity of gold reaches 20 mithqals and other requisite conditions
are also fulfilled, one should pay 1/40th part of it, which is equal to
1.728 gms, as Zakat. And if the quantity of gold does not reach this
limit, it is not obligatory to pay Zakat on it. The second taxable limit
of gold is applicable when gold, in addition to 20 mithqal sharee' is
further increased. If an additional of 4 mithqal sharee' takes place to
20 sharee' mithqals , one should pay Zakat on the total quantity at the
rate of 2.5%. And if the addition is less than 4 sharee' mithqals, Zakat
will be payable on 20 sharee' mithqals only; and it will not be
obligatory to pay it on the additional quantity. The same rule applies
as and when ongoing additions take place in the quantity of gold, like,
if a further increase of 4 mithqals takes place, Zakat should be paid on
the entire quantity, and if the increase is less than that, no Zakat
will be payable.

Taxable Limit of Silver
-----------------------

**Issue 1905:** There are two minimum taxable limits for silver: The
first is 105 ordinary mithqals, equal to 483.88 gms. Therefore, when the
quantity of silver reaches that limit, and other necessary conditions
are also fulfilled one should pay 2.5% of it as Zakat. And if the
quantity of silver does not reach the aforesaid limit, it is not
obligatory to pay Zakat on it.

The second limit of silver is when there is an addition of 21 mithqals,
that is, if an addition of 21 mithqals takes place to 105 mithqals, the
Zakat should be paid on 126 mithqals. If the addition is less than 21
mithqals he should pay Zakat on 105 mithqals only, and no Zakat is
payable on the additional quantity. The same rule applies as and when
ongoing additions take place in the quantity of silver, like, if 21
mithqals are further added , he should pay Zakat on the entire quantity
and if the addition is less than that the quantity which has been added
and is less than 21 mithqals, is not liable to any Zakat. Thus, if a
person gives 1/40 of all the gold or silver he possesses, he will have
paid the obligatory Zakat, and sometimes even more than that. For
example, if a person has 110 mithqals of silver and gives 2.5% of that,
he will have paid Zakat on 105 mithqals which was obligatory, and also
sometimes on 5 mithqals which was not obligatory.

**Issue 1906:** If a person possesses gold or silver which has reached
the taxable limit, and even if he has paid Zakat on it, he should
continue to pay Zakat on it every year, as long as it does not reduce
from the minimum limit.

**Issue 1907:** Zakat on gold and silver becomes obligatory only when
they are made into coins, and are in currency for transactions. Zakat
should, however, be paid on them even if their stamp has been effaced.

**Issue 1908:** It is obligatory, as a precaution, to pay Zakat on
coined gold and silver worn by women as ornaments, as long as such coins
are legal tenders, that is, transactions are made with them as gold and
silver currency. It is not, obligatory to pay Zakat on them if they have
ceased to be legal tenders.

**Issue 1909:** If a person possesses gold and silver neither of which
is equal to the first minimum limit, for example, if he has 104 mithqals
of silver and 19 mithqals of gold, it is not obligatory for him to pay
Zakat.

**Issue 1910:** As stated earlier, Zakat on gold and silver becomes
obligatory only when its taxable quantity is owned by a person for 11
months continuously. If, therefore, the quantity falls below the taxable
limit at any time during the period of 11 months, it is not obligatory
for him to pay Zakat on them.

**Issue 1911:** \* If during the period of 11 months, a person who
possesses gold and silver exchanges them for something else, or melts
them, it is not obligatory for him to pay Zakat on them. However, if he
changes them from coins to plain gold or silver, to avoid payment of
Zakat, the obligatory precaution is that he should pay Zakat.

**Issue 1912:** If a person melts gold and silver coins in the twelfth
month, he should pay Zakat on them, and if their weight or value is
reduced because of melting, he should pay Zakat which was obligatory on
those coins before they were melted.

**Issue 1913:** \* If gold and silver possessed by a person is partly of
superior quality and partly of inferior quality, he can pay Zakat of
each from its respective quality. But, as a precaution, he should not
pay entire Zakat based on the inferior quality. In fact, it is better
that he should give the entire Zakat based on the gold and silver of
superior quality.

**Issue 1914:** If gold and silver coins have more than usual quantity
of alloy, but if they are still known as gold and silver coins, payment
of Zakat on them is obligatory if they have reached the taxable limit,
although in their pure form they may not reach the taxable limit. But,
if they are not called gold and silver coins, liability of Zakat on them
is a matter of Ishkal, even if in their pure form they may reach the
taxable limit.

**Issue 1915:** If gold and silver coins have usual amount of alloy in
them, he can pay Zakat on them with gold and silver coins which contain
more than usual quantity of alloy, or with coins which are not made of
gold and silver, provided that its quantity equals the value of Zakat.

Zakat Payable on Camel, Cow and Sheep (including Goat)
------------------------------------------------------

**Issue 1916:** \* For Zakat on camels, cows and sheep (including goats)
there are two additional conditions, besides the other usual conditions:

The animal should have grazed in the jungle or open fields for one year.
If it is fed with cut or plucked grass, or if it has grazed in the farm
owned by its owner, or somebody else, there is no Zakat on it, except
when it was only a matter of day or two during which the animal fed
itself with the grass from its master's farm.

As a matter of precaution, it is not a condition that the camel, cow or
small cattle should not have worked during the whole year. In fact,
Zakat on them will be obligatory, if they are used for irrigation and
ploughing the land.

**Issue 1917:** If a person purchases or leases for his camel, cow and
sheep, a pasture which has not been cultivated by anyone, Zakat becoming
liable is a matter of Ishkal, though as a precaution, Zakat be paid.
But, if he pays tax on grazing his animals, then he should pay Zakat.

Minimum Taxable Limit of Camels
-------------------------------

**Issue 1918:** Camel has 12 taxable limits:

(i) 5 camels: and the Zakat on them is one sheep. As long as the number
of camels does not reach five, no Zakat is payable on them.

(ii) 10 camels: and the Zakat on them is 2 sheep.

(iii) 15 camels: and the Zakat on them is 3 sheep.

(iv) 20 camels: and the Zakat on them is 4 sheep.

(v) 25 camels: and the Zakat on them is 5 sheep.

(vi) 26 camels: and the Zakat on them is a camel which has entered the
2nd year of its life.

(vii) 36 camels: and the Zakat on them is a camel which has entered the
3rd year of its life.

(viii) 46 camels: and the Zakat on them is a camel which has entered the
4th year of its life.

(ix) 61 camels: and the Zakat on them is a camel which has entered the
5th year of its life.

(x) 76 camels: and the Zakat on them is 2 camels which have entered the
3rd year of their life.

(xi) 91 camels: and the Zakat on them is 2 camels which have entered the
4th year of their life.

(xii) 121 camels and above: In this case, the person concerned should
either calculate the camels on group of 40 each, and give for each set
of forty camels a camel, which has entered the third year of its life;
or calculate them on groups of 50 each and give as Zakat, for every 50
camels, a camel which has entered the 4th year of its life, or he may
calculate them in the groups of forty and fifty. However, in every case
he should calculate in such a way that there should be no balance, and
even if there is a balance, it should not exceed nine. For example, if
he has 140 camels he should give for 100 camels, two such camels as have
entered the fourth year of their life, and for the remaining forty
camels, he should pay one camel which has entered the third year of its
life. And the camel to be given in Zakat should be female.

**Issue 1919:** It is not obligatory to pay Zakat in between two taxable
limits. Therefore, if the number of camels with a person exceeds the
first taxable limit, which is 5 camels, but does not reach the second
taxable limit which is 10 camels, he should pay Zakat on only 5 of them,
and the same way with the succeeding taxable limits.

The Minimum Taxable Limit of Cows
---------------------------------

**Issue 1920:** Cow has two taxable limits. Its first taxable limit is
30. If the number of cows owned by a person reaches 30, and other
conditions mentioned above are fulfilled , he should give by way of
Zakat a calf which has entered the 2nd year of its life; and the
obligatory precaution is that the calf should be a male. And its second
taxable limit is 40, and its Zakat is a female calf which has entered
the 3rd year of its life. And it is not obligatory to pay Zakat when the
number of the cows is between 30 and 40. For example, if a person
possesses 39 cows, he should pay Zakat on 30 cows only. Furthermore, if
he possesses more than 40 cows but their number does not reach 60, he
should pay Zakat on 40 cows only. And when their number reaches 60,
which is twice as much as the first taxable limit, he should give as
Zakat 2 calves, which have entered the 2nd year of their life. And
similarly, as the number of the cows increases, he should calculate
either in thirties or in forties or from 30 and 40, and should pay Zakat
in accordance with the rule explained above. However, he should
calculate in such a way, that there should be no remainder, and in case
there is a remainder, it should not exceed 9. For example, if he has 70
cows, he should calculate at the rate of 30 and 40 and should pay Zakat
for 30 of them at the rate prescribed for 40 of them, because if he
calculates at the rate of 30, 10 cows will be left without Zakat being
paid on them.

Taxable limit of Sheep (Including Goats)
----------------------------------------

**Issue 1921:** Sheep has 5 taxable limits:

• The 1st taxable limit is 40, and its Zakat is one sheep. And as long
as the number of sheep does not reach 40, no Zakat is payable on them.

• The 2nd taxable limit is 121, and its Zakat is 2 sheep

• The 3rd taxable limit is 201, and its Zakat is 3 Sheep

• The 4th taxable limit is 301, and its Zakat is 4 Sheep

• The 5th taxable limit is 400 and above, and in this case calculation
should be made in hundreds, and one sheep should be given as Zakat for
each group of 100 sheep. And it is not necessary that Zakat should be
given from the same sheep. It will be sufficient if some other sheep are
given, or money equal to the price of the sheep is given as Zakat.

**Issue 1922:** It is not obligatory to pay Zakat for the number of
sheep between the two taxable limits. So, if the number of sheep exceeds
the first taxable limit (which is 40), but does not each the 2nd taxable
limit (which is 121), the owner should pay Zakat on 40 sheep only, and
no Zakat is due on the sheep exceeding that number, and the same rule
applies to the succeeding taxable limits.

**Issue 1923:** When the number of camels, cows and sheep reaches the
taxable limit, payment of Zakat an them becomes obligatory whether all
of them are males or all are females, or some of them are males and some
are females.

**Issue 1924:** In the matter of Zakat, cows and buffaloes are treated
to be of the same class, and Arabian and non-Arabian camels are also of
the same group. Similarly, for the purpose of Zakat, there is no
difference between a goat, a sheep and a one-year old lamb.

**Issue 1925:** If a person gives a sheep as Zakat, it is necessary, as
an obligatory precaution, that it should have at least entered the 2nd
year of its life, and if he gives a goat it should have, on the basis of
precaution, entered the 3rd year of its life.

**Issue 1926:** If a person gives a sheep as Zakat, there is no harm if
its value is slightly less as compared with his other sheep. However, it
is better that he should give as Zakat the sheep whose value is more
than his other sheep, and the same rule applies for cows and camels.

**Issue 1927:** If some persons are partners, then the person whose
share reaches the first taxable limit should pay Zakat. It is not
obligatory on the person whose share does not reach the first taxable
limit to pay Zakat.

**Issue 1928:** If a person has cows or camels, or sheep at various
places, and combined together they reach the taxable limit, he should
pay Zakat on them.

**Issue 1929:** Even if the cows, sheep and camels possessed by a person
are unhealthy and defective, he should pay Zakat on them.

**Issue 1930:** If all cows and sheep and camels possessed by a person
are unhealthy and defective, he can play Zakat from amongst them.
However, if all of them are healthy and young and with no defect, he
cannot pay the Zakat liable on them from unhealthy, defective and old
ones. In fact, if some of them are healthy and others are unhealthy, and
some are defective and others are without any defect, and some are old
and others are young, the obligatory precaution is that he should give
as Zakat those animals which are healthy, have no defect and are young.

**Issue 1931:** \* If before the expiry of the 11th month, a person
changes his cows, sheep and camels with something else, or changes his
taxable limit with an equivalent number of the same kind of animals -
for example, if he gives 40 sheep and takes new 40 sheep - it is not
obligatory on him to pay Zakat, if this was not done to avoid Zakat. But
if it was done to avoid Zakat, then as an obligatory precaution, Zakat
must be paid if their benefits are common, like, if he exchanges
milk-giving sheep for milk-giving sheep.

**Issue 1932:** If a person who is required to pay Zakat on cows, sheep
and camels, gives that Zakat from his other property, he should pay
Zakat on the animals every year as long as their number has not become
less than the taxable limit. But if he gives Zakat from those very
animals and they become less than the first taxable limit, payment of
Zakat is not obligatory on him. For example, if a person who owns 40
sheep, gives their Zakat out of his other property, he should pay one
sheep every year as long as their number does not become less than 40,
and if he pays Zakat from those very sheep, payment of Zakat will not be
obligatory on him till such time when their number reaches 40.

Zakat on Business Goods
-----------------------

Goods earned by commutative contracts, and set aside for investment in
business or profit earning, is, as a precaution, liable for Zakat if
certain conditions are fulfilled. The rate of Zakat is 1/40.

(i) The owner of the goods should be baligh and sane.

(ii) The goods should have reached the taxable limit, which is equal to
that of gold and silver.

(iii) The goods should have remained for one year ever since the owner
intented to invest it for profit.

(iv) The intention of investing it for profit should have remained
unchanged throughout the year. If the intention changes, like, when he
decides to spend it for maintenance, then he will not pay its Zakat.

(v) The owner should be actually capable of its disposal throughout the
year.

(vi) Throughout the year, the owner should have a buyer of the goods
equal to the capital or more. If, during the year, he gets a buyer for
the goods for less then capital outlay, it will not be obligatory upon
him to pay its Zakat.


