Zakat (Part II of II)
=====================

Disposal of Zakat
-----------------

***Issue*** 1933: \* Zakat can be spent for the following eight
purposes:

(i) It may be given to poor person, who does not possess actual or
potential means to meet his own expenses, as well as that of his family
for a period of one year. However, a person who has an art or possesses
property or capital to meet his expenses, is not classified as poor.

(ii) It may be paid to a miskin (a destitute person) who leads a harder
life than a Faqir (a poor person).

(iii) It can be given to a person who is a Wakil of Holy Imam (A.S.) or
his representative to collect Zakat, to keep it in safe custody, to
maintain its accounts and to deliver it to the Imam or his
representative or to the poor.

(iv) It can be given to those non-Muslims who may, as a result, be
inclined to Islam, or may assist the Muslims with the Zakat for fighting
against the enemies, or for other justified purposes. It can be given to
those Muslims also whose faith in the Prophet or in the Wilayat of
Amirul Momineen is unstable and weak, provided that, as a result of
giving, their faith is entrenched.

(v) It can be spent to purchase the slaves to set them free, the details
of which have been given in its relevant Chapter.

(vi) It can be given to an indebted person who is unable to repay his
debt.

(vii) It may be spent in the way of Allah for things which has common
benefit to the Muslims; for example, to construct a mosque, or a school
for religious education, or to keep the city clean, or to widen or to
build tar roads.

(viii) It may be given to a stranded traveller.

These are the situations in which Zakat can be spent. But in situation
number 3 and 4, the owner cannot spend without the permission of Imam
(A.S.) or his representative; and the same applies to the 7th situation,
as per obligatory precaution. Rules relating to these are explained in
the following articles:

***Issue*** 1934: The obligatory precaution is that a poor and destitute
person should not receive Zakat more than his expenses and those of his
family, for one year. And if he possesses some money or commodity, he
should receive Zakat equivalent to the shortfall in meeting his expenses
for a year.

***Issue*** 1935: If a person had enough amount to meet his expenses for
a year, and he spent something out of it, and then doubts whether or not
the remaining amount will be sufficient to meet his expenses for one
year, he cannot receive Zakat.

***Issue*** 1936: An artisan, a land-owner, or a merchant whose income
is less than his expenses for one year can take Zakat to meet his annual
shortfall, and it is not necessary for him to sell off his tools,
property, or spend his capital in order to meet his expenses.

***Issue*** 1937: \* A poor person who has no means of meeting his own
expenses, and those of his family, for one year, can receive Zakat, even
if he owns a house in which he lives, or possesses a means of transport,
without which he cannot lead his life, or it may be to maintain his
self-respect. And

the same rule applies to household equipments, utensils and dresses for
summer and winter, and other things needed by him (i.e. he can take
Zakat even if he possesses these things). And if a poor person does not
have these essential things, he can purchase them from Zakat, if he
needs them.

***Issue*** 1938: If it is not difficult for a poor person to learn an
art, he should not, as an obligatory precaution, depend on Zakat.
However, he can receive Zakat as long as he is learning the art.

***Issue*** 1939: \* If a person who was poor previously says that he is
still poor, Zakat can be given to him, even if the person giving Zakat
may not be satisfied with what he says. But if a person was not known to
be poor previously, Zakat cannot be given to him, as a precaution, till
one is satisfied about his poverty.

***Issue*** 1940: If a person says that he is poor, and he was not poor
previously, and if one is not satisfied with what he says, the
obligatory precaution is that Zakat should not be given to him.

***Issue*** 1941: If a Zakat giver is the creditor of a poor person, he
can adjust the debt against Zakat.

***Issue*** 1942: If a poor man dies, and his property is not as much as
it may liquidate his debt, the creditor can adjust his claim against
Zakat. And even if his property is sufficient to clear his debt, but his
heirs do not pay his debt, or the creditor cannot get back his money for
any other reason, he can adjust the debt against Zakat.

***Issue*** 1943: It is not necessary for a person who gives Zakat to
mention to the poor that it is Zakat. In fact, if the poor feels ashamed
of it, it is recommended that he should not mention at all that he has
given with the intention of Zakat.

***Issue*** 1944: \* If a person gives Zakat to someone thinking that he
is poor, and understands later that he was not poor, or owing to his not
knowing the rule, gives Zakat to a person who he knows is not poor, it
will not be sufficient. Hence, if the Zakat which he gave to that poor
still exists, he should take it back from him, and give it to the person
entitled to it. And if that thing does not exist, and the person who
took it was aware that he was given from Zakat, the Zakat payer should
obtain its substitute from him, and give it to the person entitled to
it. And if the receiver was not aware that it was Zakat, nothing will be
taken from him, and the person who has to pay Zakat will give the
substitute from his own property.

***Issue*** 1945: A person who is indebted and is unable to repay his
debt, can receive Zakat to repay it, even if he has the means to meet
his expenses for one year. However, it is necessary that he should not
have spent the loan for some sinful purpose.

***Issue*** 1946: \* If a man gives Zakat to someone who is indebted and
who cannot repay his debt, and understands later that he had spent the
loan for sinful purpose, if that debtor is poor, the man can adjust the
sum as Zakat given to poor.

***Issue*** 1947: If a person is indebted and is unable to repay his
debt, although he is not poor, the creditor can adjust against Zakat the
amount which that person owes him.

***Issue*** 1948: If a traveller is stranded because he has no money
left with him, or his means of transport does not function, he can
receive Zakat, provided that his journey is not for a sinful purpose,
and that he cannot reach his destination by taking a loan or by selling
something. He can receive Zakat even if he is not poor in his hometown.
But if he can raise money for the expenses of his journey to another
place nearby, by borrowing money or selling something, he should take
only that much of Zakat, which would enable him to reach that place.

***Issue*** 1949: \* If a stranded traveller takes Zakat, and upon
reaching his hometown finds that some of it has remained unspent, he
should send it back to the giver of Zakat, and if he cannot do so, he
should give it to the*Mujtahid* mentioning that it is Zakat.

Qualifications of those Entitled to Receive Zakat
-------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1950: \* It is necessary that the person to whom Zakat is
paid is a Shi'ah Ithna'ashari. If, therefore, one pays Zakat to a person
under the impression that he is a Shi'ah, and it transpires later that
he is not a Shi'ah, one should pay Zakat again.

***Issue*** 1951: If a child or an insane Shi'ah person is poor, a
person can give Zakat to his guardian with the intention that whatever
he is giving will belong to the child or to the insane person.

***Issue*** 1952: If a person has no access to the guardian of the child
or of the insane person, he can utilise Zakat for the benefit of the
child or of the insane person himself, or through an honest person. And
he will do the Niyyat of Zakat, when the money has reached for the
purpose.

***Issue*** 1953: \* Zakat can be given to a poor man who begs, but can
not be given to a person who spends it for sinful purpose. In fact, as a
precaution, it cannot be given to a poor man who, as a result of
receiving, feels encouraged to commit sins, even if he does not spend
that sum for sinful purposes. In fact, as a precaution, it cannot be
given to a poor man who, as a result of receiving, feels encouraged to
commit sins, even if he does not spend that sum for sinful purposes.

***Issue*** 1954: \* As an obligatory precaution, Zakat cannot be given
to a drunkard, or one who does not offer daily prayers, or one who
commits major sins openly.

***Issue*** 1955: The debt of a person who cannot repay his debt can be
paid from Zakat even if his maintenance is obligatory on the one giving
Zakat.

***Issue*** 1956: A person cannot pay from Zakat the expenses of his
dependents, like, his children. But, if he himself fails to maintain
them, others may give them from Zakat.

***Issue*** 1957: \* There is no harm if a person gives Zakat to his
deserving son for spending on his wife, servant and maid servant.

***Issue*** 1958: Father cannot pay for the religious or secular books
required by his son for education, from Zakat money, except when public
welfare warrants it, and as a precaution, he has sought the permission
of the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1959: \* If a father is not financially capable of getting
his son married, he can get him married by spending Zakat, and the son
can similarly do so for his father.

***Issue*** 1960: \* Zakat cannot be given to a wife whose husband
provides for her subsistence, nor to one whose husband does not provide
for her subsistence, if it is possible for her to refer to*Mujtahid* who
would compel him to provide.

***Issue*** 1961: If a woman who has contracted temporary marriage
(Mut'ah) is poor, her husband and others can give her Zakat. But if the
contract had a condition that the husband would maintain her for her
expenses, or if it is obligatory on the husband for some other reason to
maintain her, and he fulfils the obligation, Zakat cannot be given to
her.

***Issue*** 1962: A wife can give Zakat to her husband who may be poor
even if the husband may in turn spend that Zakat for her, being his
wife.

***Issue*** 1963: \* A Sayyid cannot take Zakat from a non-Sayyid.
However, if Khums and other religious dues are not sufficient to meet
the expenses of a Sayyid and he has no alternative, he may take Zakat
from a non-Sayyid.

***Issue*** 1964: Zakat can be given to a person about whom one is not
sure whether he is a Sayyid or not.

Intention of Zakat
------------------

***Issue*** 1965: \* A person should give Zakat with the intention of
Qurbat, that is, to comply with the pleasure of Almighty Allah. And he
should specify in his Niyyat, whether he is giving the Zakat on his
wealth, or Zakatul Fitra. Also, if it is obligatory on him to give Zakat
on wheat and barley, and if he wants to pay a sum of money equal to the
value of Zakat, he should specify whether he is paying in lieu of wheat
or barley.

***Issue*** 1966: \* If a person becomes liable to pay Zakat on various
items, and he gives a part of Zakat without making Niyyat of any of
those items, if the thing which he has given is of the same class as any
one of those items, it will be reckoned to be Zakat on that very
commodity. For instance, if it is obligatory on a person to pay Zakat on
40 sheep and on 15 mithqals of gold, and he gives one sheep as Zakat
without any specified Niyyat of either, it will be treated to be Zakat
on sheep. But if he gives some silver coins or bank notes, which does
not belong to either class, as it is neither sheep nor gold, it is a
matter of*Ishkal* and the Zakat will not be considered as paid.

***Issue*** 1967: If a person appoints someone as his representative to
give away the Zakat of his property, he should, while handing over Zakat
to the representative, make Niyyat that whatever his representative will
later give to a poor is Zakat. And it is better that his Niyyat remains
constant till Zakat reaches the poor.

***Issue*** 1968: \* If a person gives Zakat to poor, or to
the*Mujtahid* , without making the Niyyat of Qurbat, it will be accepted
as Zakat, although he will have committed a sin for not having the
Niyyat of Qurbat.

Miscellaneous Rules of Zakat
----------------------------

***Issue*** 1969: As a precaution, when wheat and barley are separated
from chaff, and when dates and grapes become dry, their owner should
give Zakat to poor or separate it from his wealth. Similarly, Zakat on
gold, silver, cow, sheep and camel should be given to poor, or separated
from one's wealth after the expiry of eleven months. However, if he
awaits a particular poor

person, or wishes to give it to a poor with some excelling virtue, he
may not separate the Zakat from his wealth.

***Issue*** 1970: It is not necessary that after separating Zakat, a
person should pay it at once to a deserving person. But, if a deserving
person is accessible, then the recommended precaution is that payment of
Zakat should not be delayed.

***Issue*** 1971: If a person who could deliver Zakat to a deserving
person did not give it, and it was lost due to his negligence, he should
give its replacement.

***Issue*** 1972: \* If a person who can deliver Zakat to a deserving
person, does not do so, and it is lost without his being careless about
it, if he had a good reason for the delay, there is no obligation to
make its substitute, like, if he was waiting for a particular poor
person, or if he wanted to distribute over many poor people, gradually.
But if he had no good reason for the delay, he should give its
substitute.

***Issue*** 1973: If a person separates Zakat from that wealth on which
it had become due, he has the right of disposal over the remaining
amount, and if he separates it from his other property, he has the
discretion over the entire property.

***Issue*** 1974: When a person has separated Zakat from his property,
he cannot utilise it and replace it with other payment.

***Issue*** 1975: If some profit accrues from the Zakat which a person
has set apart - for example, if a sheep which has been ear-marked for
Zakat gives birth to a lamb - it belongs to the poor.

***Issue*** 1976: If one entitled to Zakat is present when a person
separates Zakat from his property, it is better that he should give the
Zakat to him, except that he has a person in view who is preferable, for
some reason, to receive Zakat.

***Issue*** 1977: \* If a person trades with the property set apart for
Zakat, without obtaining the permission of the*Mujtahid* , and sustains
a loss, he should not deduct anything from Zakat. However, if he makes a
profit, he should give it, as an obligatory precaution, to a person
entitled to receive Zakat.

***Issue*** 1978: If a person gives in advance to poor, with the Niyyat
of Zakat while it has not yet become obligatory on him, it cannot be
treated as Zakat. But after Zakat becomes obligatory on him, he can
calculate it as Zakat, provided that the thing given is not used up, and
that the poor continues to be deserving.

***Issue*** 1979: If a poor person knows that Zakat has not become
obligatory on a particular person, and takes something from him as
Zakat, and it is used up or destroyed while it is with him, he is
responsible for it. And when Zakat becomes obligatory on the person, if
the poor is still deserving, the Zakat payer can adjust the Zakat
liability against what he had already given.

***Issue*** 1980: If a poor person did not know that Zakat had not
become obligatory on a particular person, and he takes something from
him as Zakat and it perishes while it is with him (i.e the pauper) he
will not be responsible for it, and the person who gives Zakat cannot
adjust it against Zakat

***Issue*** 1981: It is*Mustahab* to give Zakat on cows, sheep and
camels to those poor who have integrity; and while giving Zakat he
should give preference to his deserving relatives over others.
Similarly, he should give preference to the learned persons over those
who are not learned, and to those who do not beg over those who beg.
But, if giving Zakat to a particular poor is better for some other
reason, it is*Mustahab* that Zakat be given to him.

***Issue*** 1982: It is better that Zakat is given openly, and*Mustahab*
Sadaqah are given secretly.

***Issue*** 1983: \* If there are no deserving persons in one's
hometown, nor can he spend it for any other purpose prescribed for
Zakat, and he does not hope that he will be able to find a deserving
person later, he should take Zakat to some other town, and spend it for
an appropriate purpose. With the permission of the*Mujtahid* , he can
deduct from Zakat the expenses of taking it to the other town, and he
will not be responsible if it is lost.

***Issue*** 1984: Even if a deserving person is available in the home
town of a person, he can take Zakat to another town. However, he will
pay himself the expenses of taking it to the other town, and will be
responsible if it is lost, except when he takes it with the directive of
the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1985: The charges for weighing and scaling of wheat, barley,
raisins and dates, which a person gives as Zakat, are to be paid by him.

***Issue*** 1986: If a person has to pay as Zakat 2 mithqals and 15
grams of silver or more, he should not, as a recommended precaution,
give less than 2 mithqals and 15 grams to one poor. Also, if he has to
pay something other than silver, like wheat and barley, and its value
reaches 2 mithqals and 15 grams of silver he should not, as a
recommended precaution, give less than that to one poor.

***Issue*** 1987: It is Makrooh for a man to request the deserving
person to sell back to him the Zakat which he has received from him.
However, if the deserving person wishes to sell the thing which he has
received after its price has been agreed, the man who has given him
Zakat will have the priority over others.

***Issue*** 1988: If a person doubts whether or not he gave the Zakat
which had been obligatory on him, and the property on which Zakat was
due is also existent, he should give Zakat even if his doubts is with
regard to Zakat of earlier years. And if the liable property no more
exist, no Zakat is due on it even if the doubt relates to Zakat for the
current year.

***Issue*** 1989: \* A poor man cannot compromise for a quantity less
than the quantity of Zakat before having received it, or accept as Zakat
something costlier than its actual value. Similarly, the owner cannot
give Zakat to a deserving person on a condition that he would return it.
However, there is no objection if the deserving poor, after having
received the Zakat agrees to return it. For example, a person owes a
large sum of Zakat, and because of poverty is unable to pay Zakat, and
he repents for not having paid and seeks forgiveness from Allah, the
deserving recipient can, of his own pleasure, bestow it back on him
after having received it.

***Issue*** 1990: \* A person cannot purchase the Holy Qur'an or
religious books or prayer books from the Zakat property, and dedicate
them as

WAQF, except when it becomes necessary for public welfare, and for that
also, as an obligatory precaution, he must seek permission from
the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1991: A person cannot purchase property with Zakat and
bestow it upon his children or upon persons whose maintenance is
obligatory on him, so that they spend its income for their expenses.

***Issue*** 1992: \* A person can spend Zakat to go to Hajj, Ziyarat
etc. even if he may not be poor, or draw from Zakat an amount equal to
his annual expenses, provided that it is in the interest of the public,
and if, as a precaution, he has obtained permission from the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1993: \* If the owner of a property makes a poor man his
agent to distribute Zakat of his wealth, and if the poor has a feeling
that the intention of the owner was that he himself (i.e. the poor man)
should not take anything out of Zakat, he cannot take anything from it
for himself. But if he is sure that the owner had no such intention, he
can take for himself also.

***Issue*** 1994: If a poor man gets camel, cow, sheep, gold and silver
as Zakat and if the conditions for Zakat becoming obligatory are
fulfilled, he will have to give Zakat on them.

***Issue*** 1995: \* If two persons are joint owners of a property on
which Zakat has become obligatory, and one of then pays Zakat for his
share, and thereafter they divide the property, even if he knows that
his partner has not paid Zakat on his share, and is not going to pay it
afterwards, there is no objection if he exercises the right of
discretion over his own share.

***Issue*** 1996: \* If a person owes Khums or Zakat and also owes
Kaffara and Nadhr etc., but he is also indebted and cannot make all
these payments, and if the property on which Khums and Zakat has become
obligatory has not been used up, he should give Khums and Zakat, and if
it has ben used up, the debt, Zakat and Khums will have priority over
Kaffarah and Nadhr.

***Issue*** 1997: \* If a person owes Khums or Zakat and has an
obligation of Hajj and is also indebted, and he dies, and his property
is not sufficient for all these things, if the property on which Khums
and Zakat become obligatory has not ceased to exist, Khums or Zakat
should be paid and the balance should be spent on repaying the debt. And
if the property on which Khums and Zakat became obligatory has ceased to
exist his property should be spent to pay his debt, and if anything
remains it should be spent on Hajj. If there is still an excess, then it
must be divided between Khums and Zakat.

***Issue*** 1998: \* If a person is acquiring knowledge and as an
alternative he can earn his livelihood, Zakat can be given to him if
acquiring that knowledge is obligatory. And if acquiring that knowledge
is in the public interest, he can be given Zakat with the permission of
the*Mujtahid* , as a precaution. In the absence of these two
circumstances, it is not permissible to give him from Zakat.

Zakat of Fitrah
---------------

***Issue*** 1999: \* At the time of sunset on Eid ul fitr night (i.e.
the night preceding Eid day), whoever is adult and sane and is neither
unconscious, nor poor, nor the slave of another, he should give, on his
own behalf as well as on behalf of all those who are his dependents,
about three kilos per head of wheat or barley or dates or raisins or
rice or millet etc. It is also sufficient if he pays the price of one of
these items in cash. As per obligatory precaution, he should not give
from that food which is not staple in his place, even if it be wheat,
barley, dates or raisins.

***Issue*** 2000: If a person is not in a position to meet his own
expenses, as well as those of his family, for a period of one year, and
has also no one who can meet these expenses, then he is a poor person,
and it is not obligatory on him to pay Zakat of fitrah.

***Issue*** 2001: One should pay Fitrah on behalf of all those persons
who are treated as his dependents at his house on the nightfall of Eid
ul fitr, whether they be young or old, Muslims or non-Muslims;
irrespective of whether or not it is obligatory on him to maintain them,
and whether they are in his own town or in some other town.

***Issue*** 2002: If a person appoints his dependent who is in another
town, to pay his own fitrah from his property, and is satisfied that he
will pay the fitrah, it will not be necessary for the person to pay that
dependent's fitrah.

***Issue*** 2003: \* It is obligatory to pay the fitrah of a guest who
arrives at his house before sunset on Eid ul fitr night, with his
consent, and he becomes his temporary dependent.

***Issue*** 2004: The fitrah of a guest who arrives at his house on the
night of Eid ul fitr before sunset, without his consent, and stays with
him for some time, is also, as per obligatory precaution, wajib upon the
host. Similarly, if he is forced to maintain someone, his fitrah will
also be obligatory upon him.

***Issue*** 2005: If a guest arrives after sunset on Eid ul fitr night,
and is considered to be dependent upon the master of the house, payment
of his fitrah is obligatory on the master of the house, as an obligatory
precaution; but otherwise it is not obligatory, even if he may have
invited him before sunset and may have broken his fast at his house.

***Issue*** 2006: If a person is insane at the time of sunset on the
night of Eid ul fitr, and his insanity continues till Zuhr on Eid ul
fitr, it is not obligatory on him to pay the fitrah. Otherwise it is
necessary for him as an obligatory precaution to give fitrah.

***Issue*** 2007: \* If a child becomes baligh, or an insane person
becomes sane, or a poor person becomes self sufficient during sunset,
and satisfies the conditions of fitrah becoming obligatory on him, he
should give fitrah.

***Issue*** 2008: If it is not obligatory on a person to pay fitrah at
the time of sunset on the night of Eid ul fitr, but necessary conditions
making fitrah obligatory on him develop before Zuhr on Eid day, the
obligatory precaution is that he should pay fitrah.

***Issue*** 2009: If a non-Muslim becomes a Muslim after the sunset on
the night of Eid ul fitr, it is not obligatory on him to pay fitrah. But
if a Muslim

who was not a Shi'ah becomes a Shi'ah after sighting the moon, he should
pay fitrah.

***Issue*** 2010: \* It is*Mustahab* that a person who affords only one
sa'a (about 3 kilos) of wheat etc. should also pay fitrah. And if he has
family members and wishes to pay their fitrah as well, he can give that
one sa'a to one of his family members with the intention of fitrah and
that member can give it to another family member, and so on, till the
turn of the last person comes; and it is better that the last person
gives what he receives to a person who is not one of them. And if one of
them is a minor, his guardian can take fitrah on his behalf, and the
precaution is the thing taken for the minor should not be given to
anyone else.

***Issue*** 2011: If one's child is born after the sunset on the night
of Eid ul fitr, it is not obligatory to give its fitrah. However, the
obligatory precaution is that one should pay the fitrah of all those who
are considered one's dependents after sunset, till before the Zuhr of
Eid.

***Issue*** 2012: \* If one who was dependent of a person, and becomes
dependent of another before sunset, fitrah is obligatory on the other
person whose dependent one has become. For example, if one's daughter
goes to her husband's house before sunset, her husband should pay her
fitrah.

***Issue*** 2013: If the fitrah of a person is obligatory on another
person, it is not obligatory on him to give his fitrah himself.

***Issue*** 2014: \* If it is obligatory on a person to pay the fitrah
of another person, but he does not pay it, its payment will be, as an
obligatory precaution, obligatory on the latter. So, if all the
conditions mentioned in rule 1999 are fulfilled, he must pay his own
fitrah.

***Issue*** 2015: If it is obligatory on a person to pay the fitrah of
another person, his obligation will not end if the latter himself pays
his own fitrah.

***Issue*** 2016: In the case of a wife who is not maintained by her
husband, is she is dependent upon someone else, that person will have to
pay her fitrah. But if she is not dependent on anyone else, she will pay
her own fitrah if she is not poor.

***Issue*** 2017: A person, who is not a Sayyid, cannot give fitra to a
Sayyid, and if that Sayyid is his dependent, he cannot give to another
Sayyid either.

***Issue*** 2018: The fitrah of a child who sucks the milk of its mother
or a nurse, is payable by one who bears the expenses of the mother or
the nurse. But, if the mother or the nurse is maintained by the property
of the child itself, payment of fitrah for the child is not obligatory
on any one.

***Issue*** 2019: Even if a person maintains the members of his family
by haraam means, he should pay their fitrah out of halal property.

***Issue*** 2020: \* If a person employs someone like a carpenter, or a
servant, and agrees to maintain him fully, he should pay his fitrah as
well. But if he agrees that he would pay him for his labour, it is not
obligatory on him to pay his fitrah.

***Issue*** 2021: \* If a person dies before sunset on the night of Eid
ul fitr, it is not wajib to pay his fitrah or that of his family, from
his estate. But if he dies after sunset, it is commonly held that fitrah
will be obligatory, but it is not devoid of*Ishkal* . However, it is
better to act on precaution, and pay his fitrah as well as that of his
family.

Disposal of Fitra
-----------------

***Issue*** 2022: \* As an obligatory precaution Fitrah should be paid
to Shiah poor only, who fulfil the conditions mentioned for those who
deserve receiving Zakat. But if there is no deserving Shiah in one's
hometown, it can be given to other deserving Muslims. But in no
circumstances should Fitrah be given to Nasibi - the enemies of Ahlul
Bait (A.S)

***Issue*** 2023: If a Shiah child is poor, one can spend fitrah on him,
or make it his property by entrusting it to its guardian.

***Issue*** 2024: \* It is not necessary that the poor to whom fitrah is
given should be Adil (a just person). But, as an obligatory precaution,
fitrah must not be given to a drunkard, or one who does not offer his
daily prayers, or commits sins openly.

***Issue*** 2025: Fitrah should not be given to a person who spends it
on sinful acts.

***Issue*** 2026: \* The recommended precaution is that a poor person
should not be given fitrah which is less than a sa'a (about 3 kilos).
However, there is no harm if more than that is given to him.

***Issue*** 2027: \* When the price of a superior quality of a commodity
is double that of the ordinary, like, when the price of a particular
kind of wheat is double that of the price of its ordinary kind, it is
not sufficient to give half a sa'a of the wheat of superior quality as
fitrah. Also, it is not sufficient if the value of half a sa'a is given
with the Niyyat of fitrah.

***Issue*** 2028: One cannot give as fitrah, half a sa'a of one
commodity (eg. wheat) and half a sa'a of another commodity (eg. barley),
and if he gives these with the Niyyat of paying the price of fitrah even
then it is not sufficient.

***Issue*** 2029: \* It is*Mustahab* that while giving Zakat of fitrah,
one should give preference to one's poor relatives and neighbours, and
then to give preference to the learned persons over others.

***Issue*** 2030: \* If a man gives fitrah to a person thinking that he
is poor, and understands later that he was not poor, and if the property
which he gave to him has not ceased to exist, he should take it back
from him, and give it to a person who deserves. But if he cannot take it
back from him, he should replace it from his own property. And if what
he gave as fitrah is used up, and the person who took fitrah knew that
he had received fitrah, he should gives its substitute, but if he did
not know it, it is not obligatory on him to give substitute, and the man
who gave fitrah should give it once again.

***Issue*** 2031: \* If a person claims to be poor, fitrah cannot be
given to him unless one is satisfied with his claim; or, if one knows
that the claimant has been poor previously.

Miscellaneous Matters Regarding Fitrah
--------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2032: \* One should give fitrah with the Niyyat of Qurbat,
that is, to fulfil the orders of Almighty Allah, and should intend to be
giving fitrah at the time of disposal.

***Issue*** 2033: \* It is not correct to give fitrah before the month
of Ramadhan, and it is better that it should not be given even during
the month

of Ramadhan. However, if a person gives loan to a poor person before
Ramadhan, and adjusts the loan against fitrah, when payment of fitrah
becomes obligatory, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2034: \* It is necessary that wheat or any other thing which
a person gives as fitrah is not mixed with another commodity or dust,
and if it is mixed, but in its pure form it equals a sa'a (about 3
kilos) and the quantity of the thing mixed with it is negligible or
usable, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2035: If a person gives fitrah from a thing which is
inferior or defective, it will not be sufficient.

***Issue*** 2036: If a person gives fitrah on behalf of a number of
persons, it is not necessary for him to pay all from the same commodity.
For example, if he gives wheat as fitrah of some of them of and barley
for others, it is sufficient.

***Issue*** 2037: If a person offers Eid ul fitr prayers, he should, on
the basis of obligatory precaution, give fitrah before Eid prayers. But
if he does not offer Eid prayers, he can delay giving fitrah till Zuhr.

***Issue*** 2038: If a person sets aside fitrah from his main wealth,
and does not give it to a person entitled to receive it till Zuhr of Eid
day, he should make Niyyat of fitrah as and when he gives it.

***Issue*** 2039: If a person does not give fitrah at the time when its
payment becomes obligatory, and does not also set it aside, he should
give fitrah later on the basis of precaution, without making the Niyyat
of ada or qadha.

***Issue*** 2040: If a person sets aside fitrah, he cannot take it for
his own use, and replace it with another sum or thing.

***Issue*** 2041: If a person possesses wealth whose value is more than
fitrah, and if he does not give fitrah but makes a Niyyat that a part of
that wealth is for fitrah, it is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2042: \* If the thing set aside for fitrah is lost, he
should replace it if a poor person was available, and the fitrah giver
delayed giving it, or, he failed to look after it properly. But, if a
poor person was not available, and he cared for it properly, he is not
responsible to replace it.

***Issue*** 2043: If a deserving person is available in the hometown of
a person, the obligatory precaution is that he should not transfer the
fitrah to some other place, and if he does and it is lost, he should
give its replacement.
