Hajj
====

***Issue*** 2044: \* Hajj (pilgrimage) means visiting the House of Allah
(Ka'bah), and performing all those worshipful acts which have been
ordered to be performed there. It is obligatory on a person once in his
lifetime, provided that he fulfils the following conditions:

(i) He should be baligh.

(ii) He should be sane and free, that is, he should not be insane and
should not be a slave.

(iii) Because of proceeding to Makkah for Hajj, he should not be obliged
to commit a haraam act, avoidance of which is more important than Hajj,
nor should he be compelled to forsake an obligatory work which is more
important than Hajj.

(iv) He should be capable of performing Hajj, and this depends upon
number of factors:

(a) He should possess provisions and means for transportation, if need
be, or heshould have enough money to buy them.

(b) He should be healthy and strong enough to go to Makkah and per form
Hajj, without suffering extreme difficulties.

(c) There should be no obstacle on the way. If the way is closed, or if
a person fears that he will lose his life, or honour, while on his way
to Makkah, or he will berobbed of his property, it is not obligatory on
him to perform Hajj. But if he can reach Makkah by another route, he
should go to perform Hajj, even if the other route is a longer one. But
that route should not be unusually longer.

(d) He should have enough time to reach Makkah, and to perform all the
acts of worship in Hajj.

(e) He should possess sufficient money to meet the expenses of his
dependents whose maintenance is obligatory on him, like, his wife and
children, as well as the expenses of those who have to be paid, like,
servants, maids, etc.

(f) On return from Hajj, he should have some means of livelihood, like,
income from the property, farming, business, employment etc. so that he
may not lead a life of hardship.

***Issue*** 2045: When a person is in need of owning a house,
performance of Hajj will be obligatory on him if he also possesses money
for the house.

***Issue*** 2046: If a wife can go to Makkah but does not have any means
of support on her return, and if her husband is also poor, and cannot
provide her subsistence, subjecting her to hard life, Hajj will not be
obligatory on her.

***Issue*** 2047: If a person does not possess necessary provision for
the journey, nor any means of transport, and another person asks him to
go for Hajj undertaking to meet his expenses as well as of his family
during his Hajj, and he (i.e. the person who is asked to go for Hajj) is
satisfied with what the other man offers, Hajj becomes obligatory on
him.

***Issue*** 2048: \* If a person is offered the expenses of his return
journey to Makkah, as well as the expenses of his family during the
period of Hajj, Hajj becomes obligatory on him, even if he is indebted,
and does not possess means of support with which to lead his life after
his return. But if

the days of Hajj and the days of his work coincide, meaning that if he
abandons his work and goes for Hajj, he will not be able to pay his
debts in time, nor support himself for the rest of the year, Hajj will
not be*Wajib* on him.

***Issue*** 2049: \* If a person is given expenses of going to and
returning from Makkah, and the expenses of his family during that
period, and is asked to go to Hajj without mentioning that the help
given is his property, performance of Hajj becomes obligatory on him, if
he is satisfied that it will not be taken back from him.

***Issue*** 2050: If a person is given an amount to cover expenses just
sufficient for Hajj, with a condition that on his way to Makkah he will
serve the person who gave the expenses, Hajj does not become obligatory
on him.

***Issue*** 2051: If a person is given monetary help to enable him to
perform obligatory Hajj, and he does perform Hajj, another Hajj will not
become obligatory on him if he himself becomes wealthy.

***Issue*** 2052: If a person goes, for example, to Jeddah in connection
with trade, and acquires sufficient money to go to Makkah, he should
perform Hajj. And if he performs Hajj, performance of another Hajj will
not be obligatory on him, if he later acquires enough wealth to enable
to go to Makkah from his hometown.

***Issue*** 2053: If a person is hired to perform Hajj on behalf of
another person, but he cannot go for Hajj himself, and wishes to send
someone else, he should seek permission from the person who hired him.

***Issue*** 2054: \* If a person could afford to perform Hajj but did
not perform it, and then became poor, he should perform Hajj facing all
odds. And if he is not at all able to go for Hajj, and if another person
hires him for Hajj, he should go to Makkah and perform Hajj on behalf of
the person who has hired him. He should then remain in Makkah for a year
if possible, and perform his own Hajj. But, if it is possible that he is
hired and given his wages in cash, and the person who hires him agrees
that he may perform Hajj on his behalf next year, he should perform his
own Hajj in the first year, and that on behalf of the person who has
hired him, in the second year, if he feels that he might not be able to
perform his own Hajj in the following year.

***Issue*** 2055: \* If a person goes to Makkah in the year in which he
can afford to perform Hajj, but cannot reach Arafat and Mash'arul Haram
at the prescribed time, and cannot afford to go for Hajj during the
succeeding years, Hajj is not obligatory on him. But, if he could afford
to go for Hajj in the earlier years, and did not go, he should perform
Hajj in spite of all difficulties.

***Issue*** 2056: \* If a person did not perform Hajj in the year in
which he could afford to go for Hajj, and cannot perform Hajj now owing
to old age, or ailment, or weakness, and does not hope that in the
future, he will be able to perform Hajj in person, he should send
someone else to perform Hajj on his behalf. In fact, even if he does not
lose hope, the obligatory precaution is that he should hire a person.
And when he becomes capable afterwards, he should perform Hajj himself
also. And the same applies if a person becoming capable of going to Hajj
for the first time, is prevented to perform

Hajj because of old age, ailment or weakness, and loses hope of gaining
strength. In all these cases, however, he should, as a recommended
precaution, hire a male person, and the one who is going to Hajj for the
first time.

***Issue*** 2057: \* A person who has been hired by another person to
perform Hajj should perform Tawafun Nisa also on his behalf, failing
which his own wife (i.e. the wife of the hired person) becomes haraam
for him.

***Issue*** 2058: If a person does not perform Tawafun Nisa correctly,
or forgets to perform it, and if he remembers it after a few days and
returns to perform it, his action is in order. And if his returning is
difficult for him, he can depute another person to perform the Tawaf on
his behalf.


