Transactions (Part I of III)
============================

Rules Regarding Purchase and Sale
---------------------------------

***Issue*** 2059: \* It is recommended for a business man to learn the
rules of daily transactions. In fact, if due to ignorance, he may
necessarily contradict the laws of Shariah, then it is obligatory upon
him to learn. Imam Ja'far Sadiq (A.S.) is reported to have said: “A
person who wishes to engage in business, should learn its rules and
laws, and if he makes any transaction without learning them, he may
suffer because of entering into a void or doubtful transactions”.

***Issue*** 2060: \* If a person is not aware, because of ignorance
about the relevant laws, whether the transaction made by him is valid or
void, he cannot have any discretion over the property which he has
acquired, unless he knows that the other party has no objection to it.
In any case, the transaction remains void.

***Issue*** 2061: If a person does not possess any wealth, and it is
obligatory on him to maintain his dependents, like, his wife and
children, he should start earning. Moreover, to earn is recommended
for*Mustahab* acts like providing better means of livelihood to one's
family, and helping the poor persons.

Mustahab Acts
-------------

\* The following are*Mustahab* in connection with sale and purchase:

(i) One should not discriminate between various buyers while charging
for the commodities, except in the case of poor people.

(ii) One should not be adamant about the prices, unless one feels that
one is being duped or cheated.

(iii) One should give a little more of the thing one sells, and should
take a little less of the thing which one buys.

(iv) If the buyer regrets having purchased something, and wishes to
return it, the seller should accept it back.

Makrooh Transactions
--------------------

***Issue*** 2062: \* The following are Makrooh transactions:

(i) To sell the land, except when one wishes to purchase another land
with its proceeds.

(ii) To be a butcher.

(iii) To make shroud selling one's vocation.

(iv) To enter into transaction with people of low character.

(v) To transact a deal between the Fajr prayers and sunrise.

(vi) To make it one's vocation to buy or sell wheat and barley, or other
similar commodities.

(vii) To interfere in a deal being carried out by a Muslim, and make
one's own offer.

Haraam Transactions
-------------------

***Issue*** 2063: \* There are many Haraam deals and businesses, some
are mentioned below:

(i) To sale and purchase intoxicating beverages, non-hunting dogs, pigs,
an unslaughtered carcass (as a precaution). Besides, if a permissible
use of Najisul Ayn is possible, like, excrement and faeces being
converted to manure or fertilisers, its transaction is permitted, but as
a precaution, such sale and purchase should be avoided.

(ii) Sale and purchase of usurped property.

(iii) As a precaution, it is haraam to sell and purchase those things
which are not usually considered to be merchandise, like, the sale and
purchase of wild beasts, if it does not involve any substantial gain.

(iv) Any transaction which involves interest.

(v) Sale and purchase of those things which are usually utilised for
haraam acts only, like, gambling tools.

(vi) A transaction which involves fraud or adulteration, like, when one
commodity is mixed with another, and it is not possible to detect the
adulteration, nor does the seller inform the buyer about it, like, to
sell ghee mixed with fat. This act is called cheating (ghish) or
adulteration. The holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a) said: “If a person
makes a deceitful transaction with the Muslims, or puts them to a loss,
or cheats them, he is not one of my followers. And when a person cheats
his fellow Muslim (i.e. sells him an adulterated commodity), Allah
deprives him of Blessings in his livelihood, closes the means of his
earnings, and leaves him to himself.”

***Issue*** 2064: \* There is no harm in selling a Clean (*tahir/pak* )
thing which has become najis, but can be made Clean (*tahir/pak* ) by
washing it. And if it cannot be made Clean (*tahir/pak* ) with water,
and its use does not require it to be Clean (*tahir/pak* ), like some
oils, its sale is permissible. In fact, even if its use requires it to
be Clean (*tahir/pak* ), if it has substantial halal benefit, its sale
is permitted.

***Issue*** 2065: \* If a person wants to sell a najis thing, he should
inform the buyer about it, because by not telling him, he might do
something contrary to the rule of Shariah. For example, if he sells him
najis water which the buyer may require for Wudhu or Ghusl, and to offer
his obligatory prayers, or he sells him something which he uses as food
or drink - in all such cases, the seller should inform the buyer. Of
course, if the seller knows that it is no use informing the buyer who is
careless, and does not care about Taharat or Najasat, then it is not
necessary to inform.

***Issue*** 2066: \* Although the purchase and sale of najis medicines
for internal or external use is permissible, the buyer should be
informed about it in situations explained in the foregoing rule no.
2065.

***Issue*** 2067: \* There is no objection to selling or buying the oils
which are imported from non-Islamic countries, if it is not known to be
najis. And as for the fat which is obtained from a dead animal, if there
is a probability that it belongs to an animal which has been slaughtered
according to Islamic law, it will be deemed Clean (*tahir/pak* ), and
its sale and purchase will be permissible, even if it is acquired from a
non-Muslim or is a imported from non-Islamic countries. But it is haraam
to eat it, and it is necessary for the seller to inform the buyer about
the situation, so that he does not commit anything contrary to his
religious responsibility.

***Issue*** 2068: \* If a fox, or any other such animal, is not
slaughtered according to religious law, or dies a natural death, it is
haraam to purchase or sell its hide, as a precaution.

***Issue*** 2069: \* The purchase and sale of hide and skin which is
imported from a non-Islamic country, or is bought from a non-Muslim, is
permissible provided that one feels strongly that the animal was most
probably slaughtered according to Islamic law. And, namaaz with it will
be in order.

***Issue*** 2070: \* The fat obtained from a dead animal, and the hide
obtained from a Muslim, when one knows that the Muslim has obtained it
from a non-Muslim, without investigating whether or not the animal has
been slaughtered according to Islamic law, is Clean (*tahir/pak* ), and
its sale and purchase permissible. But it is not permissible to eat it.

***Issue*** 2071: Transaction of intoxicating drinks is haraam and void.

***Issue*** 2072: Sale of usurped property is void, and the seller
should return to the buyer the money taken from him.

***Issue*** 2073: If a buyer is serious about a transaction, but his
intention is not to pay the price of the commodity being purchased by
him, this intention will not affect the validity of the transaction,
though it is absolutely necessary that he should pay the money to the
seller.

***Issue*** 2074: If a person has purchased a commodity on credit, and
wishes to pay its price later from his haraam earning or wealth, the
transaction will be valid, but, he will have to pay the amount which he
owes from halal property, in order to be absolved of his responsibility.

***Issue*** 2075: \* Purchase and sale of instruments of entertainment
like, guitar, lute and harmonium etc., is haraam, and as a precaution,
the same rule applies to the small musical instruments made as toys for
the children. However, there is no harm in selling and purchasing
instruments of common use, like, radio and tape-recorder, provided that
it is not intended to use it for haraam purposes.

***Issue*** 2076: If a thing which can be used for halal purposes is
sold with the intention of putting it to haraam use - for example, if
grapes are sold so that wine may be prepared with them, the transaction
is haraam, and as a precaution the deal is void. However, if the seller
does not sell it with that Niyyat, but only knows that the buyer will
prepare wine with the grapes, the transaction will be in order.

***Issue*** 2077: \* Making a human sculpture or that of an animal, is
haraam, but there is no harm in purchasing and selling it, though as a
precaution, it should be avoided. However, painting human portraits or
animals is permissible.

***Issue*** 2078: \* It is haraam to purchase a thing which has been
acquired by means of gambling, theft, or a void transaction, and if a
person buys such a thing from a seller, he should return it to its
original owner.

***Issue*** 2079: \* If a person sells ghee mixed with fat and specifies
it, for example, he says: “I am selling 3 kilos of ghee” - the
transaction will be void if the quantity of fat is more, to the extent
that it cannot be called ghee. But if the quantity of fat is small, so
that it can just be classified as ghee mixed with fat, the transaction
will be valid. But the buyer has a right of refusal, based on the
deficiency in the quality, and can therefore cancel the

deal and ask for refund. And if ghee and fat are distinct from each
other, the deal covering the fat will be void, and the seller will have
to refund the price of that fat, and keep the fat for himself. But in
this case also, the buyer has a right of cancelling the transaction of
pure ghee which is in it. Where the seller does not say that he is
selling a particular thing, and just sells, say, 3 kilos of ghee he
possesses, and if it turns out to be ghee mixed with fat, the buyer can
return it, and ask for pure ghee.

***Issue*** 2080: If a seller sells a commodity which is sold by weight
or measurement, at a higher rate against the same commodity, like, if he
sells 3 kilos of wheat for 5 kilos of wheat, it is usury and, therefore,
haraam. In fact, if one of the two kinds of same commodity is faultless,
and the other is defective, or one is superior and the other is
inferior, or if their prices differ, and the seller asks for more than
the quantity he gives, even then it is usury and haraam. Hence, if a
person gives unbroken copper or brass and takes more of broken copper
and brass, or gives a good quality of rice, and asks for more of
inferior kind of rice instead, or gives manufactured gold and takes a
larger quantity of raw gold, it is usury and haraam.

***Issue*** 2081: If the thing, which he asks for in addition, is
different from the commodity which he sells, like, if he sells 3 kilos
of wheat against 3 kilos of wheat and one dirham cash, even then it is
usury and haraam. In fact, if he does not take anything in excess, but
imposes the condition that the buyer would render some service to him,
it is also usury and haraam.

***Issue*** 2082: \* If the person who is giving less quantity of a
commodity, supplements it with some other thing, for example, if he
sells 3 kilos of wheat and one handkerchief for 5 kilos of wheat, there
is no harm in it, provided that the intention is that the handkerchief
is for the excess he is receiving, and also that the transaction is not
on credit. And if both the parties supplement the commodity with
something, like 3 kilos of wheat with a handkerchief is sold for 3 1/2
kilos and a handkerchief, there is no objection to it, provided that the
intention is that half kilo of wheat with the handkerchief on one side,
was given for a handkerchief on the other.

***Issue*** 2083: \* If a person sells something by measuring in meter
or yard, like, cloth, or something which is sold by counting like, eggs
and walnuts, and asks for more instead, there is no objection, except
when the commodity exchanged are of the same kind and the transaction is
on credit, then it is not permissible. For example, if he gives ten eggs
on a condition that he should receive eleven eggs after a month, it is a
void and haraam transaction. In matters of the currency notes, a person
can sell one type of it for another, like toman against dinar or dollar,
on credit, and on condition to receive more. But if he sells toman for
toman, expecting more, then that transaction should not be on credit;
otherwise it will be void and haraam. For example, if a person gives 100
toman cash, on a condition that after six months he should be given 110
toman, that is void and haraam.

***Issue*** 2084: \* If a commodity is sold in most of the cities by
weight or measurement, and in some cities by counting, there is no
objection if that commodity is sold against the same commodity at a
higher rate, in the city where it is sold by counting. Similarly, if the
cities are different, and if it cannot be said that the majority of the
cities sell the commodity by weight

or measurement or by counting, every city will be governed by the custom
prevailing in it.

***Issue*** 2085: \* In commodities which are sold by weight or
measurement, if a person sells a commodity in exchange of something
which does not belong to the same category, and if the deal is not on
credit, he can take more. But if it is on credit, it is not permissible.
Hence, if he sells one kilo of rice for two kilos of wheat on a month's
credit, that transaction is void.

***Issue*** 2086: \* If a ripe fruit is exchanged for the raw fruit of
the same type, one cannot take more. And Fuqaha have commonly held that
if a commodity taken in exchange is from the same origin, one should not
take more. For example, if someone sells one kilo of ghee made from cow
milk for one and half kilos of cheese made from cow milk, it will be
usury and therefore haraam. But this generalisation is a matter
of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2087: From the point of usury, wheat and barley are
commodities of one and the same category. Hence, if a person gives 3
kilos of wheat and takes in exchange thereof, 31/2 kilos of barley, it
is usury and haraam. And if, a person purchases 30 kilos of barley, on
the condition that he would give in exchange 30 kilos of wheat at the
time of its harvest, it is haraam, because he has taken barley on the
spot and will give wheat some time later, and this amounts to taking
something in excess, and therefore haraam.

***Issue*** 2088: \* Father and son, husband and wife can take interest
from each other. Similarly, a Muslim can take interest from a non-Muslim
who is not under protection of Islam. But a transaction involving
interest with a non-Muslim who is under protection of Islam, is haraam.
But after the transaction is completed, and the deal is closed, if
payment of interest is permissible in the religion of that non-Muslim, a
Muslim can receive interest from him.

Conditions of a Seller and a Buyer
----------------------------------

***Issue*** 2089: There are six conditions for the sellers and buyers:

(i) They should be baligh.

(ii) They should be sane.

(iii) They should not be impudent, that is, they should not be
squandering their wealth.

(iv) They should have a serious and genuine intention to sell and
purchase a commodity. Hence, if a person says jokingly, that he has sold
his property, that transaction is void.

(v) They have not been forced to sell and buy.

(vi) They should be the rightful owners of the commodity which they wish
to sell, or give in exchange. Rules relating to these will be explained
in the following:

***Issue*** 2090: \* To conduct business with a child who is not baligh,
and who makes a deal independently, is void, except in things of small
value, in which transactions are normally conducted with the children
who can discern. But if a discerning child is accompanied by his
guardian, and he pronounces the confirmation of the deal, then the
transaction is valid in every situation. In fact, if the commodity or
money is the property of another person, and that child sells that
commodity or purchases something with that money, as an agent of the
owner, the transaction is in order, even if

the discerning child may be possessing that property or money on his
own. And similarly, if the child is a medium of payment to the seller,
and carrying the commodity to the buyer, or giving the commodity to the
buyer and carrying the money to the seller, the transaction is valid,
even if the child may not be discerning (i.e. one who can distinguish
between good and bad) because in reality, two adult persons have entered
into the contract.

***Issue*** 2091: \* If a person buys something from a child who is not
baligh, or sells something to him, in a situation when the transaction
is not valid, he should give the commodity or money back to his
guardian, if it was the child's own property, or to its owner, if it was
the property of someone else, or should obtain the owner's agreement.
But if he does not know its owner, and has also no means to identify
him, he should give the thing taken from the child to a poor on behalf
of its owner as Radde Mazalim, and in so doing, he should, as an
obligatory precaution, seek the*Mujtahid* 's permission.

***Issue*** 2092: If a person concludes a transaction with a discerning
child (i.e. one who can distinguish between good and evil), in a
situation when it is not valid to conclude a transaction with him, and
the commodity or money which he gives to the child is lost, he can claim
it from the child after he attains the age of Bulugh, or from his
guardian. But if the child is not discerning, he will have no right to
claim anything from him.

***Issue*** 2093: If a buyer or a seller is forced to conclude a
transaction, and he concedes after the transaction is concluded (e.g. if
he says: I agree), the transaction is valid. However, the recommended
precaution is that the formula of the transaction should be repeated.

***Issue*** 2094: If a person sells the property of another person
without his consent, and if the owner of the property is not agreeable
to the sale, and does not grant permission, the transaction is void.

***Issue*** 2095: The father or paternal grandfather of a child and the
executor of the father and the executor of the paternal grandfather of a
child, can sell the property of the child, and if the circumstances
demand, an Adil*Mujtahid* can also sell the property of an insane
person, or an orphan, or one who has disappeared.

***Issue*** 2096: If a person usurps some property, and sells it and
after the sale, the owner of the property allows the transaction, the
transaction is valid, and the thing which the usurper sold to the buyer
and the profits accrued to it, from the time of transaction, belongs to
the buyer. Similarly, the thing given by the buyer, and the profits
accrued to it from the time of the transaction, belong to the person
whose property was usurped.

***Issue*** 2097: If a person usurps some property, and sells it with
the intention that the sale proceeds should belong to him, and if the
owner of the property allows the transaction, the transaction is valid,
but the sale proceeds will belong to the owner, and not to the usurper.

Conditions Regarding Commodity and What is Obtained in Exchange
---------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2098: \* The commodity which is sold, and the thing which is
received in exchange, should fulfil five conditions:

(i) Its quantity should be known by means of weight or measure or
counting etc.

(ii) It should be transferable, otherwise the deal will be void, except
when a transferable object is supplemented to it. But if the buyer can
himself manage to find the thing he has bought, even if the seller is
unable to hand it over, the deal will be valid. For example, if a person
sells a horse which has run away, and the buyer can find it, the
transaction will be valid, and there will be no need to supplement it
with any transferable object.

(iii) Those details of the commodity, and the thing accepted in
exchange, which influence the minds of the people in deciding about the
transaction, must be clearly described.

(iv) The ownership should be unconditional, in a manner that, once it is
out of his ownership, he foresakes all his rights over it.

(v) The seller should sell the commodity itself and not its profit.
Hence, if he sells one year's profit of a house, it will not be in
order. But, if a buyer gives profit of his property in exchange, like,
if he buys a carpet from someone and in lieu thereof gives him the
profit of his house for one year, there is no harm in it. Details of
these will come later.

***Issue*** 2099: If a commodity is sold in a city by weight or
measurement, one should purchase that commodity in that city by weight
or measure. But if the same commodity is sold in another city at sight,
one can purchase it in that city at sight.

***Issue*** 2100: A commodity which is normally sold by weighing, can
also be sold by measure. For example, if a person wants to sell ten
kilos of wheat, he should fill a measure which takes one kilo of wheat,
and give ten such measures to the buyer.

***Issue*** 2101: \* If the transaction has become void because of the
absence of any of the aforesaid conditions, except the fourth - but the
buyer and the seller agree to have the right of discretion over their
exchanged commodities, there is no objection if they do so.

***Issue*** 2102: \* The transaction of a Waqf property is void.
However, if it is so much impaired, or is on the verge of being
impaired, that it can not be possibly used for the purpose for which it
was dedicated, like, if the mat of a mosque is so torn, that it is not
possible to offer prayers on it, it can be sold by the trustee or
someone in his position. And if possible, as a precaution, its sale
proceeds should be spent in the same mosque, for a purpose akin to the
aim of the person who originally waqfed it.

***Issue*** 2103: \* When serious differences arise between the persons
for whom waqf is made, to the extent that it may be feared that if the
waqfed property is not sold, property or life of some person is
endangered, some Fuqaha have ruled that the property may be sold off,
and the sale proceeds be spent for a purpose akin to the object of the
person who originally made the waqf. But this rule is not devoid
of*Ishkal* . But if the person who made waqf made a condition that it be
sold when advisable, then there will be no objection to it being sold
off.

***Issue*** 2104: There is no harm in buying and selling a property
which has been leased out to another person. However, the leaseholder
will be entitled to utilise the property during the period of lease. And
if the buyer does not

know that the property has been leased out, or if he purchases it under
the impression that the period of lease is short, he can cancel the
transaction when he comes to know of the true situation.

Formula of Purchase and Sale
----------------------------

***Issue*** 2105: It is not necessary that the formula of purchase and
sale be pronounced in Arabic. For example, if the seller says in any
language: “I have sold this property in exchange of this money”, and the
buyer says: “I accept it”, the transaction is in order. However, it is
necessary that the buyer and the seller should have Niyyat of Insha' -
which means that by uttering the above mentioned words, they are
genuinely intent upon buying and selling.

***Issue*** 2106: If the formula is not uttered at the time of
transaction, but the seller hands over to the buyer that which he owns,
in exchange of the property which he takes from the buyer; the
transaction is in order, and both of them become the owners.

Purchase and Sale of Fruits
---------------------------

***Issue*** 2107: \* It is in order to sell the fruits before plucking
them, when the flowers have fallen, and when the seeds have been formed,
provided that, it is also known that it is saved from harm or decay, and
its quantity can be fairly estimated. In fact, when it is still not
known whether the formed seeds have passed the stage of any harm or
decay, if the fruit sold is two years old or more, or it is just the
quantity which has presently grown, and it has a substantial value, the
sale transaction will be valid. Similarly, if other produce grown from
earth or anything else is sold together with the fruits, the transaction
will be valid. But, as an obligatory precaution, this supplement must be
such that if the seeds fail to develop into fully grown fruits, the
capital invested by the buyer is not lost.

***Issue*** 2108: \* It is also permissible to sell the fruits growing
on the tree, which have not yet developed the seed, and whose flowers
have not yet fallen. But it must be sold along with something which
grows from earth (like vegetables) so that, as explained in the
foregoing rule, the buyer sustains no loss. Or the fruit must be more
than one year old.

***Issue*** 2109: \* There is no harm in selling the dates which have
become yellow or red while they are still on the tree, but the dates of
the same tree or any other should not be exchanged for them. But, if a
person owns a date tree in the house or garden of another person, and if
the quantity of the dates of that tree is estimated, and the owner of
the tree sells them to the owner of the house or the garden, and dates
are exchanged in lieu of them, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2110: \* There is no harm in selling cucumber, brinjals,
vegetables etc. which are picked several times during a year, provided
that, they have grown and are visible and provided that, it is agreed as
to how many times during the year the buyer would pick them. But if they
have not grown nor can they be seen, their sale is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2111: \* If after the ears of wheat have developed seeds,
they are sold for the wheat obtained from the same harvest, or from
other ears, the transaction will not be valid.

Cash and Credit
---------------

***Issue*** 2112: \* If a commodity is sold for cash, the buyer and
seller can, after concluding the transaction, demand the commodity and
money from each other and take possession of it. The possession of
immovable things, like, house, land, etc. and the moveable things, like,
carpets, dress etc. means that the original owner renounces all his
right over them, and hands it over to the opposite party with full right
of discretion over it. In practice, the mode of delivery may vary
according to the situation.

***Issue*** 2113: When something is sold on credit, the period should be
fixed clearly. If, a commodity is sold with a condition that the seller
would receive the price at the time of harvest, the transaction is void,
because the period of credit has not been specified clearly.

***Issue*** 2114: If a commodity is sold on credit, the seller cannot
demand what he has to receive from the buyer before the stipulated
period is over. However, if the buyer dies, and has some property of his
own, the seller can claim the amount due to him from the heirs of the
buyer, before the stipulated period is over.

***Issue*** 2115: If a person sells a commodity on credit, he can demand
the debt from the buyer after the expiry of the stipulated period.
However, if the buyer cannot pay it, he should give him extension of
time, or rescind the transaction, and take back the commodity, if it
exists.

***Issue*** 2116: If a person gives a quantity of some commodity on
credit to a person who does not know its price, and the seller does not
tell him its price, the transaction is void. However, if he gives it on
credit to a person who knows its cash price, and charges a higher
price - for example, if he tells him: “I shall charge ten cents per
dollar more on the commodity, which I am giving to you on credit, as
compared to what I charge against cash” - and the buyer accepts this
condition, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2117: If a person sells a commodity on credit, and
stipulates a period for receiving its price, and for example, after the
passage of half of the stipulated period, he reduces his claim and takes
the balance in cash, there is no harm in it.

Conditions for Contract by Advance Payment
------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2118: \* Purchase by advance payment means that a buyer pays
the price of a commodity, and takes its possession later. Hence, the
transaction will be in order, if, for example, the buyer says: “I am
paying this amount so that I may take possession of such and such
commodity after six months”, and the seller says, “I agree”, or the
seller accepts the money and says: “I have sold such and such thing and
will deliver it after six months”.

***Issue*** 2119: \* If a person sells, on advance payment basis, coins
which are of gold and silver, and takes gold or silver coins in exchange
for them, the transaction is void. But, if he sells a commodity or money
which is not of gold and silver, and takes another commodity, or gold or
silver money in exchange, the transaction is in order if it conforms
with the seventh condition of the rule which follows. And the
recommended precaution is that one should take money and not other
commodity in exchange for the commodity sold.

***Issue*** 2120: \* There are seven conditions of advance payment
contract:

(i) The characteristic, due to which the price of a commodity may vary,
should be specified. However, it is not necessary to be very precise, it
will be sufficient if it can be said that its particulars are known.

(ii) Before the buyer and the seller separate from each other, the buyer
should hand over full amount to the seller, or if the seller is indebted
by way of cash to the buyer for an equivalent amount, the buyer can
adjust it against the price of the commodity, if the seller agrees to
it. And if the buyer pays certain percentage of the price of that
commodity to the seller, the transaction will no doubt be valid equal to
that percentage, but the seller can rescind the transaction.

(iii) The time-limit should be stipulated exactly. If the seller says
that he would deliver the commodity when the crop is harvested, the
transaction is void, because, in this case, the period has not been
specified exactly.

(iv) A time should be fixed for the delivery of the commodity when the
seller is able to deliver it, regardless of whether the commodity is
scarce or not.

(v) The place of delivery should be specified. However, if that place
becomes known from their conversation, it is not necessary that its name
should be mentioned.

(vi) The weight or measure of the commodity should be specified. And
there is no harm in selling through advance payment contract, a
commodity which is usually bought and sold by sight. However, for such a
deal, one must be careful that the difference in the quality of
individual items of the commodity must be negligibly small, like in the
cases of walnuts and eggs.

(vii) If the commodity sold belongs to the category which is sold by way
of weight and measure, then it must not be exchanged for the same
commodity. In fact, as an obligatory precaution, it must not be
exchanged for any other commodity which is sold by weight and measure.
And if the commodity sold is the one which is sold by counting, then as
a precaution, it is not permissible to exchange it for the same
commodity in increased number.

Laws Regarding Advance Payment Contract
---------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2121: \* If a person purchases a commodity by way of advance
payment, he is not entitled, till the expiry of the stipulated period of
delivery, to sell it to anyone except the seller, but there is no harm
in selling it to any person after the expiry of the stipulated period,
even if he may not have taken possession of it yet. However, it is not
permissible to sell cereals like wheat and barley, and other commodities
which are sold by weighing or measuring other than fruits, unless they
are in possession, except that the buyer wishes to sell them at cost or
lower price.

***Issue*** 2122: \* In advance payment purchase transaction, when the
seller delivers at the stipulated time the commodity which he had sold,
the buyer should accept it. Also, if the seller gives something better
in quality than the one agreed upon, and if it is reckoned to belong to
the same type, the buyer should accept it.

***Issue*** 2123: If the commodity which the seller delivers is of
inferior quality to that which was agreed upon, the buyer can reject it.

***Issue*** 2124: If the seller delivers a commodity different from the
one he had sold to the buyer, and the buyer agrees to accept it, there
will be no objection to it.

***Issue*** 2125: \* If a commodity which was sold by advance payment
becomes scarce at the time when it should be delivered, and the seller
cannot supply it, the buyer may wait till the seller procures it, or
even cancel the transaction, and take the refund, but as a precaution,
he cannot sell it back to the seller at a profit.

***Issue*** 2126: \* If a person sells a commodity promising to deliver
it after some time, and also agrees to take deferred payment for it, the
transaction is void.

Sale of Gold and Silver Against Gold and Silver
-----------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2127: If gold is sold against gold, and silver is sold
against silver, whether it is in the form of coins or otherwise, if the
weight of one of them is more than that of the other, the transaction is
haraam and void.

***Issue*** 2128: \* If gold is sold against silver, or silver is sold
against gold, the transaction is valid, and it is not necessary that
their weight be equal, but if it is sold on credit or stipulated time,
the transaction will be void.

***Issue*** 2129: If gold or silver is sold against gold or silver, it
is necessary for the seller and the buyer that before they separated
from each other, they should deliver the commodity, and its exchange to
each other. And if even a part of the thing about which agreement has
been made, is not delivered to the person concerned, the transaction
becomes void.

***Issue*** 2130: If either the seller or the buyer delivers the stock
in full as agreed, but the other person delivers only a part of his
stock, and they separate from each other, the transaction with regard to
the part exchanged will be valid, but the person who has not received
the entire stock can cancel the transaction.

***Issue*** 2131: \* If silver dust from a mine is sold against pure
silver, and gold dust from a mine is sold against pure gold, the
transaction is void, unless one is sure that the quality of silver dust
is equal to the quantity of pure silver. However, there is no harm in
selling silver dust against gold, or gold dust against silver, as
mentioned earlier.

Circumstances in Which One Has a Right to Cancel a Transaction
--------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2132: \* The right to cancel a transaction is called Khiyar.
The seller and the buyer can cancel a transaction in the following
eleven cases:

(i) If the parties to the transaction have not parted from each other,
though they may have left the place of agreement. This is called
Khiyarul majlis.

(ii) If the buyer or the seller has been cheated in a sale transaction,
or in any other sort of deal, either of the parties has been deceived,
they have a right to call off the deal. This is called Khiyar of Ghabn.
This Khiyar stems from the fact that each side in any deal wishes to
ensure that he does not receive less than what he has given, and if he
has been cheated, he should have the right to back out. But if one has
in mind that if he is given less than what he has delivered, or is paid
less than what he deserves, he will ask for

the difference, he should first demand the difference before cancelling
the deal.

(iii) If while entering into a transaction, it is agreed that up to a
stipulated time, one or both the parties will be entitled to cancel the
transaction. This is called Khiyarush Shart.

(iv) If one of the parties presents his commodity as better than it
actually is, and thereby attracts the buyer, or makes him more
enthusiastic about it. This is called Khiyar tadlis.

(v) If one of the parties to the transaction stipulates that the other
would perform a certain job, and that condition is not fulfilled. Or if
it is stipulated that the commodity will be of particular quality, and
the commodity supplied may be lacking in that quality. In these cases,
the party which laid the condition can cancel the transaction. This is
called Khiyar takhallufish shart.

(vi) If the commodity supplied is defective. This is called Khiyarul
'aib.

(vii) If it transpires that a quality of the commodity under transaction
is the property of a third person. In that case, if the owner of that
part is not willing to sell it, the buyer can cancel the transaction, or
can claim back from the seller the replacement of that part, if he has
already paid for it. This is called Khiyarush shirkat.

(viii) If the owner describes certain qualities of his commodity which
the buyer has not seen, and then the buyer realises that the commodity
is not as it was described, the buyer can rescind the deal. Similarly,
if the buyer may have seen the commodity sometimes back, and purchases
it thinking that the qualities it had then will be still existing, and
if he finds that those qualities have disappeared, he has a right to
cancel the deal.

(ix) If the buyer does not pay for the commodity he has bought for three
days, and the seller has not yet handed over to him the commodity, the
seller can cancel the transaction. But this is in the circumstance when
the seller had agreed to allow him time for deferred payment, without
fixing the period. And if the seller had not at all agreed on deferred
payment, he can cancel the transaction at once, without any delay. And
if he had allowed him more than three days' credit, then the seller
cannot rescind the deal before the termination of three days. If the
commodity is perishable, like fruits, which would perish or decay if
left for one day, and the buyer without any prior condition, does not
pay till nightfall, the seller can cancel the transaction. This is
called Khiyarut ta'khir.

(x) A person who buys an animal, can cancel the transaction within three
days. And if a person sold his commodity in exchange for an animal, he
can also cancel the transaction within three days. This is called
Khiyarul haywan.

(xi) If the seller is unable to deliver possession of the thing sold by
him, like, if the horse sold by him runs away and disappears, he can
cancel the transaction. This is called Khiyarut ta'azzurit taslim.

***Issue*** 2133: \* If a buyer does not know the price of the
commodity, or was unconcerned about it at the time of purchase, and buys
the thing for higher than usual price, he can cancel the transaction if
the difference of price is substantial, and if the difference is
established at the time of

abrogation. Otherwise, the buyer cannot cancel the deal. Similarly, if
the seller does not know the price of the commodity, or was headless
about it at the time of selling, and sells the thing at a cheaper price,
he can cancel the deal if the difference is substantial and if other
conditions mentioned above obtain.

***Issue*** 2134: In a transaction of “Conditional sale”, for example, a
house worth $2000 is sold for $1000, and it is agreed that if the seller
returns the money within a stipulated period, he can cancel the
transaction, the transaction is in order, provided that the buyer and
the seller had genuine intention of purchase and sale.

***Issue*** 2135: In a transaction of “Conditional sale”, if the seller
is sure that even if he did not return the money within the stipulated
time, the buyer will return the property to him, the transaction is in
order. However, if he does not return the money within the stipulated
time, he is not entitled to demand the return of the property from the
buyer. And if the buyer dies, he (the seller) cannot demand the return
of the property from his heirs.

***Issue*** 2136: If a person mixes inferior tea with superior tea, and
sells it as a superior tea, the buyer can cancel the transaction.

***Issue*** 2137: \* If a buyer finds out that the thing purchased by
him is defective, like, if he purchases an animal and finds that (after
purchasing it) it is blind of an eye, and this defect existed before the
transaction was made, but he was not aware of it, he can cancel the
transaction and return the animal to the seller. And if it is not
possible to return it, for example, if some change has taken place in
it, or it has been used in such a manner that it cannot be returned, the
difference between the value of the sound property and the defective
property should be assessed, and the buyer should get refund in that
proportion of the amount paid by him to the seller. For example, he has
purchased something for $4 and finds out that it is defective. Now the
price of the thing in perfect, faultless state is $8 and that of
deficient is $6, the difference between these two prices will be
assessed at 25%. The buyer will be paid 25% of what he actually paid,
and that will be one dollar.

***Issue*** 2138: \* If a seller comes to know that what he received in
exchange for his property is defective, and that defect was present in
it before the transaction, but he was not aware of it, he can cancel the
transaction, and can return it to its owner. And if he cannot return it
due to change or disposal having taken place, he can obtain the
difference between the faultless and the defective thing, according to
the above mentioned rule.

***Issue*** 2139: \* If a defect takes place in the property after
concluding the transaction, but before delivering it, the buyer can
cancel the transaction. Similarly, if some defect is found in what is
taken in exchange for the property, after concluding the transaction but
before delivering it, the seller can cancel the transaction. But if both
sides wish to settle by taking the difference between the prices, it is
permissible, if returning of the articles involved is not possible.

***Issue*** 2140: \* If a person comes to know about the defect after
concluding the transaction, it is necessary for him to cancel the
transaction at once; and if he delays for unusually long time, he cannot
cancel the

transaction. Of course, various circumstances must be taken into
consideration for the delay.

***Issue*** 2141: If a person comes to know about the defect in a
commodity after purchasing it, he can cancel the transaction even if the
seller is not present. And the same order applies to all transactions
involving the options.

***Issue*** 2142: In the following four cases the buyer cannot cancel
the transaction because of defect in the property purchased by him, nor
can he claim the difference between the prices:

(i) If at the time of purchasing the property, he is aware of the defect
in it.

(ii) If he does not object to the defect in the property.

(iii) If at the time of concluding the contract, he says: “Even if the
property has a defect I will neither return it nor claim the difference
between the prices”.

(iv) If at the time of concluding the contract, the seller says: “I sell
this property with whatever defect it may have”. But, if he specifies a
defect and says: “I am selling this property with this defect”, and it
transpires later that it has some other defect as well, which he did not
mention, the buyer can return the property due to that defect, and if he
cannot return it, he can take the difference between the prices.

***Issue*** 2143: If a buyer knows that there is a defect in the
property, and after taking possession of it another defect appears in
it, he cannot cancel the transaction, but he can take the difference
between the prices of the defective and the faultless property. But, if
he purchases a defective animal, and before the expiry of the period of
Khiyar (i.e. option to cancel a transaction) which is three days,
another defect appears in the animal, the buyer can return it, even if
he may have taken delivery of it. And if only the buyer was given the
option to cancel the deal within a fixed period, and another defect
appears in the animal during that period, the buyer can cancel the
transaction, even if he may have taken delivery of the animal.

***Issue*** 2144: If a person owns some property which he himself has
not seen, but another person has described its particular to him, and he
mentions the same particulars to the buyer and sells the property to
him. Later on, he learns after selling that the property was better than
what he knew about it, he can cancel the transaction.

Miscellaneous Rules
-------------------

***Issue*** 2145: If a seller informs the buyer about his cost price of
a commodity, he should tell him about all factors which would affect the
rise or fall in the price of the commodity, even if he may sell it at
the same price (i.e. at the cost price) or at a price less than that;
for example, he should tell the buyer whether he has purchased the
property against cash payment or on credit. And if he does not give the
particulars of the property, and the buyer knows about them later, he
can cancel the transaction.

***Issue*** 2146: If a person gives a commodity to another person, and
fixes its price and says: “Sell this commodity at this price, and the
more you sell, you will be paid your commission.” If he sells the
commodity for higher price, the excess of money realised will be that of
the owner, and he will be entitled only to the commission from the
owner. But if the arrangement is by way of granting a reward, when the
owner says: “If you sell this

commodity at a price higher than that, the excess of proceeds will be
your property” there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2147: If a butcher sells the meat of a female animal saying
that it is the meat of a male animal, he commits a sin. Hence, if he
falsely specifies the meat saying: “I am selling this meat of a male
animal” the buyer can cancel the transaction. And in case, he does not
specify it, the butcher must supply the meat of a male animal, if the
buyer is not willing to accept the meat which has been given to him.

***Issue*** 2148: If a buyer tells the draper that he wants a cloth of
fast colour, and the draper sells him a cloth whose colour fades, the
buyer can cancel the transaction.

***Issue*** 2149: Swearing in the matter of transaction is Makrooh, if
it is true, and haraam, if it is false.


