Transactions (Part II of III)
=============================

Laws of Partnership
-------------------

***Issue*** 2150: \* If two persons make an agreement that they would
trade with the goods jointly owned by them, and would divide the profit
between themselves, and if they pronounce a formula declaring
partnership, in Arabic or in any other language, or express their
intention of becoming each other's partner by conduct, the partnership
will be valid.

***Issue*** 2151: \* If some persons enter into a partnership to share
the wages from their labour, like, if a few barbers or labourers agree
mutually that they would divide between themselves whatever wages they
earn, that partnership is not in order. But if they enter into a mutual
compromise that, say, half of what one earns will be given to the other,
for a fixed period, in exchange of half of what the other earns, this
transaction will be valid, and thus each will be a partner in the wages
of the other.

***Issue*** 2152: \* If two persons enter into a partnership, on the
terms that each of them would purchase the commodity on his own
responsibility, and each would be responsible for the payment of its
price, but would share the profit which they earn from that commodity,
that partnership is not valid. However, if each of them makes the other
his agent, authorising that whatever one purchases on credit, the other
will be a partner in it, which means that he and his partner are
responsible for the debt, then they will be considered partners in that
commodity.

***Issue*** 2153: \* The persons who become partners under the rules of
partnership, must be adult and sane, and should have intention and free
volition for becoming partners. They should also be able to exercise
discretion over their properties. Hence, if a feeble-minded person who
spends his wealth impudently, enters into partnership, it is not in
order, because such a person has no right of disposal over his property.

***Issue*** 2154: \* If a condition is laid down in an agreement of
partnership, that the partner who manages, or does more work than the
other partner, or does more important work than the other, will get
larger share of the profit, it is necessary that he should be given his
share as agreed upon. Similarly, if it is agreed that the person who
does not manage, or does not do more work, or does not do more important
work, will get larger share of the profit, that condition is also valid
and it must be fulfilled.

***Issue*** 2155: \* If it is agreed that the entire profit will be
appropriated by one person, or the entire loss will be borne by one of
them, that sort of partnership is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2156: If it is not agreed that one of the partners will
receive more profit, and if the investment of each of them is equal,
they must share profit and loss equally. And if their investment is not
equal, they should divide the profit and loss in proportion to their
capital. For example, if two persons become partners, and the capital of
one of them is double the capital of the other, his share in the profit
and loss will also be double of the other, irrespective of whether both
of them do equal work, or one of them does less work, or does not work
at all.

***Issue*** 2157: \* If it is laid down in the agreement of partnership,
that both the partners will buy and sell together, or each of them will
conclude transactions individually, or only one of them will conclude
transactions, or a third party will be hired to conclude the
transaction, they should act as agreed upon.

***Issue*** 2158: If it is not specified as to which of the partners
will buy and sell with the capital, neither of them can conclude any
transactions with that capital without the permission of the other.

***Issue*** 2159: \* The partner who has been given the right of
discretion over the capital, should act according to the agreement of
partnership. For example, if it is agreed that he will purchase on
credit, or will sell against cash payment, or will purchase the property
from a particular place, he should act according to the agreement.
However, if no such agreement is made with him, he should conclude
transactions in the usual manner, and carry on in such a way that no
loss is suffered in the partnership. He should not carry any property
belonging to the partnership, with him while he is travelling, if that
is unusual.

***Issue*** 2160: \* If a partner who transacts business with the
capital of the partnership, sells and purchases things contrary to the
agreement made with him, or concludes transactions in a manner which is
not normal, because of the absence of any agreement, the transaction
made by him in both the cases will be correct and valid; but if such a
transaction results in a loss, or a part of wealth is squandered, then
the partner who has acted against the agreement, or the usual norm, will
be responsible for the loss.

***Issue*** 2161: If a partner who trades with the capital of the
partnership, does not go beyond the bounds of his authority, nor is he
negligent in looking after the capital, yet unexpectedly the entire
capital or a part of it perishes, he is not responsible.

***Issue*** 2162: \* If a partner who trades with the capital of the
partnership, declares that the capital has perished, and if other
partners trust him, they should accept his word. But if they do not
trust him, they can complain against him before the*Mujtahid* , who will
decide the case according to Islamic laws.

***Issue*** 2163: If all the partners withdraw the permission, given by
them to one another, for the right of discretion over their respective
shares held in partnership, none of them will be allowed the right of
discretion over them. And if one of them withdraws the permission
accorded by him, the other partners do not have the right of discretion;
but one who has withdrawn his permission can exercise his right of
discretion over the property of the partnership.

***Issue*** 2164: \* If one of the partners demands that the capital
invested in the partnership should be divided, others should accept his
demand even if the period fixed for the partnership may not have expired
yet, except when the division of the capital entails considerable loss
to the partners.

***Issue*** 2165: If one of the partners dies, or becomes insane, or
unconscious, other partners cannot continue to exercise right of
discretion over investment held in the partnership. And the same rule
applies when one

of them becomes feeble-minded that is, spends his property without any
consideration.

***Issue*** 2166: \* If a partner purchases a thing on credit for
himself, its profit and loss belongs to him. However, if he purchases it
for partnership, and if the agreement allows credit dealings, its profit
and loss belongs to both of them.

***Issue*** 2167: \* If the partners conclude a transaction with a joint
capital investment, and it transpires later that the partnership was
invalid, if the validity of the transaction was not dependent on mutual
consent, meaning that, if they had known that the partnership was not
valid, they would have still been agreeable to having the right of
discretion over the property or stock of each other, the transaction
will be considered valid, and whatever is gained or lost from the
transaction will be shared by them. But if the partners would not have
been disposed to agree to exercise discretion over each others' stock or

property had they known that the partnership was not valid, yet they
approve the particular transaction, it will be valid - and if they do
not, it will be invalid. And in either case, if any partner has worked
for the partnership without the previous intention to work gratis, he
can collect the wages for his services at the usual rate, considering
the percentage of other partners. But if the usual wage is more than his
share of dividend, after having agreed to the validity of the
transaction, he should take the dividend only.

Orders Regarding Compromise
---------------------------

***Issue*** 2168: \* Compromise means that a person agrees to give to
another person his own property or a part of the profit gained from it,
or waives or forgoes a debt, or some right, and that other person also
gives him in return, some property or profit from it, or waives his debt
or right in consideration of it; and even if a person gives to another
person his property or profit from it, or waives his debt or right
without claiming any consideration, the compromise will be in order.

***Issue*** 2169: \* It is necessary that the person who gives his
property to another person by way of compromise, should be adult and
sane, and should have the intention of making compromise, and none
should have compelled him to make the compromise, and he should not also
be feeble-minded from whom his own wealth is made inaccessible, or a
bankrupt who has no right to dispose of his property.

***Issue*** 2170: It is not necessary that a formula of compromise be
recited in Arabic. Rather, it is sufficient to convey the intention by
uttering any words.

***Issue*** 2171: \* If a person gives his sheep to a shepherd so that,
for example, he may look after them for one year, and use their milk and
give him a quantity of ghee, and in this manner compromise with the
shepherd for his labour, and a quantity of ghee against the milk of the
sheep, the transaction is valid. Rather, if he gives the sheep to the
shepherd for one year on lease, so that he may utilise their milk and
give him a quantity of ghee, not necessarily churned from the milk of
the leased sheep, this transaction is also in order.

***Issue*** 2172: If a person wants to make a compromise with another
person in respect of the debt which he owes, or in respect of his right,
the

compromise will be valid only if the opposite person agrees to it. But,
if he wants to forgo the debt or right owed to him, the acceptance by
the opposite person is not necessary.

***Issue*** 2173: If a debtor knows the amount he owes, but the creditor
does not know and makes compromise with the debtor for an amount less
than what is owed to him, like, if the creditor has to receive $50 but
he unknowingly makes a compromise for $10, the balance of $40 is not
halal for the debtor, except that he himself tells the creditor what he
actually owes him, and seeks his agreement. Alternatively, the debtor
should be sure that even if the creditors had known the exact amount of
the debt, he would have still settled for that lesser amount.

***Issue*** 2174: \* If two persons owe each other some property, ready
or on credit, and they know that one of them is more in quantity or
value then the other, they cannot sell their properties in exchange of
each other because it will be a transaction involving usury, and
similarly, it is haraam to conclude a compromise between them. In fact,
if it is not known that one is more in quantity or value than the other,
but there is a strong probability, as an obligatory precaution, no
compromise should be made.

***Issue*** 2175: \* If two persons are the creditors of one or two
persons and they, as creditors, wish to settle their debts between
themselves, if as previously mentioned, no aspect of interest is
involved in the transaction, there will be no objection. For example, if
both of them are owed 10 kilos of wheat, one of superior quality and the
other inferior, and the debt has become due for payment, the compromise
will be in order between the creditors.

***Issue*** 2176: If a person lent something to another for a stipulated
period, and now he, as a creditor, wishes to compromise on something
lesser in value, with an intention to collect what he gets and forgo the
balance, there is no harm in it. This rule applies when the debt
consists of gold or silver or another commodity which is sold by weight
or by measure. As for other things, however, it is permissible for the
creditor to compromise with the debtor, or with someone else for a lower
amount, or to sell that debt, as will be explained in note no. 2297.

***Issue*** 2177: If two persons make a compromise in respect of
something, they can cancel the compromise with mutual consent.
Similarly, if while concluding the agreement one or both of them is
given the option to cancel the compromise, the person who possesses that
option can cancel the compromise.

***Issue*** 2178: \* As long as the buyer and the seller do not leave
the place where a transaction was concluded, they can cancel the
transaction. Also, if a buyer purchases an animal, he has the right to
cancel the transaction within three days. And similarly, if the buyer
does not pay within three days for the commodity purchased by him, and
does not take delivery of the commodity, the seller can cancel the
transaction, as stated in rule no. 2132. However, one who makes a
compromise in respect of some property, does not possess the right to
cancel the compromise in these three cases. However, if the other party
in the compromise makes unusual delay in delivering the property over
which the compromise was reached, or if it has been

stipulated that the property will be delivered immediately, and the
opposite party does not act according to this condition, the compromise
can be cancelled. And similarly, compromise can also be cancelled in
other cases which have been mentioned in connection with the rules
relating to purchase and sale, except in the case when one of the two
parties in compromise has been defrauded, for which the law is not
ascertained.

***Issue*** 2179: A compromise can be cancelled if the thing received by
means of compromise is defective. However, it is a matter of*Ishkal* ,
if the person concerned desires to take the difference of the price
between the defective thing and the one without defect.

***Issue*** 2180: If a person makes a compromise with another person
with his property and imposes the condition that after his death the
other person will, for example, waqf that property, and that person also
accepts this condition, he should carry it out.

Rules Regarding Lease/Rent
--------------------------

***Issue*** 2181: \* The person who gives something on lease, as well as
the person who takes it on lease, should be adult and sane, and should
be acting on their free will. It is also necessary that they should have
the right of discretion over the property. Hence, a feeble-minded person
who does not have the right of disposal or discretion over his property,
his leasing out anything or taking anything on lease is not valid. The
same applies to a bankrupt person, in the wealth over which he has no
right of discretion. Of course, such a person can give himself for hire.

***Issue*** 2182: A person can become the agent of another person and
give his property on lease, or take some property on lease, on his
behalf.

***Issue*** 2183: \* If the guardian of a minor gives his property on
lease, or makes him the lessee of another person, there is no harm in
it. And if some period after the child's Bulugh is also included in the
period of lease, the child can cancel that included part of the lease
after his becoming baligh, even if the inclusion of that period after
the child's Bulugh was in his interest. But if the inclusion was based
on some religious grounds, and excluding it would be against Shariah,
and if the leasing was done with the permission of the*Mujtahid* , then
the child cannot cancel the lease after becoming baligh.

***Issue*** 2184: A minor child who has no guardian, cannot be hired
without the permission of a*Mujtahid* . And if a person does not have
access to a*Mujtahid* , he can hire the child after obtaining permission
from a M'omin who is 'Adil.

***Issue*** 2185: \* It is not necessary for the lessor and the lessee
to recite the formula in Arabic. In fact, if the owner says to a person:
“I have leased out my property to you”, and the other replies: “I accept
it”, the lease contract is in order. Also, if they do not utter any
words, and the owner hands over his property to the lessee with the
object of leasing it out, and lessee also takes it with the intention of
taking it on lease, the lease contract by such conduct is in order.

***Issue*** 2186: If a person wants to be hired for doing some work
without reciting the formula, the hire contract will be in order, as
soon as he starts doing that work.

***Issue*** 2187: If a dumb person makes it known with signs that he has
taken or given a property on lease, the lease contract is in order.

***Issue*** 2188: \* If a person takes a house, shop or room on lease,
and the owner of the property imposed the condition that only he (the
lessee) can utilise it, the lessee cannot sublet it to any other person
for his use, except that the new lease is such that its advantage
devolves on the lessee himself, like, if a woman takes a house or a room
on lease, and later marries, and gives the room or house on lease for
her own residence to her husband. And if the owner of the property does
not impose any such condition, the lessee can lease it out to another
person, but, as a precaution, he should seek the permission of the owner
before giving it on lease. And if he wishes to lease it out for a higher
amount in cash or kind, he can do so, if he has carried out some work on
it, like, white washing or renovation, or if he has suffered some
expenses in looking after the property.

***Issue*** 2189: \* If a person who is hired on wages, lays down a
condition that he will work for the hirer only, he (the hirer) cannot
lease out his service to another person, except in the manner mentioned
in the foregoing rule. And if the hired person does not lay down any
such condition, the hirer can lease out his services to another, but he
cannot charge more than the agreed wage for the hired person. Similarly,
if he himself accepts employment and then hires someone to do the task,
he cannot pay him less than what he will receive himself, unless he
joins that hired person in completing some of his work.

***Issue*** 2190: \* If a person takes or hires something other than a
house, a shop, a room a ship, and a hired person, say, he hires a land
on lease, and its owner does not lay down the condition that only he
himself can utilise it, and if the lessee leases it out to another
person on a higher rent, it will be a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2191: If a person takes for example, a house or a shop on
lease for one year, on a rent of one hundred rupees, and uses half
portion of it himself, he can lease out the remaining half for one
hundred rupees. However, if he wishes to lease out the half portion on a
rent higher than that on which he has taken the house, or shop on lease,
like, if he wishes to lease it out for hundred and twenty rupees, he can
do it only if he has carried out repairs etc. in it.

Conditions Regarding the Property Given on Lease
------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2192: \* The property which is given on lease, should fulfil
certain conditions:

(i) It should be specific. Hence, if a person says to another: “I have
given you one of my houses on lease”, it is not in order.

(ii) The person taking the property on lease should see it, or the
lessor should give its particulars in a manner which gives full
information about it.

(iii) It should be possible to deliver it. Hence, leasing out a horse
which has run away, and the hirer can not possess it, will be void.
However, if the hirer can manage to get it, the lease will be valid.

(iv) Utilisation of the property should not be by way of its destruction
or consumption. Hence, it is not correct to give bread, fruits and other
edibles on lease for the purpose of eating.

(v) It should be possible to utilise the property for the purpose for
which it is given on lease. Hence, it is not correct to give a piece of
land on lease for farming, when it does not get sufficient rain water,
and is also not irrigated by canal water.

(vi) The thing which a person gives on lease should be his own property,
and if he gives the property of another person on lease, it will be
correct only if its owner agrees to it.

***Issue*** 2193: It is permissible to give a tree on lease for
utilising its fruit, although fruit may not have appeared on it yet. The
same rule applies if an animal is given on lease for its milk.

***Issue*** 2194: A woman can be hired for her milk, and it is not
necessary for her to obtain her husband's permission. However, if her
husband's right suffers owing to her giving milk (to the child of
another person), she cannot take up the job without his permission.

Conditions for the Utilisation of the Property Given on Lease
-------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2195: \* The utilisation of the property given on lease
carries four conditions:

(i) That it should be halal. Hence, leasing out a shop for the sale or
storage of Alcoholic drinks, or providing transportation by leasing for
it, is void.

(ii) That doing the act or giving that service free of charge should not
be obligatory in the eyes of Shariah. Therefore, as a precaution, it is
not permissible to receive wages for teaching the rules of halal and
haraam, or for the last ritual services to the dead, like washing it,
shrouding etc. And as a precaution, money should not be paid in lieu of
any services which is deemed futile.

(iii) If the thing which is being leased out can be put to several uses,
then the use permissible to the lessee should be specified. For example,
if an animal, which can be used for riding or for carrying a load is
given on hire, it should be specified at the time of concluding the
lease contract, whether the lessee may use it for riding or for carrying
a load, or may use it for all other purposes.

(iv) The nature and extent of utilisation should be specified. In the
case of hiring a house or a shop, it can be done by fixing the period,
and in the case of labour, like that of a tailor, it can be specified
that he will sew and stitch a particular dress in a particular fashion.

***Issue*** 2196: If the time of commencement of a lease is not fixed,
it will be reckoned to have commenced after the recitation of the
formula of lease.

***Issue*** 2197: If, for example, a house is leased out for one year,
and it is stipulated that the period of lease will commence one month
after the recitation of the formula, the lease contract is in order,
even if the house had been leased out to another person at the time of
reciting the formula.

***Issue*** 2198: If the period of lease is not specified, and the
lessor says to the lessee: “At any time you stay in the house you will
have to pay rent at the rate of $10 per month”, the lease contract is
not in order.

***Issue*** 2199: If the owner of a house says to the lessee: “I have
leased out this house to you for £10 per month” or says: “I hereby lease
out this house to you for one month on a rent of $10, and as long as you
stay in it thereafter

the rent will be $10 per month”, if the time of the commencement of the
period of lease was specified or it was known the lease for the first
month will be proper.

***Issue*** 2200: If travellers and pilgrims stay in a house not knowing
how long they will stay there, and if they settle with the landlord that
they will, for example, pay $1 per night as rent, and the landlord also
agrees to it, there is no harm in using that house. However, as the
period of lease has not been specified, the lease will not be proper
except for the first night, and after the first night the landlord can
eject them as and when he so wishes.

Miscellaneous Rules Relating to Lease/Rent
------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2201: The property which the lessor gives on lease should be
identified. Hence if it is one of the things whose transaction is made
by weight (e.g. wheat), its weight should be specified. And if it is one
of those things whose transaction is made by counting (e.g. currency
coins), the amount should be specified. And if it is like a horse or a
sheep, the lessor should have a sight of it, or the lesser should inform
him of its particulars.

***Issue*** 2202: \* If land is given on lease for farming, and the
produce of that very land which does not presently exist, is treated as
its rent, the lease contract will not be valid. And the same applies if
he assumes a general responsibility to pay the rent on the condition
that it will be paid from the harvest. But if the source from which rent
will be paid exists, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 2203: \* If a person has leased out something, he cannot
claim its rent until he has delivered it. And if a person is hired to
perform an act, he cannot claim wages until he has performed that act,
except in the cases where advance payment of wages is an accepted norm,
like Niyabat for Hajj.

***Issue*** 2204: If a lessor delivers the leased property, the lessee
should pay the rent, even if he may not take the delivery, or may take
its delivery but may not utilise it till the end of the period of lease.

***Issue*** 2205: If a person agrees to perform a task on a particular
day against wages, and appears on that day to perform the task, the
person who has hired him should pay him the wages, even if he may not
assign that task to him. For example, if a tailor is hired to sew a
dress on a particular day, and he appears to do the work, the hirer
should pay him the wages even if he may not provide him with the cloth
to sew, irrespective of whether the tailor remains without work on that
day or alternatively does his own or somebody else's work.

***Issue*** 2206: If it transpires after the expiry of the period of
lease, that the lease contract was void, the lessee should give the
usual rent of that thing to the owner of the property. For example, if a
person takes a house on lease for one year on a rent of $100, and learns
later that the lease contract was void, and if the normal current rent
of the house is $50, he should pay $50. And if its normal current rent
is $200, and the person who leased it out was its owner, or his agent,
and was aware of the current rate of rental, it is not necessary for the
lessee to give him more than $100. But if a person other than these gave
it on lease, the lessee should pay $200. And the same order

applies, if it is known during the period of lease, that the lease
contract is void in relation to the outstanding rent for the past
period.

***Issue*** 2207: \* If a thing taken by a person on lease is lost, and
if he has not been negligent in looking after it nor extravagant in its
use, he is not responsible for the loss. Also, if, for example, a cloth
given to a tailor is damaged or destroyed, when the tailor has not been
extravagant, and has also not shown negligence in taking care of it, he
need not make any replacement.

***Issue*** 2208: If an artisan loses the thing taken by him, he is
responsible for it.

***Issue*** 2209: If a butcher cuts off the head of an animal, and makes
it haraam, he must pay its price to its owner, regardless of whether he
charged for slaughtering the animal or did it gratis.

***Issue*** 2210: If a person takes an animal on hire, and specifies as
to how much he will load on it, and if he puts a heavier load on it, and
as a result, the animal dies or becomes defective, he is responsible for
it. And even if the quantity of the load is not specified, and he puts
an unusually heavier load on it with the result that the animal dies or
becomes defective, the person concerned is responsible. And in both the
cases, he must pay extra rent than is usual.

***Issue*** 2211: \* If a person gives an animal on hire so that fragile
goods may be loaded on it, and the animal slips or trots and breaks the
things, the owner of the animal is not responsible for it. However, if
the owner beats the animal severely, or does something like it, as a
result of which the animal falls down on the ground, and breaks the
goods he (the owner of the animal) is responsible.

***Issue*** 2212: \* If a person circumcises a child, and as a
consequence of it the child dies, or is injured, the person who
circumcises is responsible if he has been careless or made a mistake,
like having cut the flesh more than usual. However, if he was not
careless, or did not make any mistake, and the child dies due to
circumcision, or sustains an injury, he will not be responsible,
provided that, he had not been consulted earlier about the possible
injury, nor was he aware that the child would be injured.

***Issue*** 2213: \* If a doctor gives medicines to a patient with his
own hands, or prescribes a medicine for him, and if the patient sustains
harm or dies because of taking that medicine, the doctor is responsible,
even if he had not been careless in treating the patient.

***Issue*** 2214: \* If a doctor tells a patient: “If you sustain harm I
am not responsible” and then exercises due precaution and care in the
treatment, but the patient sustains harm or dies, the doctor is not
responsible.

***Issue*** 2215: The lessee and the lessor can cancel the lease
contract with mutual consent. Also if a condition was laid down in the
lease contract that one or both of them would have the option to cancel
the contract, they can cancel the contract as agreed.

***Issue*** 2216: \* If the lessor or the lessee realises that he has
been cheated, if he did not notice at the time of making the lease
contract that he was being cheated, he can cancel the lease contract.
However, if a condition is

laid down in the contract of lease, that even if the parties are
cheated, they will not be entitled to cancel the contract, they cannot
cancel it.

***Issue*** 2217: If a person gives something on lease, and before he
delivers it to the other party, it is usurped, the lessee can cancel the
lease contract and take back whatever he has given to the lessor, or he
may not cancel the lease contract, and take from the usurper rent at the
usual rate, for the period the thing remained in his possession.
Therefore, if a person takes an animal on lease for one month for $10,
and someone usurps if for ten days, and the usual rent for ten days is
$15, the lessee can take $15 from the usurper.

***Issue*** 2218: \* If a lessee hires something and someone prevents
him from taking its delivery, or usurps it from him, after he has taken
the possession, or prevents him from using it, he cannot cancel the
lease. He is entitled only to take rent of that thing from the usurper
at the usual rate.

***Issue*** 2219: If the lessor sells the property to the lessee before
the expiry of the period of lease, the lease contract does not get
cancelled, and the lessee should give the rent of the property to the
lessor. The same rule will apply if the lessor sells the leased property
to someone else.

***Issue*** 2220: \* If before the commencement of the period of lease,
the leased property gets so impaired that it cannot be utilised in the
manner agreed upon, the lease contract becomes void, and the money paid
by the lessee will revert back to him. And if it is possible to utilise
the property partly, the lessee can cancel the lease contract.

***Issue*** 2221: \* If a person takes something on lease, and during
the period of lease it becomes so impaired that it is not fit for the
required use, the remaining lease contract will be void, and the lessee
can cancel the lease for the past period also. And for that period, he
may pay usual rent.

***Issue*** 2222: \* If a person leases out a house which has, for
example, two rooms, and one of those rooms is ruined and he gets it
repaired, but it does not match the standard of the previous room, the
rule mentioned in 2221, will apply in this case also. But if it is
repaired by the hirer at once, and its use does not get interrupted,
then the lease does not become void, and the lessee cannot cancel the
lease. However, if the repair takes too long, and its use is
interrupted, then the lease will be invalid for that much period, and in
this case, the lessee can cancel the whole lease, and in exchange of
whatever use he may have made, he should pay a usual rent.

***Issue*** 2223: \* If the lessor or the lessee dies, the lease
contract does not become void. But if the house is not the property of
the lessor - for example, another person made a will that as long as he
(the lessor) is alive, the income derived from the house will be his
property, and if he gives that house on lease, and dies before the
expiry of the lease period, the lease contract becomes void from the
time of his death. It can become valid again if the owner of the house
endorses the contract, and the rent for the remaining period of lease,
after the death of the lessor, will accrue to the present owner.

***Issue*** 2224: \* If an employer appoints a contractor to recruit
labourers for him, and if the contractor pays the labourers less than
what he receives for them from the employer, the excess he keeps is
haraam for him, and he should return it to the employer. And if the
contractor is given a full contract

by the employer, to complete a building, and is authorised to either
construct it himself or give a sub-contract to another party, if he
joins with the other party in doing some work, and then entrusting him
to do the remaining work against lower payment than what he has
collected from the employer, the surplus with him will be halal for him.

***Issue*** 2225: If a person who dyes the clothes, agrees to dye a
cloth with indigo, he has no right to claim any charges if he dyes it
with something else.

Rules Regarding Ju'ala (Payment of Reward)
------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2226: \* Ju'ala means that a person promises that if a
particular work is completed for him, he will give a specified amount
for it. For example, he declares that if anyone recovers his lost
property, he will give him $10. One who makes such a declaration is
called Ja'il, and the person who carries out that work is called 'Amil.
One of the differences between Ju'ala and Ijara (hire) is that, in the
case of “hire”, the hired person is bound to do the job after the
agreement, and the hirer becomes indebted to the hired person for his
wages, whereas in the case of Ju'ala, the person who agrees to do the
job is at liberty to abandon it if he so wishes; and until he completes
the job assigned, the person who declared the reward or payment does not
become indebted to him.

***Issue*** 2227: \* A person who declares the payment or reward should
be adult and sane, and should have made it with his free will and
intention, and should have the right of disposal and discretion over his
property. Therefore, the declaration by a feeble minded person who
squanders his property indiscreetly is not in order. Similarly, a
bankrupt cannot declare any reward or payment from that part of wealth
over which he has not right of discretion.

***Issue*** 2228: \* The task for which the declaration was made by the
employer should not be haraam, futile, or one of those obligatory acts
which should necessarily be performed free according to Shariah. Hence,
if a person declares that he will give $10 to a person who drinks
alcohol, or traverses a dark passage at night without any sensible
purpose, or offers his obligatory prayers, the employment will not be in
order.

***Issue*** 2229: \* It is not necessary for the employer for Ju'ala to
specify the reward he would give with all its particulars. If the
employee, in this case, is certain that he would not be taken for a
stupid or foolish person if he undertook the assignment, it is
sufficient. For example, if the employer in Ju'ala tells a person that
if he sells a particular stock or goods for more than, say, ten dollars,
whatever is the excess will be his. This form of Ju'ala is valid.
Similarly, if he says that who soever finds his horse, that person will
own half of it, or that person will be awarded ten kilos of wheat,
Ju'ala will be in order.

***Issue*** 2230: \* If a person does not at all mention the amount of
reward which he would give for his work - for example, if he says: “I
shall give money to the person who finds out my son”, and does not
specify the amount of money, and if some one performs the task, he
should pay him according to what is customarily paid for such tasks.

***Issue*** 2231: If the employee in Ju'ala performs the task before the
agreement is made, or performs it after the agreement, but with the
intention that he will not take any money, he is not entitled to demand
wages.

***Issue*** 2232: The person who makes a Ju'ala agreement can cancel it
before the person employed starts to work.

***Issue*** 2233: If the person wishes to cancel the Ju'ala agreement
after the employee has started work, it is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2234: \* A person appointed to work in Ju'ala can leave the
task incomplete. However, if his failure to complete the task causes
harm to the person who appointed him, he must complete it. For example,
if a person says: “If someone operates upon my eye I shall give him so
much money” and a surgeon commences the operation. If by not completing
the operation, the eye will be defective, he must complete it. And if he
leaves it half way, he has no claim, whatsoever, over the person who
employed him.

Rules Regarding Muzari'ah (Temporary Sharecropping Contract)
------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2236: \* One of the many types of Muzari'ah means that the
owner of a land agrees to hand over his land to a farmer, so that he
would cultivate it, and give a share of the crop to the landowner.

***Issue*** 2237: \* Muzari'ah has certain conditions:

(i) That the owner of land confirms to the farmer that he has given him
the land for farming, and the farmer also asserts that he has accepted
it. Alternatively, without their uttering anything, the owner of the
land keeps the land at the farmer's disposal with the intention that he
would do farming in it, and the farmer accepts it.

(ii) Both the owner of the land and the farmer should be adult and sane,
and should conclude the agreement of Muzari'ah with their intention and
free will. They should also not be feeble minded persons, who squander
their wealth on useless things. Similarly, the owner of the land should
not be a bankrupt person. But if the agreement in which he enters with
the farmer does not in any way involve any property over which the
bankrupt person has no right of discretion, then there will be no
objection.

(iii) As a precaution, the owner and the farmer should each share the
entire produce of the land. But this condition does not appear to be
necessary. Hence, if they, for example, agree to the condition that the
harvest in the first half or at the end, will belong to one of them, the
agreement of Muzari'ah will be valid.

(iv) The share of each of them should be fixed, like, 1/2 or 1/3 etc. of
the crop. If no share is fixed, and the owner of the land simply says:
“Cultivate this land and give me whatever you like”, it will not be in
order. Similarly, if instead of fixing a share, a fixed quantity of the
crop is offered for the farmer or the landowner, the Muzari'ah will not
be valid.

(v) The period for which the land is to remain in possession of the
farmer should be specified, and it is necessary that the period should
be long enough to make a harvest possible from the land. And if this
period is made to commence from a specified day, and to end with the
harvest time, it will be sufficient.

(vi) The land should be arable, and if it is barren but can be made fit
for farming by some improvements being done on it, the contract of
muzari'ah is in order.

(vii) If the farmer is supposed to sow seeds for a particular crop, then
that crop must be specified. For example, it must be specified whether
it will be rice or wheat, and if it is rice, for example, which type of
rice will be sown. However, if they do not have any particular crop in
view, or the crop which both of them have in view is known, it is not
necessary that they should define it.

(viii) The owner should specify the land, if he has several tracts of
land which differ from one another in their requirements. But if they do
not differ in their requirements, it is not necessary to specify. For
example, if he tells the farmer to till and cultivate any of those
lands, without specifying any one, muzari'ah will be valid.

(ix) The expenses which each of them will incur should be specified.
However, if the expenditure which each of them should incur is known, it
is not necessary to declare it.

***Issue*** 2238: \* If the owner settles with the farmer that a certain
quantity of the crop will belong to one of them, and the remaining
quantity will be divided between them, that muzari'ah is void, even if
they know that something will remain after deducting that quantity. Of
course, if they agree between themselves that some of the seeds sown, or
the tax payable to the government, will be deducted from the harvest,
and the rest will be divided between them, this muzari'ah is in order.

***Issue*** 2239: \* If the agreed period of muzari'ah (tenancy) comes
to end, and the usual crop is not obtained, there will be no objection
if the owner of the land agrees that the crop may remain on his land on
payment of rent, or without it, and if the farmer is also agreeable to
it, provided that, both of them had agreed at the time of fixing that
muzari'ah will end regardless of any crop becoming available. But if the
owner does not agree to such an arrangement, he can ask the farmer to
remove the crop from there. And if the farmer sustains a loss by
removing the crop, it will not be necessary for the owner to compensate
the farmer for it. And the farmer who is willing to pay something to the
owner, to allow the crop to stand on his land, cannot compel him to
agree.

***Issue*** 2240: \* If farming becomes impossible on the land due to
some eventuality, for example, if water supply is cut off from the
land - the contract of muzari'ah is annulled. But if the farmer does not
cultivate the land without any justifiable excuse, while the land
remains in his occupation, and the owner has no discretion over it, he
should pay the rent for that period to the owner at the usual rate.

***Issue*** 2241: \* The owner of land and the farmer cannot cancel the
contract of muzari'ah without the consent of each other, unless they had
agreed in the contract to grant that option to one or both of them. In
that case, they will cancel the contract according to the conditions
laid in the agreement. Similarly, if any one of them acts contrary to
the agreed conditions of the contracts, the other party in the contract
will have the right to cancel the transaction.

***Issue*** 2242: \* If the landowner or the farmer dies after
concluding the contract of muzari'ah, the contract is not terminated,
and their heirs take their place. However, if the farmer dies, and if
they had stipulated that the farmer himself would do the farming, the
contract of muzari'ah will become cancelled. But if the farmer had
completed his task, and fulfilled his assignment, then the muzari'ah
will remain valid, and the heirs will be given his share together with
all his rights or accruals which were due to him. However, the heirs
cannot compel the landowner to allow the crop to stand on his land.

***Issue*** 2243: \* If it becomes known after cultivation, that the
contract of muzari'ah had been void, and if the seeds have been the
property of the landowner, the produce will belong to him and he will
pay the farmer his wages and the expenses incurred by him, and the rent
for the cow and other animals belonging to the farmer, which may have
worked on the farm. And if the seeds were the property of the farmer,
the crop will belong to him, and he should pay the landowner the rent of
the land and the expenses incurred by him, and rent for the cow and
other animals belonging to the landowner which may have worked on the
farm. And in both the cases, it will be obligatory to pay the agreed
amount only, even if the other party is aware that the usual entitlement
is more than that.

***Issue*** 2244: \* If the seeds belong to the farmer, and if it
becomes known after cultivation that the contract of muzari'ah had been
void, there will be no objection if the landowner and the farmer agree
that the crop may remain on the land against payment or otherwise. Some
Fuqaha have said that if the landowner is not agreeable, he can ask the
farmer to remove the crop from the land, even before it is ready, and
that even if the farmer is willing to pay something to the landowner, he
cannot compel him to allow the crop to remain on his land. But this is
not free from*Ishkal* . And in any case, the landowner cannot compel the
farmer to pay rent and let the crop remain on his land, or even without
any rent.

***Issue*** 2245: \* If roots of the crop remain in the land after
harvesting the crop, and if after the expiry of the contract of
muzari'ah they grow again in the next year, if the landowner had not
made an agreement with the farmer regarding his share in the remaining
roots, the crop of the second year will belong to the landowner.


