Transactions (Part III of III)
==============================

Rules Regarding Musaqat and Mugharisa
-------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2246: \* Musaqat means that a person agrees with someone
that for a specified time, the fruit-bearing trees owned by him, or
those which are under his discretion, will be given to that person so
that he cares, tends and waters them. In return, that person will have
the right to take an agreed quantity of fruits. This transaction is
called Musaqat.

***Issue*** 2247: A transaction of Musaqat in respect of fruitless trees
will be in order, if it has another product of substantial monetary
value, like, any leaves of flowers which is sold for good gain - like,
the leaves of Henna, which is in common use.

***Issue*** 2248: While concluding a transaction of Musaqat, it is not
necessary that the prescribed formula be pronounced. In fact, if the
owner of the tree transfers it with the intention of Musaqat, and he who
is to do the work begins doing the work with the same intention, the
transaction is in order.

***Issue*** 2249: \* The owner of the trees, and the person who
undertakes to tend and care for them, should both be adult and sane, and
should not have been coerced by anyone. Moreover, they should not be
feeble-minded persons (who have no discretion over the property), so
that the property is not unnecessarily ruined. Similarly, the owner must
not be a bankrupt person. But if the person who tends and waters is
bankrupt, he can be engaged to do the work, provided that, in so doing,
he does not use the property he is not allowed to administer or use.

***Issue*** 2250: \* The period of Musaqat should be known, and it must
extend over a span of time when the harvest becomes ready. And if the
beginning is specified, and its end is fixed to be the time when fruits
for that year become available, the contract is in order.

***Issue*** 2251: \* It is necessary that the share of each one of them
is fixed as 1/2 or 1/3 etc. of the crop, and if they stipulate, for
example, that one ton of the fruits will belong to the owner of the
trees and the remaining quantity will go to the person who looks after
the trees, the contract is void.

***Issue*** 2252: \* It is not necessary that the contract for Musaqat
be concluded before the appearance of the crop. In fact, a contract made
after the appearance of the crop is valid, provided that, some work like
increasing the crop, protecting the trees, is still required. But if no
such work remains to be done, then a contract for merely watering the
trees, plucking the fruits, and looking after them, cannot be valid.

***Issue*** 2253: \* A contract of Musaqat for creeping plants, like
melon and cucumber, is also valid.

***Issue*** 2254: \* If a tree benefits from rainwater or the moisture
of earth, and does not stand in need of irrigation, but needs other work
as described in rule 2252, the contract of Musaqat will be in order.

***Issue*** 2255: Two persons who have entered a contract of Musaqat can
cancel it with mutual consent. Moreover, if they lay down in the
contract of Musaqat, a condition that both or one of them will be
entitled to cancel the contract, there will be no harm in cancelling the
contract as agreed to by

them. And if they lay down other conditions in the agreement, which are
not followed, the person who was to benefit from that condition can
cancel the contract.

***Issue*** 2256: If the owner dies, the contract of Musaqat is not
terminated, and his heirs take his place.

***Issue*** 2257: \* If a person to whom the upkeep of the trees was
entrusted dies, and if it was not agreed that he would tend and care for
them himself, his heirs take his place. And if they do not do the job
themselves, and also do not hire a person for the work, the*Mujtahid*
will hire a person and pay from the estate of the dead person, and
divide the crop between the heirs of the deceased and the owner of the
trees. And if they had agreed that the man would tend and care for the
trees himself, the contract will be cancelled upon his death.

***Issue*** 2258: \* If it is agreed that the entire crop will belong to
the owner, the contract of Musaqat is void, but the fruit will remain
the property of the owner, and the worker cannot claim any wages, except
when the contract of Musaqat is invalid because of some other reason. In
that case, the owner will pay wages at the usual rate to the person who
has reared the trees by watering them and doing other jobs. But if the
usual amount of wages is more than the stipulated amount, and the
opposite party was aware of it, it is not necessary for him to pay the
excess.

***Issue*** 2259: \* If a person hands over a piece of land to another
person to plant trees in it, and it is agreed that whatever is grown,
will be the property of both of them, the contract is called Mugharisa,
and is valid, though it should be avoided, as a precaution. However, a
slight change in the method of achieving the same purpose will make the
contract valid, without any objection. For example, if both the sides
enter into this sort of agreement for settling and compromising their
debts, or they become partners in the newly growing trees, and then the
worker offers his services to the owner for tending and watering them
for a specified period, against the wages equal to half the value of
land.

Persons Who Have No Right of Disposal or Discretion Over Their Own Property
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2260: \* A child who has not reached the age of puberty,
(bulugh), has no right of discretion over the property he holds or owns,
even if he is able to discern and is mature, and the permission of
his/her guardian does not apply in this case. However, in those cases
where a Na-baligh is allowed to make a transaction, like when buying or
selling things of small worth as mentioned in rule 2090, or his
testament for his relatives and kinsmen, as will be explained in rule
2706, the right can be exercised. A girl becomes baligha upon completion
of her nine lunar years, and a boy is baligh when stiff pubic hair grow,
or when he discharges semen, or upon completion of fifteen lunar years.

***Issue*** 2261: \* Growing of stiff hair on the face and above the
lips may be considered as signs of bulugh, but their growth on chest and
under the armpits, and the voice becoming harsh etc. are not the signs
of one's

reaching the age of puberty, except that one may become sure of having
reached the age of puberty due to these changes.

***Issue*** 2262: \* An insane person has no right of disposal over his
property. Similarly, a bankrupt (i.e. a person who has been prohibited
by the*Mujtahid* to dispose of or have discretion on his property
because of the demands of his creditors) cannot dispose his property
without the permission of the creditors. And a feeble-minded person
(Safih) who squanders his property for useless purposes, has no right of
disposal or discretion over his property.

***Issue*** 2263: \* If a person is sane at one time and insane at
another, the right of discretion exercised by him during his lunacy will
not be considered valid.

***Issue*** 2264: \* A dying man in his terminal illness can spend his
own wealth on himself, on the members of his family, his guests and on
other things as much as he likes, provided that, it is not considered to
be extravagance on his part. Also, he can sell his property at its
proper value, or hire it. But if he gives away his property as gift, or
sells it at a lower price than usual, it will be valid if the property
gifted or sold cheap is equal to or less than 1/3 of his estate. And if
it is more, it will be valid only if the heirs allow, and if they do
not, then whatever he spent in excess of 1/3 of his estate will be
considered void.

Rules Regarding Agency (Wakalat)
--------------------------------

Wakalat means that a person delegates somebody a task (like concluding a
transaction), which he himself had a right to do, so that the other
person may perform it on his behalf. For example, one may appoint
another person to act as one's agent for the sale of a house, or for a
marriage contract. Since a feeble-minded person does not have right of
discretion over his property, he cannot appoint an agent (Wakil) to sell
it.

***Issue*** 2265: \* In Wakalat, it is not necessary to recite a formal
formula. If a person conveys to another person, by conduct, that he has
made him his agent and the other person also conducts himself in a way
to convey that he has accepted that position, e.g. if he places his
property at Wakil's disposal so that he may sell it on his behalf, and
the Wakil takes that property for that purpose, the agency is in order.

***Issue*** 2266: If a person appoints a person in another city as his
agent, and gives him power of attorney, and he accepts it, the agency is
in order, even if the power of attorney reaches the agent after some
time.

***Issue*** 2267: \* The Muwakkil (principal), that is, the person who
appoints another person as his Wakil (agent), as well as the Wakil,
should be sane, acting on his own volition and authority. And the
principal should be baligh, except in cases where a discerning child can
act.

***Issue*** 2268: A person cannot become a Wakil for an act which he
cannot perform, or which is haraam for him to do. For example, a person
who is wearing Ehram for Hajj cannot recite the Nikah as an agent for
another person.

***Issue*** 2269: \* If a person appoints another person as his agent to
perform all his tasks, the agency is in order, but if he appoints him as
his agent for performing a task without specifying it, the agency will
be void. But if the

principal gives an optional task to the agent, like, if he appoints him
as a Wakil to either sell his house or give it on rent, that Wakalat
will be valid.

***Issue*** 2270: If a person removes his agent from office, he (the
agent) cannot perform the task entrusted to him after the news of his
dismissal has reached him. However, if he has already performed the task
before the news of his dismissal reaches him, it will be in order.

***Issue*** 2271: \* An agent can relinquish the agency even if the
principal is absent.

***Issue*** 2272: An agent cannot appoint another person as agent for
the performance of the task entrusted to him, except when the principal
has authorised him to engage an agent. In that case, he should strictly
act according to the instructions. Hence, if the principal has said to
him: “Engage an agent for me”, he should engage an agent for the
principal and cannot appoint the agent on his own behalf.

***Issue*** 2273: If an agent appoints an agent for his principal, with
his permission, he cannot remove that agent. And if the first agent dies
or the principal dismisses him, the second agency will not be
invalidated.

***Issue*** 2274: If an agent appoints someone as his own agent with the
permission of the principal, the principal and the first agent can
dismiss that second agent, and if the first agent dies or is removed
from office, the second agency becomes invalid.

***Issue*** 2275: \* If several persons are engaged as agents for
performing a task, and everyone of them is allowed to act independently,
everyone of them can perform that task, and if one of them dies the
agency of others is not invalidated. But if, they were told to work
jointly, they cannot act independently, and if one of them dies, the
agency of others is invalidated.

***Issue*** 2276: \* If the agent or the principal dies, the agency
becomes invalid. Similarly, if the thing for the disposal of which one
his appointed an agent perishes, (for example, the sheep which the agent
was entrusted to sell, dies) the agency becomes invalid. And if either
of them (i.e. the principal or the agent) becomes insane or unconscious,
the agency is invalidated. But if either of them becomes insane or
unconscious occasionally, the agency does not become void during such
periods, nor after the recovery.

***Issue*** 2277: If a person appoints someone as agent to perform a
task, and promises to give him something for his services, he must give
him the promised thing after the completion of the task.

***Issue*** 2278: If an agent is not careless in looking after the
property entrusted to him, nor does he exercise such discretion over it
for which permission was not granted, and by chance the property is lost
or destroyed, he should not compensate for it.

***Issue*** 2279: If an agent has been careless about looking after the
property entrusted to him, or treated it in a manner which was different
from the one allowed by the principal, and consequently the property is
lost or destroyed, he is responsible for it. For example, if he is given
a dress to sell, and instead he wears it, and it is lost or damaged, he
should pay compensation for it.

***Issue*** 2280: If an agent deals with a property in a manner other
than the one for which he has been granted permission, for example, he
wears a dress which he has been asked to sell, and then disposes it in
the authorised manner, that disposal will be in order.

Rules Regarding Debt or Loan
----------------------------

To give loan to Momineen, particularly the needy ones, is*Mustahab* , on
which great stress has been laid in the Holy Qur'an and in the
Traditions (Ahadith). The Holy Prophet has been reported to have said
that whoever gives loan to his Muslim brother, his wealth flourishes,
and the angels invoke Divine mercy for him, and if he is lenient with
his debtor, he will pass over the Bridge (Sirat) swiftly. And if a
Muslim denies his brethren-in-faith a loan, Paradise becomes forbidden
(haraam) for him.

***Issue*** 2281: It is not necessary to recite a specific formula in
the matter of debt. If a person gives something to another person with
the intention of loaning, and the other takes it with the intention of
borrowing, that conduct will be in order.

***Issue*** 2282: \* Whenever a debtor pays his debt, the creditor
should accept it. But if the time for repayment had been fixed at the
request of the creditor, or by mutual understanding, then in this case,
the creditor can refuse to accept the repayment before the termination
of time.

***Issue*** 2283: \* If a period is fixed for the repayment of debt in
the formal contract of debt by the debtor, or by mutual agreement, the
creditor cannot claim repayment of the debt before the expiry of that
period. But if it was stipulated by the creditor, or if no such period
was fixed, the creditor can demand the repayment of his debt at any
time.

***Issue*** 2284: When the creditor demands his debt, and the debtor is
in a position to pay it, he should pay it immediately, and if he delays
its payment, he commits a sin.

***Issue*** 2285: \* If the debtor does not possess anything other than
the house he occupies, the household effects, and other things of
essential needs, without which he would be facing hardship, the creditor
cannot claim the repayment from him. He should wait till the debtor is
in a position to repay the debt.

***Issue*** 2286: \* If a person is indebted and he is unable to repay
his debt, he should take up a suitable employment if he can, and pay off
his debt. This is an obligatory precaution. Especially, if employment
for him is easy, or if it has been his vocation, it is obligatory upon
him to do so in order to pay off the debt.

***Issue*** 2287: \* If a person has no access to his creditor, and does
not hope to find him or his heirs, he should pay the amount he owes to
poor on behalf of the creditor. And as a precaution, he should obtain
permission for it from the*Mujtahid* . And if his creditor is not a
Sayyid, the recommended precaution is that he should not give the sum he
owes to a poor who is a Sayyid. But if he hopes to find his creditor or
the heirs, he should wait and search for him. And if he does not
succeed, he should make a Will stating that if he died, and if the
creditor or the heirs appear, they should be paid from his estate.

***Issue*** 2288: If the estate of a dead person does not exceed the
obligatory expenses of his Kafan, burial and the payment of his debt,
his estate should be utilised for these purposes and his heir will not
inherit anything.

***Issue*** 2289: \* If a person takes a quantity of gold and silver
currency as a loan, and then its price falls, it will be sufficient if
he gives the same quantity which he had taken. And if its price rises,
he must give the same quantity which he had taken. However, in either
case, there is no objection if the debtor and the creditor mutually
agree to some other arrangement.

***Issue*** 2290: If the property taken on loan has not perished, and
its owner demands it, the recommended precaution is that the debtor
should return him the same property.

***Issue*** 2291: If a person who advances a loan, makes a condition
that he will take back more than what he gives, for example, he gives 3
kilos of wheat and stipulates that he will take back 3 1/2 kilos of
wheat, or gives ten eggs and says that he will take back eleven eggs, it
will be usury and therefore haraam. Rather, if he stipulates that the
debtor should, apart from the repayment, do some work for him, or repay
the loan along with a quantity of another commodity (for example, if he
lays down the condition that the debtor will return one rupee owed along
with a match box) it will be usury and haraam. Also, if he stipulates
that the debtor will return the thing loaned to him in a particular
shape, e.g. if he gives him a quantity of gold, and imposes the
condition that he will take it back as golden ornaments, that too, is
usury and haraam. However, if no condition is made by the creditor, and
the debtor himself decides to repay something more than what he
borrowed, there is no harm in it. In fact, it is*Mustahab* to do so.

***Issue*** 2292: To pay interest is haraam, the same way as charging
interest. However, if a person takes a loan against interest, he becomes
its owner, although it is better that he should not exercise his right
of disposal over it. And if it is known that the creditor would have
allowed him the use of money loaned, even if they would not have agreed
on interest, then the debtor can exercise his would have allowed him the
use of money loaned, even if they would not have agreed on interest,
then the debtor can exercise his discretion over the money loaned to him
without any objection.

***Issue*** 2293: If a person takes interest bearing loan in the shape
of wheat or any other similar thing, and does farming with it, he
becomes the owner of the harvest, but it is better that he should not
exercise his right of disposal over harvest so acquired.

***Issue*** 2294: \* If a person purchases a dress, and then pays the
owner of the dress with the money earned from interest, or with lawful
money mixed with interest money, there will be no harm in wearing that
dress and offering prayers with it. But if he says to the seller: “I am
purchasing this dress with this sort of money”, it will be haraam to
wear that dress. But offering prayers with that dress has been
adequately explained in the rules for the clothes worn by one who wishes
to pray.

***Issue*** 2295: If a person gives a sum of money to a merchant, so
that he may get from him something less in another city, there is no
harm in it. It is called 'Sarf-i-Barat'.

***Issue*** 2296: \* If a person gives some money to another person with
the condition that after a few days, he will take a larger amount from
him in another city, or town, (for example, he gives $990 to him, and
stipulates that after ten days he will take $1000 from him in another
city) and if that currency is of gold or silver, the transaction is
usury which is haraam. However, if the person who is taking more amount
gives some commodity against the excess amount or performs some task,
there is no harm in this arrangement. As for the usual bank notes, which
is classified as things to be counted, there is no harm if something
more is taken in exchange, except when it is in the form of a debt and a
condition for excess is laid, in which case, it will be interest and
haraam. Or, if a person sells bank notes on credit basis, for more in
return, and if they belong to the same classification of commodity, it
is not a permissible transaction.

***Issue*** 2297: If a person is owed by someone, and the thing owed is
not in the category of gold, silver or anything measured or weighed, he
can sell it to the debtor or anybody else for a lesser amount and
realise the sum in cash. On this basis, in the present times, a creditor
can sell the bills of exchange or the promissory notes received from the
debtor, to the bank, or any other person, at a price lower than the
amount due to him (which is called 'discounting' in common parlance) and
can take the outstanding balance in cash, because dealings with regard
to common bank notes is not by weight or measure.

Rules Regarding Hawala (Transferring the debts etc.)
----------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2298: If a debtor directs his creditor to collect his debt
from the third person, and the creditor accepts the arrangement, the
third person will, on completion of all the conditions to be explained
later, become the debtor. Thereafter, the creditor cannot demand his
debt from the first debtor.

***Issue*** 2299: \* The debtor, the creditor and the person to whom
collection is referred, should be adult and sane, and none should have
coerced them, and they should not be feeble-minded, that is, those who
squander their wealth. And it is also necessary that the debtor and the
creditor are not bankrupt. Of course, if the debt is transferred to a
person who is solvent, there is no harm even if the person assigning the
transfer is bankrupt.

***Issue*** 2300: \* Transferring the debt to a person who is not a
debtor will not be correct, unless he accepts it. And if a person wishes
to affect a transfer to a debtor for a commodity other than that for
which he is indebted, (for example, if he transfers the debt of wheat
while he is indebted to him for barley) the transfer will not be in
order, unless he accepts it. In fact, in all cases of such transfers and
Hawalas, one to whom it is assigned should have accepted it, otherwise,
the transaction will be void.

***Issue*** 2301: \* It is necessary that a person should actually be a
debtor at the time he transfers the debt. Therefore, if he intends
taking a loan from some one, he cannot transfer the prospective debt in
advance to another party, telling the would be creditor to collect the
debt from the party.

***Issue*** 2302: \* The debtor must specify exactly the category and
the quantity of the debt he transfers to another party. For example, if
his debt comprises of ten kilos of wheat and ten dollars owed to one
person, and he

tells him to go and collect either of the two debts from a certain
party, that transfer will not be valid.

***Issue*** 2303: If the debt is fully identified, but the debtor and
the creditor do not know its quantity and category at the time of
assigning the transfer, the transaction is in order. For example, if a
person who has recorded the debt he owes to someone in his books,
assigns a Hawala or transfer of debt before referring to the books, and
later, after consulting his records, informs the creditors about the
quantity of his debt, the transfer is in order.

***Issue*** 2304: \* The creditor may decline to accept the transfer of
debt, although the person in whose name the assignment has been given
may be rich, and may not fail to honour the Hawala.

***Issue*** 2305: \* If a person accepting the Hawala is not a debtor to
the person giving the Hawala, he can demand the amount of the Hawala
from the person who gave it, before honouring the Hawala, unless it was
previously agreed that the payment would be deferred for a fixed period,
and that period has not lapsed. In this case, the person receiving
Hawala cannot demand payment even if he himself may have honoured the
Hawala. And if the creditor compromises for a lesser amount, the person
honouring the Hawala should demand only that sum which he has paid.

***Issue*** 2306: \* When the conditions of the transfer of debt or
Hawala have been fulfilled, the person affecting the Hawala and the
person receiving it cannot cancel the Hawala, and if the person
receiving the Hawala was not poor at the time the Hawala was issued, the
creditor cannot cancel the Hawala even if the recipient becomes poor
afterwards. The same will apply if the recipient of the Hawala was poor
at the time it was issued, and the creditor knew about it. But if the
creditor did not know that the person to whom Hawala has been issued is
poor, and when he comes to know of it, the recipient is still poor, then
the creditor can abrogate the Hawala transaction, and demand his money
from the debtor himself. But if the recipient of Hawala has turned rich,
then cancelling the Hawala cannot be substantiated.

***Issue*** 2307: \* If the debtor, the creditor, and the person to whom
the Hawala is assigned agree among themselves that all of them or any
one of them has a right to cancel the Hawala, they can do so in
accordance with the clause of the agreement.

***Issue*** 2308: If the person issuing a Hawala pays the creditor
himself, at the request of the person in whose name the Hawala was
issued, who was also his debtor, he can claim from the recipient of
Hawala what he has paid to the creditor. And if he has paid without his
request, or if he was not his debtor, he cannot demand from him what he
has paid.

Rules Regarding Mortgage (Rahn)
-------------------------------

***Issue*** 2309: \* Mortgage means that a person effects a conveyance
of property to another person as security for money debt, or property
held under responsibility, with a proviso that if that debt is not paid,
the creditor may pay himself out of the proceeds of that property.

***Issue*** 2310: \* It is not necessary to pronounce a prescribed
formula for effecting the mortgage. If the debtor conveyances his
property to the

creditor with the intention of providing security for the debt, and the
creditor accepts it with the same intention, the mortgage is in order.

***Issue*** 2311: \* The mortgagor and the mortgagee should be adult and
sane, and should not have been coerced by anyone. Moreover, the
mortgagor should not be bankrupt and feeble-minded. The meaning of
'bankrupt' and 'feeble-minded' have been given in rule 2262. But if the
property mortgaged does not belong to the bankrupt, or if he has not
been prohibited to use it, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 2312: A person can mortgage that property over which he has
a right of disposal or discretion, and it is also in order if he
mortgages the property of another person with his permission.

***Issue*** 2313: The property mortgaged must be such in which trading
is permissible by Shariah. Hence, if alcoholic liquor or something like
it is mortgaged, the transaction will be void.

***Issue*** 2314: \* The benefit which accrues from the mortgaged
property, belongs to the owner, whether the mortgagor or any other
person.

***Issue*** 2315: \* The mortgagee cannot present or sell the mortgaged
property to another person without the permission of the owner, whether
he is the mortgagor or any other person. However, if he presents or
sells it to another person, and the owner consents to it later, there is
no harm in it.

***Issue*** 2316: \* If a mortgagee sells the mortgaged property with
the permission of the owner, the sale proceeds will not be considered
mortgaged like the property itself. And the same will apply if the he
sells it without the permission of the owner, but the owner endorses the
transaction later. But if the mortgagor sells it with the permission of
the mortgagee, with an understanding that its proceeds will be be
mortgaged, that is, the sale proceeds of that property will get
mortgaged like the property itself, then he must follow the
understanding. And if he contravenes it, the transaction will be void,
except when the mortgagee gives his assent.

***Issue*** 2317: \* If the creditor demands the repayment of debt when
it is due, and the debtor does not repay it, the creditor can sell the
mortgaged property and collect his dues, provided that he had been
authorised to do so. And if he was not authorised to do so, it will be
necessary to obtain permission from the debtor. And if the debtor is not
available, he should obtain permission for the sale of the property from
the*Mujtahid* . In either case, if the sale proceeds exceed the amount
due to him, he should give the amount in excess of his debt to the
debtor.

***Issue*** 2318: \* If the debtor does not possess anything other than
his house he occupies, and the essential household effects, the creditor
cannot demand the repayment of debt from him. But, if the thing
mortgaged by him is his house and its household effects, the creditor
can sell them, and realise his dues.

Rules Regarding Surety (Zamanat)
--------------------------------

***Issue*** 2319: If a person wishes to stand surety for the repayment
of the debts of another person, his act in this behalf will be in order,
only when he makes the creditor understand by his words in any language,
or by conduct, that he undertakes the responsibility for the repayment
of the debt, and the

creditor also accepts the deal. It is not necessary that the debtor,
too, should be agreeable.

***Issue*** 2320: \* It is necessary that the guarantor and the creditor
are adult and sane, and have not been coerced by anyone. Furthermore,
they should not be feeble-minded or bankrupt. However, these conditions
are not applicable to the debtor. Therefore, if a person stands surety
to repay the debt of a child, an insane person or a feeble-minded
squanderer, the arrangement is in order.

***Issue*** 2321: \* When a person gives a guarantee with a condition,
as when he says: “If the debtor does not repay your debt, I shall pay
it”, it is a matter of*Ishkal* to accept such a conditional guarantee as
valid.

***Issue*** 2322: \* A man giving guarantee should know that the person
for whom he stands surety is actually a debtor. If someone is still
considering to take a loan, one cannot stand as a guarantor till such
time when the loan has been taken.

***Issue*** 2323: A person can stand surety for someone only when the
creditor, the debtor, and the property given as loan, are actually
specified. Therefore, if there are two creditors of a person, and a
person wishing to guarantee says: “I guarantee to pay the debt of one of
you” his being a guarantor is void, because he has not specified as to
whose debt he would pay. Also, if a person is the creditor of two
persons, and a person giving guarantee says: “I guarantee to pay you the
debt of one of them”, his becoming a guarantor is void, as he has not
specified which person's debt he would pay. Similarly, if a person is
owed 30 kilos of wheat and $10 by another person, and a person wishing
to be a guarantor says: “I guarantee to pay one of your two debts”, and
does not specify whether he guarantees payment of wheat or money, the
guarantee is not in order.

***Issue*** 2324: If a creditor gifts the guarantor with the debt owed
to him, the guarantor cannot claim anything from the debtor, and if the
creditor gifts him with a part of his debt, the guarantor cannot demand
that part from the debtor.

***Issue*** 2325: If a person becomes a guarantor for the payment of
someone's debt, he cannot withdraw from his responsibility as a
guarantor.

***Issue*** 2326: As a precaution, the guarantor and the creditor cannot
stipulate an option for cancellation of the guarantee at any time they
wish to do so.

***Issue*** 2327: If a person was capable of paying the debt of the
creditor at the time he stood as a surety, the creditor cannot cancel
his guarantee and demand the payment of debt from the first debtor, even
if the guarantor may have become poor afterwards. And the same rule will
apply if the surety at the time of guaranteeing was not capable of
paying the debt, yet the creditor agreed to his becoming the guarantor
despite knowing it.

***Issue*** 2328: \* If at the time of standing surety, a person was
incapable of paying the debt of the creditor, and the creditor not
knowing the position, now wishes to cancel his guarantee, it will be a
matter of*Ishkal* , especially if the surety becomes capable of paying
the debt before the creditor takes notice of the matter.

***Issue*** 2329: If a person guarantees the payment of the debt of a
person, without obtaining his permission, he (the surety) cannot demand
anything from the debtor.

***Issue*** 2330: \* If a person guarantees the payment of debt with the
permission of the debtor, he can demand that amount or quantity from the
debtor even before having paid anything to the creditor. But if he paid,
or delivered a commodity other than the one which was owed, he cannot
ask the debtor to pay or deliver to him that commodity. For example, if
the debtor owed 10 tons of wheat, and the guarantor settled the debt
with 10 tons of rice, he cannot demand rice from the debtor, except when
the debtor agrees to the arrangement, in which case, there is no
objection.

Rules Regarding Personal Guarantee For Bail (Kafalat)
-----------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2331: Personal surety or security means that a person takes
the responsibility for the appearance of a debtor, as and when the
creditor asks for him. A person who accepts such a responsibility is
called Kafil (guarantor).

***Issue*** 2332: \* A personal surety will be valid only when the
guarantor makes the creditor understand by words (in any language), or
conduct, that he undertakes to produce the debtor in person as and when
demanded by the creditor, and the creditor also accepts the arrangement.
As a precaution, the debtor's consent is also necessary for the validity
of such a guarantee; in fact, as a matter of precaution, both the debtor
and the creditor must accept the Kafalat.

***Issue*** 2333: It is necessary for a guarantor (Kafil) to be adult
and sane, and he should not have been under any coercion or pressure,
and he should be able to produce the person whose guarantor he becomes.
Similarly, he should not be a feeble-minded squanderer or a bankrupt,
particularly if he has to spend his wealth in order to be able to
produce the debtor before the creditor.

***Issue*** 2334: \* Anyone of the following five things will terminate
the personal surety (bail guarantee):

(i) When the guarantor hands over the debtor to the creditor, or if the
debtor himself surrenders to the creditor.

(ii) When the debt of the creditor has been discharged.

(iii) When the creditor himself forgives the debt, or transfers it to
someone else.

(iv) When the debtor or the guarantor dies.

(v). When the creditor absolves the guarantor from his personal surety.

***Issue*** 2335: If a person forcefully releases a debtor from the
hands of his creditor, and if the creditor does not have access to the
debtor, the person who got the debtor released should hand him over to
the creditor, or pay his debt.

Rules Regarding Deposit Or Custody Or Trust (Amanat)
----------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2336: \* When a person gives his property to another person,
and tells him that it is deposited in trust, and the latter accepts it,
or, without uttering a word, by a simple conduct, the depositor and the
receiver both

understand and accept the intention, then they must follow the rules of
Amanat as will be explained later.

***Issue*** 2337: \* Both the trustee and the depositor should be baligh
and sane, and should not have been forced by anyone. Therefore, if a
person deposits some property with an insane person, or a minor, or if
an insane or a minor deposits some property with someone, their action
will not be in order. Of course, it is permissible for a discerning
child to deposit someone else's property with that person's consent.
Similarly, a depositor must not be a feeble-minded squanderer or a
bankrupt. But if the bankrupt person deposits a property from which he
has not been debarred, there is no objection. Also, the trustee must not
be a feeble-minded squanderer or a bankrupt, if the protection of the
property under his care involves spending from the wealth from which he
is debarred.

***Issue*** 2338: \* If a person accepts a deposit from a child without
the permission of its owner, he should return it to its owner. And if
that deposit belongs to the child himself, it is necessary that it is
delivered to his guardian; and if it gets lost or destroyed before the
delivery, the person who accepted the deposit must compensate for it.
But if he had secured it from the child with the intention of delivering
it to the guardian, and if he had not been careless in its safekeeping,
he will not be responsible for a loss or a damage. The same rule will
apply in the case of an insane depositor.

***Issue*** 2339: \* If a person cannot look after the deposit, and the
person making the deposit is not aware of his incapability, he should
decline to accept the deposit.

***Issue*** 2340: \* If a person tells the owner of the property that he
is not prepared to look after his property, and does not accept it, yet
the owner leaves it there and goes away, and then the property perishes,
the person who has declined to accept the deposit will not be
responsible for it. However, the recommended precaution is that, if
possible, he should look after that property.

***Issue*** 2341: \* A person who gives something to another person as a
deposit, can abrogate the arrangement as and when he likes, and
similarly, one who accepts the deposit can do the same as and when he
likes.

***Issue*** 2342: If a person renounces the custody of the property
deposited with him and abrogates the arrangement, he should deliver the
property to its owner or to the agent or guardian of its owner, as
quickly as possible, or inform them that he is not prepared to continue
as a custodian. But if he does not, without any justifiable excuse,
deliver the property to them and also does not inform them, and if the
property perishes, he should give its substitute.

***Issue*** 2343: \* If a person who accepts a deposit does not have a
suitable place for its safe keeping, he should acquire such a place, and
should take care of the deposit in a manner that he would not be accused
of negligence. But if he acts carelessly in this regard, and the
property is lost or damaged, he will have to compensate for it.

***Issue*** 2344: \* If a person who accepts a deposit has not been
negligent in looking after it, nor has he gone beyond moderation, and
then the property unexpectedly perishes, he will not be responsible for
it. But if he has been

careless about its security, say, by keeping it at a place which is
vulnerable to theft, or if he commits such excesses like using those
articles of deposit without the owner's permission (like wearing the
dress or riding the vehicle or the animal etc) and then the deposited
property is lost or damaged, he should pay the owner its compensation.

***Issue*** 2345: If the owner of a property specifies a place for its
safe keeping, telling the person who has accepted the deposit: “You will
secure the property here, and even if you suspect that it might get lost
here, you must not take it elsewhere”, in such case, he cannot transfer
it to another place, and if he does, and it is lost, he is responsible.

***Issue*** 2346: \* If the owner indicated a place for the security of
his deposit, but he did not mean to specify it to the exclusion of other
suitable places, the person accepting the deposit can transfer it to a
place which is equally safe, or safer than the first place, and if it is
lost or damaged there, he will not be responsible.

***Issue*** 2347: If the owner of a deposit becomes permanently insane
or unconscious, the deposit is automatically abrogated, and the person
who had the deposit as trust, should return it immediately to his
guardian, or inform him. And if he does not deliver the property to his
guardian without a justifiable excuse, and is also negligent in
informing him, and the property perishes, he should give him its
substitute. But if the insanity or being unconscious is intermittent,
than the deposit cannot be considered as automatically abrogated.

***Issue*** 2348: \* If the owner of the deposit dies, the transaction
is nullified; and if the deposit is transferable to the heirs without
any liability, the trustee should deliver the deposit to the heirs, or
inform them about it. And if he fails to do so, without any justifiable
excuse, he will be responsible for its loss or damage. However, if he
delayed to investigate whether the claimants were the right heirs or
not, or whether there were other heirs besides them, and showed no
negligence on his part in parting with the deposit or informing the
heirs, he will not be responsible for any loss or damage.

***Issue*** 2349: \* If the owner of the deposit dies, and it devolves
upon his heirs, the trustee of the deposit should give the property to
all the heirs, or to the person who has been authorised by all of them
to receive the property. Hence, if he gives the entire property to one
heir without the consent of others, he will be responsible for the
shares of the remaining heirs.

***Issue*** 2350: \* If the trustee of the deposit dies, or becomes
permanently insane or unconscious, his heir or guardian should inform
the depositor of the property, or deliver the property to him as quickly
as possible. But if insanity or unconsciousness is intermittent, the
deposit cannot be termed as void.

***Issue*** 2351: \* If a person with whom a property has been
deposited, observes in himself the signs of approaching death, as a
precaution he should, if possible, deliver the deposit entrusted to him
to its owner, his guardian or his agent, or inform him. And if it is not
possible to do so, he should make such arrangement which would satisfy
him that the deposit would reach its rightful owner after his death. For
example, he should make a Will about it, attested by witnesses, and give
the name of the depositor to

the executor of his Will and to the witness, describing fully the nature
of the deposit, and the place where it is kept.

***Issue*** 2352: \* If a person with whom a property has been
deposited, sees in himself the signs of approaching death, and does not
act according to his obligation as mentioned in the foregoing rule, and
the property suffers loss or damage, he will be responsible for the
deposit, and should make amends for it. But if he recovers from his
illness, or after some time repents and acts according to his
obligations, then he will not remain responsible.

Rules Regarding Borrowing, Lending (Ariyat)
-------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2353: Ariyat means that a person gives his property to
another person for use without asking anything in exchange.

***Issue*** 2354: It is not necessary in the case of Ariyat that a
formal formula be pronounced. So, for example, a person gives a dress to
someone with the intention of lending, and he takes it with the
intention of borrowing, it is in order.

***Issue*** 2355: Lending a thing which has been usurped, and a thing
which belongs to the lender but its benefit has been assigned to some
other person, like, if it has been given on lease, will be valid only
when the owner of the usurped thing, or the assignee is agreeable to its
being lent.

***Issue*** 2356: \* The assignee of any benefit, like a lessee, can
lend the object or property he has leased, to others. But, as a
precaution, he cannot give it into the possession of the borrower
without the owner's permission.

***Issue*** 2357: \* If an insane person, or a minor child, or one who
is bankrupt, or a feeble-minded squanderer, lends his property it is not
valid. But if, the guardian of such persons considers it expedient to
lend the property under his guardianship, there is no harm in it.
Similarly, if a minor acts as an intermediary in delivering the lent
article to the borrower, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 2358: If a person who has borrowed something is not
negligent in its keep, nor does he go beyond moderation in its use, he
will not be responsible if it is lost or damaged by chance. However, if
the two parties stipulate that, the borrower would be responsible for
loss or damage, or if the thing borrowed is gold or silver and it is
lost or damaged, the borrower should compensate for it.

***Issue*** 2359: If a person borrows gold or silver and stipulates that
if it is lost or damaged, he will not be responsible, he is not
responsible if it is lost.

***Issue*** 2360: \* If the lender dies, the borrower should give it to
the former' heirs, acting according to rule 2348 in respect of the
deposits.

***Issue*** 2361: \* If the lender is incapacitated in such a way that
he does not have any right of disposal or discretion over his property,
like, if he becomes insane or unconscious, the borrower must act in the
manner explained in rule 2348 in respect of deposits.

***Issue*** 2362: \* A lender can rescind the transaction as and when he
likes, and the borrower can also do so at any time he wishes.

***Issue*** 2363: \* Lending something which is not halal to use, like,
instruments of amusement and gambling, and utensils of gold and silver
for eating or drinking, or for any other purposes, is void. However,
giving them

on loan for the purpose of decoration is permissible, although
precaution is that they should not be given on loan even for this
purpose.

***Issue*** 2364: Giving on loan a sheep for the use of its milk and
wool, and lending a male animal for mating, is in order.

***Issue*** 2365: If a borrower gives the borrowed property to the
owner, or to his agent, or guardian, and thereafter that thing is lost
or damaged, the borrower is not responsible. But if he takes it to a
place without the permission of its owner, or his agent, or guardian,
although it may be a usual place where the owner usually kept it - for
example, if he takes the borrowed horse to the stable which has been
prepared for it by its owner, and ties it there, and it is lost or
destroyed later, or some one destroys it, the borrower is responsible
for it.

***Issue*** 2366: \* If a person lends a Najis thing, and if the
situation is like the one explained in rule 2065, he must inform the
borrower about it being Najis.

***Issue*** 2367: If a person has borrowed a thing, he cannot give it to
another person on hire or loan, without the permission of its owner.

***Issue*** 2368: If a thing is borrowed, and is then lent to another
person with the permission of its owner, and the first borrower dies or
becomes insane, the second lending does not become invalid.

***Issue*** 2369: If a borrower knows that the borrowed property has
been usurped, he should deliver it to its rightful owner, and he cannot
give it to the lender.

***Issue*** 2370: If a person borrows something about which he knows
that it has been usurped, and utilises it, and then it is lost or
damaged while in his possession, the rightful owner can demand
compensation for that thing, and the benefit derived from it, from him,
or from the lender who usurped it. And if he takes that compensation
from the borrower, the borrower cannot claim from the lender what he has
paid to the rightful owner.

***Issue*** 2371: If the borrower does not know that the property which
he has borrowed is a usurped one, and it is lost or damaged while it is
with him, and if its owner receives compensation from him, he too, can
demand from the lender what he has paid to the owner. But if the thing
borrowed is gold or silver, or if the person who lent him the property
stipulated that if it is lost or damaged he will have to give him
compensation for it, he cannot demand from the lender the compensation
which he gives to the rightful owner of the property.


