Marriage (Part I of II)
=======================

\* The relation between man and woman becomes lawful by contracting
marriage. There are two kinds of marriages:

(i) Permanent marriage

(ii) Fixed-time marriage

In a permanent marriage, the period of matrimony is not fixed, and it
isforever. The woman with whom such a marriage is concluded is called
da'ima (i.e. a permanent wife).

In a fixed time marriage (Mut'ah), the period of matrimony is fixed, for
example, matrimonial relation is contracted with a woman for an hour, or
a day, or a month, or a year, or more. However, the period fixed for the
marriage should not exceed the span of normal lives of the spouses,
because in that case, the marriage will be treated as a permanent one.
This sort of fixed time marriage is called Mut'ah or Sigha.

Marriage Formula
----------------

**Issue 2372:** \* Whether marriage is permanent or temporary, the
formal formula must be pronounced; mere tacit approval and consent, or
written agreement, is not sufficient. And the formula (Sigha) of the
marriage contract is pronounced either by the man and the woman
themselves, or by a person who is appointed by them as their
representatives to recite it on their behalf.

**Issue 2373:** The representative should not necessarily be a male. A
woman can also become a representative to pronounce the marriage
formula.

**Issue 2374:** \* As long as the woman and the man are not certain that
their representative has pronounced the formula, they cannot look at
each other as Mahram (like husband and wife), and a mere probable
suspicion that the representative might have pronounced the formula is
not sufficient. And if the representative says that he has pronounced
the formula, but his assertion does not satisfy the parties concerned,
it will not be deemed sufficient.

**Issue 2375:** If a woman appoints a person as her representative so
that he may, for example, contract her marriage with a man for ten days,
but does not specify the day from which the period of ten days would
commence, the representative can contract her marriage with that man for
ten days from any day he likes. However, if the representative knows
that the woman intends a particular hour or day, he should pronounce the
formula according to her intention.

**Issue 2376:** One person can act as the representative of both sides
for reciting the formula of permanent or temporary marriage. It is also
permissible that a man may himself become the representative of a woman
and contract permanent or temporary marriage with her. However, the
recommended precaution is that two separate persons should represent
each side, for the formula of marriage contract.

The Method of Pronouncing the Marriage Formula
----------------------------------------------

**Issue 2377:** \* If a woman and a man themselves want to recite the
formula of permanent marriage, the woman should first say: Zawwajtuka
nafsi 'alas sidaqil ma'lum (i.e. I have made myself your wife on the
agreed mahr), and then the man should immediately respond thus: Qabiltut
tazwij (i.e. I accept the marriage). In this way, the marriage contract
will be in order. And if a woman and a man appoint other person to act
as their representatives for pronouncing the formula of marriage, and
if, for example, the name of the man is Ahmad and that of the woman is
Fatimah, the representative of the woman should first say: Zawwajtuka
muwakkilaka Ahmad muwakkilati Fatimah 'alas sidaqil ma'lum (i.e. I have
given to your client Ahmad in marriage my client Fatimah on the agreed
mahr) and thereafter the representative of the man should immediately
respond thus: Qabiltut tazwijali Muwakkili Ahmad 'alas sidaqil ma'lum
(that is, I accepted this matrimonial alliance for my client Ahmad on
the agreed Mahr). Now the marriage contract is in order. And, on the
basis of recommended precaution, it is necessary that the words uttered
by the man should conform with those uttered by the woman; for example,
if the woman says: Zawwajituka ...... (i.e. I have made myself your
wife) the man should also say: Qabituttazwija ......(i.e. I accept the
matrimonial alliance) and not Qabitun Nikaha.

**Issue 2378:** \* It is permissible for a man and a woman to recite the
formula of the temporary marriage (Mut'ah), after having agreed on the
period of marriage and the amount of Mahr. Hence, if the woman says:
Zawwajtuka nafsi fil muddatil ma'lumati 'alal mahril ma'lum (i.e. I have
made myself your wife for an agreed period and agreed Mahr), and then
the man immediately responds thus: Qabiltu (i.e. I have accepted), the
marriage will be in order. And the marriage will also be in order if
they appoint other persons to act as their representatives. First, the
representative of the woman should say to the representative of the man
thus: Matta'tu muwakkilati muwakkilaka fil muddatil ma'lumati 'alal
mahril ma'lum (i.e. I have given my client to your client in marriage
for the agreed period and the agreed Mahr), and then the representative
of the man should immediately respond thus: Qabiltut tazwija li
muwakkili hakaza (i.e. I accepted this matrimonial alliance for my
client this way).

Conditions of Pronouncing Nikah
-------------------------------

**Issue 2379:** \* There are certain conditions for the Nikah recited
for marriage. They are as follows:

(i) On the basis of precaution, the formula (Nikah) of marriage contract
should be pronounced in correct Arabic. And if the man and the woman
cannot pronounce the formula in correct Arabic, they can pronounce the
Nikah in any other language, and it is not necessary to appoint any
representatives. But the words used in translation must convey strictly
the meaning of “Zawwajtu” and “Qabiltu”.

(ii) The man and the woman or their representatives, who recite the
Nikah, should have the intention of Insha' (i.e. reciting it in a
creative sense, making it effective immediately). In other words, if the
man and the woman themselves pronounce the formula, the intention of the
woman by saying: Zawwajtuka nafsi' should be that she effectively makes
herself the wife of the man; and by saying: “Qablitut tazwija” the man
effectively accepts her as his wife. And if the representatives of the
man and the woman pronounce the Nikah, their intention by saying:
'Zawwajtu' and 'Qablitu' should be that the man and the woman who have
appointed them as their representatives, have effectively become husband
and wife.

(iii) The person who pronounces the Nikah (whether he pronounces it for
himself or has been engaged by some other person as his representative)
should be sane, and as a precaution, he should be baligh also.

(iv) If the Nikah is pronounced by the representatives or the guardians
of the man and the woman, they should identify the man and the woman by
uttering their names or making intelligible signs towards them. Hence,
if a person has more than one daughters, and he says to a man:
Zawwajtuka Ihda Banati (i.e. I have given away one of my daughters to
you as your wife) and the man says: Qabiltu (i.e. I have accepted) the
marriage contract is void, because the daughter has not been identified.

(v) The woman and the man should be willing to enter into a matrimonial
alliance. If, however, the woman ostensibly displays hesitation while
giving her consent, but it is known that in her heart, she is agreeable
to the marriage, the marriage is in order.

**Issue 2380:** If, while reciting the Nikah, even one word is
pronounced incorrectly, as a result of which its meaning is changed, the
marriage contract would be void.

**Issue 2381:** \* If a person pronouncing Nikah comprehends its general
meaning, and has a clear intention of effecting that meaning, the Nikah
will be valid. It is not necessary for him to know the exact meaning of
each word, or to know the laws of Arabic grammar.

**Issue 2382:** If Nikah of a woman is pronounced to a man without her
consent, but later both man and woman endorse the Nikah, the marriage is
in order.

**Issue 2383:** If the woman and the man, or any one of them, is coerced
into matrimony, and they give consent after the Nikah has been
pronounced, the marriage is in order, although it is better that the
Nikah be repeated.

**Issue 2384:** \* The father and the paternal grandfather can contract
a marriage on behalf of his minor son or daughter, or on behalf of an
insane son or daughter, if they are baligh. And after the children have
become baligh or the insane has become sane, he can endorse or abrogate
it, if the contracted marriage involves any moral lapse or scandal. And
if the marriage contract does not involve any moral lapse or scandal,
but the na-baligh son or daughter calls off the marriage, then as an
obligatory precaution, a Talaq or a renewed Nikah, whatever the case may
be, must be recited.

**Issue 2385:** \* If a girl has reached the age of bulugh and is virgin
and mature (i.e. she can decide what is in her own interest) wishes to
marry, she should, obtain permission from her father or paternal
grandfather, although she may be looking after her own affairs. It is
not, however, necessary for her to obtain permission from her mother or
brother.

**Issue 2386:** \* In the following situations, it will not be necessary
for a woman to seek the permission of her father or paternal
grandfather, before getting married:

(i) If she is not a virgin.

(ii) If she is a virgin, but her father or paternal grandfather refuse
to grant permission to her for marrying a man who is compatible to her
in the eyes of Shariah, as well as custom.

(iii) If the father and the grandfather are not in any way willing to
participate in the marriage.

(iv) If they are not in a capacity to give their consent, like in the
case of mental illness etc.

(v) If it is not possible to obtain their permission because of their
absence, or such other reasons, and the woman is eager to get married
urgently.

**Issue 2387:** \* If the father or the paternal grandfather contracts
marriage on behalf of his na-baligh son, the boy, upon attaining bulugh,
should pay maintenance of his wife. In fact, he should start paying her
maintenance before becoming baligh, when he is able to consummate the
marriage. And the wife should not be too young to have any sexual
relation with the husband. And in the situation other than these, there
is a strong indication that she is entitled to maintenance from the
husband, therefore a compromise should be carried out as a precaution.

**Issue 2388:** \* If the father or the paternal grandfather contracts a
marriage on behalf of his na-baligh son, they should pay the Mahr if the
boy does not own any means, or if either of them undertakes to pay the
Mahr himself. In other situations, the father or the paternal
grandfather can pay Mahr from the boy's wealth, but it should not exceed
the proper usual Mahr customarily given in similar cases. But if the
circumstances demand that higher Mahr be paid, they can pay it from the
boy's wealth, and not otherwise, unless the boy approves it after having
become baligh.

Occasions When Husband or Wife Can Nullify Nikah
------------------------------------------------

**Issue 2389:** \* If the husband comes to know after Nikah that his
wife had, at the time of Nikah, any one of the following six
deficiencies, he can annul the marriage:

(i) Insanity, even if it is intermittent.

(ii) Leprosy

(iii) Leucoderma

(iv) Blindness

(v) Being crippled, even if it is not to the extent of immobility.

(vi) Presence of flesh or a bone in the woman's uterus, which may or may
not obstruct sexual intercourse or pregnancy. And if the husband finds
that the wife at the time of Nikah, suffered from 'Ifdha' - meaning that
her urinary and menstrual tract have been one, or her menstrual passage
and rectum have been one, he cannot annul the marriage. As an obligatory
precaution, he will have to pronounce talaq if he wants to dissolve the
marriage.

**Issue 2390:** \* A woman can annul the Nikah in the following cases,
without obtaining divorce:

(i) If she comes to know that her husband has no male organ.

(ii) If she finds that his penis has been cut off before or after the
sexual intercourse.

(iii) If he suffers from a disease which disables him from sexual
intercourse, even if that disease was contracted after the Nikah, or
before or after the sexual intercourse.

**Issue 2390:** \* In the following situations, if a wife refuses to
continue with the matrimony and wishes to dissolve the marriage, then as
a matter of precaution, the husband or his guardian will solemnise the
divorce:

(i) If she comes to know after the Nikah, that the husband was insane at
the time of Nikah; or if he becomes insane after the Nikah, before or
after consummation of the marriage.

(ii) If she finds out that at the time of Nikah, the husband had been
castrated.

(iii) If she learns that he suffered at the time of Nikah from leprosy
or leucoderma.

Note: And if the husband is incapable of sexual intercourse, and she
wishes to annul the marriage, it will be necessary for her to approach
the Mujtahid or his representative, who may allow the husband a period
of one year, and if it is found that he was not able to have sexual
intercourse with her or with any other woman, the wife can annul the
marriage.

**Issue 2391:** \* If the wife annuls the marriage because of the
husband's inability to have sexual intercourse, the husband should give
her half of her Mahr. But, if the man or the wife annuls the marriage
because of one of the other deficiencies enumerated above, and if the
marriage has not been consummated, he will not be liable for anything.
But if the marriage was consummated, he should pay her full Mahr. If the
husband annuls the marriage due to the deficiencies mentioned in rule
2389, he will not be liable for anything if he has not had sexual
intercourse with her. But if he has had sexual relation with her, then
he has to pay full Mahr.

Women With Whom Matrimony is Haraam
-----------------------------------

**Issue 2393:** Matrimonial relation is haraam with women who are one's
Mahram, for instance, mother, sister, daughter, paternal aunt, maternal
aunt, niece (one's brother's or sister's daughter) and mother-in-law.

**Issue 2394:** If a man marries a woman, then her mother, her maternal
grandmother, her paternal grandmother and all the women as the line
ascends are his Mahram, even if he may not have had sexual intercourse
with the wife.

**Issue 2395:** If a person marries a woman, and has sexual intercourse
with her, the daughters and grand-daughters (daughters of sons, or of
daughters) of the wife and their descendants, as the line goes low,
become his Mahram, irrespective of whether they existed at the time of
his marriage, or were born later.

**Issue 2396:** If a man marries a woman, but does not have sexual
intercourse with her, the obligatory precaution is that as long as their
marriage lasts, he should not marry her daughter.

**Issue 2397:** The paternal and maternal aunt of a man, and the
paternal and maternal aunt of his father, and the paternal and maternal
aunt of his paternal grandfather, and the paternal and maternal aunt of
his mother, and the paternal and maternal aunt of his maternal
grandmother, as the line ascends, are all his Mahram.

**Issue 2398:** The husband's father and grandfather, however high, are
the wife's Mahram. Similarly the husband's sons and the grandsons (son
of his sons or of daughters), however low, are her Mahram, regardless of
whether they existed at the time of her marriage or were born
afterwards.

**Issue 2399:** If a man marries a woman (whether the marriage be
permanent or temporary) he cannot marry her sister, as long as she is
his wife.

**Issue 2400:** If a person gives a revocable divorce to his wife, in
the manner which will be explained under the rules relating to
'Divorce', he cannot marry her sister during the Iddah. But if it is an
irrevocable divorce, he can marry her sister. And if it is the Iddah of
temporary marriage, the obligatory precaution is that one should not
marry his wife's sister during that period.

**Issue 2401:** A man cannot marry the niece (brother's or sister's
daughter) of his wife without her permission. But if he marries his
nieces without his wife's permission, and she later consents to the
marriage, it will be in order.

**Issue 2402:** \* If the wife learns that her husband has married her
niece (brother's daughter or sister's daughter) and keeps quiet, and if
she later consents to that marriage, it will be in order. If she does
not consent later, the marriage will be void.

**Issue 2403:** \* If before marrying his maternal or paternal aunt's
daughter, a person commits incest (sexual intercourse) with her mother,
he cannot marry that girl on the basis of precaution.

**Issue 2404:** \* If a person marries his paternal or maternal aunt's
daughter, and after having consummated the marriage, commits incest with
her mother, this act will not become the cause of their separation. And
the same rule applies if he commits incest with her mother after the
Nikah, but before having consummated the marriage with her, although the
recommended precaution is that in this circumstance he should separate
from her by giving her divorce.

**Issue 2405:** \* If a person commits fornication with a woman other
than his paternal or maternal aunt, the recommended precaution is that
he should not marry her daughter. In fact, if he marries a woman, and
commits fornication with her mother before having sexual intercourse
with her, the recommended precaution is that he should separate from
her, but if he has sexual intercourse with her, and thereafter commits
fornication with her mother, it is not necessary for him to get
separated from her.

**Issue 2406:** \* A Muslim woman cannot marry a non-Muslim, and a male
Muslim also cannot marry a non-Muslim woman who are not Ahlul Kitab.
However, there is no harm in contracting temporary marriage with Jewish
and Christians women, but the obligatory precaution is that a Muslim
should not take them in permanent marriage. There are certain sects like
Khawarij, Ghulat and Nawasib who claim to be Muslims, but are classified
as non-Muslims. Muslim men and women cannot contract permanent or
temporary marriage with them.

**Issue 2407:** If a person commits fornication with a woman who is in
the Iddah of her revocable divorce, as a precaution that woman becomes
haraam for him. And if he commits fornication with a woman who is in the
Iddah of temporary marriage, or of irrevocable divorce, or in the Iddah
of death, he can marry her afterwards, although the recommended
precaution is that he should not marry her.

The meaning of revocable divorce and irrevocable divorce, and Iddah of
temporary marriage, and Iddah of death, will be explained under the
rules relating to 'Divorce'.

**Issue 2408:** \* If a person commits fornication with an unmarried
woman and who is not in Iddah, as a precaution, he cannot marry her till
he has sought forgiveness from Allah, and repented. But if another
person wishes to marry her before she has repented, there is no
objection. If a woman is known as a lewd person, it will not be
permissible to marry her till she has genuinely repented, and similarly,
it is not permissible to marry a man known for his lustful character,
till he has genuinely repented. If a man wishes to marry a woman of
loose character, he should, as a precaution, wait till she becomes Clean
(tahir/pak) from her menses, irrespective of whether he had committed
fornication with her, or anyone else had done so.

**Issue 2409:** If a person contracts Nikah with a woman who is in the
Iddah of another man, and if the man and the woman both know, or any one
of them knows that the Iddah of the woman has not yet come to an end,
and if they also know that marrying a woman during her Iddah is haraam,
that woman will become haraam for the man forever, even if after the
Nikah the man may not have had sexual intercourse with her.

**Issue 2410:** If a person contracts Nikah with a woman who is in the
Iddah of another man, and has sexual intercourse with her, she becomes
haraam for him forever even if he did not know that she was in her
Iddah, or did not know that it is haraam to marry a woman during her
Iddah.

**Issue 2411:** \* If a person marries a woman knowing that she has a
husband, he should get separated from her, and should also not marry her
at any time afterwards. And the same rule will apply, as a precaution,
if he did not know that the woman was already married, and had sexual
intercourse with her after Nikah.

**Issue 2412:** If a married woman commits adultery, she on the basis of
precaution, becomes haraam permanently for the adulterer, but does not
become haraam for her husband. And if she does not repent, and persists
in her action (i.e. continues to commit adultery), it will be better
that her husband divorces her, though he should pay her Mahr.

**Issue 2413:** In the case of the woman who has been divorced, or a
woman who contracted a temporary marriage and her husband forgoes the
remaining period of marriage, or if the period of her temporary marriage
ends, if she marries after some time, and then doubts whether at the
time of her second marriage, the Iddah of her first husband had ended or
not, she should ignore her doubt.

**Issue 2414:** \* If a baligh person commits sodomy with a boy , the
mother, sister and daughter of the boy become haraam for him. And the
same law applies when the person on whom sodomy is committed is an adult
male, or when the person committing sodomy is na-baligh. But if one
suspects or doubts whether penetration occurred or not, then the said
woman would not become haraam.

**Issue 2415:** \* If a person marries the mother or sister of a boy,
and commits sodomy with the boy after the marriage, as a precaution,
they will become haraam for him.

**Issue 2416:** If a person who is in the state of Ehram (which is one
of the acts to be performed during Hajj) marries a woman, the Nikah is
void, and if he knew that it was haraam for him to marry in the state of
Ehram, he cannot marry that woman again.

**Issue 2417:** \* If a woman who is in the state of Ehram marries a man
who is not in the state of Ehram, her Nikah is void. And if she knew
that it was haraam to marry in the state of Ehram, as an obligatory
precaution, she should not marry that man thereafter.

**Issue 2418:** \* If a man does not perform Tawafun Nisa (which is one
of the acts to be performed during Hajj and Umrah Mufradah) his wife and
other women become haraam for him. Also, if a woman does not perform
Tawafun Nisa, her husband and other men become haraam for her. But, if
they (man or woman) perform Tawafun Nisa later, they become halal.

**Issue 2419:** \* If a person contracts Nikah with a non-baligh girl,
it is haraam to have sexual intercourse before she has completed her
nine years. But if he commits sexual intercourse with her, she will not
be haraam for him when she becomes baligh, even if she may have suffered
Ifza (which has been described in rule 2389), though as a precaution, he
should divorce her.

**Issue 2420:** A woman who is divorced three times, becomes haraam for
her husband. But, if she marries another man, subject to the conditions
which will be mentioned under the rules pertaining to 'divorce', her
first husband can marry her again after her second husband dies, or
divorces her, and she completes the period of Iddah.

Rules Regarding Permanent Marriage
----------------------------------

**Issue 2421:** \* For a woman with whom permanent marriage is
contracted, it is haraam to go out of the house without the permission
of her husband, though her leaving may not violate the rights of the
husband. Also she should submit herself to his sexual desires, and
should not prevent him from having sexual intercourse with her, without
justifiable excuse. And as long as she does not fail in her duties, it
is obligatory on the husband to provide for her food, clothes and
housing. And if he does not provide the same, regardless of whether he
is able to provide them or not, he remains indebted to the wife.

**Issue 2422:** \* If the wife does not fulfil her matrimonial duties
towards her husband, she will not be entitled for the food, clothes or
housing, even if she continues to live with him. But if she refuses to
obey occasionally, the common verdict is that even then she cannot claim
any entitlement from her husband. But this verdict is a matter of
Ishkal. In any case, there is no doubt that she does not forfeit her
Mahr.

**Issue 2423:** Man has no right to compel his wife to render household
services.

**Issue 2424:** \* The travelling expenses incurred by the wife must be
borne by the husband, if they exceed her expenses at home, and if she
had travelled with the husband's permission. But the fares for travel by
car or by air etc. and other expenses, which are necessary for a
journey, will be borne by the wife, except when the husband is himself
inclined to take her along with him on a journey, in which case he will
bear her expenses also.

**Issue 2425:** \* If the husband who is responsible for the wife's
maintenance, does not provide her the same, she can draw her expenses
from his property without his permission. And if this is not possible,
and she is obliged to earn her livelihood, and she cannot take her case
to the Mujtahid, who would compel him (even by threatening him with
imprisonment) to pay the maintenance, it will not be obligatory upon her
to obey her husband while she is engaged in earning her livelihood.

**Issue 2426:** \* If a man, for example, has two wives and spends one
night with one of them, it is obligatory on him to spend anyone of four
nights with the other as well; in situation other than this, it is not
obligatory on a man to stay with his wife. Of course, it is necessary
that he should not totally forsake living with the wife. And as a
precaution, a man should spend one night out of every four with his
permanent wife.

**Issue 2427:** \* It is not permissible for the husband to abandon
sexual intercourse with his youthful, permanent wife for more than 4
months, except when sexual intercourse is harmful to him, or involves
unusually more effort, or when the wife herself agrees to avoid it, or
if a prior stipulation to that effect was made at the time of Nikah by
the husband. And in this rule, there is no difference between the
situations when the husband is present, or on a journey, or whether she
is a wife by permanent or temporary marriage.

**Issue 2428:** If Mahr is not fixed in a permanent marriage, the
marriage is in order. And in such case, if the husband has sexual
intercourse with the wife, he should pay her proper Mahr which would be
in accordance with the Mahr usually paid to women of her category. As
regards temporary marriage, however, if Mahr is not fixed the marriage
is void.

**Issue 2429:** If at the time of Nikah for permanent marriage, no time
is fixed for paying Mahr, the wife can prevent her husband from having
sexual intercourse with her before receiving Mahr, irrespective of
whether the husband is or is not able to pay it. But if she once agrees
to have sexual intercourse before taking Mahr, and her husband has
sexual intercourse with her, then she cannot prevent him afterwards from
having sexual intercourse without a justifiable excuse.


