Marriage (Part II of II)
========================

Mut'ah (Temporary Marriage)
---------------------------

***Issue*** 2430: Contracting a temporary marriage with a woman is in
order, even if it may not be for the sake of any sexual pleasure.

***Issue*** 2431: The obligatory precaution is that a husband should not
avoid having sexual intercourse for more than four months with a wife of
temporary marriage.

***Issue*** 2432: \* If a woman with whom temporary marriage is
contracted, makes a condition that her husband will not have sexual
intercourse with her, the marriage as well as the condition imposed by
her will be valid, and the husband can then derive only other pleasures
from her. However, if she agrees to sexual intercourse later, her
husband can have sexual intercourse with her, and this rule applies to
permanent marriage as well.

***Issue*** 2433: A woman with whom temporary marriage is contracted, is
not entitled to subsistence even if she becomes pregnant.

***Issue*** 2434: \* A woman with whom temporary marriage is contracted,
is not entitled to share the conjugal bed of her husband, and does not
inherit from him, and the husband, too, does not inherit from her.
However, if one or both lay down a condition regarding inheriting each
other, such a stipulation is a matter of*Ishkal* as far as its validity
is concerned, but even then, precaution should be exercised by putting
it into effect.

***Issue*** 2435: If a woman with whom temporary marriage is contracted,
did not know that she was not entitled to any subsistence and sharing
her husband's conjugal bed, still her marriage will be valid, and
inspite of this lack of knowledge, she has no right to claim anything
from her husband.

***Issue*** 2436: \* If a wife of temporary marriage goes out of the
house without the permission of her husband, and the right of the
husband is in anyway violated, it is haraam for her to leave. And if the
right of her husband remains protected, it is a recommended precaution
that she should not leave the house without his permission.

***Issue*** 2437: \* If a woman empowers a man that he may contract a
temporary marriage with her for a fixed period, and against a specified
amount of Mahr, and instead, that man contracts a permanent marriage
with her, or contracts a temporary marriage with her without specifying
the time or amount of Mahr, the marriage will be void. But if the woman
consents to it on understanding the position, then the marriage will be
valid.

***Issue*** 2438: In order to become Mahram (with whom marriage contract
becomes haraam and is treated to be one of the close relatives), a
father or a paternal grandfather can contract the marriage of his
na-baligh son or daughter with another person for a short period,
provided that it does not involve any scandal or moral lapse. However,
if they marry a minor boy or a girl who is not in anyway able to derive
any sexual pleasure during the period from the spouse, then the validity
of such a marriage is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2439: If the father or the paternal grandfather of an absent
child, marry it to someone for the sake of becoming Mahram, not knowing
whether the child is alive or dead, the purpose will be achieved only if

during the period fixed for marriage, the child can become capable of
consummating marriage. If it later transpires that it was not alive at
the time the marriage was contracted, it will be considered void, and
the people who had apparently become Mahram will all become Na-Mahram.

***Issue*** 2440: If a husband gifts the wife of Muta'h with the period
of her temporary marriage, thus releasing her, and if he has had sexual
intercourse with her, he should give her all the things he agreed to
give her. And if he has not had sexual intercourse with her, it is
obligatory on him to give her half the amount of Mahr, though the
recommended precaution is that he should give her full amount of Mahr.

***Issue*** 2441: If a man contracted a temporary marriage with a woman,
and the period of her Iddah has not ended yet, he is allowed to contract
a permanent marriage with her or renew a contract for temporary marriage
with her.

Looking At Non-Mahram
---------------------

***Issue*** 2442: \* It is haraam for man to look at the body or hair of
the Non-Mahram women, regardless of whether it is with the intention of
pleasure or not, and whether there is a fear of falling into sinful act
or not. It is also haraam to look at the faces and the arms, upto the
wrists, of such women with the intention of pleasure, or if there is
fear of falling into sinful act, and the recommended precaution is that
one should not look at their faces or arms even without such an
intention. Similarly, it is haraam for a woman to look at the body of
Non-Mahram man, except places which are customarily not covered, like,
his face, hands, head, neck and feet. She can look at these parts of a
man without the intention of deriving any pleasure, or if there is no
fear of being entrapped in any sinful act.

***Issue*** 2443: \* To look at the body of a woman who would not care
for Hijab, even if she were advised, is not haraam, provided that it
does not lead to sinful act or sexual pleasure, and excitement, nor is
it with that intention; and in this rule, there is no distinction
between a Muslim and a non-Muslim woman; and also between those parts,
like their faces, their hands which they normally do not cover, and
other parts of their bodies.

***Issue*** 2444: \* Woman should conceal her body and hair from a man
who is non-Mahram, and as an obligatory precaution, she should conceal
herself even from a Na-baligh boy who is able to discern between good
and evil, and could probably be sexually excited. But she can leave her
face and hands upto wrists uncovered in the presence of Na-Mahram, as
long as it does not lead him to casting a sinful, evil glance or her to
doing something forbidden; for in both these cases, she must cover them.

***Issue*** 2445: It is haraam to look at the private parts of a baligh
Muslim, even if it is seen behind the glass or reflected in the mirror,
or clean water etc. As an obligatory precaution, it is also haraam to
look at the genitals of a non-Muslim, and of a discerning Na-baligh
child. However, wife and her husband can look at the entire body of each
other.

***Issue*** 2446: If a man and woman who are Mahram of each other, do
not have the intention of sexual pleasure, they can see the entire body
of each other excepting the private parts.

***Issue*** 2447: \* A man should not look at the body of another man
with the intention of sexual excitement, and also, it is haraam for a
woman to look at the body of another woman with the intention of sexual
excitement.

***Issue*** 2448: A man who is acquainted with a Na-Mahram woman, should
not, as a precaution, look at her photograph etc., provided that the
woman is not a heedless, commonplace person.

***Issue*** 2449: \*If a woman wants to give an enema to another woman,
or to a man other than her husband, or to clean her/his private parts
with water, she should cover her hand with such a thing that her hand
would not touch the private parts of the other woman or man. And the
same applies to a man who wants to give an enema to another man or a
woman other than his wife, or to clean his/her private parts with water.

***Issue*** 2450: \* If a woman is rendered helpless by her disease, and
if the only helpful treatment to her can be given by a male doctor, she
can refer to him. And if that male doctor must look at her to be able to
treat her, or to

touch her for that matter, there is no objection. However, if he can
treat her by looking at her, he should not touch her body, and if he can
treat her by touching her body, he should not look at her.

***Issue*** 2451: \* If a person is obliged to look at the private parts
of a patient for his/her medical treatment, he should, on the basis of
obligatory precaution, place a mirror opposite him/her and look into it.
However, if there is no alternative but to look directly at his/her
private parts, there is no objection. Similarly, if the duration of
regarding the genitals in the mirror would be longer than looking at
them directly, the latter method be adopted.

Miscellaneous Rules Concerning Marriage
---------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2452: If a person gets entangled in haraam acts owing to his
not having a wife, it is obligatory for him to marry.

***Issue*** 2453: \* If the husband makes it a condition before Nikah,
that the woman should be a virgin, and it transpires after Nikah that
she is not virgin, he can repudiate the marriage. However, he can deduct
and take the difference between the Mahr usually paid for a virgin woman
and the one who is not a virgin.

***Issue*** 2454: \* It is haraam for a man and a woman who are not
Mahrams, to be together at a private place where there is no one else,
if it is feared to lead to immorality and scandal, even if it is a place
where another person can easily arrive. But if there is no fear of any
evil, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 2455: If the man fixes the Mahr of the woman at the time of
Nikah, but intends not to give it, the marriage contract is in order,
but he will be indebted to her.

***Issue*** 2456: \* A Muslim who renounces Islam and adopts a
non-Muslim faith, is an apostate, and they are of two types: Fitri and
Milli. Fitri apostate is one whose parents or one of them were Muslims
when he was born, and he himself was also a Muslim, till after having
reached the discerning age, and thereafter he converted to become a
non-Muslim. A Milli is exactly the opposite.

***Issue*** 2457: \* If a woman becomes an apostate after marriage, her
marriage becomes void, and if her husband has not had sexual intercourse
with her, she is not required to observe any Iddah. And the position
will be the same if she apostatises after sexual relation, but she had
reached menopause (Ya'isa), or if she was a minor. And if she had not
reached menopause, she should observe Iddah as will be explained in the
rules of 'divorce'. And it is commonly held that if she becomes a Muslim
during her Iddah, her marriage remains intact. However, it is improbable
that this should be valid, and therefore, precaution should not be
abandoned. A Ya'isa is a woman who has reached 50 years of age, and
because of that advanced age, stops seeing Haidh and does not expect to
see it again in her life.

***Issue*** 2458: \* If a man becomes a Fitri apostate after Nikah, his
wife becomes haraam for him and she should observe Iddah of death in the
manner which will be explained in the rules relating to 'divorce'.

***Issue*** 2459: \* If a man becomes a Milli apostate after Nikah, his
marriage becomes void. And if he has not had sexual intercourse with his
wife, or if she has reached menopause, or if she is a minor, she need
not observe Iddah.

But if he apostatises after having sexual intercourse with his wife, who
happens to be of the age of women who normally have menstrual discharge,
she should observe Iddah of 'divorce' which will be mentioned under the
rules relating to 'divorce'. And it is commonly held that if her husband
becomes a Muslim before the completion of her Iddah, their marriage
remains intact. However, it is improbable that this be correct, but,
precaution should not be abandoned.

***Issue*** 2460: If the woman imposes a condition at the time of Nikah
that her husband will not take her out of the town, and the man also
accepts this condition, he should not take her out of that town against
her will.

***Issue*** 2461: If a woman has a daughter from her former husband, her
second husband can marry that girl to his son, who is not from this
wife. Also, if a person marries his son to a girl, he himself can marry
the mother of that girl.

***Issue*** 2462: \* If a woman becomes pregnant as a result of
fornication or adultery, it is not permissible for her to have an
abortion.

***Issue*** 2463: \* If a man commits fornication with a woman who has
no husband, nor is she in any Iddah, and later marries her, and a child
is born to them, and they do not know whether the child is the outcome
of legitimate relation or otherwise, the child will be considered
legitimate.

***Issue*** 2464: \* If a man does not know that a woman is in her Iddah
and marries her, and if the woman, too, does not know (that she is in
her Iddah) and a child is born to them, the child is legitimate and
according to Shariah belongs to both of them. However, if the woman was
aware that she was in her Iddah, and that during Iddah marriage is not
permissible, the child according to Shariah belongs to the father, and
in either case their marriage is void, and they are haraam for each
other.

***Issue*** 2465: \* If a woman says that she has reached menopause, her
word may not be accepted, but if she says that she does not have a
husband, her word is acceptable, except when she is known to be
unreliable, in which case, investigation will be necessary.

***Issue*** 2466: \* If a man marries a woman after her assertion that
she does not have a husband, and if some one claims later that she was
his wife, his claim will not be heeded unless it is proved to be true
according to Shariah laws.

***Issue*** 2467: \* Until a son or a daughter completes two years of
his/her age, his/her father cannot separate him/her from his/her mother.
And as a precaution, a child should not be separated from its mother
till it is seven years of age.

***Issue*** 2468: \* If a person proposing marriage is known for his
virtues and faith, then it is recommended that his proposal should not
be rejected. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is reported to have said: “Whenever
you receive a proposal for marriage on your daughter from a man whose
virtue and piety pleases you, then give her hand in his in marriage. For
if you do not do this way, great scandals and lapses will fill the
earth.”

***Issue*** 2469: \* If a woman compromises her Mahr with her husband,
on a condition that he will not marry another woman, it is obligatory
upon him

that he does not marry another woman, and that the wife should not claim
her Mahr.

***Issue*** 2470: If an illegitimate person marries, and a child is born
to him, that child is legitimate.

***Issue*** 2471: If a man has sexual intercourse with his wife during
fast in the month of Ramadhan or when she is in her menses, he commits a
sin, but if a child is conceived, it is legitimate.

***Issue*** 2472: If a woman who is sure that her husband died while on
a journey, marries another man after completing the Iddah of death,
(which will be explained in the rules relating to 'divorce') and later
her first husband returns from journey, she should immediately separate
herself from her second husband, and she will be halal for her first
husband. But, if the second husband has had sexual intercourse with her,
she should observe Iddah and the second husband should give her proper
Mahr equal to that of the women similar to her category, but she is not
entitled to subsistence during Iddah.

Rules Regarding Suckling a Child
--------------------------------

***Issue*** 2473: \* If a woman suckles a child with the conditions
which will be mentioned in rule 2483, that child becomes Mahram of the
following persons:

(i) The woman herself (i.e. the woman who suckles it) and she is called
Riza'i mother (milk mother).

(ii) The husband of the woman (for the milk belongs to him); he is
called Riza'i father (milk father).

(iii) Father and mother of that woman and all in their upward line, even
if they are milk father and milk mother.

(iv) The children born of that woman, or those who are born to her
later.

(v) The children of the children of that woman, however low, regardless
of whether they are born of her children or her children had suckled
them.

(vi) The sister and brother of that woman, even if they are her milk
sister and milk brother.

(vii) Paternal uncle and paternal aunt of that woman, even if they are
by milk, i.e. suckling.

(viii) Maternal uncle and maternal aunt of that woman, even if they are
by milk i.e. suckling.

(ix) The descendants of the husband of that woman, (to whom milk
belongs) even if they may be his milk children.

(x) Father and mother of that husband (to whom milk belongs), however
high.

(xi) Sister and brother of the husband, (to whom milk belongs) even if
they may be his milk sister and brother.

(xii) Paternal uncle and paternal aunt and maternal uncle and maternal
aunt of the husband, (to whom milk belongs) however high, even if they
are his milk uncles and aunts.

There are other persons also (details regarding whom will be given in
the following rules) who become Mahram on account of sucking milk.

***Issue*** 2474: If a woman suckles a child with the condition which
will be mentioned in rule 2483, the father of the child cannot marry the
daughters of that woman, but it is permissible for him to marry her milk
daughters, although the recommended precaution is that he should not
marry them. Moreover, he cannot marry the daughters of the husband also
(to whom milk belongs), even if they may be his milk daughters. And if
any one of them happens to be his wife already, his marriage becomes
void.

***Issue*** 2475: If a woman suckles a child with the conditions
mentioned in rule 2483, the husband of that woman (to whom milk belongs)
does not become Mahram of the sisters of that child, but the recommended
precaution is that he should not marry them. Also, the relatives of the
husband do not become Mahram of the sister and brother of that child.

***Issue*** 2476: If a woman suckles a child, she does not become Mahram
of the brothers of that child. Moreover, the relatives of that woman do
not become Mahram of the brother and sister of the child suckled by her.

***Issue*** 2477: If a person marries a woman who has suckled a girl
fully, and if he has had sexual intercourse with her, he cannot marry
that milk girl.

***Issue*** 2478: If a person marries a girl, he cannot marry the woman
who has suckled her fully.

***Issue*** 2479: A man cannot marry a girl who has been suckled fully
by his mother or paternal grandmother. Also, if his step-mother suckles
a girl from the milk belonging to his father, he cannot marry that girl.
And if a person contracts Nikah with a suckling girl, and thereafter,
his mother or his paternal grandmother or his step-mother suckles that
girl, the Nikah becomes void.

***Issue*** 2480: A man cannot marry a girl who has been suckled fully
by his sister, or by his brother's wife. And the position is the same if
that girl is suckled by that man's niece (sister's daughter or brother's
daughter) or the granddaughter of his sister or the granddaughter of his
brother.

***Issue*** 2481: If a woman suckles the child of her daughter i.e. her
granddaughter, or grandson, the daughter will become haraam for her own
husband, and the same applies if she suckles the child of the husband of
her daughter from another wife. But if a woman suckles the child of her
son, the wife of her son who is the mother of the suckling child, does
not become haraam for her husband.

***Issue*** 2482: If the step mother of a girl suckles the child of her
husband, with the milk that belongs to the girl's father, the girl
becomes haraam for her husband regardless of whether the child is the
offspring of that very girl or of some other woman.

Conditions of Suckling Which Causes to be Mahram

***Issue*** 2483: The following are the eight conditions under which
suckling child becomes the cause of being Mahram.

(i) That the child sucks the milk of a woman who is alive. It is of no
consequence if milk is drawn from the breast of a woman who is dead.

(ii) That the milk of the woman should not be the product of fornication
or adultery. Hence, if the milk for an illegitimate child is breastfed
to another child, the latter will not become Mahram of anyone.

(iii) That the child sucks milk directly from the breasts of the woman.
Hence, if milk is poured into its mouth, it has no consequence.

(iv) That the milk be pure and unadulterated.

(v) That the milk be of one husband only. Hence, if a breast-feeding
woman is divorced and then she marries another man by whom she becomes
pregnant, if the milk of the first pregnancy still continues from the
breast till she gives birth to the other child, and she feeds any child
eight times with the milk from her first pregnancy before giving birth,
and feeds the same child seven times with the milk from the second
pregnancy, after giving birth, that child will not become Mahram of
anyone.

(vi) That the child does not throw up the milk due to illness. If it
vomits the milk, the suckling has no effect.

(vii) The suckling should be of such quantity that it could be said that
the bones of the child were strengthened and the flesh allowed to grow.
And if that cannot be ascertained, then if a child suckles for one full
day and night, or if it suckles fifteen times to its fill, as will be
explained later, it will be sufficient. But if it is known that in spite
of the child having suckled for one full day and night, or for fifteen
times, the milk has not had any effect on the

bones and the growth of flesh of the child, then one should not ignore
exercising the precaution.

(viii) That the child should not have completed two years of his age,
and, if it is suckled after it has completed two years of its age, it
does not become Mahram of anyone. In fact, if, for example, it sucks
milk eight times before completing its two years, and seven times after
completing its two years, it does not become Mahram of anyone. But, if
milk continues from the breast for more than two years since a woman
gave birth to her child, and she suckles the child continuously, that
child will become Mahram of those who have been mentioned above.

***Issue*** 2484: It is necessary that the suckling child should not
have taken any other food, or sucked milk from any other person, during
one full day and night. However, it it takes very little food, so little
that one may not say that it has taken any food in between, there is no
harm in it. Also, it should have suckled the milk of only one woman
fifteen times, and during these fifteen times, it should not have sucked
the milk of any other woman. And it should have sucked milk every time
without a gap, though, if while suckling milk it pauses to breathe, or
waits a little, in a manner that from the time it started till the end,
it is taken as one suckling, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 2485: If a woman suckles a child from the milk of her
husband, and when she later marries another man, suckles another child
from the milk of her second husband, those two children do not become
Mahram of each other, although it is better that they do not marry each
other.

***Issue*** 2486: If a woman suckles several children from the milk of
one husband, all of them become Mahram of one another, as well as of the
husband, and of the woman who suckled them.

***Issue*** 2487: If a man has more than one wife, and every one of them
suckles a child in accordance with the conditions mentioned above, all
those children become Mahram of one another, as well as of that man, and
of all those wives.

***Issue*** 2488: If a man has two nursing wives, and if, for example,
one of them suckles the child eight times and the other suckles it seven
times, the child does not become Mahram of any one of them.

***Issue*** 2489: If a woman gives full milk to a boy and a girl from
the milk of one husband, the sisters and brothers of that girl will not
become Mahram of the sisters and brothers of that boy.

***Issue*** 2490: \* A man cannot marry without the permission of his
wife, those women who became her nieces (sister's daughter or brother's
daughter) owing to the suckling of milk. Also, if a person commits
sodomy with a boy, he cannot marry his milk daughter, sister, mother and
paternal grandmother by means of sucking milk. This rule applies also in
the situation where an active partner in sodomy is not baligh, or when
the passive partner is baligh.

***Issue*** 2491: A woman who suckles the brother of a person, does not
become Mahram of that person, although the recommended precaution is
that he should not marry her.

***Issue*** 2492: \* A man cannot marry two sisters even if they may be
milk sisters, that is, they have become sisters by means of suckling
milk. If he

marries two women and understands later that they are sisters, if he
married them at one and the same time, both the Nikah will be void. But
if he did not marry them at one time, the first marriage will be valid,
and the second will be void.

***Issue*** 2493: \* If a woman suckles the following persons from her
husband's milk, her husband does not become haraam for her, although it
is better to observe precaution.

(i) Her own brother and sister.

(ii) Her own paternal uncle and paternal aunt, and maternal uncle and
maternal aunt.

(iii) The descendants of her paternal uncle and her maternal uncle.

(iv) Her nephew (brother's son).

(v) Brother or sister of her husband.

(vi) Children of her sister, or children of her husband's sister.

(vii) Paternal uncle and paternal aunt and maternal uncle and maternal
aunt of her husband.

(viii) Grand children of another wife of her husband.

***Issue*** 2494: If a woman suckles the paternal aunt's daughter, or
maternal aunt's daughter of a man, she (the woman who suckles) does not
become Mahram of that man. However, the recommended precaution is that
he should refrain from marrying that woman.

***Issue*** 2495: If a man has two wives, and one of them suckles the
paternal uncle's son of the other wife, the wife who suckled does not
become haraam for her husband.

How To Breast Feed A Child
--------------------------

***Issue*** 2496: The child's mother is the best person to suckle a
child. It is better that she does not claim any award from her husband
for suckling the child, although it is good that he should reward her
for that. However, if the mother demands more payment for suckling than
a wet-nurse, her husband can entrust the child to the wet-nurse.

***Issue*** 2497: It is recommended that the wet-nurse, whose services
are obtained for a child, should be Shia Ithna-Asheri, sane, chaste, and
good looking; and it is Makrooh for a wet-nurse to be a non-Shia
Ithna-Asheri or ugly, ill-humoured or illegitimate. It is also Makrooh
to entrust the child to a wet-nurse who has given birth to an
illegitimate child.

Miscellaneous Rules Regarding Nursing a Child
---------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2498: \* It is recommended that a woman avoids suckling any
and every child, because it is possible that she may forget as to which
of them she has suckled, and later the two persons, who are Mahram to
each other, may contract marriage.

***Issue*** 2499: It is recommended, if possible, that a child is
suckled for full 21 months. And it is not preferred that it be suckled
for more than two years.

***Issue*** 2500: \* If the right of the husband is not in any way
violated by suckling, a wife may suckle the child of another person
without the permission of her husband.

***Issue*** 2501: \* If a man contracts Nikah with a suckling girl, and
the wife of that man suckles her, then it is considered that the wife
becomes the mother-in-law of her husband, and therefore, becomes haraam
for him. Although this consideration is not free from*Ishkal* , yet
precaution should not be ignored.

***Issue*** 2502: \* If a person wants that his sister-in-law (his
brother's wife) may become his Mahram, he may contract a temporary Nikah
with a suckling girl, for example, for two days, and during those two
days, the wife of his brother may suckle that girl as mentioned in rule
no. 2483. By so doing, she will become his mother-in-law, and thus be
Mahram. But if the woman suckles the girl from his brother's milk, it is
a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2503: If a man says before marrying a woman, that the woman
he is marrying is his milk sister, she is haraam for him, if his
statement is verified as true. And if he says this after the marriage,
and the woman also confirms his word, the marriage is void. Hence, if
the man has not had sexual intercourse with her, or has had sexual
intercourse but at the time of sexual intercourse the woman knew that
she was haraam for him, she is not entitled to any Mahr. And if she
learns after sexual intercourse that she was haraam for the man, the
husband should pay her Mahr according to the usual Mahr of other women
like her.

***Issue*** 2504: If a woman says, before marriage, that she is haraam
for a man because she is his milk sister, and if it is possible to
verify her statement as true, she cannot marry that man. And if she says
this after marriage, it is like the man saying after marriage that the
woman is haraam for him, and the rule in this situation has been given
in the foregoing clause.

***Issue*** 2505: \* Suckling a child, which becomes the cause of being
Mahram, can be established by the following two ways:

(i) Information in this behalf by a number of persons whose word is

reliable.

(ii) Two just men testify to this fact. It is, however, necessary that
they should also mention the conditions of suckling the child. For
example, they should be able to say, “We have seen the child for twenty
four hours, sucking milk from the breasts of a woman, and during this
time he has not eaten anything else.” And similarly, they should also
narrate in detail, the conditions which have been mentioned in rule no.
2483. Witness by one man or two or four women, even if they are Adil, is
a matter of*Ishkal* for establishing that the child has suckled from a
particular woman.

***Issue*** 2506: If it is doubted whether or not a child has sucked the
quantity of milk which becomes the cause of becoming Mahram, or if it is
considered probable that it might have sucked that quantity of milk, the
child does not become Mahram of anyone, though it is better to observe
precaution.
