Usurpation (Ghasb)
==================

Usurpation means that a person unjustly seizes the property or right of
another person. This is one of the major sins and one who commits it
will be subjected to severe chastisement on the Day of Judgement. It has
been reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) “that whoever usurps one
span of another's land, seven layers of that land will be put round his
neck like a yoke on the Day of Judgement”.

***Issue*** 2554: \* If a person does not allow the people to benefit
from a mosque, a school, a bridge and other places which have been
constructed for the use of the public, he usurps their right. Similar is
the case of a person who reserves a place in the mosque for himself and
does not allow any other person to use it. And also one who drives that
person out from that place commits a sin.

***Issue*** 2555: \* If it has been mutually agreed by the mortgager and
the mortgagee that the mortgaged property will remain with the creditor
or with a third party, the mortgager (i.e. the debtor) cannot take it
back before having paid the debt. And if he takes, he must return to the
creditor immediately.

***Issue*** 2556: \* If a third person usurps the property which has
been mortgaged to a person, the owner of the property as well as the
mortgagee can demand from him the thing he has usurped. When the thing
is returned from him, it becomes mortgaged again. And if that thing
perishes and its substitute is taken, that substitute also becomes
mortgaged like the original thing itself.

***Issue*** 2557: \* If a person usurps a property, he should return it
to its owner, and if it is lost he should compensate him for it.

***Issue*** 2558: If some benefit accrues from a thing which has been
usurped, for example, if a lamb is born of a sheep which has been
usurped, it belongs to the owner. Moreover, if, for example, a person
has usurped a house, he should pay its rent even if he does not occupy
it.

***Issue*** 2559: \* If a person usurps something belonging to a child
or an insane person, he should return it to his guardian, and if it has
been lost he should replace it.

***Issue*** 2560: \* When two persons usurp a thing jointly, and if they
have full control over it, each one of them is fully responsible for the
whole of it, even if one of them alone might not have been able to usurp
it.

***Issue*** 2561: \* If a person mixes something usurped by him with
another thing, for example, he mixes wheat usurped by him with barley,
and if it is possible to separate them, he should separate them even if
it may very difficult to do so, and return the usurped thing to its
owner.

***Issue*** 2562: \* If a person usurps a piece of golden ornament, like
an earring and melts it, he should return it with the difference between
the value before and after the melting. And if with the object of not
paying the difference, he says that he is ready to make it like the
original one, the owner is not obliged to accept the offer. Also, the
owner, too, cannot compel him to make it like the original one.

***Issue*** 2563: \* If a person changes a usurped thing into something
better than before, for example, if he makes an earring from the gold
usurped by

him, and the owner asks him to give it to him in the same (i.e. changed)
form, he should give it to him in that form. He cannot claim any charges
from the owner for his labour. Similarly, he has no right to give him
the thing in its original form without his permission, and if he gives
the thing in its original form without his permission, or changes it
into another shape, it is not known whether he will be responsible for
the difference in the value.

***Issue*** 2564: If a person changes the thing usurped by him in such
way that it becomes better than its original form, but its owner asks
him to change it back to its original condition, it will be obligatory
on him to do so. And if due to the change, its value decreases, he
should pay the difference in the value to the owner. Therefore, if he
makes an earring from the gold usurped by him and its owner asks him to
change it back to its original shape, and if after melting it, its value
becomes less than what is originally was before making the earring, he
should pay the difference.

***Issue*** 2565: If a person usurps a piece of land and cultivates or
plants trees on it, the crop and the trees and their fruits are his own
property, and if the owner of the land is not agreeable to the crops and
the trees remaining on his land, the person who has usurped the land,
should pull them out immediately even if he may suffer loss for that.
Also, he should pay rent to the owner of the land for the period the
crop and the trees remained on his land, and should also make up for the
damage done to the land, like, he should fill up the holes from which
the trees are pulled out. And if the value of land decreases because of
that, he should compensate. Moreover, he cannot compel the owner of the
land to sell it or lease it out to him, nor can the owner of the land
compel him to sell the trees or crops to him.

***Issue*** 2566: If the owner of the land agrees to the crops and trees
remaining on his land, it is not necessary for the usurper of the land
to pull them out. However, he should pay the rent of the land from the
time he usurped it till the time the owner of the land agreed to the
trees and crops remaining on it.

***Issue*** 2567: \* If a thing usurped by a person perishes and if it
is like a cow or a sheep, the price of each one of which differs on
account of individual characteristics, the usurper should pay its price;
and if its market value has undergone a change on the grounds of demand
and supply, he should pay the cost which was at the time it perished.
And the recommended precaution is that he should pay its highest price
from the time it was usurped till the time it perished.

***Issue*** 2568: If the thing usurped by a person which has perished is
like wheat and barley, whose prices do not differ due to individual
specifications, he (the usurper) should pay a thing which is similar to
the one usurped by him. However, the quality of that replacement should
be the same as of the thing which has been usurped and has perished. For
example, if he has usurped rice of superior quality, he cannot replace
it with rice of inferior quality.

***Issue*** 2569: \* If a person usurps something like a sheep and if it
perishes, and if its market price has not changed but during the time it
was with him it became fat, the usurper should pay the price of a fat
sheep.

***Issue*** 2570: If the thing usurped by a person is usurped from him
by another person and it perishes, the owner of the thing can take its
compensation from any one of them, or can demand a part of the
compensation from each of them. And if he takes compensation for the
thing from the first usurper, the first usurper can demand whatever he
has given from the second usurper. But if he is compensated by the
second usurper, that second usurper cannot demand what he has given,
from the first usurper.

***Issue*** 2571: If one of the conditions of transaction is not present
at the time of sale; for example, if a thing which should be purchased
and sold by weight is sold without being weighed, the contract is void.
And if the seller and the buyer accept the deal irrespective of the mode
of transaction, there is no harm in it. Otherwise, the things taken by
them from each other will be treated as usurped property and should be
returned to each other. And if the property of each of them perishes
while in the custody of the other, he should pay compensation for it
regardless of whether or not he knows that the transaction was void.

***Issue*** 2572: \* If a person takes some thing from a seller so that
he may see and check it, or may keep it with him for sometime so that he
may purchase it, if he likes it, and if that property perishes, he
should pay compensation for it to its owner.

Rules of the Lost Property When Found
-------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2573: \* Any lost property other than an animal, which does
not bear any sign by means of which it may be possible to locate its
owner, irrespective of whether its value is less than a dirham (12.6
chickpeas of coined silver) or not, can be kept for himself by one who
finds it, but the recommended precaution is that he gives it away as
Sadaqah on behalf of the owner, whoever he may be.

***Issue*** 2574: \* If a person finds a property whose value is less
than a dirham, and if its owner is known, and the person who finds it
does not know whether or not the owner would be happy about it, he
cannot pick it up without his (i.e. the owner's) permission. And if its
owner is not known, the person who finds should, as an obligatory
precaution, give it away as Sadaqah on behalf of the owner, whoever he
may be. And when the owner is found, the replacement should be given to
him if he does not approve the Sadaqah given on his behalf.

***Issue*** 2575: \* If a person finds something which bears a sign by
means of which its owner can be located, and even if he comes to know
that its owner is a non-Muslim whose property must be protected, and if
the value of that thing reaches one dirham, he should make an
announcement about it at the place of gathering of the people for one
year from the day on which he finds that thing.

***Issue*** 2576: If a person does not wish to make an announcement
himself, he can ask another reliable person to make the announcement, on
his behalf.

***Issue*** 2577: \* If the person who finds such a thing makes
announcement for one year, but the owner of the property does not turn
up he should act as follows:

(i) If he has found that thing at a place other than the Haram of
Makkah, he can retain it on behalf of the owner, so that he may give it
to him when he appears, or give it as Sadaqah to the poor on behalf of
the owner. As an obligatory precaution, he should not keep it for
himself.

(ii) If he has found that thing in the Haram, the obligatory precaution
is that he should give it away as Sadaqah.

***Issue*** 2578: \* If the person makes announcement for one year and
the owner of the property does not turn up, and he continues to care for
it on behalf of its owner, and in the meantime it is lost, he will not
be responsible for the loss if he has not been negligent nor over
cautious about it. And if he gave it as Sadaqah on behalf of the owner,
then the owner will have an option either to approve the Sadaqah or
demand its replacement. And the thawab for the Sadaqah will go to him
who gave the Sadaqah.

***Issue*** 2579: \* If a person finds a property, and purposely does
not make an announcement according to the rules mentioned above, he
commits a sin, and at the same time remains wajib on him to make an
announcement if he thinks it can be helpful.

***Issue*** 2580: \* If an insane person or a child who is not Baligh
finds something which bears a sign and is worth one dirham, his guardian
can make an announcement. In fact, it is obligatory upon him to announce
if he has taken its possession from the child or the insane person. And
if the owner is not found even after having announced for a year, he
should act as rule no. 2577.

***Issue*** 2581: \* If during the year in which a person has been
making an announcement (about something having been lost and found) he
loses all hope of finding the owner, he should give it away as Sadaqah
with the permission of the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 2582: \* If the property is lost during the year in which he
has been making an announcement, and he has been negligent in caring for
it, or has been over cautious, he will be responsible to the owner for
replacement, and should also continue announcing. But if he has not been
negligent nor over cautious, it is not obligatory for him to pay
anything.

***Issue*** 2583: \* If the property which bears a mark, and has value
equal to one dirham, is found at a place where it is known that the
owner of the property will not be found by means of announcement, he
should give it to the poor persons as Sadaqah on behalf of the owner on
the very first day with the permission of the*Mujtahid* , and he should
not wait till the year ends.

***Issue*** 2584: \* If a person finds a thing and possesses it under
the impression that it is his own property, but learns later that it is
not his property, he should act as outlined in the foregoing rule.

***Issue*** 2585: \* The announcement for the lost article should be
made in such a way that the owner, if he hears it, would be drawn to
investigate if the thing is his. And this differs in every situation.
For example, at times it may be sufficient to declare that an article
has been found, and at times, it is important to define it, like, saying
that a piece of gold is found. Further still, it may be necessary to say
that an earring of gold has been found, and so on.

But in all cases, total description should not be given so that it is
not identified fully.

***Issue*** 2586: If a person finds something and another person claims
that it is his, and also mentions certain marks of identification, the
former should give that thing to him only if he is satisfied that it
belongs to him. It is not necessary for the latter to mention the marks
of which mostly even the owners do not take notice.

***Issue*** 2587: If the value of a thing which a person finds is equal
to one dirham, and he does not make an announcement about it, but leaves
it in the mosque or at places of general assembly, and the thing is lost
or somebody picks it up, the person who found the thing will be
responsible.

***Issue*** 2588: \* If a person finds a thing which is perishable, he
should keep it for as long as it does not perish, and as an obligatory
precaution, announce about it, and if he does not find the owner, as a
precaution, he should fix its value with the permission of the Mujatahid
or his Wakil and sell it, keeping the money with him. In the meantime,
he should continue with the announcement till one year, and if the owner
is not found, he will act as explained in rule no. 2577.

***Issue*** 2589: \* If the thing found by somebody is with him at the
time of performing Wudhu and offering prayers, and if he has no
intention of returning it to its owner if he is found, his Wudhu and
prayers do not become void.

***Issue*** 2590: If a pair of shoes of a person is taken away and is
replaced by another pair of shoes, and he knows that the pair of shoes
which is now with him belongs to a certain person who would not mind if
he took his shoes instead of his own, he can take them. Similar rule
applies if he knows that he has been unjustly robbed of his shoes; but
in this particular case, the value of shoes left behind must not exceed
the value of his own shoes, otherwise the difference of the price will
be treated as article whose owner is unknown. And in any other situation
other than the two mentioned herein, the shoes will be considered as
articles of unknown ownership.

***Issue*** 2591: \* If a man has some property of 'unknown ownership'
that is, its owner is not known and if it cannot be classified as lost,
he is allowed to use it in a manner that would be agreeable to the
owner, provided that he is sure that the owner will have no objection in
principle. Otherwise, he must try to find the owner, and continue doing
so for as long as he thinks it useful. And when he despairs, he should,
with the permission of the*Mujtahid* , give it away as Sadaqah to the
poor. If the owner later on turns up, and if he does not approve the
Sadaqah which was given, as a precaution, he must give him a
replacement.


