Taqlid: Following a Mujtahid
============================

***Issue 1:*** \* It is necessary for a Muslim to believe in the
fundamentals of faith with his own insight and understanding, and he
cannot follow anyone in this respect i.e. he cannot accept the word of
another who knows, simply because he has said it. However, one who has
faith in the true tenets of Islam, and manifests it by his deeds, is a
Muslim and Mo'min, even if he is not very profound, and the laws related
to a Muslim will hold good for him. In matters of religious laws, apart
from the ones clearly defined, or ones which are indisputable, a person
must:

• either be a*Mujtahid* (jurist)\*\* himself, capable of inferring and
deducing from the religious sources and evidence;

• or if he is not a*Mujtahid* himself, he should follow one, i.e. he
should act accordi ng to the verdicts*(Fatwa)* of the*Mujtahid* ;

• or if he is neither a*Mujtahid* nor a follower (*Muqallid* ), he
should act on such precaution which should assure him that he has
fulfilled his religious obligation. For example, if some*Mujtahids*
consider an act to be haraam, while others say that it is not, he should
not perform that act. Similarly, if some*Mujtahid* consider an act to be
obligatory (*Wajib* ) while others consider it to be recommended
(*Mustahab* ), he should perform it. Therefore, it is obligatory upon
those persons who are neither*Mujtahids* , nor able to act on
precautionary measures (*Ihtiyat* ), to follow a*Mujtahid* .P

\*\**Mujtahid* is a jurist competent enough to deduce precise inferences
regarding the commandments from the holy Qur'an and the Sunnah of the
holy Prophet by the process of Ijtihad. Ijtihad literally means striving
and exerting. Technically as a term of juri sprudence it signifies the
application by a jurist of all his faculties to the consideration of the
authorities of law with a view to finding out what in all probability is
the law. In other words Ijtihad means making deductions in matters of
law, in the cases to which no express text is applicable.*(See, Baqir
Sadr, A Short History of 'llmul Usul, ISP, 1984)* .

***Issue*** 2: Taqlid in religious laws means acting according to the
verdict of a*Mujtahid* . It is necessary for the*Mujtahid* who is
followed, to be male, Shi'ah Ithna Ash'ari, adult, sane, of legitimate
birth, living and just ('Adil). A person is said to be just whe n he
performs all those acts which are obligatory upon him, and refrains from
all those things which are forbidden to him. And the sign of being just
is that one is apparently of a good character, so that if enquiries are
made about him from the people of his locality, or from his neighbours,
or from those persons with whom he lives, they would confirm his good
conduct. And if one knows that the verdicts of the*Mujtahids* differ
with regard to the problems which we face in everyday life, it is
necessary that the*Mujtahid* who is followed be*A'lam* (the most
learned), who is more capable of understanding the divine laws than any
of the contemporary*Mujtahids* .

***Issue*** 3: There are three ways of identifying a*Mujtahid* , and
the*A'alam* :

• when a person is certain that a particular person is a*Mujtahid* , or
the most learned one. For this, he should be a learned person himself,
and should possess the capacity to identify a*Mujtahid* or an*A'alam* ;

• when two persons, who are learned and just and possess the capacity to
identify a*Mujtahid* or the*A'alam* , confirm that a person is
a*Mujtahid* or an*A'lam* , provided that two other learned and just
persons do not contradict them. In fact, being a Mujt ahid or an*A'lam*
can also be established by a statement of only one trusted and reliable
person;

• when a number of learned persons who possess the capacity to identify
a*Mujtahid* or an*A'lam* , certify that a particular person is
a*Mujtahid* or an*A'lam* , provided that one is satisfied by their
statement.

***Issue*** 4: \* If one generally knows that the verdicts of*Mujtahids*
do vary in day to day matters, and also that some of the*Mujtahids* are
more capable than the others, but is unable to identify the most learned
one, then he should act on precaution based on t heir verdicts. And if
he is unable to act on precaution, then he should follow a*Mujtahid* he
supposes to be the most learned. And if decides that they are all of
equal stature, then he has a choice.

***Issue*** 5: There are four ways of obtaining the verdicts of
a*Mujtahid* :

• When a man hears from the*Mujtahid* himself.

• When the verdict of the*Mujtahid* is quoted by two just persons.

• When a man hears the verdict from a person whose statement satisfies
him.

• By reading the*Mujtahid* 's book of*Masae'l* , provided that, one is
satisfied about the correctness of the book.

***Issue*** 6: As long as a person is certain that the verdict of
the*Mujtahid* has not changed, he can act according to what is written
in the*Mujtahid* 's book. And if he suspects that the verdict might have
been changed, investigation in that matter is not necessary.

***Issue*** 7: If an*A'lam* *Mujtahid* gives a fatwa on some matter, his
follower cannot act in that matter on the fatwa of another*Mujtahid* .
But if he does not give a fatwa, and expresses a precaution (*Ihtiyat* )
that a man should act in such and such a manner, for exam ple if he says
that as a precautionary measure, in the first and second Rak'at of the
Salat he should read a complete Surah after the Surah of “Hamd”, the
follower may either act on this precaution, which is called obligatory
precaution (*Ihtiyat* *Wajib* ), or he may act on the fatwa of
another*Mujtahid* who it is permissible to follow. Hence, if he (the
second*Mujtahid* ) rules that only “Surah Hamd” is enough, he (the
person offering prayers) may drop the second Surah. The position will be
the same if the A'a lam*Mujtahid* expresses terms like*Ta'mmul*
or*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 8: If the*A'lam* *Mujtahid* observes precaution after or
before having given a fatwa, for example, if he says that if Najis
vessel is washed once with Kurr water (about 388 litres), it becomes
Clean (*tahir/pak* ), although as precautionary measure, it should be
washed thre e times, his followers can abandon acting according to this
precaution. This precaution is called recommended precaution (*Ihtiyat*
*Mustahab* ).

***Issue*** 9: \* If a*Mujtahid* , who is followed by a person dies, his
category will be the same as when he was alive. Based on this, if he is
more learned than a living*Mujtahid* , the follower who has a general
notion about the variation in the day to day*Masae'l* , must continue to
remain in his taqlid.

And if the living*Mujtahid* is more learned, then the follower must turn
to him for taqlid. The term 'taqlid' used here implies only an intention
to follow a particular*Mujtahid* , and does not include having acted
acco rding to his fatwa.

***Issue*** 10: If a person acts according to the fatwa of a*Mujtahid*
in certain matter, and after the death of that*Mujtahid* , he follows a
living*Mujtahid* in that matter according to his obligation, he cannot
act again according to the fatwa of the dead*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 11: It is obligatory for a follower to learn the*Masae'l*
which are of daily importance.

***Issue*** 12: \* If a person faces a problem whose rule is not known
to him, it is necessary for him to exercise precaution, or to follow
a*Mujtahid* according to the conditions mentioned above. But if he
cannot obtain the ruling of an*A'lam* *Mujtahid* on that matt er, he is
allowed to follow a non-*A'lam* *Mujtahid* , even if he has a general
notion about the difference between the verdicts.

***Issue*** 13: \* If a person relates the fatwa of a*Mujtahid* to
someone, and then that fatwa is changed, it is not necessary for him to
inform that person about the change. But if he realises after having
related the fatwa that he had made an error, and the error would lead
someone to contradicting the laws of Shariah, then as an obligatory
precaution, he should do his best to rectify the error.

***Issue*** 14: If a person performs his acts for some time without
taqlid of a*Mujtahid* , and later follows a*Mujtahid* , his former
actions will be valid if that*Mujtahid* declares them to be valid,
otherwise they will be treated as void.


