Vow and Covenant
================

Vow (Nazr)
----------

**Issue 2649:** \* Vow means making it obligatory upon oneself to do
some good act, or to refrain from doing an act which it is better not to
do, for the sake of, or for the pleasure of Allah.

**Issue 2650:** While making a vow, a formula declaration has to be
pronounced, though is not necessary that it should be in Arabic. If a
person says: “When the patient recovers from his ailment, it will be
obligatory upon me to pay $10 to a poor man, for the sake of Allah,” his
vow will be in order.

**Issue 2651:** \* It is necessary that the person making a vow is
baligh and sane, and makes the vow with free will and intention. If he
has been coerced to make a vow, or if he makes it owing to excitement,
without any intention or choice, his vow is not in order.

**Issue 2652:** \* If a person who is feeble-minded, (i.e. one who
squanders his property for useless purposes) makes a vow, for example,
to give something to poor, his vow is not in order. Similarly, if a
bankrupt person makes a vow to pay from the wealth over which he has no
right of disposal or discretion, the vow will not be valid.

**Issue 2653:** \* If a husband disallows his wife to make a vow, her
vow will not be valid, if that vow in any way violates the rights of the
husband. Similarly, a wife making a vow to pay from her wealth, without
her husband's permission, commits an act which is not free from Ishkal,
except when the vow is for Hajj, Zakat, Sadaqa or for doing a good turn
to her parents, or her blood relations.

**Issue 2654:** \* If a woman makes a vow with the permission of her
husband, he cannot abrogate her vow, or restrain her from fulfiling her
vow.

**Issue 2655:** \* If a child (son or daughter) makes a vow, with or
without the permission of his/her father, he/she should fulfil his/her
vow. However, if his/her father or mother disallows him/her to fulfil
the vow, his/her vow is void, provided that the fulfilment of the vow
does not have any priority.

**Issue 2656:** A person can make a vow only for an act which is
possible for him to fulfil. If, for example, a person is not capable of
travelling up to Karbala on foot, and he makes a vow that he will go
there on foot, his vow will not be in order.

**Issue 2657:** \* If a person makes a vow that he will perform a haraam
or makrooh act, or that he would refrain from a wajib or mustahab act,
his vow is not valid.

**Issue 2658:** If a person makes a vow that he will perform or abandon
a normal act, the performing or abandoning of which has equal merits,
his vow is not in order. But if performing it is better in some respect,
and a person makes a vow keeping that merit in view, for example, if he
makes a vow that he will eat a certain food so as to gain strength for
worshipping Allah, his vow will be in order. Also, if its renouncing is
better in some respect, and the vow to renounce it is made with that
intention, for example, if he finds smoking is harmful and makes a vow
not to smoke, his vow is in order. However, at any time when he feels
that smoking is not harmful for him, the vow will cancel by itself.

**Issue 2659:** \* If a person makes a vow, that he will offer his
obligatory prayers at a place where offering does not inherently carry
higher spiritual merits, for example, he makes a vow to offer his
prayers in a certain room, his vow will be valid, only if, offering
prayers there has some merit, like, being able to concentrate better due
to solitude.

**Issue 2660:** If a person makes a vow to perform an act, he should
perform it in strict accordance with his vow. If he makes a vow to give
Sadaqa, or to fast on the first day of every month, or to offer prayers
of the first of the month, if he performs these acts before that day or
after, it will not suffice. Also, if he makes a vow that he will give
Sadaqa when a patient recovers, but gives away before the recovery of
the patient, it will not suffice.

**Issue 2661:** If a person makes a vow that he will fast, without
specifying the time and the number of fasts, it will be sufficient if he
observes one fast. And if he makes a vow that he will offer prayers, but
does not specify its number and particulars, it will be sufficient if he
offers a two rak'at prayers. And if he makes a vow that he will give
Sadaqa, not specifying its nature or quantity, and he gives something
which can be deemed as Sadaqa, his vow will be fulfilled. And if he
simply makes a vow that he will act to please Almighty Allah, his vow
will be fulfilled if he offers one prayers, or observes one fast, or
gives away something by way of Sadaqa.

**Issue 2662:** \* If a person makes a vow that he will observe fast on
a particular day, he should observe fast on that very day; and if he
does not observe fast on that day intentionally, he should, besides
observing the qadha for that fast, also give Kaffarah for it. And the
Kaffarah applicable in this case is the one prescribed for violation of
the Oaths, as will be mentioned later. However, travelling for him on
that day is permissible, and he will not fast. Also, it is not
obligatory upon him to make a niyyat for ten days so as to be able to
fast. If a person who made the vow could not fast on the particular day
because of being on a journey, illness, or in the case of a woman, being
in the state of Haidh, or for any good excuse, then he will give only
qadha of that fast, and there will be no Kaffarah.

**Issue 2663:** \* If a person, of his own choice and volition, violates
his vow, he should give Kaffarah for it.

**Issue 2664:** If a person makes a vow to renounce an act for some
specified time, he will be free to perform that act after that time has
passed. But if he performs it before that time, due to forgetfulness, or
helplessness, there is no liability on him. Even then, it will be
necessary for him to refrain from that act for the remaining time, and
if he repeats that act before it without any excuse, he must give
Kaffarah for it.

**Issue 2665:** \* If a person makes a vow to renounce an act, without
setting any time limit, and then performs that act because of
forgetfulness, helplessness or carelessness, it is not obligatory for
him to give a Kaffarah, but, after the first instance, if he repeats the
act again at any time, voluntarily, he must give Kaffarah for it.

**Issue 2666:** If a person makes a vow that he/she will observe fast
every week on a particular day, for example, on Friday, and if Eid ul
Fitr or Eid ul Azha falls on one of the Fridays or an excuse like
journey (or menses in the case of women) springs up for him/her, he/she
should not observe fast on that day, but give its qadha.

**Issue 2667:** If a person makes a vow that he will give a specific
amount as Sadaqa, and dies before having given it away, it is not
necessary that that amount be deducted from his estate. It is better
that the baligh heirs of the deceased give that amount as Sadaqa on his
behalf, out of their own shares.

**Issue 2668:** \* If a person makes a vow that he will give Sadaqa to a
particular poor, he cannot give it to another poor, and if that poor
person dies, he should on the basis of recommended precaution, give the
Sadaqa to his heirs.

**Issue 2669:** If a person makes a vow that he will perform the Ziyarat
of a particular holy Imam, for example of Abu Abdillah Imam Husayn
(A.S.) his going for the Ziyarat of another Imam will not be sufficient,
and if he cannot perform the Ziyarat of that particular Imam because of
any good excuse, nothing is obligatory on him.

**Issue 2670:** If a person has made a vow that he will go for Ziyarat,
but has not included in his vow that he will do Ghusl or pray after the
Ziyarat, it is not necessary for him to perform those acts.

**Issue 2671:** \* If a person makes a vow that he would spend some
amount of money on the shrine of one of the Imams, or the descendants of
the Imams, without having any particular project in mind, he should
spend it on the repairs, lighting, carpeting etc. of the shrine.

**Issue 2672:** \* If a person makes a vow to use something in the name
of Holy Imam himself, and has an intention to put it to a specific use,
he should spend it for that very purpose. And if he has not made an
intention to put it to any specific use, it is better that he should use
it for a purpose which has some relationship with that Imam, for
example, he should spend it on poor Zawwar of that Imam, or on the
shrine of the Imam, like its repairs etc. or for such purposes which
would glorify the memory of that Imam. The same rule applies in the case
of the descendants of the Imams.

**Issue 2673:** \* If someone makes a vow that he would give a sheep as
Sadaqa, or in the name of a Holy Imam, and if it gives milk, or gives
birth to a young one, before it is put to use in accordance with the
vow, the milk or the lamb will be the property of the person who made
the vow, unless he had included them in his vow. And the growth of fat
on the animal will be considered part of the vow.

**Issue 2674:** If a person makes a vow for an act, if a patient
recovers or a traveller returns home, and if it transpires later that
the patient had already recovered or the traveller had already returned
before he had made the vow, it will not be necessary for him to fulfil
his vow.

**Issue 2675:** If a father or a mother makes a vow that he/she will
marry their daughter to a Sayyid, the option rests with the girl when
she attains the age of puberty, and the vow made by the parents has no
significance.

**Issue 2676:** \* When a person makes a covenant with Allah, that if
his particular lawful need is fulfilled, he will perform a good act, it
is necessary for him to fulfil the covenant. Similarly, if he makes a
covenant without having any wish, that he will perform a good act, the
performing of that act becomes obligatory upon him.

**Issue 2677:** \* As in the case of vow, a formal declaration should be
pronounced in the case of covenant ('Ahd) as well. And it is commonly
held that the covenant that one makes should be related to either acts
of worship, like, obligatory or Mustahab prayers, or to acts whose
performance is better than its renunciation. But this is not so. In
fact, all covenants which fall within the category specified in rule no.
2680 related to oaths, are valid and ought to be fulfilled.

**Issue 2678:** If a person does not act according to the covenant made
by him, he should give a Kaffarah for it, i.e. he should either feed
sixty poor persons, or fast consecutively for two months, or set free a
slave.

Rules Regarding Oath (Qasam)
----------------------------

**Issue 2679:** If a person takes an oath that he will perform an act
(e.g. that he will fast) or will refrain from doing an act (e.g. that he
will not smoke), but does not intentionally act according to his oath,
he should give Kaffarah for it, which means he should set a slave free,
or should fully feed ten indigent persons, or should provide them with
clothes. And if he is not able to perform these acts, he should fast for
three consecutive days.

**Issue 2680:** \* The conditions for validity of an oath are:-

(i) A person who takes an oath should be Baligh and sane, and should do
so with free will and clear intention. Hence, an oath by a minor, an
insane person, an intoxicated person, or by a person who has been
coerced to take an oath, will not be in order. Similarly, if he takes an
oath involuntarily, or unintentionally, in a state of excitement, the
oath will be void.

(ii) An oath taken for the performance of an act which is haraam or
makrooh, is not valid. Similarly, an oath for renouncing an act which is
obligatory or Mustahab is also void. And if he takes an oath to perform
a normal or usual act, it will be valid, if that act has any preference
in the estimation of sensible people. Similarly, if he takes an oath for
renouncing a usually permissible act, it will be valid if it is deemed
more preferable than its performance, by the sensible people. In fact,
in each case, his own judgement about the preferences will be enough to
grant validity to the oath, even if other sensible people may not
concur.

(iii) The oath must be sworn by one of those names of the Almighty Allah
which are exclusively used for Him, (e.g. 'Allah'). And even if he
swears by a name which is used for other beings also, but is used so
extensively for Him, that when any person utters that name one is
reminded of Him Alone, for example, if he swears by the name Khaliq (the
Creator) and Raziq (the Bestower), the oath will be in order. In fact,
if he uses other names or attributes of Allah, which do not remind of
Him, but give that connotation when used during an oath, like Samee'
(All Hearing) or Baseer (All Seeing), even then the oath will be valid.

(iv) The oath should be uttered in words, but a dumb person can take an
oath by making a sign. Similarly, if a person is unable to utter the
words, he may write down the oath, repeating in his mind the intention
for it, that will be a valid oath, though as a precaution, he may
confirm the oath in other ways as well.

(v) It should be possible for him to act upon his oath. And if he was
able to act upon the oath when he took it, but became incapable of
acting upon it later, the oath becomes nullified from the time he became
incapable of acting upon it, provided that he did not incapacitate
himself purposely. And the same rule applies if acting upon one's vow,
oath, or covenant, involves unbearable hardship.

**Issue 2681:** If the father forbids his son to take an oath, or the
husband forbids his wife to take an oath, their oath is not valid.

**Issue 2682:** \* If a son takes an oath without the permission of his
father, or a wife takes an oath without the permission of her husband,
the father or the husband can nullify the oath.

**Issue 2683:** If a person does not act upon his oath because of
forgetfulness, helplessness or heedlessness, he is not liable for
Kaffarah. And the same rule applies, if he is forced not to act upon his
oath. And if an obsessed person takes an oath like, if he says: “By
Allah, I am going to offer prayers now at once,” and then does not offer
prayers owing to the whims haunting him, which renders him incapable of
acting according to the oath it is not necessary for him to give
Kaffarah.

**Issue 2684:** \* If a person swears to confirm that he is telling the
truth, and if that is actually the truth, his taking of the oath is
Makrooh; and if it is a lie, his taking of the oath is haraam. In fact,
to make a false oath in the cases of dispute is a major sin. However, if
a person takes a false oath in order to save himself, or another Muslim
from the torture of an oppressor, there is no objection in it, in fact,
at times it becomes obligatory. However, if a person can resort to
'Tauriyat' (dissimulation), that is, if at the time of taking an oath,
he makes a vague, feigned utterance with no intention of resorting to
falsehood, then it is better for him to do so. For example, if an
oppressor or a tyrant who wants to harm someone asks him whether he has
seen that person, and he had seen him an hour earlier, he would say that
he has not seen him, meaning in his mind that he has not seen him during
the last few minutes.


