Rules Regarding Waqf
====================

**Issue 2685:** If a person makes something Waqf, it ceases to be his
property, and neither he nor anybody else can either gift it or sell it
to any person. Also, no one can inherit anything out of it. There is,
however, no harm in selling it in certain circumstances, as mentioned in
rules nos. 2102 and 2103.

**Issue 2686:** \* It is not necessary to utter the formal declaration
of Waqf in Arabic. If, for example, a person says: “I have waqfed this
book for the students” it will be considered valid. In fact, Waqf is
established by conduct as well. Therefore, if a person spreads a mat in
a mosque with an intention of Waqf, or constructs a building having an
appearance of a mosque, with an intention of giving it away as a mosque,
the Waqf will be established. In the cases of public Waqfs, like a
mosque, a madressah, any public utility, or Waqf for general poor or
Sadat, it does not require anyone to make a formal acceptance. In fact,
even private Waqf, like the one created for one's own children, do not
require any reciprocal acceptance.

**Issue 2687:** \* If a person marks a property for Waqf, but regrets
before actually making a Waqf, or dies, the Waqf is not considered as
established.

**Issue 2688:** \* If a person Waqfs a property, he should make it a
perpetual Waqf from the day he declares the Waqf. Therefore, if he says:
“This property is Waqf after my death” the Waqf will not be valid,
because it would not cover the period from the time of declaration till
his death. Also, if he says: “This property will remain Waqf for ten
years and will not be Waqf thereafter” or says: “It will be Waqf for ten
years and thereafter it will not be Waqf for five years, and will become
Waqf again after the expiry of that period”, such a Waqf will not be
valid.

**Issue 2689:** \* A private Waqf will be valid when the property which
has been waqfed is given away, at the disposal of beneficiaries of the
first category, or their representative or guardian. And, if a person
Waqfs something upon his minor children, and looks after it on their
behalf with the intention that it will become their property, the Waqf
is in order.

**Issue 2690:** In the case of public Waqf like madressahs, mosques etc.
it is not necessary that it be possessed by any gesture. The Waqf is
established immediately upon its declaration as such.

**Issue 2691:** It is necessary that the person who makes a Waqf should
be Baligh and sane, and should be doing so of his free will and niyyat.
Also, he should have the right, according to Shariah, of disposal and
discretion over his property. Based on this, feeble-minded person who
squanders his wealth and is therefore debarred, cannot make a valid
Waqf.

**Issue 2692:** If some property is made Waqf for an unborn child, it is
a matter of Ishkal for that Waqf to be valid, and it is necessary to
observe precaution in this case. But, if Waqf is created for some
persons who are present at that time, and also for the persons who will
be born later, even if they may not be in the womb of their mothers when
the Waqf was made, it will be in order. For example, if a person Waqfs a
property for his children and after them for his grandchildren, and for
every succeeding generation to benefit from it, the Waqf is in order.

**Issue 2693:** If a person creates a Waqf for himself, for example, if
he Waqfs a shop for himself so that its income may be spent for the
construction of his tomb after his death, the Waqf is not in order. But,
if, he creates a Waqf for the poor and later on, he himself becomes
poor, he can benefit from the accruals of that Waqf.

**Issue 2694:** \* If a person appoints a Mutawalli (trustee) of the
property waqfed by him, the trustee should act according to his
instructions, but if he does not appoint a trustee and say, he has
waqfed the property for a particular group, like, for his children, the
discretion rests with them, and if they are not baligh, the discretion
rests with their guardian. And the permission of the Mujtahid is not
necessary for appropriating any benefit from the Waqf. But for any such
steps taken to safeguard the interest of the Waqf, or the interest of
future generations, like repairing or hiring it for the benefit of the
future generation, permission from the Mujtahid is necessary.

**Issue 2695:** If a person Waqfs a property, for example, for the poor,
or for the Sayyids, or he Waqfs it for charitable purposes, and does not
appoint the trustee for the Waqf, the discretion with regard to that
Waqf rests with the Mujtahid.

**Issue 2696:** If a person Waqfs a property for a particular group,
like, his descendants, so that every generation should benefit from it
successively, and to achieve that purpose, the trustee of the Waqf
leases it out, and then dies, the lease will not become void. But, if
the Waqf has no trustee, and one generation for whom the property has
been waqfed, leases it out and they die during the currency of the
lease, and the next generation does not endorse the lease, the lease
becomes void; and if the lessee has given rent for the entire period, he
is entitled to receive the refund of rent which covers a period from the
time of their death till the end of the period of lease.

**Issue 2697:** \* If the Waqfed property is ruined, its position as
Waqf is not affected, except when the Waqf is of a special nature, and
that special feature ceases to exist. For example, if a person endows a
garden and the garden is ruined, the Waqf becomes void and the garden
reverts to the heirs of the person.

**Issue 2698:** \* If one part of a property has been waqfed and the
other part is not, and the property is undivided, the Mujtahid, or the
trustee of the Waqf, or the beneficiaries can divide the property and
separate the Waqf part in consultation with the experts.

**Issue 2699:** If the trustee of Waqf acts dishonestly, and does not
use its income for the special purposes, the Mujtahid should assign an
honest person to act with the dishonest trustee in order to restrain him
from acting dishonestly. And if this is not possible, the Mujtahid can
replace him with an honest trustee.

**Issue 2700:** A carpet which has been waqfed in Husayniya (Imambargah)
cannot be used in mosque for offering prayers, even if the mosque may be
near the Husayniyah.

**Issue 2701:** \* If a property is waqfed for the maintenance of a
mosque, and that mosque does not stand in need of repairs, and it is
also not expected that it will need repairs for quite some time, and if
it is not possible to collect and deposit the accrual till such time
when it could be used for the repairs, then, as an obligatory
precaution, the income should be used for the purposes which has nearest
conformity with the intention of the one who waqfed it, like spending it
in other needs of the same mosque, or for the repairs of any other
mosque.

**Issue 2702:** \* If a person waqfs some property for the repairs of a
mosque, and the Imam of the congregation, and the Mu'azzin, and if the
quantity for each has been specified by the donor, it should be spent in
the same manner. But if, it is not specified, the mosque should be
repaired first, and if there is any balance, it should be distributed
between the Imam of the congregation and Mu'azzin, by the trustee, as he
deems fit and proper. But it is better that these two beneficiaries
reach a compromise between them in respect of the distribution.


