Rules Regarding Will (Wasiyyat)
===============================

***Issue*** 2703: A Will is purported to direct that after one's death,
a certain task be completed, or that a portion of his property be given
in ownership to someone, or that the ownership of his property be
transferred to someone, or that it be spent for charitable purposes, or
that he appoints someone as guardian of his children and dependents. A
person who is to give effect to a Will is called executor (Wasi).

***Issue*** 2704: If a person who is dumb, can make himself understood
by means of signs, he can Will for anything he likes; and even if a
person who can speak, makes a Will by means of signs and makes himself
understood, his Will will be valid.

***Issue*** 2705: \* If a written paper is found, signed and sealed by a
deceased person, and if it is known or conveyed that he wrote it as a
Will, it should be acted upon. But if it is known that it was not his
intention to make any Will, and that he had simply made some notes for a
Will to be written later, it will not be considered as a Will.

***Issue*** 2706: \* A person making a Will should be baligh, sane, and
he should not be a feeble-minded squanderer. And the Will must have been
made with free will and choice. A Will made by a non-baligh child is
invalid, but if a child of ten years of age Wills for the benefit of his
blood relatives, or for general charity, then that Will is valid. But if
he Wills for the benefit of those other than his blood relatives, or if
a seven year old child WIlls that a certain part of wealth be for
someone, or be given to someone, that Will is a matter of*Ishkal* , and
in both cases, precaution must not be ignored. As for the feeble-minded
squanderer, his Will related to his property is not valid, but in
matters other than the property, like in matters of some tasks or duties
to be performed for the deceased, his Will is valid.

***Issue*** 2707: \* If a person who injures himself intentionally, or
takes a poison, because of which his death becomes certain or probable,
makes a Will that a certain part of his property be put to some
particular use, his Will is not in order.

***Issue*** 2708: \* If a person makes a Will that something from his
property will belong to someone, and if that person accepts the Will,
even if his acceptance took place during the lifetime of the testator,
that thing will become his property after the death of the testator.

***Issue*** 2709: \* When a person sees signs of approaching death in
himself, he should immediately return the things held in trust by him to
their owners, or should inform the owners, acting according to the
details already mentioned in rule no. 2351. And if he is indebted to
others, and the time for repayment of the debt has matured, and if the
creditors make the demand, he should repay the debt. And if he is not in
a position to repay the debt, or the time for its repayment has not yet
matured, or the creditor has not yet demanded, he should make
arrangements to ensure that his creditor will be paid after his death,
like, by making a Will to inform those who are unaware of the debt and
then appoint witness to the Will.

***Issue*** 2710: \* If a person who sees signs of approaching death in
himself, has a debt of Khums and Zakat, or has other liabilities, and if
he cannot make payment immediately, he should make a Will directing
payment, if he

owns some property, or if he knows someone will pay on his behalf. The
same rule applies if he has obligatory Hajj on him. But, if he is
capable of paying his religious dues immediately, he should pay at once,
even if he sees no signs of impending death.

***Issue*** 2711: \* If a person who finds signs of approaching death in
himself, has lapsed (Qadha) of some prayers and fasts due to him, he
should direct in his Will that a person be hired and paid from his
estate for their performance. In fact, even if he does not leave any
estate, but feels it probable that someone would perform them without
taking any fees, it is obligatory for him to make a Will in this behalf.
And if he has someone like his eldest son who would perform, it is
sufficient to inform him about it, and it is not obligatory to Will in
that respect.

***Issue*** 2712: If a person who finds signs of impending death in
himself has deposited some property with some other person, or has
concealed it in some place of which his heirs are not aware, and if
owing to the ignorance of the heirs their right is lost, he should
inform them about it. And it is not necessary for him to appoint a
guardian, or an administrator for his minor children, except when it is
feared that their property may perish, or they themselves may be ruined
without an administrator, in which case, he should appoint a trustworthy
administrator for them.

***Issue*** 2713: \* The executor (Wasi) should be sane and trustworthy
in matters related to the testator, and as a precaution, in matters
related to others also. And it is necessary as a precaution, that the
executor of a Muslim should be a Muslim. To appoint a Na-baligh child
alone for putting the Will into effect, is not in order, if the said
child is expected to exercise discretion without permission of the
guardian. But if the child is directed to put the Will into effect after
having become baligh, or with the permission of the guardian, there will
be no objection.

***Issue*** 2714: \* If a person appoints more than one executors,
allowing each of them to execute the Will independently, it will not be
necessary that they should obtain permission from one another for the
execution of the Will. And if he had not given any such permission -
whether he had or had not said that both of them should execute the Will
jointly, they should execute the Will in consultation with one another.
And if they are not prepared to execute the Will jointly, and this
unwillingness is not occasioned by any religious scruple, the*Mujtahid*
can force them to do so, and if they do not obey his orders, or any one
has a religious excuse for not being prepared to act jointly, then
the*Mujtahid* can replace the dissenting executor.

***Issue*** 2715: If a person retracts a directive in his Will, for
example, if he first says that 1/3 of his property should be given to a
person, and then says that it should not be given to him, the Will
becomes void. And if he changes his Will, for example, if he appoints an
administrator for his children, and then replaces him with another
person, his first Will becomes void, and his second Will should be acted
upon.

***Issue*** 2716: \* If a person conducts himself in a manner which
shows that he has drawn back from his Will, for example, if he sells a
house which he

had willed to give away to someone, or appoints someone as his agent to
sell it in spite of his original wish, the Will becomes void.

***Issue*** 2717: If a person makes a Will that a particular thing be
given away to someone, and later changes it to say that half of the same
thing should be given to another person, that thing should be divided
into two parts, and one part should be given to each of them.

***Issue*** 2718: \* If a person who is on his death-bed, bestows a part
of his property as gift on a certain person, and makes a Will that after
his death another quantity be given to yet another person, and if both
the gifts exceed one-third of his estate, and the heirs are not prepared
to approve the excess, then in that case the first endowment should be
given to the first beneficiary, and whatever remains from one-third
should be spent according to the Will.

***Issue*** 2719: If a person makes a Will that 1/3 of his property
should not be sold and its income should be spent for some particular
purpose, his instructions should be followed.

***Issue*** 2720: If a person says during his terminal illness, that he
owes certain amount to someone, and if he is suspected of having said
that to harm his heirs, the amount specified by him should be given out
of 1/3 of his property; and if he is not suspected of any such motive,
his admission will be valid, and the payment should be made out of his
estate.

***Issue*** 2721: \* When a person makes a Will that something be given
to another person, it is not necessary that that beneficiary should be
existing at the time of the Will. If, therefore, he makes a Will that
something be given to a child who may possibly be born of a particular
wife, it is necessary that the thing should be given to the child if he
is born after the death of the testator. And if he is not born, and if
the Will is construed as general, then it should be spent in a manner
which would be nearer to the object of the Will, according to the
testator. But, if he makes a Will that after his death, a portion of his
property will be owned by a particular person, and if that person exists
at the time of the death of the testator, the Will is in order,
otherwise it is void, and whatever he willed for that person should be
divided by the heirs among themselves.

***Issue*** 2722: If a person comes to know that someone has appointed
him his executor, and he informs the testator that he is not prepared to
perform the duties of an executor, it is not necessary for him to act as
an executor after the death of the testator. But, if he does not come to
know of his appointment before the death of the testator, or comes to
know about it, but does not inform the testator that he is not prepared
to act as an executor, he should execute the Will if the execution of
the Will does not involve any hardship to him. Also, if the executor
comes to know of his appointment at a time when due to serious illness
or some other hindrance, the testator cannot appoint any other executor,
he should, on the basis of precaution, accept the appointment.

***Issue*** 2723: \* After a testator dies, the executor cannot appoint
another person to execute the Will and retire himself. But, if he knows
that the deceased did not mean that the executor should execute the Will
himself, what he wanted was only that the given work should be
accomplished, he can appoint another person on his behalf.

***Issue*** 2724: If a person appoints two persons as joint executors,
and if one of them dies, or becomes insane, or an apostate,
the*Mujtahid* will appoint another person in his place. And if both of
them die, or become insane or apostates, the*Mujtahid* will appoint two
persons in their place. However, if one person can execute the Will, it
is not necessary to appoint two persons for the purpose.

***Issue*** 2725: \* If an executor alone cannot perform all the tasks
laid down in the Will of the deceased, even by appointing someone as his
agent or by hiring someone, then the*Mujtahid* will appoint someone to
assist him in his duties.

***Issue*** 2726: If a quantity from the property of a dead person is
lost or damaged while in the custody of the executor, and if he has been
negligent in looking after it, or has gone beyond moderation, he will be
responsible. For example, if the dead person had willed him to give a
certain quantity to the poor of a particular town, and he took it to
some other town, and in the process it has perished, he will be
responsible for it. But if, he has not been negligent nor immoderate, he
will not be responsible for the loss.

***Issue*** 2727: If a person appoints someone as his executor, and says
that after that executor's death, another person should be the executor
in his place, the second executor should perform the tasks laid down in
the Will of the deceased, after the death of the first executor.

***Issue*** 2728: If obligatory Hajj remained unperformed by the dead
person, or debts and dues like Khums, Zakat and Mazalim (wealth wrongly
appropriated) which were obligatory to pay, were not paid, they should
be paid from the estate of the deceased though he may not have directed
in his Will for them.

***Issue*** 2729: If the estate of the deceased exceeds his debt and
expenses for obligatory Hajj, and obligatory religious dues like Khums,
Zakat and Mazalim, and if he has also willed that 1/3 or a part thereof
of his property be put to a particular use, his Will should be followed,
and if he has not made a Will, then what remains is the property of the
heirs.

***Issue*** 2730: If the disposal specified by the deceased exceeds 1/3
of his property, his Will in respect of what exceeds the 1/3 of his
property will be valid only if the heirs show their agreement, by words
or by conduct. Their tacit approval will not suffice. And even if they
give their consent after some time, it is in order. But if some heirs
permit and others decline to give consent (to the Will being acted
upon), the Will is valid and binding only in respect of the shares of
those who have consented.

***Issue*** 2731: If the dispensation specified by the deceased exceeds
1/3 of his property, and his heirs give consent to that dispensation
before his death, they cannot withdraw their permission after his death.

***Issue*** 2732: If a person makes a Will that Khums and Zakat and
other debts due to him should be paid out of 1/3 of his property, and
also someone be hired for performing his qadha prayers and fasts, and
also perform*Mustahab* acts like feeding the poor, the precaution will
be that, his debt should be paid first out of the 1/3 of his property,
and if there is a balance, a person should be hired to perform his qadha
prayers and fasts, and if there is still a residue, it should be spent
on the*Mustahab* acts specified by him. If,

however, 1/3 of his property is sufficient only for the payment of his
debts, and his heirs, too, do not permit that anything more than the 1/3
of his property should be spent, his Will in respect of prayers, fasts,
and*Mustahab* acts is void.

***Issue*** 2733: If a testator wills that his debt should be paid, and
also someone should be hired for the performance of his qadha prayers
and fasts, and also*Mustahab* acts should be performed, but does not
direct that the expenses for those acts should be paid from 1/3 of his
estate, then his debt should be paid from his estate, and if anything
remains, 1/3 of it should be spent on prayers and fasts and*Mustahab*
acts specified by him. And if that 1/3 is not sufficient, and if his
heirs permit, his Will should be implemented by paying from their share,
and if they do not permit, the expenses of prayers and fasts should be
paid from the 1/3 of his estate, and if anything remains it should be
spent on the*Mustahab* acts specified by him.

***Issue*** 2734: If a person claims that the deceased had willed that a
certain amount should be given to him, and two Adil men confirm his
statement, or if he takes an oath, and one Adil man also confirms his
statement, or if one Adil man and two Adil women, or four Adil women
bear witness to what he says, the amount claimed by him should be given
to him. And if only one Adil woman bear witness, 1/4 of the amount
claimed by him should be given to him, and if two Adil women bear
witness, 1/2 of that amount, and if three Adil women bear witness, 3/4
of it should be given to him. Also, if two non-Muslim males from amongst
the people of the Book, who are esteemed as Adil in their own religion,
confirm his statement, and if the dead person was obliged to make a Will
while no Adil man and woman was present at that time, the amount claimed
by that person should be given to him.

***Issue*** 2735: If a person claims that he is the executor of the
deceased, and can act according to the Will and put it into effect, or
that the deceased had appointed him an administrator of his children,
his statement should be accepted only if two Adil men confirm it.

***Issue*** 2736: If a person makes a Will that something from his
estate is for a particular person, and that beneficiary dies before
accepting or rejecting it, his heirs can accept it as long as they do
not reject the Will. However, this order applies when the testator does
not retract his Will, otherwise the beneficiary have no right to lay
claim to that thing.


