Inheritance
===========

***Issue*** 2737: \* There are three groups of persons who inherit from
a dead person, on the basis of relationship:

(i) The first group consists of the dead person's parents and children,
and in the absence of children, the grand children, however low, and
among them whoever is nearer to the dead person inherits his property.
And as long as even a single person from this group is present, people
belonging to the second group do not inherit.

(ii) The second group consists of paternal grandfather, paternal
grandmother, and sisters, brothers, and in the absence of sisters and
brothers their children, whoever from among them is nearer to the dead
person, will inherit from him. And as long as even one person from this
group is present, people belonging to the third group do not inherit.

(iii) The third group consists of paternal uncles and paternal aunts and
maternal uncles and maternal aunts, and their descendants. And as long
as even one person from the paternal uncles and paternal aunts and
maternal uncles and maternal aunts of the dead person is present, their
children do not inherit. However, if the paternal step uncle and the son
of the real paternal uncle are present, the son of the dead person's
real paternal uncle will inherit from him to the exclusion of the
paternal step uncle. But if there are several paternal uncles and
several paternal cousins, or if the widow is alive, then this rule is
not without*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 2738: If the dead person's own paternal uncle and paternal
aunt and maternal uncle and maternal aunt and their children and their
grandchildren do not exist, the property will be inherited by the
paternal uncles and paternal aunts and maternal uncles and maternal
aunts of dead person's parents. And if even they do not exist, the
property will be inherited by their descendants. And in the absence of
their descendants, the property is inherited by the paternal uncles and
paternal aunts and maternal uncles and maternal aunts of the dead
person's paternal grand parents. And if even they do not exist, the
property is inherited by their descendants.

***Issue*** 2739: Husband and wife inherit from each other as will be
explained later.

Inheritance of the First Group
------------------------------

***Issue*** 2740: If out of the first group, there is only one heir of
the deceased (for example, father or mother or only one son or only one
daughter) he/she inherits the entire estate, and, if there are more than
one sons or daughters, the estate is divided among them in such a way,
that each son gets twice the share of each daughter.

***Issue*** 2741: \* If the father and the mother of deceased are his
only heirs, the estate is divided into 3 parts, out of which 2 parts are
taken by the father and one by the mother. If, the deceased has two
brothers or four sisters, or one brother and two sisters, who are
Muslims and are related to him from the side of the father (i.e. the
father of these persons and of the deceased is same, although their
mothers may be different), the effect of their presence on the
inheritance is that, although they do not inherit anything in the

presence of the father and the mother, the mother gets 1/6 of the
estate, and the rest is inherited by the father.

***Issue*** 2742: \* If only the father, the mother and one daughter are
the heirs of deceased, and he (the deceased) does not have two paternal
brothers, or four paternal sisters, or one paternal brother, and two
paternal sisters, with the conditions already explained, the estate will
be divided into 5 parts, out of which the father and the mother take one
share each, and the remaining 3 shares are taken by the daughter. And if
the deceased has two paternal brothers, or four paternal sisters, or one
paternal brother, and two paternal sisters, the estate will again be
divided into 5 parts, as the presence of these persons will have no
effect. But it is commonly held by the Fuqaha that, in such situation,
the estate will be divided into six parts. Father and mother will take
one part each, and three parts will be taken by the daughter. As regards
the remaining one part, it is again divided into 4 parts out of which
one part is taken by the father and 3 by the daughter. As a result, the
estate of the deceased is divided into 24 parts, out of which 15 are
taken by the daughter, 5 by the father, and 4 by the mother. But this
verdict is not without*Ishkal* , and therefore precaution must be
exercised while allocating one-fifth or one-sixth of the mother's share.

***Issue*** 2743: If the heirs of the deceased are his father, mother,
and one son only, the property is divided into 6 parts, from which one
part is taken by the father and one by the mother, and 4 by the son. And
if the deceased has several sons or several daughters, they divide the
said 4 parts equally among them. If however, he has several sons and
daughters, the 4 shares are divided among them in such a manner, that
each son gets double the share of each daughter.

***Issue*** 2744: If the heirs of deceased are only his father or mother
and one or several sons, the property is divided into 6 parts, from
which one goes to the father or mother, and 5 to the son. If there are
more than one sons, they divide those 5 parts equally among them.

***Issue*** 2745: If the deceased is survived by the father or the
mother with his sons and daughters, the estate will be divided into 6
parts. One part is taken by the father or the mother, and the remaining
5 parts are divided among the sons and daughters, in such a manner that
each son gets double the share of each daughter.

***Issue*** 2746: If the heirs of deceased are only his father or mother
and one daughter, his estate will be divided into four parts. Out of
these one part is taken by the father or the mother, and the rest goes
to the daughter.

***Issue*** 2747: If the heirs of deceased are his father or mother and
several daughters, the property is divided into 5 parts. One part is
taken by the father or the mother, and the remaining 4 parts are equally
divided among the daughters.

***Issue*** 2748: If the deceased has no children, the child of his son
gets a son's share even if it be a daughter, and the child of his
daughter gets a daughter's share even if it be a son. For example, if
the deceased has a grandson by his daughter, and a grand-daughter by his
son, the property will be divided into 3 parts, from which one part will
go to the grandson by his daughter, and 2 to the grand-daughter by his
son.

Inheritance of the Second Group
-------------------------------

***Issue*** 2749: The second group of persons, which inherits on the
basis of relationship, consists of paternal grandfather, paternal
grandmother, brothers and sisters and, if the dead person does not have
brothers and sisters, their children inherit the estate.

***Issue*** 2750: If the heirs of deceased is only one brother, or only
one sister, he or she inherits the entire estate, and if he has several
real brothers alone or several real sisters alone, they divide the
property equally among themselves. If, however, he has several real
brothers and some real sisters together, every brother gets double the
share of a sister. For example, if he has two real brothers and one real
sister, the property will be divided into 5 parts, and each brother will
get 2 parts while the sister will get one.

***Issue*** 2751: If a deceased has real brothers and real sisters, his
half brothers and sisters (whose mother is the stepmother of the
deceased) do not inherit his property. And if he has no real brothers or
real sisters, and has only one half brother or only one half sister,
(both from father's side) the entire estate will be inherited by him or
her. And if he has many paternal half brothers alone, or many paternal
half sisters alone, the estate will be divided among them equally. And,
if he has paternal half brothers together with paternal half sisters,
every brother gets double the share of every sister.

***Issue*** 2752: If the only heir of deceased is one maternal half
sister, or one maternal half brother, their father being different from
the deceased father, she or he gets the entire estate. And if he has
several maternal brothers alone, or several maternal sisters alone, or
both of them together, the estate is divided equally among them.

***Issue*** 2753: If the dead person has real brothers and sisters,
together with half brothers and sisters from father's side, and one half
brother or one half sister from maternal side, the paternal brothers and
sisters will not inherit. In this case, the estate will be divided into
6 parts, from which one part will be inherited by the maternal brother
or sister, and the remaining 5 parts will be divided by the real
brothers and sisters among themselves, in such a manner that every
brother will get double the share of every sister.

***Issue*** 2754: If a deceased has real brothers and sisters together
with paternal brothers and sisters, and several maternal brothers and
sisters, the paternal brothers and sisters will no inherit. In this
case, the estate will be divided into 3 parts, from which one part will
be divided by the maternal brothers and sisters equally among
themselves, and the remaining 2 parts will be divided among the real
brothers and sisters, in such a manner that every brother gets double
the share of every sister.

***Issue*** 2755: If the only heirs of deceased are his paternal
brothers and sisters, and one maternal brother or one maternal sister,
the estate will be divided into 6 parts. One part will be given to the
maternal brother or the maternal sister, and the remaining parts will be
divided among the paternal brothers and sisters, in such a manner that
every brother gets double the share of every sister.

***Issue*** 2756: If the only heirs of deceased is his paternal brother
and sister, and several maternal brothers and sisters, the estate will
be divided into 3 parts. One part will be shared among the maternal
brothers and sisters

equally, and the remaining 2 parts will be divided among the paternal
brothers and sisters, in such a manner that every brother gets double
the share of every sister.

***Issue*** 2757: If the brother, the sister, and the wife of deceased
are his only heirs, the wife gets her inheritance in the manner which
will be explained later, and the sister and brother get their
inheritance as stated in the foregoing rules. Also, if a woman dies and
her only heirs are her sister, her brother and her husband, the husband
gets half of the estate, and the sister and the brother inherit as
explained earlier. However, nothing is reduced from the share of
maternal brother and sister to provide for the shares of the wife or the
husband. But in the case of real brothers and real sisters, or paternal
brothers and sisters, their shares may be reduced. For example, if the
heirs of deceased are her husband, maternal brother and sister, and real
brother and sister, half of the estate will go to the husband, and one
part out of the three parts of the original estate will be given to the
maternal brother and sister, and whatever remains will be the property
of the real brother and sister. Hence, if the total estate of the
deceased is $6, $3 goes to the husband, $2 are taken by the maternal
brother and sister, and $1 will be the share of the real brother and
sister.

***Issue*** 2758: If deceased does not have sister and brother, their
share of the inheritance is given to their descendants, and the share of
maternal brother's child and maternal sister's child will be divided
among them equally. And as for the share of the paternal brother's child
and paternal sister's child, or real brother's child and real sister's
child, the commonly held principle is that every son gets twice as much
as the daughter, but it may be true that they too may get equal shares.
Therefore, it is better that they should resort to a compromise.

***Issue*** 2759: If the heir of the deceased is only one grandfather or
one grandmother, regardless of whether they are paternal or maternal,
the entire estate goes to them, and the great grandfather of the
deceased does not inherit in the presence of the grandfather. And if
only the paternal grandfather and paternal grandmother of the dead
person are the heirs, the estate will be divided into 3 parts, from
which 2 parts will be taken by the grandfather and one part will be
taken by the grandmother. And if the maternal grandfather and maternal
grandmother are the heirs, the property will be divided between them
equally.

***Issue*** 2760: If the heirs of deceased is paternal grandfather or
paternal grandmother together with maternal grandfather or maternal
grandmother, the property will be divided into 3 parts. 2 parts will go
to the paternal grandfather or paternal grandmother, and one part will
go to the maternal grandfather or maternal grandmother.

***Issue*** 2761: If the heirs of the deceased are paternal grand
parents together with maternal grand parents, the estate will be divided
into 3 parts. One part will be divided equally between the maternal
grandfather and the maternal grandmother, and the remaining 2 parts will
go to the paternal grandfather and the paternal grandmother, from which
the paternal grandfather gets twice the share of the paternal
grandmother.

***Issue*** 2762: If the only heirs of a deceased are his wife together
with his paternal grand parents, and his maternal grand parents, his
wife gets her inheritance in the manner which will be explained later.
And one of the 3 parts of the original estate of the deceased will be
given to the maternal grandfather and grandmother, to divide it equally
between them. The remaining part will be given to the paternal grand
parents, and the paternal grandfather gets twice as much as the paternal
grandmother. And if the heirs of the deceased are her husband together
with her paternal or maternal grand parents, the husband gets half of
the property, and the grand parents get their inheritance in the manner
mentioned in the foregoing rules.

***Issue*** 2763: There are a few combinations of brother or sister, or
brothers or sisters with the grand parents:

(i) That the grand parents and brothers or sister are each from the
mother's side. In that event the estate is divided among them equally,
though they are of different sex.

(ii) That all of them are from the father's side. In that case, the
property will be divided among them equally, provided that all of them
are males, or all of them are females. And if they are different, every
male will get twice as much as the female.

(iii) That the grand parents from the paternal side combine with the
real brother or sister. The rule explained in the foregoing clause will
also apply in this case. And it should be remembered that if the
paternal brother or sister of the deceased combines with real brother or
sister, those who are paternal do not inherit alone, but all of them
inherit.

(iv) That there are grand parents, paternal and maternal, all males or
all females or mixed, combined with the brothers or sisters who are
similarly of diverse categories. In this case, 1/3 of the estate will go
to the maternal relatives to be divided equally among them, regardless
of their sex. And 2/3 of the estate will go to the paternal relatives,
among whom every male gets twice as much as a female. And if there is no
difference of sex among them, and all of them are males or all of them
are females it will be divided equally among them.

(v) That paternal grand parents are combined with maternal brother or
sister. In this case, if there is only one brother or sister, he/she
gets 1/6 of the property, and if they are many, 1/3 of the property is
divided among them equally. The balance goes to the paternal grand
parents, and if both the grandfather and the grandmother are there, the
grandfather gets twice as much as the grandmother.

(vi) That maternal grand parents combine with the paternal brother. In
this case 1/3 goes to the grand parent, although he/she may be alone,
and 2/3 goes to the brother although he may be alone. If there is a
paternal sister combined with the maternal grandfather or the
grandmother, and if she is alone, she will get 1/2 of the property, and
if there are several sisters they get 2/3 of it. And in every case, the
share of the grandfather and grandmother is 1/3. And based on this
calculation, there will be a residue of 1/6 if there is only one sister.
Therefore, as an obligatory precaution, a compromise should be effected
for that extra residue.

(vii) That there are some paternal and some maternal grand parents
combined with one or more paternal brother or sister. In this case, the
share of the maternal grandfather or grandmother is 1/3, and if they are
many, it will be divided among them equally, although they are of
different sex. And the remaining 2/3 of the estate is given to the
paternal grandfather or the paternal grandmother and the paternal
brother or the paternal sister. If they are of different sex, the estate
will be divided in the ratio of one to two, and if they are all of the
same sex, it will be divided equally. And if there is a maternal brother
or maternal sister with those grand parents, the share of the maternal
grandfather or maternal grandmother, together with the maternal brother
or maternal sister will be 1/3, which will be divided among them
equally, even if they are of different sex. And the share of the
paternal grandparents will be 2/3, which be divided among them in the
ratio of one to two in the case of difference of sex, and otherwise
equally.

(viii) That there are brothers and sisters, some of whom paternal and
others maternal, combined with paternal grand parents. In this case, the
share of the maternal brother or maternal sister is 1/6, if he/she is
alone, and 1/3 if there are many of them, and it will be divided equally
among them. And as for the paternal brother or paternal sister together
with the paternal grand parents, the remaining estate will go to them,
to be divided among them equally if they are all of one sex, and if they
are different, it will be divided in the ratio of one to two. And if
there is a maternal grand parent combined with those brothers or
sisters, the total share of the maternal grandfather and maternal
grandmother with maternal brother and maternal sister is 1/3, to be
divided equally among them. The share of the paternal brother or
paternal sister will be 2/3, which will be divided among them in the
ratio of one to two, if they are of different sex, and equally if they
are of the same sex.

***Issue*** 2764: If the deceased has brothers or sisters, then the
brother's or sister's children do not inherit. However, this law does
not apply when the inheritance of brother's child or sister's child does
not clash with that of brother or sister. For example, if the dead
person has paternal brother and maternal grandfather, the paternal
brother inherits 2/3 and the maternal grandfather inherits 1/3 of the
estate. But if the deceased has a son of the maternal brother as well,
the brother's son shares with the maternal grandfather the 1/3 of the
estate.

Inheritance of the Third Group
------------------------------

***Issue*** 2765: The third group of heirs consists of paternal uncle,
paternal aunt, maternal uncle, maternal aunt and their children. As
mentioned above, the persons constituting this group inherit when none
of the persons belonging to the first two categories is present.

***Issue*** 2766: \* If the only heir of deceased is one paternal uncle
or aunt (whether he or she be the real, paternal or maternal brother or
sister of his father), he or she inherits the entire estate. And if
there are some paternal uncles alone, or aunts alone of the deceased,
and they are all real or paternal brothers and sisters of his father,
the estate will be divided equally among them. And if the survivors are
several paternal uncles together with the aunts of the deceased and all
of them are the real or the paternal brothers

and sisters of his father, then the paternal uncle will get twice the
share of the paternal aunt. For example, if two paternal uncles and one
paternal aunt are the heirs of the deceased, the estate will be divided
into 5 parts, from which the paternal aunt will get one part, and the
two paternal uncles will divide the remaining 4 parts equally between
them.

***Issue*** 2767: \* If the heirs of a deceased are several maternal
uncles or several maternal aunts, the estate will divide equally among
them. And if the survivors are maternal uncles together with the
maternal aunts, the uncles will receive twice the share of the aunts,
though, as a precaution, the uncles should compromise from the excess
they receive.

***Issue*** 2768: \* If the heirs of deceased are his paternal uncles
and paternal aunts, some of whom are the real brothers and sisters of
his father, while others are paternal or maternal half brothers and
sisters of his father, those who are paternal half brothers and sisters
will not inherit anything. And if the deceased is also survived by one
paternal uncle or one paternal aunt, who are the maternal half brother
and half sister of his father, the estate will be divided into 6 parts,
from which one part will be taken by the paternal uncle or paternal aunt
of the deceased, and the remaining will be taken by the full real
paternal uncles and paternal aunts of the deceased. If the deceased has
no real full paternal uncles and real full paternal aunts, the remaining
5 parts will be taken by those paternal uncles and paternal aunts of the
deceased who are the paternal half brothers or sisters of his father.
But, if the deceased happens to have those paternal uncles together with
paternal aunts who are the maternal half brothers and sisters of his
father, the estate will be divided into 3 parts, from which 2 parts will
be taken by the real paternal uncles and real paternal aunts of the
deceased, who are half paternal brothers and sisters of his father. Then
the remaining one part will be taken by those paternal uncles and
paternal aunts of the deceased person, who are the maternal half
brothers and sisters of his father. It is commonly held by the Fuqaha
that the uncles and aunts who are maternally connected with the father
of the deceased, should divide their share between them equally, but it
may be true that the uncles will receive twice the share of the aunts -
however, as a precaution, they should effect a compromise between them.

***Issue*** 2769: \* If a deceased has only one maternal uncle or only
one maternal aunt, he or she inherits the entire estate. And if he has a
maternal uncle together with the maternal aunt (whether they be the
full, or the paternal, or the maternal half brothers and sisters of his
mother), the estate should be divided giving the uncle twice the share
of the aunt. And since there is a probability that they should inherit
equally, observing precaution should not be ignored in that respect.

***Issue*** 2770: \* If the heirs of the deceased are one or several
maternal uncles, together with maternal aunts from the mother's side,
and full maternal uncle and full maternal aunt, and also maternal uncles
and aunts from the father's side, then to deprive the maternal uncle and
maternal aunt from the father's side is a matter of*Ishkal* . In all the
situations, the uncles will inherit twice the share of the aunts, but a
precaution by way of compromise is recommended.

***Issue*** 2771: If the heirs of deceased are one or several maternal
uncles, or one or several maternal aunts, or maternal uncle together
with maternal aunt with one or several paternal uncles, or one or
several paternal aunts, or paternal uncle together with paternal aunt,
then the estate will be divided into 3 parts from which one part will be
taken by the maternal uncle, or maternal aunt, or both of them, and the
remaining part will go to the paternal uncle, or paternal aunt, or both
of them.

***Issue*** 2772: \* If the heirs of the deceased are one maternal
uncle, or one maternal aunt together with paternal uncle and paternal
aunt, and if they are full paternal uncle and the paternal aunt or
related from the father's side, the estate will be divided into 3 parts.
One part will be taken by the maternal uncle or the maternal aunt, and
from the balance two parts of it, 3 will be given to the paternal uncle
and one part will be given to the paternal aunt. Based on this
calculation, the estate will be divided into 9 parts, from which 3 parts
will be given to maternal uncle or maternal aunt, 4 parts are given to
the paternal uncle and 2 parts are given to the paternal aunt.

***Issue*** 2773: \* If the heirs of the deceased are one maternal
uncle, or one maternal aunt together with one paternal uncle, or one
half paternal aunt related from the mother's side together with full or
half paternal uncles and aunts, the estate will be divided into 3 parts.
One part will be given to the maternal uncle or the maternal aunt, and
the remaining 2 parts will be equally divided between the paternal
uncles and aunts, with uncles taking twice the share of the aunts,
though precaution is recommended.

***Issue*** 2774: \* If the heirs of deceased are several maternal
uncles and several maternal aunts, all of whom are either full or
related from father's or mother's side, and also a paternal uncle and a
paternal aunt, the estate will be divided into 3 parts. 2 parts will be
divided between the paternal uncle and the paternal aunt as mentioned
above, and one part will be divided equally between the maternal uncles
and the maternal aunts as explained in rule no. 2770.

***Issue*** 2775: \* If the heirs of deceased is maternal uncle only, or
if there are half maternal aunts related from the mother's side together
with several maternal uncles and several maternal aunts who are either
full or half related from father's side, and also paternal uncle and
paternal aunt, the estate will be divided into 3 parts. Two of these
parts will be divided between the paternal uncle and the paternal aunt,
in the manner already mentioned, and quite likely, the remaining heirs
will share the third part equally.

***Issue*** 2776: If the deceased is not survived by paternal uncle, and
paternal aunt and maternal uncle and maternal aunt, the share to which
the paternal uncle and the paternal aunt are entitled will go to their
descendants, and the share to which the maternal uncle and maternal aunt
are entitled will go to their descendants.

***Issue*** 2777: \* If the heirs of the deceased are paternal and
maternal uncles and aunts of his father, and paternal and maternal
uncles and aunts of his mother, the estate will be divided into 3 parts.
One part will be given to the paternal and maternal uncles and aunts of
his mother, to be divided among them equally, though a precaution by way
of compromise should not be ignored. The remaining 2 parts, the same
will be again divided into 3

parts. One part will be divided as above between the father's maternal
uncle and aunt, and the remaining 2 parts will be divided as above
between the father's paternal uncle and aunt.

Inheritance By The Husband and the Wife
---------------------------------------

***Issue*** 2778: If a woman dies without any children, 1/2 of her
property is inherited by her husband, and the remaining 1/2 is given to
her other heirs. If, she has children from that or another husband, her
husband will get 1/4 of the estate, and the remaining part will be
inherited by her other heirs.

***Issue*** 2779: If a man dies childless, 1/4 of his estate will go to
his wife, and the remaining part will be given to his other heirs. And
if the man has children from that or another wife, the wife gets 1/8th
of the estate, and the remaining part will be inherited by his other
heirs. A wife does not inherit anything from the land of a house or a
garden or a farm, or from any other land, nor does she inherit from the
proceeds of such lands. She does not also inherit from that which stands
on that land, like the house and the trees, but she inherits from their
proceeds. The same rule applies to the trees and crops and buildings
standing on the land of a garden, and on agricultural land, or on any
other lands.

***Issue*** 2780: If the wife wishes to have any right of discretion
over things from which she does not inherit (for example, the land of a
residential house) she should obtain the permission of other heirs to do
so. Also, it is not permissible for other heirs to have any right of
disposal, without the permission of the wife,over those things from the
proceeds of which she inherits (for example, the value of the buildings
and trees).

***Issue*** 2781: \* If one wishes to evaluate the buildings and the
trees and other similar things, it should be calculated as assessors
usually do, that is, by estimating its value as they stand, and not as
objects uprooted or extirpated from the land. Or, they should be valued
as unrented property remaining on the land, till they are destroyed or
till they perish.

***Issue*** 2782: The canals for the flow of water fall under the
category of land, and the bricks etc, used for its construction fall
under the category of building.

***Issue*** 2783: If a deceased has more than one wives, and if he is
childless, 1/4 of the estate will be divided equally among the wives, in
the manner explained above, and if he has children, 1/8 of the estate
will be divided equally among them. And the rule applies even if the
husband may not have had sexual intercourse with some or all of them.
However, if he married a woman during a terminal illness, and did not
have sexual intercourse with her, that woman will not inherit from him
nor will she be entitled to Mahr.

***Issue*** 2784: If a woman marries a man during her illness, and dies
in that illness, her husband inherits from her even if he did not have
sexual intercourse with her.

***Issue*** 2785: If a woman is given revocable divorce, in the manner
explained in the orders relating to 'divorce', and she dies during the
waiting period of divorce (Iddah), her husband inherits from her. Also,
if the husband dies during the period of that Iddah, the wife inherits
from him. But, if one of them dies after the expiry of that period
(Iddah) or during the

period (Iddah) of irrevocable divorce, the other does not inherit from
him/her.

***Issue*** 2786: \* If a husband divorces his wife during his illness,
and dies before the expiry of twelve lunar months, the wife inherits
from him on the fulfilment of three conditions:

(i) If she has not married another man during that period. And if she
has married another man during that period, she will not inherit,
though, as a precaution, a compromise should be reached (between the
heirs and the wife).

(ii) If she had not sought divorce herself, of her own accord,
irrespective of whether she paid her husband some consideration to
obtain divorce or not. If she had herself asked for divorce, she does
not inherit.

(iii) If the husband died during the illness in which he divorced her,
as a result of that illness, or some other reason. If the husband
recovers from that illness, and dies later owing to some other cause,
the divorced wife will not inherit from him.

***Issue*** 2787: The dress which a husband gives to his wife to wear,
is to be treated as a part of his estate after his death, even if the
wife may have worn it.

Miscellaneous Rules of Inheritance
----------------------------------

***Issue*** 2788: \* The Holy Qur'an, a ring, and a sword of the
deceased, and the clothes worn by him, belong to the eldest son. And if
of the first three things, the deceased has left more than one - for
example, if he has left two copies of the Qur'an, or two rings, the
obligatory precaution is that his eldest son should make a compromise
with the other heirs in respect of those things. The travel baggage, the
gun, the dagger and other such weapons may also be included in the above
list, but, as an obligatory precaution, the eldest son may compromise
with other heirs in that regard.

***Issue*** 2789: \* If the deceased has two eldest sons, for example,
if his two sons are born of two wives at one and the same time - they
should divide his clothes, Qur'an, ring and sword equally between
themselves.

***Issue*** 2790: \* If the deceased is indebted, and if his debt is
equal to his estate or more, the four things which belong to the eldest
son, as mentioned in the preceding rule, should be given by him for the
settlement of the debt, or he should pay equal value from his own
wealth. And if the debt is less than the estate, and if the debt cannot
be set off by what remains of the estate after setting apart the four
things for the eldest son, the eldest son should give those four things,
or from his own wealth to set off the debt of the deceased. And if the
balance is adequate to clear the debt fully, even then the eldest son
should participate, as an obligatory precaution, to clear the debt as
explained above. For example, if the entire estate of the deceased is US
$60, and the articles given to the eldest son are worth $20, and the
deceased has a debt worth $30, the eldest son will proportionally pay
$10 from the four things he received from the deceased.

***Issue*** 2791: A Muslim inherits from a non-Muslim, but a non-Muslim
does not inherit from a deceased Muslim, even if he be his father or
son.

***Issue*** 2792: \* If a person kills one of his relatives
intentionally and unjustly, he does not inherit from him. But, if it was
due to some error, for

example, if he threw a stone in the air and by chance, it hit one of his
relatives and killed him, he inherits from him. Nevertheless, it is a
matter of*Ishkal* for him to inherit from the diyah (blood money) for
the killing.

***Issue*** 2793: \* Whenever it is proposed to divide the inheritance,
as a precaution, the share equal to that of one son, should be set aside
for a child who is in its mother's womb, expected to be a son, and would
inherit if he is born alive (when it is expected that only one child
will be born) and the remaining parts should be divided among the others
heirs. In fact, even if the children in the womb are expected to be more
than one, for example, if the woman is expected to give birth to twins
or triplets, as a precaution, their shares should be set aside for them.
And if, contrary to expectation, one boy or one girl was born, then
other heirs should divide the surplus among themselves.


