Rules of Salat (Part III of III)
================================

Qir'at (Reciting the Surah Al-Hamd and Other Surah of Holy Qur'an)
------------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 987: \* In the the daily obligatory prayers, one should
recite Surah al-Hamd in the first and second Rak'ats, and thereafter one
should, on the basis of precaution, recite one complete Surah. The Surah
az Zuha and Surah Inshirah are treated as one Surah in Salat, and so are
the Surah al-Fil and Quraysh.

***Issue*** 988: If the time left for Salat is little, or if a person
has to helplessly abandon the Surah because of fear that a thief, a
beast, or anything else, may do him harm, or if he has an important
work, he should not recite the other Surah. In fact, there are
situations when he should avoid it, like when the Salat time at his
disposal is limited, or when in fear.

***Issue*** 989: If a person intentionally recites Surah before Hamd,
his prayer is void, and if he does it by mistake, and realises this
while reciting it, he should abandon the Surah and recite Hamd first,
and then the Surah.

***Issue*** 990: If a person forgets to recite Hamd and Surah, or either
of them and realises after reaching the Ruku, his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 991: If a person realises before bowing for Ruku, that he
has not recited Hamd and Surah, he should recite them, and if he
realises that he has not recited the Surah, he should recite the Surah
only. But, if he realises that he has not recited Hamd only, he should
recite Hamd first and then recite the Surah again.

Moreover, if he bends but before reaching the Ruku realises that he has
not recited Hamd and Surah, or only Surah, or only Hamd, he should stand
up and act according to the foregoing rules.

***Issue*** 992: \* If a person intentionally recites one of the four
Surahs which contain verses of*Wajib* Sajdah, in Salat, he will perform
an immediate Sajdah upon reciting the verse. And if he does so, as a
precaution, his Salat will be void, and he will have to pray again. But
if he does not go to Sajdah immediately, and continues to pray, it will
be in order, though he will have committed a sin for not going to Sajdah
immediately.

***Issue*** 993: \* If a person begins reciting by mistake, a Surah
which has verses of*Wajib* Sajdah and he realises this before reaching
the verse of Sajdah, he should abandon that Surah and recite some other
Surah. But if he realises this after reciting the verse of Sajdah, he
should act as guided in the above rule (i.e. 992).

***Issue*** 994: If during Salat a man listens to the verses making
Sajdah obligatory, his prayer are in order, and on the basis of
precaution, he should make a sign of Sajdah, and should also offer
Sajdah after the prayers.

***Issue*** 995: It is not necessary to recite a Surah after Hamd
in*Mustahab* prayers, even if that prayers may have become obligatory
due to Nazr. But, as for some*Mustahab* prayers like wahshat prayers, in
which a particular Surah is recommended, if a person wishes to act
according to the rules, he should recite the prescribed Surah.

***Issue*** 996: While offering Friday prayers, or Zuhr prayers on
Friday, it is*Mustahab* that after reciting Surah al-Hamd, Surah
al-Jumu'ah should be

recited in the first Rak'at, and Surah al-Munafiqun in the second
Rak'at, and once a person begins reciting one of these Surahs he is not
allowed as per obligatory precaution, to abandon it and recite another
Surah in its place.

***Issue*** 997: \* If after Hamd, somebody begins reciting the Surah
Qul Huwallah or Qul ya ayyuhal Kafirun, he cannot abandon it and recite
some other Surah. However, if in Friday prayers and in Zuhr prayers on
Friday, he recites one of these Surahs forgetfully, instead of Surah
Jumu'ah and Surah Munafiqun, he can abandon it and recite Surah Jumu'ah
and Surah Munafiqun, but the precaution is that he should not abandon
that Surah after having read more than half of it.

***Issue*** 998: If a person recites intentionally Surah Qul Huwallah or
Surah Qul ya ayyuhal Kafirun in Friday prayers or in Zuhr prayers on
Friday, he cannot, as an obligatory precaution, abandon it to recite
Surah Jumu'ah and Surah Munafiqun, even if he may not have reached half
of it.

***Issue*** 999: \* If in Salat, a person recites a Surah other than
Surah Qul Huwallah and Surah Qul ya ayyuhal Kafirun he can abandon that
Surah before reaching half of it, and recite some other Surah. But as a
precaution, he should not abandon it after having reached half, and it
is not permissible to resort to another Surah.

***Issue*** 1000: \* If the person in Salat forgets a part of a Surah,
or cannot complete it owing to helplessness, like very little time of
Salat is left, or for some other reason, he can abandon that Surah and
recite some other Surah, even if he may have reached half of it. This
applies to Surah Qul Huwallah or Surah Qul ya ayyuhal Kafirun also.

***Issue*** 1001: \* It is*Wajib* for a man to recite Surah al-Hamd and
the other Surah loudly, while offering Fajr, Maghrib and Isha prayers,
and it is*Wajib* for a man and a woman to recite Surah al-Hamd and the
other Surah silently while offering Zuhr and Asr prayers.

***Issue*** 1002: \* As a precaution, men must take care to recite
loudly every word of Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, including their
last letters, in the prayers of Fajr, Maghrib and Isha.

***Issue*** 1003: \* A woman can recite Surah al-Hamd and other Surah in
Fajr, Maghrib and Isha prayers loudly or silently. But, if a na-Mahram
hears her voice, she should, on the basis of precaution, recite them
silently, especially if allowing him to listen is haraam.

***Issue*** 1004: \* If a person intentionally prays loudly where he
should pray silently, and vice versa, his prayer is void. But, if, he
does so owing to forgetfulness, or not knowing the rule, his prayer is
in order. And if he realises that he is doing a mistake while reciting
the Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, it is not necessary to recite
again what he has recited not following the rule.

***Issue*** 1005: If a person raises his voice unusually high while
reciting Surah al-Hamd and Surah, as if he were shouting, his prayer
will be void.

***Issue*** 1006: \* A person should learn Surahs to be recited in
Salat, so that he may not recite them incorrectly, and if one cannot by
any means learn the whole of Surah al-Hamd, he should learn as much of
it as he can and recite; but if that is a very small part, then as an
obligatory precaution, he should add to it as many verses of Qur'an that
he can remember. And if he cannot

do that, he should add some Tasbeeh to it. But if someone cannot recite
Surah al-Hamd at all, then there is no necessary replacement for it. The
recommended precaution for him is to join Salat al-Jamaat.

***Issue*** 1007: \* If a person does not know Surah al-Hamd well, but
can learn it, he should do so if the time of Salat permits. And if the
time does not permit, he should act as guided in the above rule, and his
prayers will be valid. But wherever possible, such a person should join
Salat al-Jamaat to relieve himself of the responsibility.

***Issue*** 1008: \* To take wages for teaching obligatory acts of
prayers is haraam, as a precaution, and taking wages for
teaching*Mustahab* things is permissible.

***Issue*** 1009: \* If a person does not know a certain word of Surah
al-Hamd or Surah, or does not utter it intentionally, or utters one
letter for another like, Za for Zad, or changes the inflections, by
giving movements of Fathah or Kasrah where not needed, or does not
render tashdid properly, his prayer is void.

***Issue*** 1010: If a person has learnt a word which he believes to be
correct, and recites it that way in prayers, but comes to know later
that he has been reciting it incorrectly, it is not necessary for him to
offer the prayers again.

***Issue*** 1011: \* If a person does not know whether a particular word
is to be read with Fathah or Kasrah, of if he does not know whether a
particular word has a “seen” or a “swad” in it, he should take pains to
learn that. But if he tries to recite in two or more ways, and if the
wrong or incorrect recitation is neither from the Qur'an nor any Zikr,
his prayers will be void. But if both the recitations are correct, like,
reciting the 'S' of “Siratal” with “seen” and “swad”, then the prayers
will not be affected.

***Issue*** 1012: \* The Ulama of Tajweed, that is, the art of reciting
the Qur'an, have outlined several places where “Madd” (prolonging
certain letters) is necessary. Wherever a vowel in a word precedes
another vowel, say, 'alif' or 'hamza', it has to be prolonged, so that
the utterances of each word is clear. But in Salat, its validity does
not depend upon following these rules, so if one does not strictly
follow them, his Salat will not be void. Except in “Wal-dhaalleen” (the
last word of Surah al-Hamd) one should exercise certain care to prolong,
so that tashdid is properly pronounced.

***Issue*** 1013: \* The recommended precaution is that while offering
prayers, one should not recite the ending word of any Ayat with Waqf if
one wishes to join it to the next Ayat. Nor should one render it without
waqf and join. For example, if you recite “ar Rahmanir Rahimi” and then
wait before starting the next, it is not proper. You should continue
with no waiting. Similarly, in the same Ayat, that is, “ar Rahmanir
Rahim”, if you read the last letter “mim” with sakin, you should not
attach the “mim” to “Maliki Yawmi ddin”.

***Issue*** 1014: \* In the third and fourth Rak'ats of prayers, one may
either read only Surah al-Hamd orTasbihat Arba'ah - Subhanallahi wal
hamdu lillahi wa la ilaha illal lahu wallahu Akbar which may be said
once, although it is better that it should be said three times. It is
also permissible to recite Surah al-Hamd in one Rak'at, and Tasbihat
Arba'ah in the other, but it is better to recite Tasbihat in both.

***Issue*** 1015: \* When time for Salat is short, one must recite
Tasbihat Arba'ah once, and if even that much cannot be recited within
time, then he must say only “Subhanallah” once.

***Issue*** 1016: \* It is obligatory for men and women that in the
third and fourth Rak'ats, they should recite Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat
Arba'ah silently.

***Issue*** 1017: \* If a person recites Surah al-Hamd in the third and
fourth Rak'ats, it is not obligatory for him to recite its “Bismilla”
silently, except in the case of one who is following in congregational
prayers, for whom, as an obligatory precaution, it is necessary that
“Bismillah” is recited silently.

***Issue*** 1018: A person who cannot learn Tasbihat Arba'ah, or cannot
pronounce them correctly, should recite Surah al-Hamd in the third and
fourth Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1019: If a person recites Tasbihat Arba'ah in the first two
Rak'ats, thinking that they are the last two Rak'ats, and if he realises
the error before Ruku, he should recite Surah al-Hamd and Surah. But if
he realises this during or after the Ruku, his prayer is in order.

***Issue*** 1020: If a person recites Surah al-Hamd in the last two
Rak'ats, thinking that they are the first two Rak'ats, or recites Surah
al-Hamd in the first two Raka'ts, thinking that they are the last two
Rak'ats, his prayer is in order, whether he realises the mistake before
or after Ruku.

***Issue*** 1021: \* If in the third or fourth Rak'at, a person wanted
to recite Surah al-Hamd, but instead of that,Tasbihat Arba'ah came on
his tongue, or if he wishes to recite Tasbihat Arba'ah but Surah al-Hamd
comes on his tongue, he should abandon it and recite Tasbihat Arba'ah or
Surah al-Hamd again with the intentions. However, if the recitation
which came on his tongue was the one to which he was habituated, then he
should complete it and his prayers will be valid.

***Issue*** 1022: If a person who has the habit of reciting Tasbihat
Arba'ah in the third and fourth Rak'ats, ignores his habit and begins
reciting Hamd, with the intention of performing his obligation, it will
be sufficient, and it will not be not necessary for him to recite Surah
al-Hamd or Tasbihat Arba'ah again.

***Issue*** 1023: In the third and fourth Rak'ats, it is*Mustahab* to
seek forgiveness from Allah after Tasbihat Arba'ah. That is, one should
say, Astaghfirullaha Rabbi wa Atubu Illayhi, or one should say,
Allahummaghfir li. And before bowing for Ruku, while he is uttering
Istighfar or has finished it, if he doubts whether he has read al-Hamd
or Tasbihat or not, he should read either of them.

***Issue*** 1024: \* If the person doubts while in Ruku of third or
fourth Rak'at, whether or not he has recited Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat
Arba'ah, he should ignore his doubt. Similarly, he should ignore the
doubt if it occurs while bowing for Ruku.

***Issue*** 1025: If a person doubts whether he has pronounced a verse
or a word correctly, like, whether he has uttered Qul Huwallahu Ahad
correctly or not, he may ignore his doubt. However, if he repeats that
verse or word correctly as a precautionary measure, there is no harm in
it. And if he doubts often he may repeat as many times. However, if it
becomes an obsession,

and he still goes on reading it again, as a recommended precaution, he
should pray all over again.

***Issue*** 1026: It is*Mustahab* that in the first Rak'at one should
say A'uzubillahi Minash shaytanir Rajim before reciting Surah al-Hamd,
and in the first and second Rak'ats of Zuhr and Asr prayers one should
say Bismillah loudly. It is*Mustahab* also to recite Surah al-Hamd and
other Surah distinctly, with a pause at the end of every verse i.e. not
joining it with the next verse, and while reciting Surah al-Hamd and
Surah, one should pay attention to the meanings of each verse. And it
is*Mustahab* to say, Alhamdulillahi Rabbil 'Alamin after the completion
of Surah al-Hamd by the Imam in the congregation, and by himself, if he
is praying alone. And after reciting Surah Qul huwallahu Ahad he should
say, “Kazalikallahu Rabbi” once, twice or three times or “Kazalikallahu
Rabbuna” three times. Similarly, it is*Mustahab* to pause a little after
reciting the Surah, then say Takbir, before going to Ruku or reciting
Qunut.

***Issue*** 1027: It is*Mustahab* that in all the prayers, one should
recite Surah Inna Anzalnahu in the first Rak'at, and Surah Qul huwallahu
Ahad in the second Rak'at.

***Issue*** 1028: It is Makrooh not to recite Surah Qul huwallahu Ahad
even in one of the daily prayers.

***Issue*** 1029: It is Makrooh to recite the whole ofSurah Qul
huwallahu Ahad in one breath.

***Issue*** 1030: It is Makrooh to recite in the second Rak'at the same
Surah, which one has recited in the first Rak'at. However, if one
recites Surah Qul huwallahu Ahad in both the Rak'ats, it is not Makrooh.

Ruku (Bowing)
-------------

***Issue*** 1031: \* In every Rak'at, a person offering prayers should,
after reciting the Surahs (Qira'at), bow to an extent that he is able to
rest his finger tips on his knees. This act is called Ruku.

***Issue*** 1032: \* If the person performs Ruku in an unusual manner,
like, if he bends towards left or right, his Ruku is not correct even if
his hands reach his knees.

***Issue*** 1034: Bending should be with the niyyat of Ruku. If a person
bends for some other purpose (e.g. to kill an insect), he cannot reckon
it as Ruku. He will have to stand up and bend again for Ruku, and in so
doing, he will not have added any Rukn, nor will his prayers be void.

***Issue*** 1035: If a person has abnormally long hands, so that if he
bends a little they reach his knees, or if his knees are lower than
usual, so that he has to bend himself lower to make his hands reach his
knees, he should follow the normal bowing by the others.

***Issue*** 1036: A person who performs Ruku in the sitting position,
should bow down till his face is parallel to his knees. And it is better
that he should bow down till his face reaches near the place of Sajdah.

***Issue*** 1037: It is better that in normal situations one should say
in Ruku, Subhanallah three times or Subhana Rabbiyal 'Azimi wa bi hamdih
once. But actually, uttering any Zikr to this extent is sufficient.
However, if Salat time is short, or if one is under any pressure, it
will be sufficient to say Subhanallah once.

***Issue*** 1038: The Zikr of Ruku should be uttered in succession, and
in correct Arabic, and it is*Mustahab* that it should be uttered 3, 5 or
7 times or more than that.

***Issue*** 1039: \* In Ruku, the body should be steady, and one should
not purposely move or shake oneself. And as a precaution, one should not
have any movement when reciting the obligatory Zikr.

***Issue*** 1040: If at the time of uttering the obligatory Zikr of
Ruku, he loses steadiness because of uncontrollable vigorous movement,
it will be better that after his body resumes steadiness he repeats the
Zikr. However, if the movement is so negligible that steadiness is not
lost, or if he just moves his fingers, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 1041: If a person intentionally recites the Zikr of Ruku
before he has properly bowed down, and before his body becomes still,
his prayers will be void.

***Issue*** 1042: \* If a person intentionally raises his head from Ruku
before completing obligatory Zikr, his prayer is void. If he raises his
head by mistake, and if he has not completely ceased to be in Ruku and
he recollects that he has not completed the Zikr of Ruku, he should make
himself steady and recite the Zikr. And if he recollects after he has
arisen totally from Ruku, his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1043: \* If a person is unable to remain in the state of
Ruku all the time while reciting the Zikr, then the recommended
precaution is that he should complete the remainder while standing up
from Ruku.

***Issue*** 1044: If a person cannot remain steady during Ruku owing to
some disease etc, his prayers are in order. But he should complete the
obligatory part of Zikr, as explained, before totally rising from Ruku.

***Issue*** 1045: \* If a person cannot bow down for Ruku properly, he
should lean on something and perform Ruku. And if he cannot perform Ruku
even after he has leaned, he should bow down to the maximum extent he
can, so that it could be customarily recognised as a Ruku. And if he
cannot bend at all, he should make a sign for Ruku with his head.

***Issue*** 1046: If a person supposed to make a sign with his head for
Ruku is unable to do so, he should close his eyes with the niyyat of
Ruku, and then recite Zikr. And for rising from Ruku, he should open his
eyes. And if he is unable to do even that, he should, as a precaution,
make a niyyat of Ruku in his mind, and then make a sign of Ruku with his
hands and recite Zikr.

***Issue*** 1047: If a person cannot perform Ruku while standing, but
can bend for it while sitting, he should offer prayers standing and
should make a sign with his head for Ruku. And the recommended
precaution is that he should offer another prayers in which he would sit
down at the time of Ruku, and bow down for it.

***Issue*** 1048: \* If some one raises his head after reaching Ruku,
and bows down twice to the extent of Ruku, his prayer is void.

***Issue*** 1049: After the completion of the Zikr of Ruku, one should
stand straight, and proceed to Sajdah after the body has become steady.
If one goes to Sajdah intentionally before standing erect, or before the
body is steady, the prayers are void.

***Issue*** 1050: \* If a person forgets to perform Ruku, remembering it
before Sajdah, he should stand up first, and then go into Ruku. It will
not be proper for him to go into Ruku in a bent position.

***Issue*** 1051: \* If a person offering prayers remembers after his
forehead reaches the earth, that he has not performed Ruku, it is
necessary that he should return to standing position and then perform
Ruku. But, if he remembers this in the second Sajdah, his prayers are
void.

***Issue*** 1052: It is*Mustahab* that before going into Ruku, a person
should say Takbir while he is standing erect, and in Ruku, he should
push his knees back, keep his back flat, stretch forth his neck, keep it
in line with his back, look between his two feet, say Salawat before or
after Zikr. And when he rises after Ruku, it is*Mustahab* to stand
erect, and in a state of steadiness say Sami'allahu liman hamidah.

***Issue*** 1053: It is*Mustahab* for women that while performing Ruku,
they should keep their hands higher than their knees, and should not
push back their knees.

Sujood
------

***Issue*** 1054: \* A person offering prayers should perform two
sajdahs after the Ruku, in each Rak'at of the obligatory as well
as*Mustahab* prayers. Sajdah means that one should place one's forehead
on earth in a special manner, with the intention of humility (before
Allah).

While performing Sajdahs during prayers, it is obligatory that both the
palms and the knees, and both the big toes are placed on the ground.

***Issue*** 1055: \* Two Sajdahs together are a “Rukn” (elemental), and
if a person omits to perform two Sajdah in one Rak'at of an obligatory
prayers, whether intentionally or owing to forgetfulness, or adds two
more Sajdahs, his prayers are void.

***Issue*** 1056: If a person omits or adds one Sajdah intentionally,
his prayers become void. And if he omits or adds one Sajdah forgetfully,
the rules regarding it will be explained later.

***Issue*** 1057: \* If a person who can keep his forehead on the
ground, does not do so whether intentionally or forgetfully, he has not
performed Sajdah, even if other parts of his body may have touched the
ground. But, if he places his forehead on the earth, but forgets to keep
other parts of his body on the ground, or forgets to utter the Zikr, his
Sajdah is in order.

***Issue*** 1058: \* It is better in normal situation to say
Subahanallah three times, or Subhana Rabbiy al-A'la wa bi hamdhi once.
And he should utter these words in succession and in correct Arabic.
Actually, as an obligatory precaution, uttering any Zikr to this extent
is sufficient. And it is*Mustahab* that Subhana Rabbiyal A'la wa bi
hamdhi should be said three, five or seven times, or more.

***Issue*** 1059: \* In the Sajdah, the body should be steady, and one
should not move or shake oneself purposely, and as a precaution, one
should be totally steady in Sajdah even while one is not engaged in any
obligatory Zikr.

***Issue*** 1060: If a person intentionally utters the Zikr of Sajdah
before his forehead reaches the ground, and his body becomes steady, or
if he raises

his head from Sajdah intentionally before the Zikr is completed, his
prayers are void.

***Issue*** 1061: \* If a person utters the Zikr of Sajdah by mistake,
before his forehead reaches the ground and realises his mistake before
he raises his head from Sajdah, he should utter the Zikr again, when his
body is steady.

***Issue*** 1062: If after raising his head from Sajdah, a person
realises that he has done so before the completion of the Zikr of
Sajdah, his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1063: \* If at the time of uttering Zikr of Sajdah, a person
intentionally lifts one of his seven limbs from the ground, his Salat
will be void. But if he lifts the limbs, other than the forehead, when
he is not reciting anything, and then places them back again, there will
be no harm, unless that movement renders his body unsteady, in which
case, Salat will be void.

***Issue*** 1064: If a person raises his forehead from the ground by
mistake, before the completion of the Zikr of Sajdah, he should not
place it on the ground again, he should treat it as one Sajdah. However,
if he raises other parts of the body from the ground by mistake, he
should place them back on the ground and utter the Zikr.

***Issue*** 1065: After the Zikr of the first Sajdah is completed, one
should sit till the body is steady, and then perform Sajdah again.

***Issue*** 1066: \* The place where a person places his forehead for
Sajdah should not be higher than four joined fingers, compared to where
he places his knees and the tips of the toes. As a matter of obligatory
precaution, the place of his forehead should not be more than four
joined fingers lower or higher than the place where he stands.

***Issue*** 1067: \* If a person prays on a sloped ground, whose slant
may not be known exactly, and if his forehead goes higher or lower than
the place where he keeps his knees and tips of the toes by a span of
four joined fingers, his Salat will be a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 1068: \* If a person places his forehead by mistake, on a
thing which is higher than the span of four joined fingers compared to
the place where his knees and the toes are, and if it so high that it
does not look like a normal Sajdah, he should raise his head and place
on a thing which is not as high. And if the height does not change the
appearance of the Sajdah, and his attention is drawn to it after
completing the obligatory Zikr, he should raise his head and may
complete the prayers. But if his attention is drawn to it before the
obligatory Zikr, he should gradually push or move his forehead to a
lower level, and recite the obligatory Zikr. And if that is not
possible, he should recite the obligatory Zikr and complete his prayer.
It would not be necessary for him to repeat the prayers.

***Issue*** 1069: \* It is necessary that there should be nothing
between the forehead of the person offering prayers, and the thing on
which he offers Sajdah. If the mohr (sajdagah) is so dirty that the
forehead does not reach the mohr itself, the Sajdah is void. But if only
the colour of mohr has changed, there is no harm.

***Issue*** 1070: In Sajdah a person offering prayers should place his
two palms on the ground. In a state of helplessness, there will be no
harm in

placing the back of the hands on the ground, and if even this is not
possible, he should, on the basis of precaution, place the wrists of
hands on the ground. And if he cannot do even this, he should place any
part of the body up to his elbow on the ground, and if even that is not
possible it is sufficient to place the arms on the ground.

***Issue*** 1071: \* In Sajdah, a person should place his two big toes
on the ground, but it is not necessary to place the tips of the toes. If
he places the outer or the inner parts of the toes, it will be proper.
But if he places, instead other smaller toes on the ground, or the outer
part of his feet, or if his big toe does not rest on the ground due to
very long nails, his Salat will be void. And if a person does not follow
this rule due to ignorance or carelessness, he has to pray again.

***Issue*** 1072: If a part of the big toe is cut off, one should place
the remaining part of it on the ground, and if nothing of it has
remained or what has remained is too short, he should, on the basis of
precaution, place the other toes on the ground, but if he has no toes at
all, he should place on the ground whatever part of the foot has
remained.

***Issue*** 1073: \* If a person performs Sajdah in an unusual manner,
like if he rests his chest and stomach on the ground, or stretches his
feet, his Salat will be correct and valid if it still appears like a
normal Sajdah. But if it appears more like sleeping on one's stomach,
rather than a Sajdah, his Salat will be void.

***Issue*** 1074: The mohr (sajdagah) or other thing on which a person
performs Sajdah, should be Clean (*tahir/pak* ). If, he places the mohr
on a najis carpet, or if one side of the mohr is najis, and he places
his forehead on its Clean (*tahir/pak* ) part, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 1075: \* If there is a sore or a wound etc. in the forehead
of a person, making him unable to rest his forehead on the ground, and
if the sore or the wound has not covered the whole of the forehead, he
should perform Sajdah with the unaffected part of the forehead. And if
it becomes necessary to dig a hole, or a pit so that the part with the
sore or the wound stays there, while the healthy part is on the ground,
he should do so.

***Issue*** 1076: \* If the sore or the wound has covered the entire
forehead, he should perform Sajdah with other parts of his face. As an
obligatory precaution, he should perform Sajdah with his chin, and it
that is not possible, with one of the two sides of the forehead. When it
is not possible to perform Sajdah with the face in any way, he should
perform Sajdah by sign.

***Issue*** 1077: \* If a person can sit but cannot make his forehead
reach the ground, he should bow as much as he can, and should place the
mohr or any other allowable thing on something high, and place his
forehead on it in such a way that it may be said that he has performed
Sajdah. But his palms, his knees, and toes should be on the ground as
usual.

***Issue*** 1078: \* If a person cannot find something high on which he
may place the mohr, or any other allowable thing, and if he cannot find
any person who would raise the mohr etc. for him, then as precaution, he
should raise it with his hand and do Sajdah on it.

***Issue*** 1079: \* If a person cannot perform Sajdah at all, he should
make a sign for it with his head, and if he cannot do even that, he
should make a sign with his eyes. And if he cannot make a sign even with
his eyes he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, make a sign
for Sajdah with his hands etc. and should make a niyyat for Sajdah in
his mind, and recite the obligatory Zikr.

***Issue*** 1080: \* If the forehead of a person is raised involuntarily
from the place of Sajdah, he should not, if possible, allow it to reach
the place of Sajdah again, and this will be treated as one Sajdah even
if he may not have uttered the Zikr of Sajdah. And if he cannot control
his head, and it reaches the place of Sajdah again involuntarily, both
of them will be reckoned as one Sajdah, and if he has not uttered the
Zikr, as a recommended precaution, he will do so with the niyyat of
Qurbat.

***Issue*** 1081: \* At a place where a person has to observe taqayyah
(concealing one's faith in dangerous situation) he can perform Sajdah on
a carpet, or other similar things, and it is not necessary for him to go
elsewhere, or delay the prayers so that he is able to pray freely at
that place without taqayyah. But if he finds that he can perform Sajdah
on a mat, or any other allowed objects, without any impediment, then he
should not perform Sajdah on a carpet or things like it.

***Issue*** 1082: If a person performs Sajdah on a mattress filled with
feathers, or any other similar thing, his Sajdah will be void if his
body cannot remain steady.

***Issue*** 1083: If a person is obliged to offer prayers on a muddy
ground, and if no hardship will be caused to him if his body and dress
become soiled with mud, he should perform Sajdah and tashahhud as usual.
If it is going to prove extremely hard for him, he should make a sign
for Sajdah with his head while he is standing, and recite tashahhud in
the standing position. His prayers will be in order.

***Issue*** 1084: \* The obligatory precaution is that in the first
Rak'at and in the third Rak'at, which do not contain tashahhud (like the
third Rak'at in Zuhr, Asr and Isha prayers) one should sit for a while
after the second Sajdah before rising.

Things on which Sajdah is Allowed
---------------------------------

***Issue*** 1085: \* Sajdah should be performed on earth, and on those
things which are not edible nor worn, and on things which grow from
earth (e.g. wood and leaves of trees).

It is not permissible to perform Sajdah on things which are used as food
or dress (e.g. wheat, barley and cotton etc.), or on things which are
not considered to be parts of the earth (e.g. gold, silver, etc.). And
in the situation of helplessness, asphalt and tar will have preference
over other non-allowable things.

***Issue*** 1086: \* Sajdah should not be performed on the vine leaves,
when they are delicate and hence edible. Otherwise, there is no
objection.

***Issue*** 1087: It is in order to perform Sajdah on things which grow
from the earth, and serve as fodder for animals (e.g. grass, hay etc.).

***Issue*** 1088: \* It is in order to perform Sajdah on flowers which
are not edible, and also on medicinal herbs which grow from the earth.

***Issue*** 1089: \* Performing Sajdah on a grass which is eaten in some
parts of the world, but not in the rest, but it is classified as edible,
will not be permissible. Similarly, Sajdah on raw fruits is not allowed.

***Issue*** 1090: It is allowed to perform Sajdah on limestone and
gypsum, but the recommended precaution is that Sajdah should not be
optionally performed on baked gypsum, lime, brick and baked earthenware
etc.

***Issue*** 1091: \* It is in order to perform Sajdah on paper, if it is
manufactured from allowed sources like wood or grass, and also if it is
made from cotton or flax. But if it is made from silk etc., Sajdah on it
will not be permissible.

***Issue*** 1092: Turbatul Husayn is the best thing for performing
Sajdah. After it, there are earth, stone and grass, in order of
priority.

***Issue*** 1093: \* If a person does not possess anything on which it
is allowed to perform Sajdah, or, even if he possesses such a thing, he
cannot perform Sajdah on it due to severe heat or cold, he should
perform Sajdah on asphalt or tar, and if that is not possible, on his
dress or the back of his hand, or on any thing on which it is not
permissible to perform Sajdah optionally. However, in such a situation,
the recommended precaution is that as long as it is possible to perform
Sajdah on his dress he should not do Sajdah on any other thing.

***Issue*** 1094: The Sajdah performed on mud, and on soft clay on which
one's forehead cannot rest steadily, is void.

***Issue*** 1095: If the mohr sticks to the forehead in the first
Sajdah, it should be removed from the forehead for the second Sajdah.

***Issue*** 1096: \* If a thing on which a person performs Sajdah gets
lost while he is offering prayers, and he does not possess any other
thing on which Sajdah is allowed, he can act as explained in rule 1093,
irrespective of whether the time for Salat is limited or ample.

***Issue*** 1097: \* If a person realises in the state of Sajdah that he
has placed his forehead on a thing on which Sajdah is void, and if he
becomes aware of it after completing the obligatory Zikr, he can raise
his head and continue with his prayers. But if he becomes aware of it
before reciting the obligatory Zikr, he should gradually slide or move
his head onto an allowed object, and recite the Zikr. But if that is not
possible, he should recite the obligatory Zikr and continue with his
Salat. His prayers in both cases will be valid.

***Issue*** 1098: \* If a person realises after Sajdah, that he had
placed his forehead on a thing which is not permissible for Sajdah,
there is no objection.

***Issue*** 1099: It is haraam to perform Sajdah for anyone other than
Almighty Allah. Some people place their foreheads on earth before the
graves of the holy Imams. If this is done to thank Allah, there is no
harm in it, but otherwise it is haraam.

The*Mustahab* and Makrooh Things in Sajdah

***Issue*** 1100: Certain things are*Mustahab* in Sajdah:

• It is*Mustahab* to say Takbir before going to Sajdah. A person who
prays standing, will do so after having stood up from Ruku, and a person
who prays sitting will do so after having sat properly.

• While going into Sajdah, a man should first place his hands on the
ground, and woman should first place her knees on the ground.

• The person offering prayers should place his nose on a mohr, or on any
other thing on which Sajdah is allowed.

• While performing Sajdah, fingers should be kept close to each other,
parallel to the ears, with their tips towards Qibla.

• While in Sajdah one should pray to Allah, and express his wishes, and
should recite this supplication: Ya Khayral Mas'ulin wa Ya Khayral
Mu'tin, Urzuqni warzuq 'Ayali Min Fazlika Fa Innaka Zulfazlil 'Azim - O
You Who are the best from whom people seek their needs, and O You, Who
are the best bestower of gifts! Give me and the members of my family
sustenance with Your grace. Undoubtedly You possess the greatest grace).

• After performing Sajdah, one should sit on his left thigh, placing the
instep of the right foot on the sole of the left foot.

• After every Sajdah, when a person has sat down and his body is
composed, one should say takbir.

• When his body is steady after the first Sajdah, he should
say:”Astaghfirullaha Rabbi wa Atubu Ilayhi”.

• He should say Allahu Akbar for going into second Sajdah, when his body
is steady.

• It is*Mustahab* to prolong the Sajdah, and when sitting after the
Sajdah, to place one's hands on the thighs.

• He should recite Salawat while in prostrations.

• At the time of rising, he should raise his hands from the ground,
after raising his knees.

• Men should not make their elbows and stomach touch the ground; they
should keep their arms separated from their sides. And women should
place their elbows and stomachs on the ground, and should join their
limbs with one another.

• Other*Mustahab* acts of Sajdah have been mentioned in detailed books.

***Issue*** 1101: \* It is Makrooh to recite the holy Qur'an in Sajdah.
It is also Makrooh to blow off the dust from the place of Sajdah, and
if, by so doing, one utters anything intentionally, the prayers will be,
as a precaution, void. Besides these, there are other Makrooh acts,
which are given in detailed books.

Obligatory Sajdahs in the Holy Qur'an
-------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1102: Upon reciting or hearing any of the following verses
of the holy Qur'an, the performance of Sajdah becomes obligatory:

• Surah as-Sajdah, 32:15

• Surah Ha Mim Sajdah, 41:38

• Surah an-Najm, 53:62

• Surah al-'Alaq, 96:19

Whenever a person recites the verse or hears it when recited by someone
else, he should perform Sajdah immediately when the verse ends, and if
he forgets to perform it, he should do it as and when he remembers. If
one hears the verse without any expectation, in an involuntary
situation, the Sajdah is not obligatory, though it is better to perform
it.

***Issue*** 1103: \* If a person hears the Sajdah verse, and recites it
himself also, he should perform two Sajdahs.

***Issue*** 1104: If a person hears a verse of Sajdah, while he is in
Sajdah other than that of Salat, or recites it himself, he should raise
his head from that Sajdah, and perform another one.

***Issue*** 1105: \* If a person hears the verse of obligatory Sajdah
from a person who is asleep, or one who is insane, or from a child who
knows nothing of the Qur'an, it will be obligatory upon him to perform
Sajdah. But if he hears from a gramophone or a tape recorder, Sajdah
will not be obligatory. Similarly, the Sajdah will not be*Wajib* if he
listens to a taped recitation from radio. But if there is a person
reciting from the radio station, and he recites the verse of Sajdah, it
will be obligatory to perform Sajdah.

***Issue*** 1106: \* As an obligatory precaution, the place where a
person performs an obligatory Sajdah upon hearing the verse, should not
be a usurped one, and, as a recommended precaution, the place where he
places his forehead, should not be higher or lower than a span of four
joined fingers than the place where his knees and tips of the toes rest.
However, it is not necessary to be in Wudhu or Ghusl, or to face Qibla,
nor is it necessary to conceal one's private parts or to ensure that the
body and the place where he has to place his forehead are Clean
(*tahir/pak* ). Moreover, the conditions for dress in Salat do not apply
to the performance of these obligatory Sajdah.

***Issue*** 1107: \* The obligatory precaution is that in the obligatory
Sajdah caused by the Qur'anic verse, a person should place his forehead
on a mohr, or any other thing on which Sajdah is allowed, and also one
should keep other parts of one's body on the ground, as required in a
Sajdah of prayers.

***Issue*** 1108: When a person performs the obligatory Sajdah upon
hearing the relevant verse, it will be sufficient even if he does not
recite any Zikr. However, it is*Mustahab* to recite Zikr, preferably the
following: La ilaha illal lahu haqqan haqqa; La ilaha illal lahu imanan
wa tasdiqa; la ilaha illal lahu 'ubudiyyatan wa riqqa; Sajadtu laka ya
Rabbi ta'abbudan wa riqqa la mustankifan wa la mustak biran bal ana
'abdun zalilun za'ifun kha'ifun mustajir.

Tashahhud
---------

***Issue*** 1109: \* In the second unit of all obligatory prayers, and
in the third unit of Maghrib prayers and in the fourth unit of Zuhr, Asr
and Isha prayers, one should sit after the second prostration with a
tranquil body, and recite tashahhud thus: “Ash hadu an la ilaha illal
lahu wahdahu la sharika lah, wa ash hadu anna Muhammadan 'Abduhu wa
Rasuluh, Alla humma salli 'ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad”. And it will
be sufficient if one recited the tashahhud this way: Ash hadu an la
ilaha illal lahu was ash hadu anna Muhammadan Sallal lahu Alayhi Wa
Aalihi Abduhu Wa rasuluh.

It is also necessary to recite tashahhud while offering Witr (in Salat
al-Shab) prayers.

***Issue*** 1110: The words of tashahhud should be recited in correct
Arabic, and in usual succession.

***Issue*** 1111: \* If a person forgets tashahhud, and rises and
remembers before Ruku, he should sit down to recite it, and then stand
up again. He

will then continue with his prayers. After the prayers, it is a
recommended precaution that he should perform two Sajda al-Sahv for the
additional standing. But if he remembers this in Ruku or thereafter, he
should complete the prayers and after the salam of prayers, should, as a
recommended precaution, perform the qadha of tashahhud. He should
perform two sajdatus sahv for the forgotten tashahhud.

***Issue*** 1112: It is*Mustahab* to sit on the left thigh during
tashahhud, and to place the upper part of the right foot on the sole of
the left foot and to say: 'Al-hamdu lillah' or 'Bismillahi wa billahi
wal-hamdu lillahi wa khayrul asma'i lillah' before reciting tashahhud.

It is also*Mustahab* to place one's hands on one's thighs, with joined
fingers, and to look at one's laps, and to say this after tashahhud and
salawat: Wa taqabbal shafa'atahu warfa' darajatahu.

***Issue*** 1113: It is*Mustahab* for women to keep their thighs close
to each other when reciting tashahhud.

Salam in the Prayers
--------------------

***Issue*** 1114: While a person sits after reciting tashahhud in the
last Rak'at, and his body is tranquil, it is*Mustahab* to say: Assalamu
'alayka ayyuhan Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. Then he should
say: Assalamu Alaykum and as a recommended precaution add to it Wa
Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh. Alternatively, he can say: Assalamu Alayna Wa
Ala Ibadi llahis Salihin. But if he recites this Salam, then as per
obligatory precaution, he must follow it up with saying: Assalamu
Alaykum.

***Issue*** 1115: If a person forgets the salam of prayers, and
remembers when the form of Salat has not be disrupted, nor has he
performed any act, which if done intentionally or forgetfully,
invalidates the prayers (e.g. turning away from Qibla), he should recite
the salam and his prayers will be valid.

***Issue*** 1116: \* If a person forgets the salam of prayers, and
remembers after the form of prayers has been disrupted, or after he has
performed an act which if done intentionally or forgetfully, invalidates
the prayers (e.g. turning away from Qibla), his prayers are in order.

Tartib (Sequence)
-----------------

***Issue*** 1117: If a person intentionally changes the sequence of the
prayers, for example, if he recites the other surah before reciting
Surah al-Hamd, or performs the two Sajdah before Ruku, his prayers are
void.

***Issue*** 1118: \* If a person forgets a rukn (elemental part) of the
prayers, and performs the next rukn, like, before performing Ruku if he
performs the two Sajdah, his prayers would become void, as a measure of
precaution.

***Issue*** 1119: If a person forgets a rukn, and performs an act after
it which is not a rukn, like, if he recites tashahhud without performing
the two Sajdah, he should perform the rukn and should recite again the
part which he performed erroneously, earlier than the rukn.

***Issue*** 1120: If a person forgets a thing which is not a rukn, and
performs a rukn which comes after it, like, if he forgets Surah al-Hamd
and begins performing Ruku, his prayers is in order.

***Issue*** 1121: If a person forgets an act which is not a rukn, and
performs the next act which too, is not a rukn, like, if he forgets
Surah al-Hamd and recites the other Surah, he should perform what he has
forgotten, and then recite again the thing which he mistakenly recited
earlier.

***Issue*** 1122: If a person performs the first Sajdah thinking that it
is the second one, or performs the second one under the impression that
it is the first Sajdah, his prayer is in order; his first Sajdah will be
treated as the first one, and his second Sajdah will be treated as the
second one.

Muwalat (Maintenance of Succession)
-----------------------------------

***Issue*** 1123: A person should maintain continuity during prayers,
that is he should perform various acts of prayers, like, Ruku, two
Sajdah and tashahhud, in continuous succession, and he should recite the
Zikr etc. also in usual succession. If he allows an undue interval
between different acts, till it becomes difficult to visualise that he
is praying, his prayers will be void.

***Issue*** 1124: If a person in Salat forgetfully allows a gap between
letters, or words, and if the gap is not big enough so that the form of
the prayers is disrupted, he should repeat those letters or words in the
usual manner, provided that he has not proceeded to the ensuing rukn.
And he will repeat those lines which were read in continuation. But if
he has already got into the ensuing rukn, then his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1125: \* Prolonging Ruku and Sajdah, or reciting long
Surahs, does not break Muwalat.

Qunut
-----

***Issue*** 1126: It is*Mustahab* that qunut be recited in all
obligatory and*Mustahab* prayers before the Ruku of the second Rak'at,
and it is also*Mustahab* that qunut be recited in the Witr (Salat
al-Shab) prayers before Ruku, (although that prayer is of one Rak'at
only).

In Friday Prayers there is one qunut in every Rak'at. In Salat al-Ayaat,
there are five qunut, and in Eid Prayers there are five qunut in the
first Rak'at, and four in the second Rak'at. In the prayers of
Shafa',which is a part of Salat al-Shab, qunut is to be performed with
the niyyat of Raja'.

***Issue*** 1127: It is also*Mustahab* that while reciting qunut, a
person keeps his hands in front of his face, turning the palms facing
the sky, and keeping both, the hands and the fingers, close together. It
is*Mustahab* to look at the palms in qunut.

***Issue*** 1128: Any Zikr in qunut is sufficient, even if he says,
'Subhanallah' only once. It is, however, better to make the following
supplication: La ilaha illallahul Halimul Karim, La ilaha illallahul
'Aliyyul 'Azim, Subhanallahi Rabbis samawatis sab', wa Rabbil 'arazinas
sab', wama fi hinna wama bayna hunna, wa Rabbil 'arshil 'azim, wal hamdu
lillahi Rabbil'alamin.

***Issue*** 1129: It is*Mustahab* that qunut is recited loudly. However,
if a person is offering prayers in congregation, and if the Imam can
hear his voice, it will not be*Mustahab* for him to recite qunut loudly.

***Issue*** 1130: If a person does not recite qunut intentionally, there
is no qadha for it. And if he forgets it, and remembers before reaching
Ruku, it is*Mustahab* that he should stand up and recite it. And if he
remembers while

performing Ruku, it is*Mustahab* that he should perform its qadha after
Ruku. And if he remembers it while performing Sajdah, it is*Mustahab*
that he should perform its qadha after Salam.

Translation of Prayers
----------------------

#### I. Translation of Surah al-Hamd

####

*Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim*

(I commence with the Name of Allah - in Whom all excellences are
combined and Who is free from all defects. The Compassionate - One Whose
blessings are extensive and unlimited. The Merciful - One Whose
blessings are inherent and eternal).

*Alhamdu lillahi Rabbil 'alamin*

(Special Praise be to Allah, the Sustainer of the creation).

*. Arrahmanir Rahim*

(The Compassionate, the Merciful).

*Maliki yaw middin*

(Lord of the Day of Judgement).

*Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in*

(You alone we worship, and to You alone we pray for help).

*Ihdinas siratal mustaqim*

(Guide us to the straight path).

*Siratal lazina an'amta 'alayhim*

(The path of those whom You have favoured - the Prophets and their
successors).

*Ghayril maghzubi 'alayhim walazzallin.*

(Not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone
astray).

#### II. Translation of Surah al-Ikhlas

####

*Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim*

(I commence with the Name of Allah - in Whom all excellences are
combined and Who is free from all defects. The Compassionate - One Whose
blessings are extensive and unlimited. The Merciful - One Whose
blessings are inherent and eternal).*Qul huwallahu Ahad*

(O Prophet!) Say: Allah is One - the Eternal Being).

*Allahus Samad*

(Allah is He Who is independent of all beings).

*Lam yalid walam yulad*

(He begot none, nor was He begotten).

*Walam yakullahu kufuwan ahad.*

(And none in the creation is equal to Him).

#### III. Translation of the Zikr During Ruku and Sajdah, and of those which areMustahab

####

*Subhana Rabbi yal 'Azimi wa bihamdhi*

(Glory be to my High Sustainer and I praise Him)

*Subhana Rabbi yal A'la wa bihamdih*

(Glory be to my Great Sustainer, Most High, and I praise Him)

*Sami' Allahu liman hamidah*

(Allah hears and accepts the praise of one who praises)

*Astaghfirullaha Rabbi wa atubu ilayh*

( I seek forgiveness from Allah Who is my Sustainer, and I turn to Him).

*Bi haw lillahi wa quwwatihi aqumu wa aqu'd*

(I stand and sit with the help and strength of Allah).

#### IV. Translation of Qunut

####

*La ilaha illallahul Halimul Karim*

(There is none worth worshipping but Allah Who is Forbearing and
Generous).

*La ilaha illallahul 'Aliyyul 'Azim*

(There is none worth worshipping but Allah Who is Eminent and Great).

*Subhanallahi Rabbis samawatis sab' wa Rabbil arazinas sab'*

(Glory be to Allah, Who is the Sustainer of the seven heavens and of the
seven earth).

*Wama fi hinna wama bayna hunna, wa Rabbil 'arshil 'azim*

(And Who is the Sustainer of all the things in them, and between them,
and Who is the Lord of the great 'Arsh (Divine Power).

*Wal hamdu lillahi Rabbil Aalamin*

(And all praise for Allah, the Sustainer of the worlds).

V. Translation of Tasbihat Arba'ah

*Subhanallahi wal hamdu lillahi wa la ilaha lallahu wallahu Akbar.*

(Glory be to Allah, and all praise is for Him and there is no one worth
worshipping other than Allah, and He is Greater than any description).

VI. Translation of Tashahhud and Salam

*Al Hamdu lillah, Ash hadu an la ilaha illal lahu wahdahu la sharika
lah*

(All praise is for Allah, and I testify that there is none worth
worshipping except the Almighty Allah, Who is One and has no partner).

*Wa Ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'abduhu wa Rasuluh*

(And I testify that Muhammad is His servant and messenger).

*Alla humma salli 'ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad.*

(O Allah! Send Your blessings on Muhammad and his progeny).

*Wa taqqabal shafa'atahu warfa' darajatahu*

(And accept his intercession, and raise his rank).

*Assalamu 'alayka ayyuhan Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh*

(O Prophet! Allah's peace, blessings and grace be upon you!).

*Assalamu 'alayna wa 'ala 'ibadil lahis salihin*

(Allah's peace be on us, those offering prayers - and upon all pious
servants of Allah).

*Assalamu 'alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.*

(Allah's peace, blessings and grace be on you believers!)

Ta'qib (Duas after Prayers)
---------------------------

***Issue*** 1131: It is*Mustahab* that after offering the prayers, one
should engage oneself in reciting Duas, and reading from the holy
Qur'an. It is better that before he leaves his place, and before his
Wudhu, or Ghusl or tayammum becomes void, he should recite Duas facing
Qibla.

It is not necessary that Duas be recited in Arabic, but it is better to
recite those supplications, which have been given in the books of Duas.
The tasbih of Hazrat Fatima-tuz-zahra (peace be on her) is one of those
acts which have been emphasised. This tasbih should be recited in the
following order:

•*Allahu Akbar* - 34 times

•*Alhamdulillah* - 33 times

•*Subhanallah* - 33 times

Subhanallah can be recited earlier than Alhamdulillah, but it is better
to maintain the said order.

***Issue*** 1132: It is*Mustahab* that after the prayers a person
performs a Sajdah of thanksgiving, and it will be sufficient if one
placed his forehead on the ground with that intention. However, it is
better that he should say Shukran lillah or Al'afv 100 times, or three
times, or even once. It is also*Mustahab* that whenever a person is
blessed with His bounties, or when the adversities are averted, he
should go to Sajdah for Shukr, that is, thanksgiving.

Salawat on the Holy Prophet
---------------------------

***Issue*** 1133: It is*Mustahab* that whenever a person hears or utters
the sacred name of the holy Prophet of Islam like, Muhammad or Ahmad, or
his title like, Mustafa or his patronymic appellation like Abul Qasim,
he should say, “Allahumma salli 'ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad”, even
if that happens during the Salat.

***Issue*** 1134: It is*Mustahab* that after writing the sacred name of
the holy Prophet, Salawat also be written with it. And it is better that
whenever his name is mentioned, Salawat be sent on him.

Things which Invalidate Prayers
-------------------------------

***Issue*** 1135:***Twelve things make prayers void, and they are called
mubtilat.***

***First:-*** If any of the pre-requisites of prayers ceases to exist
while one is in Salat, like, if he comes to know that the dress with
which he has covered himself is a usurped one.

***\* Second:-*** If a person, intentionally or by mistake, or
uncontrollably, commits an act which makes his Wudhu or Ghusl void,
like, when urine comes out, even if it is discharged forgetfully, or
involuntarily, after the last Sajdah of the prayers. But if a person is
incontinent, unable to control urine or excretion, his prayers will not
be void if he acts according to the rules explained early in the Chapter
of Wudhu. Similarly, if a woman sees blood of Istihaza during prayers,
her Salat is not invalidated if she has acted according to the rules of
Istihaza.

***Issue*** 1136: \* If a person sleeps involuntarily, not knowing
whether he slept during Salat or afterwards, it will not be necessary
for him to repeat the prayers, provided he knows that he has not
performed anything less than the usual Salat.

***Issue*** 1137: \* If a person knows that he slept voluntarily, but
doubts whether he slept after or during the prayers, or if he forgot
during the prayers that he was praying and fell asleep, his prayers will
be valid if the provision stated above is fulfilled.

***Issue*** 1138: If a person wakes up in Sajdah, and doubts whether he
is in the Sajdah of the Salat or in the Sajdah for Shukr, he should pray
again if he slept involuntarily. But if he slept intentionally, and
feels that he probably slept during the Sajdah of Salat due to
carelessness, his prayers are valid.

***\* Third:-*** If a person folds his hands as a mark of humility and
reverence, his prayers will be void, but this is based on precautionary
rule. However, there is no doubt about it being haraam, if it is done
believing that it is ordained by Shariah.

***Issue*** 1139: There is no harm if a person places one hand on
another forgetfully, or due to helplessness, or taqayyah, or for some
other purposes, like, scratching.

***\* Fourth:-*** The fourth thing which invalidates prayers is to say
'Amin' after Surah al-Hamd. This rule, when applied to one praying
individually, is based on*Ihtiyat* , but if someone utters it believing
that it has been ordained by Shariah, it is haraam. There is no harm if
someone utters it erroneously or under taqayya.

***\* Fifth:-*** The fifth thing which invalidates prayers is to turn
away from Qibla without any excuse. But if there is an excuse, like,
forgetting or an external force, like a strong wind blowing, which turns
him away from Qibla, his Salat will be valid if he has not deviated
towards his right or his left. But it is necessary that he returns to
the direction of Qibla as soon as the excuse disappears. And if he
turned away towards right or left side - regardless of whether his back
is towards Qibla or not - due to forgetting, he should pray again
towards Qibla as soon as he remembers, if there is time left even for
one Rak'at. But if there is no time for even one Rak'at at his disposal,
then he should continue with the same Salat towards Qibla, and he

will not have to give any qadha for that. Similar rule applies to the
one who has deviated because of the external force.

***Issue*** 1140: \* If a person turns his head away from Qibla while
his body remains facing Qibla, and if with that turning of the head, he
is able to see behind partly, he will be considered to have deviated
from Qibla, and he will follow the rule explained above. But if the
turning of head is so minimal that it can be said that his front part of
the body is towards Qibla, then his prayers will be valid, though it is
Makrooh to do such thing.

***\* Sixth:-*** The sixth thing which invalidates prayers is to talk,
even by uttering a single word consisting of one, single letter which
has a meaning or denotes something. For example, one letter “Qi” in
Arabic means “protect yourself”. Or if someone asked a person who is
praying, as to which is the second letter of Arabic alphabet, and he
said simply “Ba”. But if the utterance is meaningless, then, if it
constitutes two or more letters, his prayers will be void, based on
precaution.

***Issue*** 1141: \* If a person forgetfully utters a word consisting of
one or more letters, and that word may carry some meaning, his prayers
does not become void, but as a precaution, it is necessary that after
the prayers, he should perform Sajdatus Sahv, as will be explained
later.

***Issue*** 1142: \* There is no harm in coughing, belching during the
prayers, and as an obligatory precaution, he should not intentionally
heave a sigh. If someone utters 'Oh' or 'Ah' purposely, his Salat will
be void.

***Issue*** 1143: \* If a person utters a word with the object of Zikr,
like, if he says 'Allahu Akbar', and raises his voice to indicate
something, there is no harm in it. In fact, there is no harm if he
utters Zikr with the knowledge that it will convey something to one who
hears it. But if there is no intention of Zikr, or if it is done with
dual purpose, then there is*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 1144: \* There is no harm in reciting the Qur'an, except the
four verses, which make Sajdah obligatory, and which have been mentioned
in the rules relating to Qira't (rule no. 992) and in reciting Duas
during the prayers. However, the recommended precaution is that one
should not read Duas in any language other than Arabic.

***Issue*** 1145: If a person intentionally repeats parts of Surah
al-Hamd and other Surah, and the Zikr of prayers, without intending them
to be a part of the Salat, or as a matter of some precaution, there is
no harm in it.

***Issue*** 1146: \* A person offering prayers should not greet anyone
with Salam, and if another person says Salam to him, he should use the
same words in reply without adding anything to it. For example, if
someone says Salamun alaykum, he should also say Salamun 'alaykum in
reply, without adding Wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. As an obligatory
precaution, he should not utter 'Alaykum' or 'Alayka' before the word
Salamun if the one who greeted him did not say so. In fact, the
recommended precaution is that the reciprocation must fully conform with
the way Salam was initiated. So if he said: Salamun alaykum, the reply
should be Salamun alaykum, and if he said: As-Salamu alaykum, then the
reply should be the same. Similarly, the reply to Salamum alayka will be
Salamun alayka. But if someone initiated Salam saying Alaykumus Salam,
then the answer can be given in any of the phrases.

***Issue*** 1147: It is necessary that the reply to Salam is given at
once, irrespective of whether one is praying or not. And if, whether
intentionally or due to forgetfulness, he delays reply to the Salam, so
much that if he gives a reply after the delay, it may not be reckoned to
be a reply to that Salam, then he should not reply if he is in Salat.
And if he is not in Salat it is not obligatory for him to reply.

***Issue*** 1148: \* A person should reply to a Salam in a way that one
who greets him can hear it. However, if he who says salam is deaf, or
passes away quickly, then it is necessary to make reciprocation by sign
etc., if that would be understood. If that is not possible, then it is
not obligatory to respond when one is not praying. And if one is
praying, it is not permissible.

***Issue*** 1149: \* It is obligatory that a person who is in Salat,
responds to Salam with the intention of greeting. But if he responds
with the intention of prayers or blessing, meaning “May Allah bless
You”, there is no harm.

***Issue*** 1150: \* If a woman or a Na-Mehram or a discerning child,
that is, one who can distinguish between good and evil, says Salam to a
person in Salat, the person should respond. However, in reply to the
Salam by a woman who says Salamun alayka, the person offering prayers
can say Salamun alayki, giving Kasrah to Kaf at the end.

***Issue*** 1151: \* If a person in Salat does not respond to Salam, his
prayers are in order, though he will have committed a sin.

***Issue*** 1152: \* If a person says Salam to a person in Salat in a
mistaken way, such that it cannot be treated as a Salam, it is not
permissible to reply to it.

***Issue*** 1153: It is not obligatory to give reply to the Salam said
in jest, or the Salam of a non-Muslim man or woman who is not a Zimmi
(an infidel living under the protection of an Islamic Government). And
if he/she is a zimmi, it is sufficient, on the basis of obligatory
precaution, to answer saying 'alayka' only.

***Issue*** 1154: If a person says Salam to a group of people, it is
obligatory for all of them to give a reply. However, if one of them
replies, it is sufficient.

***Issue*** 1155: If a person says Salam to a group of people, but a
person for whom it was not intended gives a reply, it will still be
obligatory upon the group to reply.

***Issue*** 1156: If a person says Salam to a group among whom one was
in Salat, and that person doubts whether Salam was intended for him or
not, it will not be necessary for him to give a reply. And if the person
offering prayers is sure that he was also intended by the one who
greeted, but some one else has made a response, he does not have to
reply. But if he is sure that he was among the group for whom Salam was
intended, and no one has replied, then he should reply.

***Issue*** 1157: It is*Mustahab* to greet with Salam, and it has been
emphatically enjoined that a person who is riding should greet one who
is walking, and a person who is standing should greet one who is
sitting, and a younger person should greet an elder.

***Issue*** 1158: If two persons simultaneously say Salam to each other,
each one of them should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, reply
the Salam of the other.

***Issue*** 1159: When a person is not in Salat, it is*Mustahab* that
his response to the Salam should be more expansive. For example, when
one says salamun alaykum, the other should say salamun alaykum wa
rahmatullah in reply.

***\* Seventh:-*** The seventh thing which makes Salat void is an
intentional loud laugh. And if the laugh is uncontrollable, or
involuntary, if what prompted it in the first place was intentional, or
for that matter, inadvertant, the Salat will be void. But if one laughs
loudly unintentionally, or if he purposely laughs without emitting any
voice, there is no harm.

***Issue*** 1160: \* If in order to control his laughter, the condition
of the person in Salat changes, like, if the colour of his face turns
red, he should, as an obligatory precaution, pray again.

***\* Eight:-*** As an obligatory precaution, if one intentionally
weeps, silently or loudly, over some worldly matters, his Salat will be
void. But, if he weeps silently or loudly due to fear of Allah, or for
the Hereafter, there is no harm in it. In fact, it is among the best
acts.

***\* Ninth:-*** Any act which changes the form of Salat like, clapping
or jumping, invalidates the Salat, regardless of whether that act is
done intentionally or forgetfully. However, there is no harm in actions
which do not change the form of Salat, like, making a brief sign with
one's hand.

***Issue*** 1161: If a person remains silent during Salat for so long,
that it may not be said that he is offering prayers, his Salat is
invalidated.

***Issue*** 1162: \* If a person performs an extraneous act during
Salat, or maintains prolonged silence, and then doubts whether his
prayers has been thereby invalidated, he should repeat the Salat, but
the better way of doing it is to first complete the Salat, and then
repeat it.

***Tenth:-*** Eating or drinking. If a person offering prayers eats or
drinks in such a manner that people would not say that he was in Salat,
his prayers would be void, regardless of whether he does it
intentionally or forgetfully. However, if a person who wants to keep a
fast is offering a*Mustahab* Salat before the Adhan of Fajr, and being
thirsty, fears that by the time he completes the prayers it will be
Fajr, he can drink water during that*Mustahab* prayers, provided water
is not more than two to three steps away from him, and he should be
careful not to commit acts which invalidate Salat, like turning his face
away from Qibla.

***Issue*** 1163: \* Even if the intentional eating or drinking does not
change the form of Salat, as an obligatory precaution, he should repeat
the Salat, regardless of whether Muwalat is maintained or not by eating
and drinking.

***Issue*** 1164: \* If a person in Salat swallows the food which has
remained around his teeth, his prayers are not invalidated. Similarly,
if things like grains of sugar remain in the mouth and they melt slowly
and go down the throat, there is no harm in it.

***Eleventh:-*** Any doubt concerning the number of Rak'ats in those
prayers which consist of two or three Rak'ats, will render the Salat
void. Also, if one doubts about the number of the first two Rak'ats, of
Salat having four

Rak'ats, (like, Zuhr, Asr and Isha), his Salat will be void if he
continues to be in doubt.

***\* Twelfth:-*** If a person omits or adds the Rukn (elemental parts)
of the Salat, either intentionally or forgetfully, his Salat is void.
Similarly, if he does an extra Rukn forgetfully, like adding a Ruku or
two Sajdah in one Rak'at, his Salat, as an obligatory precaution, will
be void. And if one omits purposely acts which are not Rukn, or makes an
addition, Salat will be void. But if one forgetfully adds one more
Takbiratul Ihram, Salat will not be void.

***Issue*** 1165: If a person doubts after the Salat, whether or not he
performed any such act which invalidated the prayers, his Salat will be
in order.

Things which are Makrooh in Prayers
-----------------------------------

***Issue*** 1166: It is Makrooh that a person in Salat slightly turns
his face towards right or left, an angle which would not be construed as
deviation from Qibla, otherwise Salat will be void, as explained
earlier. It is also Makrooh during prayers to shut the eyes or turn
towards right or left, and to play with one's beard and hands, and to
cross the fingers of one hand into those of another, and to spit. It is
also Makrooh to look at the writing of the holy Qur'an, or some other
books or a ring. It is also Makrooh to become silent while reciting
Surah al-Hamd, or any other Surah, or Zikr, so as to listen to some
conversation. And in fact, every such act which disturbs attention and
humility is Makrooh.

***Issue*** 1167: It is Makrooh for a person to offer prayers when he is
feeling drowsy, or when he restrains his urge for urinating or
defecation. Similarly, it is Makrooh to offer prayers with tight socks
which press the feet. There are other things also which are Makrooh in
Salat. They are mentioned in detailed books on the subject.

Occasions when Obligatory Prayers can be Broken
-----------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1168: \* It is haraam, as an obligatory precaution, to break
obligatory prayers purposely. But if one has to break in order to
protect property, or to escape from financial or physical harm, there is
no objection. In fact, he can break it for any worldly or religious
purpose which is crucially important for him.

***Issue*** 1169: If it is not possible for a person to protect, without
breaking the prayers, his own life, or the life of a person whose
protection is obligatory upon him, or to protect a property the
protection of which is obligatory on him, he should break the prayers.

***Issue*** 1170: If a creditor demands payment from a person who is
praying, and if there is ample time for Salat, he should pay him while
praying, if that is possible. But if it is not possible to pay him
without breaking the Salat, then he should break the Salat, pay the
creditor and then pray.

***Issue*** 1171: If a person learns during his prayers that the mosque
is najis, and if time is short, he should complete the prayers. And if
there is sufficient time, and making the mosque Clean (*tahir/pak* )
does not change the form of prayers, he should make it Clean
(*tahir/pak* ) while praying, and then continue with the remaining part
of the prayers. And if making the

mosque Clean (*tahir/pak* ) in that state changes the form of the
prayers, breaking of prayers is permissible if making it Clean
(*tahir/pak* ) is possible after prayers; but if it is not possible, he
should break the prayers, make the mosque Clean (*tahir/pak* ), and then
offer prayers.

***Issue*** 1172: In a situation where one must break Salat, if he goes
on and completes it, his Salat is in order, though he will have
committed a sin. However, the recommended precaution is that he should
offer the Salat again.

***Issue*** 1173: \* If a person offering prayers remembers before
Qir'at, or before going to Ruku, that he has forgotten to say Adhan and
Iqamah, and if he has sufficient time at his disposal, it is*Mustahab*
that he should break the prayers and recite Adhan and Iqamah. In fact,
if he remembers having missed them out before ending the Salat, if
is*Mustahab* to break the Salat and pronounce them.

Doubts in the Prayers
---------------------

There are 22 kinds of doubts which one can have while praying. Out of
these, 7 doubts are those which invalidate the prayers, and 6 are those
which should be ignored. And the remaining 9 doubts are valid doubts.

### Doubts Which Make Prayers Void

###

***Issue*** 1174: \* The following doubts make prayers void:

• Doubts about the number of Rak'ats occurring in obligatory prayers
which consist of 2 Rak'ats, like, Fajr prayers, or prayers offered by a
traveller. However, doubt about number of Rak'ats in*Mustahab* prayers
or Salat of Ihteyat does not make the prayers void.

• Doubts about the number of Rak'ats occurring in prayers consisting of
3 Rak'ats, that is, Maghrib prayers.

• Doubt occurring in prayers of 4 Rak'ats as to whether one has
performed one Rak'at or more.

• Doubt in prayers of 4 Rak'ats before going to the second Sajdah, as to
whether he has performed 2 Rak'ats or more.

• Doubts between 2 and 5 Rak'ats or between 2 and more than 5 Rak'ats.

• Doubts between 3 and 6 Rak'ats or between 3 and more than 6 Rak'ats.

• Doubt between 4 and 6 Rak'ats or between 4 and more than 6 Rak'ats,
with the details which will come later.

***Issue*** 1175: If a person has one of those doubts which makes
prayers void, it is better for him to break the prayers if the doubt
persists. In fact, he should prolong thinking about it so that the form
of Salat changes, or till he loses all hope to ascertain the situation.

### Doubts Which May Be Ignored

###

***Issue*** 1176: The following doubts should be ignored:

• Doubt about an act whose time of performance has already passed, like,
during Ruku a person doubts as to whether he did or did not recite Surah
al-Hamd,

• Doubt occurring after the Salam of prayers,

• Doubt after the time of prayers has already passed,

• Doubt of a person, who doubts too much,

• Doubt by the Imam (one who leads the congregation prayers) about the
number of Rak'ats when the ma'mum (follower) is aware of the number, and
similarly the doubts of the ma'mum when the Imam knows the number of
Rak'ats,

• Doubt which occurs in*Mustahab* prayers and Salat of Ihteyat.

#### I. Doubts About an Act Whose Time of Performance has Passed

####

***Issue*** 1177: \* If a person doubts while offering prayers as to
whether or not he has performed a particular obligatory act, like, if he
doubts whether or not he has recited Surah al-Hamd, and if he has
engaged himself in the next act, which he would not have intentionally
performed in a normal circumstance, like reading the next Surah, he
should ignore the doubt. But in a situation other than this, he should
perform the act about which he doubts.

***Issue*** 1178: If a person doubts while reciting a verse, whether or
not he has recited the preceding verse, or doubts while reciting the end
part of a

verse, whether or not he has recited its beginning, he should ignore his
doubt.

***Issue*** 1179: If a person doubts after Ruku or Sajdah, whether or
not he has performed its obligatory parts, like Zikr and steadiness of
the body, he should ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1180: \* If, while going into Sajdah, a person doubts
whether or not he has performed Ruku, or if he doubts whether he stood
up after Ruku or not, he should ignore the doubt.

***Issue*** 1181: \* If a person doubts while rising to stand, whether
or not he has performed Sajdah or tashahhud, he should ignore the doubt.

***Issue*** 1182: If a person, who is offering prayers sitting or lying,
doubts at the time of reciting Surah al-Hamd or Tasbihat Arba'ah,
whether or not he has performed Sajdah or tashahhud, he should ignore
his doubt. And if the doubt occurs before reciting Surah al-Hamd or
Tasbihat Arba'ah, he should perform them.

***Issue*** 1183: \* If a person doubts whether or not he has performed
one of the Rukn of prayers, and if he has not yet engaged himself in the
next act, he should perform it. For example, if he doubts before
reciting tashahhud, whether or not he has performed two Sajdah, he
should perform them. And if he remembers later that he had already
performed that Rukn, as an obligatory precaution,his prayers will become
void because of additional Rukn.

***Issue*** 1184: If a person doubts whether or not he has performed an
act which is not a Rukn of Salat, and if he has not engaged himself in
the following act, he should perform it. For example, if he doubts
before reciting the other Surah, whether or not he has recited Surah
al-Hamd, he should recite Hamd. And if he remembers after reciting Hamd
that he had already recited it, his prayers will be in order, because a
Rukn has not been added.

***Issue*** 1185: \* If a person doubts whether or not he has performed
a Rukn, like, while in tashahhud, he doubts whether or not he has
performed two Sajdah, and ignores his doubt, but remembers later that he
had actually not performed that Rukn, he should perform it if he has not
entered into the next Rukn. However, if he has engaged himself in the
next Rukn, his prayer is void. For example, if he remembers before Ruku
of the next Rak'at, that he had not performed two Sajdah, he should
perform them, and if he remembers this during Ruku or thereafter, his
prayers are void.

***Issue*** 1186: If a person doubts whether or not he has performed an
act which is not a Rukn, and if he is engaged in the next act, he should
ignore his doubt. For example, if he doubts while reciting the other
Surah, whether or not he has recited Surah al-Hamd, he should ignore his
doubt. And if he remembers later that he had actually not performed that
act, he should perform it, if he has not entered into the next Rukn, and
if he has entered the next Rukn, his prayers are in order. Based on
this, if he remembers in qunut that he has not recited Surah al-Hamd he
should recite it, and if he remembers it in Ruku, his prayers are in
order.

***Issue*** 1187: \* If a person doubts whether or not he has said Salam
of prayers when he is engaged in supplications or other Salat, or when
the

form of Salat has already changed, he should ignore his doubt. And if he
doubts before these acts, he should say Salam. And if he doubts at any
stage, whether he recited the Salam correctly or not, he should ignore
that doubt.

#### II. Doubt After the Salam

####

***Issue*** 1188: If a person becomes doubtful after the Salam of
prayers, as to whether or not he has offered the prayers correctly,
like, if he doubts whether or not he has performed the Ruku, or doubts
in a 4 Rak'at prayers as to whether he has performed 4 or 5 Rak'ats, he
should ignore his doubt. But if both sides of the doubt lead to
invalidity of the prayers like, if he doubts in 4 Rak'at prayers whether
he has performed 3 or 5 Raka'ts, his prayers would be void.

#### III. Doubt After the Time of Salat has passed

####

***Issue*** 1189: If a person doubts, after the time for prayers has
already passed, as to whether he has offered the prayers or not, or if
he suspects that he may not have offered it, it is not necessary for him
to offer that prayers. If, however, he doubts before the expiry of the
time for that prayers, as to whether or not he has offered it, he should
offer it, even if he has a feeling that he might have done so.

***Issue*** 1190: If a person doubts after the time for prayers has
passed, whether or not he has offered the prayers correctly, he should
ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1191: \* If, after the time for Zuhr and Asr prayers has
passed, a person knows that he has offered 4 Rak'ats, but does not know
whether it was with the intention of Zuhr prayers or Asr prayers, he
should, offer 4 Rak'ats of qadha prayers, with the niyyat that he is
praying that which is obligatory upon him.

***Issue*** 1192: If after the time for Maghrib and Isha prayers has
elapsed, a person knows that he has offered one prayer, but does not
know whether it was of 3 or 4 Rak'ats, he should offer qadha of Maghrib
and Isha prayers.

#### IV. One Who Doubts Too Much

####

***Issue*** 1193: \* Kathirush shak is a person who doubts quite often,
meaning that he doubts more than a normal person does, due to an
unsettled mind or whims. A normal person who doubts at least once in
every three prayers, should ignore his doubts.

***Issue*** 1194: If a person with such an obsession doubts about having
performed any part of prayers, he should decide that he has performed
it. For example, if he doubts whether he has performed Ruku, he should
say that he has performed it. And if he doubts about having performed an
act which invalidate prayers, like, if he doubts whether in the Fajr
prayers he has offered 2 or 3 Rak'ats, he should consider that he has
offered the prayers properly.

***Issue*** 1195: \* If a person frequently doubts about a particular
act of prayers, then doubts occurring about other acts of prayers,
should be dealt with according to their prescribed rules. For example,
if a person who frequently doubts about having performed Sajdah, doubts
about having

performed Ruku, he should act according to the rules relating to it,
that is, if he has not performed Sajdah, he should perform Ruku, and if
he has already performed Sajdah, he should ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1196: If a person frequently doubts in a particular prayer
like, Salat of Zuhr, and if he has a doubt in the prayers of Asr, he
should act according to the rules of doubts.

***Issue*** 1197: If a person, who doubts more only when he offers
prayers at a particular place, becomes subjected to doubts at another
place of prayers, he should act according to the rules of doubts.

***Issue*** 1198: A person who doubts whether he has become one of those
who doubt too much (Kathirush shak), he should act according to the
normal rules relating to doubts. And as long as a Kathirush shak person
is not sure that he has returned to the normal condition, he should
ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1199: \* If a Kathirush shak person doubts whether he has
performed a Rukn or not, and ignores his doubts, but remembers later
that he had actually not performed it, he should perform it, if he has
not gone into next Rukn. And if he has commenced the next Rukn, his
prayer, as a precaution is void. For example, if he doubts whether he
has performed Ruku or not, and ignores his doubt, but remembers before
the second Sajdah that he has not performed Ruku, he should return and
perform Ruku, but if he remembers it in the second Sajdah, his prayer,
as a precaution is void.

***Issue*** 1200: If a Kathirush shak person doubts whether he has
performed an act which is not a Rukn, and ignores his doubt and
remembers later that he has not performed it, and the stage of its
performance has not passed, he should perform it, and if he has passed
its stage, his prayer is in order. For example, if he doubts whether he
has recited Hamd, he should recite it. But if he remembers after having
gone to Ruku, his Salat will be in order.

***Issue*** 1201: If an Imam who is leading a congregational prayer,
doubts about the number of Rak'ats, like, if he doubts whether he has
performed three or four Rak'ats, he will follow the indication given by
the follower who is certain about the numbers. If he indicates that it
is the fourth, Imam will accept it and complete the prayers. Similarly,
if the Imam is sure about the number of Rak'ats, and the follower has a
doubt, he should ignore his doubt.

#### V. Doubt inMustahab Prayers

####

***Issue*** 1202: If a person doubts about the number of Rak'ats in
a*Mustahab* prayer and if the higher side makes the prayers void, he
should decide on the lesser side of the doubt. For example, if he doubts
whether he has performed 2 Rak'ats or 3 in Nafilah of Fajr prayers, he
should decide that he has performed 2 Rak'ats. But if the higher side
does not invalidate the prayers, like, if he doubts whether he has
performed 2 Rak'ats or 1, he is free to decide either way, and his
prayers will be valid.

***Issue*** 1203: Omission of a Rukn invalidates Nafilah (*Mustahab*
prayers), but addition of a Rukn does not invalidate it. Hence, if the
person offering Nafilah prayers forgets to perform any part, and
remembers when he has entered into another Rukn, he should return to
perform the forgotten part

and then re-enter the Rukn. For example, if he remembers during Ruku
that he has not recited Surah al-Hamd, he should return to recite Surah
al-Hamd, and then go into Ruku again.

***Issue*** 1204: If a person doubts whether he has performed any Rukn
or non-Rukn part of Nafilah prayers, he should perform it if its stage
has not passed, and if it has, then he should ignore the doubt.

***Issue*** 1205: \* If in a*Mustahab* prayer of two Rak'ats, a person
suspects that he has offered 3 Rak'ats or more, he should ignore his
doubt, and his prayers are in order. If, he suspects that he has offered
2 Rak'ats or less, then as an obligatory precaution, he should pay heed
to that suspicion. For example, if he suspects that he has performed one
Rak'at only, as a precaution, he will perform another Rak'at.

***Issue*** 1206: \* If a person in Nafilah prayers performs an act
which, if he had performed in an obligatory prayers, it would have been
necessary for him to do Sajdatus Sahv, or if he forgets one Sajdah, it
will not be necessary to perform Sajdatus Sahv, or give qadha for the
Sajdah, after the Nafilah is over.

***Issue*** 1207: If a person doubts whether he has offered a
particular*Mustahab* prayer or not, and if that prayer does not have a
fixed time, like, the prayers of Ja'far Tayyar, he should decide that he
has not offered it. The position is the same if that prayer has a fixed
time, like Nafilah of daily prayers, and a person doubts before its time
lapses, whether he has offered it or not. However, if he doubts after
its time has gone, he should ignore his doubt.

### Doubts Which Are Valid

###

***Issue*** 1208: \* There are nine situations in which a person can
have doubts about the number of Rak'ats in the Salat consisting of four
Rak'ats. In those situations, one should pause to think, and if he
arrives at any decision or probability, he should act accordingly. If
doubt persists, he should follow these rules:

(i) After the second Sajdah, if a person doubts whether he has performed
2 Rak'ats or 3, he should assume that he has performed 3 Rak'ats, and
finish the prayers after performing one more Rak'at. And after finishing
the prayers he should offer, as an obligatory precaution, 1 Rak'at of
Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , standing.

(ii) If after the second Sajdah, a person doubts whether he has
performed 2 or 4 Rak'ats, he should decide that he has performed 4
Rak'ats and finish his prayers. He should then stand up to offer 2
Rak'ats of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* .

(iii) If a person doubts, after the second Sajdah, whether he has
performed 2, 3 or 4 Rak'ats, he should decide that he has performed 4
Rak'ats. After completing the prayers, he should perform 2 Rak'ats of
Salat al-*Ihtiyat* standing, and 2 Rak'ats in the sitting position.

(iv) If a person doubts after the second Sajdah, as to whether he has
performed 4 or 5 Rak'ats, he should decide that he has performed 4
Rak'ats and finish his prayers. After that he should perform two
sajdatus sahv. And this rule applies to every situation of doubt between
four and more Rak'ats, like, if one doubts whether he has prayed four or
six Rak'ats. And there can be a situation where at one single time, one
doubts whether he has

performed less than four or more than four Rak'ats. If this doubt occurs
after the second Sajdah, he will in each doubt, decide that he has
performed four Rak'ats, then for a doubt that he might have performed
less, he will redress it by Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , and for a doubt that he
might have performed more, he will perform Sajdatus Sahv.

In any of these four situations, if the doubt occurs after the first
Sajdah, and before having gone into the second, the prayers will be
void.

(v) If a person doubts at any stage during his prayers, whether he has
performed 3 or 4 Rak'ats, he should decide that he has performed 4
Rak'ats and finish his prayers. Thereafter he should offer Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* of 1 Rak'at standing or of 2 Rak'ats in the sitting
position.

(vi) If a person doubts while standing, as to whether he has performed 4
Rak'ats or 5, he should sit down and recite tashahhud and the Salam of
prayers. Then he should stand up to offer Salat al-*Ihtiyat* of 1
Rak'at, or give 2 Rak'ats while sitting.

(vii) If one doubts, while standing, whether he has performed three or
five Rak'ats, he should sit down and read tashahhud and Salam to finish
the prayers. After that, he should offer 2 Rak'ats of Salat al-*Ihtiyat*
standing.

(viii) If a person doubts while standing, as to whether he has offered
3, 4 or 5 Rak'ats, he should sit down and recite tashahhud and the Salam
of prayers. Thereafter, he should offer Salat al-*Ihtiyat* of 2 Rak'ats
standing, and another 2 Rak'ats in the sitting position.

(ix) If a person doubts, while standing, whether he has performed 5 or 6
Rak'ats, he should sit down and recite tashahhud and Salam of the
prayers. Thereafter, he should perform two sajdatus sahv. In all the
foregoing four situations one should, as a recommended precaution, also
offer two sajdatus sahv for an extra qiyam.

***Issue*** 1209: \* When a person has any of the above valid doubts, he
should not break the prayers, if the time for Salat is very short. He
should act according to the rules given above. In fact, even if there be
ample time for Salat, it is a recommended precaution that Salat should
not be broken, and the rules of redressing the situations of doubt be
followed.

***Issue*** 1210: \* If a person has one of those doubts for which
offering of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* is obligatory, as a recommended
precaution, he should offer the Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , and without doing
so, he should not start praying again. And before any such act occurs
which invalidates Salat, if he starts the Salat afresh, without having
performed Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , it will be void. Of course, if in the
meantime, an act occurred which renders Salat void, and he prayed
without having offered Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , this Salat will be in order.

***Issue*** 1211: \* When a person has any of those doubts which
invalidate the prayers, and if he feels that by continuing to the next
act, he may acquire certainty, or form a strong idea about the actual
situation, he is not allowed to continue with that Salat if the doubt
has occurred in the first 2 Rak'ats. For example, if he doubts while
standing, whether he has offered one Rak'at or more, and feels that if
he goes into Ruku, the doubt may be allayed, it is not permissible to go
to Ruku. But in all situations other than this, he can continue with the
Salat if he feels that it would help him acquire certainty.

***Issue*** 1212: If initially the feeling of a person is inclined on
one side, and later both the sides become equally strong, he should act
according to the rules of doubt. And if initially both sides are equally
strong, and he decides to act according to his obligation, but later his
feeling inclines to the other side, he should adopt it, and complete the
prayers.

***Issue*** 1213: If a person does not know whether his feeling is
inclined on one side, or is equal on both sides, he should act according
to the rules of doubt.

***Issue*** 1214: \* If a person learns after prayers, that while in
Salat, he was in a state of doubt as to whether, he offered 2 Rak'ats or
3 and that he decided in favour of 3 Rak'ats, but does not know whether
his strong feeling favoured offering three Rak'ats, or whether it
favoured both sides equally, he does not have to offer Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* .

***Issue*** 1215: \* If a person doubts after standing up, whether or
not he has performed the 2 Sajdah, and simultaneously, has a type of
doubt which would only be valid if it occurred after two Sajdah, like if
he doubts whether he has performed two or three Rak'ats, his Salat will
be valid if he acts according to the rule prescribed for that doubt. But
while in tashahhud, if he falls into a type of doubt which would be
valid only if it occurred after two sajdah, assuming that he has done
two Sajdah, if the remedy of that doubt was to decide upon a Rak'at
which has no tashahhud, his Salat will be void. For example, if that
doubt was between 2 or 3 Rak'ats. And if the remedy of the doubt was to
decide upon a Rak'at which has tashahhud, his Salat will be valid, like
if the doubt is between 2 and 4 Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1216: \* If a person doubts before he begins tashahhud, or
before standing (Qiyam) in the Rak'ats which do not have tashahhud,
whether he has performed one or both the Sajdah, and right at that
moment, a doubt occurs which would only be valid if it occurred after
two Sajdah, the prayers will be void.

***Issue*** 1217: If a person doubts while standing, whether he is in
third or fourth Rak'at, or whether it is third, fourth or fifth Rak'at,
and at that time he remembers to have omitted one or both Sajdah of the
preceding Rak'at, his prayers will be void.

***Issue*** 1218: If one doubt of a person is allayed and another doubt
takes its place, like, if he doubted first whether he had offered 2 or 3
Rak'ats, and later he doubts whether he has offered 3 or 4 Rak'ats, he
should act according to the rules of the second doubt.

***Issue*** 1219: \* If a person doubts after prayers, whether while in
Salat, his doubt was about 2 and 4 Rak'ats or about 3 and 4 Rak'ats, he
may act according to the rules of both the doubts; and also, he may
break the Salat and after committing an act which invalidates Salat, he
can repeat the prayers.

***Issue*** 1220: If a person realises after prayers, that while he was
in Salat, he had a doubt, but does not know whether it was a valid or
unsound doubt, and further, if it was one of the valid doubts, he does
not know to which type it belonged, in such a case, it is permissible
for him to treat the prayers as void, and offer it again.

***Issue*** 1221: If a person who prays in the sitting position has a
doubt, which would oblige him to perform either 1 Rak'at Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* standing or 2 Rak'ats in the sitting position, he should
offer 1 Rak'at sitting. And if he has a doubt for which his obligation
is to offer two Rak'ats of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* standing, he should offer
2 Rak'ats sitting.

***Issue*** 1222: If a person, who normally offered prayers in the
standing position, becomes unable to stand while offering Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , he should offer it as one who offers prayers in the
sitting position. Rules of these have been detailed above.

***Issue*** 1223: If a person, who normally sat when offering prayers,
becomes capable of standing for offering Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , he should
act according to the obligation of one who offers prayers standing.

### Method of Offering Salat al-Ihtiyat

###

***Issue*** 1224: A person, for whom it is obligatory to offer Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , should make its niyyat immediately after the Salam of
prayers, and pronounce takbir and recite Surah al-Hamd and then perform
Ruku and two Sajdah. Now, if he has to perform only one Rak'at of Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , he should recite tashahhud and Salam of the prayers after
two Sajdah. If it is obligatory for him to perform 2 Rak'ats of Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , he should perform, after the 2 Sajdah, another Rak'at
like the first one, and then complete with tashahhud and Salam.

***Issue*** 1225: \* Salat al-*Ihtiyat* does not have other Surah and
qunut, and this prayer should be offered silently; its niyyat should not
be uttered; and the recommended precaution is that its 'Bismillah'
should also be pronounced silently.

***Issue*** 1226: If a person realises before starting Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* that the prayer which he had offered was correct, he need
not offer it, and if he realises this during Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , he
need not complete it.

***Issue*** 1227: \* If a person becomes certain before starting Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , that the prayers which he had offered had lesser Rak'ats,
and if he has still not performed an act which would invalidate prayers,
he should complete those parts of the prayers which he had not
performed, and as a precaution, also perform 2 Sajdatus Sahv for the
extra Salam. And if he has performed an act which invalidates prayers,
for example, if he has turned away from Qibla, he should repeat the
prayers.

***Issue*** 1228: If a person realises after Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , that
the deficiency in his original prayers was equal to the Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , like, if he offers 1 Rak'at of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* in the
case of doubt about 3 and 4 Rak'ats, and it transpires later that he had
actually offered 3 Rak'ats in the original prayers, his prayers will be
in order.

***Issue*** 1229: If a person learns after Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , that the
deficiency in his original prayers was lesser than the Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , like, if he offers 2 Rak'ats of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* for
the doubt about 2 and 4 Rak'ats, and learns later that he had actually
offered 3 Rak'ats, he should repeat his original prayers.

***Issue*** 1230: \* If a person learns after Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , that
the deficiency in his original prayers was more than Salat al-*Ihtiyat*
, like, if he offers 1 Rak'at of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* for the doubt
between 3 and 4 Rak'ats, and learns

later that he actually offered 2 Rak'ats only, if he has performed any
act, which invalidates the prayers like, if he turns away from Qibla, he
should offer the prayers again. And even if he has not performed an act
which invalidates prayers, the obligatory precaution is that he should
repeat his prayers, and should not be content with simply adding the
missing Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1231: If a person had a doubt as to whether it was his
second, third or fourth Rak'at, and remembers after offering 2 Rak'ats
of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* in standing position, that he had actually offered
2 Rak'ats of his original prayers, it will not be necessary for him to
offer 2 Rak'ats of Salat al-*Ihtiyat* in the sitting position.

***Issue*** 1232: \* If a person had a doubt whether it was his third or
fourth Rak'at, and remembers while offering 1 Rak'at of Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* in the standing position, that he had actually offered 3
Rak'ats in the original prayers, if he remembers before going to Ruku,
he should abandon Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , and complete 1Rak'at as an
addendum. This way his prayers will be valid. But for one more Salam, he
will perform two Sajdatus Sahv, as an obligatory precaution. But if he
remembers this after having entered Ruku, he must pray again. As a
precaution, he cannot content himself with just adding the remaining
Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1233: \* If a person had a doubt about second, third and
fourth Rak'ats, and while he was offering 2 Rak'ats of Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* in the standing position, he remembered that he had
actually offered 3 Rak'ats, he should act as guided in the above rule.

***Issue*** 1234: \* If a person realises during Salat al-*Ihtiyat* ,
that the deficiency in his prayers was more or less than his Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , he should act according to rule no. 1232.

***Issue*** 1235: \* If a person doubts whether he offered Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* which was obligatory on him, and if the time of prayers has
lapsed, he should ignore the doubt. And if he has time at his disposal,
and if much time has not elapsed between the doubt and the prayers, and
he has also not performed an act invalidating the prayers, like turning
away from Qibla, he should offer Salat al-*Ihtiyat* . But if he has
performed an act which invalidates the prayers, or if a good deal of
time has elapsed between the prayers and the doubt, he should, as an
obligatory precaution, pray again.

***Issue*** 1236: \* If a person increases a Rukn in Salat al-*Ihtiyat*
, or if he prays 2 Rak'ats instead of 1, his Salat al-*Ihtiyat* will be
void, and he will have to offer the original Salat again.

***Issue*** 1237: If, during Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , a person doubts about
any one of its acts, and if its stage has not passed, he should perform
it. And if its stage has passed, he should ignore the doubt. For
example,if he doubts whether or not he has recited Surah al-Hamd, and if
he has not yet gone into Ruku, he should recite Surah al-Hamd, and if he
has gone into Ruku, he should ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1238: When a person doubts about the number of Rak'ats in
Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , if he finds that by deciding on the higher side,
Salat al-*Ihtiyat* will be void, he should decide on the lesser. But if
he finds that deciding on the higher side would not invalidate Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , then he should decide on the higher side. For example, if
a person, who is offering 2 Rak'ats of Salat

*al-Ihtiyat* , doubts whether he has offered 2 or 3 Rak'ats, since
taking it on the higher side will invalidate the prayers, he should
decide that it is second Rak'at. And if he doubts whether he has offered
1 or 2 Rak'ats, then since taking it on the higher side will not
invalidate the prayers, he should consider that he has offered 2
Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1239: If an act which is not a Rukn, is omitted or added
forgetfully in Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , it will not be necessary to perform
sajdatus sahv for it.

***Issue*** 1240: If the person offering Salat al-*Ihtiyat* doubts after
Salam, whether or not he has performed one of the parts or conditions of
the prayers, he should ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1241: \* If a person forgets tashahhud or one Sajdah in
Salat al-*Ihtiyat* , and if he is not able to perform it at once, the
obligatory precaution is that he should perform the qadha for Sajdah
after the Salam of the prayers.

***Issue*** 1242: \* If a man has an obligation to perform Salat
al-*Ihtiyat* , qadha of a Sajdah or two Sajdatus Sahv, he should first
offer Salat al-*Ihtiyat* .

***Issue*** 1243: As far as Rak'ats of Salat are concerned, probability
or strong feeling about it will be treated at the same level as
certainty. For example, if a person does not know for certain whether he
has offered 1 Rak'at or 2, and has a strong feeling that he has offered
2 Rak'ats, he should decide in its favour. And if in a prayer of 4
Rak'ats, he strongly feels that he has offered 4 Rak'ats, he should not
offer Salat al-*Ihtiyat* . But in the matter of acts of Salat,
probability has the position of doubt. Hence, if he feels that probably
he has performed Ruku, and if he has not yet entered Sajdah, he should
perform the Ruku. And if he thinks that he has not recited Surah
al-Hamd, and has already started the other Surah, he should ignore his
doubt and his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1244: There is no difference between the rules of doubt,
forgetting, and probability or strong feeling, regardless of it
occurring in the daily obligatory prayers or other*Wajib* Salat. For
example, if one doubts in Salat of Ayaat, whether he has performed 1
Rak'at or 2, his Salat will be void because it is a doubt which has
occurred in a Salat consisting of 2 Rak'ats. Similarly, if he has a
strong feeling that it is his first or his second Rak'at, he will
complete the prayers based on that feeling.

Sajdatus Sahv (Sajdah for Forgotten Acts)
-----------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1245: \* Two Sajdatus Sahv become necessary for five things,
and they are performed after Salam. Their method will be explained
later:

(i) For talking forgetfully during prayers.

(ii) Reciting Salam at the wrong place, like, forgetfully reciting them
in the first Rak'at.

(iii) Forgetting tashahhud.

(iv) When there is a doubt in a 4 Rak'at prayers, after second Sajdah,
as to whether the number of Rak'ats performed is 4 or 5, 4 or 6.

(v) When after Salat, one realises that he has either omitted or added
something by mistake, but that omission or addition does not render the
prayers void.

These five situations call for Sajdatus Sahv.

As per recommended obligation, if a person performs only one Sajdah
forgetting the other, or if he erroneously sits down where he should
stand, or vice versa, he should perform 2 Sajdatus Sahv. In fact, for
every omission and addition made by mistake, in Salat, two Sajdatus Sahv
be performed.

***Issue*** 1246: \* If a person talks, by mistake or under the
impression that his prayer has ended, he should perform 2 Sajdatus sahv,
as a precaution.

***Issue*** 1247: \* Sajdatus sahv is not obligatory for the sound
emitted by coughing, but if one inadvertently sighs or moans, like,
'Ah', he should, as a precaution, perform Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1248: If a person makes an error in some recitation, and
then repeats to correct it, Sajdatus Sahv will not be obligatory upon
him.

***Issue*** 1249: If a person talks for some time in Salat by mistake,
and if the process is construed as having talked just once, he will
perform two Sajdatus Sahv after Salams.

***Issue*** 1250: If a person forgets the tasbihat Arba'ah, the
recommended precaution is that he should perform 2 Sajdatus Sahv after
his prayers.

***Issue*** 1251: \* If at a place where the Salam of prayers is not to
be said, a person forgetfully says “Assalamu 'alayna wa'ala 'ibadil
lahis salihin” or says: “Assalam 'alaykum” he should, as an obligatory
precaution, perform 2 sajdatus sahv, even if he did not add “Wa
Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh”. But if he says: “As Salamu alayka Ayyuhan
Nabiyyu Wa Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh” then Sajdatus Sahv will be a
recommended precaution.

***Issue*** 1252: If a person says, by mistake, all the 3 Salams at the
time when Salam should not be recited, it is sufficient to perform 2
Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1253: \* If a person forgets one Sajdah or tashahhud, and
remembers it before the Ruku of the next Rak'at, he should return and
perform it. And after the prayers, he should, as a recommended
precaution, offer two Sajdatus Sahv for additional standing (Qiyam).

***Issue*** 1254: \* If a person remembers during Ruku or thereafter,
that he has forgotten one Sajdah or tashahhud of the preceding Rak'at,
he should perform the qadha of Sajdah after the Salam of prayers, and
for tashahhud he should perform two Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1255: \* If a person does not perform Sajdatus Sahv after
the Salam of prayers intentionally, he commits a sin, and it is
obligatory upon him to perform it as early as possible. And if he
forgets to perform it, he should perform it immediately when he
remembers. It is, however, not necessary for him to repeat the prayers.

***Issue*** 1256: If a person doubts whether or not two Sajdatus Sahv
have become obligatory upon him, it is not necessary for him to perform
them.

***Issue*** 1257: If a person doubts whether two or four Sajdatus Sahv
have become obligatory upon him, it will be sufficient if he performs
two Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1258: If a person knows that he has not performed one of the
two Sajdatus Sahv, and if it is not possible to do it then, he should
perform two Sajdatus Sahv again. And if he knows that he has offered
three Sajdah forgetfully, the obligatory precaution is that he should
perform two Sajdatus Sahv again.

### The Method of Offering Sajdatus Sahv

###

***Issue*** 1259: \* Immediately after the Salam of prayers, one should
make a niyyat of performing Sajdah, placing one's forehead, as an
obligatory precaution, on an object which is allowed. It is a
recommended precaution that Zikr be recited, and a better Zikr is:
Bismillahi wa billah assalamu 'alayka ayyuhan Nabiyyu wa rahmatullahi wa
barakatuh. Then one should sit up and perform another Sajdah reciting
the above mentioned Zikr. After performing the second Sajdah one should
sit up again and recite tashahhud and then say: Assalamu 'alaykum'; it
is better to add to it: Wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.

Qadha of the Forgotten Sajdah and Tashahhud
-------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1260: If a person forgets Sajdah and tashahhud, and offers
its qadha after prayers, he should fulfil all the conditions of prayers,
like his body and dress being Clean (*tahir/pak* ), and facing the
Qibla, and all various other conditions.

***Issue*** 1261: \* If a person forgets Sajdah a few times, like, if he
forgets one Sajdah in the first Rak'at and another in the second Rak'at,
after the prayers, he should perform the qadha of each one of them. It
is better that, as a precaution he should also perform Sajdatus Sahv for
each of them.

***Issue*** 1262: \* If a person forgets one Sajdah and tashahhud, he
should, as a precaution, offer two Sajdatus Sahv for each of them.

***Issue*** 1263: If a person forgets two Sajdahs from two Rak'ats, it
is not necessary to observe the order while giving their qadha.

***Issue*** 1264: \* If between the Salam of prayers and the qadha of
Sajdah, a person performs an act which would invalidate the prayers were
he to do so purposely or forgetfully, like, turning away from Qibla, the
recommended precaution is that, after performing the qadha of Sajdah, he
should repeat his prayers.

***Issue*** 1265: \* If a person remembers just after the Salam of
prayers that he has forgotten a Sajdah, or tashahhud of the last Rak'at,
he should resume to complete the prayers, and should, as an obligatory
precaution, perform two Sajdatus Sahv for an additional Salam.

***Issue*** 1266: \* If between the Salam of prayers and the qadha of
Sajdah, a person performs an act which makes Sajdatus Sahv obligatory
(like, if he talks forgetfully), he should, as an obligatory precaution,
first perform qadha of Sajdah and then do two Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1267: \* If a person does not know whether he has forgotten
a Sajdah or tashahhud in his prayers, he should perform qadha of Sajdah,
and also perform two Sajdatus Sahv. And as a recommended precaution, he
should perform qadha of tashahhud also.

***Issue*** 1268: If a person doubts whether or not he has forgotten to
perform Sajdah, or tashahhud, it is not obligatory for him to perform
its qadha, nor to perform Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1269: \* If a person knows that he has forgotten Sajdah, but
doubts whether or not he has performed it before the Ruku of the
succeeding Rak'at, the recommended precaution is that he should perform
its qadha.

***Issue*** 1270: \* If it is obligatory on a person to perform qadha of
Sajdah, and owing to some other act, Sajdatus Sahv also becomes
obligatory upon

him, he should first perform the qadha of Sajdah after prayers, and then
perform Sajdatus Sahv.

***Issue*** 1271: \* If a person doubts whether or not he has given the
qadha of the forgotten Sajdah after the prayers, and if the time for the
prayers has not lapsed, he should give the qadha. In fact, even if the
time of Salat has lapsed, he should, as an obligatory precaution, give
the qadha.

Addition and Omission of the Acts and Condition of Prayers
----------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1272: Whenever a person intentionally adds something to the
obligatory acts of prayers, or omits something from them, even if it be
only a letter, his prayers become void.

***Issue*** 1273: \* If a person adds or omits the Rukn (elemental
parts) of prayers due to ignorance, his prayers are void. But adding or
omitting a non-Rukn due to justifiable ignorance or by relying on some
authority, will not make the prayers void. And if someone, due to his
ignorance about the rule, prays Fajr, Maghrib and Isha with silent
Qir'at, or Zuhr and Asr with loud Qir'at, or offers four Rak'ats where
he should have prayed two because of travelling, his prayers will be in
order.

***Issue*** 1274: If a person realises during prayers that his Wudhu or
Ghusl had been void, or that he had begun offering prayers without Wudhu
or Ghusl, he should abandon that prayers and repeat the same with Wudhu
or Ghusl. And if he realises it after the prayers, he should pray again
with Wudhu or Ghusl. And if the time for the prayers has lapsed, he
should perform its qadha.

***Issue*** 1275: \* If a person remembers after reaching Ruku, that he
has forgotten the two Sajdah of the preceding Rak'at, his prayers are
void. And if he remembers before going to Ruku, he should return to
perform the two Sajdah. Then he should stand up to recite Surah al-Hamd
and Surah or Tasbihat Arba'ah, and complete the prayers. And after the
prayers, he should, on the basis of recommended precaution, perform two
Sajdatus Sahv for additional standing.

***Issue*** 1276: If a person remembers before saying “Assalamu alayna”
and “Assalamu Alaykum” that he has not performed the two Sajdah of the
last Rak'at, he should perform the two Sajdah and should recite
tashahhud again, and then recite Salam.

***Issue*** 1277: If a person realises before the Salam of prayers, that
he has not offered one Rak'at or something more from the end part of
prayers, he should perform the part which had been forgotten.

***Issue*** 1278: \* If a person realises after the Salam of prayers
that he has not offered one Rak'at or more from the end part of the
prayers, and if he has done any such thing which would invalidate the
prayers, were he to do so intentionally or forgetfully, like turning
away from Qibla, his prayers will be void. But if he has not performed
any such act then, he should immediately proceed to perform that part of
the prayers which he forgot, and should, as an obligatory precaution,
offer two Sajdatus Sahv for additional Salam.

***Issue*** 1279: \* If a person after the Salam of prayers, does an act
which would have invalidated the prayers, were then to do so
intentionally or otherwise, like turning away from Qibla, and then
remembers that he had

not performed two Sajdah, his prayers will be void. And if he remembers
it before he performs any act which would invalidate the prayers, he
should perform the two forgotten Sajdah, and should recite tashahhud
again, together with Salam of the prayers. Thereafter, he should perform
two Sajdatus Sahv for the Salam recited earlier.

***Issue*** 1280: \* If a person realises that he has offered the
prayers before its time set in, he should offer that prayers again, and
if the prescribed time for it has lapsed, he should perform its qadha.
If he realises that he has offered the prayers with his back to Qibla,
he should pray again if the time of Salat is still there, and if the
time has lapsed, there will be qadha if he had prayed opposite because
of uncertainty about Qibla. And if he prayed towards the right or the
left of Qibla, and realised it after the time of Salat has lapsed, there
is no qadha. But if he realises while the time of Salat is still on, he
has to pray again, if he had not made enough efforts to determine the
direction of Qibla.

Prayers of a Traveller (Musafir)
--------------------------------

A traveller should reduce the Rak'ats in Zuhr, Asr and Isha prayers,
that is, he should perform two Rak'ats instead of four, subject to the
following eight conditions:

• The first condition is that his journey is not less than 8 farsakh. A
farsakh in shariah is a little less than 51/2 kilometres. (When
converted into miles, 8 farsakh is equal to 28 miles approximately).

***Issue*** 1281: \* If the total of outward journey and return journey
is 8 farsakh, even if the single journey either way does not equal 4
farsakh, he should shorten his prayers. Therefore, if his outward
journey is 3 farsakh, and his return is 5 farsakh, or vice versa, he
should offer shortened prayers, that is, of two Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1282: If the total of outward and return journey is just 8
farsakh, the traveller should shorten his prayers, even if he does not
return on the same day or night. However, as a precaution, he should
also offer complete prayers.

***Issue*** 1283: If a brief journey is less than 8 farsakh or if a
person does not know whether or not his journey is 8 farsakh, he should
not shorten his prayers. If he doubts whether or not his journey is 8
farsakh, it is not necessary for him to investigate, he should offer
complete prayers.

***Issue*** 1284: \* If an 'Adil or a reliable person tells a traveller
that the distance covered in his journey equals 8 farsakh, he should
shorten his prayers, if he feels satisfied.

***Issue*** 1285: If a person believed that his journey equalled 8
farsakh, and he shortened his prayers, and learnt later that it was not
8 farsakh, he should offer four Rak'ats of prayers, and if the time for
the prayers has lapsed, he should perform its qadha.

***Issue*** 1286: \* If a person is sure that his journey is not of 8
farsakh, or if he doubts whether or not it is of 8 farsakh, if he
realises on his way that the distance of his journey had been 8 farsakh,
he should offer shortened prayers, even if very little remains of his
journey. If he has offered complete prayers, he should offer it again in
the shortened form, but if the times of Salat has lapsed, there is no
qadha for it.

***Issue*** 1287: If a person frequents between two places which are
less than 4 farsakh apart, he should offer complete prayers, even if the
total distance covered by him may add up to 8 farsakh.

***Issue*** 1288: If two roads lead to a place, one of them less than 8
farsakh away, and the other 8 farsakh or more, the traveller will offer
shortened prayers if he travels by the road which is 8 farsakh away, and
complete prayers if he travels by the road which is less than 8 farsakh
away.

***Issue*** 1289: \* The beginning of 8 farsakh should be calculated
from a point beyond which he will be deemed a traveller, and this point
is represented by the last boundary of a city. In certain very big
cities, it would be probably reckoned from the end of locality.

• \* The second condition is that the traveller should intend at the
time of the commencement of the journey, to cover a distance of 8
farsakh. If he travels up to a point which is less than 8 farsakh away,
and after reaching there decides to go further, and the two distances,
when combined total 8

farsakh, he should offer full prayers. This is so, because he did not
intend travelling 8 farsakh when he commenced his journey. But if he
decides to travel further 8 farsakh from there, or to go to a distance
of 4 farsakh and then to cover another 4 farsakh to return home, or to
go to a place where he intends staying for 10 days, he should shorten
his prayers.

***Issue*** 1290: A person who does not know how many farsakh his
journey would be, like, if he travels in search of something not knowing
how far he will have to go, should offer full prayers. But, if the
return journey to his home, or up to a place where he intends staying
for 10 days, is 8 farsakh or more, he should offer shortened prayers.
Moreover, if he makes a niyyat, during the journey, that he will travel
4 farsakh and again return covering 4 farsakh, he should shorten his
prayers.

***Issue*** 1291: A traveller should offer shortened prayers only when
he is firmly determined to travel 8 farsakh. Hence, if a person goes
outside the city thinking that he would cover 8 farsakh if he finds a
companion, he will offer shortened prayers only if he is sure that he
will find a companion. And if he is not sure to find one, he should pray
full.

***Issue*** 1292: \* A person who intends to travel 8 farsakh, will pray
shortened prayers even if he covers little distance every day. But he
will do this when he has reached the point beyond which travelling
begins, as explained in rule no. 1327. However, if his journey is at
such a slow pace, that it cannot be considered a journey, then, as per
obligatory precaution, he should pray both, full and shortened prayers.

***Issue*** 1293: \* If a person who is under the control of another
person while on a journey, like, a servant travelling with his master,
knows that his journey is 8 farsakh, he should offer shortened prayers.
But if he does not know, he should offer full prayers, and it is not
necessary for him to inquire.

***Issue*** 1294: \* If a person, who is under the control of another
person while on a journey, knows or thinks that he will get separated
from that person before reaching 4 farsakh, he should offer full
prayers.

***Issue*** 1295: \* If a person who is under the control of another
person while on a journey, feels that he would separate from that person
before reaching 4 farsakh, he should offer full prayers. But if he feels
sure that he would not separate, at the same time having a faint
presentiment that an impediment might occur in the journey, he should
offer shortened prayers.

• The third condition is that the traveller should not change his mind
while on his way. If he changes his mind, or is undecided before
covering 4 farsakh, he should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1296: \* If after covering a distance which would add up to
make 8 farsakh on return, the traveller abandons the journey, and if he
decides to remain at that place, or to return after 10 days, or is
undecided about returning or staying there, he should offer full
prayers.

***Issue*** 1297: \* If a person abandons the journey after reaching a
distance which would add up to make 8 farsakh on return, and decides to
return, he should offer shortened prayers even if he wants to stay there
for less than 10 days.

***Issue*** 1298: \* If a person commences his journey to go to a place
which is at a distance of 8 farsakh, and after covering a part of the
journey, decides

to go elsewhere, and the distance between the place from where he
started his journey, up to the new place, is 8 farsakh, he should
shorten his prayers.

***Issue*** 1299: \* If a person, before reaching 8 farsakh, becomes
undecided about proceeding further, and if he stops his journey, and
later decides to proceed to complete the intended journey, he should
offer shortened prayers till the end of his journey.

***Issue*** 1300: \* If a person, before covering 8 farsakh, becomes
undecided about proceeding further, and in the same state of indecision
continues travelling, till he decides to go further for 8 farsakh, or
for a distance which would add up to make 8 farsakh on return, he should
pray shortened prayers till the end, regardless of whether he wants to
return the same day or night, or stay there for less than 10 days.

***Issue*** 1301: \* If before covering a distance of 8 farsakh a,
traveller becomes undecided whether he should complete the journey or
not, and decides later to do so, if his remaining journey is less than 8
farsakh, he should offer full prayers. But if the distance covered
before indecision and the remaining distance, both add up to 8 farsakh,
he will offer shortened prayers.

• \* The fourth condition is that the traveller does not intend to pass
through his home town and stay there, or to stay at some place for 10
days or more, before he reaches a distance of 8 farsakh. Hence a person,
who intends to pass through his home town and stay there, or to stay at
a place for 10 days, before he reaches of 8 farsakh, he should offer
full prayers.

***Issue*** 1302: \* A person, who does not know whether or not he will
pass through his home town and stay there, before reaching 8 farsakh, or
through a place where he will stay for 10 days, should offer full
prayers.

***Issue*** 1303: \* A person who wishes to pass through his home town
and stay there, before he reaches 8 farsakh, or to stay at a place for
10 days, or if he is undecided about it, should offer complete prayers
even if he later abandons the idea of passing through his home town, or
staying at a place for 10 days. However, if the remaining journey is of
8 farsakh or adds upto 8 farsakh on return, he should shorten his
prayers.

• \* The fifth condition is that the purpose of travelling should not be
haraam. Therefore, if a person travels to do something unlawful, like,
to commit theft, he should offer full prayers. The same rule applies
when travelling itself is haraam, like, when travelling involves a harm
which is haraam in Shariah, or when a wife travels without the
permission of her husband for a journey which is not obligatory upon
her. But if it is an obligatory journey, like that of*Wajib* Hajj, then
shortened prayers should be offered.

***Issue*** 1304: \* A journey which is not obligatory, and is a cause
of displeasure of one's parents, is haraam, and while going on such a
journey, one should offer full prayers and should also fast.

***Issue*** 1305: A person whose journey is not haraam, nor is it for a
purpose which is haraam, should shorten his prayers even if he may,
during the journey, commit some sin like, indulging in Gheebat or taking
alcohol.

***Issue*** 1306: If a person undertakes a journey to avoid some
obligatory act, regardless of whether he has some other purpose attached
to it, he

should offer full prayers. Hence, if a person owes some money, and he
undertakes a journey to avoid the demand of his creditor, he should
offer full prayers. However, if his journey has different purpose, he
should shorten his prayers, even if he leaves out some obligatory acts
during that journey.

***Issue*** 1307: \* If a person travels on a vehicle or on an animal
which is usurped, and travels to escape from the rightful owner, or if
he travels on a usurped land, he will offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1308: \* If a person is travelling with an oppressor, of his
own volition, and by so doing is helpful to the oppressor in his
inequity, he should offer full prayers. But if he is helpless, or, if he
is travelling with the oppressor to save the oppressed person, he should
shorten his prayers.

***Issue*** 1309: If a person travels for recreation and outing, his
journey is not haraam, and he should shorten his prayers.

***Issue*** 1310: \* If a person goes out for hunting, with the object
of sport and pleasure, his prayers during the outward journey will be
full, and on return it will be qasr if it does not involve hunting. But
if a person goes out for hunting, to earn his livelihood, he should
offer shortened prayers. Similarly, if he goes for business and increase
in his wealth, he will pray qasr, although in this case, the precaution
is that he should offer qasr as well as full prayers.

***Issue*** 1311: If a person has journeyed to commit a sin, he should,
on his return, shorten his prayers, if the return journey alone covers 8
farsakh. And the recommended precaution is that if he has not done
Tawba, he should offer qasr as well as full prayers.

***Issue*** 1312: \* If a person travelling with the purpose of
committing a sin, abandons the idea during his journey, he will pray
qasr even if the remaining distance from there, or the total of going
and returning from there is not 8 farsakh.

***Issue*** 1313: \* If a person who originally set forth on a journey
with no intention of sin, decides during his journey to make it a
journey of sin, he will offer full prayers. However, the prayers which
he might have prayed in qasr form uptill then, will be in order.

• \* The sixth condition is that the traveller should not be a nomad,
who roam about in the deserts, and temporarily stay at places where they
find food for themselves, and fodder and water for their animals, and
again proceed to some other place after a few days' halt. During these
journeys the nomads should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1314: \* If a nomad travels to find out residence for
himself, and pasture for his animals, and carries his bag and baggage
with him, he should offer full prayers, otherwise if his journey is 8
farsakh he should shorten his prayers.

***Issue*** 1315: \* If a nomad travels for Ziyarat, Hajj (pilgrimage),
trade or any other similar purpose, he should shorten his prayers.

• \* The seventh condition is that travelling should not be his
profession, that is, one who has no other work but travelling; or that
travelling is the means of his subsistence, like the camel riders,
drivers, herdsmen and sailors. Such people will pray full, even if they
travel for their personal

work, like transporting their own household effects, or transporting
their families. Those who live at one place and work at another,
commuting every day, or every other day, like students or businessmen
etc., fall in this category.

***Issue*** 1316: \* If a person whose profession is travelling, travels
for another purpose like, for Hajj, he should shorten his prayers except
when he is a known frequent traveller. If, for example, the driver of
automobile hires out his vehicle for pilgrimage, and incidentally
performs pilgrimage himself as well, he should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1317: \* If a person whose profession is that of a courier,
that is, a person who travels to transport the pilgrims to Makkah, is
travelling, he should offer full prayers, and if his profession is not
travelling and he travels only during Hajj days for the purpose of
portage, the obligatory precaution is that he should offer qasr as well
as full prayers. However, if the period of his journey is short, like
two or three weeks, he may offer shortened prayers.

***Issue*** 1318: If a person whose profession is that of a courier who
takes pilgrims to Makkah from distant places, spends a considerable part
of the days in a year travelling, he should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1319: A person whose profession for a part of the year is
travelling, like a driver who hires out his automobile during winter or
summer, should offer full prayers during those journeys, and the
recommended precaution is that he should offer qasr prayers, as well as
full prayers.

***Issue*** 1320: If a driver or a hawker, who goes round within an area
of 2 or 3 farsakh in the city, happens to travel on a journey consisting
of 8 farsakh, he should shorten his prayers.

***Issue*** 1321: \* If a person whose profession is travelling, stays
in his home town for 10 days or more, with or without the original
intention, he should offer full prayers during the first journey that he
undertakes after ten days. The same rule will apply, when he travels
after ten days from a place which is not his home town.

***Issue*** 1322: \* If a herdsman whose profession is travelling, stays
at his home town or any other place for 10 days with or without any
intention, he should, as a recommended precaution, perform both qasr and
full prayers when he undertakes his first journey after ten days.

***Issue*** 1323: \* If herdsmen or camel drivers who have travelling as
their profession, find it difficult and exhausting to conduct a
particular additional journey, they should pray qasr in it.

***Issue*** 1324: A person who tours different cities, and has not
adopted a homeland for himself, should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1325: \* If a person whose profession is not travelling, has
to travel quite often to transport a commodity he owns, he will pray
qasr, unless the travelling is so frequent that he becomes known as a
constant traveller.

***Issue*** 1326: If a person is not a professional traveller, and he
has abandoned his homeland and wants to adopt another homeland, he
should shorten his prayers while he is travelling.

• \* The eighth condition is that the traveller reaches the limit of
tarakhkhus, that is, at a point beyond which travelling begins. But if a

person is not in his hometown, the rule of tarakhkhus will not apply to
him. Just as he travels from his place of residence, his prayers will be
qasr.

***Issue*** 1327: \* The limit of tarakhkhus is a place where people of
the city do not see the traveller, and its sign is, when he does not see
them.

***Issue*** 1328: \* A traveller who is returning to his hometown will
continue praying qasr, till he enters the hometown. Similarly, a person
who intends to stay for ten days at a place, will offer qasr prayers,
till he reaches that place.

***Issue*** 1329: If a city is situated at such a height, that the
residents can be seen from a distance, or, if it is so low that if a
person covers a little distance, he would not see them, a traveller from
that city should offer qasr prayers applying that distance, which would
make him unable to see them were he travelling on a flat land. And if
the elevation or depression of the path varies abnormally, the traveller
should take an average mean into consideration.

***Issue*** 1330: If a person starts his journey from a place which is
uninhabited, he should shorten his prayers when he reaches a place from
which the residents, if they had been there, would not have been seen.

***Issue*** 1331: \* If a person travelling in a ship or on a train,
starts praying full prayers before reaching the point of tarakhkhus, and
if he reaches that point before having gone into the Ruku of the third
Rak'at, he should pray qasr.

***Issue*** 1332: \* In the situation mentioned above,if he reaches the
point of tarakhkhus after the Ruku of the third Rak'at, he can abandon
that prayer, and pray qasr.

***Issue*** 1333: \* If a person was sure that he had reached the point
of tarakhkhus, and accordingly started praying qasr, and then he
realised that at the time of prayers, he had not reached that point, he
should pray again. At that time when he realised this, if he has still
not reached the point of tarakhkhus, he will pray full, and if he has
already crossed the point, he will pray qasr. And if the time of prayer
has lapsed, he will give qadha.

***Issue*** 1334: \* If a person is gifted with an unusually sharp
eyesight, enabling him to see from a distance where others may not be
able to see, he will pray qasr from a point from where a person with
normal vision would not see the residents.

***Issue*** 1335: \* If a person doubts whether or not he has reached
the point of tarakhkhus he should offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1336: \* A traveller who is passing through his hometown, if
he makes a stopover there, he will pray full, otherwise, as an
obligatory precaution, he will combine both, full as well as qasr
prayers.

***Issue*** 1337: \* When a traveller reaches his hometown during his
journey, and makes a stopover there, he should offer full prayers as
long as he stays there. But, if he wishes to go from there to a distance
of 8 farsakh, or to go upto 4 farsakh and then return for the same
distance, he should offer qasr prayers when he reaches the limit of
tarakhkhus.

***Issue*** 1338: \* A place which a person adopts for his permanent
living is his home, irrespective of whether he was born there, or
whether it was the home of his parents, or whether he himself selected
it as his residence.

***Issue*** 1339: \* If a person intends to stay for some time at a
place which is not his original home town, and to later migrate to
another place, then such a place will not be considered as his home
(Watan).

***Issue*** 1340: \* A place which a person adopts for his residence is
his hometown (watan) even if he has not made a specific intention to
live there for ever. It is his watan, if the people there do not
consider him a traveller, inspite of his sojourn at other place where he
may be putting up for ten or less days.

***Issue*** 1341: If a person lives at two places, for example, he lives
in one city for six months, and in another for another six months, both
of them are his home(watan). And, if he adopts more than two places for
his living, all of them are reckoned to be his home (watan).

***Issue*** 1342: \* Some Fuqaha have said that if a person owns a house
at a place, and lives there continuously for six months, with the
intention of living there, he should, as long as that house is owned by
him, offer full prayers as and when he travels to that place. But this
verdict is not evidenced.

***Issue*** 1343: If a person reaches a place which was previously his
home, but has since abandoned it, he should not offer full prayers
there, even if he may not have adopted a new home (watan).

***Issue*** 1344: If a traveller intends to stay at a place continuously
for ten days, or knows that he will be obliged to stay at a place for
ten days, he should offer full prayers at that place.

***Issue*** 1345: If a traveller intends to stay at a place for ten
days, it is not necessary that his intention should be to stay there
during the first night or the eleventh night. And as soon as he
determines that he will stay there from sunrise on the first day up to
sunset of the tenth day, he should offer full prayers. Same will apply
if, for example, he intends staying there from noon of the first day up
to noon of the eleventh day.

***Issue*** 1346: A person who intends to stay at a place for ten days,
should offer full prayers if he wants to stay for ten days at that place
only. If he intends to spend, for example, ten days between Najaf and
Kufa, or between Tehran and Shamiran, he should offer qasr prayers.

***Issue*** 1347: \* If a traveller who wants to stay at a place for ten
days, has determined at the very outset, that during the period of ten
days, he will travel to surrounding places up to the limit of tarakhkhus
or more, and if the period of his going and returning is so brief, that
it cannot be considered as infringement of his intention of staying
there for 10 days, he should offer full prayers. But if it is considered
as an infringement, then he should pray qasr. For example, if he is away
from that place for a day and a night, then that prolonged period will
be breaking the intention, and he will pray qasr. But if he was away
for, say, half a day, returning by the evening, it will not be
considered as breaking the intention. Of course, if he travels
frequently from that place, giving an impression that he is visiting two
or more places, then he will pray qasr.

***Issue*** 1348: A traveller, who is not determined to stay at a place
for ten days, like, if his intention is that he will stay there for ten
days if his friend arrives, or if he finds a good house to stay in, he
should offer qasr prayers.

***Issue*** 1349: \* If a traveller has decided to stay at a place for
ten days, but at the same time, considers it probable that he may have
to leave earlier because of some hindrance, and if that suspicion is
justifiable, he should offer shortened prayers.

***Issue*** 1350: \* If a traveller knows, for example, that ten days or
more remain before the month ends, and decides to stay at a place till
the end of the month he should offer full prayers. But if he does not
know how many days remain before the end of the month, and simply
decides to stay till the end of the month, he should pray qasr, even if
it later turns out to be ten or more days.

***Issue*** 1351: If a traveller decides to stay at a place for ten days
and abandons the idea before offering one Salat consisting of four
Rak'ats, or becomes undecided, he should pray qasr. But, if he abandons
the idea of staying there after having offered one Salat consisting of
four Rak'ats, or wavers in his intention, he should offer full prayers
as long as he is at that place.

***Issue*** 1352: \* If a person who has determined to stay at a place
for ten days, keeps a fast and abandons the idea of staying there after
Zuhr, if he has offered one Salat consisting of four Rak'ats, his fast
on that day, and for as long as he is there, would be valid, and he
should offer full prayers. And if he has not offered a Salat consisting
of four Rak'ats, the fast kept by him on that day should be, as a
precaution, continued and its qadha be given later. He will then pray
qasr, and will not fast in the remaining days.

***Issue*** 1353: If a traveller who has decided to stay at a place for
ten days, abandons the idea, but doubts before changing his intention to
stay, whether or not he has offered one Salat consisting of four
Rak'ats, he should offer qasr prayers.

***Issue*** 1354: If a traveller starts prayers with the intention of
qasr, and decides during the prayers that he would stay there for ten
days or more, he should offer full prayers consisting of four Rak'ats.

***Issue*** 1355: \* If a traveller who has decided to stay at a place
for ten days, changes his mind during his first Salat consisting of four
Rak'ats, he should finish his prayers with two Rak'ats if he has not
started the third. And in the later days, he should continue with qasr.
Similarly, if he has started the third Rak'at, but has not gone into
Ruku, he should sit down, and complete the Salat in its shortened form.
But if, he has gone into Ruku, he can forsake that Salat, and pray again
as qasr. And for as long as he is there, he should pray qasr.

***Issue*** 1356: If a traveller who has decided to stay at a place for
ten days, stays there for more than ten days, he should offer full
prayers as long as he does not start travelling, and it is not necessary
that he should make a fresh intention for staying for further ten days.

***Issue*** 1357: \* A traveller who decides to stay at a place for ten
days, should keep the obligatory fast; he may also keep*Mustahab* fast,
and offer Nafila (*Mustahab* everyday prayers) of Zuhr, Asr and Isha
prayers.

***Issue*** 1358: \* If a traveller, who has decided to stay at a place
for ten days, if after offering a Salat of four Rak'ats (not qadha), or
after staying for ten days even without having offered one set of full
prayers, wishes to travel less than 4 farsakh away and to return, and to
stay again at his first place for ten days or less, he should offer full
prayers from the time he goes till he returns, and after his return. But
if his return to the place of his stay is only for passing through, on a
journey of eight farsakh or more, it will be necessary for him to offer
qasr prayers at the time of going, returning, and also at that place.

***Issue*** 1359: If a traveller who decides to stay at a place for ten
days, after offering Salat (not qadha) of four Rak'ats, decides to go to
another place less than 8 farsakh away, and to stay there for ten days,
he should offer full prayers while going, and at the place where he
intends to stay. But, if the place where he wants to go is 8 farsakh
away or more, he should shorten his prayers while going, and if he does
not want to stay there for ten days, he should shorten his prayers
during the period he stays there also.

***Issue*** 1360: If a traveller who has decided to stay at a place for
ten days, wishes, after offering Salat (not qadha) of four Rak'ats, to
go to a place which is less than 4 farsakh away, and is undecided about
returning to his first place, or is totally unmindful about it, or he
wishes to return, but is uncertain about staying for ten days, or is
totally unmindful of staying there for ten days, or travelling from
there, he should from the time of his going till returning, and after
his return offer full prayers.

***Issue*** 1361: If a person decides to stay at a place for ten days,
under the impression that his companions wish to stay there for ten
days, and after offering Salat (not qadha) of four Rak'ats, he learns
that they have made no such decision, he should offer full prayers as
long as he is there, even if he himself gives up the idea of remaining
there.

***Issue*** 1362: If a traveller stays at a place unexpectedly for
thirty days, like, if he remained undecided throughout those thirty
days, whether he should stay there or not, he should offer full prayers
after thirty days, even it be for a short period.

***Issue*** 1363: If a traveller intends to stay at a place for nine
days or less, and if after spending nine days or less, he decides to
extend his stay for further nine days or less, till thirty days, he
should offer full prayers on the thirty first day.

***Issue*** 1364: An undecided traveller will offer full prayers after
thirty days, if he stays for all thirty days at one place. If he stays
for a part of that period at one place, and the rest at another place,
he should offer qasr prayers even after thirty days.

Miscellaneous Rules
-------------------

***Issue*** 1365: \* A traveller can offer full prayers in Masjidul
Haram and Masjidul Nabi and Masjid of Kufa, and even in the entire
cities of Makkah, Madina and Kufa. He can also offer full prayers in the
Haram of Imam Husayn (A.S.), upto the distance of 25 armlengths from the
sacred tomb.

***Issue*** 1366: If a person who knows that he is a traveller, and
should offer qasr prayers, intentionally offers full prayers at places
other than the four mentioned above, his prayers are void. And the same
rule applies, if he forgets that a traveller must offer qasr prayers,
and prays full. However, if he prays full forgetting that a traveller
should offer shortened prayers, and

remembers after the time has lapsed, it is not necessary for him to give
the qadha.

***Issue*** 1367: \* If a person who knows that he is a traveller, and
should offer shortened prayers, offers full prayers by mistake, and
realises within the time for that Salat, he should pray again. And if he
realises after the lapse of time, he should give qadha as a precaution.

***Issue*** 1368: If a traveller does not know that he should shorten
his prayers, and if he offers full prayers, his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1369: \* If a traveller knew that he should offer shortened
prayers, but did not know its details, like, if he did not know that
shortened prayers should be offered when the distance of the journey is
of 8 farsakh, and if he offers full prayers, as an obligatory
precaution, he should repeat the prayers if he comes to know the rule
within the time of Salat, and if he does not do that, he will give its
qadha. But if he learns of the rule after the time has lapsed, there is
no qadha.

***Issue*** 1370: If a traveller knows that he should offer shortened
prayers, but offers full prayers under the impression that his journey
is less than 8 farsakh, when he learns that his journey has been of 8
farsakh, he should repeat the prayers as qasr. And if he learns after
the time for the prayers has lapsed, it is not necessary for him to
offer qadha.

***Issue*** 1371: If a person forgets that he is a traveller and offers
complete prayers, and if he remembers this within the time for prayers,
he should pray qasr, and if he realises this after the time is over, it
is not obligatory for him to offer qadha of that prayers.

***Issue*** 1372: \* If a person who should offer complete prayers,
offers qasr instead, his prayers are void in all circumstances; and as a
precaution, this will apply even when he ignorantly prays qasr, at a
place where he stopped for 10 days.

***Issue*** 1373: If a person begins a prayer of four Rak'ats, and
remembers during prayers that he is a traveller, or realises that his
journey is of 8 farsakh, if he has not gone into the Ruku of the third
Rak'at, he should complete Salat with two Rak'ats. But if he has gone
into the Ruku of the third Rak'at, his prayer is void. If he has at his
disposal, time even to offer one Rak'at, he should offer qasr prayers.

***Issue*** 1374: \* If a traveller is not aware of some of the details
regarding the prayers during travel, for example, if he does not know
that if he goes on an outward journey of 4 farsakh, and a return journey
of 4 farsakh, he should offer shortened prayers, and he engages in
prayers with the intention of offering four Rak'ats, if he comes to know
the rule before Ruku of the third Rak'at, he should complete the prayers
with two Rak'ats. But if he learns of this rule during Ruku, his prayers
as a precaution are void. And if he has time at his disposal, even to
offer one Rak'at of prayers, he should offer qasr prayers.

***Issue*** 1375: If a traveller who should offer complete prayers,
ignorantly makes a niyyat for qasr and learns about the rule during
Salat, he should complete the Salat with four Rak'ats, and the
recommended precaution is that after the completion of the prayers, he
should offer a prayer of four Rak'ats once again.

***Issue*** 1376: If before the time of prayers lapses, a traveller who
has not offered prayers reaches his hometown, or a place where he
intends to stay for ten days, he should offer full prayers. And if a
person who is not on a journey, does not offer prayers within its time,
and then proceeds on a journey, he should offer the prayers during his
journey in shortened form.

***Issue*** 1377: If the Zuhr, Asr, or Isha prayers of a traveller, who
should have offered qasr prayers, becomes qadha, he should perform its
qadha as qasr, even if he gives qadha at his hometown or while he is not
travelling. And if a non-traveller makes one of the above three prayers
qadha, he should perform its qadha as full, even if he may be travelling
at the time he offers the qadha.

***Issue*** 1378: \* It is*Mustahab* that a traveller should say thirty
times after every qasr prayers: “Subhanallahi walhamdu lillahi wala
ilaha illallahu wallahu Akbar”. More emphasis is laid on this after
Zuhr, Asr and Isha prayers. In fact, it is better that it is repeated
sixty times after these three prayers.

Qadha Prayers
-------------

***Issue*** 1379: \* A person who does not offer his daily prayers
within time, should offer qadha prayers even if he slept, or was
unconscious during the entire time prescribed for the prayers.
Similarly, qadha must be given for all other obligatory prayers, if they
are not offered within time, and as an obligatory precaution, this
includes those Salat which one makes obligatory upon oneself by Nazr, to
offer within a fixed period. But the prayers of Eid-ul-Fitr and
Eid-ul-Adha have no qadha, and the ladies who have to leave out daily
prayers, or any other obligatory prayers, due to Haidh or Nifas, do not
have to give any qadha for them.

***Issue*** 1380: If a person realises after the time for the prayers
has lapsed, that the prayers which he offered in time was void, he
should perform its qadha prayers.

***Issue*** 1381: A person having qadha prayers on him, should not be
careless about offering them, although it is not obligatory for him to
offer it immediately.

***Issue*** 1382: A person who has qadha prayers on him, can
offer*Mustahab* prayers.

***Issue*** 1383: If a person suspects that he might have qadha on him,
or that the prayers offered by him were not valid, it is*Mustahab* that,
as a measure of precaution, he should offer their qadha.

***Issue*** 1384: It is not necessary to maintain sequential order in
the offering of qadha, except in the case of prayers for which order has
been prescribed, like, Zuhr and Asr prayers or Maghrib and Isha prayers
of the same day. However, it is better to maintain order in other qadha
prayers also.

***Issue*** 1385: If a person wishes to offer some qadha prayers for
other than the daily prayer, like Salat al-Ayaat, or, for example, if he
wishes to offer one daily prayer and a few other prayers, it is not
necessary to maintain order in offering them.

***Issue*** 1386: If a person forgets the sequential order of the
prayers which he has not offered, it is better that he should offer them
in such a way, that he would be sure that he has offered them in the
order in which they lapsed. For example, if it is obligatory for him to
offer one qadha prayer of Zuhr and one of Maghrib, and he does not know
which of them lapsed first he should first offer one qadha for Maghrib
and thereafter one Zuhr prayer, and then one Maghrib once again, or he
should offer one Zuhr prayer and then one Maghrib prayer, and then one
Zuhr prayer once again, so that he is sure that the qadha prayers which
lapsed first has been offered first.

***Issue*** 1387: If Zuhr prayers of one day and Asr prayers of another
day, or two Zuhr prayers or two Asr prayers of a person becomes qadha,
and if he does not know which of them lapsed first, it will be
sufficient if he offers two prayers of four Rak'ats each, with the
niyyat that the first is the qadha prayer of the first day, and the
second is the qadha prayer of the second day.

***Issue*** 1388: If one Zuhr prayer and one Isha prayer, or one Asr
prayer and one Isha prayer of a person become qadha, and he does not
know which of them lapsed first, it is better that he should perform
their qadha in a way that would ensure that he has maintained the order.
For example, if one Zuhr

prayer and one Isha prayer have lapsed, and he does not know which of
them lapsed first, he should first offer one Zuhr prayer, followed by
one Isha prayer, and then one Zuhr prayer once again, or he should first
offer one Isha prayer, and thereafter one Zuhr prayer, and then one Isha
prayer once again.

***Issue*** 1389: If a person knows that he has not offered a prayer
consisting of four Rak'ats, but does not know whether it is Zuhr or
Isha, it will be sufficient to offer a four Rak'at prayer with the
niyyat of offering qadha prayer for the Salat not offered. And as far as
reciting loudly or silently, he will have an option.

***Issue*** 1390: If five prayers of a person have lapsed one after
another, and he does not know which of them was first, he should offer
nine prayers in order. For example, he commences with Fajr prayer and
after having offered Zuhr, Asr, Maghrib and Isha prayers, he should
offer again Fajr, Zuhr, Asr and Maghrib prayers. This way he will ensure
the requisite order.

***Issue*** 1391: If a person knows that one prayer on each day has
lapsed, but does not know its order, it is better that he should offer
daily prayers of five days; and if his six prayers of six days have
lapsed, he should offer six days' daily prayers. Thus for every qadha
prayer of an additional day, he should offer an additional day's
prayers, so that he may become sure that he has offered the prayers in
the same order in which they had become qadha. For example, if he has
not offered seven prayers of seven days, he should perform qadha prayers
of seven days.

***Issue*** 1392: If a person has a number of Fajr or Zuhr prayers qadha
on him, and he does not know their exact number, or has forgotten, for
example, if he does not know whether they were three, four or five
prayers, it will be sufficient if he offers the smaller number. However,
it is better that he should offer enough qadha to ensure, that he has
offered all of them. For example, if he has forgotten how many Fajr
prayers of his have become qadha and is certain that they were not more
than ten, he should, as a measure of precaution, offer ten Fajr prayers.

***Issue*** 1393: \* If a person has only one qadha prayer of previous
days, it is better that he should offer it first, and then start
offering prayers of that day, if the time of Fadhilat is not lost. And
if he has no pending qadha of previous days, but has one or more of the
same day, it is better that he should offer qadha prayers of that day
before offering the present obligatory prayers, provided that, in so
doing, the time of Fadhilat is not lost.

***Issue*** 1394: \* If a person remembers during the prayers that one
or more prayers of that same day have become qadha, or that he has to
offer only one qadha prayer of the previous days, he should convert his
niyyat to qadha prayers, provided that (a) time allows, (b) converting
the niyyat is possible, (c) and the time of Fadhilat is not lost. For
example, if he remembers before Ruku of the third Rak'at in Zuhr that
his Fajr prayers was qadha, and if the time for Zuhr is not limited, he
should convert his niyyat to Fajr prayer, and complete it with two
Rak'ats, and then offer Zuhr prayer. But, if the time is limited, or if
he cannot convert his niyyat to qadha like, when he remembers in Ruku of
the third Rak'at of Zuhr, that he has not offered the Fajr prayers,

and by converting the niyyat to Fajr prayers, one Ruku which is a Rukn
will increase, he should not change his niyyat to the qadha Fajr prayer.

***Issue*** 1395: If a person is required to offer a number of qadha
prayers of previous days, together with one or more prayers of that very
day, and if he does not have time to offer qadha of all of them, or does
not wish to offer qadha of all of them on that day, it is*Mustahab* to
offer the qadha of that day before offering ada (the same day's)
prayers, and it is better that after offering previous qadha, he should
once again give qadha of that day, which he had offered earlier.

***Issue*** 1396: As long as a person is alive, no other person can
offer his qadha on his behalf, even if he himself is unable to offer
them.

***Issue*** 1397: Qadha prayers can be offered in congregation,
irrespective of whether the prayers of the Imam are ada or qadha. And it
is not necessary that both of them should be offering the same prayers;
there is no harm if a person offers qadha Fajr prayers with the Zuhr
prayer or Asr prayers of the Imam.

***Issue*** 1398: It is recommended that a discerning child, one who can
distinguish between good and evil, is made to form the habit of praying
regularly, and to perform other acts of worship. In fact, it
is*Mustahab* that he is encouraged to offer qadha prayers.

Qadha Prayers of a Father is Obligatory on the Eldest Son
---------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1399: If a person did not offer some of his obligatory
prayers, and did not care to give qadha, in spite of being able to do
so, after his death, it is upon his eldest son, as an obligatory
precaution to perform those qadha, provided that the father did not
leave them as a deliberate act of transgression. If the son cannot do
so, he may hire someone to perform them. The qadha prayers of his mother
is not obligatory upon him, though it is better if he performs them.

***Issue*** 1400: If the eldest son doubts whether or not his father had
any qadha on him, he is under no obligation.

***Issue*** 1401: If the eldest son knows that his father had a certain
number of qadha prayers on him, but he is in doubt whether his father
offered them or not, he should offer them, as an obligatory precaution.

***Issue*** 1402: If it is not known as to who is the eldest son of a
person, it is not obligatory on anyone of the sons to offer their
father's qadha prayers. However, the*Mustahab* precaution is that they
should divide his qadha between them, or should draw lots for offering
them.

***Issue*** 1403: If a dying person makes a will that someone should be
hired to offer his qadha prayers, and if the hired person performs them
correctly, the eldest son will be free from his obligation.

***Issue*** 1404: If the eldest son wishes to offer the qadha prayers of
his mother, then in the matter of loud or silent recitations in Salat,
he will follow the rules which apply to him. So, he should offer the
qadha prayers of his mother for Fajr, Maghrib and Isha prayers loudly.

***Issue*** 1405: If a person has to offer his own qadha prayers, and he
also wishes to offer the qadha prayers of his parents, whichever he
offers first will be in order.

***Issue*** 1406: \* If the eldest son was minor, or insane at the time
of his father's death, it will not be obligatory upon him to offer qadha
of his father when he attains puberty or becomes sane.

***Issue*** 1407: If the eldest son of a person dies before offering the
qadha prayers of his father, it will not be obligatory on the second
son.

Congregational Prayers
----------------------

***Issue*** 1408: It is*Mustahab* that obligatory prayers, especially
the daily prayers, are performed in congregation, and more emphasis has
been laid on congregational prayers for Fajr, Maghrib and Isha, and also
for those who live in the neighbourhood of a mosque, and are able to
hear its Adhan.

***Issue*** 1409: It has been reported in authentic traditions, that the
congregational prayers are twenty five times better than the prayers
offered alone.

***Issue*** 1410: It is not permissible to absent oneself from the
congregational prayers unduly, and it is not proper to abandon
congregational prayers without a justifiable excuse.

***Issue*** 1411: \* It is*Mustahab* to defer prayers with an intention
to participate in congregational prayers, because a short congregational
prayer is better than a prolonged prayer offered alone. It is also
better than the individual prayer offered at its prime time. But it is
not known whether a congregational prayer offered after the Fadhilat
time could be better than the prayer offered alone, within the time of
Fadhilat.

***Issue*** 1412: When congregational prayers are being offered, it
is*Mustahab* for a person, who has already offered his prayers alone, to
repeat the prayers in congregation. And if he learns later that his
first prayer was void, the second prayer will suffice.

***Issue*** 1413: \* If the Imam (leader) or the Ma'mum (follower)
wishes to join a congregation prayer again, after having already prayed
in congregation once, there is no objection if it is done with the
niyyat of Raja', since its being*Mustahab* is not established.

***Issue*** 1414: If a person is so obsessed with doubts and anxiety
during prayers, that it leads to its invalidity, and if he finds peace
only in congregational prayers, he must offer prayers in congregation.

***Issue*** 1415: \* If a father or a mother orders his/her son to offer
prayers in congregation, as a recommended precaution, he should obey.
And if this order is based on parental love, and if disobedience would
cause injury to their feelings, it is haraam for the son to disobey,
even if it does not incur the parental wrath.

***Issue*** 1416: \**Mustahab* prayers as a precaution cannot be offered
in congregation in any situation, except Istisqa prayers (invoked for
the rain) or prayers which were obligatory at one time, but
became*Mustahab* later, like, Eid ul Fitr and Eid ul Azha prayers, which
are obligatory during the presence of Ma'soom Imam (A.S.) and
are*Mustahab* during his occultation.

***Issue*** 1417: When an Imam is leading a congregation for the daily
prayers, one can follow him for any of the daily prayers.

***Issue*** 1418: \* If Imam of the congregation is offering his own
qadha, or on behalf of another person whose qadha is certain, he can be
followed. However, if he is offering the qadha, his own or on behalf of
the other, as a precaution, it is not permissible to follow him, unless
the prayers being offered by the follower is also based on a precaution
similar to that of Imam. However, it is not necessary that the follower
may not have another reason for precaution.

***Issue*** 1419: If a person does not know whether the prayers of Imam
is an obligatory daily prayer or*Mustahab* prayer, he cannot follow him.

***Issue*** 1420: \* For the validity of congregation, it is a condition
that there should be no obstruction between the Imam and the follower,
nor between one follower and the other follower, who is a link between
him and the Imam. An obstruction means something which separates them,
regardless of whether it prevents seeing each other, like in the case of
a curtain, or a wall, or does not prevent, like in the case of a glass
wall. Therefore, if there is an obstruction, at any time of the prayers,
between Imam and the follower or between the followers themselves, thus
breaking the link, congregation will be void. But women are exempted
from this rule, as will be explained in due course.

***Issue*** 1421: If the persons standing at the end of the first row,
cannot see the Imam because the line is very long, they can still follow
him; similarly if the following rows are very long, and persons standing
at the far end cannot see the line before, they can follow the
congregation.

***Issue*** 1422: If the rows of the congregation extend to the gate of
the mosque, the prayers of a person standing in front of the gate behind
the line will be in order, and the prayers of those followers who stand
behind him will also be valid. In fact, the prayers of those who are
standing on either sides, and are linked with the congregation by means
of another follower, will also be in order.

***Issue*** 1423: If a person who is standing behind a pillar is not
linked with the Imam by another follower from either side, he cannot
follow the Imam.

***Issue*** 1424: \* The place where Imam stands should not be higher
than the place of the follower, unless the height is negligible. And, if
the ground has a slope, the Imam should stand at the higher end. But if
the slope is so small that people ordinarily consider the ground as
flat, there will be no objection.

***Issue*** 1425: In the congregational prayers, there is no objection
if the place where followers stand is higher than that of the Imam. But
if it is so high, that it cannot be considered that they have assembled
together, then the congregation is not in order.

***Issue*** 1426: \* If a discerning child, one who is able to
distinguish good from evil, stands between two persons in one line, thus
causing a distance, their prayers in congregation will be valid as long
as they do not have knowledge about that child's Salat having become
void.

***Issue*** 1427: If after the takbir of the Imam, the persons in the
front row are ready for prayers and are about to say takbir, a person
standing in the back row can say takbir. However, the recommended
precaution is that he should wait, till the takbir of the front row has
been pronounced.

***Issue*** 1428: If a person knows that the prayers of one of the rows
in front is void, he cannot follow the Imam in the back rows, but if he
does not know whether the prayers of those persons are in order or not,
he may follow.

***Issue*** 1429: If a person knows that the prayers of the Imam is
void - like, if he knows that the Imam is without Wudhu, though the Imam
himself may not be mindful of the fact, he cannot follow that Imam.

***Issue*** 1430: \* If the follower learns after the prayers, that the
Imam was not a just person ('Adil), or was a disbeliever, or his Salat
was void for any other reason, like, having no Wudhu, his own Salat will
be valid.

***Issue*** 1431: \* If a person doubts during Salat whether he has
followed the Imam or not, he will rely upon the signs which
satisfactorily lead him to believing that he has been following. For
example, if he finds himself listening silently to the Qir'at of Imam,
he should complete the prayers with the congregation. But if he is in a
situation where no such decision can be made, he should complete his
prayers as one offered individually (i.e.Furada).

***Issue*** 1432: \* If a person decides to separate himself during
congregational Salat into the niyyat of Furada without any excuse, his
congregational prayers will be incorrect, but his Salat will be valid.
Except when he has not acted according to the rules related to Furada
prayers, or if he has committed an act which invalidates Furada prayers,
like having performed an extra Ruku. In fact, in certain situation, his
prayers will be valid even if he has not followed the rules of Furada.
For example, if he did not have the intention from the beginning to
separate himself, and therefore did not recite Qira't, and decided in
Ruku, his prayer will be valid when converted to Furada.

***Issue*** 1433: \* If the follower makes an intention of Furada after
the Imam has recited Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, because of some
good excuse, it will not be necessary for him to recite Surah al-Hamd
and the other Surah. But if he makes the intention of Furada before Imam
has completed Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, it will be necessary
for him to recite the part recited by the Imam.

***Issue*** 1434: \* If a person makes the intention of Furada during
the congregation prayers, he cannot revert back to congregational
prayers again. But, if he is undecided whether he should make the
intention of Furada or not, and eventually decides to end the prayers
with congregation, his prayers with the congregation will be in order.

***Issue*** 1435: If a person doubts whether he had made an intention of
Furada during the congregational prayers, he should consider that he had
not made the intention.

***Issue*** 1436: \* If a person joins the Imam at the time of Ruku, and
participates in Ruku of the Imam, his prayer is in order, even if the
Zikr by the Imam may have come to an end. It will be treated as one
Rak'at. However, if he goes to Ruku and misses Imam's Ruku, he can
complete his prayers as Furada.

***Issue*** 1437: \* If a person joins the Imam when he is in Ruku, and
as he bows, he doubts whether or not he reached the Ruku of the Imam,
his congregational prayer will be valid if that doubt occurs after the
Ruku was over. Otherwise, he can complete his prayers with the niyyat of
Furada.

***Issue*** 1438: \* If a person joins the Imam when he is in Ruku, but
before he bows to Ruku, the Imam raises his head from his Ruku, that
person has a choice either to complete his prayers as Furada, or to
continue with the Imam upto Sajdah, with the niyyat of Qurbat. Then when
he stands, he can

do takbir other than Takbiratul Ihram, as a general Zikr, and continue
with the congregation.

***Issue*** 1439: If a person joins the Imam from the beginning of the
prayers or during the time ofSurah al-Hamd and the other Surah, and if
it so happens that, before he goes into Ruku, Imam raises his head from
Ruku, his prayers will be in order.

***Issue*** 1440: \* If a person arrives for prayers when the Imam is
reciting the last tashahhud, and if he wishes to earn 'thawab' of
congregational prayers, he should sit down after making niyyat, and
pronouncing takbiratul ehram, and may recite tashahhud with the Imam,
but not the Salam, and then wait till the Imam says Salam of the
prayers. Then he should stand up, and without making niyyat and takbir,
begin to recite Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah treating it as the
first Rak'at of his prayers.

***Issue*** 1441: \* The followers should not stand in front of the
Imam, and, as an obligatory precaution, when the followers are many,
they should not stand in line with Imam. But if there is only one male
follower, he may stand in line with Imam.

***Issue*** 1442: If the Imam is a male and the follower is a female,
and if there is a curtain or something similar between that woman and
the Imam, or between that woman and another male follower, and the woman
is linked to the Imam through that male, there is no harm in it.

***Issue*** 1443: If after the commencement of the prayers, a curtain or
something similar intervenes between the follower and the Imam, or
between one follower and the other, through whom the follower is linked
to the Imam, the congregation will be invalidated, and it will be
necessary for the follower to act according to Furada obligation.

***Issue*** 1444: \* As an obligatory precaution, the distance between
the place where the follower performs Sajdah, and where the Imam stands,
should not be more than a foot, and the same rule applies to a person
who is linked with the Imam through another follower standing in front.
And the recommended precaution is that the distance between the rows
should be just enough to allow a person to do Sajdah.

***Issue*** 1445: \* If a follower is linked to the Imam by means of a
person, on his either side, and is not linked to the Imam in front, the
obligatory precaution is that he should not be at a distance of more
than a foot from his companions on either side.

***Issue*** 1446: If during the prayers, a distance of one foot occurs
between the follower and the Imam, or between the follower and the
person through whom he is linked to the Imam, he (the follower) will be
isolated and can, therefore, continue as Furada.

***Issue*** 1447: \* If the prayers of all the persons who are in the
front row comes to an end, and if they do not resume congregational
prayers, the congregational prayers of the person in the back rows will
be void. In fact, even if they resume, the validity of congregational
prayers of the people in the back rows is questionable.

***Issue*** 1448: \* If a person joins the Imam in the second Rak'at, it
is not necessary for him to recite Surah al-Hamd and Surah, but he may
recite qunut and tashahhud with the Imam, and the precaution is that, at
the time

of reciting tashahhud, he should keep the fingers of his hands and the
inner part of his feet on the ground and raise his knees. And after the
tashahhud, he should stand up with the Imam and should recite Surah
al-Hamd and Surah. And if he does not have time for the other Surah, he
should complete Surah al-Hamd, and join the Imam in Ruku, and if he
cannot join the Imam in Ruku, he can discontinue Sura al-Hamd and join.
But in this case, the recommended precaution is that he should complete
his prayers as Furada.

***Issue*** 1449: If a person joins the Imam when he is in the second
Rak'at of the Salat having four Rak'ats, he should sit after the two
Sajdah in the second Rak'at, which will be the third of the Imam, and
recite*Wajib* parts of tashahhud, and should then stand up. And if he
does not have time to recite the Tasbihat Arba'ah thrice, he should
recite it once, and then join the Imam in Ruku.

***Issue*** 1450: If Imam is in the third or fourth Rak'at, and one
knows that if he joins him and recite Surah al-Hamd he will not be able
to reach him in Ruku, as an obligatory precaution, he should wait till
Imam goes to Ruku and then join.

***Issue*** 1451: \* If a person joins the Imam when he is in the state
of qiyam of third or fourth Rak'at, he should recite Surah al-Hamd and
the other Surah, and if he does not have time for the other Surah, he
should complete Surah al-Hamd and join the Imam in Ruku. But if he has
no time even for Surah al-Hamd, he may leave it incomplete and join Imam
in Ruku. But in this case, the recommended precaution is that he should
change to Furada.

***Issue*** 1452: \* If a person who knows that if he completes Surah or
qunut, he will not be able to join the Imam in his Ruku, yet he
purposely recites Surah or qunut, and misses the Imam in Ruku, his
congregational prayer will be void, and should act accordingly to the
rules of Furada prayers.

***Issue*** 1453: \* If a person is satisfied that if he commences a
Surah or completes it, he will be able to join the Imam in his Ruku,
provided that the Surah does not take very long, it is better for him to
commence the Surah or to complete it, if he has already started. But if
the Surah will take too long, till no semblance of congregation exists,
he should not commence it, and if he has commenced it, he should not
complete it.

***Issue*** 1454: \* If a person is sure that if he recites the other
Surah, he will be able to join the Imam in Ruku, and then if he recites
the Surah and misses the Imam in Ruku, his congregational prayers are in
order.

***Issue*** 1455: If Imam is standing, and the follower does not know in
which Rak'at he is, he can join him, but he should recite Surah al-Hamd
and the other Surah with the niyyat of Qurbat though he may come to know
later that the Imam was in the first or second Rak'at.

***Issue*** 1456: \* If a person does not recite Surah al-Hamd and
Surah, under the impression that the Imam is in the first or second
Rak'at, and realises after Ruku that he was in the third or fourth, his
prayers are in order. However, if he realises this before Ruku, he
should recite Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, and if he does not have
sufficient time for this, he should act according to rule no. 1451.

***Issue*** 1457: If a person recites Surah al-Hamd and Surah under the
impression that the Imam is in the third or fourth Rak'at, and realises
before

or after Ruku that he was in the first or second, his (i.e. the
followers') prayers are in order, and if he realises this while reciting
Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, it will not be necessary for him to
complete them.

***Issue*** 1458: If a congregational prayer begins while a person is
offering a*Mustahab* prayers, and if he is not sure that if he completes
his*Mustahab* prayers, he will be able to join the congregational
prayers, it is*Mustahab* to abandon the*Mustahab* prayers, and join the
congregational prayers. In fact, if he is not certain that he will be
able to join the first Rak'at, he should follow this rule.

***Issue*** 1459: If a congregational prayer begins while a person is
offering a prayer of three or four Rak'ats, and if he has not gone into
Ruku of the third Rak'at, and is not sure whether upon completion, he
will be able to join the congregational prayers, it is*Mustahab* to end
the prayers with the niyyat of*Mustahab* prayers of two Raka'ts, and
join the congregational prayers.

***Issue*** 1460: If the prayers of the Imam comes to an end, but the
follower is still reciting tashahhud or the first Salam, it is not
necessary for him to make the intention of Furada.

***Issue*** 1461: \* If a person is behind the Imam by one Rak'at, it is
better that when the Imam is reciting tashahhud of the last Rak'at, he
(the follower) should place the fingers of his hands and the inner part
of his feet on the ground, and raise his knees, and wait till the Imam
says Salam of the prayers and then stand up. And if he makes niyyat of
Furada at that very moment, there is no harm in it.

Qualification of an Imam of Congregational Prayers
--------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1462: \* The Imam of the congregational prayers should be:

• Adult (Baligh)

• Sane

• Ithna 'Ashari Shi'ah

• 'Adil

• Of legitimate birth

• Being able to offer the prayers correctly

Furthermore, if the follower is a male, the Imam also should be a male.
To follow a boy of ten years of age is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 1463: If a person who once considered an Imam to be 'Adil,
doubts whether he continues to be 'Adil, he can follow him.

***Issue*** 1464: A person who offers prayers standing, cannot follow a
person who offers his prayers while sitting or lying, and a person who
offers his prayers while sitting, cannot follow a person who offers his
prayers while lying.

***Issue*** 1465: A person who offers prayers sitting, can follow
another person who offers his prayers while sitting. But if a person
offers prayers while lying, for him to follow a person who offers
prayers in sitting or lying position is a matter of*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 1466: If Imam, because of some justified excuse, leads the
prayers in a najis dress, or with tayammum, or jabira Wudhu, it is
permissible to follow him.

***Issue*** 1467: If Imam is suffering from incontinence, whereby he
cannot control his urine or excretion, it is permissible to follow him.
Moreover, a woman, who is not mustahaza can follow a woman who is
mustahaza.

***Issue*** 1468: \* It is better that a person who suffers from
blotches or leprosy does not lead the congregational prayers, and, on
the basis of obligatory precaution, a person who has been subjected to
Islamic punishment should not be followed.

Rules of Congregational Prayers
-------------------------------

***Issue*** 1469: When a follower makes his niyyat, it is necessary for
him to specify the Imam. But, it is not necessary for him to know his
name. If he makes niyyat that he is following the Imam of the present
congregation, his prayer is in order.

***Issue*** 1470: It is necessary for the follower to recite all the
things of the prayers himself, except Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah.
However, if his first or second Rak'at coincides with third or fourth
Rak'at of the Imam, he should recite Surah al-Hamd and Surah.

***Issue*** 1471: If the follower hears Surah al-Hamd and Surah of Imam
in the first and second Rak'at of the Fajr, Maghrib and Isha prayers, he
should not recite them, even if he may not be able to distinguish the
words. And if he does not hear the voice of the Imam, it is*Mustahab*
that he should recite Surah al-Hamd and Surah silently. But if he
recites them loudly by mistake, there is no harm.

***Issue*** 1472: \* If the follower hears some words of Surah al-Hamd
and the other Surah recited by Imam, he may recite as much as he cannot
hear.

***Issue*** 1473: If the follower recites Surah al-Hamd and the other
Surah by mistake, or recites Surah al-Hamd and Surah thinking that the
voice he heard was not the voice of Imam, and if he later realises that
it was the voice of Imam, his prayers are in order.

***Issue*** 1474: If a follower doubts whether he is hearing the voice
of Imam, or if he does not know whether the voice he hears is that of
Imam or someone else, he can recite Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah.

***Issue*** 1475: \*The follower should not recite Surah al-Hamd and
Surah in the first and second Rak'ats of Zuhr and Asr prayers and it
is*Mustahab* that instead of them he should recite Zikr.

***Issue*** 1476: The follower should not say Takbiratul ehram before
the Imam. As an obligatory precaution, he should not say the takbir
until the takbir of the Imam is completed.

***Issue*** 1477: \* If the follower says the Salam by mistake, before
the Imam does it, his prayer is in order, and it is not necessary that
he should say Salam again along with the Imam. And even if he says Salam
before the Imam intentionally, there is no objection.

***Issue*** 1478: \* If a follower recites other parts of prayers other
than Takbiratul ehram before the Imam, there is no objection. But, if he
hears them being recited by the Imam, or if he knows when Imam is going
to recite them, the recommended precaution is that he should not recite
them before the Imam.

***Issue*** 1479: It is necessary for the follower that, besides that
which is recited in the prayers, he should perform all acts like Ruku
and Sajdah with

the Imam or a little after him, and if he performs them before the Imam,
or after a considerable delay, intentionally, his congregational prayers
becomes void. However, if he converts to Furada, his prayers will be in
order.

***Issue*** 1480: \* If a follower raises his head from Ruku before the
Imam by mistake, and if the Imam is still in Ruku, he (the follower)
should return to Ruku, and then raise his head with the Imam. In this
case, the extra Ruku, which is a Rukn, will not invalidate the prayers.
However, if Imam raises his head before the follower reaches him, as a
precaution, the prayer of the follower will be void.

***Issue*** 1481: \* If a follower raises his head by mistake, and sees
that the Imam is in Sajdah, as a precaution, he should return to Sajdah,
and if it happens in both the Sajdah, the prayers will not be void,
although a Rukn has been added.

***Issue*** 1482: \* If a person raises his head from Sajdah before the
Imam by mistake, and as he returns to Sajdah he realises that the Imam
has already raised his head, his prayer is in order. But, if it happens
in both the Sajdah, as a precaution, his prayer is void.

***Issue*** 1483: If a follower raises his head from Ruku or Sajdah
before Imam by mistake, and does not return to Ruku or Sajdah
forgetfully, or thinking that he will not reach the Imam, his
congregational prayer is in order.

***Issue*** 1484: If a follower raises his head from Sajdah and sees
that the Imam is still in Sajdah, he joins the Imam in Sajdah thinking
that it is Imam's first, and later realises that it was actually Imam's
second, the follower should consider his own Sajdah also as second. But
if he goes into Sajdah thinking that it is the second Sajdah of Imam,
and later learns that it was Imam's first, he should join Imam in that
Sajdah, and also in the subsequent one. In both the cases, however, it
is better that he prays again, after completing the congregational
prayers.

***Issue*** 1485: If a follower goes to Ruku before the Imam by mistake,
and realises that if he raises his head, he may reach some part of the
Qir'at (surah) of the Imam, and if he does so, then goes to Ruku again
with the Imam, his prayers are in order. And if he does not return
intentionally, his prayers are void.

***Issue*** 1486: If a follower goes to Ruku before Imam by mistake, and
realises that if he returns to the state of Qiyam, he will not reach any
part of the Qir'at of Imam, if he raises his head just for the sake of
offering prayers with the Imam, and then goes to Ruku again with Imam,
his congregational prayers are in order. Also, if he does not return (to
the state of Qiyam) intentionally, his prayers will be in order, and
will become Furada.

***Issue*** 1487: If a follower goes to Sajdah before the Imam by
mistake, and if he raises his head with the intention of joining Imam,
and doing Sajdah with the Imam, his congregational prayers are in order.
And if he does not return intentionally, his prayers are in order, but
it will turn into Furada.

***Issue*** 1488: If Imam mistakenly recites qunut in a Rak'at which
does not have qunut, or recites tashahhud in a Rak'at which does not
have tashahhud, the follower should not recite qunut or tashahhud. But,
he cannot go to Ruku

before the Imam or rise before the Imam rises. In fact, he should wait
till the qunut or tashahhud of Imam ends, and offer the remaining
prayers with him.

Guidelines for Imam and the Follower
------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1489: \* If there is only one male follower, it is*Mustahab*
that he stands at the right hand side of Imam, and if there is only one
female follower, she will stand in the same direction, but slightly
behind so that when she goes to Sajdah, her head is in line with Imam's
knees. If there is one male, and one or more females in the
congregation, the male will position himself to the right of Imam, and
the females will all stand behind Imam. When there are many men and one
or many women in the congregation, men will stand behind Imam, and women
will stand behind the male followers.

***Issue*** 1490: If Imam and the followers are both women, the
obligatory precaution is that all of them should stand in a line, and
the Imam should not stand in front of others.

***Issue*** 1491: It is*Mustahab* that the Imam positions himself in the
middle of the line, and the learned and pious persons occupy the first
row.

***Issue*** 1492: It is*Mustahab* that the rows of the congregation are
properly arranged, and that there be no gap between the persons standing
in one row; all standing shoulder to shoulder.

***Issue*** 1493: It is*Mustahab* that after the Qadqa matis salah' has
been pronounced, the followers should rise.

***Issue*** 1494: It is*Mustahab* that the Imam of the congregation
should take into account the condition of those followers who may be
infirm or weaker, and should not prolong qunut, Ruku and Sajdah, except
when he knows that the people following him are so inclined.

***Issue*** 1495: It is*Mustahab* that while reciting Surah al-Hamd and
the other Surah, and the Zikr loudly, the Imam of the congregation makes
his voice audible. But care must be taken to see that the voice is not
abnormally loud.

***Issue*** 1496: If Imam realises in Ruku, that a person who has just
arrived wants to join him, it is*Mustahab* that he prolongs the Ruku
twice over. He should then stand up, even if he may realise that another
person has also arrived to join.

Things which are Makrooh in Congregational Prayers
--------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1497: If there is vacant space in the rows of the
congregation, it is Makrooh for a person to stand alone.

***Issue*** 1498: It is Makrooh for the follower to recite the Zikr in
the prayers in such a way that Imam hears them.

***Issue*** 1499: It is Makrooh for a traveller, who offers Zuhr, Asr
and Isha prayers in shortened form (two Rak'ats), to follow a person who
is not a traveller. And it is Makrooh for a person who is not a
traveller to follow a traveller in those prayers.

Salat al-Ayaat
--------------

***Issue*** 1500: \* Salat al-Ayaat whose methods will be explained
later, becomes obligatory due the following four things:

• Solar Eclipse

• Lunar Eclipse

The prayer becomes*Wajib* even if the moon or the sun are partially
eclipsed, and even if they do not engender any fear.

• Earthquake, as an obligatory precaution, even if no one is frightened.

• Thunder and lightning, red and black cyclone and other similar
celestial phenomena, which frightens most of the people; similarly for
the terrestrial events like receding sea water, or falling mountains
which engender fear in these circumstances, as per recommended
precaution, Salat al-Ayaat be offered.

***Issue*** 1501: If several events which make Salat al-Ayaat obligatory
occur together, one should offer Salat al-Ayaat for each of them. For
example, if solar eclipse as well as an earthquake take place, one
should offer separate Salat al-Ayaat for each of these two occurrences.

***Issue*** 1502: If a number of qadha Salat al-Ayaat is obligatory on a
person, irrespective of whether they have become obligatory due to one
and the same thing, like, solar eclipse occurring three times, or due to
different events like solar eclipse, lunar eclipse and earthquake, it is
not necessary for him while offering the qadha prayers to specify the
event for which he is offering the prayer.

***Issue*** 1503: Offering of Salat al-Ayaat is obligatory for the
residents of only that town in which the event takes place. It is not
obligatory for the people of other towns.

***Issue*** 1504: \* The time of Salat al-Ayaat sets in as the eclipse
starts, and remains till the eclipse is over. It is better, however, not
to delay till the reversal of eclipse commences, though completion of
Salat al-Ayaat may coincide with the time of reversal.

***Issue*** 1505: If a person delays offering of Salat al-Ayaat till the
sun or the moon starts coming out of eclipse, the niyyat of Ada (i.e.
praying within time) will be in order, but if he offers the prayers
after the eclipse is over, he should make a niyyat of qadha.

***Issue*** 1506:\* If the duration of solar or lunar eclipse allows
time for one or less Rak'at, Salat al-Ayaat can be offered with the
niyyat of Ada. Similarly, if a person has enough duration of eclipse at
his disposal, but he delays till the time to offer one Rak'at remains
before the eclipse is over, he will pray with the niyyat of Ada (i.e.
within time).

***Issue*** 1507: \* When earthquake, thunder lightning and other
similar events take place, a person should offer Salat al-Ayaat
immediately, not allowing undue delay. But if these occurrences continue
for a protracted time, praying immediately is not obligatory. If one
delays when one should not, then, as per recommended precaution, Salat
al-Ayaat should be offered without the niyyat of ada or qadha.

***Issue*** 1508: If a person did not know about the sun or the moon
eclipse, and came to know after the eclipse was over, he should give its
qadha if it

was a total eclipse. And if he comes to know that the eclipse was
partial, qadha will not be obligatory.

***Issue*** 1509: \* If certain people say that the sun or the moon has
been eclipsed, but a person hearing that is not satisfied with what they
say, and consequently does not offer Salat al-Ayaat, if it transpires
later that what they said was true, the person should offer Salat
al-Ayaat if it was a total eclipse. And if it was a partial eclipse, it
is not obligatory upon him to offer Salat al-Ayaat. The same rule
applies if two persons who he does not consider Adil, say that the sun
or the moon has been eclipsed and it transpires later that they are
Adil''.

***Issue*** 1510: \* If a person is satisfied with the statement of
persons who know the time of solar or lunar eclipse according to
scientific calculation, he should pray Salat al-Ayaat. Also, if they
inform him that the sun or moon will be eclipsed at a particular time,
and give him the duration of the eclipse, he should accept their words
and act accordingly, provided he is fully satisfied with them.

***Issue*** 1511: If a person realises that Salat al-Ayaat offered by
him was void, he should offer it again. And if the time has passed, he
should offer its qadha.

***Issue*** 1512: If Salat al-Ayaat becomes obligatory on a person at
the time of daily prayers, and if he has enough time at his disposal for
both, he can offer any of them first. If the time for one of them is
short, he should offer that prayers first, and if the time for both of
them is short, he should offer the daily prayers first.

***Issue*** 1513: If a person realises during the daily prayers that the
time for Salat al-Ayaat is short, and if the time for daily prayers is
also short, he should complete the daily prayers and then offer Salat
al-Ayaat. But if the time for daily prayers is not short, he should
break that prayers and first offer Salat al-Ayaat and then offer the
daily prayers.

***Issue*** 1514: If a person realises while offering Salat al-Ayaat,
that the time for daily prayers is short, he should leave Salat al-Ayaat
and start offering the daily prayers. After completing the daily
prayers, and before performing any act which invalidates the prayers, he
should start Salat al-Ayaat from where he left.

***Issue*** 1515: \* If solar or lunar eclipse, thunder, lightning or
any other similar events take place when a woman is in her menses or
nifas, it will not be obligatory for her to offer Salat al-Ayaat, nor is
there any qadha upon her.

### Method of Offering Salat al-Ayaat

###

***Issue*** 1516: Salat al-Ayaat consists of two Rak'ats, and there are
five Ruku in each. Its method is as follows: After making niyyat of
offering the prayers, one should say takbir (Allahu Akbar) and recite
Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah, and then perform the Ruku.
Thereafter, he should stand and recite Surah al-Hamd and a Surah and
then perform another Ruku. He should repeat this action five times, and,
when he stands after the fifth Ruku, he should perform two Sajdah, and
then stand up to perform the second Rak'at in the same manner as he has
done in the first. Then he should recite tashahhud and Salam.

***Issue*** 1517: \* Salat al-Ayaat can also be offered in the following
manner:

After making niyyat to offer Salat al-Ayaat, a person is allowed to say
takbir and recite Surah al-Hamd and then divide the verses of the other
Surah into five parts, and recite one verse or more or less, and
thereafter perform the Ruku.

He should then stand up and recite another part of the Surah (without
reciting Surah al-Hamd) and then perform another Ruku. He should repeat
this action, and finish that Surah before performing the fifth Ruku.

For example, he may say: Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim Qul a-ao thu bi
rabil falaq, and perform the Ruku. He should then stand up and say, Min
sharri ma khalaq, and perform another Ruku.

He should then stand up and say, Wa min sharri ghaassiqin e-tha waqab,
and perform the third Ruku. Thereafter he should stand up again and say,
Wa min sharril nafathaati fil oqaad, and perform the fourth Ruku.

Then he should stand up again and say, Wa min sharri haassidin e-tha
hassad, and then perform two Sajdah and then rise for the second Rak'at,
the same way as the first Rak'at.

At the end, he should recite tashahhud and Salam after the two Sajdah.
It is also permissible to divide a Surah into less than five parts. In
that event, however, it is necessary that when the Surah is over, one
should recite Surah al-Hamd before the next Ruku.

***Issue*** 1518: There is no harm if in one Rak'at of Salat al-Ayaat, a
person after Surah Al Hamd recites another Surah five times, and in the
second Rak'at recites Surah Al Hamd, and divides the other Surah into
five parts.

***Issue*** 1519: \* The things which are obligatory and*Mustahab* in
daily prayers are also obligatory and*Mustahab* in Salat al-Ayaat.
However, if Salat al-Ayaat is offered in congregation, one may say
'As-salaat' three times in place of Adhan and Iqamah. If the prayer is
not being offered in congregation, it is not necessary to say anything.

***Issue*** 1520: It is*Mustahab* that the person offering Salat
al-Ayaat should say takbir before and after Ruku, and after the fifth
and tenth Ruku he should say Sami'allahu liman hamida before takbir.

***Issue*** 1521: It is*Mustahab* that qunut be recited before the
second, fourth, sixth, eighth and tenth Ruku, but it will be sufficient
if qunut is recited only before the tenth Ruku.

***Issue*** 1522: If a person doubts as to how many Rak'ats he has
offered in Salat al-Ayaat, and is unable to arrive at any decision, his
prayer is void.

***Issue*** 1523: \* If a person doubts whether he is in the last Ruku
of the first Rak'at, or in the first Ruku of the second Rak'at, and he
cannot arrive at any decision, his Salat al-Ayaat is void. But if he
doubts whether he has performed four Ruku or five, and if the doubt
takes place before he goes into Sajdah, he should perform the Ruku about
which he is doubtful. But if he has reached the stage of Sajdah, he
should ignore his doubt.

***Issue*** 1524: \* Every Ruku of Salat al-Ayaat is a Rukn, and if any
addition or deduction takes place in them, the prayer is void.
Similarly, if an omission takes place inadvertently, or, as a
precaution, an addition is made to it unintentionally, the prayers will
be void.

Eid ul Fitr and Eid ul Azha Prayers
-----------------------------------

***Issue*** 1525: Eid ul Fitr and Eid ul Azha prayers are obligatory
during the time of Imam (A.S.), and it is necessary to offer them in
congregation. However during the present times when the Holy Imam is in
Occultation, these prayers are*Mustahab* , and may be offered
individually as well as in congregation

***Issue*** 1526: The time for Eid prayers is from sunrise till Zuhr.

***Issue*** 1527: It is*Mustahab* that Eid ul Azha prayers is offered
after sunrise. As for Eid ul Fitr, it is*Mustahab* that one should have
a breakfast after sunrise, pay Zakatul Fitr and then offer Eid prayers.

***Issue*** 1528: \* Eid prayers has two Rak'ats. In the first Rak'at, a
person should recite Surah al Hamd and a Surah and then they say five
takbirs, and after every takbir he should recite qunut. After the fifth
qunut, he should say another takbir and then perform Ruku and two
Sajdah. He should then stand up and say four takbirs in the second
Rak'at, and recite qunut after everyone of these takbirs. Thereafter, he
should say the fifth takbir and then perform Ruku and two Sajdah. After
the second Sajdah he should recite tashahhud, and then complete the
prayers with Salam.

***Issue*** 1529: Any recital or Dua will suffice in qunut of the Eid
Prayers. However, it is better that the following Dua is recited:
Allahumma ahlal kibriya'i wal 'azamah, wa ahlal judi wal jaburat, wa
ahlal 'afwi war rahmah, wa ahlat taqwa wal maghfirah. As aluka bihaqqi
hazal yawmil lazi ja'altahu lil muslimina 'ida, wali Muhammadin sal lal
lahu 'Alaihi wa Alihi, zukhran wa sharafan wa karamatan wa mazida an
tusalliya 'ala Muhammad wa Ali Muhammad wa an tudkhilani fi kulli
khayrin adkhalta fihi Muhammadan wa Ala Muhammad wa an tukhrijani min
kulli su'in akhrajta minhu Muhammadan wa Ala Muhammad salawatuka 'alahi
wa 'alahim. Alla humma inni as aluka khayra ma sa alaka bihi ibadukas
salihun, wa auzubika mim masta aza minhu ibadukal mukhlasun.

***Issue*** 1530: \* During the period of 0ccultation of Imam (A.S.), it
is an obligatory precaution that two sermons (khutbas) be delivered
after Eid prayers, and it is better that on Eid ul-fitr, the sermons
should explain rules regarding Zakatul Fitr, and on Eid ul-Azha, rules
regarding sacrificing the animals be explained.

***Issue*** 1531: No particular Surah has been specified for Eid
prayers. But, it is better that after reciting Surah al Hamd in the
first Rak'at, Surah Wash Shams be recited and in the second Rak'at Surah
al Ghashiya. Or in the first Rak'at, to recite Surah of Sabbi Hism, and
in the second Rak'at Surah Wash Shams.

***Issue*** 1532: It is recommended that Eid prayers be performed in the
open fields. However, in Makkah, it is*Mustahab* that it should be
offered in Masjidul Haram.

***Issue*** 1533: It is*Mustahab* to walk barefooted to attend Eid
prayers, with all the dignity, and to do Ghusl before Salat, and to
place a white turban on one's head.

***Issue*** 1534: It is*Mustahab* that in Eid prayers Sajdah be
performed on earth, and hands be raised while saying takbirs. It is
also*Mustahab* that a

person who is offering Eid prayers alone, or as an Imam of the
congregation, recites prayers loudly.

***Issue*** 1535: It is*Mustahab* that the following takbirs be said on
Eid ul Fitr night (ie night preceding the Eid day), after Maghrib and
Isha prayers, and on Eid day after Fajr prayers, as well as after Eid ul
fitr prayers: “Allahu Akbar, Alllahu Akbar, la ilaha illal lah wallahu
akbar, Allahu Akbar, wa lilla hil hamd, Allahu akbar ala ma hadana”“

***Issue*** 1536: In Eid ul Azha, it is*Mustahab* that the above
mentioned takbirs be said after ten prayers, of which the first is the
Zuhr prayers of Eid day and the last is the Fajr of 12th Zillhajj. It is
also*Mustahab* that after the above mentioned takbirs, the following be
recited: “Allahu Akbar 'ala ma razaqana min bahimatil an 'am, wal hamdu
lil lahi ala ma ablana”.

If, a person happens to be in Mina on the day of Eid ul Azha, it
is*Mustahab* that he should say these takbirs after fifteen prayers, of
which the first is Zuhr prayers of Eid day, and the last is the Fajr
prayers of the 13th of Zillhajj.

***Issue*** 1537: The recommended precaution is that women should avoid
going to offer Eid prayers. This precaution does not apply to elderly
women.

***Issue*** 1538: Like in all other prayers, the follower should recite
everything in the Eid prayers, except Surah al-Hamd and the other Surah.

***Issue*** 1539: If a follower joins the prayers at a time when the
Imam has already said some takbirs, he should, while the Imam performs
Ruku, say all the takbirs and qunut which he has missed, and it will be
sufficient if in each qunut he says: Subhanallah or Alhamdu lillah only.

***Issue*** 1540: If a person joins the Eid prayers when the Imam is in
Ruku, he can make niyyat, say the first takbir of the prayers, and then
go into Ruku.

***Issue*** 1541: If a person forgets one Sajdah in Eid prayers, he
should perform it after the prayers. Similarly, if something takes place
for which a Sajadatus Sahv would be necessary after daily prayers, it
will also be necessary after the Eid prayers.

Hiring a Person to Offer Prayers
--------------------------------

***Issue*** 1542: After the death of a person, another person can be
engaged to offer, on payment of wages, those prayers and other acts of
worship which the dead person did not offer during his lifetime. And it
is also in order if a person offers the services without taking payment
for it.

***Issue*** 1543: \* A person can accept engagement to offer
some*Mustahab* acts like Ziyarat, Umrah, Hajj, on behalf of the living
persons. Also he can perform some*Mustahab* acts, and dedicate their
thawab to living or dead persons.

***Issue*** 1544: \* A person who is hired to offer the qadha prayers of
a dead person, should be a*Mujtahid* , or should know the rules of the
prayers correctly according to Taqleed, or should act according to
precaution, provided that he knows fully on what occasions precaution is
to be observed.

***Issue*** 1545: At the time for making niyyat, the hired person must
specify the dead person, but it is not necessary that he should know
his/her name. Hence, it is enough if he intends: “I am offering prayers
for the person on whose behalf I am hired.”

***Issue*** 1546: The hired person should act with the niyyat that he is
acting to discharge the obligation of the dead person. It will not be
enough if he performs and dedicates its thawab to the dead person.

***Issue*** 1547: One who hires a person, should be satisfied that the
hired person will perform the act for which he is hired.

***Issue*** 1548: If it transpires that the person hired for offering
prayers for a dead person has not performed it, or has performed
incorrectly, another person should be hired for the purpose.

***Issue*** 1549: \* If a person doubts whether or not the hired person
has performed the act, and in spite of the hired person's assurance, he
is not satisfied, he must hire another person. But if he doubts whether
or not the hired person has performed it correctly, he should presume
that it has been correct.

***Issue*** 1550: \* A person who has some excuse (for example, if he
offers prayers with tayammum or in a sitting position) should never be
hired for offering prayers for a dead person, even if the prayers of the
dead person may have become qadha that way.

***Issue*** 1551: A man can be hired on behalf of a woman, and a woman
can be hired on behalf of a man, and in the matter of offering prayers
loudly or silently, the hired person should act according to his/her own
obligation.

***Issue*** 1552: Observing order is not obligatory for the qadha
prayers of a dead person, except in the case of prayers whose
performance is prescribed in an order, like, Zuhr and Asr prayers or
Maghrib and Isha prayers of one day, as has been mentioned earlier.

***Issue*** 1553: If it is agreed with the hired person that he will
accomplish it in a particular manner, the hired person should follow the
agreement. If nothing has been agreed, then he can perform according to
his own obligation. And the recommended precaution is that between his
own obligation and that of the dead person, he should choose that which
is nearer to precaution - for example if the obligation of the dead
person was to say

tasbihat arba'ah (recital of the third or fourth Rak'at while standing)
three times, and his own obligation is to say it once, he should recite
three times.

***Issue*** 1554: If it is not agreed with the hired person how
many*Mustahab* acts he will perform, he should perform as much as is
usual.

***Issue*** 1555: If a person engages several people for offering the
qadha prayers of a dead person, it is necessary, as explained in rule
no.1552, that he should fix a time for each one of them.

***Issue*** 1556: If, a hired person agrees to offer the prayers of a
dead person within one year, but he dies before the year ends, another
person should be hired to offer the uncompleted prayers. And if he feels
that the hired person probably did not offer some prayers, even then, as
an obligatory precaution, another person should be hired.

***Issue*** 1557: \* If a person hired for offering the prayers of a
dead person, dies before offering all the prayers, and if he had taken
wages for all the prayers, if the hirer has placed a condition that he
would offer all the prayers himself, the hirer can take back the
proportionate amount of wages for the remaining prayers. Or he can
cancel the contract and pay an adequate sum. And if it was not agreed
that the hired person would offer all the prayers himself, then the
heirs of the deceased should pay from his estate, and engage another
person to complete the task. And if there is nothing in the estate, it
is not obligatory upon the heirs.

***Issue*** 1558: If the hired person dies before offering all the qadha
prayers of the dead, and if he himself had some qadha of his own, if
there is any residue from his estate after acting according to the above
rule, someone should be hired to perform all his qadha if he has willed,
and his heirs give permission. And if they do not permit, his one-third
(thuluth) should be spent for the qadha prayers.
