Fasting (Part I of II)
======================

Fasting means that a person must, in obedience to the commands of Allah,
from the time of Adhan for Fajr prayers up to Maghrib, avoid nine things
which will be mentioned later.

Niyyat for Fasting
------------------

***Issue*** 1559: \* It is not necessary for a person to pass the niyyat
for fasting through his mind or to say that he would be fasting on the
following day. In fact, it is sufficient for him to decide that in
obedience to the command of Allah he will not perform from the time of
Adhan for Fajr prayers up to Maghrib, any act which may invalidate the
fast. And in order to ensure that he has been fasting throughout this
time he should begin abstaining earlier than the Adhan for Fajr prayers,
and continue to refrain for some time after sunset from acts which
invalidate a fast.

***Issue*** 1560: A person can make niyyat every night of the holy month
of Ramadhan that he would be fasting on the following day, and it is
better to make niyyat on the first night of Ramadhan that he would fast
throughout that month.

***Issue*** 1561: \* The last time for making niyyat to observe a fast
of Ramadhan for a conscious person, is moments before Adhan of Fajr
prayers. This means he must be intent upon fasting at that time, even if
he later became heedless of his intention due to sleep etc.

***Issue*** 1562: \* As for*Mustahab* fast one can make its niyyat at
any time in the day, even moments before Maghrib - provided he has not
committed any such act which invalidates the fast.

***Issue*** 1563: \* If a person sleeps before Adhan for Fajr prayers in
Ramadhan or any other day fixed for an obligatory fast without making a
niyyat, and wakes up before Zuhr to make a niyyat of fast, his fast will
be in order. But if he wakes up after Zuhr, as a precaution, he should
continue with the abstinence with the niyyat of Qurbat and then give its
qadha also.

***Issue*** 1564: \* If a person intends to keep a fast other than the
fast of Ramadhan, he should specify that fast; for example, he should
specify it as the qadha fast or a fast to fulfil a vow. On the other
hand, it is not necessary that a person should specify in his niyyat
that he is going to observe a fast of Ramadhan. If a person is not aware
or forgets that it is the month of Ramadhan and makes a niyyat to
observe some other fast it will be considered to be the fast of
Ramadhan.

***Issue*** 1565: \* If a person knows that it is the month of Ramadhan,
yet intentionally makes an intention of observing a fast other than the
fast of the month of Ramadhan his fast will not be reckoned a fast of
the month of Ramadhan nor the fast of which he made the niyyat.

***Issue*** 1566: If a person observes fast with the niyyat of the first
day of the month and understands later that it was the second or third
of the month, his fast is in order.

***Issue*** 1567: If a person makes an intention before Adhan for dawn
prayers to observe a fast and then becomes unconscious and regains his
senses during the day time, he should, on the basis of obligatory
precaution,

complete the fast on that day, and if he does not complete it, he should
observe its qadha.

***Issue*** 1568: If a person makes niyyat before the Adhan for Fajr
prayers to observe a fast and then gets intoxicated and comes to senses
during the day he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution,
complete the fast of that day and should also give its qadha.

***Issue*** 1569: If a person makes a niyyat before the Adhan for Fajr
prayers to observe a fast, and then goes to sleep, and wakes up after
Maghrib his fast is in order.

***Issue*** 1570: \* If a person did not know or forgot that it was the
month of Ramadhan, and takes notice of this before Zuhr and if he has
performed some act which will invalidates a fast, his fast is void. But,
he should not perform any act till Maghrib which invalidates a fast and
should also observe qadha of that fast after Ramadhan. The same rule
applies if he learns after Zuhr that it is the month of Ramadhan. But if
he learns before Zuhr, and if he has not done anything which would
invalidate his fast, his fast will be valid.

***Issue*** 1571: \* If a child reaches the age of puberty before the
Adhan for Fajr prayers in the month of Ramadhan he/she should keep fast
and if he/she reaches the age of puberty after the Fajr Adhan, the fast
of that day is not obligatory for him/her except if he/she intended to
observe a*Mustahab* fast on that day, then he/she should complete it as
a precaution.

***Issue*** 1572: \* If a person who has been hired to observe the fasts
of a dead person or has fasts of Kaffarah upon him as an obligation,
observes*Mustahab* fasts, there is no harm in it. However, if a person
has his own qadha of fasts, he cannot observe*Mustahab* fasts. If he
forgets this and observes a*Mustahab* fast and remembers it before Zuhr
his*Mustahab* fast will be void and he can convert his intention to the
fast of qadha, and if he takes notice of the situation after Zuhr his
fast is void as a precaution, and similarly if he remembers this after
Maghrib, the validity of his fast is a matter if*Ishkal* .

***Issue*** 1573: \* If it is obligatory for a person to observe a
specific fast other than the fast of the month of Ramadhan, for example,
if he has vowed that he would observe fast on a particular day, and he
does not make an intention purposely till the Adhan for Fajr prayers,
his fast is void. And if he does not know that it is obligatory for him
to fast on that day or forgets about it and remembers it before midday,
and if he has not performed any act which invalidates the fast and makes
an intention to fast, his fast is in order, and if he remembers after
Zuhr, he should follow the precaution applied to the fast of Ramadhan.

***Issue*** 1574: If a person does not make an intention till near Zuhr
for an obligatory fast which has no fixed time, like a fast of Kaffarah,
there is no harm in it. In fact, if he had decided before making a
niyyat that he would not fast, or was undecided as to whether he should
or should not fast, if he has not performed any act which invalidates a
fast, and decides before Zuhr to fast, his fast will be in order.

***Issue*** 1575: \* If a non-Muslim embraces Islam in the month of
Ramadhan before Zuhr, he should, on the basis of obligatory precaution,

make an intention to fast, and complete it provided that he had not
committed any act which would make a fast void. And if he does not
observe fast on that day he should give its qadha.

***Issue*** 1576: \* If a patient recovers from his illness in the
middle of a day in the month of Ramadhan, before Zuhr, and if he has not
done anything to invalidate the fast, he should make niyyat and fast.
But if he recovers after Zuhr, it will not be obligatory on him to fast
on that day.

***Issue*** 1577: \* If one doubts whether it is the last day of Sha'ban
or the first day of Ramadhan then the fast on that day is not
obligatory. If however, somebody wants to observe fast on that day he
cannot do so with the intention of observing the Ramadhan fast, but if
he makes an intention that if it is Ramadhan then it is the Ramadhan
fast and if it is not Ramadhan then it is qadha fast or some other fast
like that, his fast will be valid. But it is better to observe the fast
with the intention of qadha fast or some other fast, and if it is known
later that it was Ramadhan then it will automatically be Ramadhan fast.
And even if he makes a niyyat of a natural fast, and later it becomes
known that it is Ramadhan, it will be sufficient (i.e. that fast will be
counted as the Ramadhan fast).

***Issue*** 1578: If it is doubtful whether it is the last day of
Sha'ban or the first of Ramadhan, and a person observes a qadha or
a*Mustahab* fast or some other fast on that day, and later comes to know
the same day that it is the first of Ramadhan, then he should convert
the intention to the Ramadhan fast.

***Issue*** 1579: \* If somebody is undecided in his niyyat whether to
break or not an obligatory fixed fast, like that of Ramadhan, or decides
to do so, immediately his fast becomes invalid even if he does not
actually break it or is repentant of his intention.

***Issue*** 1580: \* If, while observing a*Mustahab* fast or an
obligatory fast the time of which is not fixed (e.g. a fast for
Kaffarah) a person intends to break the fast or wavers whether or not he
should do so, and if he does not break it, he should make a fresh niyyat
before Zuhr in the case of an obligatory fast, and before Maghrib in the
case of a*Mustahab* fast. That way his fast will be in order.

Things which make a Fast void
-----------------------------

***Issue*** 1581: \* There are nine acts which invalidate fast:

(i) Eating and drinking

(ii) Sexual intercourse

(iii) Masturbation (Istimna) which means self abuse, resulting in
ejaculation

(iv) Ascribing false things to Almighty Allah, or his Prophet or to the

successors of the Holy Prophet

(v) Swallowing thick dust

(vi) Immersing one's complete head in water

(vii) Remaining in Janabat or Haidh or Nifas till the Adhan for Fajr
prayers

(viii) Enema with liquids

(ix) Vomiting

Details of these acts will be explained in the following articles:-

### I. Eating and Drinking

###

***Issue*** 1582: If a person eats or drinks something intentionally,
while being conscious of fasting, his fast becomes void, irrespective of
whether the thing which he ate or drank was usually eaten or drunk (for
example bread with water) or not (for example earth or the juice of a
tree) and whether it is more or less; even if a person, who is fasting,
takes the tooth brush (Miswak) out of his mouth and then puts it back
into his mouth, swallowing its liquid, his fast will be void, unless the
moisture in the tooth brush mixes up with the saliva in such a way that
it may no longer be called an external wetness.

***Issue*** 1583: If while eating and drinking, a person realises that
it is Fajr, he should throw the food out of his mouth, and if he
swallows it intentionally, his fast is void, and according to the rules
which will be mentioned later, it also becomes obligatory on him to give
Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1584: If a person who is fasting eats or drinks something
forgetfully, his fast does not become invalid.

***Issue*** 1585: There is no objection to an injection which
anaesthetises one's limb or is used for some other purpose being given
to a person, who is observing fast, but it is better that the injections
which are given as medicine or food are avoided.

***Issue*** 1586: If a person observing fast intentionally swallows
something which remained in between his teeth, his fast is invalidated.

***Issue*** 1587: \* If a person wishes to observe a fast, it is not
necessary for him to use a toothpick before the Adhan of Fajr prayers.
However, if he knows that some particles of food which have remained in
between his teeth, will go down into his stomach during the day, then he
must clean his teeth with toothpick.

***Issue*** 1588: Swallowing saliva does not invalidate a fast, although
it may have collected in one's mouth owing to thoughts about sour things
etc.

***Issue*** 1589: There is no harm in swallowing one's phlegm or mucous
from head and chest as long as it does not come upto one's mouth.
However, if it reaches one's mouth, the obligatory precaution is that
one should not swallow it.

***Issue*** 1590: \* If a person observing fast becomes so thirsty that
he fears that he may die of thirst or sustain some harm or extreme
hardship, he can drink as much water as would ensure that the fear is
averted. However, his fast becomes invalid, and if it is the month of
Ramadhan, as an obligatory precaution, he should not drink more than
that, and then for the rest of the day, refrain from all acts which
would invalidate the fast.

***Issue*** 1591: Chewing food to feed a child or a bird and tasting
food etc. which does not usually go down the throat, will not invalidate
the fast, even if it happens to reach there inadvertently. However, if a
person knows beforehand that it will reach the throat, his fast becomes
void, and he should observe its qadha and it is also obligatory upon him
to give Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1592: A person cannot abandon fast on account of weakness.
However, if his weakness is to such an extent that fasting becomes
totally unbearable, there is no harm in breaking the fast.

### II. Sexual Intercourse

###

***Issue*** 1593: Sexual intercourse invalidates the fast, even if the
penetration is as little as the tip of the male organ, and even if there
has been no ejaculation.

***Issue*** 1594: \* If the penetration is less than the tip of the male
organ, so that it cannot be said that intercourse has taken place, also
if no ejaculation takes place, the fast does not become invalid. This
applies to both, circumcised and uncircumcised men.

***Issue*** 1595: If a person commits sexual intercourse intentionally
and then doubts whether penetration was upto the point of circumcision
or not his fast, as an obligatory precaution, becomes invalid, and it is
necessary for him to observe its qadha. It is not, however, obligatory
on him to give Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1596: If a person forgets that he is observing fast and
commits sexual intercourse or he is compelled to have sexual intercourse
in a manner that makes him helpless, his fast does not become void.
However, if he remembers (that he is observing fast) or ceases to be
helpless during sexual intercourse, he should withdraw from the sexual
intercourse at once, and if he does not, his fast becomes void.

### III. Istimna (Masturbation)

###

***Issue*** 1597: If a person, who is observing fast, performs
masturbation (Istimna), his fast becomes void (The explanation of
istimna has been given in rule 1581/iii).

***Issue*** 1598: If semen is discharged from the body of a person
involuntarily, his fast does not become void.

***Issue*** 1599: Even if a person observing fast knows that if he
sleeps during the day time he will become Mohtalim (i.e. semen will be
discharged from his body during sleep) it is permissible for him to
sleep, even if he may not be inconvenienced by not sleeping. And if he
becomes Mohtalim, his fast does not become void.

***Issue*** 1600: If a person who is observing fast, wakes up from sleep
while ejaculation is taking place, it is not obligatory on him to stop
it.

***Issue*** 1601: A fasting person who has become Mohtalim can urinate
even if he knows that by urinating the remaining semen will flow from
his body.

***Issue*** 1602: \* If a fasting person who has become Mohtalim, knows
that some semen has remained in his body and if he does not urinate
before taking Ghusl, it will come out after Ghusl, he should on the
basis of recommended precaution, urinate before taking Ghusl.

***Issue*** 1603: \* A person who indulges in courtship with an
intention to allow semen to be discharged, will complete his fast and
also observe its qadha, even if semen is not discharged.

***Issue*** 1604: If a fasting person indulges in courtship without the
intention of allowing the semen to be discharged, and also, if he is
sure that semen will not be discharged, his fast is in order, even if
semen may be discharged unexpectedly. However, if he is not sure about
the discharge and it takes place, then his fast is void.

### IV. Ascribing Lies to Allah and His Prophet

###

***Issue*** 1605: \* If a person who is observing fast, intentionally
ascribes something false to Allah and the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and his
vicegerents (a.s.), verbally or in writing or by making a sign, his fast
becomes void, even if he may at once retract and say that he has uttered
a lie or may repent for it. And, as a recommended precaution, he should
refrain from imputing lies to Bibi Fatema Zahra (a.s.) and all the
Prophets and their successors.

***Issue*** 1606: \* If a person observing fast wishes to quote
something about which he has no authority or he does not know whether it
is true or false, he should, as an obligatory precaution, give a
reference of the person who reported it, or of the book in which it is
written.

***Issue*** 1607: \* If a person quotes something as the word of Allah
or of the Holy Prophet with the belief that it is true, but realises
later that it is false, his fast does not become void.

***Issue*** 1608: If a person ascribes something to Almighty Allah or
the Holy Prophet knowing it to be false and understands later that it
was true, as an obligatory precaution, he should complete his fast and
should also observe its qadha.

***Issue*** 1609: \* If a person intentionally ascribes to Allah or the
Holy Prophet or the successors of the Holy Prophet a falsehood
fabricated by some other person, his fast becomes void. However, if he
quotes the person who has fabricated that falsehood, his fast will not
be affected.

***Issue*** 1610: \* If a person who is observing fast, is asked whether
the Holy Prophet said such and such thing and he intentionally says 'No'
where he should say 'Yes' or intentionally says 'Yes' where he should
say 'No', his fast becomes void, as an obligatory precaution.

***Issue*** 1611: \* If a person quotes a true word of Allah or of the
Holy Prophet, and later says that he had uttered a lie, or if he
ascribed something false to them at night, and says on the following day
when he is observing fast, that what he said on the previous night was
true, his fast becomes void, except when his intention is to convey his
newly acquired information.

### V. Letting Dust Reach One's Throat

###

***Issue*** 1612: \* On the basis of obligatory precaution, allowing
thick dust to reach one's throat makes one's fast void, whether the dust
is of something which is halal to eat, like flour, or of something which
is haraam to consume like dust or earth.

***Issue*** 1613: \* Allowing thin dust to reach one's throat will not
invalidate the fast.

***Issue*** 1614: \* If thick dust is whipped up by the wind and if a
person does not take care in spite of taking notice of it, allowing the
dust to reach his throat, his fast becomes void on the basis of
obligatory precaution.

***Issue*** 1615: \* As an obligatory precaution, a person who is
observing fasts, should not allow the smoke of cigarettes, tobacco, and
other similar things to reach his throat.

***Issue*** 1616: \* If a person does not take care to prevent dust,
smoke, etc. from entering his throat, and if he was quiet sure that
these things would not reach his throat, his fast is in order; but if he
only felt that they might not reach his throat, it is better that he
should observe that fast again as qadha.

***Issue*** 1617: If a person forgets that he is fasting and does not
exercise care, or if dust or any other similar thing enters his throat
involuntarily, his fast does not become void.

### VI. Immersing One's Head in Water

###

***Issue*** 1618: \* If a fasting person intentionally immerses his
entire head in the water, his fast is known to be void, even if the rest
of his body remains out of water. But this act does not invalidate the
fast; it is a Makrooh act, and as a measure of precaution, should be
avoided.

***Issue*** 1619: \* If a person immerses half of his head in the water
once, and the other half the second time, his fast is not affected.

***Issue*** 1620: \* If the entire head is immersed under the water,
leaving some hair out, the rule applied will be that mentioned above in
1618.

***Issue*** 1621: \* There is no harm in immersing one's head in liquids
other than water like, in milk. Similarly, fast is not affected by
immersing one's head in mixed water that is, Mudhaaf.

***Issue*** 1622: \* If a fasting person falls into the water
involuntarily, and his entire head goes into the water, or if he forgets
that he is fasting and immerses his head in the water, his fast is not
affected.

***Issue*** 1623: \* If a person throws himself into the water thinking
that his entire head will not go down into the water, and water covers
his entire head, his fast remains in order.

***Issue*** 1624: \* If a person forgets that he is fasting and immerses
his head in the water, and he remembers under the water that he is
fasting, it is better that he takes his head out of water at once, but
if he does not do so, his fast will not be void.

***Issue*** 1625: \* If a person is pushed into water and his head is
immersed in water, the fast is not affected at all. But if the fellow
who pushed him and forced his head under water releases him, it is
better that he raises his head out of water immediately.

***Issue*** 1626: \* If a fasting person immerses his head under water
with the Niyyat of Ghusl, both his fast and Ghusl will be in order.

***Issue*** 1627: \* If a person dives headlong in the water to save
some one from drowning, although it may be obligatory to save that
person, as a recommended precaution, he should give qadha for that fast.

### VII. Remaining in Janabat or Haidh or Nifas Till Fajr Time

###

***Issue*** 1628: \* If a person in Janabat does not take Ghusl
intentionally till the time of Fajr prayers, his/her fast becomes void.
And if a person whose obligation is to do tayammum, wilfully does not do
it, his/her fast will be also void. This rules apply to the qadha of the
fasts of Ramadhan, also.

***Issue*** 1629: If a person in Janabat does not take Ghusl
intentionally till the time of Fajr prayers, for obligatory fasts other
than those of the month of Ramadhan and their qadha, those fasts which
have fixed days, like those of Ramadhan, his/her fast will be in order.

***Issue*** 1630: \* If a person enters the state of Janabat during a
night in the month of Ramadhan, and does not take Ghusl intentionally
till the time left before Adhan is short, he/she should perform tayammum
and observe the fast. However, it is a recommended precaution that its
qadha is also given.

***Issue*** 1631: If a person in Janabat in the month of Ramadhan
forgets to take Ghusl and remembers it after one day, he should observe
the qadha of the fast of that day. And if he remembers it after a number
of days he should observe the qadha of the fasts of all those days,
during which he is certain to have been in Janabat. For example, if he
is not sure whether he was in Janabat for three days or four, he should
observe the qadha of three days.

***Issue*** 1632: If a person who does not have time for Ghusl or
performing tayammum in a night of Ramadhan gets into state of Janabat,
his fast will be void and it will be obligatory upon him to give qadha
of that fast, as well as Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1633: \* If a person investigates whether or not he has
enough time at his disposal, and believing that he has time for Ghusl,
goes into state of Janabat and when he learns later that actually the
time was short, he performs tayammum, his fast will be in order. And if
he presumes without any investigation that he has enough time at his
disposal and gets into Janabat and when he learns later that the time
was short, keeps the fast with tayammum, he should, as a recommended
precaution, observe the qadha of that fast.

***Issue*** 1634: \* If a person is in Janabat during a night in
Ramadhan and knows that if he goes to sleep he will not wake up till
Fajr, he should not sleep before Ghusl and if he sleeps before Ghusl and
does not wake up till Fajr, his fast is void, and qadha and Kaffarah
become obligatory on him.

***Issue*** 1635: When a person in Janabat goes to sleep in a night of
Ramadhan and then wakes up, the obligatory precaution is that if he is
not sure about waking up again, he should not go to sleep before Ghusl,
even if he has a faint hope that he might wake up before Fajr if he
sleeps again.

***Issue*** 1636: \* If a person in Janabat in the night of Ramadhan
feels certain that if he goes to sleep he will wake up before the time
of Fajr prayers, and is determined to do Ghusl upon waking up, and
oversleeps with that determination till the time of Fajr prayers, his
fast will be in order. And the same rule applies to a person who, though
not absolutely certain, is hopeful about waking up before the time of
Fajr prayers.

***Issue*** 1637: If a person in Janabat in a night of Ramadhan is
certain or reasonably hopeful that if he sleeps he will wake up before
the time of Fajr prayers but he is not heedful of the fact that after
waking up he would do Ghusl, if he oversleeps till the time of Fajr
prayers, the qadha of that fast will be obligatory on him as a
precaution.

***Issue*** 1638: \* If a person in Janabat in a night of Ramadhan is
sure or fairly hopeful that if he sleeps he will wake up before the time
of Fajr prayers, but he does not intend to do Ghusl then, or is
undecided about it, his fast is void.. And if he sleeps and does not
wake up the qadha and Kaffarah will be obligatory on him.

***Issue*** 1639: \* If a person in Janabat sleeps and wakes up during a
night of Ramadhan and is certain or fairly hopeful that if he sleeps
again, he will wake up before the time of Fajr prayers, with full
determination to do Ghusl after waking up, and oversleeps till the time
of Fajr, he should observe the qadha of the fast of that day. And if he
goes to sleep for the third time and does not wake up till the time of
Fajr prayers, it is obligatory on him to

observe the qadha as well as give the kaffarah, as a recommended
precaution.

***Issue*** 1640: When a person becomes Mohtalim during sleep, the
first, second and third sleep means the sleep after waking up; and the
sleep in which he became Mohtalim will not be reckoned to be the first
sleep.

***Issue*** 1641: If a person observing fast becomes Mohtalim during day
time, it is not obligatory on him to do Ghusl at once.

***Issue*** 1642: When a person wakes up in the month of Ramadhan after
the Fajr prayers and finds that he has become Mohtalim his fast is in
order, even if he knows that he became Mohtalim before the Fajr prayers.

***Issue*** 1643: \* When a person who wants to observe the qadha of
Ramadhan, remains in Janabat intentionally till the time of Fajr
prayers, he cannot fast on that day. And if it was not intentional, he
can fast, but as a precaution, it should be avoided.

***Issue*** 1644: \* If a person wants to observe the qadha of Ramadhan
and wakes up after the time of Fajr prayers finding himself Mohtalim,
and knows that he became Mohtalim before the time Fajr prayers, he can
fast on that day with the niyyat of qadha.

***Issue*** 1645: If a person remains in Janabat intentionally till the
time of Fajr prayers in an obligatory fast which does not have fixed
days, like, the fast of Kaffarah, apparently his fast is in order, but
it is better that he should observe fast on some other day.

***Issue*** 1646: \* If a woman becomes Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidth
or Nifas before the time of Fajr prayers in the month of Ramadhan or, as
a precaution, on a day she wants to give qadha of Ramadhan, and does not
do Ghusl - or in the case of time being short, tayammum - intentionally,
her fast will be void. And if it is not the fast of Ramadhan or its
qadha, her fast will be in order, but as a precaution, she should do
Ghusl. And if the obligation of a woman is tayammum instead of Ghusl for
Haidth or Nifas and she does not do it intentionally, in the month of
Ramadhan or for its qadha, before the time of Fajr prayers, her fast is
void.

***Issue*** 1647: \* If a woman becomes Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidh
or Nifas before the time of Fajr prayers in the month of Ramadhan and
she has no time to do Ghusl, she should perform tayammum. But it is not
necessary for her to remain awake till the time of Fajr prayers. The
same rule applies to a person whose obligation is tayammum after getting
into the state of Janabat.

***Issue*** 1648: If a woman gets Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidh or
Nifas just near the time of Fajr prayers in the month of Ramadhan, and
has no time left for Ghusl or tayammum, her fast is valid.

***Issue*** 1649: If a woman gets Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidh or
Nifas after the Fajr or if Haidh or Nifas begins during the day though
just near the Maghrib time, her fast is void.

***Issue*** 1650: If a woman forgets to do Ghusl for Haidh or Nifas and
remembers it after a day or more, the fasts that she has observed will
be valid.

***Issue*** 1651: \* If a woman gets Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidh or
Nifas before the time of Fajr prayers in the month of Ramadhan but
neglects her

obligation and does not do Ghusl before Fajr, nor does she resort to
tayammum as time becomes short, her fast will be void. But if she is not
negligent, like when she waits for her turn in a public bath, then even
if she sleeps three times without doing Ghusl till Fajr, her fast will
be valid if she does not ignore tayammum.

***Issue*** 1652: \* If a woman is in a state of excessive Istihadha,
her fast will be valid even if she does not carry out the rules of
Ghusls as explained in rule no. 402. Similarly, her fast will be in
order if she does not do the Ghusls prescribed for medium Istihadha.

***Issue*** 1653: A person who has touched a dead body (i.e. has brought
any part of his own body in contact with it) can observe fast without
having done Ghusl for touching a dead body, and his fast does not become
void even if he touches the dead body during the fast.

### VIII. Enema

###

***Issue*** 1654: If liquid enema is taken by a fasting person, his fast
becomes void even if he is obliged to take it for the sake of treatment.

### IX. Vomiting

###

***Issue*** 1655: If a fasting person vomits intentionally his fast
becomes void, though he may have been obliged to do so on account of
sickness. However, the fast does not become void, if one vomits
forgetfully or involuntarily.

***Issue*** 1656: \* If a person eats something at night knowing that it
will cause vomiting during the day time, the recommended precaution is
that he should give the qadha of that fast.

***Issue*** 1657: \* If a fasting person can stop vomiting without
causing any harm or inconvenience to himself, he should exercise
restraint.

***Issue*** 1658: \* If a fly enters the throat of a fasting person, it
will not be necessary to throw it out if it has gone deep down the
gullet, and his fast will be valid. But if it has not descended deep
down, it must be coughed out, even by vomiting, if it is not harmful to
do so. If one does not do so, fast will be void.

***Issue*** 1659: If a person swallows something by mistake and
remembers before it reaches the stomach that he is fasting, it is not
necessary for him to throw it out, and his fast is in order.

***Issue*** 1660: If a fasting person is certain that if he belches,
something will come out from the throat, he should not, as a precaution,
belch intentionally, but there is no harm in his belching if he is not
certain about it.

***Issue*** 1661: If a fasting person belches and something comes from
his throat or into the mouth, he should throw it out, and if it is
swallowed unintentionally, his fast is in order.

Rules Regarding Things which Invalidate a Fast
----------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1662: \* If a person intentionally and voluntarily commits
an act which invalidates fast, his fast becomes void, but if he does not
commit such an act intentionally, there is no harm in it (i.e. his fast
is valid). However, if a person in Janabat sleeps and does not do Ghusl
till the time of Fajr prayers, as detailed in rule no. 1639, his fast is
void. Similarly, if a person due to utter ignorance of the rule that a
certain act will invalidate the fast, or due to reliance upon some
authority which he thought was genuine, unhesitatingly commits an act
which invalidates the fast, his fast will not be void, except in the
cases of eating, drinking and sexual intercourse.

***Issue*** 1663: \* If a fasting person forgetfully commits an act
which invalidates fast and thinking that since his fast has become void,
commits intentionally another act which invalidates fast, his fast will
be void.

***Issue*** 1664: \* If something is dropped forcibly down the throat of
a fasting person, his fast does not become void. But, if he is compelled
to break his fast by intimidation, like, if he is warned that his life
or wealth would be at stake, and he willingly breaks the fast to ward
off the danger, his fast will be void.

***Issue*** 1665: \* A fasting person should not go to a place where he
knows that something will be put down his throat or that he will be
compelled to break his fast by his own hands. And if he goes there and
he is compelled to commit an act by his own hands which invalidates a
fast, his fast will be void. The same will apply, as an obligatory
precaution, if something is forcibly put down his throat.
