Fasting (Part II of II)
=======================

Things which are Makrooh for a Person Observing Fast
----------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1666: \* Certain things are Makrooh for a person observing
fast, some of them are mentioned below:

(i) Using eyedrops and applying Surma if its taste or smell reaches the
throat.

(ii) Performing an act, which causes weakness, like blood-letting
(extracting the blood from the body) or going for hot bath.

(iii) Inhaling a snuff if one is not aware that it might reach the
throat; and if one is aware that it will reach the throat its use is not
permissible.

(iv) Smelling fragrant herbs.

(v) For women, to sit in the water.

(vi) Using suppository, that is, letting into rectum a stimulant for
bowels.

(vii) Wetting the dress which one is wearing.

(viii) Getting a tooth extracted or doing something as a result of which
there is bleeding in the mouth.

(ix) Cleaning the teeth with a wet toothbrush.

(x) Putting water or any other liquid in the mouth without a good cause.

It is also Makrooh for a fasting person to court or woo his wife without
the intention of ejaculation; or to do something which excites him
sexually. And if he does it with the intention of ejaculation, and no
ejaculation takes place, his fast, as an obligatory precaution, will be
deemed void.

Obligatory Qadha Fast and Kaffarah
----------------------------------

***Issue*** 1667: \* In the following situations, both qadha and
Kaffarah become obligatory, provided these acts are committed
intentionally, voluntarily and without any force or pressure, during the
fasts of Ramadhan:

(i) Eating

(ii) Drinking

(iii) Sexual Intercourse

(iv) Masturbation

(v) Staying in the state of Janabat till the time of Fajr prayers

And as a recommended precaution, invalidating the fast due to reasons
other than those mentioned above, should also be recompensed with
Kaffarah, besides the obligatory qadha.

***Issue*** 1668: \* If a person commits any of the foregoing acts with
an absolute certitude that it does not invalidate fast, Kaffarah will
not be obligatory on him.

Kaffarah for Fast
-----------------

***Issue*** 1669: \* The Kaffarah of leaving out a fast of Ramadhan is
to:

(a) free a slave, or (b) fast for two months or (c) feed sixty poor to
their fill or give one mudd (= 3/4 kg.) of food-stuff, like, wheat or
barley or bread etc. to each of them. And if it is not possible for him
to fulfil any of these, he should give Sadaqa according to his means and
seek Divine forgiveness. And the obligatory precaution is that he should
give Kaffarah as and when he is capable to do so.

***Issue*** 1670: A person who intends fasting for two months as a
Kaffarah for a fast of Ramadhan, should fast continuously for one month
and one day, and it would not matter if he did not maintain continuity
for completion of the remaining fasts.

***Issue*** 1671: \* A person who intends fasting for two months as a
Kaffarah for a fast of Ramadhan, should not commence fasting at such
time when he knows that within a month and one day, days like
Eid-ul-Azha will fall when it would be haraam to fast.

***Issue*** 1672: If a person who must fast continuously, fails to fast
on any day in the period without any just excuse, he should commence
fasting all over again.

***Issue*** 1673: \* If a person who must fast continuously, is unable
to maintain the continuity due to an excuse beyond control, like, Haidh
or Nifas or a journey, which one is obliged to undertake, it will not be
obligatory on him/her after the excuse is removed, to commence fasting
again from the beginning. He/she should proceed to observe the remaining
fasts.

***Issue*** 1674: \* If a person breaks his fast with something haraam,
whether it is haraam in itself, like, wine or adultery or has become
haraam due to some reason like, any food which is normally permissible
but it is injurious to his health, or if he has sexual intercourse with
his wife during Haidth, he will have to observe all the three Kaffarah,
as a recommended precaution. It means that he should set free a slave,
fast for two months and also feed sixty poor to their fill, or give one
mudd of wheat, barley, bread etc. to each of them. If it is not possible
for him to give all the three Kaffarah, he should perform any one
Kaffarah which he can possibly give.

***Issue*** 1675: \* If a fasting person intentionally imputes lies to
Allah or the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the recommended precaution is that
he should give all the three Kaffarah as detailed above.

***Issue*** 1676: \* If a fasting person engages in sexual intercourse
several times a day during Ramadhan or commits masturbation, one
Kaffarah becomes obligatory on him. But, as a recommended precaution, he
should give a Kaffarah each time he engages in sexual intercourse.

***Issue*** 1677: \* If a fasting person repeats an act which
invalidates fast of Ramadhan other than sexual intercourse and
masturbation, one Kaffarah will be sufficient for all.

***Issue*** 1678: \* If a fasting person commits an act which
invalidates a fast other than sexual intercourse, and then has sexual
intercourse with his wife, one Kaffarah will suffice for both the acts.

***Issue*** 1679: \* If a fasting person commits a halal act to
invalidate a fast, like, if he drinks water and thereafter commits
another act which is haraam and invalidates a fast, like, if he eats
haraam food, one Kaffarah will suffice.

***Issue*** 1680: \* If a fasting person belches and swallows
intentionally that which comes in his mouth, his fast becomes void, and
he should give its qadha and Kaffarah also. And if the thing which comes
to his mouth is haraam to consume, like, blood or some food which no
more looks like food, and he swallows it intentionally, he will give the
qadha of that fast, and as a recommended precaution, give all the three
Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1681: If a person takes a vow that he would fast on a
particular day, and if he invalidates his fast intentionally on that
day, he should give Kaffarah, the one for which one becomes liable upon
breaking a vow. The details will come in the relevant Chapter.

***Issue*** 1682: If a fasting person breaks his fast when someone
unreliable informs him that Maghrib has set in, and he later learns that
Maghrib had not set in, or doubts whether it had set in or not, it is
obligatory on him to give qadha and Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1683: If a person who has intentionally invalidated his fast
travels after Zuhr or before Zuhr to escape the Kaffarah, he will not be
exempted from the Kaffarah. In fact, if he has to proceed unexpectedly
on a journey before Zuhr, even then it is obligatory for him to give
Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1684: If a person invalidates the fast intentionally and
then an excuse like Haidth, Nifas or sickness arises, the recommended
precaution is that he/she should give a Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1685: If a person was certain that it was the first day of
Ramadhan and invalidated his fast intentionally, and it transpired later
that it was the last day of Sha'ban it would not be obligatory on him to
give Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1686: If a person doubts whether it is the last day of
Ramadhan or the first day of Shawwal and invalidates his fast
intentionally, and it transpires later that it is the first day of
Shawwal, it will not be obligatory on him to give Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1687: \* If a man who is fasting in the month of Ramadhan
has sexual intercourse with his wife who is also fasting and if he has
compelled her for that, he should give Kaffarah for his own fast and as
a precaution, also for his wife's. And if she had wilfully consented to
the sexual intercourse, a Kaffarah becomes obligatory on each of them.

***Issue*** 1688: If a woman compels her fasting husband to have sexual
intercourse with her, it is not obligatory on her to give Kaffarah for
her husband's fast.

***Issue*** 1689: If a man who is fasting in Ramadhan compels his wife
for sexual intercourse, and if the woman expresses her agreement during
the intercourse, the man should, on the basis of obligatory precaution,
give two Kaffarah and the woman should give one Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1690: If a man who is observing fast in Ramadhan has sexual
intercourse with his fasting wife who is asleep, one Kaffarah becomes
obligatory on him. But the wife's fast is in order and she will not give
any Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1691: If a man compels his wife or a woman compels her
husband to commit an act which makes the fast void, other than the
sexual intercourse, it will not be obligatory upon any of them to give
any Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1692: A man who does not observe fast due to travelling or
illness, cannot compel his fasting wife to have sexual intercourse. But,
if he compels her, Kaffarah will not be obligatory on him either.

***Issue*** 1693: One should not be negligent about giving Kaffarah.
But, it is not necessary to give it immediately.

***Issue*** 1694: If Kaffarah has become obligatory on a person and if
he fails to fulfil it for some years, no increase in the Kaffarah takes
place.

***Issue*** 1695: \* When a person is required to feed sixty poor by way
of Kaffarah for one fast, and if he has access to all of them, he cannot
give to any one of them more than one mudd of food, or feed a poor man
more than once, calculating it as feeding more than one person. However,
he can give to a poor person one mudd of food for each member of his
family, even if they may be minors.

***Issue*** 1696: \* If a person offering qadha of a fast of Ramadhan
intentionally breaks his fast after Zuhr, he should give food to ten
poor persons, one mudd to each, and if he cannot do this, he should
observe fast for three days.

Occasions on which it is Obligatory to Observe the Qadha Only
-------------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1697: \* In the following cases it is obligatory on a person
to observe a qadha fast only and it is not obligatory on him to give a
Kaffarah:

(i) If a person is in Janabat during a night of Ramadhan and as detailed
in rule no. 1639 does not wake up from his second sleep till the time of
Fajr prayers.

(ii) If he does not commit an act which invalidates a fast but did not
make Niyyat to observe fast, or fasts to show off intends not to fast at
all, or decides to commit an act which invalidates a fast, then as an
obligatory precaution, he must give its qadha.

(iii) If he forgets to do Ghusl of Janabat during the month of Ramadhan
and fasts for one or more days in the state of Janabat.

(iv) If in the month of Ramadhan, a man without investigating as to
whether Fajr has set in or not commits an act, which invalidates a fast,
and it becomes known later that it was Fajr, he should as a precaution
and with the Niyyat of Qurbat, refrain from committing any further acts
which invalidate the fast, and give its qadha also.

(v) If someone else informs that it is not Fajr yet, and on the basis of
his statement one commits an act which invalidates a fast and it is
later found out that it was Fajr.

(vi) If someone informs that it is Fajr and not believing his word or
thinking that the fellow is joking, he commits, without investigating,
an act which invalidates a fast and it becomes known later that it was
Fajr.

(vii) If a blind person, or any one like him, breaks his fast relying on
the statement of another person, and it is known later that Maghrib had
not set in.

(viii) When a person is certain that Maghrib has set in, and breaks his
feet accordingly, and later he learns that it was not Maghrib, he must
give qadha. But if he believed that Maghrib had set in because of cloudy
weather, and broke his fast, and later it became evident that Maghrib
had not set in, he will observe qadha of that fast as a precautionary
measure.

(ix) When one rinses his mouth with water because it has dried due to
thirst and the water uncontrollably goes down one's throat, qadha has to
be given. Similarly, as a recommended precaution, one should give a
qadha if the mouthwash was for a wudhu for*Mustahab* prayers, and the
water went down the throat. But if he forgets that he has kept a fast,
or if he does the

mouthwash, not because of thirst, but for a wudhu for an obligatory
prayers and water is uncontrollably swallowed, there will be no qadha.

(x) If a person breaks his fast due to duress, helplessness or taqayyah,
he will observe qadha of the fast, but it is not obligatory on him to
give a Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1698: If a fasting person puts something other than water in
his mouth and it goes down the throat involuntarily, or puts water in
his nose and it goes down involuntarily, it will not be obligatory on
him to observe qadha of the fast.

***Issue*** 1699: It is Makrooh to do excessive mouth washing for a
fasting person, and after the mouthwash if he wishes to swallow saliva,
it is better that he spits it out three times before doing so.

***Issue*** 1700: \* If a person knows or feels that if he does a
mouthwash water will seep down his throat involuntarily, he should avoid
it. And as an obligatory precaution, he should avoid the mouthwash if he
knows or feels that water may trickle down his throat due to his own
forgetfulness.

***Issue*** 1701: \* If in the month of Ramadhan, a person becomes sure
after investigation that it is not Fajr and commits an act which
invalidates a fast, and it is later known that it was Fajr already, it
will not be necessary for him to offer qadha of that fast.

***Issue*** 1702: If a person doubts whether or not Maghrib has set in,
he cannot break his fast. But if he doubts whether or not it is Fajr he
can commit, even before investigation, an act which invalidates a fast.

Rules Regarding the Qadha Fasts
-------------------------------

***Issue*** 1703: If an insane recovers and becomes sane, it will not be
obligatory on him to offer qadha for the fasts which he did not observe
when he was insane.

***Issue*** 1704: If an unbeliever becomes a Muslim, it is not
obligatory on him to offer qadha for the fasts of the period during
which he was an unbeliever. However, if a Muslim apostatises and becomes
Muslim again, he must observe qadha for the fasts of the period during
which he remained an apostate.

***Issue*** 1705: A person must offer qadha for the fasts left out due
to being intoxicated, even if the intoxicant was taken by him for the
purpose of medical treatment.

***Issue*** 1706: If a person did not fast on certain days because of
some excuse and later doubts about the exact date on which the excuse
was over, it will not be obligatory on him to offer qadha basing his
calculation on the higher number. For example, if a person travelled
before the commencement of the month of Ramadhan, and now does not
remember whether he returned on the 5th of Ramadhan or on the 6th, or if
he travelled in the last days of the month of Ramadhan and returned
after Ramadhan, and now does not remember whether he travelled on the
25th of Ramadhan or on the 26th, in both the cases, he can observe qadha
based on the lesser number of days, that is, five days. However, the
recommended precaution is that he should offer qadha for the higher
number of days, that is, six days.

***Issue*** 1707: If a person has to give qadha for Ramadhan fasts of
several years, he can begin with the qadha of Ramadhan of any year as he
likes.

But, if the time for qadha fasts of the last Ramadhan is short, like, if
he has to observe five qadha fasts of the last Ramadhan and only five
days are left before the commencement of approaching Ramadhan, it is
better to observe qadha fasts of last Ramadhan.

***Issue*** 1708: If a person has qadha fasts of the month of Ramadhan
for several years, and while making Niyyat he does not specify to which
year the fasts belong, they will not be reckoned to be the qadha of the
last year.

***Issue*** 1709: A person who observes a qadha for the fast of Ramadhan
can break his fast before Zuhr. However, if the time for qadha fast is
short, it is better not to break it.

***Issue*** 1710: If a person observes qadha fast of a dead person, it
is better not to break the fast after Zuhr.

***Issue*** 1711: \* If a person does not observe the fasts of the month
of Ramadhan due to illness, Haidh or Nifas and dies before he/she can
give qadha in time, he/she will not have any qadha liability.

***Issue*** 1712: \* If a person does not fast in the month of Ramadhan
due to illness and his illness continues till next Ramadhan, it is not
obligatory on him to observe qadha of the fasts which he had not
observed, but for each fast he should give one mudd of food like, wheat,
barley, bread etc. to poor. And if he did not observe fast owing to some
other excuse, like, if he did not fast because of travelling and his
excuse continued till next Ramadhan, he should observe its qadha fasts,
and the obligatory precaution is that for each day he should give one
mudd of food to poor.

***Issue*** 1713: If a person did not fast in Ramadhan due to illness,
and his illness ended after Ramadhan, but there emerged another excuse
due to which he could not observe the qadha fasts till next Ramadhan, he
should offer qadha for the fasts which he did not observe. Also, if he
had an excuse other than illness during Ramadhan, and that excuse ended
after Ramadhan, but he then fell ill and could not give qadha till next
Ramadhan because of that illness, he will offer the qadha for the fasts
he did not observe and, on the basis of obligatory precaution, he will
give one mudd of food to poor for each day.

***Issue*** 1714: If a person does not observe fasts in the month of
Ramadhan owing to some excuse and his excuse is removed after Ramadhan,
yet he does not observe the qadha fasts intentionally till next
Ramadhan, he has to give qadha of the fasts and should also give one
mudd of food to poor for each fast.

***Issue*** 1715: \* If a person deliberately ignores observing qadha
till the time left is short, and during that short time he develops an
excuse, he has to give qadha and as a precaution, give one mudd of food
to poor for each day. Similarly, if after the excuse is over, he firmly
decides to give qadha, but is unable to do so because of some fresh
excuse during that short time, he will follow the above rule.

***Issue*** 1716: If the illness of a person continues for very long,
protracted over many years, he should, after being cured, observe the
qadha fasts of the last Ramadhan, and for each day of the earlier years
he should give one mudd of food to poor.

***Issue*** 1717: A person who has to give one mudd of food to poor for
each day, can give food of Kaffarah of a few days to one poor person.

***Issue*** 1718: If a person delays observing qadha fasts of the month
of Ramadhan for a few years, he should give the qadha and should on
account of delay in the first year, give one mudd of food to a poor
person for each day. As for the delay in the subsequent years, nothing
is obligatory on him.

***Issue*** 1719: \* If a person does not observe fasts of the month of
Ramadhan intentionally, he should give their qadha and for each day left
out, he should observe fast for two months or feed sixty poor persons or
set a slave free, and if he does not observe the qadha till next
Ramadhan, he should also give one mudd of food for each day as a
Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1720: \* If a person does not observe fast of the month of
Ramadhan intentionally, and commits sexual intercourse or masturbation
several times during the day, the Kaffarah does not multiply together
with it. Similarly, if he performs other acts which invalidate the fast,
like eating several times, one Kaffarah will suffice.

***Issue*** 1721: \* After the death of a person his eldest son, as an
obligatory precaution, should observe his qadha fasts as explained in
connection with the prayers earlier.

***Issue*** 1722: \* If a father had not observed obligatory fasts other
than the fasts of the month of Ramadhan, like, a fast of Nadhr, the
recommended precaution is that his eldest son should observe its qadha.
However, if the father was hired for observing fasts on behalf of a dead
person, but he did not observe them, it is not obligatory for the eldest
son to offer them.

Fasting by a Traveller

***Issue*** 1723: A traveller for whom it is obligatory to shorten a
four Rak'ats prayers to two Rak'ats, should not fast. However, a
traveller who offers full prayers, like, a person who is a traveller by
profession or who goes on a journey for a haraam purpose, should fast
while travelling.

***Issue*** 1724: There is no harm in travelling during the month of
Ramadhan, but it is Makrooh to travel during the month to evade fasting.
And similarly, it is Makrooh to travel before the 24th of Ramadhan
unless travelling is undertaken for the purpose of Hajj or Umrah or for
some important work.

***Issue*** 1725: \* If it is obligatory on a person to observe a
particular fast other than the fasts of Ramadhan, like, if he has
undertaken to fast on behalf of someone against payment, or if it is the
fast of the third day of I'tekaf, he cannot travel on that day, and if
he is already on journey then he should make a Niyyat to stay there for
ten days, if possible, and keep the fast. And if it is an obligatory
fast of Nadhr, travelling on that day is permissible, and it is not
necessary to make an intention of staying there for ten days. Though, it
is better not to travel unless it is absolutely necessary, and if he is
already on a journey, he should have the Niyyat to stay there for 10
days.

***Issue*** 1726: If a person makes a vow to observe a*Mustahab* fast
and does not specify any day for it, he cannot keep the fast while
travelling. However, if he makes a vow that he will observe fast on a
particular day during a journey, he should observe that fast during the
journey. Also, if he makes a

vow that he will observe a fast on a particular day, whether he is
journeying on that day or not, he should observe the fasts on that day
even if he travels.

***Issue*** 1727: A traveller can observe*Mustahab* fasts in Madinah for
three days with the Niyyat of praying for the fulfilment of his wish,
and as a precaution, those three days be Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.

***Issue*** 1728: If a person does not know that the fast of a traveller
is invalid and observes fast while journeying, and learns about the rule
during the day, his fast becomes void, but if he does not learn about
the rule till Maghrib, his fast is valid.

***Issue*** 1729: If a person forgets that he is a traveller or forgets
that the fast of a traveller is void, and observes fast while
journeying, is fast is invalid.

***Issue*** 1730: \* If a fasting person travels after Zuhr, he should,
as a precaution, complete his fast. If he travels before Zuhr and had an
intention from the previous night to do so, he cannot fast on that day.
As a precaution, he cannot fast on that day even if he had no intention
to travel from the previous night. In both the cases, he cannot break
the fast till he has reached the limit of Tarakkhus. If he does, he will
be liable to give Kaffarah.

***Issue*** 1731: If a traveller in the month of Ramadhan, regardless of
whether he was travelling before Fajr, or was fasting and then undertook
the journey, reaches his hometown before Zuhr or a place where he
intends to stay for ten days, and if has not committed an act which
invalidates a fast, he should fast on that day. But if he has committed
such an act, it is not obligatory on him to fast on that day.

***Issue*** 1732: \* If a traveller reaches his hometown after Zuhr, or
a place where he intends to stay for ten days, he cannot fast on that
day.

***Issue*** 1733: It is Makrooh for a traveller and for a person who
cannot fast owing to some excuse, to have sexual intercourse or to eat
or drink to his fill, during the day time in Ramadhan.

People on Whom Fasting is Not Obligatory

***Issue*** 1734: Fasting is not obligatory on a person who cannot fast
because of old age, or for whom fasting causes extreme hardship. But in
latter case, he should give one mudd food to a poor person for every
fast.

***Issue*** 1735: If a person who did not fast during the month of
Ramadhan owing to old age, becomes capable of fasting later, he should,
on the basis of recommended precaution, give the qadha.

***Issue*** 1736: \* Fasting is not obligatory on a person who suffers
from a disease which causes excessive thirst, making it unbearable, or
full of hardship. But in the latter case, that is, of hardship, he
should give one mudd of food to poor, for every fast. At the same time,
as a recommended precaution, such a person may not drink water in a
quantity more than essential. If he recovers later, enabling him to
fast, then as a recommended precaution, he should give qadha for the
fast.

***Issue*** 1737: \* Fasting is not obligatory on a woman in advanced
stage of pregnancy, for whom fasting is harmful or for the child she
carries. For every day, however, she should give one mudd of food to
poor. In both the cases, she has to give qadha for the fasts which are
left out.

***Issue*** 1738: \* If a woman is suckling a child, whether she is the
mother or a nurse, or suckles it free, and the quantity of her milk is
small, and if

fasting is harmful to her or to the child, it will not be obligatory on
her to fast. And she should give one mudd of food per day to poor. In
both the cases, she will later give qadha for the fasts left out. But
this rule is specifically applicable in a circumstance where this is the
only way of feeding milk to the child - (as an obligatory precaution).
But if there is an alternative, like, when more than one woman offer to
suckle the child, then establishing this rule is a matter of*Ishkal* .

Method of Ascertaining the First Day of a Month
-----------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1739: \* The 1st day of a month is established in the
following four ways:

(i) If a person himself sights the moon.

(ii) If a number of persons confirm to have sighted the moon and their
words assure or satisfy a person. Similarly, every other thing which
assures or satisfies him about moon having being sighted.

(iii) If two just (Adil) persons say that they have sighted the moon at
night. The first day of the month will not be established if they differ
about the details of the new moon. This difference can be either
explicit or even implied. For example, when a group of people goes out
in search of a new moon and none but two Adils claim to have seen the
new moon, though, among those who did not see, there were other Adils
equally capable and knowledgeable, then the testimony by the first two
Adils will not prove the advent of a new month.

(iv) If 30 days pass from the first of Sha'ban, the 1st of Ramadhan will
be established, and if 30 days pass from the 1st of Ramadhan the 1st of
Shawwal will be established.

***Issue*** 1740: The 1st day of any month will not be proved by the
verdict of a Mujtahed and it is better to observe precaution.

***Issue*** 1741: The first day of a month will not be proved by the
prediction made by the astronomers. However, if a person derives full
satisfaction and certitude from their findings, he should act
accordingly.

***Issue*** 1742: \* If the moon is high up in the sky, or sets late, it
is not an indication that the previous night was the first night of the
month. Similarly, if there is a halo round it, it is not a proof that
the new moon appeared in the previous night.

***Issue*** 1743: If the first day of the month of Ramadhan is not
proved for a person and he does not observe fast, and if it is proved
later that the preceding night was infact the night of Ramadhan, he
should observe qadha of that day.

***Issue*** 1744: \* If the first day of a month is proved in a city, it
is also proved in other cities if they are united in their horizon. And
the meaning of having a common horizon in this matter is that if new
moon was sighted in a city, there would be a distinct possibility of
sighting it in the other cities, if there were no impediments, like, the
clouds etc.

***Issue*** 1745: The first day of a month is not proved by a telegram
except when one is sure that the telegram is based on the testimony of
two Adils, or on a source which is reliable in the eyes of Shariah.

***Issue*** 1746: If a person does not know whether it is the last day
of Ramadhan or the first of Shawwal, he should observe fast on that day,
and if

he comes to know during the day that it is the first of Shawwal, he
should break the fast.

***Issue*** 1747: \* If a prisoner cannot ascertain the advent of
Ramadhan, he should act on probability and he should act on a
probability which in his estimation is stronger. But if even that is not
possible, he may consider a month which he strongly feels to be Ramadhan
and fast; however, he should keep that month in view so that if it later
transpires that he kept fasts before Ramadhan, he will give the qadha.
And if it transpired that it was Ramadhan or after it, he does not have
any liability of qadha.

Haraam and Makrooh Fasts
------------------------

***Issue*** 1748: It is haraam to fast on the day of Eid-ul-Fitr and
Eid-ul-Azha. It is also haraam to fast with the Niyyat of first fast of
Ramadhan on a day about which he is not sure whether it is the last day
of Sha'ban or the first of Ramadhan.

***Issue*** 1749: It is haraam for a wife to keep a*Mustahab* fast if by
so doing she would not be able to attend to her duties to her husband.
And the obligatory precaution is that even if she can attend to her
duties towards her husband, she should not observe a*Mustahab* fast
without his permission.

***Issue*** 1750: \* It is haraam for the children to observe
a*Mustahab* fast if it causes emotional suffering to their parents.

***Issue*** 1751: \* If a son observes a*Mustahab* fast without the
permission of his father, and his father prohibits him from it during
the day time, the son should break the fast if his disobedience would
hurt the feeling of his father.

***Issue*** 1752: \* If a person knows that fasting is not harmful to
him, he should fast even if his doctor advises that it is harmful. And
if a person is certain or has a feeling that fasting is harmful to him,
he should not fast even if the doctor advises for it, and if he fasts in
these circumstances, his fast will not be valid if it turns out that the
fast was actually harmful, or if it was not kept with the Niiyyat of
Qurbat.

***Issue*** 1753: \* If a person has a strong feeling that it is harmful
for him to fast, and owing to that feeling, fear is created in his mind,
and if that feeling is commonly acceptable, he should not observe fast,
and if he does, it will not be valid in the way described in the
foregoing rule.

***Issue*** 1754: If a person who believes that fasting is not harmful
to him, observes fast and realises after Maghrib that it was
considerably harmful to him, he should, on the basis of obligatory
precaution, give the qadha of that day.

***Issue*** 1755: Besides the fasts mentioned herein, there are other
haraam fasts also, the details of which are found in relevant books.

***Issue*** 1756: It is Makrooh to fast on 'Ashura (10th of Muharram).
It is also Makrooh to fast on the day about which one is not sure
whether it is the day of 'Arafa or Eid-ul-Azha.

Mustahab Fasts
--------------

***Issue*** 1757:\* Fasting is*Mustahab* on every day of a year except
those on which it is haraam or Makrooh to observe a fast. Some of them
which have been strongly recommended, are mentioned here:

(i) The first and last Thursday of every month and the first Wednesday
after the 10th of a month. If a person does not observe these fasts it
is*Mustahab* that he gives their qadha. And if he is incapable of
fasting, it is*Mustahab* for him to give one mudd of food or prescribed
coined silver to poor.

(ii) 13th, 14th and 15th day of every month.

(iii) On all days of Rajab and Shaban or on as many days as it is
possible to fast, even though it may be one day only.

(iv) The day of Eid Nawroz.

(v) From the 4th up to the 9th of the month of Shawwal.

(vi) The 25th and 29th day of the month of Zi qa'da.

(vii) From the 1st day to the 9th day (i.e. 'Arafa day) of the month of
Zil hajj. But if, it is not possible for one to recite the Duas of
'Arafa due to weakness caused by fasting, it is Makrooh to fast on that
day.

(viii) The auspicious day of Ghadir (18th Zil hajj).

(ix) The auspicious day of Mubahala (24th Zil hajj).

(x) The 1st, 3rd and 7th day of Muharram.

(xi) The birthday of the Holy Prophet (17th Rabi'ul awwal).

(xii) 15th day of Jumadi'ul oola.

Fasting is also recommended on 27th of Rajab - the day the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) declared his Prophethood.

If a person observes a*Mustahab* fast, it is not obligatory on him to
complete it. In fact, if one of his brethren-in-faith invites him to a
meal, it is*Mustahab* that he accepts the invitation and breaks the fast
during the day time even if it may be after Zuhr.

Mustahab Precautions
--------------------

***Issue*** 1758: It is*Mustahab* for the following persons that even if
they may not be fasting, they should refrain from those acts in the
month of Ramadhan which invalidate a fast:

(i) A traveller who has committed an act during his journey which makes
a fast void and reaches his hometown before Zuhr, or the place where he
intends to stay for ten days.

(ii) A traveller who reaches home after Zuhr or at a place where he
intends to stay for ten days. The same rule applies if he reaches such
places before Zuhr and if he has already broken his fast while
journeying.

(iii) A patient who recovers after Zuhr or even if he recovers before
noon, though he may have committed acts which invalidate fast. And if he
has not committed any such act, then his obligation has been explained
in rule no. 1576.

(iv) A woman who becomes Clean (*tahir/pak* ) from Haidh or Nifas during
day time.

***Issue*** 1759: It is*Mustahab* that a person breaks his fast after
offering Maghrib and Isha prayers. However, if he feels terribly
inclined to eat, so much that he cannot concentrate on the prayers, or
if someone is waiting for him, it is better that he should break his
fast first and offer the prayers later. However, as far as possible, he
should try to offer the prayers during the prime time (Fadheelat).
