Khums
=====

***Issue 1760: \* Khums is obligatory on the following seven things:***

1. Profit or gain from earning.

2. Minerals.

3. Treasure trove.

4. Amalgamation of Halal wealth with Haraam.

5. Gems obtained from the sea diving.

6. Spoils of war.

7. As commonly held, a land which a zimmi (a non-Muslim living under the
protection of Islamic Government) purchases from a Muslim.

Profit from Earning
-------------------

***Issue*** 1761: If a person earns by means of trade, industry or any
other ways of earning, like, if he earns some money by offering prayers
and fasting on behalf of a dead person, and if it exceeds the annual
expenses for maintaining himself and his family, he should pay Khums
(i.e. 1/5) from the surplus, in accordance with the rules which will be
explained later.

***Issue*** 1762: If a person acquires wealth without having worked for
it, like, if someone gives him a gift, and that wealth exceeds his own
annual expenses, he should pay Khums from the excess.

***Issue*** 1763: \* There is no Khums liability on Mahr which a wife
receives, nor on the property, which a husband gets in exchange of
divorcing his wife by way of Khula, and the same rule applies to the
property which one inherits according to the genuine laws of
inheritance. If a Shia Muslim inherits from a source which is not
accepted in our Fiqh, like inheriting from a distant relative despite
his heirs being present (Ta'seeb), it will be considered a gain, and
Khums will have to paid from it. Similarly, if a person inherits from an
unexpected source, neither from his father nor from his son, then as an
obligatory precaution, he will pay Khums from that inheritance if it
exceeds his annual expenses.

***Issue*** 1764: \* If a person inherits some property and knows that
the person from whom he has inherited did not pay Khums from it, he (the
heir) should pay its Khums. And if that property is itself not liable
for Khums, but the heir knows that the person from who he has inherited,
owed some Khums, he should pay it from the deceased's estate. But in
both the cases, if the person from whom he inherits did not believe in
Khums, or never paid it, then it is not necessary for the heir to pay
off the Khums owed by the dead.

***Issue*** 1765: If a person saves from the annual expenses because of
economising and frugality, he should pay the Khums.

***Issue*** 1766: \* If the expenses of a person are borne by somebody
else, that person should pay Khums on his entire earning.

***Issue*** 1767: If a person gives away a property as Waqf to some
individuals, like his sons, and if they do farming and planting trees on
that property, and acquire from it an earning which exceeds their annual
expenses, they should pay its Khums. Similarly, if they profit from that
property in some other manner, like if they lease it out, they should
pay Khums from the amount which exceeds their annual expenses.

***Issue*** 1768: \* If the wealth received by a poor man, by way of
obligatory or recommended Sadaqah, exceeds his annual expenses, or if he
earns profit from the property given to him, like, if he gets fruit from
a tree which has been given to him, and that exceeds his annual
expenses, he should pay Khums from it. But wealth which he has received
as Khums or Zakaat is not liable for any Khums.

***Issue*** 1769: \* If a person purchases a commodity with the money on
which the Khums has not been paid, that is, if he says to the Shia Ithna
Asheri seller: “I am purchasing this commodity with this money,” the
transaction will be in order in respect of the entire property, and
Khums will apply to the commodity which he has purchased with that
money. And no permission and acknowledgement of a*Mujtahid* will be
necessary.

***Issue*** 1770: If a person purchases a commodity, and after the
transaction, pays its price from the money from which Khums has not been
paid by him, the transaction will be in order, but he will be indebted
to those who deserve to receive Khums, for the sum he has paid to the
seller.

***Issue*** 1771: \* If a Shia Ithna Asheri person purchases something
on which Khums has not been paid, the Khums will be the liability of the
seller, and the buyer is not responsible for anything.

***Issue*** 1772: \*If a person gives a gift to a Shia Ithna Asheri,
from which Khums has not been paid, one fifth of it is the liability of
the donor himself, and one who gets the gift is not required to pay
anything.

***Issue*** 1773: If a person acquires wealth from an unbeliever, or a
person who does not believe in paying Khums, it will not be obligatory
for him, that is, the person who receives, to pay Khums.

***Issue*** 1774: \* It is obligatory on the merchants, the earners, the
artisans, and others like them that when a year passes since they
started earning, they should pay Khums from whatever is in excess of
their expenses for one year. And if a person who is not earning, makes
an unexpected gain, he should pay Khums after a year has passed since he
gained, on the savings which exceeds his expenditure for that year.

***Issue*** 1775: A person can pay Khums as and when he earns a profit
during a year, and it is also permissible to delay payment of Khums till
the end of the year. And there is no objection if one adopts the solar
year for the payment of Khums.

***Issue*** 1776: If a merchant or an earner fixes a year for payment of
Khums, and makes a profit, but dies during the same year, his expenses
till his death should be deducted from the profit, and Khums should be
paid on the balance.

***Issue*** 1777: If the price of a commodity one purchases for the
purpose of business shoots up, and he does not sell it, and its price
falls during the year, it is not obligatory on him to calculate Khums on
the increased prices.

***Issue*** 1778:\* If the price of a commodity which a person purchases
for the purpose of business shoots up, and he does not sell it till
after the end of the year, expecting that the price will rise, and then
the price falls, it is obligatory for him to calculate Khums based on
the increase in the price.

***Issue*** 1779: \* If a person possesses some goods other than
merchandise, from which Khums has been paid by him, if its price shoots
up, and he sells

it, he will pay Khums on the excess gained. Similarly if, the tree which
he has purchased bears fruit, or a sheep which becomes fat, and if his
object in maintaining them was to earn profit, he should pay Khums from
the price increase. In fact, even if it was not his object to earn
profit, he should pay Khums on them.

***Issue*** 1780: \* If a person establishes a garden, with the
intention of selling it after its price goes up, he should pay Khums on
the fruit, the growth of the trees and the increase in the price of the
garden. But, if his intention is to sell the fruit of the trees and
benefit from its value, he should pay Khums on the fruit only.

***Issue*** 1781: If a person plants willow, plane tree and other trees
like them, he should pay Khums on their growth every year. And
similarly, if he makes profit from the branches of the trees which are
cut every year, and the price of these branches alone, or the same added
with other profits made by him, makes his income exceed his expenditure
for the year, he should pay his Khums at the end of each year.

***Issue*** 1782: \* If a person has a few sources of income, for
example, he receives rent for his property and is also engaged in trade,
if they are all considered as one business, he should pay Khums at the
end of the year from what exceeds his expenses. And if he makes a profit
in one source and sustains loss in another, he can offset his loss of
one with the profit of the other. But if he has two different
businesses, like, if he is engaged in trade as well as farming, he
cannot, as an obligatory precaution, offset the loss in one with the
profit made from the other.

***Issue*** 1783: A person can deduct from his profit, the expenditure
which he incurs in making profit, like, on brokerage and transportation,
and it is not necessary to pay Khums on that amount.

***Issue*** 1784: No Khums is payable on what one spends from his profit
during the year on food, dress, furniture, purchase of house, marriage
of son, dowry of daughter, Ziyarat etc., provided that it is not beyond
his status, and he has not been extravagant.

***Issue*** 1785: Whatever a person spends on Nadhr and Kaffarah is a
part of his annual expenditure. Similarly,what he gives away as a gift
or a prize is included in his annual expenditure, provided it is not
beyond his status.

***Issue*** 1786: \* If a person cannot prepare all the dowry for his
daughter at the time of her marriage, and has to do so over a few years,
and if it is deemed unbecoming for him not to give away any dowry, Khums
will not be liable on what he purchases during the year, provided it is
within his means. But if he exceeds his means, or spends the profit of
one year to buy the dowry in the following year, he will pay its Khums.

***Issue*** 1787: Whatever a person spends for his journey to Hajj and
other Ziyarats (pilgrimages) is reckoned to be part of his expenditure
of the year in which he spends it, and if his journey extends till part
of the next year, he should pay Khums on what he spends during the
second year.

***Issue*** 1788: \* If a person who earns profit from his work and
trade, has some other property on which Khums is not liable, he can
calculate his expenditure for the year from the profit earned from his
work or business.

***Issue*** 1789: \* If a person purchases provision for his use during
the year, with the profit made by him, and at the end of the year a part
of it remains unused, he should pay Khums on it. And if he wants to pay
its value, which may have increased since he brought the provision, he
should calculate the price prevailing at the end of the year.

***Issue*** 1790: \* If a person purchases household accessories with
the profit earned by him before paying Khums, it is not necessary for
him to pay Khums on them if their need ends after the year ends. There
will no liability of Khums if their needs cease to exist during the
year, but they must be those articles which are kept for many years,
like the winter and summer dresses. Other than these, Khums will be, as
an obligatory precaution, liable as soon as their need is over.
Similarly, when a woman no more needs her ornaments for adornment, Khums
will have to be paid on it.

***Issue*** 1791: If a person does not make any profit during a year, he
cannot deduct his expenditure of that year from the profit which he
makes in the next year.

***Issue*** 1792: \* If a person does not make any profit in the
beginning of the year, and spends his capital, and then makes some
profit before the year ends, he is allowed to deduct the amount spent
from his capital, from the profit.

***Issue*** 1793: \* If a part of the capital is lost in trade etc., a
person can deduct the lost amount from the profit made in the same year.

***Issue*** 1794: \* If something else other than capital is lost from
his wealth, he cannot procure it from the profit made by him. But if he
needs that thing during that very year, he can procure it from the
profit.

***Issue*** 1795: \* If a person does not make any profit throughout a
year, and borrows money to meet his expenses, he cannot deduct the
borrowed amount from the profit made by him during the succeeding years.
But, if he borrows money in the beginning of the year to meet his
expenses, and makes profit before the year ends, he can deduct the
borrowed amount from his profit. Similarly, in the first case mentioned
above, he can deduct his debt from the profit made during the year, and
that part of the profit will not be liable for Khums.

***Issue*** 1796:\* If a person takes a loan to increase his wealth, or
to purchase a property which he does not need, he cannot repay that loan
from the profit earned during that year. However, if the loan taken out
by him, or the thing purchased with it, is lost, he can pay the loan out
of the profit made by him during that year.

***Issue*** 1797: \* A person can pay the Khums of the thing from
itself, or he can also pay money equivalent to the value of the Khums
for which he is liable. But if he wants to pay from another commodity
which has not yet become liable for Khums, he cannot do so without the
permission of*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1798: If a person becomes liable for Khums and he has not
paid it although a year has passed, and also does not intend to pay it,
he cannot have any discretion over that property. In fact, as an
obligatory precaution, the position is the same (i.e. he cannot have any
discretion over the property) even if he intends to pay Khums.

***Issue*** 1799: A person who owes Khums cannot take responsibility for
it, i.e. treat himself to be the debtor of those entitled to receive it,
and use the entire property, and if he uses that property and it is
lost, he should pay Khums on it.

***Issue*** 1800: If a person who owes Khums makes a compromise with
the*Mujtahid* , and takes responsibility for it, he can appropriate the
entire property, and the profit he earns from it after the compromise,
belongs to him.

***Issue*** 1801: \* If one partner pays Khums on the profit made by
him, and the other partner does not pay it, and he (the other partner)
offers in the next year, as share of his capital, the property on which
Khums has not been paid by him, the first partner who has paid Khums can
have the right of disposal over that property, if the other fellow is a
Shia Ithna Asheri Muslim.

***Issue*** 1802: \* If a minor child owns some capital, and profit
accrues on it, Khums becomes liable and it is obligatory upon his
guardian to pay the Khums. But if he does not, the minor child will have
to pay it when he attains puberty.

***Issue*** 1803: \* If a person acquires wealth from another person,
and doubts whether or not he has paid Khums on it, he has a discretion
over it. In fact, even if he is certain that the other person has not
paid Khums on it, he has the discretion over it if that person is a Shia
Ithna Asheri.

***Issue*** 1804: If a person purchases with the profit earned by him, a
property which is not supposed to be part of his needs and annual
expenses, it is obligatory on him to pay Khums on it at the end of the
year. And if he does not pay Khums, and the value of the property
increases, he should pay Khums on its current value. And besides
property, the same rules apply to carpets etc.

***Issue*** 1805: If a person who has never paid Khums since he became
liable, purchases a property, and its price goes up, and if he had not
purchased it with the intention to see its price inflated and sell - for
example, if he had purchased a land for farming and paid its price out
of the money on which he had not paid Khums, he should pay Khums on the
purchase price. And if, he has paid to the seller the money on which
Khums has not been paid by him, and told him: “I am purchasing this
property with this money” he should pay Khums on the current value of
that property.

***Issue*** 1806: \* If a person who has never paid Khums since he
became liable for it, purchases with the profit of his trade, something
which is not needed by him, and a year passes since he made that profit,
he should pay Khums on that thing. And if he purchases household
equipment and other necessities, in accordance with his status, it is
not necessary for him to pay Khums on them, if he knows that he
purchased them during the year with the same year's profit. And if he
does not know, he should, as an obligatory precaution, make compromise
with the*Mujtahid* .

Minerals
--------

***Issue*** 1807: \* Gold, silver, lead, copper, iron, oil, steamcoal,
Feerozah, Aqeeq, alum, salt or any other mineral are from Anfaal, which
means that they belong to Imam (A.S.). But if anyone extracts them
without any

religious impediments, he can own them. And when they are of prescribed
quantity, Khums must be paid on them.

***Issue*** 1808: The taxable limit of a mineral is 15 common mithqals
of coined gold i.e. if the value of a thing which is extracted from a
mine reaches 15 mithqals of coined gold, the person concerned should pay
Khums on it, after deducting from it the expenses which he has incurred.

***Issue*** 1809: \* If a person has derived profit from a mine, but the
value of the thing which he has extracted does not reach 15 mithqals of
coined gold, payment of Khums on it will be necessary when that profit
alone or combined with other profits of his trade exceed his expenses
for one year.

***Issue*** 1810: \* Chalk, lime, fuller's-earth and red clay are, as an
obligatory precaution, minerals, and one who extracts them, is required
to pay Khums if the value of that mineral reached the prescribed taxable
limit. This will become obligatory without deducting annual expenses

***Issue*** 1811: If a person acquires something from a mine, he should
pay Khums on it whether the mine is over the ground, or under, and
whether it is located in an owned land, or at a place which has no
owner.

***Issue*** 1812: \* If a person does not know whether or not the value
of the thing extracted by him from a mine reaches 15 mithqals of coined
gold, as an obligatory precaution, he should ascertain the value, as far
as possible, by getting it weighed or by any other means.

***Issue*** 1813: \* If a few persons jointly extract something, and if
its total value reaches 15 mithqals of coined gold, they should pay
Khums on it, as a recommended precaution, even if the value of the share
of each one of them may not be liable for Khums.

***Issue*** 1814: \* If a person extracts mineral by digging a land
belonging to another person without his consent, the Fuqaha have said
that it belongs to the owner of the land. But this is a matter
of*Ishkal* , and a better alternative is that they come to some
understanding between them, and if that fails, reference should be made
to the*Mujtahid* for his decision.

Treasure - Trove
----------------

***Issue*** 1815: A treasure trove is a property which is hidden
underground, or in a tree or a mountain or a wall, and someone finds it
out. It should be in such form that it can be called a treasure-trove.

***Issue*** 1816: \* If a person finds a treasure-trove in a land which
does not belong to anyone, he can appropriate it, but he must pay Khums
on it.

***Issue*** 1817: \* The taxable limit of a treasure-trove is 105
mithqals of coined silver or 15 mithqals of coined gold. It means that
any thing found in the treasure should be equal to the above mentioned
value of either of the metals before it becomes liable for Khums.

***Issue*** 1818: \* If a person finds a treasure-trove in a land which
he has purchased from another person, and knows that it does not belong
to the previous owners of the land,nor does it belong to any other
Muslim or a Zimmi who may be themselves alive, or their heirs, he can
take it as his property, but he must pay Khums on it. But if he has a
strong feeling that the treasure may belong to the previous owner of the
land, since the land and all in it was in his sole control, he should
inform the previous owner. If it turns out that the treasure is not his,
he should inform the owner preceding

the previous owner, and so on, and if he finds out that the treasure did
not belong to them, he can appropriate it, but he must pay Khums on it.

***Issue*** 1819: \* If a person finds wealth in many containers buried
at one place, and its total value is 105 mithqals of silver or 15
mithqals of gold, he should pay Khums on it. However, if he finds the
treasure-trove at several places, it is obligatory on him to pay Khums
on each one of those treasures whose value reaches the minimum taxable
limit, and no Khums is payable on the treasure-trove whose value is
lesser.

***Issue*** 1820: \* If two persons find a treasure-trove whose total
value reaches 105 mithqals of silver or 15 mithqals of gold, they would
not pay Khums on it if the share of each one of them may not come to the
minimum taxable limit.

***Issue*** 1821: \* If a person purchases an animal, and finds some
valuables in its belly, it is necessary for him to inform the seller or
the previous owner about it, provided that he has a strong feeling that
it could belong to either of them, and that they owned it together with
what was in the belly of the animal. But if he finds that it does not
belong to either, as an obligatory precaution, he will pay Khums on it,
even if its value is less than the minimum limit. This rule applies to
fish and its like, if they were looked after in a special place like
fish farm, and someone supervised its feeding. But if the fish was
caught from an open sea or a river, then it is not at all necessary to
inform anyone.

When Halal Property gets mixed up with Haraam Property
------------------------------------------------------

***Issue*** 1822: \* If halal property gets mixed up in such a way that
it is not possible to identify each from the other, and the owner of the
haraam property and its quantity are not known, and if it is also not
known whether the quantity of the haraam property is more or less than
the due Khums, the person concerned should pay Khums, with the Niyyat of
Qurbat on the entire property, to one entitled to receive Khums and such
properties whose owners are unknown, and after the payment of Khums the
balance will become halal for him.

***Issue*** 1823: If halal property gets mixed up with haraam property,
and the person concerned knows the quantity of haraam property,
(irrespective of it being more or less than Khums) but does not know its
owner, he should give away that quantity as Sadaqah on behalf of its
owner, and the obligatory precaution is that he should also obtain
permission from the*Mujtahid* .

***Issue*** 1824: \* If halal property gets mixed up with haraam
property, and the person concerned does not know the quantity of haraam
property, but knows its owner, they should come to some understanding
and agreement with each other, and pay the owner a sum which would
ensure that the amount due has been paid up. In fact, if the person
concerned knows that it was due to his own negligence that the mix up
occurred, then he should, as a precaution, pay more than what he feels
might belong to the owner.

***Issue*** 1825: If a person pays Khums on a property which has halal
mixed with haraam parts, and learns later that the quantity of haraam
property was more than Khums, he should give the excess as Sadaqah, on
behalf of the owner of the property which has remained unlawful with
him.

***Issue*** 1826: \* If a person pays Khums on a property which has been
mixed up, or gives some property as Sadaqah on behalf of an unknown
person, and if the owner turns up later, as an obligatory precaution, he
must reimburse him his part, if he does not agree to the action taken.

***Issue*** 1827: \* If a halal property mixes up with haraam property,
and the quantity of the haraam property is known, and the person
concerned knows that the owner is one of a group, but cannot identify
him, he should inform all of them. If one of them claims while others do
not, or show no interest, he should hand over to the one who claimed.
And if two or more people claim, he should refer to the*Mujtahid* for
his decision after all attempts at compromise and understanding have
failed. And if all of them in the group showed an interest, or did not
present themselves for a compromise, then he will draw lots to determine
the owner, and as a precaution, the lots will be drawn by the*Mujtahid*
, or his Wakil.

Gems Obtained by Sea Diving
---------------------------

***Issue*** 1828: \* If pearls, corals or other gems are obtained from
the sea-bed by diving, whether it is mineral or a growth, if it reaches
3/4 mithqal of gold in value (= 3.51 g.) Khums should be paid on it,
regardless of whether it was brought up after a single dive or more. But
if the gems were brought up in two different diving seasons, and in each
case, the minimum value limit of 3.51 g. of gold was not reached, it
will not be obligatory to pay Khums on either. Similarly, when diving is
done in partnership, and the share of each partner is not commensurate
with 3.51 g. of gold in value, Khums will not be obligatory upon them.

***Issue*** 1829: If a person takes out gems from the sea mechanically
without diving, it is obligatory on him, as a precaution, to pay Khums
on it. But, it he obtains them from the surface of the sea or from the
sea-shore, he should pay Khums if his income from this source alone, or
in combination with other profits made by him, exceeds his expenses for
one year.

***Issue*** 1830: Khums on fish and other animals which are caught by a
man without diving is obligatory, if his income from this source alone,
or combined with other profits made by him, exceeds his expenses for one
year.

***Issue*** 1831: \* If a person dives into the sea without the
intention of bringing out anything, and by chance lays his hand on a
gem, and he intends to appropriate it, he should, as a obligatory
precaution, pay Khums on it. As an obligatory precaution, he should pay
Khums on it in every situation.

***Issue*** 1832: \* A person dives into the sea and brings out an
animal which has a gem in its belly. Now, if that animal is one like a
pearl oyster which usually contains a gem, he should pay Khums on it if
it reaches the minimum limit in value as explained. And if it has
swallowed the gem by chance, then as an obligatory precaution, Khums
must be paid on it, even if it does not reach the minimum limit of the
value.

***Issue*** 1833: If a person dives in big rivers like Tigris and
Euphrates, and brings out a gem, he should pay Khums on it if gems are
usually produced in those rivers.

***Issue*** 1834: \* If a person dives in water and brings out some
ambergris, he should pay Khums on it if it has the minimum limit value =
3.51 g. of gold. If he obtains it from the surface of the sea, or from
sea-shore, the same rule will apply.

***Issue*** 1835: If a person whose profession is diving or extracting
minerals, pays Khums on what he finds, and his income exceeds his
expenses for a year, it is not necessary for him to give Khums on them
again.

***Issue*** 1836: \* If a child extracts a mineral, or finds a
treasure-trove, or brings out gems from the sea-bed by diving, his
guardian will have to pay Khums on them. And if the guardian fails to
give, then the child will have to pay the Khums when he grows up to be
Baligh. Similarly, if child has wealth in which halal and haraam parts
are mixed up, the guardian must make that wealth Clean (*tahir/pak* ).

Spoils of War
-------------

***Issue*** 1837: \* If Muslims fight against the infidels by the
command of the Holy Imam (A.S.) and, in the war, acquire some booty,
that booty is called Ghanimat. And it is obligatory to pay Khums on what
remains after deducting the expenses incurred for protection and
transport etc. of that booty, and after setting aside what the Imam
spends according to his discretion, and what he keeps as his special
right. And for the liability of Khums, there is no difference between
movable and immovable booty. Of course, the lands which have been seized
as spoils of war belong to the Muslim public, even if the war was not
fought with the permission of Imam.

***Issue*** 1838: \* If Muslims engage in a war against infidels without
the permission of Imam (A.S.), and win some spoils of the war,
everything that they acquire as the spoils belongs to Imam (A.S.), and
the fighters have no right in it.

***Issue*** 1839: \* Anything which is in the hands of the infidels,
does not become Ghanimat if the original proprietor of those things was
a Muslim or a Zimmi.

***Issue*** 1840: \* To steal from a Harbi non-Muslim (one who is not
under the protection of an Islamic State) is Haraam, as it is
dishonesty, and also conducive to breach of the peace. Anything obtained
this way should be, as a precaution, returned to them.

***Issue*** 1841: \* It is commonly held that a Momin can appropriate
things owned by a Nasibi {one who is an enemy of Ahlul Bait (A.S.)} and
just pay its Khums. But this is a matter of*Ishkal* .

Land Purchased by a Non-Believer Zimmi from a Muslim

***Issue*** 1842: \* If a Zimmi non-believer purchases land from a
Muslim, as is commonly held by Fuqaha, the former should pay Khums on it
from that land itself, or from any other property belonging to him. But
liability of Khums, the way it is understood in this case, is a matter
of*Ishkal* .

Disposal of Khums
-----------------

***Issue*** 1843: \* Khums should be divided into two parts. One part is
Sehme Sadaat, it should be given to a Sayyid who is poor, or orphan, or
who has become stranded without money during his journey. The second
part is Sehme Imam (A.S.), and during the present time it should be
given to a*Mujtahid* , who fulfils all conditions, or be spent for such
purposes as

allowed by that*Mujtahid* . As an obligatory precaution, that*Mujtahid*
must be Aalam, and well versed in public affairs.

***Issue*** 1844: An orphan Sayyid to whom Khums is given should be
poor. But the Sayyid who has been stranded without money while on
journey, can be helped with Khums even if he may not be a poor man in
his own hometown.

***Issue*** 1845: If the journey of a Sayyid who has been stranded was
with the purpose of committing a sin, as an obligatory precaution, he
should not be given Khums.

***Issue*** 1846: Khums can be given to a Sayyid who may not be A'dil,
but it should not be given to a Sayyid who is not Ithna 'Ashari.

***Issue*** 1847: Khums should not be given to a Sayyid if he is a
transgressor, and Khums given to him encourages him further to commit
the sins. And as a precaution, Khums should not be given to a Sayyid who
is a drunkard, or does not offer his daily prayers, or commits sins
openly, even if giving Khums to him may not aid him in committing sins.

***Issue*** 1848: If a person claims that he is a Sayyid, Khums cannot
be given to him unless two just ('Adil) persons confirm that he is a
Sayyid, or if he is so well-known among the people, (as Sayyid) that one
is sure and satisfied about him being a Sayyid.

***Issue*** 1849: \* Khums can be given to a person who is known as
Sayyid in his home city, if one is not certain or satisfied about
anything to the contrary.

***Issue*** 1850: If the wife of a person is a Sayyidah, he should not,
as an obligatory precaution, give Khums to her for meeting her own
expenses. However, if it is obligatory on the wife to meet the expenses
of others, and she cannot meet them, it is permissible to give Khums to
her, so that she may meet their expenses. Similarly, one can not give
Khums to her so that she may use it on her non-essential expenses.

***Issue*** 1851: If it is obligatory on a person to meet the expenses
of a Sayyid or a Sayyidah, who may not be his wife, he cannot, on the
basis of obligatory precaution, give him/her food, dress and other
essential items of subsistence from Khums. However, there is no harm if
he gives him/her a part of Khums to meet other necessary expenses.

***Issue*** 1852: If it is obligatory on a person to maintain a poor
Sayyid, but he cannot meet his expenses, or can meet them but does not
want to do so, Khums can be given to that Sayyid.

***Issue*** 1853: The obligatory precaution is that a needy Sayyid
should not be given Khums in excess of his yearly expenses.

***Issue*** 1854: If there is no deserving Sayyid in the hometown of a
person, and if he is certain or satisfied that no such person will be
available in near future, or if it is not possible to hold in safety the
amount of Khums till the availability of a deserving person, he should
take the Khums to another town, and give it to the deserving persons
there, and he can deduct from Khums money the expenses of transfer. And
if Khums is lost in the transfer due to his negligence, he should
reimburse it, but if he has not failed in taking its care, it is not
obligatory on him to pay anything.

***Issue*** 1855: If there is no deserving person in his hometown, and
he is certain or satisfied that such a person may be found in future,
and it may also be possible to look after Khums till the availability of
a deserving person, the person concerned can still take it to another
town. And if despite his carefulness, Khums is lost on the way, it will
not be necessary for him to pay anything. He cannot, however, deduct
from Khums the expenses of transferring it to the other place.

***Issue*** 1856: \* Even if a deserving person is available in the home
town of a person, he can transfer Khums to another town to give it to a
deserving person. However, he himself should bear the expenses of taking
Khums to the other town, and if Khums is lost, he is responsible for it,
even if he may not have been negligent in looking after it.

***Issue*** 1857: If a person takes Khums to another town in compliance
with the directive of the*Mujtahid* , and it is lost, it is not
necessary for him to pay Khums again. And the position is the same if he
gives Khums to a Wakil of the*Mujtahid* , and the Wakil transfers it to
another place, and in the process the Khums is lost.

***Issue*** 1858: It is not permissible that the price of a commodity is
inflated and then it is given as Khums. And as stated in note no. 1797,
it is totally unacceptable to pay Khums from the commodity other than
the one on which Khums is liable, except in the case of money for gold
and silver coins etc.

***Issue*** 1859:\* If a person is the creditor of a person who is
entitled to receive Khums, and wants to adjust his debt against Khums
payable by him, he should, as an obligatory precaution, either seek the
permission of a*Mujtahid* to do so, or give Khums to the deserving
person and thereafter, the deserving person returns it to him towards
the debt. He can also take the Wakalat from deserving person, receive
Khums on his behalf, and then deduct his debt from it.

***Issue*** 1860: \* A person who is liable for Khums cannot lay a
condition to the deserving person that he would return the sum after
having received it, except when the deserving person, after having
received the Khums, agrees to return it. For example, if a person owes a
large sum of Khums, and is unable to pay it because of poverty, and does
not wish to remain indebted to the deserving people, there will be no
objection if the deserving person agrees to receive Khums from him, and
then to bestow it upon him as a gift.


