His Birth and Upbringing
========================

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was a pure branch from the tree of prophethood and a
shiny bough from the tree of imamate. By him and his fathers Allah has
consolidated Islam and exalted monotheism. Before talking about the
aspects of his great personality, we talk about his pure origin, birth,
and upbringing.

*The origin and the birth*
--------------------------

### His father

The father of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was Imam Muhammad al-Jawad bin**[1]**
Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin al-Husayn bin Ali bin
Abu Talib (peace be upon them). It is the most exalted lineage in Islam.
Humankind, throughout all its ages, has never had a lineage more
honorable and more exalted than this lineage that has lit the world with
the essence of Islam and faith. From this great, honorable family Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) came to the existence. His father, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.),
was the wonder of the world through his talents and geniuses. He, after
the death of his father Imam ar-Redha (a.s.), assumed the general
religious authority and leadership of the nation while he was seven
years

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bin means “son of” and bint means “daughter of”.

and some months. The Abbasid government seized this opportunity and
charged Yahya bin Aktham, who was one of the great ulama at that time,
to test Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) and refute him so that the fact that the
imam was the most knowledgeable one of his age, which was and is one of
the basic elements in the Shiite doctrine, would come to nothing. Yahya
asked Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) before a big crowd of scholars, viziers, and
officials of the Abbasid government about a jurisprudential question and
Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) ramified the question into many branches. Yahya was
astonished and he felt a failure and acknowledged the exceptional
scientific abilities of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.). The news of this event and
of others circulated in the meetings of Baghdad and everywhere.

### His mother

Before we talk about the mother of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) we would like to
say, as we have said many times before, that Islam has adopted the unity
of society and struggled against all the means that might lead to
disagreement or break that unity. In the light of this fact, the imams
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) walked. They did not differentiate between the
White and the Black. They got married to bondmaids in order to do away
with all kinds of racial segregation. Imam Ali bin al-Husayn Zaynul
Aabidin (as-Sajjad) (a.s.) got married to a bondmaid who gave birth to
Zayd the eternal martyr, and Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.) got married
to a bondmaid who gave birth to Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s.).

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) bought this bondmaid and he himself educated her.
She lived in the house of imamate with the Alawid women, the daughters
of the messenger of Allah (a.s.), who were the example of honor,
chastity, and purity. She was affected by their conducts and devoted
herself to worship Allah. She spent her nights worshipping and reciting
the Book of Allah.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Uyoon al-Mu’jizat.

It sufficed her that she had given birth to a master from the masters of
Muslims and an imam from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) whom Allah has made
safety and deliverance for people.

Historians disagreed on her name. Here are some of the names as
mentioned by historians:

1. Sumana al-Maghribiyya**[1]** and known as Lady Ummul Fadhl**[2]**

2. Mariya al-Qubtiyya**[3]**

3. Yadash**[4]**

4. Haweet**[5]**

There are other sayings but the detailing in this point is not so
important to the subject.

### Great newborn baby

Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) was born in Siriya**[6]** in Yathrib (Medina)**[7]**
and by this birth the world was delighted. No one had ever been born in
that age more pious, more devoted, or more knowledgeable than him at
all. He inherited all qualities of good, honor, and nobility.

### Ceremonies of the birth

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) performed the certain rituals for his blessed
newborn son. He performed azan in his right ear and eqama in the left,
circumcised him on the seventh day after the birth, cut the hair of his
head, gave silver, as much as the weight of the hair, to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tathkiratul Khawas, p.39.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.126, ad-Durr an-Nadheem.  
 **[3]** Bahr al-Ansab, p.35.  
 **[4]** Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.9 p.553 (manuscript).  
 **[5]** Tareekh al-A’imma, p.16.  
 **[6]** A village established by Imam Musa al-Kadhim (s) about three
miles from Medina.  
 **[7]** Al-Ittihaf bihubil Ashraf, p.67, Jawharatul Kalam fee Madh
as-Sadah al-A’lam, p.151.

the poor, and slaughtered a ram as aqiqa**[1]** as it was usual for the
imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) with their children when being born.

### Birth date

Most of historians agreed that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was born in 212
AH**[2]** and it was also said that he was born in 214 AH**[3]** but
they disagreed on the month and day of birth. Here are some of their
sayings:

1. He was born on the twenty-seventh of Thul Hijja.**[4]**

2. He was born on the thirteenth of Rajab.**[5]**

3. He was born on Monday, the third of Rajab.

4. Some sources mentioned that he was born in Rajab but without
mentioning the day. It has been mentioned in some du’as (supplications)
that, “O Allah, I ask You by the ones born in Rajab, Muhammad bin Ali
the second and Ali bin Muhammad al-Muntajab”.

Some historians did not mention the month and the day of his birth but
said he was born in Medina.**[6]**

### His name

His father Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) named him Ali like the blessed name of
his two great grandfathers Ameerul Mo’minin Imam Ali (a.s.) and Imam Ali
bin al-Husayn Zaynul Aabidin (a.s.). He resembled his grandfather Imam
Ali (a.s.) in eloquence and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aqiqa is the name of the sacrifice on the seven day after the
birth of a child.  
 **[2]** Usul al-Kafi, vol.1 p.497, al-Irshad, p.368, A’yan ash-Shia,
vol.4 p.252.  
 **[3]** Al-Ittihaf bihubil Ashraf, p.67, Jawharat al-Kalam, p.151,
Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.159, Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.321.  
 **[4]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4 p.252.  
 **[5]** Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.321, Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2
p.159.  
 **[6]** Al-Ittihaf Bihubil Ashraf, p.67.

rhetoric and his grandfather Imam Zaynul Aabidin in piety, worshipping,
and asceticism.

### His surname

Giving a surname to a child was a kind of honoring which helped his
personality grow well towards perfection. The infallible imams (a.s.)
noticed this important fact and therefore, they surnamed their children
in their early childhood. The Arabs were proud of surname.

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) surnamed his son Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) as Abul Hasan
which was the same as the surnames of his two grandfathers Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s.) and Imam ar-Redha (a.s.). Narrators differentiated
between these three imams in this surname by saying Abul Hasan the First
(Imam Musa al-Kadhim), Abul Hasan the Second (Imam ar-Redha), and Abul
Hasan the Third (Imam Ali al-Hadi).

### His epithets

His epithets expressed the high qualities he had. His epithets are as
follows:

1. **An-Nasih** (loyal); he was called so because he was the sincerest
advisor to the nation.

2. **Al-Mutawakkil** (reliant on Allah); he disliked this epithet and
ordered his companions not to call him with it. I think he hated this
epithet because it was the epithet of the Abbasid caliph Ja’far
al-Mutawakkil who had bitter grudge, spite, and enmity towards the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).

3. **At-Taqiy** (pious, devout); he was called so because he feared
Allah and turned to Him. Al-Mutawakkil, the tyrant Abbasid caliph, tried
his best to attract Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to the fields of amusement and
debauchery but he failed.

4. **Al-Murtadha** (being pleased with by Allah); it was his most famous
epithet.

5. **Al-Faqeeh** (jurisprudent); he was the most aware of his age in
jurisprudence and he was the authority that jurisprudents and scholars
referred to.

6. **Al-Aalim** (knowledgeable); he was the most knowledgeable one of
people at that time not only in the Islamic laws, but all branches of
knowledge and sciences.

7. **Al-Ameen** (trustee on religion and life)

8. **At-Tayyib** (generous, good-hearted, good-natured…)

9.  **Al-Askari** (military); he was called so because he resided in
Surra Men Ra’a (Samarra’) which was called al-Askar.**[1]**

10. **Al-Muwadhdhih** (explainer of the verdicts of the Holy Book and
the Sunna)

11. **Ar-Rasheed** (wise, prudent); he was called so because he was the
wisest and most prudent of his time.

12. **Ash-Shaheed** (the martyr) because he was martyred at the hands of
the enemies of Allah.

13. **Al-Wafiy** (loyal); he was the most loyal of his people, and
loyalty was an element of his personality.

14. **Al-Khalis** (pure from every defect and bad)

### His lineaments

He was brown**[2]** like his father Imam al-Jawad and grandfather Imam
ar-Redha (peace be upon them). Narrators described that he was
black-eyed, with thick hands, wide chest, hooked nose, pretty face, and
good body odour. He was stout in body like his grandfather Imam Abu
Ja’far al-Baqir (a.s.), neither short nor

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is mentioned in Umdat at-Talib, p.188 and Ilal ash-Sharayi’,
p.241, that the quarter where Imam al-Hadi (s) lived was called Askar
and therefore he was called al-Askari.  
 **[2]** Noor al-Absar, p.164, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.127, Jawharat
al-Kalam, p.151.

tall, with wide shoulders, big organs**[1]**…straight stature.**[2]**

### His charm

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) resorted to Allah the Almighty to protect his son
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) from troubles and adversities of time and from every
evil. Every day he charmed him with this du’a that showed his
devotedness to Allah:

“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, there is no power
save in Allah, the Exalted, the Great. O Allah, the Lord of angels and
Gabriel, prophets and messengers, the Omnipotent over the inhabitants of
the heavens and the earth, and the Creator and Possessor of everything,
protect me from the harm of our enemies, and whoever wants to do us
wrong from the jinn and human beings. O Allah, blind their eyes and
hearts and make between us and them screen, guard, and defender. You are
our Lord and there is no power and might save in Allah. On Him we have
relied and to Him we have turned and He is the Mighty, the Wise. O our
Lord, save us from every evil, and from the evil of every living
creature you have control on, and from the evil of everything that calms
down on the day and the night, and from every bad, and from the evil of
every evildoer. O Lord of the worlds and the Lord of messengers, have
blessings on Muhammad and all his progeny and favor Muhammad and his
progeny with the best of everything, and there is no power save in
Allah, the High, the Great. In the name of Allah, and in Allah I
believe, and from Allah I seek protection, and to Allah I resort, and
with Allah I seek refuge, and by the glory and might of Allah I seek
protection from the devils of the humans and the jinn, and from their
footing, knighting, and running, and from their cunning and evil, and
from the evil of what they do under night and under day, from far and
from near, and from the evil of the present and the absent, and of the
witness and the visitor alive or dead…and from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’ Fee Tareekh Samarra’, vol.3 p.20.  
 **[2]** Jawharat al-Kalam, p.151.

the evil of far people and close people, and from the evil of my self in
its obsession, and from the evil of the devils, and the sense, touch,
and dubiosity, and from the envy of the jinn and the humans.

And by the name, which the throne of Balqis**[1]** shook for, I protect
my religion and self, and all those under my care from the evil of every
figure or imagination, whiteness or blackness, statue or appearance,
ally or not ally of whatever dwells in the air, cloud, darkness, light,
shadow, hot, cold, seas, plains, badlands, ruins, building, hills,
marshes, moors, churches, graveyards (of Christians), deserts and
cemeteries, from the emanating who appear in the night and disappear on
day, evening and morning, afternoon and sunset, and from the suspicious
and accusers, and the talebearers in the night, the devils, the
Pharaohs, Satan, and from their soldiers, wives, tribes, and clans, and
from their backbiting, slandering, expectoration, maligning, magic,
beating, playing, deceit, and from the evil of every wicked of
magicians, the jinn, their wind, and all what they generate…and from the
evil of every wicked coming or going, accidental or resisting, calm or
moving, and the beating of a vein, and headache and fever…and from the
evil of every living creature you have power on, You are on Right Path.
O Allah, have blessing on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and much
peace…’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) fed his great newborn son with this du’a so that he
would receive live with confidence that the power which ran and managed
this universe was but Allah the Almighty, the Creator of everything and
the Maker of life and whatsoever else than Him had no power. Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.) planted in his son the absolute faith in the powers of
Allah, and taught him that resorting must be only to Allah Who saved
from all misfortunes and distresses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** She was a sovereign on Yemen.

### His upbringing

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) grew up in a family different from all families in
its noble conducts, high morals, and lofty virtues. Their young revered
the old and the old respected the young. Historians mentioned wonderful
pictures from the high conducts of the members of this great family.
They said that Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) did never talk before his brother
Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) as a kind of reverence. They said that Imam Zaynul
Aabidin (a.s.) did not eat with his mother or nursemaid for fear that he
might eat something that his mother or nursemaid had looked at to pick
and then he might be undutiful to her. These morals were like the morals
of the prophets that were and are not found in other than this great
family.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) grew up under the wing of his father Imam al-Jawad
(a.s.) who was the wonderful example of virtues and high morals. Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.) shed lights from his soul on his son and planted his
virtues into him. He always praised his son and showed his admiration of
his talents and geniuses.

Historians said that when Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) wanted to go to Iraq, he
seated Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), who was six years then, in his lap and said
to him, ‘What do you like as present from the masterpieces of Iraq?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) smiled and said, ‘A sword like a flame.’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) turned to his son Musa and said to him, ‘And you!
What do you like?’

Musa said, ‘Some mats.’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) did not hide his admiration and he said to his son
al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) is like me…!’ He was delighted
because this showed courage and valor which were from his and his
fathers’ qualities.

### His early genius

The intelligence, geniuses, and talents Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) had in his
childhood astonished the minds and amazed the intellect. He had a strong
memory, excessive intelligence, and sharp wit. Historians have mentioned
many examples on his intelligence. They mentioned that al-Mu’tasim, the
Abbasid caliph, after he had assassinated Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.),
charged Umar bin al-Faraj to go to Yathrib (Medina) in order to choose a
teacher for Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) who was six years and some months then.
He asked him to choose a teacher that must be one of the enemies of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) so that he would feed him with hatred towards the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). When Umar arrived in Yathrib, he met the wali there
and informed him of his task. The wali and some others directed him to
al-Junaydi who had intense grudge towards the Alawids. Umar sent for
al-Junaydi who accepted the task. A monthly salary was assigned to
al-Junaydi and he was charged to prevent the Shia from visiting or
contacting with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Al-Junaydi began teaching Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) but he was astonished at the sharp wit and acute
intelligence of him. One day, Muhammad bin Ja’far met al-Junaydi and
asked him,

‘What about this boy (Imam al-Hadi) whom you teach?’

Al-Junaydi said to him angrily, ‘Do you say “this boy” and not “this
sheikh”? I ask you by Allah; do you know anyone in Medina more aware in
knowledge and literature than me?’

Muhammad bin Ja’far said, ‘No!’

Al-Junaydi said, ‘I mention some matters of literature and think that I
have elaborated upon them, but he (Imam al-Hadi) opens sections of
literature where I myself learn from him. People think that I teach him,
but, by Allah, I learn from him…’

After some time Muhammad bin Ja’far met al-Junaydi again and asked him,
‘What about the boy?’

Al-Junaydi said to him, ‘Let you not say so! By Allah, he is the best of
the inhabitants of the earth and the best of the creatures of Allah.
Many a time, when he wants to enter his room, I say to him, ‘You do not
enter the room until you recite a sura.’ He says, ‘Which sura you want
me to recite?’ I ask him to recite long suras and he recites them in a
way that I have heard no recitation better than his. He recites the
suras with a voice nicer than the pipes of Prophet David (a.s.). He has
memorized the Qur'an from its beginning until its end and he knows its
revelation and interpretation…’ Al-Junaydi added, ‘This young boy grew
up in Medina between black walls. How did he get this wide knowledge?
Glory be to Allah!’

Al-Junaydi gave up his enmity towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and believed
in them and in their imamate.’**[1]**

Of course, there is no justification to this phenomenon except that
which the Shia believe that Allah has endowed the infallible imams of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), whether young or old, with knowledge, wisdom, and
virtue that He has not endowed anyone of His people with at all.

### His gravity and reverence

He inherited gravity and reverence from his fathers. The mien of
prophets and brightness of guardians appeared on him, and no one of his
enemies or followers met him unless he revered and respected him highly.

Muhammad bin al-Hasan al-Ashtar al-Alawi said, ‘One day, I was with my
father at the door of al-Mutawkkil (the Abbasid caliph) among a crowd of
people. While we were waiting there, Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) came and all
the people dismounted revering and honoring him until he entered the
palace. Someone denied this reverence towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
said, ‘Why do we dismount to this boy? By Allah, he is neither the
noblest nor the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’ fee Tareekh Samarra’, vol.3 p.95-96.

eldest of us. By Allah, we do not dismount to him when he comes out.’

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari replied to him, ‘By Allah, you shall dismount to
him with meanness and lowness.’

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came out, people began crying out with takbir
and tahlil**[1]** and all of them stood up glorifying him. Abu Hashim
turned to people and said, ‘Did you not claim that you would not
dismount to him?’

They said, ‘By Allah, we could not control ourselves until we
dismounted.’**[2]**

Hearts revered and honored him, and this reverence did not come out of
authority or rule, but it resulted from his devotedness to Allah,
asceticism in the worldly life, and utmost piety. He came out of the
meanness of disobedience of Allah to the honor of obedience. From the
great reverence of people towards him, was that whenever he came to
al-Mutawakkil in his palace, everyone in the palace hastened to serve
him. They competed to raise the curtains, open the doors, etc., and they
did not ask him to do anything by himself.**[3]**  

### The Alawids’ reverence towards him

All the Alawids agreed on revering and honoring Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
acknowledging his leadership and virtue. Among them was the uncle of his
father Zayd the son of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) who was a respectable
old man. One day, Zayd asked Umar bin al-Faraj, who was the doorkeeper
of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), to ask permission for him. He was permitted to
come in to have honor of meeting Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Zayd came in to
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), who was in the front of the meeting. He sat before

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Takbir is the saying “Allahu Akbar-Allah is great” and tahlil is
the saying “la illaha illallah-there is no god but Allah”.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, p.131, A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4
p.274-275.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.129.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) as a manner of honoring, glorifying, and believing
in his imamate. The next day, Zayd came to the meeting of Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) who was not present yet. Zayd sat in the front of the meeting.
When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came, Zayd jumped and seated Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) in his place, although Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was too young then and
Zayd was too old.**[1]**

### Relation of the People of the Book to him

The reverence towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was not limited to Muslims.
People of the Book other than Muslims believed in his high position near
Allah. When they faced a misfortune, they carried gifts to Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) and took him as means to relieve their misfortunes.

Hibatollah bin Abu Mansor al-Musily said that Yousuf bin Ya’qob the
Christian had had relation with his father. Once, he came to his father
as guest and his father asked him why he had come to Baghdad. He said,
‘It was sent for me to meet al-Mutawakkil and I did not know what for,
but I bought myself with one hundred dinars that I gave to Ali bin
Muhammad bin ar-Redha (Imam al-Hadi).’ Hibatollah added, ‘My father
congratulated him, and then he left Baghdad towards Surra Man
Ra’a.**[2]** He stayed there for some days and then came back
delightedly. My father asked him about his travel and he replied, ‘I
arrived in Surra Man Ra’a, which I had not visited before. I liked to
take the one hundred dinars to the son of ar-Redha (Imam al-Hadi) before
I would go to meet al-Mutawakkil. I asked about him and it was said to
me that al-Mutawakkil had prevented him from going out and that he kept
to his house. I feared to visit him and refrained from asking about him.
It came to my mind that I would ride on my sumpter and go to the town so
that I might know something about him without asking. Walking in the
streets and markets, I got to a house that it came to my mind it might
be the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). I

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.94.  
 **[2]** Samarra’, the capital of al-Mutawakkil the Abbasid caliph.

asked my servant to see whose house it was. The servant asked and it was
said to him that it was the house of the son of ar-Redha. My servant
knocked the door and a black servant came out towards me and said, ‘Are
you Yousuf bin Ya’qob?’ ‘Yes!’ I replied. He said, ‘Dismount!’ I
dismounted from my sumpter and he took me into a vestibule. He went in
and then came out asking me, ‘Where are the one hundred dinars?’ I gave
them to him and he took them to the imam. After a while, he came and
permitted me to come in. I came in. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was alone. He
looked at me kindly and compassionately and said, ‘Is it not yet for
you?-he meant (to be guided).’ 

I said, ‘O my master, a sufficient proof has appeared to me!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘How far! You will not be a Muslim, but your
son will and he will be from our Shia. O Yousuf, there are some people
claiming that our guardianship does not benefit ones like you. Go to
what you have come to! You shall see what you like.’

Yousuf was astonished at the miracle he saw from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He
went to al-Mutawakkil and got all that he wanted.

Hibatollah said, ‘Yousuf died and I met his son who was a good Muslim
following the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He told me that his father was still
Christian when he died, and that he (the son) became a Muslim after the
death of his father. He often said, ‘I am the good tiding of my
master’’.**[1]**

The people of the Book believed in Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and found in his
life a continuity to the lives of prophets and saints.

### What authors say about him

All those, who wrote the life of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), saw honor,
dignity, knowledge, piety, and charisma in his great personality and
showed their admiration and high regard to him. Here are

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.13 p.133.

some sayings of historians and scholars about him:

#### 1. Abul Falah al-Hanbali

Abdul Hayy Abul Falah al-Hanbali says, ‘Abul Hasan bin Ali al-Jawad bin
ar-Redha bin Musa al-Kadhim bin Ja’far as-Sadiq al-Alawi al-Husayni, who
is known as al-Hadi, was a jurisprudent, worshipping imam. He was one of
the imams whom the Shiite exaggerators believe to be infallible like
prophets…’**[1]**

#### 2. Al-Yafi’iy

Al-Yafi’iy says, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was worshipful, jurisprudent,
imam…’**[2]**

#### 3. Abul Fida’

He says, ‘Ali at-Taqiy (pious) is one of the twelve imams of the Shia.
He is Ali az-Zakiy bin Muhammad al-Jawad…’**[3]**

#### 4. Ibn as-Sabbagh al-Maliki

He says, “Someone of scholars said, ‘The virtue of Abul Hasan has
established its domes on the galaxy, and stretched its ropes on the
stars. No excellence is counted, unless to him is its end and no
nobility is mentioned, unless to him are its details and totality, and
no high quality is regarded, unless his proofs appear on it. He deserved
all that due to the essence of liberal qualities that he alone had, and
glory that governed his lofty nature which was purified from any
blemish, and so his nature and morals were pleasant, his conducts were
fair, and his qualities were virtuous. His gravity, calmness, certainty,
chastity, honesty, and wit were like the Prophet’s and Ali’s. He had a
pure soul and high determination that no one of men resembled him in,
and he lived a coarse life of asceticism that no human participated him
in or looked forward to it.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shatharat ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.128-129.  
 **[2]** Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.160.  
 **[3]** Tareekh Abul Fida’, vol.2 p.47.  
 **[4]** Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p.268.

#### 5. Ibn Shahrashub

He says, ‘He (Imam al-Hadi) was the best and most truthful of people. He
was the wittiest from near and the most perfect from far. When he kept
silent, gravity appeared on him, and when he spoke, splendor appeared on
him. He was from the house of prophethood and imamate, and the abode of
guardianship and caliphate. A branch from the lofty tree of prophethood
was he, and a fruit from the tree of the mission was he…’**[1]**

#### 6. Al-Qutb ar-Rawandi

He says, ‘As for Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi, all qualities of imamate have
gathered in him. His virtue, knowledge, and good merits have been
perfected. All his morals were extraordinary like the morals of his
fathers. He spent the night worshipping towards the Qibla wearing a wool
garment and sitting on a mat. If we mention his high qualities, the book
shall be prolonged with them.’[2]

#### **7. Ath-Thahabi**

He says, ‘Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Zaynol Aabidin bin as-Sayyid ash-Sharif al-Alawi al-Husayni was
jurisprudent and one of the twelve imams. The Twelver Shia call him
al-Manari.’**[3]**

#### 8. Ibn Hajar

He says, ‘Ali al-Hadi was the heir of his father’s knowledge and
generosity.’**[4]**  

#### 9. Ibn Anbasah

He says, ‘Ali al-Hadi is surnamed as al-Askari because he lived in Surra
Man Ra’a which was called al-Askar. His mother was Umm Walad (bondmaid)
who was absolutely virtuous and noble…’**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Manaqib, vol.4 p.401.  
 **[2]** Al-Kharayij.  
 **[3]** Tareekh al-Islam, vol.5.  
 **[4]** As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah.  
 **[5]** Umdat at-Talib fee Ansab Aal Abi Talib, p.188.

#### 10. Muhammad bin Talha

Muhammad bin Talha ash-Shafi’iy says, ‘As for the qualities of Ali
al-Hadi, ears did never receive more pleasant than them that they
surrounded him as precious pearls in their shells. What witnessed for
Abul Hasan Ali al-Hadi was that his soul was described with invaluable
descriptions, and that it was in the position of prophethood in its
honor of ranks and honor of roots…’**[1]**

#### 11. Aagha Buzurg at-Tahrani

This great researcher says, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was the best of his
brothers. He inherited the knowledge and generosity of his fathers. The
imamate moved and was limited to him from among his brothers because he
had all the conditions of imamate. The conditions of imamate are
knowledge, justice, qualifiedness, soundness of senses and organs that
does not affect one’s determination and action, being Arab from Quraysh,
besides being from the Hashemites…’**[2]**  

#### 12. Khayruddeen az-Zarkali

He says, ‘Ali al-Hadi bin Muhammad al-Jawad bin Ali ar-Radhiy bin Musa
bin Ja’far al-Husayni at-Talibi was the tenth of the twelve imams for
the Shia and one of the pious virtuous…’**[3]**

These are some words said by scholars and ulama showing their admiration
towards Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and some of his high qualities for he was
the highest religious authority in the Islamic world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Matalib as-Sa’ool.  
 **[2]** Shajarat as-Sibtayn, (manuscript).  
 **[3]** Al-A’lam, vol.5 p.140.
