His Knowledge and Sciences
==========================

Allah had dilated the chest of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) for knowledge and
expanded his heart for sciences. Secrets of facts and obscurities of
things were uncovered for him with no request or effort. People talked
about the vast knowledge he had that no one at all was equal to him in
his amazing, scientific treasures which covered all sciences of Hadith,
jurisprudence, philosophy, theology, and other branches of knowledge.

Scholars and jurisprudents often referred to his opinion in complicated
and mysterious questions on the verdicts of the Islamic Sharia.
Al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid caliph, who was the bitterest enemy of Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) and of his fathers, referred to the opinion of Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) in the questions which the ulama of his age disagreed on
and he preferred the opinion of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to the opinions of
the rest of ulama. We shall discuss this point in the coming chapters.

Anyhow, we shall talk in brief about the knowledge and sciences
transmitted from him and his maxims and literatures that dealt with
different educational and social matters.

*Hadith*
--------

The traditions transmitted from the Prophet (a.s.) and the infallible
imams of his progeny were not limited to legal verdicts and religious
questions, but they included all sides of life. They had established the
bases of morals, disciplines, good behaviors, and other intellectual and
social issues.

Many traditions were transmitted from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) that some of
them were narrated from the Prophet (a.s.) and some were narrated from
his infallible fathers (a.s.).

### His traditions from the Prophet (a.s.)

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated a group of traditions from his fathers who
narrated them one by one from the Prophet (a.s.). Here are some of them:

1. Al-Mas’oudi said, “Muhammad bin al-Faraj told me in Jirjan…that Abu
Du’amah said, ‘I visited Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa during his
illness that led to his death and when I wanted to leave, he said to me,
‘O Abu Du’amah, you have a right on me. Do I tell you a tradition that
shall delight you?’ I said to him, ‘I am in utmost need of that O son of
the messenger of Allah.’

He said, ‘My father Muhammad bin Ali told me from his father Ali bin
Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin
Ali from Ali bin al-Husayn from al-Husayn bin Ali from his father Ali
bin Abu Talib that the messenger of Allah (a.s.) said to him, ‘Write
down!’ Ali said, ‘What shall I write down?’ The messenger of Allah
(a.s.) said, ‘Write down: “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. Faith is that which hearts acknowledge and deeds prove, and
Islam is that which tongues witness and marriage becomes lawful with.’

Abu Du’amah said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, I do not know which
of them is better; the tradition or the narrators!’ Ali al-Hadi (a.s.)
said, ‘It is a book written down by the hand of Ali

bin Abu Talib and the dictation of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) that we
inherit one from the other…’**[1]**

This tradition shows the difference between faith and Islam (being a
Muslim). Faith is to settle inside the soul and the deep of heart and to
be proved through good deeds, but Islam (being or turning a Muslim) is
to witness the oneness of Allah and the prophethood of Muhammad (a.s.)
and consequently marriage becomes lawful besides other positive orders
that require being a Muslim in order to be achieved.

2. Al-Hasan bin Ali narrated from Abul Hasan al-Hadi from his fathers
that Ameerul Mo’minin said, “Once, I heard the messenger of Allah (peace
be upon him and his progeny) say, ‘When people will be resurrected on
the Day of Resurrection, a caller will call me: O messenger of Allah,
Allah has permitted you to reward your lovers and the lovers of your
household (progeny) who have followed them for the sake of you and been
opponent to their enemies for the sake of you. You can reward them as
you like.’ I shall say, ‘O my Lord, Paradise! You put them in whatever
part of it You like. This is the praised estate You have promised
of.”**[2]**

3. Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that the Prophet
(a.s.) said, ‘Love Allah for the blessings He gives you, and love me for
the love of Allah, and love my household for my love!’**[3]**

4. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that the Prophet (a.s.)
said, ‘On the Day of Resurrection I will be intercessor for four ones;
the lovers of my progeny, one who follows them, one who shows enmity
against their enemies, one who carries out their needs, and one who
relieves their distresses…’**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muruj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.114.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.3.  
 **[3]** Al-Amali by Sheikh at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

The Prophet (a.s.) stressed on loving his pure progeny and made this
love as an obligation on every Muslim man and Muslim woman, because
loving and following them would protect the nation from disagreement,
separation, deviation and seditions.

5. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that the Prophet (a.s.)
said, ‘Allah the Almighty says: O son of Adam, you are not fair to Me. I
endear Myself to you through blessings and you make yourself hated
through sins. My good comes down to you and your evil comes up to Me.
Every day and night a honorable angel comes to Me bringing ugly deeds
from you. O son of Adam, if you hear your description from other than
you while you do not know who the described one is, you will soon hate
him…’**[1]**

The tradition invites people to do good deeds and avoids the deeds that
Allah hates, because every deed goes up to Allah. Allah has said, ***(To
Him do ascend the good words; and the good deeds…)*[2]** and He rewards
His people due to their deeds in the worldly life.

6. Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that the
Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘My daughter was named Fatima because Allah the
Almighty has weaned**[3]** her and whoever loves her from Fire…’**[4]**
 

7. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers from his grandfather
Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) that Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari said, ‘Once I was
with the Prophet (a.s.). I was at his side and Ali Ameerul Mo’minin at
the other side when Umar bin al-Khattab came drawing some man from the
collars. The Prophet (a.s.) asked Umar, ‘What is the matter with this
man?’ Umar said, ‘He narrated that you had said: ‘He, who says “there is
no god but Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah” will be in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Amali by Sheikh at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 35:10.  
 **[3]** In Arabic “fatama” means weaned.  
 **[4]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10.

Paradise. If people hear this, they will give up good deeds. Have you
said this?’ The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘Yes, if they keep to the love and
guardianship of this man.’ He pointed to Imam Ali (peace be upon
him).’**[1]** 

8. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers from his grandfather
Imam Ali (a.s.) that the Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘O Ali, Allah has created
me and you from His light when He created Adam and put that light into
Adam. This light reached to Abdul Muttalib and then it divided and so I
was in Abdullah and you were in Abu Talib. Prophethood does not fit
other than me and guardianship does not fit other than you. Whoever
denies your guardianship denies my prophethood and whoever denies my
prophethood Allah will throw him down on his nose into Fire…’**[2]**  

Allah created Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) and his guardian Imam Ali (a.s.)
from one light and then they illuminated intellectual and social life
and liberated the earth from idolatry and superstitions of the
pre-Islamic era. They were but one self. Whoever denied the guardianship
of Imam Ali (a.s.) denied the prophethood of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) and
will have no share in the afterlife and will be among losers.

9. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that the Prophet (a.s.)
had said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali, he, who loves you, loves me, and
he, who hates you, hates me.’

There are many prophetic traditions declaring that the love to Imam Ali
(a.s.) is out of the love to the Prophet (a.s.) and the hatred towards
Imam Ali (a.s.) is out of the hatred to the Prophet (a.s.) because Imam
Ali (a.s.) was the very self of the Prophet (a.s.), the gate of the town
of his knowledge, the father of his two grandsons, and his defender in
all situations and battles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.8.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.9.

10. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers from his grandfather
Ameerul Mo’minin (a.s.) that the Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘He, who likes to
meet Allah (on the Day of Resurrection) safe, purified, and without
fearing the great horror, let him follow you O Ali, and follow your two
sons al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and (your grandsons) Ali bin al-Husayn,
Muhammad bin Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Musa,
Muhammad bin Ali, Ali bin Muhammad, al-Hasan bin Ali, and al-Mahdi the
last of them. O Ali, at the end of time there will be a group of people
following you where people will hate them but if they love them it will
be better for them if they know. They (that group) will prefer you to
their fathers, mothers, brothers, tribes, and all relatives. The best
blessings of Allah be on them. Those people will be resurrected under
the banner of Hamd (praise). Allah will forgive their bad deeds and
exalt their positions as reward for what they have done.’**[1]**

11. He narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘People (after death) are
of two kinds; one will rest and the other will relieve (others). One,
who will rest, is a believer. He will be free from this world with all
its troubles and will go to the mercy of Allah and His great reward. As
for the one, who will relieve, is a dissolute. People, animals, and
trees will be relieved from him and he will go to what he has
done.’**[2]**

### His narrations from Ameerul Mo’minin

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated a good collection of maxims and sayings
from his grandfather Ameerul Mo'minin, the pioneer of wisdom and justice
in the earth. Here are some of them:

1. He narrated that Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Beware of
wishes because they are from the wares of dissolutes.’**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.9.  
 **[2]** Al-Amali by at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.

Islam resists all means that lead to backwardness and deterioration.
Among these means is the relying on wishing and giving up work and labor
which means the stop of progress and development in life.

2. He narrated that Ameerul Mo'minin said, ‘He, who busies himself
thinking of the afterlife, will be rich with no money, feel at ease with
no family, and feel mighty with no fellows.’**[1]**

One, who cares for the affairs of the afterlife, will be rich with his
piety and religiousness, will be happy because he satisfies his
conscience through associating with his Creator, and will be respectable
and honorable among people by his benevolence and piety.

3. He narrated that Ameerul Mo'minin said, ‘Knowledge is a worthy
inheritance, morals are graceful garments, pondering is a clear mirror,
and taking lessons is a sincere warner. It suffices you to have good
manners by giving up what you hate from others.’**[2]**

4. He narrated that Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Whoever feels conceited will
perish.’**[3]**

5. He narrated from Ameerul Mo'minin his saying, ‘He, who is certain of
recompense (from Allah), will give generously.’**[4]**

6. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, “Once, a Jew came to Ameerul Mo'minin
(a.s.) and said to him, ‘Tell me about that which is not of Allah, that
which Allah does not have, and that which Allah does not know!’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘What Allah does not know is that He does not know
(accept) that He has a child. This refutes your (the Jews’) saying that
Uzayr is the son of Allah. As for that which is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Amali by at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.219.  
 **[3]** Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.1 p.78.  
 **[4]** Ibid., vol.11 p.523.

not of Allah, it is injustice because there is no injustice with Allah
against His people. And as for your saying about that which Allah does
not have, it is that Allah has no partner.’

The Jew was astonished and turned Muslim. He declared the shahada and
then said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘I bear witness that you are the truth,
from the people of truth, and have said the truth.’**[1]**

Imam Ali was the gate of the town of the Prophet’s knowledge. If he was
given his right (in the caliphate), he would give verdicts to the people
of the Bible from their Bible, to the people of the Psalms (Zabur) from
their Psalms, and to the people of the Torah from their Torah. He often
said that if the caliphate had come to him after the death of the
Prophet (a.s.), every Jew or Christian would have turned Muslim and
followed the path of the truth.

7. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that a man from Iraq
asked Imam Ali (a.s.) when he was marching (with his army) for the
battle of Siffeen, ‘Tell us about our marching to fight the people of
Sham!**[2]**Is it by the fate of Allah?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘O sheikh (old man), yes, it is. By Allah, you do
not mount a castle or descend into a valley unless it has been
determined by the fate of Allah.’

The man said, ‘I expect the reward of my efforts from Allah O Ameerul
Mo'minin.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) explained fate by saying, ‘O sheikh, wait! You may think
it is inevitable fate and inescapable doom! If it is so, then reward and
punishment, enjoining and forbidding, scolding, warning and threatening
will be void, and a bad doer will not to be blamed and a good doer will
not be rewarded. A good doer will be worthier of being blamed than a
guilty one, and a guilty one will be worthier of reward than a good
doer. This opinion is of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’.  
 **[2]** Nowadays Damascus. But then, Sham encompassed the present
Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.

idolaters, enemies of Allah, fatalists, and the magi. O sheikh, Allah
the Almighty has charged His people but has given them the option to do
or not to do, and forbidden them as warning. He gives much for a little.
He is not disobeyed out of defeat and He is not obeyed by force. He has
not created the heavens, the earth, and what is between them in vain.
That is the opinion of those who disbelieve, and woe unto those who
disbelieve from the Fire…’

The man got up reciting some verses of poetry in which he praised Imam
Ali (a.s.) and showed his satisfaction to what Imam Ali said.**[1]**

We shall discuss in detail the subject of fate in the following chapter
inshallah.

8. He narrated that Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Many are they those
inattentive people who may weave a dress to wear but it is their shroud,
and build a house to live in but it is the place of their grave.’**[2]**

### His narrations from Imam al-Baqir

He narrated from his grandfather Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) his
saying, ‘Beware of the physiognomy of a believer because he sees by the
light of Allah.’ Then he recited this verse, ***(Lo! therein verily are
portents for those who read the signs).*****[3]**  

### His narrations from Imam as-Sadiq

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated many traditions from his grandfather Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s.). Here are some of them:

1. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘There are three prayers
that are not blocked from Allah the Almighty; the prayer of a father for
his child if he is dutiful to him or against his child

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tawhid, p.380-381.  
 **[2]** Uyoon Akhbar ar-Redha.  
 **[3]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.220.

if he is undutiful to him, the prayer of an oppressed one against his
oppressor or for his (oppressed one’s) supporter, and the prayer of a
believer for his believing brother if he comforts him or against him if
he does not, when he is able to do that (to comfort him)…’**[1]**

2. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Keep to piety because it
is the essence of religion which you keep to and believe in Allah
through it. It is that which Allah wants from those who follow
us.’**[2]**

3. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘He, who does not
practice taqiyya (dissimulation) to keep us safe from the villains of
people, is not from us.’**[3]**

The infallible imams (a.s.) urged their followers to act due to taqiyyah
to spare their bloods from the tyrannical governments who killed the
Shia with no bit of mercy. If taqiyyah had not been legislated, no one
of the Shia and lovers of the Ahlul Bayt (s) would have remained alive.

4. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘There are three times at
which du’a is not blocked from Allah the Almighty; the du’a after the
obligatory prayers, the du’a during the falling of rain, and the du’a
when one of the signs of Allah appears in His earth.’**[4]**  

Allah the Almighty likes to be supplicated at these times and He has
promised to respond to His suppliants as He also responds to
supplication in the holy shrines of the infallible imams.

5. He said, “Once, a man came to Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) and said to him,
‘I have been bored with this life. Would you please ask Allah for death
to me?’ Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘The price of life is to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.4 p.163.  
 **[2]** Al-Amali by at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.11 p.466.  
 **[4]** Al-Amali by at-Toosi.

obey and not to disobey. If you live long to obey, is better to you than
to die and neither to disobey nor to obey.’”

6. He said, “Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked to describe death and he
said, ‘For the faithful death is sweeter than breeze that a faithful
smells and refreshes with it and all fatigue and pain end, and for the
unbelievers it is like the stinging of snakes and scorpions or
bitterer.’ It was said to him, ‘Some people say that death is bitterer
than sawing, cutting with scissors, stoning, and turning of millstones
on the pupils of eyes.’ Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Yes, it is so for
some unbelievers and sinners. Do you not see that some of them suffer
these severities? What they will meet after that will be much severer.
It is the torment of the afterlife which will be much severer than the
torment in this life.’ It was said to him, ‘Then, why do we see some
unbelievers die easily while talking and laughing, and some believers
too, and we see some believers and unbelievers suffer much when dying?’
Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘The easy death of a believer is a soon
reward for him, and when he suffers at death, he is purified from his
sins in order to be pure and then to deserve the eternal reward in the
afterlife. The easy death of some unbelievers is that they are given the
reward of their good deeds in this world and in the afterworld they will
have torment. And if some unbelievers suffer at death, it is the
beginning of the torment of Allah on them. Allah is just and He does not
wrong.’**[1]**

7. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) explained the saying of Prophet
Jacob (a.s.) “Comely patience!” by saying, ‘It is the patience that one
undergoes without complaining.’**[2]**

8. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) interpreted this Qur’anic verse
***(Their sides draw away from (their) beds)*[3]** by saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Uyon Akhbar ar-Redha.  
 **[2]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.228.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 23:16.

‘They did not sleep until they offer the Isha’ (evening) prayer.’**[1]**

9. He narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said in interpreting this
Qur’anic verse ***(…We will most certainly make him live a happy
life),*****[2]** ‘It means satisfaction.’

### His narrations from Imam Musa bin Ja’far

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his fathers that his grandfather Imam
Musa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim (a.s.) said, ‘Allah created the creation and
knew what they would be. He enjoined them to do some things and forbade
them from doing some other things. He gave them a way to do what He
enjoined them to do and gave them a way to refrain from what He forbade
them from. He forced no one of His creation to disobey but He tried them
with misfortunes as He had said,***(He may try you; which of you is best
in deeds).*****[3]**’

In this tradition, Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) refuted the concept of
“compulsion” which we shall discuss in one of the coming chapters.

### His narrations from Imam ar-Redha

Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated from his grandfather Imam Ali
bin Musa ar-Redha (a.s.) that one day Abu Hanifah was with Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) and when he went out, he met Imam Musa Bin Ja’far
al-Kadhim (a.s.) and asked him, ‘O boy, from whom does disobedience
come?’

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) replied, ‘It is one of three; it either comes
from Allah the Almighty-and certainly not- and it does not behoove the
Generous Lord to punish His slave for something he does not do, or from
Allah and man-and it does not-and it does not behoove the mighty partner
to oppress the weak partner, or from man- and it does- and if Allah
punishes him, it will be for

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Amali by at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 16:97.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 67:2.

his guilt, and if He forgives him, it will be out of His generosity and
munificence.’**[1]**

In this tradition the imam (a.s.) refuted the concept of “compulsion”
and showed that man is free in this life. He is forced neither to obey
nor to disobey. His will makes him free to choose whatever he likes.

### Referring obscure traditions to the Ahlul Bayt

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) ordered his followers to be certain about the
traditions narrated from the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s). If
they were certain that those traditions had come from the infallible
imams and they understood their contents, they should act according to
them; otherwise, they should refer them to the imams to verify and
explain them.

Once, Dawud bin Farqad al-Farisi said in a letter he sent to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘We ask you about the knowledge transmitted to us from
your fathers and grandfathers. There is some contradiction in them. How
do we act due to them with this contradiction?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him, ‘If you are certain it is our
saying, you act upon it, otherwise, you refer it to us.’**[2]** He
ordered his followers to refer such traditions to the imams of the Ahlul
Bayt (s) so that they would show whether they were theirs or fabricated.

### Contradictory traditions

Al-Himyari wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking about contradictory
traditions and how to act upon them. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him,
‘He, who clings to the head of a spring, his affairs will not be
confused because they come out white and pure.’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
meant that whoever associated with the imam nothing would be confused to
him because he would take

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tawhid, p.96.  
 **[2]** Basa’ir ad-Darajat.

facts from their origin and source.

When al-Himyari read this reply, he wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘How
can we get the head and it is blocked between us and it (him)?’
Al-Himyari meant that there was no way for people to contact with Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) because of the political pressure and severe punishment
the government followed against the Shia who contacted with the
infallible imams (a.s.).

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘The truth is available for whoever
sincerely seeks it…’**[1]**

### Jurisprudence

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) paid too much attention to the spreading of the
principles of the Islamic Sharia, the explaining of its verdicts, and
the teachings of its sciences. Jurisprudents and scholars gathered
around him taking from the springs of his knowledge and recording his
traditions that were from the sources of the Islamic rulings to the
Twelver Shia.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was the unequalled jurisprudent of his age to a
degree that even al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid caliph, who was one of the
bitterest enemies to the Alawids, referred to him in complicated
questions and preferred his fatwas to the other jurisprudents’. Here we
mention some traditions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) that Shiite jurisprudents
refer to in deriving legal verdicts;

### Washing the dead

Ahmad bin al-Qassim wrote a letter to Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.)
asking if a believer died and a washer wanted to wash the corpse
(perform the ritual ghusl of the dead) while there were some
Murjites**[2]** present whether the washer would wash the corpse of the
believer in the way like the other (sects of) Muslims did without
putting a turban on his head and without putting a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ad-Dur an-Nadhim (a manuscript).  
 **[2]** Or “Murji’a”: the name of a politico-religious movement in
early Islam.

palm branch with him or not. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘He should
perform the ghusl of believer even if they are present. As for the palm
branch, it should be put secretly and he (the washer) should try his
best not to let them see him do that.’**[1]**

This tradition showed clearly that a dead believer should be washed
according to the way of the Ahlul Bayt (s) paying no attention to the
Murjites. It also showed to put palm branches with the corpse secretly
due to taqiyyah. There are many traditions about the recommendation of
putting two green palm branches with a dead believer, otherwise, some
branches of trees other than palm-tree. One of these traditions is the
one narrated by Ali bin Bilal from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), on which
jurisprudents depend in deriving their fatwa.**[2]**     

### Offering the prayer in (cloths of) fur

Shiite jurisprudents specify certain conditions on one’s clothing, when
offering the prayer, for the validity of the prayer such as purity and
not to be ill-gotten. They depend in that on true traditions transmitted
from the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s).

Ali bin Eesa wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking about the
permissibility of offering the prayer with cloths of fur of the animals
whose meat is unlawful to eat, and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him
saying, ‘I do not like offering the prayer in any of these furs.’ He
wrote again to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying that he lived among people
that he had to practice taqiyyah with them and that no one could travel
in his country without cloths of fur, and he feared that he would be
harmed if he put off his fur clothing. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to
him, ‘You wear fur of fennec and beaver.’**[3]** This tradition
permitted offering prayer with cloths of the fur of fennec and beaver
when one is obliged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.2 p.737.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.2 p.738, al-Hada’iq an-Nadhirah, vol.4
p.41.  
 **[3]** Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.3 p.254.

### Offering the prayer with man’s hair

There are many traditions from the infallible Imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) showing the impermissibility of prayer with fur of animals whose
meat is unlawful to eat like cat for example. Of course, this does not
include man’s hair. Once, ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt asked Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) about the permissibility of offering prayer with a garment on
which some hair or nail of man hanged and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said to
him it was permissible.**[1]**

### Passing before a prayer

Twelver Shia jurisprudents believe that prayer is not invalidated when
someone passes in front of one who is offering prayer. They depend in
that on a tradition narrated by Abu Sulayman from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
that some man asked him (Imam al-Hadi) whether prayer would be invalid
if someone passed in front of one during offering his prayer and Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘No, prayer is not so simply invalidated. It is
accepted from its keeper.’**[2]**

### Offering prayer in the desert

Ali bin Mahziyar asked Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘If someone is in
the desert when the time of obligatory prayer comes and he cannot come
out of the desert before the time of prayer elapses, what should he do
with his prayer since it is forbidden to offer prayer in the desert?’
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘He can offer prayer in the desert but he
should avoid roads.’**[3]** It is unrecommended to offer prayer in the
middle of roads whether are busy with people or empty, and if one
troubles the passers-by when offering prayer in the middle of roads,
prayer is unlawful in this case.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol. 3 p.277.  
 **[2]** Ibid., vol.3 p.334.  
 **[3]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.3 p.251.  
 **[4]** Al-Lum’ah, vol.1 p.223.

### Prostrating on glass

Shia jurisprudents have agreed that prostration in prayer must be
performed on the earth or what is grown from the earth.**[1]** They have
not permitted prostration on things which are eatable or wearable and
they have prohibited prostration on glass. They depend in all that on
traditions narrated from the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s).

Muhammad bin al-Husayn said, ‘One of our companions wrote a letter to
Imam Abul Hasan (a.s.) asking about prostrating on glass. He said, ‘When
I sent my letter, I thought with myself and said: it (glass) is from
that which is grown from the earth and I did not have to ask about it.
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to me, ‘Do not offer prayer on glass even if
your self says to you it is grown from the earth because it is from salt
and sand which are changed.’**[2]**

### A conscious one is not to reoffer prayer

Jurisprudents say a mukallaf**[3]** must not be unconscious when prayers
are required from him. If a mukallaf is unconscious from the beginning
of the time of charging to the end, he is not charged with prayers
neither ada’ nor qadha’.**[4]** They depend on many traditions of the
infallible imams (a.s.).

Ali bin Mahziyar asked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about the unconscious and he
said, ‘An unconscious one has neither to offer qadha’ prayer nor to
perform qadha’ fasting. Allah is worthier of pardoning him.’**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This especially concerns the place where the forehead is put
during prostration.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.4 p.604.  
 **[3]** A mukallaf is one who is obliged to fulfill the religious
duties.  
 **[4]** Ada’ is to offer prayer (or other obligations) at its specified
time and qadha’ is to offer prayer out of its specified time.  
 **[5]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.5 p.352.

Ayyub bin Noah wrote to him asking about one who was unconscious for a
day or a little more whether he had to offer qadha’ prayers or not. Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to him, ‘He has to offer neither prayers nor
fasting.’**[1]**  

### Offering qasr**[2]** prayer in the travel to Mecca

Twelver Shia jurisprudents make conditions on qasr prayer such as that
travel is not to be one’s job like driver, sailor, shepherd and the
like. Such persons offer tamam (full) prayer in travel. Travel as a job
depends on one’s will and practice of travel a time after another in a
way that there is no unusual break in it. Entrepreneurs who take
pilgrims to the hajj every year are not permitted to offer full prayer
but they must offer qasr (shortened) prayer.**[3]**  

Muhammad bin Jazzak said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan the Third (Imam
al-Hadi) that I had some camels and had employees on them (to travel in
caravans), but I did not go except in the way of Mecca to perform the
hajj and on very few occasions to some places. I asked him what I should
do when I went with them (the shepherds) whether I should offer qasr
prayer and break my fasting in travel or not. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote
to me, ‘If you do not keep to them and do not go with them in every
travel except to Mecca, you have to offer qasr prayer and to break
fasting.’**[4]**

### Khums

Khums (one fifth) is one of the Islamic taxes that Islam has imposed to
fight poverty, spread culture, develop intellect, and revive Islamic
sciences. Khums is obligatory on the profits of trades, industries, and
other kinds of work that are more than one and his family’s expenditure
of one year as it is mentioned in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.5 p.352.  
 **[2]** Qasr is the shortened form of prayer.  
 **[3]** Minhaj as-Salihin, vol.1 p.216-217.  
 **[4]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.5 p.518.

books of jurisprudence. Jurisprudents depend in that on the traditions
transmitted from the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s).

In al-Kafi it has been mentioned that Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani
said, “I wrote to Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) (a.s.) saying, ‘Ali bin Mahziyar
read to me your father’s book in which he imposed (a tax of) a half of
the sixth on the owners of small villages after deducting the costs, and
one, whose village income does not cover the costs, does not have to pay
a half of the sixth or anything else. Some people disagreed on this and
said, ‘The khums  must be paid from the income of villages after
deducting the costs of the village and the tax taken on it by the
government and not the expenditure of one and his family.’ Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) wrote replying, ‘After deducting his and his family’s expenditure
and after the tax of the government.’**[1]**

Ali bin Mahziyar narrated that Ali bin Muhammad bin Shuja’ an-Naysaburi
said to Abul Hasan the Third, ‘Some man got from his farm one hundred
kurrs**[2]** of wheat which included zakat. The tenth, which was ten
kurrs, was taken, thirty kurrs were spent on repairing the farm, and
sixty kurrs remained for him. What must be paid to you (as khums) from
that?...’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote, ‘For me is the khums (fifth) of
what remains after deducting his (the owner’s) expenditure (of a
year).’**[3]**

Jurisprudents have depended on these traditions in verdicting that the
khums is obligatory on whatever remains from the expenditure of a year.
Jurisprudential books and practical theses have discussed this matter in
details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hada’iq an-Nadhirah, vol.12 p.348.  
 **[2]** Kurr is a unit of weight.  
 **[3]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.6 p.123.

### Zakat

Zakat is one of the effective programs Islam has established in its
economical system. It is one of the wonderful means that pluck out the
roots of poverty and wretchedness in society. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was
asked about some branches of zakat and he gave answers to them where
jurisprudents depended and still depend on in deriving legal verdicts.

Among the conditions jurisprudents make on the deserving of zakat is
that one, who deserves to be given zakat, must be a believer.
Unbelievers are not to be given from the zakat. It was narrated that
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked whether it was permissible to give those,
who believed in embodiment (of God), from the zakat or not and he said,
‘Do not give whoever believes in embodiment from the zakat and do not
offer prayer behind him!’**[1]**

Of course, there is no specification for those who believe in embodiment
and so this prevention from zakat includes every unbeliever who does not
believe in Allah and the Day of Resurrection.

Jurisprudents say that one, who is given from the zakat, is not to be
from those whose expense is on the giver of the zakat like father or
grandfather, children or grandchildren. However, al-Kulayni mentioned in
al-Kafi that Isma’il bin Imran al-Qummi said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan the
Third that I had male and female children and asked him whether I could
give them from the zakat or not. He wrote to me that I could.’ The
sheikh (at-Toosi) in at-Tahthibayn thought this tradition to concern the
case of this man, and his like, whose money did not satisfy the
expenditure of his family.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 6 p.157.  
 **[2]** Al-Hada’iq an-Nadhirah, vol.

There is no limitation to the money given to the poor from zakat except
the zakat al-fitr.**[1]** One of the Shia wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
through Ahmad bin Isaaq asking him, ‘Can I give my brothers two or three
dirhams from the zakat?’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to him, ‘You can do
inshallah.’**[2]**

The first kind of zakat legislated in Islam was the zakat al-Fitr which
jurisprudents called as the zakat of bodies. It is obligatory on all
people; faithful and unfaithful, old and young, male and female. Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani saying, ‘The
zakat al-Fitr is (obligatory) on you and on all people and whoever you
are responsible for whether male or female, old or young, free or slave,
suckling or weaned. You pay six rotls due to the rotl of Medina. A rotl
is one hundred and ninety-five dirhams, and so the zakat al-Fitr is one
thousand and one hundred and seventy dirhams.’**[3]**

Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani said, ‘Traditions were different on the
zakat al-Fitr and so I wrote to Abul Hasan asking him about that and he
wrote to me saying, ‘The (amount of) zakat al-Fitr is a sa’**[4]** of
the usual food in your country. On the people of Mecca, Yemen, Ta’if,
the sides of Sham, Yamama, Bahrain, Iraq, Persia, Ahwaz, and Kirman is a
sa’ of dates, on the people of the middle of Sham a sa’ of raisin, on
the people of the island, Mosul, and all mountains a sa’ of wheat or
barley, on the people of Tabaristan a sa’ of rice, on the people of
Khurasan a sa’ of wheat, on the people of Marw and Riy a sa’ of raisin,
on the people of Egypt a sa’ of wheat, and on other peoples is a sa’ of
their usual foods. On the nomads of the desert is a sa’ of uqt (dried
cheese). The zakat al-Fitr is obligatory on you and on all
people.’**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The zakat that is given at the end of fasting in Ramadan.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.6 p.177.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.237.  
 **[4]** Sa’ is a measure of about 3.25 kilograms.  
 **[5]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.6 p.238.

The substance of the zakat al-Fitr is to be from the usual food of the
people of a country like wheat or barley for example. The obligatory
amount of this kind of zakat is one sa’ which is about three kilograms.
One can pay money instead of food substances as jurisprudents say.

### Fasting

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked about many questions on fasting and he
answered them in traditions transmitted by his followers.

**Fasting on seeing the crescent**

The surest way of the beginning of Ramadan is the seeing of the
crescent. Whoever sees the crescent, whether alone or with others, must
fast.

Ali bin Rashid narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) his saying, ‘Do not
fast except on the seeing (of the crescent).’**[1]** Jurisprudents
believe in the impermissibility of fasting with the intention of
obligation when the seeing of the crescent of Ramadan is not proved.

**Fasting of a suckling mother**

Ali bin Mahziyar wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking him, ‘There is some
woman who suckles her son or other than her son in the month of Ramadan.
She suffers much in her fasting. She suckles until she faints and cannot
fast. Does she suckles her child and breaks her fasting to perform it
later on if she will be able or she gives up suckling in order to fast?
If she cannot hire some woman to suckle her child, what does she do?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to him saying, ‘If she can hire a wet nurse
for her child, she may do and perform her fasting; otherwise, she breaks
fasting and continues suckling her child and performs her fasting later
on whenever she will be able to fast.’**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.7 p.187.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.154.

Jurisprudents depend on this tradition in giving a fatwa that a suckling
mother, whose milk is little, is permitted not to fast in Ramadan if her
fasting harms her child and she cannot hire a wet nurse.

**Expiation (kaffara) of specified fasting**

Al-Husayn bin Ubayda wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying, ‘O my master,
some man vowed to fast on a certain day, but he slept with his wife on
that day. What expiation is on him?’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him,
‘He has to fast for one day instead of that day and set free a
slave.’**[1]** In the light of this tradition, jurisprudents say that
the kaffara of breaking one’s specified fasting is the same as the
kaffara of breaking one’s oath which is the freeing of a slave, or
feeding ten needy persons, or giving them cloths, and if he cannot do
that, he must fast for three days.

### Trade

Narrators transmitted from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) many questions on trade,
which jurisprudents depended on in deriving their fatwas. Here are some
of them:

**Prohibition of the working with the unjust**

Since the Abbasid rulers were unjust and oppressive, work with them was
unlawful as the Shia believed. Muhammad bin Ali bin Eesa wrote to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) asking whether the work for the Abbasids and taking from
their monies was permissible or not. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘That
which happens by force and subjection is pardoned by Allah, otherwise,
it is hated. There is no doubt that the little of it is better than the
much. The expiation of that is that one does what may delight us and our
followers.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said in his reply that Allah did not punish one, who
worked for the Abbasids, if his work was by force and subjection, but if
it was by one’s will, it would be hated-or might

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.7 p.187.

mean forbidden here. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said that the expiation on one
who worked with the Abbasids was to delight the Ahlul Bayt (s) by
carrying out the needs of the faithful and the poor and saving them from
misfortunes and oppression (of the government). Jurisprudents mentioned
many traditions in their studies on “working with tyrants”.**[1]**

When the book of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) came to Muhammad bin Ali bin Eesa,
he wrote to the Imam, ‘I want in working with them to cause them
troubles and to revenge on them through being close to them.’ Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘Whoever does so his work is not unlawful, but
rather he will be rewarded (by Allah).’**[2]**

### Renting

1. Muhammad bin Eesa al-Yaqtini wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying to
him, ‘Someone sent his son to some man to work for him as a bushelman
for one year and for specified wage. Then another man came to the father
and asked him for employing the son for one year but more wage. Does the
father have the right to send his son to the second man and is it
permissible for him to annul his agreement with the first man?’ Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote to him that the father had to fulfill his agreement
with the first man except if his son became ill or weak.**[3]** 

2.  Muhammad bin Isaaq said, “I wrote to Abul Hasan (peace be upon him)
saying, ‘Some man rented a farm from another man. Then, the lessor sold
the farm in the presence of the tenant who did not deny the sale, but
rather he was present and as a witness. Then the buyer died and left
some heirs. Does that property go into the inheritance or it remains in
the hand of the tenant until the period of renting ends?’ Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) wrote, ‘until the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Makasib by Sheikh al-Ansari.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.12 p.137.  
 **[3]** Ibid., vol.13 p.254.

period of renting ends.’**[1]**  

3. Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan (a.s.)
asking him about some woman who rented her land for ten years on
condition that the rent was to be given at the end of every year.
Nothing of the rent would be given to her except after the end of every
year. Before (or after) three years, the woman died. Should her heirs
carry out the renting to the specified period, or the renting would be
invalid by the death of the woman?’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote, ‘If the
renting had a specified time that did not end when the woman died, the
heirs would have the right to determine on the renting, and if the third
or the half or some period of renting passed, the heirs could decide on
the remaining period of renting inshallah.’**[2]**

Jurisprudents disagreed on renting whether it would be invalid or not by
the death of the lessor or the tenant. Some of them said it would not be
invalid and some others said it would be invalid since the death of the
lessor and not from the beginning. They relied in that on this saying of
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).   

### Entailment

Ali bin Mahziyar said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan the Third (a.s.) that I
had entailed a piece of land on my children, hajj, and other ways of
charity, and you have a right from it after me and for me after you, but
I changed it from this way.’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘You are free
from any blame and permitted to do so.’**[3]**

Sheikh al-Hurr al-Aamili understood from this tradition that the change
here took place before receiving the entailment. It is also possible
that the entailment here might mean “will” because he said “after
me”**[4]** in order not to contradict entailment which if

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa’il ash-Shia, Vol.13 p.268.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.299.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

takes place with its correct conditions, it becomes inevitable and
cannot be renounced.

### Foods

Once, Ayyub bin Noah asked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about buffalo. He said,
‘The people of Iraq say it has been metamorphosed- which means that its
meat is unlawful to eat.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him saying, ‘Have you not heard the
saying of Allah, ***(And two of camels and two of cows)*****[1]**?’ Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) refuted this spuriousity and proved that buffalo was a
kind of cows and not a metamorphosed animal.

### Judgment

Ja'far bin Eesa said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) (a.s.) that if a
woman dies and her father claims that he has lent her some things and
some slaves. Is his claim accepted without evidence?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied that the father’s claim might be accepted
without evidence. I also wrote to him, ‘If the husband of the dead
woman, or his father or mother claim, like her father does, that they
have lent her some things or some slaves, are they considered like her
father in the claim?’ Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote, ‘No…’**[2]**

### Penalties

1. Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Shu’bah narrated that Abul Hasan the Third
(a.s.) said, ‘As for a man who confesses sodomy, if there is no evidence
proved against him, but he willingly confesses his guilt against
himself, and if the imam, who is from Allah, is to punish on behalf of
Allah, he can pardon on behalf of Allah. Have you not heard the saying
of Allah, ***(This is Our free gift, therefore give freely or withhold
without reckoning)?’*****[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 6:144.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.18 p.213.s  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 38:39.

This tradition shows clearly that a legal imam, who is appointed by
Allah, may pardon whoever confesses sodomy against himself, though he
has the right to punish for that. However, if one is proved by clear
evidence that he has committed sodomy, the imam is not to pardon him.

2. Ja'far bin Rizqillah said, ‘Some Christian man, who committed
adultery with a Muslim woman, was brought to al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid
caliph, in order to punish him. When the caliph wanted to punish the
man, he turned to Islam. Yahya bin Aktham said, ‘His faith (in Islam)
cancelled his polytheism and sin.’ Some other one said, ‘He is to be
punished with three penalties.’ Another one said, ‘He is to be punished
with so-and-so.’ Then, al-Mutawakkil ordered his men to ask Imam Abul
Hasan (al-Hadi) about his opinion on the matter and the imam said, ‘He
(the sinner) is to be hit until he dies.’ Yahya and the rest of
jurisprudents denied this fatwa and asked al-Mutawakkil to write to Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) and ask him for the evidence he depended on in his fatwa.
Al-Mutawakkil wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
replied,***‘But when they saw Our punishment, they said: We believe in
Allah alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him. But their
faith could not avail them when they saw Our doom. This is Allah's law
which hath ever taken course for His bondmen. And then the disbelievers
will be ruined)**.’***[1]** Then, al-Mutawakkil ordered the sinner to be
hit and he was hit until he died.’**[2]**

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) depended on the Book of Allah in issuing his fatwa
that made al-Mutawakkil and the jurisprudents astonish at his abundant
knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 40:84-85.  
 **[2]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.18 p.331.

### Disbelief of the excessive

The Shia believe unanimously that the excessive are unfaithful and
impure and so it is permissible to kill them. It was narrated that Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) said to one of his companions, ‘If you see one of them
(the excessive) alone, you break his head with a stone.’**[1]** We shall
talk in details about them in one of the coming chapters.

We have mentioned above a few examples of Imam al-Hadi’s jurisprudence.
The questions he was asked showed that he was the highest authority of
fatwas in the Islamic world at his time and he had great scientific
treasures in the Islamic laws.

### Theological argumentations

At the age of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) many doubts and illusions spread about
the bases of Islam. The beginning was during the Umayyad rule that paved
the way for the spread of deviant and misguiding thoughts and concepts.
The Umayyads encouraged those misguiding cultures which went on more
strongly during the Abbasid rule. Muslim ulama, and at the head were the
imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s), resisted and confuted the atheistic
opinions and thought by irrefutable, scientific evidences. All that was
recorded in the books of “argumentation” written by Shia scholars to
prove the struggle of their imams in supporting Islam and fighting
against disbelief and atheism. Here we mention some examples transmitted
from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in this concern.

### The impossibility of seeing Allah

Ahmad bin Isaaq wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) asking him about the seeing
of Allah and what people said in this concern. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
replied, ‘seeing is not possible if there is no air (space) between the
seer and the seen thing where sight goes through. If there is no air and
no light between the seer and the seen thing, there will be no sight.
When the seer equals the seen thing in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol.18 p.554.

cause of sight between them, sight takes place, but those who compare
between the seer (man) and Allah they are mistaken because they liken
Allah to man…for effects must relate to causes.’**[1]**

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) proves the impossibility of seeing where there is no
air and light, because the eye sees through these two means; air and
light, otherwise, seeing is impossible and these two powers cannot see
Allah the Almighty because they are limited possibilities that cannot
see the great power that created and managed these amazing worlds and
universes with all their wonders.

The system of seeing sees things when they equal the seer in the
possible aspect of seeing, and if there is no equality between them,
there will be no sight. Prophet Muses tried his best to see Allah;
***(And when Musa came at Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him,
he said: My Lord! show me (Thyself), so that I may look upon Thee. He
said: You cannot (bear to) see Me but look at the mountain, if it
remains firm in its place, then will you see Me; but when his Lord
manifested His glory to the mountain He made it crumble and Musa fell
down in a swoon; then when he recovered, he said: Glory be to Thee, I
turn to Thee, and I am the first of the believers)**.***[2]**

Prophet Moses (a.s.) received the words of Allah and his soul longed and
wished to see his Lord, but he forgot who and what he was when he asked
for that which no human being in the earth was allowed or could bear
this great seeing. However, Prophet Moses (a.s.) was occupied by his
great longing and forced by wish until when the decisive words of Allah
waked him up, ***(You cannot (bear to) see Me).*** Then the Great
Creator pitied for His prophet and taught him why he could not see Him,
***(but look at***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usul al-Kafi, vol.1 p.97, at-Tawhid, p.109.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 7:143.

***the mountain, if it remains firm in its place, then you will see
Me).*** The mountain is firmer and more fixed, though less sensitive and
responsive than man but nevertheless, ***(when his Lord manifested His
glory to the mountain He made it crumble).*** Prophet Moses (a.s.)
understood the awe of the situation and fell in a swoon, and when he
woke up, said, ***(Glory be to Thee, I turn to Thee, and I am the first
of the believers)**.***[1]**

See how Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) spoke with his Lord with these bright words
that show the extent of his knowing of Allah the Almighty, ‘O my Lord,
thoughts of thinkers went astray, sights of seers fell short,
descriptions of describers dissipated, sayings of fabricators vanished
before the wonders of Your affair, or the reach to Your highness, for
You are in the unreachable place, and no eye can fall upon You with a
glance or expression. How far, and how far! O You the First, the Only,
the Unique! You have exalted in highness with the glory of greatness,
and risen up beyond every bottom and end with the omnipotence of
pride…’**[2]**

### Impossibility of embodiment

It is impossible for the Necessary Being to be described with embodiment
because this is from the aspects of possible being that needs, for its
existence, a cause, and for its inexistence a cause because it is a
created thing. In many traditions Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) confuted those who
believed in embodiment. Here are some of his traditions:

1. As-Saqr bin Abu Dalf said, ‘I asked Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad about
monotheism and said to him that I believed in that which Hisham bin
al-Hakam believed. He believed in embodiment before his guidance. The
imam (a.s.) became angry and said, ‘What do you have to do with the
saying (belief) of Hisham? He, who claims that Allah is a body, is not
from us and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Fee Dhilal al-Qur’an (in the shadows of the Qur’an), vol.9
p.39.  
 **[2]** At-Tawhid, p.66.

we are free from him in this world and in the afterworld. O ibn Abu
Dalf, body (substance) is created and it is Allah Who has created and
bodied it.’**[1]** 

2. Hamza bin Muhammad said, ‘I wrote to Abul Hasan (a.s.) asking him
about the body and the shape (of Allah) and he wrote to me, ‘Glory be to
Him, Whom nothing is like neither in body nor in shape.’**[2]**

3. Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani narrated, ‘I wrote to the man (he
meant Abul Hasan) saying to him, ‘With us there are some of your
followers who have disagreed on monotheism. Some of them say (Allah is)
“a body” and some say “shape”.’ He wrote saying, ‘Glory be to Him Who
can not be limited, and can not be described. Nothing is like Him and He
is the Hearing, the Knowing.’**[3]**

It is impossible to describe Allah the Almighty with the limits of the
created things and it is impossible to describe Him with multiplicity of
aspects because His attributes are His very essence as theologian have
proved.

### Impossibility of describing Allah

Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.), in his talk with al-Fat~h bin Yazeed
al-Jirjani, declared the impossibility of describing the Wise Creator
with any attribute that might cover his essence and truth. He said, ‘The
Creator is not described except with that which He Himself had described
Himself with. How can the Creator, Whom senses fail to conceive, minds
to arrive at, imaginations to contain, and sights to surround, be
described? Exalted is He above what describers say, and glorified is He
above what depicters prescribe. He is far in His nearness, and near in
His farness. He has adapted the “how” that it is not said (for Him)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tawhid, p.104.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.97.  
 **[3]** Ad-Durr an-Nadhim, at-Tawhid, p.100.

how, and has adapted the “where” that it is not said (for Him) where. He
is out of how and where. He is Only, One, Eternal, Absolute.  He
begetteth not, nor was begotten, and there is none comparable unto Him.
Glory be to Him. Or how is Muhammad (blessings be on him and on his
progeny) described in his essence where Allah the Sublime compared him
with His own name, participated him in His gift, and promised whoever
obeyed him to be rewarded for his obedience when He said, ***(and they
did not find fault except because Allah and His Messenger enriched them
out of His grace)**?***[1]** It tells the saying of those who give up
His obedience and He tortures them between the covers of Hellfire and
its garments of tar, ***(O would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the
Messenger)**.***[2]** Or how are those (the Ahlul Bayt), whom Allah the
Sublime compared their obedience with the obedience of His messenger,
described in their essence when He said, ***(O you who believe! obey
Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority from among
you)**,**[3]*** and ***(and if they had referred it to the Messenger and
to those in authority among them)**,**[4]*** and, ***(Surely Allah
commands you to make over trusts to their owners)**,**[5]*** and, ***(so
ask the followers of the reminder if you do not know)**?***[6]**

O Fat~h, as Allah, glory be to Him, the messenger, the guardian (imam
Ali), and the sons of Fatima (the infallible imams) can not be
described, neither can a believer who believes and submits to our matter
be.’**[7]**

The tradition shows the impossibility of describing Allah in a way that
expresses His very essence and truth. It is the same for the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 9:74.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 33:66.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 4:59.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 4:83.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 4:58.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 21:7.  
 **[7]** Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.176.

Prophet (a.s.) and the infallible imams and even a believer who loyally
submits and believes in the Ahlul Bayt (s), for descriptions fail to
surround a believer’s noble tendencies and virtuous qualities.

### Monotheism

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked about the truth of monotheism and he said,
‘Allah the Almighty was still alone nothing with Him, and then He
created things skillfully, and chose names for Himself. Names and words
are still with Him since eternity.

Allah was and is still existent. Then He formed what He willed and
nothing can repel His will or delay His determination…’**[1]**

### Refuting of compulsion and free will

Perhaps one of the most wonderful intellectual and scientific traditions
transmitted from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was this letter that he sent to the
people of Ahwaz (in Iran) in which he refuted the concept of
“compulsion” that the Ash’arits adopted and spread when they said that
man was compelled into his actions and he had no will or option. He also
refuted the concept of “free will” that the Mu’tazilites believed in
saying that Allah had authorized people in their actions due to their
will and there were no will or power over them. After refuting these two
concepts, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) proved with irrefutable, scientific proofs
the concept of “the matter between the two matters; a moderate concept
between compulsion and free will”, which was the concept adopted by the
imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s) and by their followers. This letter was one
of the best discussions in this concern. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said in
this letter,

‘From Ali bin Muhammad, peace, mercy, and blessings of Allah be upon you
and upon whoever follows the guidance. Your book came to me and I
understood what you mentioned of your disagreement in your religion,
your plunging in the matter of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ihtijaj by at-Tabarsi.

“fate”, the belief of some of you in “compulsion”, and others in “free
will”, and the disagreement, separation, and enmity among you because of
that. Then you asked me about that and to explain it you. I understood
all that…

Know, may Allah have mercy on you, that we looked up in the abundant
traditions and news and we found, for all Muslims who understand from
Allah, them (traditions) not free from two meanings; either truth that
is to be followed or falsehood that is to be avoided. The nation has
agreed unanimously with no disagreement between them that the Qur'an is
the truth that has no doubt in it for Muslims of all sects. Their
agreement is the proof of the Book and that they are right and guided
due to the saying of the messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and on
his progeny), “My nation does not agree on deviation.” He told that what
the entire nation agreed on is truth when no group disagrees with
another. The Qur'an is the truth that there is no difference between
them (Muslims) in its revelation and truthfulness. So when the Qur'an
witnesses the truthfulness of some news but a group of the nation denies
it, they should acknowledge it as a necessity for basically the nation
has agreed unanimously on the truthfulness of the Qur'an, and if they
deny, this require them to be out of the (Muslim) nation…’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) says in this passage that Muslims must refer to the
Qur'an, which falsehood shall not come to from before it nor from behind
it, in the matters they disagree on and see that which agrees with the
Qur'an is the truth and that which contradicts it is falsehood. Whoever
believes this falsehood will be out of Islam.

He added, ‘The first news that is proved, witnessed, and confirmed by
the Book is the saying of the messenger of Allah (a.s.), ‘I leave to you
the two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my household. You shall
not go astray as long as you keep to them. They shall not separate until
they shall come to me at the pond (in Paradise).’ We found the evidences
of this tradition in

the Book of Allah where Allah said, ***(Only Allah is your Vali and His
Messenger and those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the
poor-rate while they bow. And whoever takes Allah and His messenger and
those who believe for a guardian, then surely the party of Allah are
they that shall be triumphant)**.***[1]** All Muslim sects narrated
traditions that Ameerul Mo’minin (a.s.) had given his ring as charity
while he was bowing in prayer and Allah praised him for that and
revealed this verse. We found the messenger of Allah (a.s.) saying,
‘Whoever I was his guardian, Ali is to be his guardian’ and (addressing
Imam Ali), ‘You are to me as was Aaron to Moses but there will be no
prophet after me’ and, ‘Ali repays my debts, carries out my promises,
and he is my caliph over you after me’…

The tradition indicated clearly the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.) after
the Prophet (a.s.) and that there was no one worthier of the Prophet
(a.s.) than Imam Ali (a.s.), the pioneer of intellectual and
civilizational development in the earth.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) added, ‘The first tradition, from which these
traditions were derived, is a true tradition that all Muslims have
agreed on with no disagreement among them. It also conforms to the Book.
When the Book witnesses the truthfulness of these traditions besides
other evidences, then the nation has to acknowledge them as a necessity
for their evidences are clear in the Qur'an and they conform to the
Qur'an and the Qur'an conforms to them. Moreover, the truth of these
traditions were transmitted from the messenger of Allah (a.s.) through
the truthful (infallible imams) and narrated by known, reliable people.
Therefore, following these traditions is obligatory on every believing
man and believing woman, and no one deviates except intransigents. That
is because the sayings of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) and his progeny
are connected with the sayings of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 5:55-56.

Allah like this verse, ***(Surely (as for) those who speak evil things
of Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the
hereafter, and He has prepared for them a chastisement bringing
disgrace)*****[1]** We found the like of this verse in this saying of
the messenger of Allah (a.s.), ‘He, who harms Ali, harms me, and who
harms me harms Allah, and whoever harms Allah is about to be revenged on
(by Allah)’**[2]** and his saying, ‘He, who loves Ali, loves me, and who
loves me, loves Allah’**[3]**, and, ‘…in bani Wulay’ah…I will send to
them a man who is like myself. He loves Allah and His messenger and
Allah and His messenger love him. O Ali, get ready to march to them!’,
and his saying on the day of Khaybar, ‘Tomorrow, I will send to them a
man who loves Allah and His messenger, and Allah and His messenger love
him. He is brave and not runaway. He shall not come back until he shall
conquer by the will of Allah.’**[4]** The messenger of Allah (a.s.)
confirmed the conquer before the marching. The companions of the
messenger of Allah looked forward to that but on the next day, the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) sent for Ali and sent him at the head of the
army. He singled him out with this virtue and called him “brave and not
runaway”. Allah called him “a lover of Allah and His messenger” and
informed that Allah and His messenger loved him.

We just introduced this explanation as evidence and confirmation to what
we want to say about the matter of “compulsion and free will” and “the
matter between the two matters”. We ask Allah for help and assistance
and on Him we rely in all our affairs. We

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 33:57.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak as-Sahihayn, vol.3 p.122, al-Isabah,vol.4 p.304,
Kanzul Ummal, vol.6 p.152, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.129, ar-Riyadh
an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.165.  
 **[3]** Mustadrak as-Sahihayn, vol.3 p.130, Tareekh Baghdad, vol.13
p.32, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.4 p.383, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.131.  
 **[4]** Sahih of ibn Majah, p.12, Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.1p.62,
Khasa’is of an-Nassaei, p.32, Kanzul Ummal, vol.6 p.395.

begin with the saying of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), ‘It is neither compulsion
nor free will but it is a position between the two positions. It is the
soundness of creation, freedom, enough time, equipments, and the cause
that provokes a doer towards his doing.’ These are five things with
which Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) grouped the items of virtue. If someone lacks
one of these items, obligations are not required from him. Imam as-Sadiq
(a.s.) informed of the necessary thing that people must know and the
Book confirmed it. The clear verses of the Qur'an and the messenger of
Allah proved it. The messenger of Allah and his progeny do not exceed by
their sayings the limits of the Qur'an. If traditions conform to the
Qur'an and agree with its proofs, following them is obligatory and no
one violates except the people of intransigence. When we pondered on the
saying of as-Sadiq about “the position between the two positions” and
his denying of “compulsion and free will”, we found the Book proving and
confirming his saying, besides that there was another saying by him
confirming the first one. Once, as-Sadiq was asked, ‘Has Allah obliged
His people to commit sins?’ He said, ‘He (Allah) is much fairer than
this.’ It was said to him, ‘Has He, then, authorized them to do that?’
He said, ‘Allah is mightier and more omnipotent over them than this.’ It
was narrated that he said, ‘People, in fate, are of three kinds; one
claims that people are authorized to do as they like and thus he deems
Allah weak in His authority, and this one will perish. The other one
claims that Allah forces people into sins and charges them with what
they are unable to do, and this one mistakes Allah and he will perish.
And one claims that Allah charges people with what they are able to do
and does not charge them with what they are unable to do, so when this
one does good, he thanks Allah and when he does wrong, he asks Allah to
forgive him and this is a true Muslim.’ As-Sadiq (a.s.) told that he,
who believed in “compulsion” or “free will”, opposed the truth. I have
already explained “compulsion” and “free will” and that whoever believed
in them is wrong, and therefore the truth is “the position between the
two positions”…’

I give example on each topic to explain the meaning for requesters and
make research easier. These examples are confirmed by the Qur’anic
verses and proved true by men of understanding. We ask Allah for success
and perfection.

As for “compulsion”, it is the belief of those who claim that Allah
forces people into committing sins and disobediences and then He
punishes them for that. Whoever believes in this concept wrongs Allah,
falsifies Him and denies His saying, ***(and your Lord does not deal
unjustly with anyone)[1]*** and, ***(This is due to what your two hands
have sent before, and Allah is not in the least unjust to the
servants)[2]*** and, ***(Surely Allah does not do any injustice to men,
but men are unjust to themselves)*****[3]** besides many other verses in
this concern. He, who claims he is forced into disobedience, ascribes
his sins to Allah and considers Allah as unjust in punishing him.
Whoever considers Allah as unjust denies His Book, and whoever denies
His Book must be unbeliever due to the consensus of the nation. The
example on this is like the example of a man having a slave who neither
possesses himself nor does he have any property at all. The lord knows
this about his slave; nevertheless, he orders the slave to go to the
market to bring him something but without giving him the price of that
thing. The lord knows well that that something has an owner that no one
can take that thing from him except after paying the price. The lord of
the slave considers himself as just, fair, wise, and free from any kind
of injustice. He threatens his slave with punishment if he does not
bring him that thing, though he knows well that no one can take that
thing except after paying its price and the slave does not have the
price. When the slave comes back to his lord unsuccessfully, his lord
becomes angry at him and punishes him. If the lord is just and fair in
his judgment, he should not punish his slave; otherwise, he shall be
considered

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 18:49.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 22:10.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 10:44.

as unjust and oppressive, and if he does not punish his slave, he shall
contradict himself and be a liar for he has threatened his slave with
punishment. So lying and oppression contradict justice and wisdom. High
Exalted is He above what they say!

Whoever believes in “compulsion” or in what leads to “compulsion”
considers Allah as unjust and oppressive if He punishes those whom He
forces into committing sins. Whoever claims that Allah forces His people
into their doings must say that Allah should not punish them, and
whoever claims that Allah does not punish sinners denies Allah when
saying, ***(Yea, whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every
side, these are the inmates of the fire; in it they shall abide)[1]***
and, ***((As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans
unjustly, surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and they
shall enter burning fire)[2]*** and, ***((As for) those who disbelieve
in Our communications, We shall make them enter fire; so oft as their
skins are thoroughly burned, We will change them for other skins, that
they may taste the chastisement; surely Allah is Mighty, Wise)*****[3]**
and many other sayings in different verses. Thus, whoever denies the
threat of Allah must be unbeliever and be one of those about whom Allah
has said, ***(Do you then believe in a part of the Book and disbelieve
in the other? What then is the reward of such among you who do this but
disgrace in the life of this world, and on the day of resurrection they
shall be sent back to the most grievous chastisement, and Allah is not
at all heedless of what you do)**.***[4]**

We say that Allah the Almighty rewards people for their doings and
punishes them for their doings that they do with their will and ability
He has given to them. He has enjoined them to do

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:81.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 4:10.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 4:56.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 2:85.

some things and forbidden them from doing some other things. He says in
His Book, ***(Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and
whoever brings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only with the like
of it, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly)[1]*** and, ***(On the
day that every soul shall find present what it has done of good and what
it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and that (evil) there
were a long duration of time; and Allah makes you to be cautious of
(retribution from) Himself; and Allah is Compassionate to the
servants)[2]*** and, ***(This day every soul shall be rewarded for what
it has earned; no injustice (shall be done) this day)**.***[3]** These
clear verses refute “compulsion” and deny whoever believes in it. There
are many other verses like these ones but we do not mention them in
order not to expatiate. We pray Allah for success.

As for the concept of “free will”, which Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) refuted,
it is the concept of saying that Allah the Almighty has authorized His
people to choose His enjoinments and prohibitions and He neglected them.
The infallible imams of the Prophet’s progeny say that if Allah has
authorized people and neglected them, then he must be pleased with what
they choose and they deserve reward for that and should not be punished
for sins they commit if indeed there is negligence. This belief (of free
will) has two meanings; the first is that people have defeated Allah and
forced Him, willingly or unwillingly, to accept their choices; and this
shows that He is weak, or He has failed to make them worship Him through
the enjoinments and prohibitions according to His will, whether they
wanted or not, and therefore, He authorized them to choose His
enjoinments and prohibitions according to their wills when He failed to
make them worship according to His will, and so He gave them the option
in choosing faith or unfaith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 6:160.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 3:30.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 40:17.

It is like a man who buys a slave to serve him, acknowledge his favor,
submit to his lordship, follow his orders, and refrain from his
prohibitions. The lord of the slave claims he is mighty and wise. The
lord orders his slave to do things and forbids him from doing other
things. He promises the slave of great rewards if he follows his orders
and threatens him with severe punishments if he disobeys. The slave
contradicts the will of his lord and does not submit to his orders and
prohibitions. Whatever the lord orders or forbids the slave to or not to
do, the slave does not obey but follows his own will and tendency and
not his lord’s. The lord is not able to make the slave act according to
his will, and so he lets him free to choose due to his own will and
tendency and accepts whatever he does. One day, the lord sends the slave
to do something for him. The slave carries out that thing according to
his tendency and not to his lord’s. When he comes back, the lord finds
that the slave has done unlike what he (the lord) wants. He says to him,
‘Why did you do unlike what I have asked you to do?’ The slave says, ‘I
depended on your authorization to me and did as I liked.’ An authorized
one is free in his doing; therefore, “free will” is impossible for
people towards their Lord…’

Free will is the belief that Allah has left His people free to do as
they like and that Allah has no relation in people’s doings. The imam
(a.s.) refuted this belief with clear proofs and said it was impossible.
He added,

‘It is, due to that, that the lord of the slave is either able to make
the slave follow his orders and refrain from his prohibitions according
to his will and not to the slave’s will, and to give him ability as much
as that which he orders him to do and forbids him from. If he orders him
to do something and forbids from doing another thing, he should tell him
the reward and punishment for each. He should warn him against his
punishment and encourage him towards his reward so that the slave will
know the power of his lord through the power the lord has given to the
slave himself that makes him able to follow his orders, refrain from his

prohibitions, approve his encouragement, and keep off his warning. Thus,
the lord will be just and fair to the slave and his excuse in pardoning
and warning will be clear. Then, if the slave follows his lord’s orders,
he shall be rewarded by him, and if he does not refrain from his
prohibitions, he shall be punished. The second meaning is that the lord
is unable to punish the slave and make him follow his orders and so he
lets the slave free to do good or bad, to obey or disobey. This
inability disproves might and deity and makes “enjoining of the right
and forbidding from the wrong” vain. It contradicts the Holy Book where
Allah says, ***(and He does not like ungratefulness in His servants; and
if you are grateful, He likes it in you)[1]*** and, ***(be careful of
(your duty to) Allah with the care which is due to Him, and do not die
unless you are Muslims)[2]*** and, ***(And I have not created the jinn
and the men except that they should serve Me. I seek no livelihood from
them, nor do I ask that they should feed Me)[3]*** and, ***(And serve
Allah and do not associate any thing with Him)[4]*** and, ***(Obey Allah
and His Messenger and do not turn back from Him while you
hear)**.***[5]**

He, who claims that Allah has entrusted His orders and prohibitions to
His people, describes Allah as unable and consequently He must accept
all that which His people do whether good or bad. This one also denies
the orders, prohibitions, warnings and threatening of Allah. When one
claims that Allah has entrusted all that to man, it means that man is
free to believe or disbelieve and he shall not be blamed for that. He,
who believes in “free will” in this meaning, denies the orders,
prohibitions, warning, and threatening of Allah and he is one of those
who are included in this verse, ***(Do you then believe in a***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 39:7.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 3:102.  
 **[3]** Qur'an,51:56-57.  
 **[4]** Qur'an,4:36.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 8:20.

***part of the Book and disbelieve in the other? What then is the re
ward of such among you as do this but disgrace in the life of this
world, and on the day of resurrection they shall be sent back to the
most grievous chastisement, and Allah is not at all heedless of what you
do)**.***[1]** Allah is too far above that which the people of “free
will” believe in…’

After refuting the concepts of “compulsion” and “free will”, Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) proved the concept of “the matter between the two
matters” which was the theory of the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(s). He said,

‘But we say: Allah the Almighty created people by His power and gave
them the ability of obeying Him. He ordered them to do what He wanted
and forbade them from what He wanted. He accepted from them their
obedience to His orders and He pleased it, and He prohibited them from
disobeying Him, dispraised the disobeyers, and punished them for that.
Allah has the choice of enjoining His people on doing some things that
He pleased and forbidding them from other things that He hated. He
punishes for disobediences due to the ability he has given to His people
by which they can obey Him and avoid His prohibitions because He is
just, fair, wise, and has clear excuses. He chooses from among His
people as He wills to inform of His mission and authority over people.
He chose Muhammad (a.s.) and sent him with His mission to His creation,
but some unbelievers from (Muhammad’s) people said out of envy and
haughtiness, ***(Why was not this Qu’ran revealed to a man of importance
in the two towns)**.***[2]** They were Umayyah bin Abussalt and Abu
Mas’oud ath-Thaqafi. But Allah refuted their sayings and thoughts when
revealing, ***(Will they distribute the mercy of your Lord? We
distribute among them their livelihood in the life of this world, and We
have exalted some of them above others in degrees, that***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:85.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 43:31.

***some of them may take others in subjection; and the mercy of your
Lord is better than what they amass)**.***[1]**

Therefore, He enjoined on what He liked, and forbade from what He
disliked. He would reward whoever obeyed Him and would punish whoever
disobeyed Him. If Allah entrusted His affairs to His people, He would
permit Quraysh**[2]** to choose Umayyah bin Abussalt or Abu Mas’oud
ath-Thaqafi for they were preferred by Quraysh to Muhammad (a.s.).

When Allah disciplined the believers by saying, ***(And it behoves not a
believing man and a believing woman that they should have any choice in
their matter when Allah and His Messenger have decided a
matter),*****[3]** He did not allow them to choose according to their
desires, and He did not accept from them except to follow His orders and
avoid His prohibitions that had been informed by those, whom He had
chosen (as prophets). He, who obeyed Him, was guided, and he, who
disobeyed Him, deviated and went astray and would be not excused because
he had the ability to obey Allah’s orders and avoid His prohibitions;
therefore, Allah prevented a disobeyer from His reward and He would
punish him instead…’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) proved in the previous paragraphs the theory of “the
matter between the two matters” that the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s)
believed in. This concept was established on a firm basis of
understanding, intellect, and logic. Grand Ayatollah al-Khoei, in his
studies on Usul, proved the matter. He said, ‘The matter is not a matter
of worship, but the medium way, by which the problem of “compulsion and
free will” can be solved, is limited to it. Deeds of people depend on
two sides; the first is their lives, abilities, knowledge, and the like,
and the second is their wills and doings. The first side is from Allah
and connected

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 43:32.  
 **[2]** Quraysh was the tribe which inhabited Mecca.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 33:36.

to His Eternal Being and is submissive to Him. It is the very connection
and submission itself and not something has connection and submission.
In this light, if Allah the Almighty stops that for a moment, surely
life will stop…

The second side is from people. Supposing the existence of the first
side, it is connected with the second one in its essence and branched
with it naturally. Hence, no deed comes from man except by the
correlation of these two sides. But, if one side prevails, no deed is
achieved. On this base, it is true to ascribe deeds to Allah and to man.
To explain this point, we give examples to show the difference of the
concepts of “compulsion” and “free will” from the theory of the Twelver
Shia. A deed of man comes in three kinds:

First, the deed that comes without man’s will and choice; as when we
suppose that there is someone with a trembling hand who is unable to
control his hand. If his master ties a sword in his trembling hand, with
supposing that there is someone lying beside him, though this man knows
that when the sword slips from his hand and falls on that sleeping
person, it will kill him, naturally this deed is away from his will and
choice. Reasonable people see that he is not responsible for this deed
and he is not to be blamed for it. The one, who is responsible and to be
blamed for that, is the one who ties the sword in that man’s hand. This
is the theme of the theory of “compulsion”.

Second, the deeds that come from man by his will, choice, and
independency with no need to any other than him; it is as if when we
suppose that a master gives a sword to a free person who is free to do
what he wants and able to move his hand freely. In this case, if this
person commits a murder in the outside, he himself will be responsible
for that murder and not the giver of the sword, though the giver of the
sword knows that giving the sword to that person leads to a murder
besides that he can take the sword from that person whenever he wants;
nevertheless, the murder cannot be imputed to the giver of the sword but
to that person who was

free in moving his hand with no external influence. This is the theme of
the theory of “free will”.

Third, the deeds that come from man by his choice and power, though he
is not independent by himself but in need of other than him that if the
aid of that other one stops at any time, his deeds will stop definitely;
as an example we suppose that the master has a paralyzed slave that is
unable to move. The master connects an electric current to the slave’s
body to arouse power in his muscles and make him able to move and act.
The master holds the control of the electric current, which gives power
to the slave’s body at all time, with his hand that if he cuts the
current for a moment, the power will be cut from the slave’s body and he
becomes unable to move. On this base, if the master connects that power
to the slave’s body and the slave goes by his will and kills someone
where the master knows what the slave does, in this case this deed is
imputed to both of them; to the slave because he is able to or not to do
that deed as he wills after power is connected to his body, and to the
master because he gives power to the slave even at the time of
committing that murder though he is able to cut that power from the
slave at any time he wants. This is the theme and fact of the theory of
“the matter between the two matters”…’**[1]**

We come back again to the tradition of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He says,

‘The matter between the two matters is neither “compulsion” nor “free
will”. It is this what Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.) told Abayah bin Rub’iy
al-Asadi about when he asked him about the ability by which man could
stand up, sit down, and act. Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.) said to Abayah,
‘You asked about ability. Do you have it without Allah or with Allah?’
Abayah kept silent and did not know what to say. Imam Ali (a.s.) said,
‘If you say that you have it with Allah, I will kill you, and if you say
that you have it without Allah, I will kill you.’ Abayah said, ‘Then
what shall I say, O Ameerul

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Lectures on usul al-Fiqh, vol.2 p.87-89.

Mo'minin?’ Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘You say that you have it by Allah Who
has it without you. If He makes you possess it, it is from his favor,
and if He deprives you of it, it is from His trial for you. He is the
Possessor of what He makes you possess, and He is the Powerful over what
He gives you power in. Do you not hear people asking (Allah) for ability
and power when they say: there is no ability and power save in Allah (la
hawla wela quwwata illabillah)?’ Abayah said, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, what
does it mean?’ Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘There is no ability to keep away
from disobediences save by the preservation of Allah, and we have no
power to obey Allah save by the assistance of Allah.’ Abayah jumped and
kissed Imam Ali’s hands and feet.’  

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) added, ‘It is narrated from Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.)
that one day Najda came to him asking about how to know Allah. He asked,
‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, with what you have known your Lord?’ Imam Ali
(a.s.) said, ‘With the thinking that has empowered me and the mind that
has led me.’ Najda said, ‘Are you molded into that?’ Imam Ali (a.s.)
said, ‘If I am molded into that, I shall not be praised for good deeds
and blamed for bad deeds, and so a good doer shall deserve blame more
than a wrongdoer. I know that Allah is Eternal, Everlasting and any
other than Him is transient and mortal. The Eternal, Everlasting One is
not like a transient creature.’ Najda said, ‘I see you have become
wise.’ Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.) said, ‘I am free to choose. If I commit a
bad deed instead of good deed, I shall be punished for it.’

It is also related to Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.) that he said to a man who
asked him after coming back from Sham, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, tell us
about our marching to Sham! Is it by the fate of Allah?’ Ameerul
Mo'minin (a.s.) said, ‘O sheikh (old man), yes. You do not ascend up a
hill or descend a valley unless it is by the will and fate of Allah.’
The old man said, ‘I expect the reward of my efforts from Allah O
Ameerul Mo'minin.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) explained fate by saying, ‘O sheikh, wait! Allah has
rewarded you for your marching as you march, for your residence as you
reside, and for your going back as you go back. You may think it is
inevitable fate and inescapable doom. If it is so, then reward and
punishment, enjoining and forbidding, scolding, warning and threatening
will be void, and a bad doer shall not be blamed and a good doer shall
not be rewarded. A good doer shall be worthier of being blamed than a
guilty one, and a guilty one shall be worthier of reward than a good
doer. This opinion is of idolaters, enemies of Allah, fatalists, and the
magi. O sheikh, Allah the Almighty has charged His people but given them
the option to do or not to do, and forbidden them as warning. He gives
much for a little. He is not disobeyed out of defeat and He is not
obeyed by force. He has not created the heavens, the earth, and what is
between them in vain. That is the opinion of those who disbelieve, and
woe unto those who disbelieve from the Fire…’ The old man got up, kissed
Imam Ali’s head, and recited some verses of poetry praising him.

Ameerul Mo'minin proved what complied with the Book and he denied
“compulsion” and “free will” and showed that whoever believed in them
denied the Book of Allah and was unbeliever. We seek the protection of
Allah from deviation and disbelief. We believe neither in compulsion nor
in free will, but we believe in “the matter between the two matters”
that is the trial of the ability which Allah has given to us in order to
worship Him with it as the Book witnessed and the pure imams of the
Prophet’s progeny (peace be upon them) believed in…’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) gave an example by saying, ‘The example of the trial
of ability is like the example of a man who possesses a slave and he has
too much money. He wants to try his slave though he knows what his slave
shall be and do. He gives the slave some of his money and agrees with
him on some things. He orders him to spend the money on some things and
forbids him from other things that he (the master) does not like. He
orders him to

avoid them and not to spend from his money on them, though money is
spent in both sides. The slave spends some money in obeying the master
and seeking his pleasure, and some in the way he has forbidden. The
master houses the slave in a temporary house and informs him that he
shall not live in this house forever but he shall live in another house,
which the master will take him to, where there shall be eternal reward
and eternal punishment. If the slave spends the money in the way that
the master has ordered him to do, he shall be rewarded with the eternal
reward as his master has promised to reward him in the other house that
he will take him to, and if he spends the money in the way that his
master has forbidden him from, he shall be punished with eternal
punishment in the eternal house. The master determines a limit for that.
It is the abiding in the first house. When the limit is reached, the
master changes the slave and the money, though he is still the owner of
the slave and money in all times but he has promised that he shall not
deprive the slave of that money as long as he lives in that house until
he completes his abiding in it. The master fulfils the desires of the
slave because justice, loyalty, fairness, and wisdom are from the
qualities of the master. If the slave spends that money in the way he is
ordered of, the master shall carry out his promise to him by rewarding
him with eternal bliss in an everlasting house, and if he spends the
money in the way he is forbidden from and contradicts the orders of his
master, he shall be punished with the eternal punishment that the master
has warned him of. Doing that, the master is not unjust to the slave
because he has pre-informed him that he will carry out his promise and
threat to him. It is for this reason that the master is described as
mighty and omnipotent. The master is Allah the Almighty, the slave is
man, money is the vast power of Allah, the trial is the showing of
wisdom and might, the temporary (transient) house is the worldly life,
the sum of money that the master has given to the slave is the ability
that man has, and the way Allah has ordered the money to be spent in is
the ability of following the prophets and acknowledging what they have
brought

from Allah the Almighty. The ways Allah has forbidden are the ways of
Iblis, the promise of the eternal bliss is the Paradise, the transient
house is this life, and the other house is the everlasting house that is
the afterlife. The moderate concept between “compulsion” and “free will”
is the trial and test of the ability that the slave has been given. It
is explained in the five examples which Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has
mentioned that they have had all virtues. I shall interpret them due to
the proofs of the Qur'an and reason inshallah.’

This example presented by Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) is clear that man has full
control over his will and choice. When man obeys Allah, he obeys Him out
of his satisfaction and choice and he is not forced into that, and when
he disobeys his Lord, he does that by his will and choice too. On the
base of this choice, the concept of “the matter between the two matters”
is based, which is the concept that has been adopted by the infallible
imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) added, ‘As for the saying of as-Sadiq (a.s.), it
means the perfection of man’s morals, the perfection of senses,
constancy of mind, discernment, and eloquence. Allah says, ***(And
surely We have honored the children of Adam, and We carry them in the
land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things, and We have
made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of those whom
We have created)**.***[1]** Allah informs that He has preferred man to
all His creatures of animals, beasts, sea creatures, birds, and all
living creatures by virtue of reason and speaking. Allah says,
***(Certainly We created man in the best make)**,**[2]*** and, ***(O man
! what has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious one, Who created
you, then fashioned you, then proportioned***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 17:70.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 95:4.

***you, into whatever form He pleased He constituted you)**,***[1]** and
in many other verses. The first blessing of Allah for man is the
soundness of his mind and his preference to all creatures with the
perfection of his mind and the faculty of speaking. Every living
creature in the earth is independent in its senses and complete in its
being but man is preferred by the faculty of speaking to all other
sensitive creatures. It is for this faculty of speaking that Allah has
made man prevail over all creatures. Man is the commander while other
creatures are submissive to him. Allah says, ***(thus has He made them
subservient to you, that you may magnify Allah because He has guided you
aright)[2]*** and, ***(And He it is Who has made the sea subservient
that you may eat fresh flesh from it and bring forth from it ornaments
which you wear)[3]*** and, ***(And He created the cattle for you; you
have in them warm clothing and (many) advantages, and of them do you
eat. And there is beauty in them for you when you drive them back (to
home), and when you send them forth (to pasture). And they carry your
heavy loads to regions which you could not reach but with distress of
the souls)**.***[4]** For that, Allah invited man to follow His orders
and obey Him by preferring him through straightening his shape and
giving him the faculty of speaking and knowledge after giving him the
ability of carrying out what He has ordered him to do. Allah says,
***(Therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah as much as you can, and
hear and obey)[5]*** and, ***(Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty
but to the extent of its ability)**,**[6]*** and, ***(Allah does not lay
on any soul a burden except to the extent to which He has granted
it)**,***[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 82:6-8.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 22:37.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 16:14.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 16:5-7.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 64:16.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 2:286.  
 **[7]** Qur'an, 65:7.

and in many other verses. If Allah deprives man of one of his senses, He
exempts him from his duty by that sense. Allah says, ***(No blame is
there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any blame upon the
sick)**.***[1]** Allah has exempted these persons from jihad and all
duties that they cannot do. Rather, He has imposed on wealthy people to
offer the hajj and pay the zakat for they have the ability of that.
Allah has not imposed the hajj and zakat on poor people. He says,
**(*and pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of
Allah, (upon) every one who is able to undertake the journey to
it)****,**[2]*** and, ***(Those who put away their wives (by saying they
are as their mothers) and afterward would go back on that which they
have said, (the penalty) in that case (is) the freeing of a slave…and
for him who is unable to do so (the penance is) the feeding of sixty
needy ones)**.***[3]** This proves that Allah has not imposed on His
people what is over than the ability He has given to them or forbidden
them from what they have no ability to refrain from. This is the
soundness of creation.

And as for his saying “clearing the way”, it means that there is no
watch over man that prevents him from carrying out what Allah has
ordered him. It is due to the saying of Allah about the disabled who are
not free to act as Allah says, ***(Except the feeble among men, and the
women, and the children, who are unable to devise a plan and are not
shown a way)**.***[4]** He informs that a disabled one is not given a
way and so he is not to be blamed if his heart is full of faith.

As for time limit, it is the age of man where he is required to seek
knowledge since he comes of age until death. He, who dies while seeking
the truth and does not get perfection, shall be to good. Allah says,
***(and whoever goes forth from his house***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 24:61.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 3:97.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 58:3-4.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 4:98.

***emigrating to Allah and His Messenger, and then death overtakes him,
his reward is indeed with Allah)**.***[1]**

Equipments are wealth and power by which man can be able to follow the
commands of Allah. Allah says, ***(There is no way (of blame) against
the doers of good)**.***[2]** Do you not see that Allah has accepted the
excuse of those who have no further money to spend, but imposed on the
people who have enough money and riding camels (or horses)**[3]** to go
to the hajj and jihad? He has also accepted the excuse of the poor and
imposed to them a share from the wealth of the rich. He has said,
***((Alms are) for the poor who are confined in the way of
Allah)**.***[4]** Allah has exempted them and has not charged them with
that which they are unable to do.

As for his saying “the provoking cause”, it is the intention that leads
man to all his deeds. The sense of this intention is in the heart
(mind). Whoever does a thing without intending it by his heart
(sincerely) it shall not be accepted from him. Allah does not accept
from man a deed except out of sincere intention, and therefore He has
said about hypocrites, ***(They say with their mouths what is not in
their hearts, and Allah is best aware of what they conceal)**.***[5]**
Then Allah revealed to His messenger (a.s.) a blame on the believer,
***(O you who believe! why do you say that which you do not
do)**.***[6]** If man says something and believes in it, his true
intention makes him prove his saying by doing, and if he does not
believe in his saying, the truth of his saying shall not appear. Allah
has permitted the true intention even if the doing does not comply with
the intention because of something that may prevent from achieving the
doing as Allah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 4:100.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 9:91.  
 **[3]** Means of transportation.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 2:273.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 3:167.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 61:2.

says, ***(…except he who is compelled while his heart is still content
with faith)*[1]** and ***(Allah does not punish you for what is vain in
your oaths, but He will punish you for what your hearts have
earned)**.***[2]** The Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet (a.s.)
show that the heart is the possessor of all senses and it confirms their
doings, and nothing invalidates what the heart confirms. This is the
explanation of the five examples mentioned by as-Sadiq (a.s.) which
determine “the position between the two positions”. The two positions
are “compulsion” and “free will”. If these five items are found in a
man, it is obligatory on him to do as Allah and His messengers have
ordered, and if that man lacks one of these items, he is exempted from
the doing concerning that item.

As for the proofs in the Holy Qur'an on the “trying according to
ability” which means the concept of “the matter between the two
matters”, are many, such as this holy verse ***(And verily We shall try
you till We know those of you who strive hard (for the sake of Allah)
and the patient, and till We test your record)**,***[3]** and ***(And
those who deny Our revelations, We draw them near (to destruction) step
by step from whence they know not)**,***[4]** *and **(Do men think that
they will be left alone on saying, We believe, and not be
tried)**,***[5]** and ***(And certainly We tried Sulaiman)**,***[6]**
and in the story of Prophet Moses ***(He said: So surely We have tried
your people after you, and the Samiri has led them astray)**,***[7]**
and the saying of Moses **(It is naught but Thy trial)**.**[8]** These
verses are compared

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 16:106.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 2:225.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 47:31.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 7:182.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 29:2.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 38:34.  
 **[7]** Qur'an, 20:85.  
 **[8]** Qur'an, 7:155.

one to another and they confirm one another.

As for the verses of affliction which mean “trying”, they are also many
such as, ***(but that He might try you in what He gave you)**,***[1]**
and ***(then He turned you away from them that He might try
you)**,***[2]** and ***(We have tried them as We tried the people of the
Garden)**,***[3]** and ***(Who created death and life that He may try
you; which of you is best in deeds)**,***[4]** and ***(And when his Lord
tried Ibrahim with certain words)**,***[5]** and ***(and if Allah had
pleased He would certainly have exacted what is due from them, but that
He may try some of you by means of others)**.***[6]**

These verses and many others like them prove the “trying”. Allah the
Almighty has not created the creations in vain, nor has He ignored them,
nor has He showed His wisdom for play. He has said, ***(What! did you
then think that We had created you in vain and that you shall not be
returned to Us?)**.***[7]** If someone says, ‘Did Allah not know what
His people would do so that He tried them?’ We say, ‘Yes, He knows what
they shall do before they do. He says, ***(and if they were sent back,
they would certainly go back to that which they were
forbidden)**.***[8]** Allah tries people to show them His justice and
that He does not torture them except by a certain excuse and after
committing their deeds. Allah says, ***(And had We destroyed them with
chastisement before this, they would certainly have said: O our Lord,
why didst Thou not send to us a messenger, for then we should have
followed Thy communications before that we***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 5:48.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 3:152.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 68:17.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 67:2.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 2:124.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 47:5.  
 **[7]** Qur'an, 23:115.  
 **[8]** Qur'an, 6:28.

***met disgrace and shame)**,***[1]** and ***(and We never punish until
we have sent a messenger)**,***[2]** and ***((We sent) messengers as the
givers of good news and as warners, so that people should not have a
plea against Allah after the (coming of) messengers)**.***[3]** So the
trial of Allah is on the ability that He has given to man and this is
the concept of “the matter between the two matters”. About this the
Qur'an spoke and the traditions of the infallible imams (a.s.)
confirmed.

If someone says: What is the argument in this saying of Allah ***(Surely
Allah makes err whom He pleases and guides aright whom He
pleases)**,***[4]** and in other verses like it? It is said: the
metaphor in all these verses is in tow meanings; one is that Allah tells
about His might that He is able to guide whomever He pleases and
misguide whomever He pleases, and if He forces them into one of these
two ways, neither reward nor punishment they would deserve, and the
second is the “informing” like in this verse ***(And as to Thamud, We
gave them guidance, but they chose error above guidance)**.***[5]** It
means that Allah has showed them the right way. If He had forced them
into guidance, they would not be able to go astray. It is not whenever
an allegorical verse is mentioned that it will be an evidence on the
clear verses which we have been ordered to follow. Allah says, ***(He it
is Who has revealed the Book to you; some of its verses are decisive,
they are the basis of the Book, and others are allegorical. Then as for
those in whose hearts there is perversity, they follow the part of it
which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and seeking to give it (their
own) interpretation)**,***[6]** and ***(…give good news to My servants
who***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 20:134.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 17:15.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 4:165.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 35:8.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 41:17.  
 **[6]** Qur'an, 3:7.

***listen to the word, then follow the best of it; those are they whom
Allah has guided, and those who are the men of understanding)**.***[1]**
The best of the word means the clearest and most decisive.

May Allah make us successful in saying and doing to what He likes and
pleases, and may He keep us away from His disobedience by His favor and
grace. Much praise be to Allah as He deserves, and His blessings be on
Muhammad and on His good progeny. Allah is sufficient for us and most
excellent is the Protector.’**[2]**

This is the end of the wonderful letter of Imam al-Hadi (a.s) in which
he refuted the illusions of the Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilites and
proved with irrefutable proofs the concept of “the matter between the
two matters” which the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) believed
in.

Samples from his supplications
------------------------------

The supplications of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) formed a wonderful part in the
Islamic heritage. They had established the bases of behaviors and morals
and the spiritual elements of personality. They included important,
political documentations that showed the extent of persecution and
oppression the Islamic nation faced during those ages under the rule of
the Umayyads and the Abbasids who spared no effort in oppressing people
and making them as tools to serve the rulers and their retinues. Besides
that these supplications showed the resort and devotedness of the imams
to Allah and that they believed with their hearts, feelings, and
passions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 39:17-18.  
 **[2]** Tuhaf al-Uqul, p.458-475, also mentioned in brief in al-Ihtijaj
by at-Tabarsi.

### His supplication (du’a) at distresses

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s) suffered a distress or he wanted some need to be
satisfied, he prayed Allah with this du’a. Narrators said that before
reciting this du’a Imam al-Hadi (a.s) fasted on Wednesday, Thursday, and
Friday, performed a ghusl in the morning of Friday, paid charity to a
poor person, offered a four rak’as prayer, and then he spread his palms
towards the heaven and invoked sincerely by reciting,

“O Allah, praise be to You that is the best praise that You deserve, the
most pleasant praise to You, the most appropriate praise to You, the
most beloved praise to You. Praise be to You as You deserve, and as You
accepted it to Yourself, and as those, whom You accepted their praise,
praised You from all Your creation. Praise be to You as Your prophets,
messengers, and angels praised You with, and as it fits Your glory,
highness, and greatness. Praise be to You that tongues fail to describe,
and speech stops before reaching its end. Praise be to You that is not
less than Your contentment, and that is better than every praise.

O Allah, praise be to You in joy and trouble, ease and distress,
soundness and illness, years and ages. Praise be to You for Your favors
and blessings to me. Praise be to You for what You have gifted me, tried
me, healed me, provided me with livelihood, given me what I need,
preferred me, honored me, dignified me, and guided me to Your religion;
a praise that no describer can describe and no sayer can suffice.

O Allah, praise be to You for Your kindness to me, and Your favors on
me, and Your preferring me to other than me. Praise be to You for Your
adjusting my creation, and for Your educating me well as a favor from
You and not for a precedent good from me. O my Lord, then which blessing
You have not given me, and which gratitude that is not required from me
to You?! I am satisfied with Your kindness, and You suffice me from
among all creation.

O my Lord, You are the Bestower upon me, the Beneficent, the Gracious,
the Beautiful, the Lord of glory and honor, and of great

favors and blessings, so praise be to You for all that. O my Lord, You
did not disappoint me in any distress, did not betray me for any guilt,
and did not expose me for any concealed sin. Your blessings are
continuous on me in every difficulty and ease. You have always done me
good and pardoned me.

O Allah, make me enjoy my hearing, sight, and organs and all that which
the earth has for me. O Allah, my first need I ask You for, and my wish
I request from You, and make it the means before my request, and I come
nearer to You by it is the sending of blessing on Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad and I ask You to have blessing on him and on them as
the best blessing that You have commanded Your people to send on them,
and as the best of that which any of Your people has ever asked You for,
and as You are responsible for them until the Day of Resurrection. O
Allah, have blessing on them inasmuch as all those who have sent
blessings on them, and inasmuch as all those who shall send blessing on
them; a continuous blessing with the means, exaltedness, and virtue, and
have blessing on Your prophets, messengers, and Your good slaves, and
have blessing on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and send much
peace on them!

O Allah, and from Your generosity is that You do not disappoint whoever
asks You for something, and looks forward to what You have, and You
dislike whoever does not ask You, and no one is so other than You. O my
Lord, my greed for Your mercy and forgiveness, and my trust in Your
kindness and favor has led me to call on You, yearn for You, and offer
my need before You. I have presented before my ask the aiming at You by
the means of Your Prophet, who had brought the truth from You, and
brought Your light and straight path by which You have guided the
people, and by whose light You have enliven the earth, and whom You have
endowed with the highest dignity, and honored with the shahada, and sent
him after a cessation of the messengers. O Allah, I believe in his
secret and openness, and in the secret of his

progeny whom You had kept uncleanness away from and purified a thorough
purifying…O Allah, do not cut between me and them in this life and in
the afterlife and accept my deeds by them!

O Allah, You had guided Your people to Yourself when You said, ***(And
when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very near; I
answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me, so they should
answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right
way)**,***[1]** and ***(O my servants, who have acted extravagantly
against their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely
Allah forgives the faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful)**,***[2]** and ***(And Noah did certainly call upon Us, and
best of answerers are We)**.***[3]** O Lord, yes! The best of the called
upon You are, the best of lords You are, and the best of answerers You
are! You say, ***(Say: Call upon Allah or call upon the Beneficent;
whichever you call upon, His are the best names)**,***[4]** and I call
upon You, O Allah, by Your names which if You are called upon by, You
respond and if You are asked by, You give. I call upon You suppliantly,
humbly with the call of one whom inadvertence has taken away and
neediness has exhausted. I call upon You with the call of one who has
given up, confessed his guilt, and hoped for Your great pardon, and wide
reward.

O Allah, if You have singled out someone, who followed what You have
ordered him and acted as You have created him for, with Your mercy, he
would not reach that except by You and Your assistance. O Allah…to You
my Master is my preparing hoping for Your prizes and gifts. I ask You to
have blessing on Muhammad and on the progeny of Muhammad and to satisfy
my ask and need…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:186.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 39:53.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 37:75.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 17:110.

O You, the most generous of givers, the best of the beneficent, have
blessing on Muhammad and on the progeny of Muhammad, and whoever from
Your people wants to harm me disconcert his heart, refute his tongue,
blind his sight, curb his head, make him busy with himself, and make me
safe from him by Your might and power! O Allah, do not make it the last
time to me that I call upon You suppliantly, and if You do, then forgive
me all my faults with forgiveness that does not leave one guilt. Make my
call among the responded calls, my deed among the accepted deeds near
you, and my speech among that which comes up to You of good deeds, and
make me with Your Prophet and choice, and the imams, peace be upon them
all. By them I beseech You, and by them I yearn to You. Respond to my
call O the most Merciful of the merciful, and forgive me my slips.’ Then
Imam al-Hadi (a.s) asked for his need and went down into prostration and
said,

“There is no god but Allah the Forbearing, the Generous. There is no god
but Allah the Most High, the Great. Glory be to Allah the Lord of the
seven heavens, the lord of the seven earths, and the Lord of the Great
Throne. O Allah, I resort to Your pardon from Your punishment, and to
Your contentment from Your wrath, and to You from You. I cannot reach
the praise of You or the gratitude to You. You are as You have praised
Yourself. Make my life a growth to me in every good, and my death a
relief to me from every evil. Make the delight of my eyes in Your
obedience. O my Trust and Hope, do not burn my face in Fire after my
prostration to You my Master. With no favor from me on You, You have the
favor on me, so pity my weakness and delicate skin, and relieve me from
the distresses of this life and of the afterlife, and favor me with the
company of the Prophet (a.s) and his progeny (peace be upon them) in the
high ranks in the Paradise…O You the Light of light, the Manager of
affairs, Generous, Glorious, One, Unique, Eternal, Who neither begot nor
was begotten, and there is none comparable to You, O You Who are so and
no one is so other than You, O You Whom there is no god in the high
heavens or in the low earth other than You, O You Who honor every humble
one,

and humble every mighty one, by Your glory and loftiness I have lost my
patience, so have blessing on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and
relieve me…!

### His du’a at sleeping

When he went to bed or awoke from sleep, he recited this du’a:

“There is no god but Allah the Alive, the Eternal, and He has power over
all things. Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and the Deity of
the messengers. Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the seven heavens and all
that which they have, and the Lord of the seven earths and all that
which they have, the Lord of the Great Throne, and peace be on the
messengers, and praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds.”

### The du’a of resorting

“O You, my supply, my hope and reliance, my resort and support, O You
the One and Unique, O You, Who “say: He, Allah, is One”, O Allah, I ask
You by those like whom You have not created in Your creation, to have
blessing on them…”

### His du’a of seeking protection from Satan

“O You Who are mighty in Your might, Who are the mightiest in Your
might, make me mighty from Your might, assist me with Your help, keep
away from me the evil suggestion of the Devils, defend me by Your
defense, protect me by Your protection, and make me from the good people
of Your creation, O You One, Unique, Eternal!’

### A lofty du’a

“O You the most hearing of hearers, the most perceptive of seers, the
best of lookers, the promptest of accounters, the Most Merciful of the
merciful, the wisest of judges, have blessing on Muhammad and on the
progeny of Muhammad, and increase my livelihood, prolong my old, favor
me with Your mercy, make me from those who defend Your

religion and do not replace me by other than me…!’**[1]**

His communes
------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s) communed Allah the Almighty in the darkness of night
with a suppliant heart and peaceful soul. It was narrated that he said
in his communes:

1. “O my Lord, a guilty has come, and a poor has sought; do not
disappoint his effort! Have mercy on him, and forgive his
faults.’**[2]**

2.  “My Lord, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, and have mercy
on me when my trace will disappear from this life and my mention will be
removed among people, and I shall be forgotten as those who had been
forgotten. My Lord, I have become old, my skin has become delicate, my
bones have become thin, time has affected me, my death has approached
me, my days have elapsed, my lusts have gone but my guilt remained! O my
Lord, have mercy on me when my shape will change!”**[3]** 

3. “O my Lord, thoughts of thinkers went astray, sights of seers fell
short, descriptions of describers dissipated, sayings of fabricators
vanished before the wonders of Your affair, or the reach to Your
highness, for You are in the unreachable place, and no eye can fall upon
You with a glance or expression. How far, and how far! O You the First,
the Only, the Unique! You have exalted in highness with the glory of
greatness, and risen up beyond every bottom and end with the omnipotence
of pride.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4 p.285.  
 **[2]** Ad-Durr an-Nadheem.  
 **[3]** Ad’iyat al-Bihar.  
 **[4]** At-Tawhid.

His ziyarahs
------------

A collection of wonderful ziyarahs**[1]** were transmitted from Imam
al-Hadi (a.s) by which he visited his pure fathers, the infallible imams
of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). These ziyarahs are full of arguments on the
right of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) in the Islamic caliphate. They also
include important documentations of their achievements, morals, virtues,
and qualities.

Az-Ziyarah al-Jami’ah is the most famous and important ziyarah of the
infallible imams (a.s). It is very widespread among the Shia and all
followers of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) who have memorized it. They recite it
on Fridays as a visit to the pure imams (a.s). It has been published
hundreds of times in different editions and we think there is no need to
mention it here for it is very well-known and widespread among Muslims.

### Ziyarah of al-Ghadir

The Day of al-Ghadir is one of the most important occasions for the
Twelver Shia who consider it as an Eid where the Prophet (a.s) had
appointed Imam Ali (a.s) as the caliph over Muslims after him. The Shia
visited and still visit the holy shrine of Imam Ali (a.s) on the Day of
al-Ghadir every year to confirm their guardianship and allegiance to
him.

Imam al-Hadi (a.s) visited the holy shrine of his grandfather Imam Ali
(a.s) in the year when al-Mu’tasim, the Abbasid caliph, brought him from
Medina to Sammarra’.**[2]** Imam al-Hadi (a.s) visited his grandfather
Ameerul Mo'minin with this wonderful ziyarah in which he mentioned the
virtues of Imam Ali (a.s) and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ziyarah linguistically means “a visit” but here it refers to the
special sacred wordings said by the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s) and by others as a kind of greeting, respect and reverence offered
to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and other holy personalities when visiting their
shrines or may be recited on certain days and occasions wherever one
is.  
 **[2]** Mafatih al-Jinan by Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi, p. 363.

the political and social problems he suffered at that age. We mention
here some passages from the ziyarah:

“…And you were the first one who believed in Allah and offered prayer to
Him, fought in His way, and did well in the house of polytheism where
the earth was full of deviation and Satan was worshipped openly.

You had the memorable situations, famous occasions, and great days; the
Day (battle) of Badr and the Day of al-Ahzab ***(when the eyes turned
dull, and the hearts rose up to the throats, and you began to think
diverse thoughts of Allah. There the believers were tried and they were
shaken with severe shaking, and when the hypocrites, and those in whose
hearts was a disease, were saying: Allah and His messenger promised us
naught but delusion, and when a party of them said: O people of Yathrib,
there is no place to stand for you here, therefore go back, and a party
of them asked permission of the prophet, saying: Surely our houses are
exposed; and they were not exposed; they only desired to fly away)***[1]
and Allah said, ***( And when the believers saw the allies, they said:
This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us, and Allah and His
Messenger spoke the truth; and it only increased them in faith and
submission)**.***[2]** Then you killed their Amr**[3]** and defeated
their parties ***(and Allah turned back the unbelievers in their rage;
they did not obtain any advantage, and Allah sufficed the believers in
fighting; and Allah is Strong, Mighty)**.***[4]** And on the Day of Uhud
***(when you climbed (the hill) and paid no heed to anyone, while the
messenger, in your rear, was calling you***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 33:10-13.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 33:22.  
 **[3]** Amr bin Abd Widd was the most famous, and bravest hero of the
polytheists who fought in the battle of al-Ahzab.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 33:25.

***(to fight),*****[1]** but you drove away the polytheists from the
Prophet (a.s) on the right and on the left until Allah drove them from
it (war) fearfully and gave victory by you to the (disappointers), and
on the Day of Hunayn as Allah said, ***(when your great numbers made you
vain, but they availed you nothing and the earth became strait to you
notwithstanding its spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. Then
Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the
believers)**.***[2]** And the believers were you and your companions…And
on the Day of Khaybar when Allah showed the weakness of the hypocrites
and cut the roots of the unbelievers- praise be to Allah the Lord of the
worlds- ***(And certainly they had made a covenant with Allah before,
that they would not turn (their) backs; and Allah's covenant shall be
inquired of)**.***[3]**

And you participated with the Prophet (a.s) in all his wars and battles
holding the banner before him, and beating with the sword in front of
him. Then for your well-known resolution and insight on affairs, he made
you the emir in the battles and there was no emir over you…

In your sleeping in the bed (of the Prophet)**[4]** you were like the
slaughtered (Prophet Ishmael) Peace be upon him, that you responded as
he responded, and you obeyed as he obeyed patiently hoping for the
reward when his father said to him, ***(O my son! surely I have seen in
a dream that I should sacrifice you; consider then what you see. He
said: O my father, do what you are commanded; if Allah please, you will
find me of the patient ones)**,***[5]** and so were you when the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 3:153.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 9:25-26.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 33:15.  
 **[4]** Here Imam al-Hadi (a.s) talked about the sleeping of Imam Ali
(a.s) in the Prophet’s bed when Quraysh decided to kill the Prophet
(a.s) but Imam Ali (a.s) sacrificed his life for him.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 37:102.

Prophet (a.s) ordered you to sleep in his bed to save him by your self
and you hurried to respond obediently and to expose your self to
killing, and so Allah thanked your obedience and showed your good deed
by saying, ***(And among men is he who sells himself to seek the
pleasure of Allah)**.***[1]**

I witness that you contradicted desires, allied with piety, suppressed
anger, pardoned people, became angry when Allah was disobeyed, became
pleased when Allah is obeyed, carried out what you were entrusted with,
kept what you were confided, achieved what you were charged with, and
waited for what you were promised, and I witness that you did not avoid
(some people) out of humbleness, nor refrained from your right (in the
caliphate) with grief, nor abstained from confronting the extorters of
your right out of subservience, nor you showed satisfaction unlike the
satisfaction of Allah out of flattering, nor you became weak after what
you faced for the sake of Allah, nor you weakened or gave up the
demanding of your right and lay in wait. God forbid! You were not so,
but if you were wronged, you were content with your Lord and entrusted
your affairs to Him.

You did not mind misfortunes, and did not weaken at distresses, and did
not abstain from fighting against falseness…It was you who said: neither
do the masses of people around me increase my glory, nor does their
separation from me cause me loneliness even if all people betray me…

Allah the Almighty responded to His prophet’s call concerning
you,**[2]** and then He ordered him to announce that he entrusted you
with the affair (caliphate) of his nation as glorification to you,
declaring your proof, and refuting the falsehood and fabricated excuses.
When he feared a sedition from the dissolute and feared

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:207.  
 **[2]** In this passage Imam al-Hadi (a.s) talked about the famous
event of al-Ghadir when Muslims paid homage to Imam Ali (a.s) as the
caliph after the Prophet (a.s) due to the decree of the Prophet (a.s)
himself.

for you from the hypocrites, the Lord of the worlds revealed to him,
***(O Messenger, deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord,
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people)**.***[1]** He burdened himself with
journey, stopped at the hot desert, and made his speech. He called out
and made everyone hear, and asked them, ‘Have I informed?’ They said,
‘By Allah, yes!’ He said, ‘O Allah, bear witness!’ Then he said, ‘Am I
not worthier of Muslims than themselves to them?’ They said, ‘Yes, you
are.’ Then, he took your hand and said, ‘Whoever his guardian I am, here
is Ali to be his guardian. O Allah, support whoever supports him, be
enemy to whoever shows enmity towards him, help whoever helps him, and
disappoint whoever disappoints him!’ They did not believe in what Allah
had revealed to His prophet concerning you except a few, and most of
them did not add save perdition…!

Then was your ordeal on the Day of Siffin when the copies of the Qur'an
were raised trickily and cunningly. Suspicion appeared, the truth was
known, but supposition was followed. It was like the ordeal of Aaron
when Moses made him the emir over his people but they separated from him
and left him alone while Aaron calling out, ***(O my people! you are
only tried by it, and surely your Lord is the Beneficent Allah,
therefore follow me and obey my order. They said: We will by no means
cease to keep to its worship until Musa returns to us)**.***[2]** So
were you when the copies of the Qur'an were raised and you said: ‘O
people, you are tried by it and deceived.’ But they disobeyed and
objected to you and called for the two judges. You, before Allah,
exempted yourself from their doing and made Allah the judge over them.
When the truth shone, and their abominable doing was refuted, they
confessed their fault and deviation from the truth, and after that they
disagreed. Then, they forced you to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 5:67.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 20:90-91.

accept the arbitration which you denied and prohibited but they liked.
They permitted their guilt that they committed. You were on insight and
guidance and they were in deviation and blindness. They still insisted
on hypocrisy and were still in error until Allah made them taste the
evil results of their doing and He killed from them by your sword who
opposed you and became wretched and lost, and gave life by your argument
to whoever followed the guidance and was happy. The blessings of Allah
be on you everywhere and everywhen. Neither can a praiser cover your
description, nor can a dispraiser encompass your virtues…’

 From the prophets’ stories     
--------------------------------

In some traditions Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) told his companions some stories
of the prophets.

### Noah and Iblis

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) related a dialogue between Prophet Noah (a.s.) and
Iblis. He said, ‘One day, Iblis came to Noah and said to him, ‘You have
done me a great favor. Trust in me and I shall not betray you.’ Noah
became angry. Allah revealed to him to let Iblis speak out. Noah said to
Iblis, ‘Speak out!’ Iblis said, ‘If we find the son of Adam stingy,
envious, arrogant, or rash, we (the Devils) snatch him as the snatching
of a ball. If all these morals gather in him, we call him a mutinous
devil.’ Noah said, ‘What is the great favor I have done to you?’ Iblis
said, ‘You invoked Allah against the people of the earth and sent them
to Hell, and so I was free. Without your invoking against them, I would
be busy with them for a long time.’**[1]**

### Moses and Allah

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) related, “Moses said, O my Lord, what is the reward
of one who avoids treason out of being shy of You?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qisas al-Anbiya’ (The stories of the prophets) by ar-Rawandi.

Allah the Almighty said, ‘He shall be safe on the Day of Resurrection.’

Moses said, ‘What is the reward of one who loves the people of Your
obedience?’

Allah the Almighty said, ‘I will save his body from My Fire.’

Moses said, ‘What is the reward of one who kills a believer
intentionally?’

Allah the Almighty said, ‘I will not look at him on the Day of
Resurrection and I will not pardon his sin.’

Moses said, ‘My Lord, what is the reward of one who refrains from
harming people and helps them instead?’

Allah the Almighty said, ‘On the Day of Resurrection, Fire will say to
him: I have no way over you.’**[1]** Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) told such
stories to his companions to be examples for them on good morals and
manners.

### A maxim from Jesus Christ

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) narrated to his companions, ‘If one of you gives
(charity) with his right hand, let him conceal that from his left hand,
and if he prays, let him conceal that.’

Allah the Almighty loves that when a believer gives charity or does
good, he is to keep it secret and not to announce or spread it among
people lest he shall lose the reward, for he has to seek the reward from
Allah.

### From the Islamic events

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) talked to his companions about some important
Islamic events that happened at the first Islamic age. One of them was
the killing of the martyr Qanbar, Imam Ali’s servant, at the hand of the
tyrant al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf ath-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Amali by as-Saduq.

Thaqafi.**[1]** He said,

‘Qanbar came in to al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf who shouted at him, ‘What
service did you offer to Ali bin Abu Talib?’

Qanbar said, ‘I helped him in performing ablution.’

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘What did he say when he finished his ablution?’

Qanbar said, ‘He recited this Qur’anic verse: ***(But when they
neglected that with which they had been admonished, We opened for them
the doors of all things, until when they rejoiced in what they were
given We seized them suddenly; then lo! they were in utter despair. So
the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off; and all praise is
due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds)****.***[2]**

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘I think he meant us?!’

Qanbar said, ‘Yes, he did.’

Al-Hajjaj said to Qanbar, ‘What do you do if I behead you?’

Qanbar said, ‘Then I shall be happy and you shall be wretched.’

The tyrant ordered his men to behead this good man and he was
killed.’**[3]**

### The virtue of the Prophet and Ali

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) praised the innumerable favors the Prophet (a.s.)
and Imam Ali (a.s.) did the nation. He said, ‘From glorifying Allah is
the preferring of the two fathers of religion Muhammad and Ali to the
fathers of kinship, and from being indifferent to the loftiness of Allah
is to prefer the fathers of kinship to the fathers of religion; Muhammad
and Ali…’**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He was one the most oppressive walis of the Umayyads.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 6:44-45.  
 **[3]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[4]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.227.

He also said, ‘If the two fathers of religion Muhammad and Ali are not
glorified to one more than his fathers of kinship, one shall have no
value near Allah.’**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) and his guardian Imam Ali (a.s.) have had rights on
the nation more than the rights of fathers. By them Allah has taken
people out of the life of ignorance, meanness, and wretchedness to the
life of Islam that is full of honor, glory, and dignity.

### The virtue of the ulama during the time of occultation

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) talked about the virtue of the ulama during the time
of the occultation of his grandson Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). He said, ‘If,
after the occultation of Imam al-Mahdi, there will be no ulama who will
invite and guide to him, defend his religion with clear proofs, and save
the weak faithful from the traps of Iblis and his followers and from the
traps of the enemies of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), no one remains unless he
will apostate from the religion of Allah, but it is they who will hold
the hearts of the weak of the Shia as a shipper when holding the rudder
of his ship. Those are the best of people near Allah.’

### The virtue of patience

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) talked about patience and the great reward the
patient shall get from their Lord. Al-Hasan bin Ali narrated, “I heard
Abul Hasan saying, ‘On the Day of Resurrection, a caller will call out:
where are the patient? Some people will get up. Then, a caller will call
out: where are the discerning? Some people will get up. The patient are
those who are patient with the performing of the obligations, and the
discerning are those who are discerning in refraining from sins.’**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ihtijaj.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar.

### Pessimism towards days

Islam resisted all bad habits and traditions of the pre-Islamic era.
From those habits that Islam resisted was the pessimism at days which
the pre-Islamic society believed in. It neither brought good nor did it
save from evil, for all things were determined by Allah the Creator of
the universe and Giver of life.

Al-Hasan bin Mas’oud**[1]** said, “One day, I went to Abul Hasan Ali bin
Muhammad (a.s.) after my finger was scratched, and a rider knocked
against my shoulder, and I went into a crowd that some of my clothes
were torn. I said: may Allah save me from your evil O day! How
ill-omened you are!’

Abul Hasan (a.s.) said to me, ‘O Hasan, you say so though you frequent
us! You throw your guilt on that which is guiltless!’

I recovered my senses, understood my mistake, and said: I ask Allah to
forgive me.’

Abul Hasan (a.s.) said, ‘O Hasan, what is the guilt of days that you are
pessimistic at when you are punished for your deeds on them?’

I said, ‘I always ask Allah for forgiveness. It is my repentance O son
of the messenger of Allah.’

He said, ‘By Allah, it does not benefit you. Allah punishes you for
blaming days which have no guilt in what you blame them for. O Hasan, do
you know that it is Allah Who rewards and punishes for deeds whether
sooner or later?’

I said, ‘O yes, my master.’

He said, ‘Do not give days a role in the judgment of Allah!’

I said, ‘O yes, my master.”**[2]**  

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) confirmed what the Prophet (a.s.) had

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He might be al-Hasan bin Sa’eed al-Ahwazi.  
 **[2]** Tuhaf al-Uqul, p.482-483.

announced in one of his traditions that it was not from Islam that a
Muslim be pessimistic, but he must have a strong will and determination
in doing everything except sins.

### Cleanness

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) invited to cleanness and prettification. He said,
‘Allah is beautiful and He loves beauty and prettification, and He hates
misery and miserable ones. Allah the Almighty likes, when He gives a
blessing to His slave, to see the effects of that blessing appear on
him.’ He was asked, ‘How is that?’ He said, ‘To clean his dress, make
his smell good, order his house, and sweep the yard. Even a lamp lit
before sunset takes poverty away and increases livelihood.’**[1]**

### Rarity of lawful income

Sayyid bin Tawus narrated that Muhammad bin Harun al-Jallab said, ‘I
said to my master Ali bin Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.): we narrated from your
fathers that a time would come where there would be nothing rarer than a
friendly brother or gaining a lawful dirham (well-gotten money).’ He
said, ‘O Muhammad, a friendly brother is available, but you are in a
time where there is nothing rarer than a well-gotten dirham and a loyal,
faithful brother.’**[2]**

The rarity of well-gotten money results from the impiety in gaining and
the greediness to get money in any way. As for a friendly brother who
seeks his own benefits, he is available everywhere and everywhen, but as
for a god-fearing brother who keeps his brother away from committing sin
and takes him to do good, he is rare at all times.

### Ignoring the fact of death

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked, ‘Why do these Muslims hate death?’ He
said, ‘Because they ignore it, and therefore, they hate it. If they knew
it and were from the devotees of Allah, they would

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Amali by Sheikh al-Mufid.  
 **[2]** Ma’athir al-Kubara’, vol.3 p.227.

surely love it and know that the afterlife would be better than the
worldly life.’ Then Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) turned to his companions and
said, ‘Why do a child and an insane refrain from drug that recovers
their bodies and relieves them from pain?’

They said, ‘Because they ignore the benefit of drug.’

He said, ‘I swear by Him Who had sent Muhammad with the truth as
prophet, whoever prepares himself to death, it would be better for him
than this curative drug. If they know what bliss death gets to, they
will love it and call for it more than a sane, determined man when
calling for drug to cure his diseases and get safety.’**[1]**

In another tradition it was related that one day Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
visited a sick companion and saw him cry fearing from death. He said to
him, ‘O Abdullah (slave of Allah), you fear from death because you do
not know it. If you become dirty and filthy, and you suffer from this
dirt and filth that cause you sores and mange, and then you know that
washing in the bathroom will relieve all that, do you not want to go to
the bathroom and remove all that from you, or you hate to do that and
you let filth, sores, and mange on you?’

The sick man said, ‘O yes, son of the messenger of Allah, may Allah have
blessing and peace on you and your household.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Death is that bathroom. It is the last thing
remaining for you to wash your guilt and purify you from your sins. If
you come to it and be its neighbor, you shall be free from every
distress, grief, and pain, and shall get to every happiness and
delight.’ The sick man was calm. He submitted to death and pleased with
the fate of Allah.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’ani al-Akhbar by as-Saduq.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

### True repentance

Ahmad bin Hilal asked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about true repentance and he
replied to him, ‘that the inward and the outward are to be the same and
better.’**[1]**

### The meaning of “rajeem”

Abdul Adhim al-Hasani narrated that he heard Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad
al-Hadi (a.s.) saying, ‘The meaning of “rajeem-accursed” that Satan is
described with is that he is stoned with curse, and rejected from every
place of good. No faithful mentions him unless he curses him. In the
eternal knowledge of Allah that when Imam al-Mahdi (al-Qa’im) (a.s.)
will reappears, every believer at his time will stone Satan as he had
been stoned with curse before.’**[2]**

### Mob

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Mob are the killers of the prophets…Allah was
not pleased with them when He compared them to the livestock and said,
***(but they are worse).*****[3]**

Mobs are those groups of people who have no social or religious
understanding. It is they whom tyrannical powers push to kill prophets
and reformers throughout history.

### Words of light

A collection of precious words was narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).
These words are from the wonderful intellectual treasures in Islam, in
which Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) has discussed different educational, moral,
and psychological issues. Here are some of his words:

1. “Better than good is its doer, better than favor is its sayer, and
more preferable than knowledge is its follower.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ma’ani al-Akhbar by as-Saduq.  
 **[2]** Ma’ani al-Akhbar by as-Saduq.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 7:179.

2. He said to one of his servants, ‘Blame so-and-so (friendly) and say
to him: if Allah wants good for someone, He made him be pleased when he
is blamed.’

3. “He, who asks for more than his merit, is worthier of deprivation.”

4. “The rightness of one, who ignores dignity, is his lowness.”

5. “Patience is to possess yourself and control your anger when you are
able to show it.”

6. “People (run their affairs) in this life with money and in the
afterlife with deeds.”

7. “Whoever is pleased with himself, many are those who are displeased
at him.”

8. “Fates show you what you do not imagine.”

9. “The evilest of misfortune is bad morals.”

10. “Wealth is the littleness of wishing and the satisfaction with what
suffices you, poverty is greediness and despair, and lowness is
following the little and looking forward to insignificants.’

11. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked about resolution and he said, ‘It is
to see your opportunity and hurry to achieve it as possible as you can.’

12. “The rider of a reluctant horse is a captive of himself.” He, who
walks in crooked ways, is led by his fancy that throws him into the
abyss of misfortunes.

13. “An ignorant one is a captive of his tongue.’

14. “Disputing destroys old friendship, and unties firm knots. The least
of it is that it leads to hatred which is the first cause of the rupture
of relations.”

15. “Blaming is the key to haughtiness, though it is better than spite.”

16. One of Imam al-Hadi’s companions exaggerated in praising

the imam who said to him, ‘Much flattery attacks discernment. If you are
trusted by your brother, turn from flattery to good will.”

17. “Misfortune for the patient is one, and for the impatient is two.”

18. “Envy eradicates good deeds, and pride brings detestation.”

19. “Self-conceit turns one away from seeking knowledge and leads him to
ignorance.”

20. “Stinginess is the worst of morals, and greediness is a bad nature.”

21. “Associating with the wicked shows the wickedness of one who
associates with them.”

22. “The denying of blessings is a sign of ungratefulness and a cause
for changing (of blessings).”

23. “Importunity takes peacefulness away and leads to regret.”

24. “Mockery is the joking of the foolish and the craft of the
ignorant.”

25. “Undutifulness (to parents) lessens offspring and leads to
meanness.”

26. “Sleeplessness makes sleep more pleasant, and hunger makes food more
delicious.”

27. “Think of your death between your family where no physician shall
defend you and no friend shall benefit you!”

28. “Think of the regrets of wasting to be more determined!”

29. “A niggard and a wise man do not rest.”

30. “There is no cure for corrupted natures.”

31. “He, who cannot prevent, cannot give.”

32. “Worse than evil is its doer and more horrible than horror is an
adventurer into it.”

33. “Beware of envy for it harms you and not your enemy.”

34. “In a time where justice is more than oppression, it is unlawful to
suspect anyone before being certain of that which is suspected of, and
in a time where oppression is more than justice, one should not trust in
anyone except after being certain of him.”

35. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said to al-Mutawakkil (the Abbasid caliph), “Do
not expect good will from one whom you have offended, or loyalty from
one whom you have betrayed, or sincerity from one whom you have
suspected, because the hearts of others towards you are like your heart
towards them.”  

36. “Retain blessings by being good neighbor to them (by spending them
in the right way and helping people through charities), expect more by
being grateful to Allah for them, and know that soul is very willing to
what it is given and very unwilling to what it is prevented from, so
carry it on a sumpter that does not slow.”

37. “Ignorance and niggardliness are the worst of morals.”

38. “Good appearance is apparent beauty and good mind is hidden beauty.”

39. “It is from inadvertence to Allah that one keeps on disobedience and
wishes forgiveness from Allah.”

40. “If people walked in a vast valley, I would walk in a valley of a
man who worshipped Allah alone sincerely.”

41. “The anger at one, over whom you have authority, is meanness.”

42. “A grateful one is happier with gratitude than with the blessing
that requires gratitude, because blessings are enjoyment and gratitude
is a blessing.”

43. “Allah made the worldly life a place of trying and the afterlife a
place of reward. He made the misfortunes of the worldly life as a means
for the reward of the afterlife, and the reward of the

afterlife as a compensation for the misfortunes of the worldly life.”

44. “An understanding oppressor is about to take attentions away from
his oppression through his understanding, and a foolish just man is
about to put out the light of his justice through his foolishness.”

45. “Whoever shows you his sincere love you are to show him your
obedience.”

46. “Do not feel safe from the evil of one who despises himself.”

47. “The world is a market in which some people gain and others lose.”

48. “Think of your death among your family where no physician shall save
you and no lover shall benefit you.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These sayings are quoted from ad-Durr an-Nadhim, al-Ittihaf
Bihubil Ashraf, Bihar al-Anwar, al-Amali of Sheikh at-Toosi, Aa’yan
ash-Shia, Nuzhat an-Nadhir, Tuhaf al-Uqul, al-Amali of Sheikh al-Mufid,
Ma’ani al-Akhbar of Sheikh as-Saduq, Ma’athir al-Kubara’.
