His Companions and the Narrators of His Traditions
==================================================

The vast culture and knowledge of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in all sciences
such as tafsir (commentary of the Qur’an), jurisprudence, Islamic arts,
ethics, and other fields made him the end that scholars and seekers of
knowledge set off towards.

The companions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) represented the true mission of
Islam. They saved the mission of Islam from lose. They associated with
the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) who were the flowing
spring of the essence of Islam. They narrated and recorded their (the
imams’) traditions in their four hundred records (usuls) that were
collected later on in the four books to which the Shia jurisprudents
referred and are still referring to in deriving legal verdicts.

These companions had done the Islamic world a great favor by writing
down the knowledge and literature of the infallible imams (a.s.);
otherwise, that great heritage would be lost and consequently the human
culture and intellect would lose much.

The thing that makes one pride on the jihad of those narrators is that
they associated with the infallible imams (a.s.) and recorded their
traditions in a time that was most critical and full of offense and
oppression. The Umayyad and Abbasid governments went too

far in oppressing the Alawids and their followers and in preventing the
public from associating with them (the Alawids). Those governments, with
no mercy or leniency, chased everyone who tried to spread or talk about
the virtues of the Alawids or narrate their traditions and arrested him
to be killed or to remain in the darkness of prisons forever. Therefore,
narrators refrained from mentioning the names of the infallible imams
from whom they narrated traditions. They referred to them by surnames
one time and by titles other time. They did not declare their real
names.

Anyhow, we mention here the companions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and the
narrators of his traditions with brief accounts on them because this, as
we think, shall complete the study on the imam that it discovers some
important sides of his personality.

#### 1. Ibrahim bin Isaaq

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said that he was reliable.**[1]**    

#### 2. Ibrahim bin Abu Bakr ar-Razi

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[2]**

#### 3. Ibrahim bin Idris

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]** So did al-Barqi.**[4]**

#### 4. Ibrahim bin Dawud al-Ya’qubi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]** Al-Barqi said he was from Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Jawad’s companions.**[6]** Al-Kashshi mentioned him as one of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi, p.409.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi, p.409.  
 **[4]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Barqi.

narrators who narrated from Imam Abul Hasan (a.s.).**[1]**

#### 5. Ibrahim bin Shayba

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** Once, he wrote a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
complaining to him against the deviants from religion who distorted the
Islamic intellect. We shall discuss this matter when we talk about the
age of the imam later on.

#### 6. Ibrahim bin Abdah an-Naysaburi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari’s companions.**[3]** Al-Kashshi said that Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) sent a letter to Isaaq bin Isma’il in which he greeted
Ibrahim bin Abdah and appointed him as his agent to receive the legal
dues.**[4]** Once, Imam al-Askari (a.s.) deputed him to Abdullah bin
Hamdwayh al-Bayhaqi and sent a letter with him saying in it, “I have
sent Ibrahim bin Abdah so that the (other) districts and the people of
your district pay my dues on you to him and made him my trust and agent
before my followers there. Let them fear Allah and pay the dues and they
have no excuse in not doing that or delaying it. May Allah not distress
them for disobeying His guardians and may He have mercy on them and on
you through my mercifulness to them, and Allah is Ample-giving,
Generous.”**[5]**  

#### 7. Ibrahim bin Uqbah

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[6]** and so did al-Barqi.**[7]** He narrated traditions
from Imam Abu Ja’far al-Jawad (a.s.) and Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.).
Sahl bin Ziyad and other narrators narrated from him.**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[5]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.1 p.118.  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[8]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.1 p.121-122.

#### 8. Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris an-Naysaburi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari’s companions.**[1]**

#### 9. Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam ar-Redha, Imam al-Jawad,
and Imam al-Hadi’s companions. Al-Kashshi said he was the agent of Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.). He performed the hajj forty times.**[2]** He was the
agent of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) who wrote to him, “Your account has been
received. May Allah accept from you and be pleased with them and make
them with us in this life and in the afterlife. So-and-so dinars and
so-and-so clothes were sent to you. May Allah bless them for you and
bless every gift He has given to you. I have written to an-Nadhr
ordering him to refrain from troubling and objecting to you and
informing him of your position to me. And I have written to Ayyub
ordering him of the same too. I have written a book to my followers in
Hamadan ordering them to obey you and follow your orders and that I have
no agent (there) except you.”**[3]**

This letter shows that Ibrahim bin Muhammad was so trusted and of a high
position near the imam (a.s.).

#### 10. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Jawad and Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** An-Najashi said he had written a book called
al-Bisharat.**[5]** Al-Kashshi mentioned a tradition narrated by
Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar that he said, “When my father
(Ibrahim) was about to die, he gave me some money and gave me a certain
sign. No one knew about this sign except Allah the Almighty. He said to
me, ‘Whoever show you this sign, you have to give him this money.’ I
went to Baghdad and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Rijal an-Najashi.

stopped at an inn. On the following day, someone came and knocked the
door. I asked the servant to see who he was. The servant said, ‘An old
man at the door.’ I said, ‘Let him come in.’ The old man came in, took a
seat and said, ‘I am al-Umari. Give me the money that is with you which
is so-and-so.’ He showed me the sign and I gave him the money.**[1]**
This tradition shows that Ibrahim was the agent of the imam in receiving
the legal dues and definitely he was fair and reliable in order to be
the imam’s agent.

#### 11. Ibrahim ad-Dahqan

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 12. Ahmad bin Isaaq bin Abdullah al-Ash’ari al-Qummi

He was the deputy of the people of Qum. He narrated traditions from Imam
Abu Ja’far the second (al-Jawad) and Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.). He
was from the close companions of Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.). He
had written some books such as Ilal as-Sawm, Masa’il ar-Rijal of Imam
al-Hadi, and Ilal as-Salat. He was one of those who saw Imam al-Mahdi
(a.s.) and there were many traditions narrated on praising him.

#### 13. Ahmad bin Isaaq ar-Razi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]** He narrated traditions from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and
Sahl bin Ziyad narrated from him.**[4]**  

#### 14. Ahmad bin Isma’il bin Yaqtin

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[5]**

#### 15. Ahmad bin Abu Abdullah al-Barqi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.2 p.48.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Barqi.

companions.**[1]** He narrated about forty traditions.**[2]**

#### 16. Ahmad bin al-Hasan bin Isaaq bin Sa’d

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 17. Ahmad bin al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Fadhdhal

He was eloquent and reliable in traditions. His brother Ali bin al-Hasan
and other Kufi men narrated from him.**[4]** He had written some books
such as the book of Salat (prayer) and the book of Wudu’. He died in
260AH.**[5]**

#### 18. Ahmad bin Hamza bin al-Yasa’ al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]** He narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), Abban bin
Uthman, al-Husayn bin al-Mukhtar, Zakariyya bin Adam, Muhsin bin Ahmad,
and Muhammad bin Ali. Al-Husayn bin Sa’eed, Abdullah bin Ja’far, Ali bin
Mahziyar and other men narrated from him.**[7]**

#### 19. Ahmad bin al-Khadheeb

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[8]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 20. Ahmad bin Zakariyya bin Baba al-Qummi

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[9]**

#### 21. Ahmad bin al-Fadhl

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.2 p.32.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[5]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.2  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 2  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[9]** Rijal al-Barqi.

companions.**[1]**

#### 22. Ahmad bin Muhammad as-Siyadi al-Basri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari’s companions.**[2]**  

#### 23. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa al-Ash’ari al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam ar-Redha, Imam al-Jawad,
and Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[3]** He was the chief and notable of
the people of Qum and was the head who met the rulers. He had written
some books such as at-Tawhid (monotheism), The Virtue of the Prophet,
al-Mut’ah (temporary marriage), an-Nawadir (rarities), an-Nasikh wel
Mansukh (abrogating and abrogated), the Virtues of the Arabs, and other
books.**[4]**

#### 24. Ahmad bin Hilal as-Sabrtani al-Baghdadi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions (or
just a narrator of his traditions). He was accused of
exaggeration.**[5]** Many traditions dispraised him and said that he was
irreligious.

#### 25. Isaaq bin Isma’il bin Noubakht

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[6]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 26. Isaaq bin Muhammad al-Basri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was accused of exaggeration.**[7]** The author of al-Khulasah
said he was from the companions of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) but he was
accused of exaggeration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.

#### 27. Ayyub bin Noah bin Duraj

He was trustworthy and reliable. An-Najashi said, ‘He was an agent of
Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) and Abu Muhammad (al-Askari) (peace be upon them).
He had a high position near them. He was trustworthy, very pious, and a
devoted worshipper. He was reliable in his traditions. His father Noah
bin Duraj was a judge in Kufa and was a true faithful. Jameel bin Duraj
was his brother.’**[1]** Sheikh at-Toosi said, ‘Ayyub bin Noah was
reliable. He had a book and traditions from Abul Hasan the Third (Imam
al-Hadi).’ Al-Kashshi said, ‘He was pious. He left just one hundred and
fifty dinars after his death, though people thought him wealthy. He
narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and many narrators narrated from him.’

#### 28. Bishr bin Bashshar an-Naysaburi

He was the uncle of Abu Abdullah ash-Shathani. He was from Imam
al-Hadi’s companions as Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned in his Rijal. He
narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), and Sahl narrated from him.**[2]**

#### 29. Ja’far bin Ahmad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[3]** and so did al-Barqi. He narrated from Muhammad bin
Ali, and Ali bin Ibrahim al-Qummi narrated from him in his
Tafsir.**[4]**

#### 30. Ja’far bin Ibrahim bin Noah

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions,**[5]** and
so did Sheikh at-Toosi.

#### 31. Ja’far bin Abdullah bin al-Husayn bin Jami’ al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions. He
communicated through letters with Imam al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 3 p.307.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi, p.411.  
 **[4]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.4 p.49.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Barqi.

Mahdi (a.s.).**[1]**

#### 32. Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Isma’il bin al-Khattab

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[2]** and so did al-Barqi. Sheikh at-Toosi said that once,
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote him a letter.**[3]**

#### 33. Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Younus al-Ahwal as-Sayrafi

He narrated from Imam Abu Ja’far the second (al-Jawad). He had written a
book.**[4]** Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 34. Hatim bin al-Faraj

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]**

#### 35. Al-Hasan bin Ja’far

He was known as Abu Talib al-Fafani. He was from Baghdad. Sheikh
at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions, and also he
mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hasan al-Askari’s companions.**[7]**

#### 36. Al-Hasan bin al-Hasan al-Alawi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[8]**

#### 37. Al-Hasan bin al-Husayn al-Alawi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.4 p.307.  
 **[3]** At-Tahthib.  
 **[4]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Ibid.  
 **[9]** Rijal at-Toosi.

#### 38. Al-Hasan bin Kharzath

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]** An-Najashi said, ‘He narrated too many traditions. He
had written a book called “the names of the messenger of Allah” and a
book called “al-Mut’ah-temporary marriage”. It was said that he was
excessive at the end of his life.’**[2]**

#### 39. Abu Ali al-Hasan bin Rashid

He was a reliable man from Baghdad. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one
of Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[3]** Sheikh al-Mufid said he was one of
the famous jurisprudents and chiefs from whom people took the verdicts
of halal and haram and who were uncriticized and unblameable.**[4]**Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) appointed him as his agent and sent him many letters.
Here are some of them:

1. Al-Kashshi mentioned that Muhammad bin Eesa al-Yaqtini said, “Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote a letter to Ali bin Bilal in 232AH saying in it,
‘‘I praise Allah and thank Him for his might and mercy and pray Him to
have blessing and mercy on Muhammad the Prophet and on his progeny. I
have appointed Abu Ali in the position of al-Husayn bin Abd Rabbih and
entrusted him with that for the knowledge he has that no one is
preferred to him. I know you are the chief of your district and so I
wanted to honor you by writing this book on that to you. You have to
obey him and deliver to him all the dues that are with you. You have to
inform my manumitted slaves and recommend them of that, for this will
support and suffice him and save us efforts and please us. Doing this,
you will have the reward of Allah and Allah gives whoever He likes. He
is the Giver, Who rewards with His mercy and you are in the trust of
Allah. I have written this letter with my handwriting

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ar-Risalah al-Adadiyyah.

and I praise Allah too much.”**[1]**

This letter shows the reliability, trustworthiness, and virtue of
al-Hasan bin Rashid where Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) ordered his followers to
obey, follow, and pay the legal dues to him.

2. Al-Kashshi mentioned that Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa said, ‘I copied
the book that was with ibn Rashid to the mawali who lived in Baghdad,
Mada’in, and the villages around. This is the text of the letter:

‘I praise Allah for the health and soundness I am in, and pray Him to
have blessing, all mercy, and kindness on His Prophet and his progeny. I
have appointed Abu Ali bin Rashid in place of Ali bin al-Husayn bin Abd
Rabbih who was my agent before, and now he (Abu Ali bin Rashid) has the
position of his predecessor. I have entrusted him with what I had
entrusted my previous agents with to receive my rights from you. I have
accepted him to you and preferred him to the others in that, and he is
well-qualified for this job. May Allah have mercy on you, pay the dues
to him and to me and do not make an excuse on yourselves. Hurry to obey
Allah, make your monies lawful, spare your bloods, help one another in
goodness and piety, and fear Allah that you may find mercy, and hold
fast by the covenant of Allah all together and do not die unless you are
Muslims. Obeying him is as obeying me, and disobeying him is as
disobeying me. Keep to the right path that Allah may reward you and give
you more from His favor, for Allah is Ample-giving, Generous, and He is
Gracious and Merciful to His people. May we and you be in the trust and
preservation of Allah. I have written it with my handwriting, and too
much praise be to Allah.’**[2]**

3. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) sent a letter to Ayyub bin Noah saying,

“O Ayyub, I order you to stop disputation between you and Abu

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

Ali, and that each of you should keep to what he has been entrusted with
and ordered to manage the affairs of his district. If you follow all
that which I have ordered you of, you will no longer need to refer to
me. O Abu Ali, I order you of the same as I have ordered Ayyub. Do not
accept anything from anyone from the people of Baghdad and the other
villages. Order anyone coming to you from other than your district to
carry the dues to the very agent of his own district. O Abu Ali, I order
you as I have ordered Ayyub. Let each of you do as I have ordered
him!’**[1]**

Definitely, Abu Ali bin Rashid had a respectable position near Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.), and certainly he did not obtained that position except
through his piety and religiousness. When bin Rashid died, Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) prayed Allah to have mercy on him, to forgive, and be pleased
with him.

#### 40. Al-Hasan bin Dharif

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** An-Najashi said, ‘Al-Hasan bin Dharif bin Nasif was a
reliable man from Kufa. He and his father lived in Baghdad. It is said
that he has a book on rarities. Many narrators narrated from
him.’**[3]** 

#### 41. Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Umar bin Ali bin al-Husayn bin Ali bin Abu Talib

He was called an-Nasir lil-Haqq. He was from Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** The author of Sharh al-Masa’il an-Nasiriyyat says,
‘Abu Muhammad an-Nasir al-Hasan bin Ali was virtuous for his vast
knowledge and asceticism. His jurisprudence was brighter than the bright
sun. It was he who spread Islam in ad-Daylam and made its people be
guided by him after deviation. His splendid biography is more than to be
accounted, and more obvious than to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.

be hidden.’**[1]**

#### 42. Al-Hasan bin Ali al-Washsha’

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** An-Najashi said, ‘He was the son of the daughter of
Elyas as-Sayrafi al-Khazzaz. Al-Hasan narrated from his grandfather
Elyas that he said when he was about to die, ‘Witness on me, and this
moment is not of lying, that I heard Abu Abdullah (as-Sadiq) (peace be
upon him) saying: By Allah, Fire will not touch one, who loves Allah and
His messenger and believes in the imams, after his death.”

Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa said, ‘Once, I went to Kufa seeking Hadith.
I met there al-Hasan bin Ali al-Washsha’ and asked him to show me the
books of al-Ala’ bin Razin al-Qalla and Abban bin Uthman al-Ahmar. He
gave me the two books and I asked him to permit me to copy them. He said
to me, ‘O man, why are you in a hurry? Go and copy them.’ I said, ‘I
fear accidents.’ He said, ‘If I knew that this tradition would be
requested so much, I would write much more. I met in this mosque (the
mosque of Kufa) nine hundred sheikhs that each of them said: Ja’far bin
Muhammad (Imam as-Sadiq) said to me…This man was a notable scholar of
the sect (the Shia) and had written some books such as “the Reward of
the Hajj”, “al-Manasik”, and a book of rarities.’**[3]**

#### 43. Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Uthman as-Sajjadah

He was excessive. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** From his excessiveness was that Nasr bin as-Sabah
said, ‘One day, al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Uthman as-Sajjadah said to me,
‘What do you say about Muhammad bin Abu Zaynab and Muhammad bin Abdullah
bin Abdul Muttalib (the Prophet) (peace be upon him and upon his
progeny)? Which of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.5 p.30-31.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.

them is better?’ I said to him, ‘You say!’ He said, ‘Muhammad bin Abu
Zaynab (is better). Do you not see that Allah the Almighty has blamed
Muhammad bin Abdullah (the Prophet) (peace be upon him and upon his
progeny) on some occasions in the Qur'an, but He has not blamed Muhammad
bin Abu Zaynab? Allah has said to Muhammad bin Abdullah, **(And if We
had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have inclined unto
them a little)**,**[1]** and **(If thou ascribe a partner to Allah, thy
work will fail and thou indeed wilt be among the losers)**,**[2]** and
in other verses, and He has not blamed Muhammad bin Abu Zaynab for
anything of that.’ Abu Amr said, ‘On as-Sajjadah be the curse of Allah,
of cursors, of the angels, and of people altogether. He was from the
Aliya’ites who criticized the messenger of Allah (a.s.) and who had no
share in Islam.’**[3]** This tradition shows the bad beliefs of this
man.

#### 44. Al-Hasan bin Muhammad al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** Al-Kashshi said, ‘Abu Muhammad al-Fadhl bin Shathan
mentioned in one of his books: “From the famous liars is ibn Baba
al-Qummi. Sa’d said that al-Ubaydi said to him, ‘Once, (Imam) al-Askari
wrote to me saying: I am free before Allah from al-Fihri and al-Hasan
bin Muhammad bin Baba al-Qummi, and you also be free from them. I warn
you and all my followers from them. I curse them. The curse of Allah be
on them. They extort the monies of people in the name of us. They are
mischievous and harmful. May Allah harm them and plunge them into
mischief. Ibn Baba pretends that I have sent him as a prophet and that
he is a “bab”.**[5]** The curse of Allah be on him. Satan has mocked at
him and deceived him. Allah curses whoever accepts that from him. O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 17:74.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 39:65.  
 **[3]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** In early Shiism “bab” denotes the senior authorized disciple of
the imam.

Muhammad, if you are able to split his head with a rock, you do. He has
harmed me. May Allah harm him in this life and in the afterlife.’**[1]**
Ibn Baba was deviant from the truth and from religion and he harmed the
imam with the heresies he originated.

#### 45. Al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Hayy

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** He seemed to be a Twelver Shia, but he was unknown.

#### 46. Al-Hasan bin Muhammad al-Mada’ini

He was from the companions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).**[3]**

#### 47. Al-Husayn bin Asad an-Nahdi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[4]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 48. Al-Husayn bin Asad al-Basri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]** Al-Barqi said he was from the companions of Imam
al-Jawad (a.s.) and said he was reliable and truthful.**[6]**

#### 49. Al-Husayn bin Ashkib

An-Najashi said, ‘Al-Husayn bin Ashkib was a reliable, preferable sheikh
from Khurasan. Abu Amr mentioned him in his book “ar-Rijal” as one of
the companions of Imam Abul Hasan al-Mahdi (a.s.). Al-Ayyashi narrated
many traditions from him and considered his traditions as true and said
he was trustworthy.**[7]** Al-Kashshi said, ‘He was a theologian,
scholars, and author of some books.’**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[7]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[8]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 50. Al-Husayn bin Ubaydillah al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was accused of excessiveness.**[1]** Al-Kashshi said, ‘He was
exiled from Qum at the time when those, who were accused of
excessiveness, were exiled.’**[2]**

#### 51. Al-Husayn bin Malik al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[3]**

#### 52. Al-Husayn bin Muhammad al-Mada’ini

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[4]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 53. Hafs al-Marwazi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 54. Hamdan bin Sulayman bin Umayrah an-Naysaburi

He was known as at-Tajir. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam
al-Hadi’s companions.**[6]** An-Najashi said, ‘Hamdan bin Sulayman Abu
Sa’eed an-Nayshaburi was a reliable man from the notables of our
companions.’**[7]**

#### 55. Hamza bin Sulayman bin Rasheed

He was from Baghdad. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam
al-Hadi’s companions.**[8]**

#### 56. Khalil bin Hashim al-Farisi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.

companions.**[1]**

#### 57. Khayran bin Isaaq az-Zakani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 58. Khayran al-Khadim

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable,**[3]** and so did al-Barqi. He had a high position
near Imam al-Jawad (a.s.). Al-Kashshi mentioned some of his traditions
with Imam al-Jawad (a.s.).

#### 59. Dawud bin Abu Zayd

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable, truthful, and religious. He had written some books
as mentioned by al-Kashshi and ibn an-Nadim.**[4]**

#### 60. Dawud bin al-Qassim al-Ja’fari

He was from Baghdad and surnamed as Abu Hashim. He was notable and had a
high position near the imams (a.s.). He met Imam ar-Redha, Imam
al-Jawad, Imam al-Hadi, Imam al-Askari, and Imam al-Mahdi (peace be upon
them). He narrated traditions from them all. He had composed poetry on
the imams and written a book. He was preferred by rulers. Al-Barqi
mentioned him as one of Imam al-Jawad, al-Hadi, and Imam al-Askari’s
companions.**[5]** Al-Kashshi said, ‘Abu Amr said that Dawud had a
respectable, high position near Abu Ja’far (al-Jawad), Abul Hasan
(al-Hadi), and Abu Muhammad (al-Askari) (peace be upon them).’**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.7 p.92.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 61. Dawud bin Sakhinah as-Sarimi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[1]** and so did al-Barqi. An-Najashi said, ‘He narrated
traditions from Imam ar-Redha (a.s.) and remained alive until the days
of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and he had letters on some questions with
him.’**[2]**

#### 62. Raja’ bin Yahya bin Saman Abul Husayn al-Aqraba’iy

He narrated traditions from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He narrated a thesis
called al-Maqna’ah on the laws of the Sharia that was narrated from him
by Abul Mufadhdhal ash-Shaybani.**[3]**

#### 63. Ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam ar-Redha and Imam al-Hadi’s
companions and said he was reliable.**[4]** Al-Kashshi mentioned that
Ma’mar bin Khallad said, ‘Ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt, when al-Fadhl bin Sahl
wanted to send him to one of the districts of Khurasan, said to me, ‘I
want you to ask permission for me to come in to Abul Hasan (peace be on
him) to greet and farewell him. I like him to give me from his clothes
and some dirhams that have been coined with his name.’ When I went to
him (to Imam al-Hadi), he immediately said to me, ‘O Ma’mar, Where is
Rayyan? Does he like to come to us so that I give him from my clothes
and from my dirhams?’ I said, ‘Glory be to Allah! By Allah, he just
asked me to ask you for that.’ He said, ‘O Ma’mar, the faithful are
successful. Ask him to come!’ I asked him to come in and he did. He
greeted Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), who gave him one of his garments. When he
came out, I found thirty dirhams in his hand.’**[5]** This tradition
shows that he was faithful and trustworthy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 64. As-Sariy bin Salamah al-Isfahani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he had written a book.**[1]**

#### 65. Sulayman bin Hafswayh

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions, and
so did al-Barqi.**[2]**  

#### 66. Sulayman bin Dawud al-Marwazi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 67. As-Sindi bin Muhammad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]**

#### 68. Abu Sa’eed Sahl bin Ziyad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[5]** An-Najashi said, ‘He was weak in traditions
and unreliable. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa accused him of excessiveness
and lying, and he exiled him from Qum where he lived to ar-Riy. He wrote
to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari through Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid
al-Attar. He had written a book called at-Tawhid (monotheism) that was
narrated by Abul Hasan al-Abbas bin Ahmad bin al-Fadhl bin Muhammad
al-Hashimy as-Salihi from his father from Abu Sa’eed al-Adami, and he
also had a book on rarities.’**[6]**

Ibnul Ghadha’iri said about him, ‘He was very weak in narrations and of
bad beliefs. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa al-Ash’ari exiled him from Qum,
announced that he was free from him, and forbade people from listening
to him or narrating from him. He

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi, Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Rijal an-Najashi.

narrated mursal**[1]** traditions and depended on unknown
narrators.’**[2]**

#### 69. Abu Nu’as Sahl bin Ya’qub bin Isaaq

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said that he served Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in Surra Man Ra’a and managed
his affairs. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said to him, ‘You are Abu Nu’as of the
truth.’**[3]**

#### 70. Shahwayh bin Abdullah

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** He narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and Isaaq bin
Muhammad narrated from him the tradition of the appointing of Al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) as the imam after his father.**[5]**  

#### 71. Abul Khayr Salih bin Salamah ar-Razi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]**  

#### 72. Salih bin Eesa bin Umar bin Bazi’

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[7]**

#### 73. Salih bin Muhammad al-Hamadani

He was reliable. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[8]** and so did al-Barqi. Ibn Shahrashub said that he was
from the trustworthy companions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A mursal tradition is a tradition that is narrated with a cut
series of narrators.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.8 p.340.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi, p.415.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Usul al-Kafi.  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[9]** Al-Manaqib.

#### 74. Abdus al-Attar

He was from Kufa. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]**  

#### 75. Abdurrahman bin Muhammad bin Tayfur

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 76. Abdurrahman bin Muhammad bin Ma’ruf al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 77. Abd as-Samad al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]**

#### 78. Sharif Abdul Adheem al-Hasani

He was from the Prophet’s progeny. He was knowledgeable, pious, and
religious. Here we talk in brief about him.

#### His lineage

His lineage belongs to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Talib
(a.s.), the master of the inhabitant of the Paradise and beloved of the
Prophet (a.s.). He was the son of Abdullah bin Ali bin al-Hasan bin Zayd
bin al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s.).**[5]** Definitely, there was
no lineage in the world higher or more honorable than this lineage with
which Allah had honored the Arabs and the Muslims.

**His reliability and knowledge**

He was reliable, fair, very religious, virtuous jurisprudent. Abu Turab
ar-Rouyani said, ‘I heard Abu Hammad ar-Razi saying: Once, I went to Ali
bin Muhammad (al-Hadi) (a.s.) in Surra Man Ra’a and asked about some
things of halal and haram and he

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Rijal an-Najashi.

answered them for me. When I said goodbye, he said to me, ‘O Hammad, if
there is something dubious to you in the matters of religion in your
district, ask Abdul Adheem al-Hasani about it and give him my regards.’
This tradition show that Abdul Adheem was of good knowledge and
jurisprudence.

**His meeting with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)**

He had the honor of meeting with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and showing him his
beliefs. He said to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), ‘O son of the messenger of
Allah, I want to show you my religion (beliefs). If it pleases you, I
will fix on it.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) smiled at him and said, ‘O Abul Qassim, speak out!’

Abdul Adheem said, ‘I say: there is nothing whatever like Allah the
Almighty. He is free from the two limits; the limit of ta’til (making
Allah a bare unity) and the limit of tashbih (the comparing of Allah to
the creatures). He is neither a mass, nor a shape, nor a show, nor a
substance, but He is the Embodier of masses, the Shaper of shapes, the
Creator of shows and substances, the Lord, the Owner, the Maker, and the
Former of all things.

Muhammad, His slave and messenger, is the last of prophets. There is no
prophet after him until the Day of Resurrection, and his religion is the
last of religions that there is no religion after it until the Day of
Resurrection. And I say: the imam, caliph, and guardian after him (after
the Prophet) is Ameerul Mo’minin Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s.), and then
al-Hasan, and then al-Husayn, and then Ali bin al-Husayn, and then
Muhammad bin Ali, and then Ja’far bin Muhammad, and then Musa bin
Ja’far, and then Ali bin Musa, and then Muhammad bin Ali, and then you
my master.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) turned to him and said, ‘And after me is my son
al-Hasan. What shall people do with the successor (Imam al-Mahdi) after
him?’

Abdul Adheem said, ‘How is that my master?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Because he shall not be seen, and it shall be
not permissible to mention him by his name, until he will reappear to
fill the world with justice and fairness after it is filled with
injustice and oppression.’

Abdul Adheem said, ‘I acknowledge that and say: their guardian is the
guardian of Allah, their enemy is the enemy of Allah, obeying them is
the obedience of Allah, and disobeying them is the disobedience of
Allah…and I say: the Prophet’s ascension (to the Heavens) is true, the
questioning in the grave is true, the Paradise is true, the Hell is
true, the Right Way (sirat)**[1]** is true, the Scale is true, the Day
of Resurrection will come undoubtedly, and Allah will resurrect all
those in graves.

I say: the obligations after the guardianship (to the imams of the Ahlul
Bayt) are prayer, fasting, zakat, hajj, jihad, enjoining the right, and
forbidding the wrong.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘O Abul Qassim, by Allah this is the religion
of Allah which He has determined for His people. Keep to it, may Allah
fix you on the truth in this life and in the afterlife.’**[2]**

**His flight to ar-Riy**

When the Abbasid government exaggerated in chasing and oppressing the
Alawids, Abdul Adheem fled to ar-Riy to be safe from the evils of the
Abbasids. He lived in the house of a notable man from the Shia.
Historians said that there he devoted himself to worship. He fasted in
the day and spent the night worshipping and supplicating his Lord like
his fathers who spent their night worshipping and supplicating.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sirat is a bridge that dominates Hell on the Day of
Resurrection.  
 **[2]** Amali of Sheikh as-Saduq, and mentioned in brief in Wassa’il
ash-Shia, vol.1 p.13.

During his residing in ar-Riy he went in disguise to visit the tomb of
one of Imam Musa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim’s sons**[1]** who was, as we
think, Sayyid Ahmad known as Shah Jiragh. The Shia, who lived in ar-Riy,
knew about the coming of Abdul Adheem and so they visited him
secretly**[2]** for fear of the government.

**His death**

Sayyid Abdul Adheem lived in ar-Riy for some time fearfully and his self
was full of sorrow and pain for his cousins who met different kinds of
injustice and oppression from the Abbasids who bore enmity and grudge
against the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). They (the Abbasids) denied them and
denied all their rights and they poured on them all kinds of misfortunes
and distresses.

Sharif Abdul Adheem became seriously ill and suffered severe pains, the
bitterest of which was his remoteness from his relatives and country.
Death came near to him but his tongue was still mentioning and praising
Allah. He left this life in loneliness where no one from his family was
with him.

With his death a bright page from the pages of the Islamic jihad was
folded and that flame, which lit the way for people towards their honor
and dignity, was put out.

The people of ar-Riy of all classes hastened to escort the honored
corpse of the Alawid master. The funerals were held splendidly and the
sacred body was carried to its last and eternal abode. They built him a
great shrine that was and is still visited by hundreds of visitors every
day.

#### 79. Abu Amr Uthman bin Sa’eed al-Umari as-Samman

He was trustworthy and pious. He served Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) since he was
eleven years old.**[3]** He had a high position near the imam (a.s.).
Ahmad bin Isaaq al-Qummi said, ‘One day, I went to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.

Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad (Imam al-Hadi) (blessings be on him) and
said to him: O my master, some times I am here and some times I am not.
I cannot come to you at every time. Whose sayings do we accept and whose
orders do we follow?’

He said, ‘This is Abu Amr the trustworthy, the faithful. Whatever he
says to you is from me and whatever he informs you of is in behalf of
me.’

When Abul Hasan (a.s.) died, I referred to his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) and asked him one day as I had asked his father before.
He said to me, ‘This is Abu Amr the trustworthy, the faithful. He is the
trust of the formers and my trust in life and death. Whatever he says to
you is from me and whatever he informs you of is in behalf of
me.’**[1]**

This tradition shows that he had a high position and was trusted by the
infallible imams (a.s.) besides that it shows his virtue and knowledge
and that he was an authority of fatwas and religious verdicts.

#### 80. Urwa bin Yahya ad-Dahqan

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions,**[2]** so
did Sheikh at-Toosi but he said that he was cursed and
perfidious.**[3]** Al-Kashshi mentioned that Muhammad bin Musa
al-Hamadani said that Urwa bin Yahya al-Baghdadi known as ad-Dahqan, the
curse of Allah be on him, fabricated lies against Abul Hasan Ali bin
Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.) and Abu Muhammad bin Ali al-Askari (a.s.) after
him and took their monies for himself. He fabricated lies against Abu
Muhammad until he cursed him and ordered his followers to curse and pray
Allah against him.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ghaybah.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 81. Ali bin Ibrahim al-Hamadani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]** He narrated from Abdullah bin Hammad al-Ansari and
his son Muhammad narrated from him.**[2]** 

#### 82. Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim al-Qummi[3] 

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions. He
was one of the prominent personalities of knowledge in his age and he
had written many books.

#### 83. Abul Hasan Ali bin Abu Qurrah

  Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]**

#### 84. Ali bin Bilal al-Baghdadi

He narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and had written a book.**[5]**
Al-Kashshi said, ‘I found a book with the handwriting of Jabra’il bin
Ahmad that Muhammad bin Eesa al-Yaqtini said, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote
to Ali bin Bilal in 232Ah: “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. I praise Allah and thank Him for his might and mercy and pray
Him to have blessing and mercy on Muhammad the Prophet and on his
progeny. I have appointed Abu Ali in the position of al-Husayn bin Abd
Rabbih and entrusted him with that for the knowledge he has that no one
is preferred to him. I know you are the chief of your district and so I
wanted to honor you by writing this book on that to you. You have to
obey him and deliver to him all the dues that are with you and you have
to inform my manumitted slaves and recommend them of that for this will
support and suffice him and save us efforts and please us. Doing this,
you will have the reward of Allah and Allah gives whoever He likes. He
is the Giver, Who rewards with His mercy and you are in the trust of
Allah. I have written this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.11 p.222.  
 **[3]** Ibid. p.203.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Rijal an-Najashi.

letter with my handwriting and I praise Allah too much.”**[1]**

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote this book to Ali bin Bilal for his reliability
and fairness and for his great love to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Ali bin Bilal narrated from Muhammad bin Isma’il bin Bazee’, and
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Yahya narrated from him a tradition on the virtue
of the ziyara of the believers and how it is done.**[2]**

#### 85. Ali bin Ja’far al-Hamadani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was his agent and was reliable.**[3]** An-Najashi said, ‘He had
some questions to Abul Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).’**[4]** Sheikh at-Toosi
considered him as one of the praised deputies (of Imam al-Mahdi) and
said, ‘He was a good, virtuous man from the agents of Abul Hasan (Imam
al-Hadi) and Abu Muhammad (Imam al-Askari) (peace be on them).**[5]**
Ahmad bin Ali ar-Razi narrated that Ali bin Mukhallad al-Ayadi said,
‘Abu Ja’far al-Umari said to me that once Abu Tahir bin Bilal went to
perform the hajj and he saw Ali bin Ja’far spend too much money. When he
went back, he wrote to Abu Muhammad (Imam al-Askari) (a.s.) about that
and Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied to him: ‘We have ordered to give him one
hundred thousand dinars and then another one hundred thousand dinars but
he refused to take them so that we would keep them for people…He went to
Abul Hasan (a.s.) and he ordered to give him thirty thousand
dinars.’**[6]**  

He was preferred by Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Once, there was a dispute
between him and Faris. Ibrahim bin Muhammad wrote to the imam (a.s.)
telling him about that and asking him to show him

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.11 p.301.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[5]** Al-Ghaybah.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

which of them he should follow. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him
saying, “It should not be asked about one like this man and he should
never be doubted. The position of Ali bin Ja’far is so great to us. May
Allah please us with him. He is far above to be compared with others. Go
to Ali bin Ja’far to satisfy your needs, and fear Faris and do not let
him interfere in your affairs. Let you and those who follow you from the
people of your country do that. I have been informed of what he (Faris)
misrepresented to people. Do not pay attention to him inshallah!’**[1]**

One day, there was a dispute between Ali bin Ja’far and ibn al-Qazwini.
Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Hamadani wrote a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
telling him about that and asking him to show him which of them he
should follow. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied to him saying,

“It should not be asked about one like this man, and there is no doubt
in him. Allah has glorified the position of the patient (Ali bin Ja’far)
where al-Qazwini is compared to him! Go to him to satisfy your requests
and questions and let those who follow you go to him to satisfy their
needs and answer their questions and to avoid al-Qazwini and not let him
interfere in their affairs for I have been informed of what he
fabricated among people. Do not pay him any attention inshalah!’**[2]**

In a previous chapter we have mentioned the prayer of Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) for Ali bin Ja’far when he was in prison and that the prayer was
responded to and Ali was freed from prison.

#### 86. Ali bin al-Hasan

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.

#### 87. Ali bin al-Hasan bin Fadhdhal

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]** An-Najashi said, ‘He was the best jurisprudent of our
companions in Kufa and one of the notables there. He was trustworthy and
the most aware of Hadith among them. Our companions listened to and
obeyed him. Many traditions were heard from him. No fault was found in
him and he was accused of nothing. He seldom narrated from a weak
narrator. He was Fatahite**[2]** and did not narrate from his father any
tradition. When I was eighteen years, I discussed with him on his books,
but at that time I did not understand traditions and did not permit
myself to narrate them before him. He narrated from his two brothers who
narrated from their father.

He had written many books such as the book of “Wudu’”, “Haydh and Nafas;
menstruation and puerperium”, “Salat; prayer”, “Zakat and Khums”,
“Fasting”, “Manasik (rituals of) al-Hajj”, “Divorce”, “Nikah; marriage”
and others.’**[3]**

Al-Kashshi said, ‘Abu Amr said: I asked Abu an-Nadhr Muhammad bin
Mas’oud about all those narrators and he said, ‘As for Ali bin al-Hasan
bin Ali bin Fadhdhal, I did not see among those whom I had met in Iraq
and Khurasan one more knowledgeable or better than Ali bin al-Hasan (who
was) in Kufa. There was no book about the imams (a.s.) unless he had a
copy of it. He was the best of memorizers, but he was a Fatahite
believing in Abdullah bin Ja’far (as the imam) and then after him Abul
Hasan Musa (a.s.). He was reliable.’**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** A sect believing that Abdullah al-Aftah the son of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (s) was the imam after his father.  
 **[3]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[4]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 88. Ali bin al-Hasan bin Abd Rabbih

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[1]** and so did al-Barqi.**[2]**

#### 89. Ali bin al-Husayn al-Hamadani

He was reliable. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[3]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 90. Ali bin Ramees al-Baghdadi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
added that he was weak.**[4]**

#### 91. Ali bin ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt al-Ash’ari al-Qummi

He was reliable. He had a copy of the traditions of Imam Abul Hasan the
Third (a.s.) and a book of different traditions. Sheikh at-Toosi
mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions,**[5]** and so did
al-Barqi.**[6]**

#### 92. Ali bin Ziyad as-Saymari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[7]** Muhammad bin Ya’qub narrated from Ali bin Muhammad
that Abu Aqeel Eesa bin Nasr said, ‘Ali bin Ziyad as-Saymari wrote (to
Imam al-Hadi) asking him for a shroud and he replied to him, “You shall
need it in the year eighty.” He sent him the shroud some days before his
death.’**[8]**

#### 93. Ali bin Shira

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[7]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[8]** Ibid.  
 **[9]** Ibid.

#### 94. Ali bin Abdul Ghaffar

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[1]** and so did al-Barqi.**[2]**

#### 95. Ali bin Abdullah

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 96. Ali bin Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]**

#### 97. Ali bin Abdullah az-Zubayri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 98. Ali bin Ubaydillah

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companion,**[6]** and so
did Sheikh at-Toosi.**[7]**

#### 99. Ali bin Amr al-Attar al-Qazwini

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[8]** and so did al-Barqi. He was one of the narrators who
narrated the tradition of the announcing of the imamate of Imam Abu
Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) by his father after him.**[9]**

#### 100. Ali bin Muhammad bin Ziyad as-Saymari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[10]** The author of Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith saw that Ali
bin Ziyad as-Saymari mentioned before and this Ali bin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[7]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[8]** Ibid.  
 **[9]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.11 p.114.  
 **[10]** Rijal at-Toosi.

Muhammad as-Saymari were but the same man and not two.**[1]**

#### 101. Ali bin Muhammad bin ash-Shuja’ an-Naysaburi

 He narrated traditions from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).**[2]**

#### 102. Ali bin Muhammad bin Shirah al-Qashani

Sheikh at-Toosi said he was weak from Isfahan from the children of Ziyad
the mawla of Abdullah bin Abbas from aal Khalid bin al-Azhar.**[3]**
Al-Barqi mentioned him as Ali bin Muhammad al-Qashani and said he was
from Imam al-Hadi’s companions. An-Najashi said, ‘He was a virtuous
jurisprudent of too many traditions. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa
criticized him and said he heard from him denied beliefs. He had written
some books such as “Prayer”, and “al-Jami’” which was a big book on
jurisprudence.’

#### 103. Ali bin Muhammad al-Minqari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** An-Najashi said he was reliable from Kufa and had
written a book on rarities.**[5]**

#### 104. Ali bin Muhammad an-Nawfali

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[6]** and so did al-Barqi.**[7]** He narrated from Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) and Ahmad bin Muhammad narrated from him.**[8]**

#### 105. Ali bin Mahziyar al-Ahwazi ad-Dawraqi

He was from the prominent ulama and one of the famous disciples of Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.). Here, we talk in brief about him:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.12 p.154.  
 **[2]** Ibid. p.60.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[8]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.12 p.193.

**His worship**

Ali bin Mahziyar was unequaled in his piety and obedience. Narrators
said that from his worshipping was that when the sun rose, he prostrated
himself to Allah and he did not raise his head from prostration until he
prayed Allah for one thousand of his brothers as he prayed for himself.
On his forehead there was like the knee of a camel because of his much
prostration for Allah.**[1]**

**Imam al-Jawad praises him**

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) praised Ali bin Mahziyar on some occasions. Once,
he wrote him a letter saying,

‘O Ali, I have tested you and tried you in loyalty, obedience, service,
reverence and performance of your duties and if I say that I have not
seen anyone like you, I might be truthful. May Allah reward you with the
Gardens of Paradise. Neither your position nor your services in the hot
and cold and in the day and night have been unknown to me. I pray Allah,
when He will gather the creatures on the Day of Punishment, to have
enviable mercy on you. He is the Hearer of prayer.’**[2]**

**His works**

He had written a good collection of books showing his abundant
knowledge. From among these books are the following: Wudu’, Prayer,
Zakat, Fasting, Hajj, Divorce, Punishments, Blood Money, at-Tafsir, The
Virtues, Setting Slaves Free and Management, Gains, Defects,
Supplication, Courtesy and Chivalry, al-Mazar (shrine), Refuting the
excessive, Recommendations, Inheritances, Khums, Witnesses, the Virtues
of the Believers, Heroism, Reservation (Taqiyya), Hunting and
Slaughtering, Asceticism, Drinks, Vows and Oaths and Penances, Letters
(huroof), al-Qa’im (al-Mahdi), Good Tidings, Prophets, Rarities, the
Letters of Ali bin Asbat, and other books. Most of these books are on

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi, vol.2 p.825.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

jurisprudential subjects which show that he was one of the great
jurisprudents in Islam.

**His narrations**

Ali bin Mahziyar narrated about 437 traditions from Imam al-Jawad
(a.s.), Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), and others.**[1]** He was from the pillars
of the Shiite culture and was nonesuch among the scholars and ulama of
his age.

#### 106. Ali bin Yahya ad-Dahqan

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was accused of excessiveness.**[2]**

#### 107. Eesa bin Ahmad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[3]** and narrated from him many traditions, from which was
this one: ‘Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad al-Askari (al-Hadi) told me from
his father from his fathers that (Imam) Ali (a.s.) said, ‘The messenger
of Allah (blessing and peace be upon him) said (to Ali): let him, who
likes to meet Allah safe and pure, and the supreme horror not to grieve
him, follow you and your sons al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Ali bin al-Husayn,
Muhammad bin Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Musa,
Muhammad, Ali, al-Hasan, and then al-Mahdi who is the last of
them.’**[4]**

#### 108. Faris bin Hatim al-Qazwini

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions (or
just a narrator of his traditions) and added that he was cursed,
excessive.**[5]** Al-Kashshi mentioned that Nasr bin as-Sabah said,
‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) cursed al-Hasan bin Muhammad known as ibn Baba,
Muhammad bin Nusayr an-Namiri, and Faris

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.12 p.194.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Al-Ghaybah.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.

bin Hatim al-Qazwini.’**[1]**

Many traditions were related to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) on cursing this man
and warning the Shia from associating with him because he was a source
of deviation and error. Here are some of those traditions:

1. Urwah wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about Faris and he said, ‘Deny
what he says and disgrace him. May Allah exclude and disgrace him. He is
a liar in all that he claims. But keep yourselves away from arguing with
him or consulting with him. Do not give him way for evil. May Allah save
us from his burden and the burden of his like.’**[2]**

2. Ibrahim bin Dawud al-Ya’qubi wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) about him
and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) replied, ‘Pay him no attention, and when he
comes to you, dishonor him!’**[3]** 

We shall mention his deviant opinions when we shall study the age of the
imam in a coming chapter

Anyhow, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) ordered his followers to kill this deviant,
misguiding man when saying, ‘Who will relieve me by killing him and I
assure Paradise for him by the will of Allah?’**[4]**

#### 109. Al-Fat~h bin Yazid al-Jirjani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[5]** and so did al-Barqi.**[6]** An-Najashi said that he
was the author of “the Questions” or might be “the Answers of the
Questions” –as we think- that Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was asked about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Rijal al-Barqi.

#### 110. Al-Fadhl bin Shathan an-Nayshaburi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]** He was from the great ulama and the most prominent
men of the Islamic intellect in his time. He studied and dealt with
different sciences and arts and wrote books on them. Here we shall
mention, in brief, some points on him:

**Imam al-Hasan praises him**

Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) praised al-Fadhl bin Shathan. When once,
one of al-Fadhl’s books was shown to Imam al-Askari (a.s.), he read some
of it, prayed Allah to have mercy on al-Fadhl, and said, ‘I envy the
people of Khurasan the being of al-Fadhl bin Shathan among them.’ Once
again, he read another book of al-Fadhl, prayed Allah three times to
have mercy on al-Fadhl, and said about the book, ‘It is true that it
should be acted according to it.’**[2]**

**Confuting the opponents**

Al-Fadhl took upon himself to defend his beliefs and refute the
spuriosities raised against his cult. He said, ‘I am a successor of
those who passed away. I met Muhammad bin Abu Umayr, Safwan bin Yahya
and others and took knowledge from them since fifty years ago. Hisham
bin al-Hakam passed away, may Allah have mercy on him, and Younus bin
Abdurrahman was his successor. He refuted the dissenters. Then Younus
bin Abdurrahman passed away and left no successors except as-Sakkak who
refuted the dissenters until he left to the better world. I am the
successor after them, may Allah have mercy on them.’**[3]**

He was the successor of those great scholars who struggled and defended
their high principles that the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
had adopted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

**His works**

This great scholar wrote on different sciences such as jurisprudence,
tafsir, theology, philosophy, linguistics, logic, and other fields of
knowledge. The books he had written were more than one hundred and
eighty.**[1]** Some of them were mentioned by Sheikh at-Toosi,**[2]**
an-Najashi,**[3]** ibn an-Nadim,**[4]** and others.

#### 111. Al-Fadhl bin Kathir al-Baghdadi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 112. Al-Fadhl bin al-Mubarak

He narrated traditions from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and Muhammad bin Eesa
al-Ubaydi narrated from him.**[6]**

#### 113. Al-Qassim ash-Sha’rani al-Yaqtini

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was accused of excessiveness.**[7]**

#### 114. Al-Qassim as-Sayqal

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[8]** and so did al-Barqi. He narrated from Imam ar-Redha
(a.s.) and Imam al-Jawad (a.s.), and Muhammad bin Abdullah al-Wasiti
narrated from him.**[9]**

#### 115. Kafur al-Khadim

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[10]** so did ibn Dawud and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Al-Fihrist by at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[4]** Al-Fihrist by ibn an-Nadim.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.12 p.339.  
 **[7]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[8]** Ibid.  
 **[9]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.13 p.73.  
 **[10]** Rijal at-Toosi.

said he was reliable.**[1]**

#### 116. Muhammad bin Abu Tayfur al-Mutatabbib

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** 

#### 117. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ibrahim

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 118. Abu Ali Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Mahmudi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[4]** Al-Kashshi said, ‘I found in the book of Abdullah
ash-Shathani that he had written with his handwriting: “I heard al-Fadhl
bin Hashim saying, ‘Al-Mahmudi mentioned to me that he had performed the
hajj many times. I asked him about their number but he did not tell me.

He said, ‘I have been endowed with much good (money), praise be to
Allah.’

I said to him, ‘Do you perform the hajj for yourself or for
others**[5]**?’

He said, ‘After the obligatory hajj of Islam, I perform the hajj for the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) and his progeny, and for the guardians of
Allah, the believing men, and believing women as far as Allah has
permitted me.’

I said to him, ‘What do you say in your hajj?’

He said, ‘I say: O Allah, I began for Your messenger Muhammad (blessing
be on him and on his progeny) and I made my reward from You and him for
Your pure guardians (peace be upon them) and donated my reward from them
for your faithful slaves who believe in Your Book and the Sunna of Your
Prophet (blessing be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** That the reward of the hajj is intended to be for others.

on him and on his progeny…’**[1]**

This shows his goodwill and benevolence, and that the education of the
pure imams (a.s.) to their companions has produced such perfect persons.

#### 119. Abul Hasan Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ubaydillah bin al-Mansur

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 120. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Mutahhar

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]** He narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), and Abdullah
bin Ja’far narrated from him.**[4]**

#### 121. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Mihran

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[5]**

#### 122. Muhammad bin Isma’il as-Saymari al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]** 

#### 123. Muhammad bin Jazzak al-Jammal

He was reliable. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[7]** Ibn Shahrashub said he was from the trustworthy
companions of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).

#### 124. Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Shammun al-Basri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[8]** An-Najashi said, ‘He was a Waqifite**[9]** and then
was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.15 p.26.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Ibid.  
 **[9]** The waqifites were a group of people believing in the imamate
of the

excessive. He was very weak and of bad beliefs…He had written “as-Sunan
wel Aadab wa Makarim al-Akhlaq”, and “al-Ma’rifah”.’**[1]**

Al-Kashshi mentioned from him his saying, ‘I wrote to Abu Muhammad (Imam
al-Askari) complaining of poverty and then I said to myself: has Abu
Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (a.s.) not said, ‘Poverty with us (the Ahlul
Bayt) is better than wealth with our enemy, and being killed with us is
better than living with our enemy.’ The reply to my letter came saying,
‘Allah the Almighty tries our followers, when their sins increase, by
poverty, and He may forgive many (of sins), and it is as your self said
to you: poverty with us is better than wealth with our enemy. We are a
shelter for whoever resorts to us and a light for whoever seeks light,
and preservation for whoever resorts to us. Whoever loves us will be
with us in the highest position, and whoever deviates from us will be in
Fire.’ Abu Abdullah (as-Sadiq) said, ‘You acknowledge that your enemy
will be in Fire and do not acknowledge that your guardian will be in
Paradise! Nothing prevents you from that but weakness.’**[2]**

He died when he was one hundred and twenty years. It was said that he
narrated from eighty men of the companions of Imam Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq
(a.s.).**[3]**

#### 125. Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Abu al-Khattab az-Zayyat

He was reliable man from Kufa. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of
Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[4]** An-Najashi said, ‘He was a lofty man
from our companions. He was respectable, reliable, and notable. He
narrated many traditions and it was depended on his narrations. He had
written good books such as “at-Tawhid”, “al-Ma’rifah wel Bada’”,
“ar-Radd ala Ahl al-Qadar”, “al-Imamah”,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

first seven imams from Imam Ali (a.s.) to Imam Musa bin Ja’far
al-Khadhim (a.s.) and did not believe in the rest five imams.  
 **[1]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.

“al-Lu’lu’ah”, “Wasaya al-A’immah”, “Rarities”.’**[1]** 

#### 126. Muhammad bin Hamza al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 127. Muhammad bin al-Huşayn al-Fihri

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
added that he was cursed.**[3]**

#### 128. Muhammad bin al-Huşayn

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was from Ahwaz.**[4]**

#### 129. Abul Abbas Muhammad bin Khalid ar-Razi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 130. Muhammad bin Raja’ al-Khayyat

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[6]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 131. Muhammad bin ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[7]** An-Najashi said there were questions
between him and Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.).**[8]**

#### 132. Muhammad bin Sa’eed bin Kulthum al-Marwazi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was a theologian.**[9]** Al-Kashshi mentioned from Nasr bin
as-Sabah that Muhammad bin Sa’eed al-Marwazi

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[9]** Rijal at-Toosi.

was from the prominent theologians in Naysabur.**[1]**

#### 133. Muhammad bin Sulayman al-Jallab

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 134. Muhammad bin Şayfi al-Kufi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 135. Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable from Qum.**[4]**

#### 136. Muhammad bin Abdurrahman al-Hamadani an-Nawfali

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and said he
had letters with Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.).**[5]**

#### 137. Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Mihran al-Karkhi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was accused of excessiveness and weakness.**[6]** An-Najashi
said, ‘He was excessive, a liar, irreligious, and unreliable and was
famous for that. He had some books like “al-Mamdohin wel Mathmomin; the
praised and the dispraised”, “Maqtal (murder of) Abul Khattab”, “Manaqib
(virtues of) Abul Khattab”, “al-Malahim; battles or heroisms”,
“at-Tabsirah; enlightenment”, “al-Qibab; domes”, and “an-Nawadir;
rarities” which was the nearest of them to the truth whereas the others
were full of falsehood.’**[7]**

#### 138. Muhammad bin Abdullah an-Nawfali al-Hamadani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Rijal al-Barqi.  
 **[6]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[7]** Rijal an-Najashi.

companions.**[1]** 

#### 139. Muhammad bin Ubaydillah at-Tahi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**  

#### 140. Muhammad bin Ali bin Eesa al-Ash’ari al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]** 

An-Najashi said, ‘Muhammad bin Ali was a notable man in Qum and the emir
on it appointed by the king. So was his father. He had questions with
Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.).’**[4]**

#### 141. Muhammad bin Ali bin Mahziyar

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[5]** Ibn Tawus said he was from the well-known
deputies and babs whom the Twelver Shia, who believed in the imamate of
al-Hasan bin Ali, did not disagree on.**[6]** 

#### 142. Muhammad bin Eesa bin Ubayd al-Yaqtini

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was weak.**[7]**

Al-Kashshi mentioned that he had written some books like “al-Imamah”,
“al-Wadhih al-Makshuf fir-Rad ala Ahl al-Wuquf”, “Bu’d al-Isnad”, “Qurb
al-Isnad”, “al-Wasaya”, “al-Lu’lu’”, “al-Masa’il al-Muharramah”,
“adh-Dhiya’”, “Dhara’if”, “at-Tawqi’at”, “at-Tajammul wel-Muru’ah”,
“al-Fay’ wel Khums”, “ar-Rijal”, “az-Zakat”, “Thawab al-A’mal”, and
“an-Nawadir”.**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.17 p.34.  
 **[7]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[8]** Rijal al-Kashshi.

#### 143. Muhammad bin al-Faraj ar-Rakhji

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]** There were firm communications and many
correspondences between him and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Here are some of
the letters that were between them:

1. Al-Kashshi mentioned that Muhammad bin al-Faraj said, “I wrote to
Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) (a.s.) asking him about Abu Ali bin Rashid, Eesa
bin Ja’far bin Aasim, and ibn Band, and he replied to me saying, ‘You
have mentioned bin Rashid, may Allah have mercy on him. He lived happy
and died as a martyr.’ And he prayed Allah for ibn Band and bin
Aasim.”**[2]**

2. Al-Kulayni mentioned that Ali bin Muhammad an-Nawfali said, “Muhammad
bin al-Faraj said to me, ‘Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) wrote to him, ‘O
Muhammad, manage your affairs and be careful!” My affairs were managed
and I was careful and I did not know what for he wrote to me so until an
agent from the government came, tied me, and carried me from Egypt after
confiscating all what I possessed. I were in prison for eight years and
then a book came to me from him (from Imam al-Hadi) in prison saying, ‘O
Muhammad, do not reside in the Western District!’ I read the book and
said to myself: he writes to me so, though I am in prison! It is
wonderful!! After a little time I was set free.’

Then Muhammad bin al-Faraj wrote to him ( to Imam al-Hadi) asking about
his properties and he replied that they would be given back to him. When
Muhammad went to al-Askar, he wrote to him about giving his properties
back to him but he died before that.”**[3]**

This letter shows that the Imam (a.s.) trusted and assisted Muhammad.
When Muhammad became ill, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) sent him a garment. He put
the garment under his head and when

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal al-Kashshi.  
 **[3]** Usul al-Kafi.

he died, he was enshrouded with it.

#### 144. Muhammad bin al-Fadhl

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[1]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 145. Muhammad bin al-Fadhl al-Baghdadi

He narrated from Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), and Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari
narrated from him.**[2]**

#### 146. Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin al-Qassim bin Hamza bin Musa al-Alawi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**  

#### 147. Muhammad bin Marwan al-Jallab

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable,**[4]** and so did al-Barqi.

#### 148. Muhammad bin Marwan al-Khattab

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 149. Muhammad bin Musa bin Furat

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]**

#### 150. Muhammad bin Musa ar-Rab’iy

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.17 p.152.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.

#### 151. Muhammad bin Yahya bin Daryab

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]**

#### 152. Masqalah bin Isaaq al-Qummi al-Ash’ari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]**

#### 153. Mu’awiya bin Hakeem bin Mu’awiya bin Ammar al-Kufi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

An-Najashi said about him, ‘He was reliable, notable from the companions
of Imam ar-Redha (a.s.). Abu Abdullah al-Husayn said, ‘I heard our
sheikhs saying: Mu’awiya bin Hakeem narrated twenty-four traditions on
usul, and had written some books like “Divorce”, “Menstruation”,
“Obligations”, “Marriage”, “Penalties”, “Blood Monies”, and a book of
rarities.’**[4]**

#### 154. Mansur bin al-Abbas ar-Razi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]** An-Najashi said, ‘His state was uncertain. He had a
big book on rarities.’**[6]**

#### 155. Musa bin Dawud al-Ya’qubi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[7]** He was a Twelver Shia but unknown.

#### 156. Musa bin Umar bin Bazee’ the mawla of al-Mansur

He was reliable. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions,**[8]** and said he had a book on rarities.**[9]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[7]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.

#### 157. Musa bin Umar al-Hadheen

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[1]**

#### 158. Musa bin Murshid al-Warraq an-Nayshaburi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** He was a Twelver Shia but unknown.

#### 159. Nasr bin Muzahim al-Qummi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**  

#### 160. An-Nadhr bin Muhammad al-Hamadani

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions, and
said he was reliable.**[4]** Allama (al-Hilli) said in al-Hawi that he
was reliable.

#### 161. Yahya bin Abu Bakr ar-Razi adh-Dharir

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 162. Yahya bin Muhammad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]** He was unknown.

#### 163. Abu Yousuf Ya’qub bin Isaaq ad-Dawraqi al-Ahwazi

He was known as ibn as-Sikkit. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of
Imam al-Hadi’s companions.**[7]** He was preferred by Imam al-Jawad
(a.s.) and Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). They cared much for him. He narrated
traditions from Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) and had some

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Fihrist by Sheikh at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Al-Fihrist by at-Toosi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.

questions with him.**[1]**

Ibn as-Sikkit was expert in linguistics, literature, Poetry, and grammar
of Arabic and had written many books such as “Tahthib al-Alfadh” and
“Islah al-Mantiq”.

Ibn Khillikan mentioned that some scholar said, ‘No book on linguistics
has ever passed across the bridge of Baghdad like the book of “Islah
al-Mantiq”. There is no doubt that it is from the useful, interesting
books including many sides of language. We do not know a book like it in
this concern. Many scholars were interested in the book. Al-Wazir
al-Maghribi summarized it. Al-Khatib at-Tabrizi edited it. Ibn Khillikan
mentioned that Abul Abbas al-Mubarrid said, ‘I have not seen a book for
the people of Baghdad better than the book of ibn as-Sikkit in logic.’
Tha’lab said, ‘Our companions have agreed on that there is no one, after
ibn al-I’rabi, more aware in linguistics than ibn as-Sikkit.’**[2]**
Al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid caliph, killed him because of his loyalty to
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). We shall detail this in a coming chapter.

#### 164. Ya’qub al-Bajali

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]** He was a Twelver Shia but unknown.

#### 165. Ya’qub bin Manqush

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari’s companions.**[4]**     

#### 166. Abu Yousuf al-Katib Ya’qub bin Yazid bin Hammad al-Annbari as-Salami

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[5]** He said in al-Fihrist that he had written
some books one of which was a book of rarities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tanqih al-Maqal, vol.3 p.329.  
 **[2]** Al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.1 p.314.  
 **[3]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.

An-Najashi said, ‘He was one of the clerks of al-Muntasir (the Abbasid
caliph). He narrated from Abu Ja’far the second (a.s.)…He was reliable
and truthful. He had some books like “al-Bada’”, “al-Masa’il”, “Nawadir
al-Hajj”, and “at-Ta’n ala Younus”.’**[1]**

#### 167. Abu Bakr bin Abu Tayfur al-Fahmaki al-Mutatabbib

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[2]** He was from the narrators who narrated the tradition
of the announcing of the imamate of Imam al-Askari (a.s.). He said,
‘Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) wrote to me saying, “My son Abu Muhammad is the
most loyal of aal**[3]** Muhammad and the firmest in authority. He is
the eldest of my sons and he is the successor. To him is the imamate and
its verdicts. Whatever you asked me about you can ask him about for he
has all what you need.’**[4]**

#### 168. Abul Husayn bin Hilal

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]** Allamah al-Hilli**[6]** and al-Majlisi**[7]** said he
was reliable.

#### 169. Abul Huşayn al-Hudhayni

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable.**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal an-Najashi.  
 **[2]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[3]** The progeny or family of.  
 **[4]** Usul al-Kafi.  
 **[5]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[6]** Al-Khulasah.  
 **[7]** Al-Wajizah.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.

#### 170. Abu Tahir

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was the brother of Muhammad bin Muhammad.**[1]**

#### 171. Abu Tahir bin Hamza bin al-Yasa’ al-Ash’ari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was reliable from Qum.**[2]**

#### 172. Abu Tahir Muhammad

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[3]**

#### 173. Abu Abdullah al-Mughazi

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said he was excessive.**[4]**

#### 174. Abu Abdullah al-Mukari

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[5]**

#### 175. Abu Muhammad bin Ibrahim

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s
companions.**[6]**

#### 176. Abu Yahya al-Jirjani

He was Ahmad bin Dawud bin Sa’eed al-Fazari.**[7]**

#### 177. Kulthum al-Karkhiyya

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned her as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions and
said that Abdurrahman ash-Sha’eeri, the father of Abdurrahman bin Dawud
al-Baghdadi, narrated from her.**[8]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rijal at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Tanqih al-Maqal, vol.4 p.39.  
 **[8]** Rijal at-Toosi.
