Preface
=======

*In the name of Allāh, the Beneficent, the Merciful*

*O Allāh, send Your blessings upon Muhammad & his Progeny*

The book in your hand is an introductory treatise on Islamic beliefs,
laws and ethics as well as the early history of the faith in fifty
lessons. These lessons were part of the Islamic Correspondence Course
that I compiled, wrote and edited for the Islamic Education and
Information Centre, Toronto, in the early nineties.

The course consists of three parts: Part I (twenty lessons) on Islamic
theology outlines the basic beliefs of the faith; followed by Part II
(fifteen lessons) on Islamic jurisprudence explaining the spiritual and
financial issues as well as the social and familial aspects of life; it
concludes with Part III (fifteen lessons) on the brief history of the
first three centuries covering the lives of the Prophet Muhammad, his
daughter, Fātima, and the Twelve Imams of Ahlul Bayt (peace be upon them
all). Each lesson is followed by a question paper.

Besides my own writings, the sources used in preparing this course have
been duly mentioned at the end of each lesson. Nonetheless, I would like
to acknowledge here the writings of my late father ‘Allāmah Sayyid
Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi, the board of writers of Dar Rāh-e Haqq Institute
(Qum, Iran), the late ‘Allāmah S.M. Husayn Tabātabā’i, and Ayatullāh
Nāsir Makārim Shirāzi. I also would like to thank Br. Haider Ali Khoja,
a lecturer at Humber College, for preparing the question papers for the
initial lessons which helped me in preparing questions for the remaining
lessons in the same pattern.

I pray to the Almighty Allāh that this book may prove as useful and
helpful for seekers of truth as did the Islamic Correspondence Course
which soon became popular on a world-wide basis: an Islamic Centre in
Houston, Texas, included it in its *tablīgh* program for new Muslims; a
prominent organization in the United Kingdom plans to put it on-line;
and the Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania has translated it into Swahili
and has included it as the intermediary level of its correspondence
courses.

*Wa mā tawfīqī illa bi’l-lāh.*

Toronto, Canada  
 Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi  
 Safar 1425 / April 2004


