Lesson 10: Prophets & Scriptures
================================

Almighty God did not leave man alone; he sent guidance in the form of
prophets and messengers. According to the common belief of all Muslims,
God sent 124,000 prophets and messengers to guide mankind in all parts
of the world. The first was Prophet Adam and the last was Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon them both).

The basic faith of all the prophets was the same: to call people to the
One and Only God (*tawhīd*) and bring peace in human society; the
differences are only in the codes of law. However, not all the 124,000
prophets were of the same rank and status; some were greater than the
other; some were sent as assistants to those messengers who came before
them; some were given a holy scripture while others were not.

There were some prophets who came with divine laws which their followers
were to implement. Such prophets were higher in rank over the others,
and are known as *ulu 'l-\`azm* prophets*. Ulu 'l-\`azm* means “those
who possess great responsibility”. The ulu *’l-‘azm* prophets are five:

1. Prophet Nuh (a.s.) known in English as Noah.

2. Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) known in English as Abraham.

3. Prophet Musa (a.s.) known in English as Moses. A person who believes
in the message of Prophet Musa (a.s.) is known as a Jew.

4. Prophet ‘Isa (a.s.) known in English as Jesus. A person who follows
the message of Prophet ‘Isa (a.s.) is known as a Christian.

5. Prophet Muhammad (a.s.). A person who follows the message of Prophet
Muhammad (a.s.) is known as a Muslim.

The divine laws brought by Prophet Nuh were followed till the advent of
Prophet Ibrahim and the more advanced divine laws were sent by God
through him. Then Prophet Musa was sent with a new set of laws which
were even more elaborate; Musa was followed by Prophet \`Isa who
modified the laws of Musa. Last of all came Prophet Muhammad with the
most perfect and comprehensive divine law. No prophet or holy scripture
is to be sent after Muhammad (a.s.).

Many prophets were also given scriptures—God commandments sent to
mankind through His prophets and messengers. The scriptures that were
revealed to Prophet Nuh and Prophet Ibrahim are not well-known. The
Qur'ān talks about scrolls (*suhuf*) of Ibrahim which shows that many
books were revealed to him.

The most famous scriptures revealed to the prophets are the following:  
 1. The *Tawrāt* (Torah) revealed to Prophet Musa.

2. The *Zabūr* (Psalms) revealed to Prophet Dawud (a.s.) known in
English as David.

3. The *Injīl* (Gospel) revealed to Prophet \`Isa.

4. The *Qur'ān* (pronounced as Qur-aan) revealed to Prophet Muhammad.

\* \* \*

This lesson has been prepared by S. M. Rizvi.

### Question Paper on Lesson 10

*Question 1*: [1.5 points for each answer]  
 Fill in the blanks from the pool of words given below by simply placing
the number of the correct word in the blank space.  
 (a) According to Islamic belief, God sent \_\_\_\_ prophets in all
parts of the world.

(b) In Qur'anic terminology, all prophets were Muslims and their
fundamental mission was to preach \_\_\_\_ of God and \_\_\_\_ on earth.

(c) The name of the first prophet was \_\_\_\_ (a.s.) and the name of
the last prophet was \_\_\_\_ (a.s.).

(d) All prophets were not \_\_\_\_ in status and rank.

(e) The prophets who came with a divine law are called \_\_\_\_
prophets.

(f) Christians are those who believe in \_\_\_\_ known in Arabic as
\_\_\_\_.

(g) \_\_\_\_ are the people who believe in Prophet Musa known in English
as \_\_\_\_.

(h) Prophet Nuh (a.s.) is known in English as \_\_\_\_.

(i) Zabur, known in English as \_\_\_\_, was given to Prophet Dawud
(a.s.) known in English as \_\_\_\_.

(j) Torah, known in Arabic as \_\_\_\_, was given to Prophet \_\_\_\_
(a.s.).

(k) Prophet \`Isa (a.s.) was given the book called \_\_\_\_ in Arabic
and \_\_\_\_ in English.

(l) The Qur'ān was revealed to Prophet \_\_\_\_ (a.s.).

(m) The Qur'ān talks about certain scrolls called \_\_\_\_ revealed to
Prophet \_\_\_\_ (a.s.).

        1. Psalms

        2. Tawrat

        3. 124,000

        4. Ibrahim

        5. Ulu 'l-\`azm

        6. unity

        7. equal

        8. \`Isa

        9. David

        10. Muhammad

        11. Suhuf

        12. Jesus

        13. Injil

        14. Musa

        15. Jews

        16. Bible

        17. Noah

        18. Adam

        19. peace

        20. Moses

*Question 2*: [10 points]  
 Listed below are some of the Prophets mentioned in the Qur'ān. Circle
the letter before the names of those who came with a divine law.  
 (a) Prophet Ya\`qub (Jacob).

(b) Prophet Ayyub (Job).

(c) Prophet Musa (Moses).

(d) Prophet Yahya (John).

(e) Prophet Muhammad (a.s.).

(f) Prophet Yunus (Jonah).

(g) Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham).

(h) Prophet Yusuf (Joseph).

(i) Prophet \`Isa (Jesus).

(j) Prophet Nuh (Noah)

(k) Prophet Ismail (Ishmael).

(l) Prophet Zakariyya (Zacharia).

*Question 3*: [10 points]  
 (a) Specify the names of the Divine Books in the order in which they
were revealed, and also write the names of the Prophets who received
those Books.

(b) Which Divine Book contains the most comprehensive and eternal laws?


