Lesson 13: The Last Message & The Last Prophet
==============================================

1. Muhammad, the Last Prophet
-----------------------------

Islam, from the very beginning, has said that it is the last divine
message to mankind, the final manifestation of revelation and
prophethood, and the culmination of the previous revealed religions. The
Muslims believe that the Prophet of Islam is the last Messenger of God,
and that the Qur'ān is the final revelation of God.

The Qur'ān has explained the universality of Islam and has shown that
Muhammad (peace be upon him) is the last messenger sent by God. For
example, verse 40 of chapter 33 says:

***“Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but the Messenger of
God and the Seal of the Prophets; Allah has knowledge of everything.”***

Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) himself once said to ‘Ali (a.s.): “In all
respects, your relationship to me is like that of Hārun to Musa (i.e.,
if Hārun was Musa's brother, I also take you as a brother; if he was
Musa's successor, you also will be my successor). Except that Musa was
not the last prophet, and I am the last.”[^1] He also said, “I am the
last brick in the building of prophethood. With my coming, the prophets
have come to an end.”

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “With the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad’s (a.s.),
revelation came to an end.”[^2] The eighth Imam, ‘Ali ar-Riza (a.s.),
said, “The pure religion of Muhammad (a.s.) will not be abrogated till
the day of resurrection, and also no prophet will follow him.”[^3]

What we have just recounted is only a sample of tens of hadith which
clearly and succinctly explain the conclusive status of the Prophet
(a.s.) and the perpetuity of his pure religion; they leave no room for
doubt.

2. The Universality of Islam
----------------------------

Islam is an everlasting religion because it is all-inclusive. It is a
comprehensive project based on human disposition, and it embraces all
aspects of life: individual, social, material, spiritual, doctrinal,
emotional, economic, legal and so forth, and it explains the basis of
each in the most realistic manner for all peoples, in every time and
place.

So now let us study some aspects of this universality.

### (A) The God of Islam

The God of Islam is the Preserver of all worldly things. He is not the
god of a tribe or of a special group only. In their prayers, the Muslims
say: **“*****Al-hamdu lil lāhi Rabbi 'l-\`ālamin*** **— Praise be to
Allāh, the Lord of the Universe.” (Qur'ān 1:2)**

God is a reality without parallel, beyond all human attributes and
likeness; He is not like the gods of some religions who are presented in
the form of a human, an animal or a thing.

The God of Islam is One without equal; He has no son or mother or
father; neither partner nor associate. This is the message of a short
chapter of the Qur'ān which the Muslims recite every day in their
prayers so as to be far away from the possibility of associating
anything with Him.

### (B) Equality In Islam

Superiority of race or segregation is not only eliminated and void in
the eyes of Islam, but the equality of man is an absolute reality in
Islam. Islam says that all human beings are equal, all are from one
father and one mother, and are members of one family—so from the aspect
of nobility, origin and connections, they are equal partners. No one is
better than anyone else, except in purity and devotion to God.

The Qur'ān says: ***O mankind, We have created you from a male and a
female, and made you into races and tribes so that you may know one
another. Surely the noblest among you in the sight of Allāh is the most
God-fearing of you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-aware.*** **(49:13)**

### (C) Islam & Freedom of Thought

Islam is a firm supporter of rational argument and freedom of thought.
Imposition of ideas or beliefs, or the stifling of voices does not exist
in Islam. The Qur'ān says: ***There is no compulsion in religion
[because] the truth has become clear from the error.*** **(2:256)**

In Islam, investigation of the foundations of beliefs is a duty for
every individual, and it is an obligation for everyone not to accept
anything without proof. Islam censures those who blindly follow the
beliefs of their fathers and ancestors, and commends self-investigation
and deep examination. It rejects feeble-mindedness and vain speculation,
and urges only to the perusal of knowledge and certainty. The Qur'ān
says: ***And pursue not that you have no knowledge of; the hearing, the
sight, the heart — all of these shall be questioned of.*** **(17:36)**

Islam grants its opponents the right to set forth their queries in
reasonable discussion and to enumerate their proofs and listen to the
answers. Say, ***“Produce your proof, if you speak truly.”***
**(2:111)** This was the reason that many Jews, Christians and those
from other groups who took a stand against Islam, came to the Prophet or
the Imams, and sat down and discussed their religious ideas.

### (D) Islam & Knowledge

Islam lends great value to thinking. It asks the learned and wise to
think and think again about creation, time, night and day, the sky, the
earth, animal life, man and the universe and what is in it. The Qur'ān
says:

***“Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and day, and the ship that floats in the sea
with profit to men, and the water Allah sends down from the sky
therewith reviving the earth after it is dead, and His scattering abroad
on it all types of crawling things, and the turning about of the winds
and the clouds suspended between heaven and earth — surely there are
signs for a people who use their mind.”*** **(2:164)**

The Qur'ān also asks people to study the lives of the nations who came
before, their thoughts and the causes of their decline and fall, so that
they may keep far from the precipices of their destruction. It says,
**“*****Indeed many events have taken place before you, therefore travel
on the earth and see what was the outcome of those who rejected [the
message of God]. This is a clear statement for mankind, and a guidance
and an admonition for the pious people.*****” (3:136)**

In short, Islam desires that man should think deeply and freely and
travel across the far horizons of thought and knowledge and take
everything that is best for the improvement of his being.

For this reason, Islam values scientific advances and discoveries which
are for the help of humanity, and this is why scientists and scholars
emerged in the centuries following the advent of Islam, to decorate the
high road of human civilization with the jewel of their scientific
endeavours, so much so that their great names will shine forever at the
summit of scientific history. They include Jābir ibn Hayyān, Rāzi, Ibn
Sinā (Avicenna) and Nasīru 'd-Din Tusi, who were celebrities in all the
sciences of their time: philosophy, natural science, astronomy, alchemy,
etc. The books of Ibn Sina were even taught in European universities up
to the end of the last century. Jurji Zaydān, the famous Christian
writer of Lebanon, says in his *Ta'rikh at-Tamaddun al-Islami*, “As soon
as Islamic civilization found its feet, and the new sciences spread
among the Muslims, Muslim scholars appeared whose thinking was more
important than the founders of some of the branches of the sciences. In
fact these sciences took on a fresh colour with the new researches of
Islamic scientists, and progresses due to Islamic civilization.” (p.
598)

### (E) Islam’s Concept of Life

There is no opposition, in Islam, between the material and the spiritual
life. Islam does not approve of those who do not work in this world or
make no effort; but neither does it accept those who only work for their
material betterment without any regard to the spiritual life. Imam
Ja\`far as-Sādiq (a.s.) said: “He who abandons this world for the next
(i.e., he who withdraws from the worldly life in the name of asceticism)
and he who gives up the next world for this world — both are not from
among us.”[^4]

So it can be said that in this matter Muslims should adjust their
actions with equal movement in this world, by advancing with its
happiness, and in the spiritual world, by enriching with its
contentment. There is no monasticism in Islam if monasticism means being
a burden on society, withdrawal from social life, egoism or seclusion.
The Prophet said, “There is no monasticism for us; the monasticism for
my followers is to struggle in the way of Allāh.”[^5]

### (F) Islamic Laws & Change in Lifestyle

The transformation, evolution and development of the means of living and
progress in the various elements of civilization have no kind of
incompatibility with the eternity of the laws of Islam. How? Because the
incompatibility of a law with this kind of progress can only happen if
the law depends on the specific material means available at the time and
place the law was made.

For example, if a law is made that only the hand must be used in
writing, or only a donkey must be used for traveling, etc. then this
kind of law becomes outdated with the advance of science and technology.
But if the law was not based on specific and transitory means of life,
and instead it pertained to the basic and permanent need of mankind,
then there will be no clash between that law and the new means of life.

Islamic laws are of the latter category, that is, they do not look
especially at the means of life at a given period in history. For
example, they say, “A Muslim nation must be strong enough to protect
itself from foreign powers.” This law, even though made at a time when
sword was a means of defence, looks at the permanent need of a Muslim
society. However, if Islam had said that a Muslim nation must defend
itself with swords, then this law would become obsolete in the twentieth
century.

Whatever changes take place in the means of life, it will not be outside
the all inclusive domain of the laws of Islam — this is, indeed, the
secret of Islam's eternity.

3. The Continuation of Divine Assistance
----------------------------------------

Some people imagine that since Muhammad (a.s.) is the Last Messenger,
the divine guidance from God has stopped completely. This is not valid
because the meaning of the finality of prophethood is only that after
the Prophet of Islam, no other prophet, messenger, book or religion will
come. It does not mean that the connection between the unseen world and
this world has been severed.

The divine guidance of God for human society is everlasting and is
continued, according to the Shi‘a Muslims, by means of the twelve Imams
of Ahlu 'l-bayt. According to Mulla Sadra, in *Mafātih al-Ghayb*,
“Revelation, that is to say the descent of the angel to the delegated
and prophetic eyes, has been forever cut off [after the Prophet of
Islam], but the door of inspiration and illumination has not and will
never be closed, and it is not possible for it to be interrupted.”

You will learn more about this in the next lesson.

\* \* \*

This lesson adapted from Dar Rah-e Haq, *The Roots of Religion*, and has
been edited to suit the need of this course by S.M. Rizvi.

Question Paper on Lesson 13
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [15 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) Islam preaches belief in a God who is the sole Creator and
Sustainer of all things.

(b) Islam does not allow dissenting views.

(c) Muhammad is the Messenger of God and the Seal of the Prophets.

(d) Islam discourages theological speculation.

(e) Islam provides a comprehensive code of conduct to its followers.

(f) Islam gives more importance to spiritual life than material life.

(g) Islam promotes monasticism.

(h) Islamic laws are perpetually valid because they are independent of
material means of implementation.

(i) Islam promotes equality, encourages intellectual inquiry, exalts
pursuit of knowledge and maintains a balance between material and
spiritual life.

(j) Islam encourages suppression of desires.

*Question 2*: [10 points]  
 Circle the letter of one correct statement:

(a) According to Islam, Christianity and Judaism are valid religions
even today.

(b) It is permissible to revise the fundamental Islamic principles to
suit the needs of changing times.

(c) Imam ‘Ali ar-Riza (a.s.) said, “With the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad
(a.s.), revelation came to an end.”

(d) Muslims believe that the Prophet of Islam is the Last Messenger of
God and that the Qur'ān is the Final Revelation.

(e) Islam is the continuation of Christianity and Judaism.

*Question 3*: [25 points: 15 for (a) & 10 for (b)]  
 (a) What is the fundamental criterion for a law to be eternal and
permanent?

(b) Describe at least two Islamic laws that would fit the criterion you
mentioned in (a).

[^1]: This is an authentic hadith accepted by all Muslims, see al-Amini,
al-Ghadir, vol. 3, p. 196-202.

[^2]: Nahju 'l-Balaghah, sermon 133.

[^3]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 2, p. 34.

[^4]: Wasā'ilu 'sh-Shi‘a, vol. 12, p. 49

[^5]: Bihāru 'l-Anwār, vol. 70, p. 114.


