Lesson 18: The Twelfth Imam: Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.)
=====================================================

The twelfth Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his appearance)
was born on the 15th of Sha\`ban in the year 255 AH in Samarra. His
imamat began at the age of five when his father died in 260 AH. His name
(Muhammad) and his agnomen (Abu 'l-Qāsim) are the same as that of the
Prophet of Islam.

His father was the eleventh Shi‘a Imam, Imam Hasan al-\`Askari; and his
mother was the great lady Nargis (may the peace of Allah be with them
both).

For various reasons, the Twelfth Imam, did not appear publicly; and for
about seventy years, people were in communication with him through the
intermediary of his special agents, in order of succession: \`Uthman bin
Sa\`id, Muhammad bin \`Uthman, Husayn bin Ruh, and ‘Ali bin Muhammad
as-Samarri. This period of seventy years is known as the minor
occultation (*al-ghaybatu 's-sughra*) and at the end of that period
began the major occultation (*al-ghaybatu 'l-kubra*).

During the major occultation till the time of re-appearance, no one has
been appointed as his special representative. As for legal issues, the
people have the duty of referring to the *fuqaha* and *mujtahids*—those
excelling in knowledge of the Islamic laws.

1. Belief in Al-Mahdi & the Universal Reform
--------------------------------------------

The belief in the re-appearance of the expected Mahdi, the universal
reformer is not confined to the Shi‘a Muslims. Other Islamic groups and
even non-Muslims like the Jews and the Christians believe in the
appearance of a great spiritual reformer. In Psalm 37, we read:

“...Trust in the Lord and do good; so you will dwell in the land and
enjoy security...  
 For the wicked shall be cut off; but those who wait for the Lord shall
possess the land...  
 But the weak shall possess the land, and delight themselves in abundant
prosperity...  
 The Lord knows the day of the flawless, and their heritage will abide
forever...  
 For those blessed by the Lord shall possess the land, but those cursed
by Him shall be cut off...  
 The righteous shall possess the land, and dwell upon it for ever...”

2. The Qur’ān & the Belief in al-Mahdi
--------------------------------------

Allāh has promised the believers and worshippers of the True God that a
time will come when they will take over the power of the world, and the
glorious religion of Islam will reign all over the earth.

***For We have written in the Psalms, after the remembrance, \`My
righteous servants will inherit the earth.' (21:105)***

***Allah has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds
that He will surely make you successors in the land just as He made
those who were before them successors, and that He will surely establish
their religion for them, and will give them in exchange, after their
fear, security: \`They shall serve Me, not associating with Me
anything.' (24:55)***

***It is He who has sent His Messenger with the religion of truth, that
he may lift it above every religion, though the unbelievers be averse.
(61:9)***

***We desire to be gracious to those who were abased in the land, and to
make them leaders, and to make them the inheritors. (28:5)***

The above verses clearly show that in the end the world will fall into
the hands of Allāh’s worthy and righteous servants and that they will
become the leaders of the people of the world. Then Islam will be
victorious over all religions.

3. Belief in the Mahdi & Sunni Authorities
------------------------------------------

In this subject, the scholars in the Sunni school have related many
hadiths from the Prophet of Islam through trustworthy narrators. From
among them are ahadith which say that the Imams are twelve persons and
that they are all from the Quraysh.

Al-Mahdi, the promised one, is from the family of the Prophet and a
descendent of Imam ‘Ali and Fatimah az-Zahra, and in many ahadith it is
mentioned that he is from the line of Imam Husayn. The Sunnis have
mentioned and recorded hundreds of ahadith about the Mahdi in more than
seventy books through their own authorities of which we shall just
mention a few examples:

*Al-Musnad* of Ahmad bin Hanbal (d. 241 AH).  
*Sahih* of al-Bukhāri (d. 256 AH).  
*Sahih* of al-Muslim (d. 261 AH).  
*Sunan* of Abu Dāwud as-Sajistāni (d. 275 AH).  
*Sahih* of at-Tirmidhi (d. 279 AH).

The authors of the above books are among the most authoritative books of
the Sunnis and, more interestingly, all died either before the birth of
the Twelfth Imam (255 AH) or shortly after his birth.

4. The Hidden Reformer
----------------------

We have at least three hundred ahadith from the Prophet and from five
Imams about Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.). From these ahadith, it is clear that
the Mahdi is the ninth son of Husayn bin ‘Ali; that his father is Hasan
al-‘Askari and his mother is Nargis Khatun; that his name is the same as
that of the Last Prophet; that the Mahdi would be born during his
father's lifetime in Samarra; that his father would die when he would be
young; that he will live as long as God wished it; that he will
re-appear and the world will be filled with justice and equality at a
time when there will be injustice everywhere.

And when he comes —may God hasten his appearance— he will lean against
the Ka‘bah and cry out and call for his followers, who will number 313
persons. Prophet ‘Isa (Jesus) will come from the heaven down to the
earth, and will pray behind the Mahdi. The Twelfth Imam will enforce the
commands of Islam all over the world; and the earth will be like heaven.

There are many ahadith related by the Shi‘a and Sunni scholars on many
aspects connected with this great Imam, and these are mentioned in books
like *Bihāru ’l-Anwār* of ‘Allāmah Majlisi (d. 1010 AH) and *Muntakhabu
’l-Athar* of Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi.

When we look at the ahadith on this subject, we come to realize the
ahadith mentioning al-Mahdi (a.s.) have been narrated most frequently,
and that there are few subjects in Islam which have been mentioned in
hadith so often. Thus, in this light, anyone who believes in Islam and
its Prophet must necessarily declare his belief in the existence of the
promised Mahdi who is now in occultation.

Now we shall relate two ahadith on this issue from the famous Sunni
book, *Yanābi‘u 'l-Muwaddah*:

1. The Prophet said, “Al-Mahdi is a descendent of mine. He will be in
concealment, and when he manifests himself, the earth will become filled
with justice just as it was previously filled with injustice.”

2. Salman al-Farsi says that he went to the Prophet when Husayn bin ‘Ali
was sitting in his lap and the Prophet was kissing his eyes and mouth,
and then the Prophet said to Husayn, “You are a chief, son of a chief,
and the brother of a chief; you are an Imam, son of an Imam, and the
brother of an Imam. You are the Proof (*hujjah*), son of a proof and the
brother of a proof; you will be the father of nine proofs of whom the
ninth will be the *qā'im* (one who will establish the divine rule on
this earth).”

5. The Length of al-Mahdi’s Life
--------------------------------

We believe that the lengthening of a man's life is not an impossibility,
because it is explicitly stated in the Qur'ān that, ***“We sent Nuh to
his people and so he lived among them a thousand years, all but
fifty.”*** **(29:14)** Even modern science does not deny the possibility
of lengthening the human lifespan.

If a greatly extended life is not an impossible event, there is nothing
to prevent God from keeping a man alive for thousands of years because
the regulations of a man's life is in the hands of God. He can bring a
new order into existence which has precedence over the usual order of
things, just as He did in the case of all the miracles. The miracles of
the prophets: the cooling of the fire for Ibrahim, the turning of Musa’s
staff into a serpent; bringing the dead to life through \`Isa, and so
forth, are all against the usual flow of things but God brought another
order into existence by His own power and a miracle occurred. All the
Muslims, the Jews and the Christians believe in these miracles.

Similarly, for the length of the life of Imam Mahdi, there remains no
place for any kind of objection, because if someone says that such a
length of life is impossible, then his claim cannot be at all accepted
after the stipulation of the Qur'ān concerning the length of Prophet
Nuh's life. If someone says that a prolonged life is possible but
against the normal natural order of things, then it can be retorted that
the length of life of Imam Mahdi is against the natural order just as
the miracles of the prophets are against the natural order but within
the power of God.

Someone who believes in the power of God and in the miracles of the
prophets cannot have the slightest objection to the length of Imam
Mahdi’s life.

\* \* \*

This lesson is based on *The Roots of Religion* of Dar Rah-e Haq.

Question Paper on Lesson 18
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [7 points]  
 Fill in the Blanks:  
 (a) The 12th Imam was born on the \_\_\_\_\_ of Sha\`bān in the year
\_\_\_\_\_ AH in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(b) The Minor Occultation lasted for \_\_\_\_\_ years.

(c) The name of the 12th Imam's mother was
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(d) The 12th Imam's imamate began at the age of \_\_\_\_ in the year
\_\_\_\_ AH.

(e) During the Minor Occultation, Imam
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ with the outside world through his
special \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(f) The 12th Imam's name was \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and his
agnomen was \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(g) According to the Qur'ān, Prophet Nūh lived for \_\_\_\_\_\_ years.

*Question 2*: [15 points]  
 Is the belief in the re-appearance of an expected universal reformer
unique to Shi‘a Muslims? What other religions and Muslim sects believe
in the re-appearance of the Mahdi? Name the Biblical chapter and verse
number that confirms this belief.

*Question 3*: [5 points]  
 Narrate one hadīth that describes the existence and the re-appearance
of the 12th Imam.

*Question 4*: [10 points]  
 What is the fundamental purpose of the re-appearance of the 12th Imam?

*Question 5*: [13 points]  
 Passages from the Psalm 37 and the Qur'ān quoted in this lesson
describe various qualities of the people who will inherit God's land and
to whom God will bestow the leadership of this world. But there are two
qualities which have been mentioned both in the Psalms and the Qur'ān.
What are those two qualities?


