Lesson 22: Sources Of The Sharī‘a
=================================

1. The Qur’ān & the Sunna of the Prophet
----------------------------------------

The Muslims during the days of Prophet Muhammad lived by the sharī‘a by
following the **Qur’ān** and the ***Sunna***. *Sunna* means the example
of the Prophet. (Sunna is sometimes written as ‘sunnat’.)

Was not the Qur'ān enough on its own? The Qur'ān is a book of guidance
which was sent for the entire human world till the end of time. As such,
it only deals with the general issues and mentions only the basic
principles underlying the Muslim way of life. The Qur'ān is more like a
constitution than a book of law. The deals were left to the Prophet.

The Qur'ān itself clearly explained this relationship between the
Prophet and itself in the following verses:

***He raised up among the common people a Messenger from among
themselves to recite to them His revelations, to purify them, and to
teach them the Book and the wisdom.*** **(62:2)**

***And We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Reminder (that is, the
Qur'ān) so you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to them,
and so that they may reflect.*** **(16:44)**

These two verses definitely prove that Prophet Muhammad was not just a
‘mail-man’ whose only job was to deliver the Qur'ān to us. He was a
teacher and a commentator of the Qur'ān. Even his actions are a source
of guidance for Muslims:

***You have a good example in Allah's Messenger for whosoever hopes for
God and the last day, and remembers God oft.*** **(33:21)**

The obedience to the Prophet has been considered as the proof of loving
Allah:  
***Say (O Muhammad), \`If you love Allah, then follow me; (if you do so)
Allah will love you and forgive for you your sins.'*** **(3:31)** To
show the importance of obeying the Prophet, Allah further says:
***Whoever obeys the Prophet has surely obeyed Allah.*** **(4:80)**

The Qur'ān is not only silent on the details of things which can change
over time, it is also silent on the rules of worship which can never
change. For example, the Qur’ān in twenty-five different places commands
the Muslims to say the daily prayers (salāt), but not once has Allāh
explained how the Muslims are to say their prayers. (The only exception
to this statement is that of *salātu ’l-khawf*, the prayer said in a
battle-field or when one is in danger.) This silence on the part of the
Qur’ān, I believe, was for the specific purpose of forcing the people to
go to the Prophet, ask him for details and follow his example.

2. The Example of the Imams
---------------------------

After the Prophet’s death, the Muslims were very much divided on the
issue of leadership. This gave birth to the two groups known as the
Shi‘a and the Sunnis. The Shi‘a lived by the sharī‘a by following the
Qur’ān, and the ***sunna*** of the Prophet and **of the Imams**.

The sunna, in Shi‘a definition, means “the sayings, deeds and silent
approval of the Prophet and the twelve infallible Imams of Ahlu
'l-bayt.” Although the issue of the leadership has already been
discussed in another lesson in Part One, I would like to mention one
reason why the Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt are preferable as the source of the
sharī‘a than anyone else.

The Muslims of the early days realized the importance of the Prophet’s
sunna and started to memorize his sayings known as hadith. Later
generations preserved the saying they had heard from the companions of
the Prophet in the books of hadith. Even the actions of the Prophet,
observed by his companions, were preserved in writing. But this process
of preserving the sunna of the Prophet was not immune from mistakes and
forgery. Many sayings were invented and wrongfully attributed to the
Prophet during the early period of the Islamic history, especially
during the Umayyid era. At times, the rulers bribed the companions to
fabricate ‘hadīth’ in their favour and/or against their opponents. At
other times, some people invented ‘hadīth’ for apparently good causes
not realizing that they were using the wrong means of trying to make
people more religious!

Abu ‘Ismah, Faraj bin Abi Maryam al-Marwazi was asked: “From where have
you got all these traditions narrated through ‘Ikrimah, from Ibn ‘Abbās,
from the Prophet, describing the reward of reciting each and every sūrah
(chapter) of the Qur’ān?” He said, “I found people interested only in
the *fiqh* of Abu Hanīfah and *maghāzi* of Ibn Ishāq; therefore, I
forged these ahādīth for the pleasure of God to bring them back to the
Qur’ān.”

In this background of the early development of hadīth, we must find an
authentic and informed source for the sunna of the Prophet. When you
look at the Muslims of the Prophet’s days, you can find no one who was
more knowledgeable, informed, reliable and closer to the Prophet than
the Ahlu ’l-bayt, the family of the Prophet: Fātimah, ‘Ali and their
sons. After all, it is the Qur’ān which testifies to their spiritual
purity of the highest form by saying: ***“Verily Allah intends to purify
you, O the Ahlu ’l-bayt, a thorough purification.”*** **(33:33)**
Combine this verse about the Ahlu ’l-bayt’s purity with the following:
***“It is the holy Qur’ān in a preserved tablet, none shall touch it but
the purified ones.”*** **(56:79)** The real sense of this verse is that
the Qur’ān which is “in a preserved tablet” is not accessible to anyone
except those who are purified by Allāh. This shows that the Ahlu ’l-bayt
could understand the Qur’ān better than any other Muslim.

It is for this very reason that Allāh commanded His Messenger to ask the
people to love his Ahlu ’l-bayt: ***Say (O Muhammad), ‘I do not ask from
you any reward (for teaching Islam to you) except to love my near
ones.’*** **(42:23)** This love was made obligatory because it would
automatically entail obedience of those whom one loves. If the Ahlu
’l-bayt were not truthful, reliable, and worthy of following, would
Allāh command us to love them?

These few verses of the holy Qur’ān are enough to show that the best
commentators of the Qur’ān and the most authentic source for the
Prophet’s sunna are the Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt. The Prophet himself said,

“I am leaving among you two worthy things. As long as you hold fast on
to them both, you will never go astray after me. One is greater than the
other: the Book of Allāh (which is a rope suspended from the heaven to
the earth) and my descendants, my Ahlu ’l-bayt. They will not separate
from each other until they come to me at the (fountain of) Kawthar (in
the hereafter). Therefore, see how you recompense me by the way you deal
with them.”

This is not the place to discuss the authenticity of this hadīth, but it
will suffice to quote Ibn Hajar al-Makki, a famous Sunni polemicist.
After recording this hadīth from various companions who had heard it
from the Prophet at various places and times, Ibn Hajar says, “And there
is no contradiction in these [numerous reports] since there was nothing
to prevent the Prophet from repeating [this statement] at those various
places because of the importance of the holy Book and the pure
Family.”[^1]

We can conclude from these verses and the hadith mentioned above that
the Ahlu ’l-bayt are the divinely appointed commentators of the Qur’ān,
and the most authentic and the best source for the sunna. It is for this
reason that we prefer them to all other sources.

Even when we quote a hadīth from the Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt, it is
actually the hadīth of the Prophet which they have preserved as the true
successors of the last Messenger of God. Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.),
the sixth Shi‘ite Imam, says:

My hadīth is the hadīth of my father, the hadīth of my father is that of
my grandfather, the hadīth of my grandfather is that of Husayn [bin
‘Ali], the hadīth of Husayn is that of Hasan [bin ‘Ali], the hadīth of
Hasan is that of Amiru ’l-mu’minīn [‘Ali bin Abi Tālib], the hadīth of
Amīru ’l-mu’minīn is that of the Messenger of God (s.a.w.), and the
hadīth of the Messenger is a statement of Allāh, the Almighty, the
Great.”[^2]

The historical circumstances did not allow the opportunity to the first
three Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt to formally teach and train their followers
in the matters of the sharī‘a. It was after the tragedy of Karbala that
the Imams, especially the fifth and the sixth Imams, got the opportunity
to formally train their followers in the sharī‘a laws. The training by
these Imams actually laid the foundation for the development of
*ijtihād* among the Shi‘as after the occultation of the twelfth Imam
Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.).

\* \* \*

During the Minor Occultation (*ghaybat*) of the Present Imam, it was
still possible for the Shi‘as to present their problems to the Imam
through his specially appointed representatives. These representatives
were ‘Uthmān bin Sa‘īd al-Amri (260-265 AH), Muhammad bin ‘Uthmān
al-‘Amri (265-305 AH), Husayn bin Rūh (305-326 AH), and ‘Ali bin
Muhammad al-Samiri (326-329 AH).

However, after the Imam went into the Major Occultation, the problems of
the sharī‘a were resolved through the process known as *ijtihād* and
*taqlīd*—the two most important ways of living by the sharī‘a. Ijtihād,
in Shī‘a jurisprudence, means “the process of deriving the laws of
sharī‘a from its sources.” A person who can do ijtihād is known as a
“mujtahid”. Taqlīd means “to follow the mujtahid in the laws of
sharī‘a.”

\* \* \*

This lesson is based on *An Introduction to the Sharī‘a* by Sayyid M.
Rizvi

Question Paper on Lesson 22
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [15 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) The Qur’ān is the only source of the sharī‘a.

(b) Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) was the embodiment of the teachings of the
Qur’ān.

(c) Sunna is the second source of the sharī‘a.

(d) All hadith are to be accepted as authentic and correct.

(e) Abu ‘Ismah was correct in fabricating “ahādith” to bring people
closer to the Qur’ān.

*Question 2*: [20 points]  
 Why are the Ahlu ’l-Bayt the most important source for the sunna of the
Prophet and commentary of the Qur’ān?

*Question 3*: [15 points]  
 Explain by an example (from the lesson or other sources) how the
Prophet of Islam cannot be separated from the Qur’ān and its complete
understanding.

[^1]: Ibn Hajar al-Makki, as-Sawā'iqu 'l-Muhriqah, chapter 11, section
1.

[^2]: In Shi‘a sources, see al-Kulayni, al-Usul al-Kāfi, vol. 1, p. 52;
in Sunni sources, see ash-Sha\`rāni, at-Tabaqātu 'l-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 28;
Abu Nu\`aym, Hilyatu 'l-Awliyā', vol. 3, p. 193, 197.


