Lesson 23: Ijtihād, Taqlid & Ihtiyāt
====================================

1. Introduction
---------------

As mentioned in the previous lessons, a Muslim must follow the sharī\`a
in every aspect of his or her life. If Islam is a religion which is to
stay till the end of time, then there must always be some people who can
guide the Muslims in the changing circumstances of time and of place.
After the Prophet of Islam, the most ideal persons to guide the Muslims
were the Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt. However, the Present Imam, Muhammad
al-Mahdi (a.s.) has gone into the Occulation and will re-appear when
Allāh wishes him to appear. So what is to be done in the meantime? Are
the Shi‘as to suspend the sharī‘a? No, of course not! Islam is the
religion for all times and places.

2. Ijtihād
----------

The Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt had foreseen the time of the Occulation and
had prepared their followers for the situation in which they will not be
in direct contact with their Imam. This preparation was done by training
the Shi‘as in the science of Islamic laws, or in other words, in
ijtihād. (Ijtihād means “the process of deriving the laws of the sharī‘a
from its sources.”) Ijtihād is an essential phenomenon for the survival
of the Islamic sharī‘a during the Occultation of the Imam (a.s.).
Without the system of ijtihād, we would not be able to apply Islamic
laws in the rapidly changing circumstances of human society.

Ijtihād is not only permissible, but essential from the Islamic point of
view. It is an obligation in Islam to study everything that is necessary
for the spiritual development and material wellbeing of the Muslim
community. However, this obligation is of the category which is known as
*wājib kifā'i*.[^1] In the present instance, for example, Islamic
society needs experts in the medical sciences, in physics and chemistry,
in engineering, education; and as long as there is a lack of expertise
in these areas, it is an obligation on the community as a whole to
acquire it. This means that a group of Muslims must devote themselves to
research so as to benefit the Muslim community. Similarly, an Islamic
society without experts in the sharī‘a cannot properly consider itself
Islamic, and so it is an obligation for a group of persons from this
society to devote themselves to the study of the religious sciences to
provide proper guidance to all Muslims.

This is such an important obligation that Allah has exempted those who
go to seek religious knowledge from the duty of jihād. He says:

***“It is not (right) for the believers to go forth all together (for
jihād). So why should not a party from every section of them (i.e., the
believers) go forth to become learned in the religion, and to warn their
people when they return to them—so that haply they may beware.”
(9:124)***

It is clear from many narrations that the Imams of Ahlu ’l-bayt (a.s.)
used to be pleased whenever any of their companions taught religion or
gave legal rulings (*fatwa*) to others. There are several documented
cases of Shi‘as who lived far from Medina asking the Imam of their time
to appoint someone in their area to adjudicate between them in religious
problems: Zakariyyah ibn Adam al-Qummi and Yūnus bin ‘Abdu ’r-Rahmān,
for example, were named by Imam ‘Ali ar-Riza, to solve disputes in their
own districts.

In a famous hadīth, ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.)
about the legality of two Shi‘as seeking a verdict from an illegitimate
ruler in a dispute over a debt or a legacy. The Imam’s answer was that
it was absolutely forbidden to do so. Then Ibn Hanzalah asked what the
two should do, and the Imam replied:

“They must seek out one of your own who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is
well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge
and arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you...”

Besides these ahādīth, we have quite a few sayings of the Imams that
tell us what to do if we come across two ahādīth which are contradictory
or semi-contradictory—and solving the contradictory ahādīth is one of
the functions of ijtihād. These types of ahādīth are known as *al-akhbār
al-‘ilājiyyah*, the ahādīth which solve the problems in the studying of
the hadīth.

In conclusion, we can say that one way of following the sharī‘a is to
study the science of sharī‘a, learn the process of ijtihād and become a
mujtahid.

3. Taqlīd
---------

Although we have mentioned ijtihād as the first of the possible ways of
following the sharī‘a, it is not something which every person can do. To
become a mujtahid means spending the major part of your life in studying
the Islamic sciences in general and the Islamic legal system in
particular. A person must, first of all, study the Arabic language
(especially classical Arabic) since all the sources of the sharī‘a are
in classical Arabic. Then he must study and gain expertise in Usūlu
’l-Fiqh (the Principles of Jurisprudence) which involves the methodology
of defining and using the sources of the sharī‘a. One also has to study
the Qur’ānic verses on laws, the hadīth literature, and also the
conclusions reached by the past mujtahids. In studying the hadīth
literature, one has to also study ‘ilmu ’r-rijāl which deals with the
narrators of hadīth—otherwise he will not be able to distinguish the
authentic hadīth from the inauthentic ones. In short, ijtihād is not
everyone’s cup of tea.

The social life of human beings is based on mutual co-operation: each
one of us takes the duty of fulfilling one of the needs of the society,
and, in return, each one of us expects to benefit from the expertise of
the others. Just as not everyone can become his or her own doctor, in an
Islamic society, not everyone can become a mujtahid. Those who are not
mujtahid will follow the sharī‘a by doing taqlīd—following the opinions
of a high-ranking and pious mujtahid.

### (A) Is Taqlīd Reasonable?

First of all, taqlīd is not “blind following,” it is based on an
informed decision taken by the individual Shi‘a man or woman. Before you
start following the opinions of a mujtahid in the sharī‘a laws, you have
to ascertain that he has the required expertise and that he is of
upright character.

Secondly, it is not always unreasonable to follow others and to hold
uncritical faith in them. We can logically distinguish four possible
forms of imitation:

1. an ignorant person imitating another ignorant person;  
 2. a more learned person imitating a less learned person;  
 3. a less learned person imitating an ignorant person;  
 4. a less learned person imitating a more learned person.

It is quite clear that the first three forms of imitations are
unreasonable and can serve no purpose. However, the fourth kind of
imitation is obviously not only reasonable, but also necessary and a
matter of common sense; in our everyday life we follow and imitate
others in many things; we like to take the advice of experts in matters
outside our own knowledge.

Someone who wishes to build a house, explains the basic idea of what he
wants to the builder and then submits to his advice as to how he should
go about the actual construction. The patient follows the treatment
advised by the doctor; a litigant consults a lawyer when drawing up his
case for a court. The examples are abundant; in most cases the advice is
taken voluntarily, but sometimes the citizen may be required by law to
seek expert advice and act upon it, before, for example, he is allowed
to take some particularly dangerous drug. The clearest example is
obviously a case of a legal dispute between two parties, when they are
required to take their grievances before a judge and abide by his
decision if they cannot settle their dispute amicably.

The practice of taqlīd is an example of the same kind: the person who is
not an expert in Islamic jurisprudence is legally required to follow the
instructions of the expert, that is, the mujtahid.

### (B) Support from the Qur’ān & Sunnah

This sensible practice of following the mujtahid in sharī‘a laws has
been endorsed by Islam.

As mentioned in a verse quoted earlier, the Qur’ān strongly exhorts at
least a group of Muslims to devote their time and energy in studying
religion. This obligation is of such importance that Allah has exempted
such persons from the duty of jihād. More interesting is the reason and
purpose of their knowledge: ***“...to warn their people...”***
**(9:124)** This verse divides the people into two groups: those who are
learned in religious sciences and those who are not. It is the duty of
the learned to **“warn”** (a broad term which implies advice and
guidance) the common people, and it is expected of the common people to
**“beware”** (take heed of the learned persons’ advice and follow). In
sharī‘a matters, this process of guiding the common people is
technically known as “ijtihād,” and the process of following the
guidance by the common people is technically known as “taqlīd”.

The Imams of Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.) have endorsed this system in theory as
well as in practice:

*In Theory:* In a famous hadīth quoted earlier, ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked
Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.) about the legality of two Shi‘as seeking a
judgment from an illegitimate ruler or a judge appointed by such a ruler
in a dispute over a debt or inheritance. The Imam's answer was that it
was absolutely forbidden to do so; and then he read the following verse:
***“...(Yet in a dispute) they desire to summon one another to the
judgment of the tāghūt though they were commanded to reject and
disbelieve in him.”*** **(4:60)**

Then ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked, “What should the two (Shi‘as) do then?”
The Imam replied, “They must seek out one of your own who narrates our
traditions, who is versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden,
who is well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as
judge and arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you. If the ruling
which he based on our laws is rejected, then this rejection will be
tantamount to ignoring the order of Allāh and rejecting us, and
rejecting us is the same as rejecting Allāh, and this is the same as
polytheism.”

In another hadīth, Abi Khadījah relates that Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.)
sent him to his companions with the following message: “If a dispute or
a difference occurs among you about a property, then take care not to
seek judgment from those illegitimate [judges]; instead, you must seek a
person who knows what is permissible and what is forbidden by us, for I
appoint him as a judge over you. And take care that you do not seek
judgment against one another with an unjust ruler.”

The least that these two narrations prove is that Shi‘as are not allowed
to refer to unauthorized jurists for solutions to their problems,
instead they are advised to seek the guidance of those who are
well-versed in the teachings of the Ahlu ’l-bayt. In these ahādīth, the
practice of seeking the advice of experts in sharī‘a laws is taken for
granted.

*In Practice:* There are several documented cases of Shi‘as who asked
the Imams of their time to appoint someone to adjudicate between them in
religious problems. Such questions were raised by those who lived far
from Medina or those who could not gain access to their Imam in Medina
itself.

4. Ihtiyāt
----------

If a person is not a mujtahid and does not even want to do *taqlīd* of
any *mujtahid*, then according to the laws of sharī‘a he must do
*ihtiyāt*. Doing *ihtiyāt* means taking precaution. In the context of
our present discussion, it means that one must adopt a line of
precautionary action by which he or she can be sure of fulfilling the
requirements of God's commandment.

In practical terms, *ihtiyāt* means that a person, in each and every
problem, will have to study the views of mujtahids on that issue and act
on the most precautionary of all views. For example, if one mujtahid
says that “it is disliked to smoke” and another says that “it is harām
to smoke,” then one has to follow the second view. Or if one mujtahid
says that “you must shave your head during the first pilgrimage to
Mecca” while another says “you have a choice between shaving or just
cutting a little of your hair,” then one has to follow the first view.
This has to be done in each and every issue.

\* \* \*

In short, during the Occultation (*ghaybat*) of the Present Imam (a.s.),
there are three ways of following the sharī‘a: ijtihād, taqlīd and
ihtiyāt.

This lesson is based on *An Introduction to the Sharī‘a* by Sayyid M.
Rizvi

Question Paper on Lesson 23
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [15 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) Ijtihād enables us to apply Islamic laws in the rapidly changing
circumstances of human society.

(b) A Muslim society cannot be truly Islamic unless it also has
mujtahids in its midst.

(c) Taqlīd of a mujtahid by a non-Mujtahid is unreasonable and
illogical.

(d) Ihtiyāt is the easiest way of following the sharī‘a.

(e) A person can follow the sharī‘a by doing ijtihād, taqlīd or ihtiyāt.

*Question 2*: [20 points]  
 Explain what you understood from the hadith of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah
mentioned in this lesson.

*Question 3*: [15 points]  
 How would you defend the practice of taqlīd in the present time?

[^1]: An obligation which is on every member of the community as long as
it is unfulfilled; but as soon as some person or persons has fulfilled
it; it is no longer an obligation on those who have not fulfilled it.


