Lesson 24: More About The Sharī‘a
=================================

The purpose of human life in this world is to successfully go through
the trials and tribulations in order to achieve salvation in the
hereafter. In the hereafter, life will have no end. God did not leave us
without any means of guidance.

He sent prophets, messengers and books to guide mankind towards the
right path. The last prophet and messenger was the Prophet of Islam, and
the final revelation was the Qur'an. Islam is the ultimate means of
guidance for mankind through the tests and trials of this world. The
Prophet was sent “to convey the revelation; to purify spiritually and to
teach the Qur’ān and wisdom.”

Islam seeks to guide its followers by the legal system known as
“sharī‘a”. No aspect of our life is outside the jurisdiction of the
sharī‘a: legal and moral, personal and social, economic and politics,
all issues are directly or indirectly covered by the sharī‘a.

In this lesson you will learn more about the Islamic laws from different
perspectives.

1. The Roots & Branches of Religion
-----------------------------------

To differentiate between the matters of belief and the laws of sharī‘a,
the Shi‘a scholars have coined two interesting terms: The matter of
beliefs (monotheism, justice of God, prophethood, imāmat and
resurrection) are described as “the Roots of Religion — *Usūl ad-Dīn*”
because they form the foundation of our faith. The Shi‘a scholars have
also coined the term “the Branches of Religion — *Furū‘ ad-Dīn*” for the
sharī‘a laws.

These terminologies actually reflect the connection between “belief” and
“practice”. If the roots are strong, they will generate healthy
branches, green leaves, colourful flowers and delicious fruits; but if
the roots are weak, the tree will be considered useless. Similarly, if a
Muslim’s beliefs are strong, then it should show in the practical life
of that person. A non-practicing Muslim betrays the weakness in his
religious roots which are in need of further nurturing through
intellectual stimulation and spiritual guidance.

The items normally listed as “the Branches of Religion” are as follows:

1. Prayers (*salāt*).

2. Fasting in Ramadhan (*sawm*).

3. Pilgrimage to Mecca (*hajj*).

4. Tax on Wealth (*zakāt*).

5. Tax on Money (*khums*).

6. Spiritual as well as Physical Struggle for sake of Allāh (*jihād*).

7. Promoting good in the family and society (*amr bil ma\`ruf*).

8. Preventing evil in the family and society (*nahi \`anil munkar*).

9. Loving and following the Prophet & his family (*tawalla*).

10. Disassociating from the enemies of the Prophet & his family
(*tabarra*).

These ten teachings reflect the main framework of the Islamic sharī‘a;
otherwise, the entire corpus of Islamic sharī‘a falls under the term
‘branches of religion’.

2. The Classification of Sharī‘a Laws
-------------------------------------

All the issues covered by the sharī‘a are traditionally classified into
four main groups. The classification was put in the final form by one of
the great Shi‘a mujtahids of the 7th Islamic century, al-Muhaqqiq
al-Hilli (d. 676 AH). His famous work of jurisprudence, *Sharāya‘u
’l-Islām*, is still one of the main reference books for the scholars of
Islamic laws. Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli classified the laws into the
following groups:

1. *‘Ibādāt — the Acts of Worship* like prayers, fasting, hajj, etc.

2. *‘Uqūd — Mutual Contracts* like business transaction, partnership,
trusts, power of attorney issues, and marriage.

3. *Iyqā‘āt — Unilateral Instigations* like divorce, confessions in
legal matters, vows, etc.

4. *Ahkām — Miscellaneous*: anything which does not fit in the three
groups above like rules of eating and drinking, agriculture,
arbitration, testimony, etc.

Here I would like to present a modern classification of sharī‘a issues
done by the late Sayyid Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr. Ayatullah as-Sadr of
Najaf was a rising star among the new generation of mujtahids;
unfortunately the Shi‘a world was deprived of his knowledge and
leadership when he was tortured and killed by Saddam's regime in 1981.
Sadr also divides the sharī‘a laws into four groups but his
classification makes the issues more clear for the modern man unused to
classical texts.

1. *‘Ibādāt — the Acts of Worship* like prayers, fasting and hajj.

2. *Financial Laws*:

    a. On Social Level: issues like Islamic taxes of various kinds.

    b. On Individual Level:

        i. the laws pertaining to the means of possessions.

        ii. the laws pertaining to the utilization of one's possessions.

3. *Personal Laws*: issues like marriage and divorce, eating and
drinking, vows and oaths, hunting and slaughtering, bidding good and
forbidding evil, etc.

4. *Social Laws*: issues like the political system, judiciary, penal
code, jihad, etc.

3. The Five Types of Decrees
----------------------------

All Islamic injunctions fall within the five main categories of laws:
*wājib, mustahab, jā’iz, makrūh,* and *harām*. There are other
sub-divisions within these five decrees.

1. *Wājib*: means obligatory, necessary, incumbent. An act which must be
performed. One will be punished for neglecting a wajib act, e.g., the
daily prayers.

*Ihtiyāt wājib*: Sometimes you might see the term “*ihtiyāt wājib*” in
the decrees of the mujtahids. It means “precautionarily obligatory” and
its significance is the same as that of the wājib with one difference:
wherever the mujtahid says that “it is precautionarily obligatory,” you
have the option of leaving his opinion in that particular problem and
following the opinion of the second best mujtahid provided the second
mujtahid has a different opinion.

*Wājib* is also divided into two: *‘ayni* and *kifā’i*:

*Wājib ‘ayni* means an obligation which is imposed on individual
Muslims, e.g., the daily prayers. No one can do this duty for someone
else.

Whereas *wājib kifā’i* means an obligation which is imposed on the
Muslim community as a whole; and if it is fulfilled by one or more
individuals, then the rest of the community is no longer required to do
that. For example, a dead Muslim must be buried in the proper Islamic
way. This is a duty imposed on the Muslim community collectively; if
some people do that, then others are not responsible; but if no one does
that, then the entire community is answerable to God.

2. *Mustahab*, also known as *sunnat*, means recommended, desirable,
better. It refers to the acts which are recommended but not wajib. If
one neglects them, he will not be punished; however, if one performs
them, he will be rewarded.

3. *Jā’iz* means permitted, allowed, lawful. An act which is permitted
and lawful; there is no reward for performing it nor any punishment for
neglecting it, e.g., drinking tea.

*Halāl & Mubāh*: There are other words which reflect the same meaning as
*jā’iz* but with a different connotation: “*Halāl*” also means
permissible acts or things, but it is used mostly for permissible things
rather than actions. For example, the term “halāl meat” is used for the
meat whose consumption is permissible in Islam. Similarly, “*mubāh*”
means permissible, but it is exclusively used for things which are
lawfully yours or under your control as opposed to “*ghasbi* — usurped”.

4. *Makrūh* means reprehensible, disliked, discouraged. An act which is
disliked by Islam but not haram. If one does a makrūh act, he will not
be punished; however, if he refrains from it, then he will be rewarded.

5. *Harām* means forbidden, prohibited. An act from which one must
abstain. If someone performs a haram act, he will be punished either by
the Islamic court or in the hereafter or both.

\* \* \*

This lesson has been written by Sayyid M. Rizvi.

Some parts have been adopted from his *An Introduction to the Islamic
Sharī‘a*.

Question Paper on Lesson 24
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [20 points]  
 Fill in the blanks by writing appropriate terms of the shari\`ah:  
     (a) Salāt is a wājib \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ act.

    (b) Drinking alcohol is a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ act.

    (c) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ means a recommended act in Islam.

    (d) A usurped property is known as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

    (e) Drinking tea is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

    (f) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ means something that is lawfully yours.

    (g) Sunnat act is also known as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

    (h) Permissible acts and things are known as
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

    (i) A duty imposed upon the entire community is known as
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

    (j) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ means precautionarily
obligatory.

*Question 2*: [10 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) Shari\`ah only deals with spiritual training.

(b) The book “Sharāya’u ’l-Islām” was written by al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli.

(c) ‘Uqūd means the acts of worship.

(d) Furū‘ ad-Dīn means the Roots of Religion.

(e) Ayatullah S. M. Bāqir as-Sadr lived in Najaf, Iraq.

*Question 3*: [20 points]  
 Explain in your own words the relationship between “beliefs” and
“laws”.


