Lesson 26: Islam’s Spiritual Program (2)
========================================

(B) The Daily Spiritual Training
--------------------------------

Islam has also provided its followers with a program for spiritual
training on a daily basis. This program is known as salāt.Salāt is not
a “prayer” in the sense of talking to God whenever, wherever and however
you like. Salāt is an act of worship which must be done in a prescribed
manner. Whenever we use the words “ritual prayer” it refers to salāt and
not to “prayer” in the sense explained above.

In appearance, salāt is just an act of worship; but with further insight
into the philosophy of salāt, you will realize that it is also a program
which trains the Muslims to spiritually strengthen themselves and to
become the masters of their own lives rather than be slaves of their
desires. It is this aspect of salāt which has made it the pillar of
Islam. The Prophet says: “The salāt is the pillar of religion.”

While describing the effect which salāt should have on the lives of
Muslims, Allah says:

***“Establish the salāt; surely the salāt prevents [the doer] from the
indecencies and the forbidden [acts]. And surely the remembrance of
Allah is great.” (29:45)***

This verse clearly says that a true salāt would help the doer in staying
away from sins. It is in the light of this verse that the Prophet of
Islam (s.a.w.) said, “The first deed to be checked [on the Day of
Judgment] will be the salāt: if it is accepted, then other deeds will
also be accepted; but if it is rejected, then other deeds will also be
rejected.” What the Prophet meant was that the salāt plays a pivotal
role in the life of a Muslim: if his salāt was a true salāt and had
affected his behaviour, then there is a great chance that his other
deeds will also be good; but if his salāt was just a ritual without any
impact on his life, then there is a lesser chance that his other deeds
would be good.

The five daily prayers, provided done with understanding, will not just
be rituals but a program for spiritual upliftment of the Muslim. The
salāt will constantly remind him to keep the purpose of life in focus
and work towards it. That is why the Prophet once asked his companions,
“If there is a stream outside your house and you wash yourself in it
five time every day, then would any dirt remain on your body?” When the
answer was negative, the Prophet said, “Indeed the example of salāt is
like that flowing stream — whenever one performs a salāt, the sins
between the two prayers are washed away.”[^1]

In this lesson, we will look at just three aspects of salāt which can
help us in spiritual training.

### (i) Wudhu: Reminder of Spiritual Purity

Every Muslim is required to do ritual ablution (*wuzū*) before salāt.
Even this simple ablution is a way of reminding us about spiritual
purification. When we study the two verses of the Qur'ān about
ablutions, we see that there are two planes of purification: physical
and spiritual. Although *wudhu* and ghusl (the major ablution) are
related to physical purification, there is a more sublime reason
underlying these two ablutions — they serve as a reminder to and gateway
of spiritual purification.

In the chapter al-Baqarah, after talking about one of the major
ablutions, the Qur'an says:

***“Surely Allah loves those who oftenly turn to Him,***

***and He also loves those who cleanse themselves.” (2:222)***

In another verse, after talking about *wudhu*, the Qur'ān says:

***“Allah does not desire to make any impediment for you;***

***but He desires to cleanse you,***

***& that He may complete His blessings upon you;***

***haply you may be grateful.” (5:6)***

We find two different themes in these verses: First: Allāh loves those
who cleanse themselves, and that He desires to cleanse us. Second: He
wants to complete His blessings upon us, and that He loves those who
oftenly turn towards Him. The first theme is related to the physical
cleanliness, while the second theme is related to the spiritual purity.

The words of the first theme are very clear; they refer to cleanliness.
But what do the words of the second theme mean? What is the meaning of
“oftenly turning to Allah?” Turning to Allah implies that the person had
turned away from Allah. What does this mean? These are the questions
which I will discuss below.

In the Islamic value system, the human soul is like a light bulb. If the
bulb is protected from dust and dirt, it will enlighten the area around
it; but if dust and dirt is allowed to accumulate on the bulb, then it
will not be able to illuminate the area as much as before. Similarly,
the human soul has to be protected from spiritual \`dirt' and
uncleanliness, otherwise it will not be able to guide the person as
rightly as before.

After swearing by the most majestic signs of His creation, Allah says in
chapter 91, verses 1-10 that the pure human soul has the ability to
understand what is right and what is wrong provided it is purified and
uncorrupted. He makes it clear that the soul, just like the body, is
capable of becoming spiritually impure and unclean. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has
said, “The human soul is a precious jewel; whoever protects it, enhances
its (effectiveness), and whosoever degrades it, decreases its
(effectiveness).”

The impurities that can corrupt a human soul are collectively known as
“sins”. Accumulation of sins can indeed render the human soul
spiritually ineffective and, in Qur'anic expression, \`seize the heart'.
Allah says, ***“Whatever (sins) they have committed has seized their
heart.” (83:14)*** By committing sins, not only is the soul of a Muslim
seized but he also spiritually turns away from Allah. Sins create a
distance between God and man.

Can a person rescue his soul from the seizing of the sins? Can a sinner
spiritually get closer to God? Yes, indeed, a sinful person can
spiritually return to Allah. Returning to Allah means repenting and
asking forgiveness for your sins. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) has
explained this phenomenon as follows: “Each believer has a bright soul.
When he commits a sin, a dark dot appears on his bright soul. If he
repents, the dark dot will disappear. But if he persists in his sins,
the darkness will increase until it covers the entire soul—then the
person would never return towards goodness.”[^2]

Just as our bodies can become impure by the physical things, our souls
can become impure by sins. To rid our bodies of the physical dirt, we
use water; similarly, to rid our souls of the spiritual impurities, we
use *tawbah* (repentance). In short, the human soul is corruptible; it
is corrupted by sins; the corrupted soul can be purified by *tawbah*.

After talking about ritual ablutions which are done by water, Allah says
that “He loves those who do *tawbah*”. By this He is drawing our
attention to the spiritual purification. So with this insight into the
Qur'anic verses, whenever a Muslim does the ritual ablution, he also
remembers the spiritual purification which is even more important than
the physical purification.

### (ii) Salāt Helps in Spiritual Training

The five daily prayers have different numbers of cycles known as
*rak‘ah*. Each *rak‘ah* consists of the act of standing while reciting
two short chapters from the Qur'ān, the act of bowing and two
prostrations.

The *fajr* (dawn) prayer consists of 2 cycles.  
 The *zuhr* (noon) prayer consists of 4 cycles.  
 The *‘asr* (afternoon) prayer consists of 4 cycles.  
 The *maghrib* (evening) prayer consists of 3 cycles.  
 The *‘isha* (night) prayer consists of 4 cycles.

One wonders why Islam prescribed a different number of cycles for these
prayers? Why could not they be the same for all ritual prayers?

Many people have attempted to explain it in different ways, but I have
also looked at this question and came to the conclusion that there is no
particular reason for this variety in the number of cycles. It seems
that this difference in the number of cycles was introduced by Islam in
order to create a sense of discipline among the Muslims and to create
the spirit of absolute obedience to the Divine laws.

A Muslim is someone who voluntarily submits himself to Allah. This is
not always easy keeping in mind the trials and tribulations which we are
going through. Praying on a daily basis and following the number of
cycles prescribed by the sharī‘a *without questioning its merit* is a
way of instilling in us the spirit of obedience to the laws of Islam.
You must pray in the prescribed manner even if you do not understand the
merit of some of its rules; you should pray with the thought in your
mind that this is how Allah, *subhanahu wa ta\`ala*, wants you to pray.
This will indeed help you in harnessing the power of desires and
emotions within yourself, and help you in getting closer to the purpose
of life — to totally submit ourselves to the will of Allah.

### (iii) Sajdah: Daily Reminder of the Purpose of Life

Sajdah is the last part in each cycle of salāt; it is the part where you
prostrate in such a way that your forehead, both palms, both knees and
the big toes of both feet are touching the ground. Sajdah is to be done
twice in each cycle: one should go into the first sajdah, then sit
upright for a moment, and then go into the second sajdah.

Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Tālib (a.s.) was once asked why we have two sajdahs in
each cycle of salāt. The reply that the Imam gave shows that sajdah
(like many other parts of the ritual prayer) has a symbolic meaning
also. He said,

“While you are in the first sajdah, you are saying [to God] \`From it
[the earth] You have created me.'  
 While getting up from the first sajdah, you are saying \`From it You
have taken me out.'  
 When you go into the second sajdah, you are saying \`To it You will
return me.'  
 While getting up from the second sajdah, you are saying, \`From it You
will take me out again.'”

In this hadith, the holy Imam has actually applied the following verse
to the sajdah: ***“From it We have created you, and to it We shall
return you, and from it We shall take you out again.”*** **(20:55)**

If you study this hadith carefully, you will realize that:

1. You have been created from the earth. Remembering your origin will
not allow you to be arrogant and proud on the basis of race or wealth.

2. Getting up from the first sajdah is like our birth, going down into
the second sajdah is like death and getting up from the second sajdah is
like resurrection. This symbolic meaning will never let us forget the
day of judgment and the life hereafter.

3. It also shows that this worldly life is symbolically nothing more
than a few moments that you sit between the two sajdahs.

This insight into the philosophy of sajdah will surely transform your
salāt from a mere ritual to a practical reminder about your origin, the
transient nature of this world and your ultimate destination in the
hereafter.

\* \* \*

What you have read above are just three examples from the rules related
to salāt which help the Muslims in focusing on the purpose of life and
strengthening themselves spiritually. We thank Allah, subhanahu wa
ta\`ala, for providing such means of spiritual training in the daily
rituals of an Islamic life.

This lesson has been written by Sayyid M. Rizvi.

Some sections have been summarized from his *The Ritual & Spiritual
Purity*.

Question Paper on Lesson 26
---------------------------

*Question 1*: [20 points]  
 Fill in the blanks:  
 (a) Salāt is a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ spiritual program.

(b) The Prophet (s.a.w.) said: “Salāt is the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of
religion.”

(c) Muslims are required to say \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ritual prayers in a
day.

(d) Physical dirt can be cleansed by water; spiritual sins can be washed
away by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(e) The dawn prayer is known as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(f) The human heart can be ‘seized’ spiritually by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ .

(g) There are \_\_\_\_\_\_ cycles in maghrib prayer.

(h) All cycles of the daily salāt have \_\_\_\_\_ sajdahs.

(i) In the light of Imam ‘Ali's saying, the sajdah is a symbolic
reflection of verse \_\_\_:\_\_\_ of the Qur'an.

(j) According to the Qur'an, the salāt prevents the doer from the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ acts.

*Question 2*: [15 points]  
 Expain how the salāt promotes the spirit of obedience in a Muslim.

*Question 3*: [15 points]  
 How does sajdah help us in focusing on the purpose of life?

[^1]: Wasā'ilu 'sh-Shi‘a, vol. 3, p. 7.

[^2]: Al-Usūl al-Kāfi, vol. 2, p. 273.


