Lesson 28: The Islamic Community (2)
====================================

1. Equality of Believers
------------------------

### (A) The Concept

Islam came with a universal concept of brotherhood. Its foundation is
based on *tawhīd*, the belief in One God. And its social program is also
based on unity of the believers.

Just as in *tawhīd*, one first has to reject the false gods and then
declare faith in the One and Only God, similarly, Islam rejects all
artificial and man-made marks of distinction. No one can claim any
superiority over the other based on race, colour, language or wealth.

Allah clearly declares in the Qur'ān:

***O you mankind! We have created you of a male and a female, and then
We made you into races and tribes so that you may know each other.
Surely the most honourable of you in Allah's sight is the one who is the
most pious among you; surely Allah is All-Knowing and Aware. (49:13)***

According to this verse, all humans can trace their origin to Adam and
Eve. Allah has divided them into different tribes and races so that it
may be easy to recognise each other. Thus the difference in race, tribe,
colour and language are to facilitate the recognition of each other.
These physical and material differences cannot be a standard for
preference or superiority of one over others. Besides knowledge and
*jihād*, the only mark of distinction recognized in Islam is *taqwa*,
i.e., piety and Godfearing. As Allah has said, “Surely the most
honourable of you in Allah's sight is the one who is most pious among
you.”

Islam preached and promoted racial equality and harmony among the
believers. It does not say that one should not feel fraternity towards
the believers who belong to his tribe or culture. However, a Muslim
crosses the acceptable limits of ethnic fraternity when he starts
preferring the evil person of his own tribe over the good Muslims of
another tribe. Such racial prejudice is not allowed in Islam at all.

### (B) Examples From History

When the *adhān*, the call to prayer, was introduced in Medina, the
Prophet selected Bilāl as the first *mu’azzin* — even though Bilāl was
not an Arab, he was an Ethiopian. He could not even pronounce the letter
“*shin* **ش** ” properly; it sounded like “*sin* **س** ”; so instead of
saying “*Ash-hadu an lā ilaha il-lal-lāh,*” he used to say “*As-hadu
an...*” Some Arabs came to the Prophet and complained about his choice
for the first *mu’azzin*. The Prophet rejected their complaint and said
Allāh hears the *sin* of Bilāl as *shin*.[^1]

Juwaybar was a native of Yamamah who came to Medina in search of the
truth about Islam. He soon accepted Islam. Since he had neither money
nor any friend, he was temporarily accommodated along with other poor
Muslims in the Mosque by permission of the Prophet. The Mosque, however,
was not a place of habitation; therefore, the Prophet selected a site
outside the Mosque and erected a shed over it for the homeless people.
This place came to be known in history as “Suffa”.

One day the Prophet came to the people of Suffa and started talking to
Juwaybar. He said, “How good it would be if you could marry and start a
family, ending this loneliness and isolated life?” Juwaybar said, “O
Messenger of Allah, I have neither wealth nor beauty; nor have I a noble
descent or lineage. Who will marry me? And which woman likes to be the
wife of a poor, short, dark complexioned and ugly man like me?”

“O Juwaybar,” said the Prophet, “God has changed the worth of the human
being in Islam. Many people were high-placed in the pre-Islamic society
and Islam brought them down. Many were despised nonentities and Islam
bestowed them with honour, high rank, and brought them up. Islam
abolished racial discrimination and pride of lineage. Now all people
irrespective of their colour and origin are equal. Nobody has
superiority over others except through piety and obedience to Allah.

“Therefore, O Juwaybar, do as I say. Go to the house of Ziyād bin Labid
to ask for the hand of his daughter in marriage.”

Ziyād was one of the wealthiest persons of Medina and was held in high
status by his own tribe. When Juwaybar entered his house, Ziyād was
surrounded by his relatives and some of his tribesmen. Juwaybar took a
seat, paused for a moment and then raising his head, he said, “I have
brought a message from the Prophet. Do you like to hear it
confidentially or openly?”

Ziyād: “A message from the Prophet is an honour to me, better tell it
openly.”  
 Juwaybar: “The Prophet has sent me to request you for your daughter for
myself.”  
 Ziyād: “Did he himself make this suggestion to you?”  
 Juwaybar: “I don't speak on my own accord. Everybody knows me, I am not
a liar!”  
 Ziyād: “Strange! We do not give our daughters to persons of unequal
status nor outside our tribe. You go back; I shall go to the Prophet and
have a talk with him myself.”  
 Juwaybar left the house murmuring, “By God whatever the Qur'ān teaches
and whatever is the purpose of the prophethood of Muhammad is totally
against what Ziyād says.”

Those nearby heard the murmuring of Juwaybar. Zalfa, the lovely daughter
of Ziyād, heard these words. She came from behind the curtain and said
to father: “Father, who was the man who just went out saying something?
And what did he mean?”

Ziyād: “He had come to ask for your hand in marriage and was claiming
that the Prophet had sent him for this purpose.”  
 Zalfa: “Isn't it possible that he had really sent him, and thus your
rejection may amount to disobedience of the Prophet's order?”  
 Ziyād: “What do you feel about it?”  
 Zalfa: “I feel you should bring him back before he reaches to the
Prophet, and then go yourself to find out the truth.” So Ziyād went
behind Juwaybar and persuaded him to come back to his home. Then he went
hurriedly up to the Prophet.  
 Ziyād: “O Messenger of God, Juwaybar came to me with such and such
message from you. I would like to inform you that our custom is to give
our daughters to persons of equal status from our own tribe who all
happen to be your companions.”  
 “O Ziyād,” said the Prophet, “Juwaybar is a faithful man. That dignity
and honour of which you are talking of has not been abolished. Every
believer man is equal (for the purpose of marriage) to every believer
woman.”  
 Ziyād returned to his house and explained the matter to his daughter.
She said, “Please do not reject the proposal put by the Prophet. This
matter concerns me. I accept Juwaybar whatever his condition may be. If
the Prophet is pleased with it, I am also pleased.”

The wedding was duly solemnized. Ziyād paid the *mahr* (marriagegift
paid by the groom to the bride) and also provided a house and its
essential items to the newly wed from his own wealth.

When the night came, Juwaybar was dazzled by the beauty of his bride and
the richness of the house which was given to him. He was completely
overwhelmed by the unexpected blessings of Allah; in spiritual ecstasy,
he went to a corner of the room and spent the whole night in recitation
of the Qur'ān and prayer. It was dawn when he came to himself and then
decided to fast in gratitude to God.

When the women from Ziyad's family came to see the bride the next
morning, they found her untouched. They kept the matter secret from
Ziyād. Two nights and days passed in the same manner: Juwaybar prayed
during the nights and fasted during the days. Now the women informed
Ziyād about this unusual situation because they thought that perhaps
Juwaybar was impotent. Ziyād took the matter to the Prophet; the Prophet
called Juwaybar and inquired about the unusual behaviour seen in him.

“O Prophet!,” answered Juwaybar, “when I entered the house and found
myself amidst that affluence, a state of gratitude and devotion over
took me. I thought it was necessary to offer thanks and prayers to Allah
before doing anything. Tonight I shall go to my wife.”

Juwaybar and Zalfa lived a most happy life. When the call for jihād
came, Juwaybar participated in it with enthusiasm typical of a brave
Muslim, and attained martyrdom under the banner of Islam. After his
martyrdom, Zalfa was the most sought after woman for a wife and people
were eager to pay the greatest *mahr* for her.[^2]

\* \* \*

The example of Bilāl (a non-Arab) and Juwaybar (a poor and “status-less”
Arab) shows that the concept of equality was not only presented on a
theoretical level in Islam rather the Prophet demonstrated equality
among the Muslims during his own lifetime in a practical manner. It was
in light of this teaching that he married his cousin to Zayd bin
Hāritha, a freed slave, and gave the sister of ‘Abdu ’r-Rahmān bin ‘Awf
(a Qurayshite) in marriage to Bilāl, an ex-slave of Ethiopian origin.

In his last *khutba*, the Prophet openly declared: “There is no
superiority for an Arab over a non-Arab, nor for a non-Arab over an
Arab, nor for a white man over a black, nor for a black over a white,
except by piety. All of you are from Adam and Adam was from the dust.”

\* \* \*

### (C) Promotion of Equality & Brotherhood

Islam has also instituted certain rituals that promote the sense of
equality among the followers of Islam.

One important way of promoting brotherhood among the Muslims is the
***salāt*** in both forms: *furāda* (individual prayer) and *jamā\`at*
(congregational prayer).

In the *furāda* prayer, you are required to recite surah al-Fatiha (the
first chapter of the Qur'ān). If you read the meaning of this surah, you
will notice that half of the surah uses plural pronouns. For example:

“Only You, WE worship; and only You WE ask for help.”  
 “Guide US to the straight path...”

You have to say these sentences with plural pronouns even if you are
praying *furāda*, on your own. You have to say “We...We...” even when
you are praying alone. Why?

Firstly, because Allah wants you to realize and feel that you are not
alone; that you are part of a brotherhood known as “the Islamic
brotherhood”; that you belong to a community known as “the Islamic
*ummah*.”

Secondly, Allah wants us to think of the Islamic ummah even when we are
all alone. Islam is not a personal religion; it is a social religion.
Thinking about other Muslims will surely promote the sense of
brotherhood among the followers of Islam all over the world.

Although the daily prayers can be said individually as well as in
congregation; however, to say the daily prayers in congregation has been
highly recommended because it promotes the feeling of brotherhood and
equality in Islam. How?

Firstly, all stand in lines regardless of any difference of race, tribe,
colour, language or wealth. It often happens that a poor person will be
standing in the front row while a wealthy person will be standing in the
second row. And this means that in the position of sajdah (prostration),
the head of the wealthy person will be at the feet of the poor person!
This will make the wealthy person realize that in God's view, rich and
poor are all equal.

Secondly, there is no reservation in the rows of congregational prayers.
No one can come and say to someone else that “move from here, this is my
place.” And if a person forcefully removes someone else, then his salāt
will be invalid (*bātil*). This rule ensures that everyone feels equally
related to God.

Thirdly, in jamā\`at prayer, every one will be reciting in the same
language, and doing exactly the same action at the same time—takbir,
ruku\`, sajdah, etc. And also saying “we...we...”. This will surely
create a sense of unity among the Muslims.

It is because of this aspect of congregational prayer that Islam has
strongly recommended the jamā\`at prayer on a daily basis. And it is
because of this aspect of jamā\`at prayer that Islam has even increased
the spiritual reward of group prayer as follows:

*Number of Persons Reward for 1 rak\`at is equal to:*

2 150 prayers  
 3 600 prayers  
 4 1200 prayers  
 5 2400 prayers  
 6 4800 prayers  
 7 9600 prayers  
 8 19,200 prayers  
 9 36,400 prayers  
 10 72,800 prayers  
 more than 10 nobody knows but Allah.

\* \* \*

Another important practical demonstration of equality and brotherhood in
Islam is the ritual of hajj—the pilgrimage to Mecca. Although ***hajj***
is obligatory only once in a lifetime for those Muslims who can
physically and financially afford the journey, it is indeed an
experience that leaves longlasting and deep impressions on the
psychological and spiritual dimension of the pilgrim.

Before entering the holy territory of Mecca and its vicinity, it is
necessary that all pilgrims change into *ihrām*. *Ihrām* (pronounced as
ehrām) is simple dress for pilgrims: For men, it consists of two
extra-large size white towels—one to be tied from the waist down to the
knees, and the other to be placed over the shoulders. For women, it
consists of a two-piece simple white dress. Also, no cosmetics are
allowed while a person is in the *ihrām*. This dress takes away all
means by which a person would distinguish himself by the use of dress
and cosmetics; you are not even allowed to look at yourself in the
mirror.

When the pilgrim reaches Mecca, he has to proceed to the Holy Mosque and
do *tawāf*—going around the Ka\`bah seven times. This uniformity in
dress and action—all believers moving around the Ka\`bah has a strong
impact in bringing out the real identity of a person: you are nothing
but a slave of God, and in this there is no difference between you and
the next person doing the tawāf.

It is appropriate to quote the impression which hajj had on one of the
most famous Muslim figures in the Afro-American community of the USA,
Malcolm X.

“There were tens of thousands of pilgrims, from all over the world. They
were of all colors, from blue-eyed blondes to black-skinned Africans.
But we were all participating in the same ritual, displaying a spirit of
unity and brotherhood that my experience in America had led me to
believe never could exist between the white and the non-white.  
 “America needs to understand Islam, because this is the one religion
that erases from its society the race problem. Throughout my travels in
the Muslim world, I have met, talked to, and even eaten with people who
in America would have been considered \`white'—but the \`white' attitude
was removed from their minds by the religion of Islam. I have never
before seen sincere and true brotherhood practiced by all colors
together, irrespective of their color.”[^3]

\* \* \*

This lesson has been written by Sayyid M. Rizvi.

Question Paper on Lesson 28
---------------------------

Question 1: [10 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) The meaning of taqwa is same as that of jihād.

(b) Fraternity with the believers of your own tribe is disallowed in
Islam.

(c) Bilal used to pronounce “shin” ش as “seen” س.

(d) Juwaybar was a native of Ethiopia.

(e) Zalfa was daughter of Ziyad bin Labid.

(f) Salātu 'l-Furāda means congregational prayer.

(g) Salātu 'l-Jamā\`at means congregational prayer.

(h) The reward for 1 rak\`at in a jamā\`at prayer of six people is equal
to 2400 prayers.

(i) “Ihrām” means the garment of the pilgrim.

(j) Going around the Ka\`bah is known as “tawāf”.

Question 2: [5 points]  
 What are the three criteria of preference and superiority in Islam?

Question 3: [6 points]  
 Explain at what stage fraternity towards your own tribe/people becomes
“prejudice” from the Islamic point of view.

Question 4: [5 points]  
 Name three people in the life of the Prophet, whose marriage reflected
the equality of believers in Islam.

Question 5: [12 points]  
 Briefly explain how the congregational prayer promotes the concept of
equality in Islam.

Question 6: [12 points]  
 Briefly explain how the pilgrimage to Mecca promotes the concept of
equality in Islam.

[^1]: Rizvi, S.Sa’eed Akhtar, Slavery from Islam & Christian
Perspectives, p. 69.

[^2]: Mutahhari, M., Anecdotes of Pious Men, p. 8.

[^3]: The Autobiography, p. 340.


