Lesson 29: The Islamic Community (3)
====================================

1. Bidding The Good & Forbidding The Evil
-----------------------------------------

**1.** ***Amr Bi ’L-Ma‘Rūf & Nahi ‘Ani ’L-Munkar:*** **Bidding The Good
& Forbidding The Evil**

**Islam: A Social Religion.** Islam is not a religion in the spiritual
sense of the word only; it deals with all aspects of human life. Islam
also seeks to create peace and harmony in the social life of a Muslim
society. It has instituted ways to promote good and prevent evil in the
society. The most important social principle of Islam is known as “*amr
bi ’l-ma‘rūf wa nahi ‘ani 'l-munkar*”.

*Amr bi 'l-ma‘rūf* means to bid the good or to promote the good; whereas
*nahi ‘ani 'l-munkar* means to forbid the evil or to prevent the evil.
This social principle is relevant on the individual level as well as
social level. We have to promote good and prevent evil within the sphere
of our own family and friendship circle as well as within the Muslim
community and the human society at large.

2. Importance of Amr & Nahi
---------------------------

Amr bi ’l-marūf & nahi ‘ani ’l-munkar is a moral and ethical safety-net
for the Muslim community and the human society at large. It does not
allow the Muslim community to abandon its members in the path of
immorality and self-destructive path. Nor does it allow the Muslim ummah
to be indifferent to the moral and ethical dilemma faced by humanity at
large.

Allāh says:

***“There should be among you (O believers), a group (of the learned and
sincere persons) who should call (the people) towards goodness, bid
(them) to the good and forbid (them) from the evil—they are the
successful people.”*** **(3:104)**

While describing the believers, Allāh says:

***“...The believing men and the believing women are helpers of each
other: they bid the good, forbid the evil, establish the prayer, pay the
alms, and they obey Allah and His Messenger—these are the people on whom
Allah will be merciful. Indeed Allah is Powerful and Wise.”***
**(9:71)**

In the latter verse, while counting the positive qualities of the
believers, Allah has placed amr bi ’l-ma‘rūf and nahi ‘ani ’l-munkar
before the salāt and the zakāt. Because it is with amr and nahi that
salāt, zakāt and other good deeds will be promoted and practised in the
Muslim community.

Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Tālib (a.s.) said: “Verily the people before you
perished because when they committed sins, the Rabbis and the Priests
did not forbid them from it. And when the people became submerged into
sins and the Rabbis and the Priests did not forbid them, then the
chastisement came down upon them. Therefore, bid towards the good and
forbid the evil; and know that bidding towards the good and forbidding
from evil will not hasten your death or decrease your sustenance.” On
the same lines, the Prophet of Islam (may peace be upon him) had said
earlier that, “My followers will be in good condition as long as they
bid (each other) towards the good, forbid (each other) from the evil,
and co-operate with each other in good (deeds). If they do not do this,
then the (heavenly) blessings will be lifted from them and some (evil
ones) among them will be imposed over them (as a ruler). In that state,
they will have no helper, neither on the earth nor in the heaven.”

Once a person from the tribe of Khath‘am came to the Prophet and asked
him: “O the Messenger of God! Please inform me about the best [teaching]
of Islam.”

The Prophet: “Believing in God.”  
 Khath‘ami: “Then what?”  
 The Prophet: “Maintaining [good] relations with the relatives.”  
 Khath‘ami: “Then what?”  
 The Prophet: “Bidding the good and forbidding the evil.”  
 Then the Khath‘ami asked, “And please also tell me what are the worst
deeds in view of Allah?”  
 The Prophet: “Shirk: associating a person or a thing with Allah.”  
 Khath‘ami: “Then what?”  
 The Prophet: “Severing relations with the relatives.”  
 Khath‘ami: “Then what?”  
 The Prophet: “Promoting evil and forbidding the good.”

These ahādīth from the Prophet and the Imam are sufficient to impress
the importance of amr bi 'l-ma‘rūf and nahi ‘ani 'l-munkar for the
ethical and moral wellbeing of the Muslim ummah and humanity at large.

3. Amr & Nahi: An Expression of Brotherhood
-------------------------------------------

Amr and nahi should not be seen as interfering in the lives of other
people; it is, on the contrary, one of the demands of brotherhood in
Islam.

The Qur’ānic verse in which Almighty Allāh has talked about Islamic
brotherhood is not actually a verse about brotherhood—it is a verse
which gives an extreme example of amr and nahi, and it justifies the
“interference” by saying that “indeed the believers are brothers”. Now
read the entire two verses:

***If two groups from among the believers fight (against each other),
then you should make peace between them. However, if one continues its
aggression over the other, then fight the aggressor party until it
agrees to return to the command of Allah. If the aggressor agrees to
return (to the command of Allah), then make peace between the two on the
basis of justice. Be just; verily Allah loves those who are just.***
***Indeed the believers are brothers, therefore, make peace between your
brothers. And fear Allah so that you may be dealt with mercy.”***
**(49:9-10)**

This verse is saying that Muslims cannot be indifferent to the problems
of their brethren; they have to get involved: either they should resolve
the conflict peacefully or side with the oppressed against the aggressor
until peace and justice is achieved in the society. This is not
interference in the negative sense, this is the demands and rights of
brotherhood which Allāh has established among the believers.

4. Conditions & Levels of Amr & Nahi
------------------------------------

The issue of amr bi ’l-ma‘rūf and nahi ‘ani ’l-munkar, depending on the
circumstance, can take different forms: it can become wājib or sunnat.
Even the means of amr and nahi depends on the circumstances of the issue
and the person involved.

The person who wants to do amr and nahi should observe the following
**conditions**:

1. You must be familiar with the Islamic view on that issue in order to
properly define “good” and “evil” before encouraging others to do good
or forbid them from evil.

2. In each given case, you must weigh the possibility of the influence
of your advice. If you are sure or there seems to be a great probability
that your words will have no effect on the other person, then it is not
necessary to do amr or nahi.

3. You must also evaluate the state of the person whom you want to
advise. Is he insisting or repeating the evil deeds or was it just a one
time slip on his part? If you discern or come to know that he is not
going to repeat the sin, then you do not have to do amr or nahi.

4. You must also evaluate the overall situation to make sure that your
action of amr or nahi would not lead to a worse situation than what
exists at present.

\* \* \*

Even when you have decided that you should do amr or nahi, you will have
to look at the different level of doing *amr bi 'l-ma‘rūf* and *nahi
‘ani 'l-munkar*. In all, there are **three levels** of amr and nahi:

1. By indirect action: By indirectly expressing your dislike of the
other person's wrongful behaviour. For example, by not greeting him or
greeting him without the previous warmth, or by ignoring him: with the
hope that this might lead the person to think about change in your
attitude towards him, and hopefully guide him to the right direction.

2. Verbally: If the first method does not work, then talk to the person.
Whether you should talk politely and friendly, or harshly depends on the
situation.

3. By direct action: This is only applicable to those who have authority
over others: parents, teachers and Islamic government. If preventing the
evil depends on physical action, then it must be thought out very
carefully. The example mentioned in 49:9 is of this level of amr and
nahi.

\* \* \*

This lesson has been written by Sayyid M. Rizvi.

Question Paper on Lesson 29
---------------------------

Question 1: [10 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) Islam is as much a social religion as it is spiritual.

(b) Muslims should not attempt to reform those who are on the path of
immorality.

(c) In verse 9:71, amr and nahi has been mentioned before salāt and
zakāt.

(d) Indifference to immorality takes away the Divine blessings from the
entire society.

(e) Amr & nahi are expressions of brotherhood in Islam.

Question 2 [10 points]  
 Briefly demonstrate the importance of amr bi 'l-ma‘rūf and nahi ‘ani
'l-munkar in Islam.

Question 3: [10 points]  
 How does the Qur’ān justify “inteference” in cases of inappropriate
behaviour?

Question 4: [10 points]  
 Briefly list the conditions for doing amr and nahi.

Question 5: [10 points]  
 What are the three levels of amr and nahi?


