Lesson 34: Family Life In Islam (2)
===================================

1. Children’s Status & Rights
-----------------------------

Allah, *subhanahu wa ta\`ala*, has made the parents' heart as the source
of love for their children. The love for children has been \`legislated'
by Allah in the very nature of parenthood. It is normal for a parent to
love his or her child; it is abnormal for a parent not to love his or
her child. This is the natural law as well as the religious law.

Islam has provided some wonderful guidelines for the parents in order to
bring up their children —from birth to age 21— in the proper Islamic
manner. The Prophet said to Imam ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, there are as many rights
of children incumbent upon parents as there are rights of parents
incumbent upon children.”

2. Some Basic Rights
--------------------

The rights of children upon their parents can be summarized under the
following six items:

1. THE RIGHT TO LIVE: No parent has the right to abort the child or to
kill the child after birth for any reason whatsoever. For example, the
Qur'ān has strongly condemned those who kill their children for fear of
poverty. Allah says: *“Do not kill your children because of (fear* *of)
poverty—We will provide for you and them.”* (6:152) The Prophet said,
“Whoever refrains from marriage because of fear of poverty, he has
indeed thought badly of God.”

2. THE RIGHT TO BELONG TO A FAMILY: No parent can disown his or her
child, or deprive the child from the family name.

3. THE RIGHT TO HAVE A GOOD NAME: Imam ‘Ali says: “The first beneficence
of a parent towards his child is to give him a good name; therefore, you
should name your child with a good name.” A child hears his name day and
night; and it is reasonable to believe that the meaning of that name
subconsciously strengthens those characteristics which are implied in
that name. What is emphasized here is the fact that a name has a
psychological effect on the person, provided it is not counter-manded by
rearing or society.

A bad name has one more tangible evil effect. Whenever that name is
announced, the person will feel embarrassment and the name will become a
source of constant irritation, affecting his outlook on society. Hence
the emphasis in *ahādith* on giving good names to children.

The Prophet used to emphasize this aspect of life so much that Imam
as-Sadiq said, “The Prophet used to change the bad names of people and
places.”

4. THE RIGHT OF MAINTENANCE: It is a child's right to be provided by the
parents with the necessities of life: food, dress, shelter, furniture,
and whatever a person normally needs to live a respectable life.

5. THE RIGHT TO HAVE BASIC EDUCATION: It is the right of a child to
receive basic secular as well as religious education.

6. THE RIGHT TO BE BROUGHT UP ACCORDING TO ISLAM: It is the right of the
child to be brought up in a home environment which is Islamic.

3. Three Stages of Life
-----------------------

Islam has divided the upbringing of a child into three stages from birth
to age 21. The division is based on the following hadith of the Prophet
(s.a.w.): “The child is the master for seven years; and a slave for
seven years and a vizier for seven years; so if he grows into a good
character within 21 years, well and good; otherwise leave him alone
because you have discharged your responsibility before Allah.”

The same hadith has been explained by Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (a.s.): “Let
your child play upto seven years; and keep him with you (for education
and training) for another seven years; then if he succeeds (well and
good); otherwise, there is no good in him.”

### The First Stage: from birth to age seven

As the first stage is a care-free period, the child is to be considered
as “master” of the parents. The Prophet said, “The child is the master
for seven years.” This is the age of being a child and playing; he or
she is not yet fully ready for education through formal instruction.

What has been said above, however, does not mean that a child cannot
grasp or understand anything; not at all. The child is constantly
influenced by the atmosphere in which he lives; he/she learns by
observation and imitation; therefore, it is absolutely necessary for the
parents to provide good examples by their own behaviour. The Prophet
said, “Respect your children and teach them good behaviour, Allah will
forgive (your sins).”

Although the child is not ready for formal instructions, our Imams have
emphasized that religious issues —very basic and simple— should be
introduced to them gradually. “Graduality” is the most important point
to remember at this stage of life. The following hadith narrated by
\`Abdullah ibn Fazl from the fifth or sixth Imam is very significant to
understand what is meant by gradually:

“When the child reaches 3 years of age, teach him seven times to recite
*la ilaha il-lal lāh.*  
 Then leave him at that till he is 3 years, 7 months and 20 days old;
then train him to say *Muhammadun rasu-lul lāh.*  
 Then leave him at that till he completes 4 years, then teach him seven
times to say *sal-lal lāhu \`ala Muhammadin wa āli Muhammad*.  
 Then leave him at that till he reaches the age of 5 years; then see if
he can distinguish between the right and the left hand. When he knows
the difference, then make him face *qiblah* and tell him to do
*sajdah*.  
 This is to continue till he is 6 years of age. Then he should be told
to pray and taught *ruku\`* and *sajdah*.  
 When he completes 7 years, then he should be asked to wash his face and
hands, and then told to pray.  
 This will continue till he reaches the age of 9 years, when he should
be taught proper ritual ablution for prayer and proper salāt.  
 When he learns proper wudu and salāt, Allah forgives the sins of his
parents.”

### The Second Stage: from age eight to fourteen.

The Prophet said, “The child is...a slave for [the next] seven years.”
Since this is the age when the child's mind can grasp logical reasoning
and is developed for formal education—it is very important that the
child not only be educated but, at the same time, he or she should be
raised with proper Islamic ethics. By saying that the child is a “slave”
from eight to fourteen, the Prophet wants to emphasize that at this age
the parents should be strict in disciplining their children. A child is
a “slave” in the sense that he has to follow the instructions of parents
and teachers.

In the sayings of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams of Ahlu 'l-byat
(a.s.), three things have been emphasized for the male children in the
second stage of upbringing: 1. literacy for secular knowledge; 2.
religious knowledge and 3. physical education and martial arts. For
example, the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “It is the right of the male child
on his father to...teach him the Book of Allah...and riding and
swimming.” Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “It is the duty of the
father to teach his son writing.”

Religious education is very crucial at this stage so that the child's
religious beliefs are based on sound reasoning and firm foundation. Imam
Ja\`far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Make haste in teaching your youngsters
hadith before they are approached by murji\`ite (a misguided sect).”

Literacy, and seeking of secular and religious knowledge has been
equally emphasized for the girls in our ahadith. However, instead of
physical education, the ahadith talk about those specific subjects which
would help the girls in becoming good wives and educated mothers. The
destiny of the future generations of the ummah, after all, depends on
the mothers who are learned, informed, and aware of their role in
establishing a society which is always conscious of Allah's presence.

### The Third Stage: from age fifteen to twenty-one.

The Prophet described this stage of upbringing as follows: “The
child...is an adviser for [the next] seven years.” At the age of
fourteen, fifteen and up, a Muslim child is expected to have become a
responsible teenager. Therefore, the Prophet says that the parents
should now treat him or her more like a ‘friend’ than a ‘slave’.

At this stage, the parents should guide and help their teenage child in
make correct decisions for themselves. In mid- and late-teens, the child
has to start the specific training or education for the career that he
intends to pursue so that he may soon stand on his own feet. It is also
the time when the child is nearing the age of marriage.

Islam has strongly emphasized that the parents should get their
daughters married at an early age when they have acquired mental
maturity—their higher education can continue even after marriage but
marriage should not be postponed for the sake of anything else. The
condition of mental maturity cannot be measured by age or time. The same
emphasis goes for male children.

At the age of twentyone, the parents’ responsibility towards their
children comes to an end. If anyone brings up his children based on
Islamic values, that child surely will be the apple of the parents' eyes
and the delight of their hearts; and it is this child who, in his turn,
may be hoped to fulfil his obligations towards his parents.

The Prophet said, “A virtuous child is a flower from the flowers of
Paradise.” He also said, “Among the good fortunes of a man is the
virtuous child.”

\* \* \*

This lesson is based on \`Allamah Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi's

*The Family Life of Isam* (Revised Edition, 1980)

with additions and modifications made for this course.

Question Paper on Lesson 34
---------------------------

Question 1: [10 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) The Prophet said, “The child is the master for [the first] seven
years.”

(b) A bad name has no tangible effect on the child.

(c) Salat should be taught all at once when a child becomes nine years
old.

(d) During the first seven years, a child learns through observation and
imitation of the people around him.

(e) Literacy and basic education are necessary for both the boys and the
girls.

Question 2: [20 points]  
 List the six basic rights of children upon their parents.

Question 3: [20 points]  
 Briefly describe the three stages of upbringing as outlined in the
hadith of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.).


