Lesson 35: Family Life In Islam (3)
===================================

1. Parents’ Status
------------------

### (A) Father

In the Islamic family system, the father is considered as the head of
the family. Whenever some people form a group, they must also have a
leader. For example, a soccer team needs a captain who would make sure
each player follows their plan properly; a school needs a principal; a
government needs a ruler. “Family” is a group of people; and, therefore,
it also needs a leader whom we call as “the head of the family”.

As the head of the family, it is the father's responsibility to provide
the necessities of life for his dependants: his children, his wife (and
elderly parents, if they are needy).

What are the necessities of life? Food, dress, shelter, furniture, and
whatever a person normally needs to live a respectable life.

The rights which a father has over his children are of three types:  
 • Spiritual & Emotional: to love one's father, and to deal with him in
a humble, kind and merciful manner.

• Physical: to cheerfully bear any hardship you may face in taking care
of him; to talk gently to him; not to raise your voice or hands above
his; and not to precede him in any way.

• Financial: to fulfill his needs before he asks you for it.

Imam Zaynu 'l-\`Abidin (a.s.) said: “It is the right of your father to
realize that he is your root and you are his branch; and that without
him you would have been non-existent. Therefore, whenever you find in
yourself anything that is likeable, remember that your father is the
basic means of that gift [of Allah] to you. And be thankful to Allah and
grateful to your father accordingly.”

### (B) Mother

In Islam, the mother is a substitute head of the family. In many Muslim
societies, the father works outside the house, whereas the mother is in
charge inside the house.

As mentioned earlier, it is the father's duty to provide the necessities
of life for the children. If the father is dead, then it is the duty of
the grandfather to provide for his grandchildren. Only when both, the
father and the grandfather, are dead the duty of providing the
necessities of life for the children fall upon the mother.

A mother's basic duty towards her children is to love, nurture and train
them as best as she can so that they may grow up as healthy and good
Muslims. That is why it is said that, “Paradise is at the feet of the
mothers.”

The three types of rights mentioned for the father, equally apply for
the mother also. Rather in some ways, the rights of mothers are superior
to that of fathers.

Hakim bin Hizam asked the Prophet, “O Messenger of God, to whom should I
do good?” The Prophet said, “Your mother.” Hakim asked, “And then who?”
The Prophet again said, “Your mother.” Hakim asked the saem question for
the third time, and the Prophet again answered that “Your mother.” When
Hakim asked the fourth time, only then did the Prophet say, “Your
father.”

Why is so much importance given to the rights of mothers? Imam Zaynu
'l-\`Abidin (a.s.) says:

“It is the right of your mother that you should appreciate that she
carried you [in her womb] as nobody carries anybody, fed you the fruits
of her heart which nobody feeds anybody, protected you [during
pregnancy] with her ears, eyes, hands, legs, hair, limbs, [in short]
with her whole being, gladly, cheerfully and carefully. She patiently
suffered all the worries, pains, difficulties and sorrows, till the
hands of God removed you from her and brought you to this world. Then
she was most happy feeding you forgetting her own hunger; clothing you,
even if she herself had no clothes; giving you milk and water, not
caring for her own thrist; keeping you in the shade, even if she had to
suffer from the heat of the sun; giving you every comfort with her own
hardships; lulling you to sleep while keeping herself awake...Therefore,
you must remain thankful to her accordingly, and you cannot do so except
by the help from Allah.”

2. Parents’ Rights in the Qur’ān
--------------------------------

As the children step into adulthood, parents proceed towards old age.
The children, in their childhood, need the protection of their parents;
and the parents, in their old age, need the kindness of their children.
Allah, *subhanahu wa ta\`ala*, says:

***“If We grant long life to any, We cause him to be reversed in nature
(i.e., from strength to weakness).” (36:68)***

The three types of parents' rights mentioned earlier are based on the
following verses of the Qur'ān:

***Your Lord has decreed that you should worship no one but Him and that
you should • be kind to your parents; • and if one or both of them
attain old age in your life [and become angry with you for some reason],
then do not even say to them ‘Oh’ [in contempt], nor should you repel
them. Instead, you should address them in respectful manner. • And out
of kindness, behave with them humbly. • And [pray for them by] saying
‘My Lord! bestow upon them Your mercy just as they cherished me in
childhood.’*** **(17:23-24)**

In many verses, the Qur'ān has combined the kindness towards the parents
side by side with the worship of Allah. ***“Worship Allah and join not
any partner with Him and do good to parents...”*** **(4:36)** In verse
17:231, it says: ***“And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but
Him, and that you should be kind to parents...”***

Obedience to the parents is a mirror of obedience to Allah. For example,
in verse 31:14-15, Allah says: “And We enjoined on man (to be good) to
his parents...Show gratitude to Me and to your parents. To Me is your
return. And if they strive to make you join in worship with Me things of
which you have no knowledge, then do not obey them; yet bear them
company in this life with fairness and consideration.” The last sentence
means that you should be kind to your parents even if they are
non-Muslims; however, you should not obey them if they ask you to do
anything against the teachings of Islam.

We find that the Qur'ān and hadith has emphasized more on the rights of
the parents than the rights of the children. Why?

The fact is that the parent's heart is the fountainhead of the love for
the child; this affection becomes the life-blood of the parents. The
Qur'an has alluded to this instinctive parental love in several places.
On the other hand, children especially when they are no longer in need
of parental care, do not feel so much love for the parents. We are not
speaking about respect. Here the talk is about instinctive love; and
experience is a reliable witness to confirm this observation. Allah,
*subhanahu wa ta\`ala*, says: ***“Your parents and your children, you
know not which of them are nearest to you in benefit.”*** **(4:11)**

It is a known fact that signposts are not needed on a road going
straight; but at a crossroads where several routes branch out, one
cannot expect to get onto the right path without a guide or a sign-post.
It is for this reason that Islam does not emphasize in so many words
those aspects of life which are taken care of by human nature itself. It
is where the hold of natural instinct is loosened that Islam extends its
helping hand and leads man onto the right path by telling him what he is
expected to do. It is for this reason that Islam did not emphasize the
rights of children so forcefully; but full emphasis was given to the
rights of the parents.

3. Importance of Silatu ’r-Rahm
-------------------------------

The importance of *silatu 'r-rahm* can be seen from the following verses
of the Qur'an and the ahādith of the Prophet and his Ahlu 'l-bayt.

### The Positive Aspect

Allah, *subhanahu wa ta\`ala*, says: Say to them: “Whatever of good
(wealth) you spend, it is for your parents, the near relatives, the
orphans, the poor and the estranded traveller.” The primary recipients
of your charity should be your parents and your relatives if they are
needy.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Some people go on an evil path and commit
sins, but they behave gently with their relatives. Because of their
*silatu 'r-rahm*, their wealth is increased and their lives are
prolonged. How much more would have been their reward if they had been
good people?” Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “The reward of charity is increased
ten times; and the reward of lending is increased eighteen times; and
the reward of doing good to a believer is increased twenty times; and
the reward of doing good to a relative is increased twenty four times.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.): “Anyone who desires to prolong his life and his
livelihood, then he should have strong ties with his relatives.” There
are many other ahadith on silatu 'r-rahm. The rewards of silatu 'r-rahm
in this world can be summarized as follows:

• prolonging of life;

• increase in livelihood;

• prosperity in family and home;

• last moments of death will be eased.

### The Negative Aspect

Allah, subhanahu wa ta\`ala, says: ***“Those who break their covenant
with God...those who sever the relationship which Allah has ordered to
be joined, and those who do mischief on the earth—they are the (real)
losers.” (2:27)*** In another verse, after describing the same acts, He
says: ***“...on them shall be the curse, and they shall have a terrible
home (in the hereafter).” (13:25)***

On the basis of these verses, severing the ties with one's relatives is
counted among the major sins in Islam.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “I seek protection of Allah from the sins which
hasten death.” Someone asked, “O' Amir al-mu'minin, is there any sin
which hastens death?” The Imam said, “Yes; and this is the severance of
relationship. Indeed, when the members of a family remain united and
help each other, then Allah gives them livelihood, even if they be
drinkers of liquor. And, indeed, when members of a family separate from
each other and sever relationship with one another, then Allah deprives
them (of their livelihood) even if they are pious.”

### The Methods of Silatu 'r-Rahm

How should we do silatu 'r-rahm? Silatu 'r-rahm, as mentioned earlier,
means keeping strong ties with one's relatives. There is no one way of
doing silatu 'r-rahm. For example, in one hadith, the Prophet said, “Do
silatu 'r-rahm even if it is by saying *salām*.” *Silatu 'r-rahm* can
take different forms: *•* not giving any trouble to one's relatives; *•*
dealing with relatives on the basis of love and Islamic ethics; *•*
participating in ones’ relatives' sorrow and joy; *•* helping them
financially.

\* \* \*

This lesson is based on \`Allamah Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi's

*The Family Life of Isam* (Revised Edition, 1980)

with additions and modifications made for this course.

Question Paper on Lesson 35
---------------------------

Question 1: [10 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) The father is the leader of the family without any
responsibilities.

(b) A mother's basic duties towards her children is: to love, nurture
and train them as good Muslims.

(c) In showing kindness to the parents, the rights of mother and father
are equal.

(d) The Qur'ān has emphasized more on the rights of the children rather
than the rights of the parents.

(e) Silatu 'r-rahm can affect our lives in this world.

Question 2: [20 points]  
 How did the statement of Imam Zaynu ’l-‘Abidin about the mother affect
you personally? Write your thoughts in a short paragraph.

Question 3: [20 points]  
 Explain the ways and methods by which you would do silatu 'r-rahm in
today's modern and busy lifestyle of the West.


