Lesson 39: The Second Imām (Hasan bin ‘Ali)
===========================================

***Name: Hasan.***  
***Agnomen: Abu Muhammad.***  
***Title: Al-Mujtaba.***  
***Father: ‘Ali bin Abi Tālib.***  
***Mother: Fātimah, daughter of the Prophet.***  
***Birth: 15 Ramadhān, 3 years after hijrah in Medina.***  
***Death: 28 Safar 50 years after hijrah in Medina.***

1. Birth & Early Life
---------------------

Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba —upon whom be peace— was the second Imam. He and
his brother Husayn were the two sons of Amir al-mu’minin ‘Alī and Lady
Fātimah, the daughter of the Prophet. He was born in the year 3 A.H. in
Medina. The Prophet came to ‘Ali’s home, congratulated the new parents
and named the child, on Allāh’s order, as “Hasan”.

He shared in the life of the Prophet for over seven years, growing up
during that time under his loving care. The Prophet used to carry him
over his shoulder and say: “O Allah! I love him, so You also love him.”
Many other sayings of the Prophet have been recorded by historians —both
Shi’a and Sunni— about Hasan and Husayn:

• “Whoever loves Hasan and Husayn, he also loves me; whoever hates these
two, he also hates me.”

• “Hasan and Husayn are the chiefs of the youths of Paradise.”

• “These two children of mine are Imams (leaders) no matter whether they
rise up (against a tyrant) or make peace.”

Hasan and Husayn, in spite of their young age, were blessed with such a
high level of spiritual purity that the Prophet would ask them to
witness some of the treaties and documents issued by him. Wāqidi
narrates that when the Prophet wrote a treaty for the tribe of Thaqif,
Khālid bin Sa’īd wrote the treaty whereas Hasan and Husayn have been
named as witnesses to that treaty. Similarly, when the Prophet did
mubāhala with the Christians of Najran, Hasan and Husayn were among
those whom he asked to accompany him.

The verse of purity, as mentioned in earlier lessons, also included
Hasan and Husayn.  
 Many times the Prophet had said, “Hasan and Husayn are my children.”
Because of these same words ‘Alī would say to his other children, “You
are my children, and Hasan and Husayn are the children of the Prophet.”

2. With ‘Ali Amiru ’l-Mu’minīn
------------------------------

After the death of the Prophet which was no more than three, or
according to some, six months earlier than the death of lady Fātimah,
Hasan was placed directly under the care of his noble father.

He was part of all the struggles and trials that his father went through
during the rule of the first three caliphs. For example, when Abu Dharr
al-Ghifāri, the famous companion of the Prophet, was to be sent into
exile on orders of the third caliph, people had been forbidden from
bidding him farewell. The only persons who dared to come to the city’s
gate to bid farewell were ‘Ali, Hasan and Husayn (may peace be upon them
all). This was also a way of protesting against the unjust decision of
the third caliph against Abu Dharr.

In 36 A.H., Imam Hasan accompanied his father to Basra, where the Battle
of Jamal took place. Before reaching Basra, Hasan was deputized by his
father to go to Kufa, with ‘Ammār bin Yāsir, to raise additional forces
for the Imam’s army. With his articulate and moving sermons, he exposed
the falsehood of opponents at Basra, gathered a considerable number of
people and joined his father in the Battle of Jamal.

In the Battle of Siffin also, Hasan was alongside his noble father till
the very end. Mu’āwiyah sent ‘Ubaydullāh bin ‘Umar to try and incite
Hasan by saying: “Stop supporting your father, and we will make you the
caliph because the Quraysh do not like your father who is responsible
for killing many of their elders but they are prepared to accept you as
their leader.” Imam Hasan replied: “The Quraysh wanted to destroy Islam,
whereas my father killed their elders for Allah and for Islam. This is
the basis of why they hate my father!”

When the outcome of the arbitration in Siffin became obvious, Imam Hasan
made a speech and said: “These two persons were chosen so that they may
put the Qur’ān before their personal whims but they acted in the wrong
manner; therefore, they do not deserve to be considered as arbiters...”

3. The Imamate of Hasan bin ‘Ali
--------------------------------

After the death of his father, through Divine command and according to
the will of his father, Hasan became Imam.

At dawn on the night of ‘Ali’s death, Imam Hasan addressed the people in
which he said: “...There has died tonight a man who was the first among
the early (Muslims) in good actions. Nor did any later (Muslim) attain
his level in good actions. He used to fight alongside the Apostle of
God, may Allah bless him and his family, and protect him with his own
life. The Apostle of God used to send him forward with his standard
while Gabriel supported him on his right and Michael supported him on
his left. He would not return until God brought victory through his
hands...

“He has left behind him no gold and silver except seven hundred dirhams
of his stipend, with which he was intending to buy a servant for his
family.” Then tears overcame him and he wept and the people wept with
him. Then he continued:

“I am the (grand)son of the one who brought the good news. I am the
(grand)son of the warner. I am the (grand)son of the man who, with God’s
permission, summoned the people to God. I am the (grand)son of the light
which shone out to the world. I am of the House, from whom God has kept
away abomination and whom God has purified thoroughly. I am of the House
for whom God had required love in his Book...” Then he sat down.

‘Abdullāh ibn al-’Abbās arose in front of him and said, “People, this is
the son of your Prophet, the testamentary trustee (wasi) of your Imam.
So pledge allegiance to him.” The people answered him saying: “No one is
more loved by us nor has anyone more right to succession.” Then they
rushed forward to pledge allegiance to Imam Hasan as the successor of
Amiru ’l-mu’minin. He also occupied the outward function of caliphate
for about six months, during which time he administered the affairs of
the Muslims.

During that time Mu‘āwiyah, a bitter enemy of ‘Alī and his family, and
had fought for years with the ambition of capturing the caliphate, first
on the pretext of avenging the death of the third caliph and finally
with an open claim to the caliphate, he sent spies into Iraq, the seat
of Imam Hasan’s caliphate, to incite rebellion and opposition.

After the spies of Mu‘āwiyah were captured and punished, Imam Hasan
wrote him “...It is surprising that after the Prophet’s death, the
Quraysh fought for the caliphate and considered themselves as superior
to other Arabs because they were from the tribe of the Prophet. The
Arabs accepted their argument.

“But then the Quraysh [based on same line of thought] refused to accept
our superiority and shunned us aside although we were more closely
related to the Prophet than they. We adopted forbearance so that the
enemies and hypocrites do not destroy Islam.

“And today we are amazed by your claim to the caliphate even though you
do not deserve it in the least; neither you have any religious
superiority nor any good record in the past. You are a product of the
group that fought against the Prophet and the son of the worst enemy of
the Prophet among the Quraysh...” The Imam ended the letter with an
advice for Mu’awiyah to accept the decision of the Muslim community and
pledge allegiance to him.

Mu’awiyah replied: “...You and my situation is similar to your family
and Abu Bakr’s situation. Abu Bakr occupied the caliphate on the pretext
of having more experience than your father. Similarly, I find myself to
be more experienced than you...”

Mu’awiyah not only refused to recognize Imam Hasan, he also marched with
his army into Iraq. War ensued during which Mu’āwiyah gradually
subverted the generals and commanders of Imam Hasan’s army with large
sums of money and deceiving promises until the army rebelled against
Imam Hasan. One should realize that not all the people in the Imam’s
army were Shi‘as; they belonged to various groups: the Khawārij came
because they also opposed Mu’awiyah; the opportunists who came for
material gain if Imam Hasan succeeded; those who just followed their
tribal leaders and owed loyalty to them and not the Imam.

The Imam was, finally, forced to make peace and to yield the caliphate
to Mu’āwiyah provided:

1. The caliphate would again return to Imam Hasan after Mu‘āwiyah’s
death.

2. The Imam’s household and partisans would be protected in every way.

3. The practice of cursing Imam ‘Ali (peace be upon him) in Friday
prayers will be discontinued.

4. Imam Hasan would not address Mu‘āwiyah as “amīru ‘l-mu’minin — leader
of the believers.”

5. Mu‘āwiyah will rule on the basis of the Qur’ān and the sunnah.

6. Mu‘āwiyah would distribute one million dirhams from the revenue of
Dara among the children who became orphans during the battles of Jamal
and Siffin.

In this way Mu‘āwiyah captured the caliphate and entered Iraq. In a
public speech he officially made null and void all the peace conditions,
and in every way possible placed the severest pressure upon the members
of the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet and the Shi‘as. During all the ten
years of his imamate, Imam Hasan lived in conditions of extreme hardship
and under persecution, with no security even in his own house.

4. His Noble Character
----------------------

In human perfection Imam Hasan was reminiscent of his father and a
perfect example of his noble grandfather. In fact, as long as the
Prophet was alive, he and his brother were always in the company of the
Prophet who even sometimes would carry them on his shoulders. Both Sunni
and Shi’ite sources have transmitted this saying of the Holy Prophet
concerning Hasan and Husayn: “These two children of mine are Imams
whether they stand up or sit down” (allusion to whether they occupy the
external function of caliphate or not). Also there are many traditions
of the Holy Prophet and ‘Alī concerning the fact that Imam Hasan would
gain the function of imamate after his noble father.

Imam Hasan was well-known for spiritual wayfaring; he had also gone for
pilgrimage 25 times by walking all the way from Medina to Mecca.

The Imam was also known for his generosity. On hearing a man praying by
the Ka’bah to Allāh for relieving him of a 10,000 dirham debt, the Imam
went home, returned with that money and gave it to that person. Three
times in his life, the Imam divided his entire property and possessions
and gave away onehalf in charity.

5. His Death
------------

In the year 50 A.H. Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali (may peace be upon them) was
poisoned and martyred by one of his own wives who, as has been accounted
by historians, had been motivated by Mu’āwiyah. The latter did not want
the caliphate to return back to ‘Ali’s family; he wanted to remove all
the obstacles from the way of his own son, Yazid to inherit the kingdom.
The Umayyids, against all the high principles of Islam and humanity,
forcefully and violently barred the Banu Hashim from burying Imam Hasan
next to his grandfather’s grave. He was finally buried in Jannatu
‘l-Baqi’.

Imam Hasan’s patience and forbearance is even acknowledge by his
enemies. Marwan bin Hakam, Mu’awiyah’s governor in Medina who always
persecuted the Imam, participated in the latter’s funeral. Imam Husayn
said, “While my brother was alive, you tried your best to oppose him and
fight against him; and now you are showing up in his funeral!” Marwan
said, “Whatever I did, I did to a person whose forbearance was stronger
than this mountain” while pointing towards a mountain outside Medina.

\* \* \*

This lesson has been compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using the following
sources.  
 1. *Shi’a Islam’* of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.  
 2. *A Brief History of the Fourteen Infallibles* published by WOFIS,
Tehran.  
 3. *Pishway-e Dawwum: Hazrat Imam Hasan (a.s.)* by Dar Rah-e Haq, Qum.

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources, may refer to item \# 1 and \# 3 mentioned above.

Question Paper on Lesson 39
---------------------------

Question 1: [20 points]  
*Fill in the blanks from the list of words given below:*

Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali was born in \_\_\_\_\_\_ A.H. in
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. For over \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ years, he shared in the
life of the Prophet who used to say: “Hasan and Husayn are the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of Paradise.”

Hasan was deputized by his father to go to \_\_\_\_\_ with
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to raise additional \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ for the Battle of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Mu‘āwiyah succeeded in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ the army of Imam Hasan
because not all the people in the Imam's army were \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;
they belonged to various groups like the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and people with loyalty to their
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ leaders.

Imam Hasan denied the religious legitimacy to Mu‘āwiyah's status by
refusing to address him as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ . The imamate of
Imam Hasan did not depend on political power as attested by the saying
of the Prophet concerning him and his brother that: “These two children
of mine are Imams whether they \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ or
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Mu‘āwiyah motivated one of the Imam's \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ him in order to pave the way for \_\_\_\_ to inherit
the kingdom.

Khawarij Yazid  
 ‘Ammār forces  
 subverting Shi‘as  
 opportunists 3  
 sit down tribal  
 poison Medina  
 youths seven  
 chiefs Jamal  
 stand up Kufa  
 wives amiru 'l-muminin

Question 2: [15 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) Hasan & Husayn were witnesses to the Prophet's treaty with the
tribe of Thaqif.

(b) Abu Dharr al-Ghifari was sent into exile on order of Mu‘āwiyah.

(c) Hasan was sent by his father to Medina for raising additional forces
for the Battle of Jamal.

(d) The Prophet (s.a.w.) said: “Hasan and Husayn are my children.”

(e) \`Abdullah ibn al-\`Abbas was the first to invite people to pledge
allegiance to Imam Hasan.

(f) Mu‘āwiyah honestly adhered to the peacetreaty.

(g) Imam Hasan had done 15 hajj by walking all the way from Medina to
Mecca.

(h) Imam Hasan is buried next to the grave of his grandfather.

(i) Marwan testified to the great forbearance of Imam Hasan (a.s.).

(j) Jannatu 'l-Baqi\` is a graveyard in Medina.

Question 3: [15 points]  
 Summarize the analysis that Imam Hasan (a.s.) has done in his letter to
Mu‘āwyah for the events of Saqifa in which the caliphate was snatched
away from the Ahlul Bayt.


