Lesson 43: The Sixth Imām (Ja‘far bin Muhammad)
===============================================

***Name: Ja‘far.***  
***Agnomen: Abu ‘Abdillāh.***  
***Title: As-Sādiq.***  
***Father: Muhammad bin ‘Ali.***  
***Mother: Umm Farwah.***  
***Birth: 17th Rabi I, 83 AH in Medina.***  
***Death: 25th Shawwāl 148 AH in Medina.***

1. Birth & Early Days
---------------------

Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq, son of the fifth Imam, was born in 83 A.H./702
C.E. After the death of his father in 114 A.H., he became Imam by Divine
Command and decree of the Imam who came before him.

2. His Imamate: Continuation of Scholarly Jihād
-----------------------------------------------

During the 34 years of imamate of as-Sādiq (a.s.) greater possibilities
and a more favorable climate existed for him to propagate religious
teachings. This came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands,
especially the uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad
caliphate, and the bloody wars which finally led to the fall and
extinction of the Umayyads. The greater opportunities for Shi’ite
teachings were also a result of the favourable ground the fifth Imam had
prepared during the twenty years of his imamate through the propagation
of the true teachings of Islam and the sciences of the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt of
the Prophet.

Imam as-Sādiq took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his imamate, which coincided with the end
of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates. He instructed
many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and transmitted
sciences, such as Zurārah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Mu’min at-Tāq, Hishām
ibn Hakam, Abān ibn Taghlib, Hishām ibn Sālim, Hurayz, Hishām Kalbi
Nassābah, and Jābir ibn Hayyān, the alchemist. Even some important Sunni
scholars such as Sufyān Thawri, Abu Hanifa (the founder of the Hanafi
school of law), Qadi Sukuni, Qadi Abu ’l-Bakhtari and others, had the
honor of being his students. It is said that his classes and sessions of
instruction produced four thousand scholars of hadith and other
sciences. Refering to the two years that he spent as a student of Imam
as-Sādiq (a.s.), Abu Hanifa used to say: “If it had not been for those
two years, Nu‘mān[^1] would have perished.”

The number of traditions preserved from the fifth and sixth Imams is
more than all the hadith that have been recorded from the Prophet and
the other ten Imams combined. That is why the Shi‘a school of laws in
Islam is known as “Ja‘fari”.

3. Students & Companions
------------------------

*Hamrān bin A‘yan:* Some of the students of Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.)
had reached such heights of excellence that they earned the complete
trust of their teacher. Once a Syrian (who those days were usually
against the Ahlu ’l-Bayt because of the Umayyad propaganda) entered the
gathering of the Imam.

Upon inquiring the purpose of his visit, he said, “I have been told
whatever the people ask you, you have an answer for that. So I have come
to debate with you.”  
 Imam (a.s.): “On what issue would you like to debate with me?”  
 Syrian: “About the Qur’ān.”  
 Imam pointed towards Hamrān bin A‘yan and said, “Go and debate with
him.”  
 Syrian: “I have come to challenge you and debate with you, not with
him.”  
 Imam (a.s.): “Defeating Hamrām would be like defeating me!”

So the Syrian went to Hamrān and had a debate with him about the Qur’ān.
Hamrān answered all questions satisfactorily until the Syrian ran out of
them. He finally conceded his own defeat.

Mufazzal bin ‘Umar: He is well known for a treatise which the Imam
dictated for him on the subject of tawhīd. Here we will just mention one
incident which shows that Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq was also actively working
for peace and social harmony among his followers.

One day Mufazzal saw that two Shi‘as were arguing and fighting with one
another on the division of the estate of their relative. Mufazzal took
both of them home and after discussion, resolved their conflict. In
bringing about the resolution he had to add four hundred dirhams from
himself. As the two Shi’as were leaving, Mufazzal said, “You should know
that the money I have used to resolve your conflict is not my own money;
it belongs to Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.) who had given it to me with
the instruction that whenever I see conflict among his followers, I
should try to maintain peace among them by using that money.”

4. Rulers & their Attitude
--------------------------

Imam as-Sādiq’s imamate coincided with the rule of the last five Umayyad
rulers (Hishām bin ‘Abdu ’l-Malik, Walīd bin Yazīd, Yazīd bin Walīd,
Ibrāhīm bin Walīd, and Marwān al-Himār) and the first two ‘Abbāsid
caliphs (Abu ’l-‘Abbās Saffāh and Mansūr Dawāniqi).

As mentioned in the previous lesson, the Muslim people were gradually
turning away from the Umayyads. The anti-Umayyad sentiment which had
started with the massacre of Karbala, finally led to the fall of the
Umayyads in 132 A.H. However, those who were leading the revolt in the
name of Ahlu ’l-Bayt could not resist the temptation of power, and
seized the seat of caliphate for themselves. These were the descendants
of ‘Abbās bin ‘Abdul Muttalib, the uncle of the Prophet. Hence the next
dynasty to rule the Muslim world was known as Banu ‘Abbās or the
‘Abbāsids.

\* \* \*

Hishām, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. The later Umayyad rulers were not strong enough
to harass the Imam.

The Imam was then arrested by Saffāh, the first ‘Abbāsid caliph and
brought to Iraq. After some time, he was allowed to return to Medina.
The reign of Mansūr, the second ‘Abbāsid caliph, was even worse for the
Shi’as. He ordered such torture and merciless killing of many of the
descendants of the Prophet who were Shi’ite that his actions even
surpassed the cruelty and heedlessness of the Umayyads. At his order
they were arrested in groups, some thrown into deep and dark prisons,
and tortured until they died, while others were beheaded or buried alive
or placed at the base of or between walls of buildings, and walls were
constructed over them.

Once Mansūr wrote to Imam as-Sādiq (a.s.) asking him why he did not
visit him like other dignitaries. The Imam wrote in reply: “Neither do
we possess any worldly treasure for which we may fear you, nor do you
possess any spiritual virtue for which we may seek your favour. So why
should we come to you?” Mansūr replied, “Then come for admonishing us.”
The Imam replied, “Those who seek this world will never admonish you,
and those who seek the hereafter will never come to you.”

5. Last Days & Death
--------------------

Finally, Mansūr had Imam as-Sādiq (a.s.) arrested and brought to
Sāmarrah (Iraq) where he had the Imam kept under supervision, was in
every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several times thought of
killing him. Eventually the Imam was allowed to return to Medina where
he spent the rest of his life under severe restrictions placed upon him
by the Abbasid ruler, until he was poisoned and martyred through the
intrigue of Mansur.

Upon hearing the news of the Imam’s martyrdom, Mansur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam’s will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot. Of course,
the aim of Mansur was to put an end to the whole question of the imamate
and to Shi’ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina, following
orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam had
chosen five people rather than one to administer his last will and
testament: the caliph himself, the governor of Medina, ‘Abdullah Aftah,
the Imam’s older son, Musa, his younger son, and Hamidah, his wife. In
this way the plot of Mansur failed.

Abu Basīr, a close companion of Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.), went to the
Imam’s house for expressing condolences on the death of the Imam. Umm
Hamīdah, the wife of the Imam, said, “O Abu Basīr, if you had been at
the Imam’s side when he died, you would have been surprised. In his last
moments, the Imam opened his eyes and asked that all family members come
close to his bed. When everyone had gathered around him, he said,
‘Verily, the person who considers the salāt as a trivial issue, he will
not deserve our intercession.”

\* \* \*

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following sources.  
 1. *Shi’a Islam’* of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.  
 2. *Pishway-e Shishum: Hazrat Imam Ja‘far-e Sādiq (a.s.)* by Dar Rah-e
Haq.

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer mentioned above.

Question Paper on Lesson 43
---------------------------

Question 1: [20 points]  
 True or False:  
 (a) The imamate of Ja‘far as-Sādiq (a.s.) was for thirty four years.

(b) The holy Imam’s imamate began in 141 A.H.

(c) Abu Hanifa studied under Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq for two years.

(d) ‘Umar bin ‘Abdu ’l-‘Aziz, the most just of the Umayyads ruled during
the imamate of the sixth Imam.

(e) Mufazzal used four thousand dirhams to resolve the dispute between
two Shi‘as.

(f) Marwān al-Himār, the last Umayyad ruler, arrested the sixth Imam and
brought him to Damascus.

(g) Abu Hanifa said, “If it had not been for those two years Nu‘mān
would have perished.”

(h) “Ja‘fari” is the name for the Shi‘a school of Islamic laws.

(i) The ‘Abbāsid rulers, being cousins of the Prophet’s family, were
kind and courteous towards them.

(j) The Umayyads were overthrown in the name of the Ahlu ’l-Bayt and the
massacre of Karbala.

Question 2: [20 points]  
 Explain why you think that the ‘Abbasid rulers, even though they came
to power in the name of the Ahlu ’l-Bayt, were always suspicious of the
prominent figures of the Prophet’s family.

Question 3: [10 points]  
 Write your own impressions about the answer which Imam Ja‘far as-Sādiq
(a.s.) wrote to Mansūr explaining why he does not visit the king.

[^1]: Nu‘mān was the first name of Imam Abu Hanifa.


