Lesson 50: Guidance in Occultation & the Message of Shi‘ism
===========================================================

1. Importance of Belief in al-Mahdi
-----------------------------------

The Occultation of the Imam is a time of trial for the believers. But
belief in Imam al-Mahdi is very essential for salvation. Imam Hasan
al-‘Askari (a.s.) said, “I see that after me differences will appear
among you concerning the Imam after me. Whoso accepts the Imams after
the Prophet of God but denies my son is like the person who accepts all
the prophets but denies the prophethood of Muhammad, the Prophet of God,
upon whom be peace and blessing. And whoso denies [Muhammad] the Prophet
of God is like one who has denied all the prophets of God, for to obey
the last of us is like obeying the first and to deny the last of us is
like denying the first. But beware! Verily for my son there is an
occultation during which all people will fall into doubt except those
whom Allāh protects.”

2. The Question of Long Life
----------------------------

The opponents of the Shi‘ism protest that according to the beliefs of
this school the Hidden Imam should by now be nearly twelve centuries
old, whereas this is impossible for any human being.

In answer it must be said that the protest is based only on the
unlikelihood of such an occurrance, not its impossibility. Of course
such a long lifetime or a life of a longer period is unlikely. But those
who study the hadiths of the Holy Prophet and the Imams will see that
they refer to this life as one possessing miraculous qualities. Miracles
are certainly not impossible nor can they be negated through scientific
arguments. It can never be proved that the causes and agents that are
functioning in the world are solely those that we see and know and that
other causes which we do not know or whose effects and actions we have
not seen nor understood do not exist. It is in this way possible that in
one or several members of mankind there can be operating certain causes
and agents which bestow upon them a very long life of a thousand or
several thousand years. Medicine has not even lost hope of discovering a
way to achieve very long life spans. In any case such protests from
“peoples of the Book” such as Jews, Christians and Muslims are most
strange for they accept the miracles of the prophets of God according to
their own sacred scriptures.

3. The Spiritual Guidance of al-Mahdi
-------------------------------------

The opponents of Shi‘ism also protest that, although Shi‘ism considers
the Imam necessary in order to expound the injunctions and verities of
religion and to guide the people, the occultation of the Imam is the
negation of this very purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be
reached by mankind cannot be in any way beneficial or effective. The
opponents say that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform mankind
He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not need to
create him thousands of years earlier.

In answer it must be said that such people have not really understood
the meaning of the Imam, for the duty of the Imam is not only the formal
explanation of the religious sciences and exoteric guidance of the
people. In the same way that he has the duty of guiding men outwardly,
the Imam also bears the function of *wilāyat* and the esoteric guidance
of men. It is he who directs man’s spiritual life and orients the inner
aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his physical presence or
absence has no effect in this matter. The Imam watches over men inwardly
and is in communion with the soul and spirit of men even if he be hidden
from their physical eyes. His existence is always necessary even if the
time has not as yet arrived for his outward appearance and the universal
reconstruction that he is to bring about.

4. The Spiritual Message of Shi‘ism
-----------------------------------

The message of Shi‘ism to the world can be summarized in one sentence:
“To know God.” Or in other words, it is to instruct man to follow the
path of Divine revelation and the knowledge of God in order to gain
felicity and salvation. And this message is contained in the very phrase
with which the Holy Prophet commenced his prophetic mission when he
said, “Oh men! Know God in His Oneness (and acknowledge Him) so that you
will gain salvation.”

As a summary explanation of this message we will add that man is
attached by nature to many goals in this worldly life and to material
pleasures. He loves tasty food and drink, fashionable dress, attractive
palaces and surroundings, a beautiful and pleasing wife, sincere friends
and great wealth. And in another direction he is attracted to political
power, position, reputation, the extension of his rule and dominion and
the destruction of anything that is opposed to his wishes.

But in his inner and primordial, God-given nature man understands that
all these are means created for man, but man is not created for these
things. These things should be subservient to man and follow him and not
vice versa. To consider the stomach and the region below it as a final
end of life is the logic of cattle and sheep. To tear up, cut and
destory others is the logic of the tiger, the wolf and the fox.

The logic inherent in human existence is the attainment of wisdom and
nothing else. This logic based upon wisdom (with the power which it
possesses to discern between reality and the unreal), guides us toward
the truth and not toward things our emotions demand or toward passions,
selfishness and egoism. This logic considers man as a part of the
totality of creation without any separate independence or the
possibility of a rebellious self-centeredness. In contrast to the
current belief that man is the master of creation and tames rebellious
nature and conquers it to force it to obey his wishes and desires, we
find that in reality man himself is an instrument in the hand of
Universal Nature and is ruled and commanded by it.

This logic based upon wisdom invites man to concentrate more closely
upon the apprehension he has of the existence of this world until it
becomes clear to him that the world of existence and all that is in it
does not issue from itself but rather from an Infinite Source. He will
then know that all this beauty and ugliness, all these creatures of the
earth and the heavens, which appear outwardly as independent realities,
gain reality only through another Reality and are manifested only in Its
Light, not by themselves and through themselves. In the same way that
the “realities” as well as the power and grandeur of yesterday have no
greater value than tales and legends of today, so are the “realities” of
today no more as “reality” tomorrow.

In the last analysis, everything in itself is no more than a tale and a
dream. Only God is Reality in the absolute sense, the One Who does not
perish. Under the protection of His Being, everything gains existence
and becomes manifested through the Light of His Essence.

If man becomes endowed with such vision and power of apprehension, then
the tent of his separative existence will fall down before his eyes like
a bubble on the surface of water. He will see with his eyes that the
world and all that is in it depend upon an Infinite Being who possesses
life, power, knowledge and every perfection to an infinite degree. Man
and every other being in the world are like so many windows which
display according to their capacity the world of eternity which
transcends them and lies beyond them.

It is at this moment that man takes from himself and all creatures the
quality of independence and primacy and returns these qualities to their
Owner. He detaches himself from all things to attach himself solely to
the One God. Before His Majesty and Grandeur he does nothing but bow in
humility. Only then does he become guided and directed by God so that
whatever he knows he knows in God. Through Divine guidance he becomes
adorned with moral and spiritual virtue and pure actions which are the
same as Islam itself, the submission to God, the religion that is in the
primordial nature of things.

This is the highest degree of human perfection and the station of the
perfect man (the Universal Man; *insān-e kāmil*), namely the Imam who
has reached this rank through Divine grace. Furthermore, those who have
reached this station through the practice of spiritual methods, with the
different ranks and stations that they possess, are the true followers
of the Imam. Thus it becomes clear that the knowledge of God and of the
Imam are inseparable in the same way that the knowledge of God is
inextricably connected to the knowledge of oneself. For he who knows his
own symbolic existence has already come to know the true existence which
belongs solely to God who is independent and without need of anything
whatsoever.

\* \* \*

This lesson is entirely based on *Shi’a Islam*

of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.

Question Paper on Lesson 50
---------------------------

Question 1: [20 points]  
 Give two examples from the past prophets who lived and/or are still
living for relatively longer than normal lifespan during our time.

Question 2: [10 points]  
 What system of guidance did the Imams devise for guiding their
followers on the formal explanation of religious matters during the time
of Occultation?

Question 3: [20 points]  
 Briefly describe in one paragraph the spiritual message of Shi‘ism.


