Lesson 5: The One & Only God
============================

The advent of science has exposed for us a unique pattern of the
universe. There was a time when the earth was considered to be the
center of the universe, that it was stationary, and the heavenly bodies
revolved around it. Then came a time when the people explored the solar
system through the help of the telescope; and so, they gave the sun, the
pride of place. Now we know that our solar system is but an
insignificant family of planets at the edge of the huge galaxy which we
call the Milky Way.

We see the moon rotating around the earth, like a happy child dancing
brightly around its mother. There are eight other planets, besides our
own earth, in the solar family; and five of them have satellites of
their own. Mars and Neptune have two moons each; Jupiter has twelve
moons and satellites; Saturn has nine and Uranus has five moons. All the
moons and satellites rotate around their planets. And all these planets,
in turn, rotate around the sun, which may be called the head of the
family.

Now, let us trace back our steps before going further.

All these stars, planets, and satellites are made of atoms. And an atom
itself is just a miniature solar system. Formerly, it was believed that
atoms were immutable entities, i.e., they could not be divided. Now that
atoms are known to have so many particles, the belief in their
indestructibility has been shattered away. Atoms consist of a nucleus
and a number of electrons. The nucleus is built from simple particles:
neutrons and protons. The nucleus is located at the center of the atom
and is surrounded by electrons. Electrons revolve around the nucleus in
a fixed orbit much like our solar system. It should be mentioned here,
to make the picture more clear, that the nucleus of an atom is a
particle of very small radius, but of exceedingly great density. In
plain words, all the atomic mass (except a negligible fraction) is
concentrated in the nucleus, while the size of the nucleus is less than
one hundred thousandth of the size of an atom. And don't forget that
more than 100,000,000 atoms can be put side by side in one centimeter.
Now, as we have stated earlier, the atom is a world in itself. The
protons and neutrons behave as though they were rotating around their
own axis, like rotating tops. Their spin suggests the idea of an
internal rotation.

Thus, we see that there is a single pattern of operation, right from the
smallest sub-atomic particles to the mighty solar system.

But this is not the end of the story.

As we know, the sun, together with its family, is placed on the brink of
the Milky Way. “If we could view the Milky Way from a vast distance and
see it as a whole, we should observe a rather flat wheel of stars with
spiral arms — something like the sparks of a Catherine wheel.” It
consists of many millions of separate stars like our sun. This system of
stars is physically connected by gravitational forces and moves through
space as a whole. It is called a Galaxy.

If we think that our solar system is a family of stars, a galaxy may be
called a very big tribe consisting of millions and millions of such
families.

The multitude of galaxies were unknown in the past. By about 1920 it was
thought that there were at least 500,000 galaxies. Now, with the advent
of powerful telescopes this number had risen to 100,000,000, and is
increasing day by day. So far as the eyes of cameras and telescopes can
see, there are clusters and clusters of galaxies.

Human knowledge, at present, is in its infancy. Nobody knows what is
beyond these galaxies. Nor do we know much about the nature of their
movement. The Qur'ān says, “God has decorated the nearest sky with these
lamps (i.e., stars).” So we know that until now, we have not seen the
end of even the first sky. And who knows what wonders are hidden beyond
the first sky! “You have not been given knowledge but a little.”

So, let us confine our talk to the little that we know about. We know
that the particles of atoms are rotating around their axis; satellites
are rotating around their planets; planets are rotating around their
stars; and stars along with their dependent families, are rotating in
the galaxies.

Our faith in monotheism, the Unity or Oneness of God, is the purest in
the world. We have given countless proofs for our belief in the last
fourteen centuries. Now science has opened a new path, which, also leads
to the belief in the Unity of God. It may be described briefly, in these
words: “The uniform pattern of the universe is an indisputable proof
that all this has been made by one, and only one, Creator.”

When we see two identical watches, we need not be told that they were
made in the same factory. On the same ground, when we see the entire
universe woven into a single entity; all its components governed by the
same laws; all its parts operating on the same pattern, our natural
instinct guides us to believe that it is created, made and controlled by
ONE and only ONE Creator.

And, remember, there is a great difference between watches and the
universe. Watches may be imitated or duplicated by impostors and
forgerers. But, as the scientists say, “by definition there is only one
universe. One cannot repeat it or do experiments with it.” So, we need
not bother ourselves with the thought of any imitation-gods. If the
universe —the creation— cannot be more than one, how can God —the
Creator— be more than one?

\* \* \*

This lesson is entirely based on chapter 18 of Syed Sa’eed Akhtar
Rizvi's *God of Islam*, Dar-es-salaam, 1970. It has been slightly
summarized and edited to suit this course by S.M. Rizvi.

Question Paper On Lesson 5
--------------------------

*Question 1*: [20 points]  
 (a) Is it preferable to work under one boss or several bosses?

(b) Comment on the situation when a person works under two supervisors
and each gives him conflicting orders.

*Question 2*: [20 points]  
 One of the examples of uniformity and consistency in this universe is
that in Toronto the longest and the shortest days fall exactly on the
same day every year since time immemorial. Give two more such examples
from your own observation.

*Question 3*: [10 points]  
 Describe in your own words the scientific evidence that points to the
existence of only One God.


