Lesson 6: Tawhīd & Sifāt
========================

1. Tawhīd: Monotheism
---------------------

The corner-stone of Islamic beliefs is tawhīd, the belief in Unity or
Oneness of God which is also known as monotheism. Tawhīd is the first
part of the kalimah—the formula of faith in Islam. It says:

*Lā ilāha il-lal lāh*

There is no god but Allāh.

“Allāh” is the proper name of God in Islam. The word “Allāh” means “One
who deserves to be loved” and “in Whom everyone seeks refuge.” This
word, grammatically speaking is unique. It has no plural and no
feminine. So this name itself reflects light upon the fact that God is
one and only one; He has neither any partner nor any equal. The name
cannot be adequately translated by the word “God” because God can be
transformed into “gods” and “goddess”.

\* \* \*

### The Message of Tawhīd:

The first part of the *kalimah* consists of two statements: A negative
statement (“There is no god”) and a positive (“but Allāh”).

The negative statement leads a Muslim throughout his life not only in
religious matters but also in social affairs. “There is no god” shows a
Muslim that nothing in the universe is superior to him. It is observed
in the Qur'ān that ***He is the One who created for you all that is in
the earth***. So a Muslim knows that nothing in this world is to be
worshipped. Neither stone nor trees, neither animals nor human beings,
neither the Sun, the Moon, nor the stars can be worshipped, because
everything is created for his benefit.

When a Muslim thus rejects every falsehood and every idea of
nature-worship, idol-worship and human-worship, he is ready to believe
in the positive truth of *tawhīd*. Believing in a Supreme Being gives an
aim to our life and provides a purpose for our actions. Had man been
left with the wrong impression that there was no God at all, his life
would have been aimless, and an aimless life is dangerous. So it is
added that there is no god “but Allāh”.

The *kalimah* *of* tawhīd has a negative and a positive aspect. Both are
instrumental in creating the belief that every person is equal to every
other person. When nobody is superior, nobody is inferior. Thus, the
belief in tawhīd promotes the sense of brotherhood and equality and
equity which is another feature of Islam.

2. Sifāt: the Attributes of God
-------------------------------

In the preceding lessons, we have learnt about most of the important
attributes of God. There are many attributes which are a must for God,
while there are others which are beneath His dignity and, therefore,
cannot be found in Him.

The attributes of God, therefore, have been grouped into “positive” and
“negative”: the former reflects the attributes that exist in Him, where
as the latter reflect the attributes that cannot be found in Him. The
positive attributes of God are known as *as-sifāt ath-thubutiyyah*;
whereas the attributes that cannot be found in God are known as
*as-sifāt as-salbiyyah*.

### (A) The Positive Attributes (As-Sifāt Ath-Thubutiyyah)

There are many attributes which are befitting Allāh, but only eight are
usually mentioned because of their importance. The eight *as-sifāt
ath-thubutiyyah* are as follows:  
 1. Eternal (*al-Qadīm*): God has neither a beginning nor an end.

2. Omnipotent (*al-Qādir*): God is Omnipotent; He has power over every
thing and every affair.

3. Omniscient (*al-\`Alīm*): God is Omniscient; He knows every thing.
Even our unspoken intentions and unexpressed desires are not hidden from
Him.

4. Living (*al-Hayy*): God is always Alive and will remain Alive for
ever.

5. Will Power (*al-Murīd*): God has His own will and discretion in all
affairs. He does not do anything under compulsion.

6. All-Perceiving (*al-Mudrik*): God is All-Hearing and All-Seeing; He
can see and hear everything without any need of eyes and ears.

7. Master of Speech (*al-Mutakallim*): God can create speech in
anything, as He did in a tree for Prophet Musa (a.s.) and in the curtain
of light for our holy Prophet (a.s.).

8. Truthful (*as-Sādiq*): God is always true in His words and promises.

It is impossible to fix any limit to the attributes of God. This list is
not exhaustive but is essential to understand the glory of Allāh. These
attributes are not acquired but are inherent in the concept of Divinity.

### (B) The Negative Attributes (As-Sifāt As-Salbiyyah)

The term “negative attributes” means those attributes which cannot be
found in God because they are incompatible with the concept of Divinity.
Similar to the positive attributes, the negatives attributes are also
many but only eight are normally listed because of their importance. The
eight *as-sifāt as-salbiyyah* are as follows:

1. Partner (*as-Sharīk*): God has no partner or colleague.

2. Compound *(al-Murakkab*): God is neither made nor composed of any
material. He cannot be divided even in imagination.

3. Place (*al-Makān*): God has neither a center nor a place because He
has no body; and He is everywhere because His power and knowledge is
magnificently apparent everywhere.

4. Incarnation (*al-Hulūl*): God does not enter into anything or any
person, nor does anything enter Him. Therefore, the belief in
incarnation is incompatible with the concept of Divinity.

5. Change (*Mahall-e Hawādith*): God is not subject to change.

6. Visible (*al-Mar'i*): God is not visible; He has not been seen, is
not seen, and will never be seen.

7. Need (*Ihtiyāj*): God is not deficient in any virtue, so He does not
need anything. He is free from want.

8. \`Acquired Attribute' (*Sifat-e Zā'id*): The attributes of Allāh are
not separate from His person. When we say that God is Omnipotent and
Merciful, we do not mean that his power and mercy are something
different from His person.

To understand the concept of \`additional quality' or \`acquired
attribute' more clearly, read the following two sentences: “Tea is
sweet” and “Sugar is sweet”. In the first example, sweetness is an
additional quality for tea; the tea was not sweet when it was made, it
became sweet after sugar was added to it. But in the second example,
sweetness is an essential quality not an added quality for sugar; the
sugar was sweet from the day it became a sugar; a “sugar” which is not
sweet is not sugar at all. The positive attributes of God are like
sweetness is to sugar; they are not additional to the person of God.
Power, mercy, knowledge, justice, virtue, truth, etc. were never
separate from His person.

\* \* \*

This lesson is entirely based on chapter 26 & 27 of Syed Sa’eed Akhtar
*Rizvi's God of Islam*, Dar-es-salaam, 1970. It has been compiled and
edited to suit this course by S.M. Rizvi.

Question Paper on Lesson 6
--------------------------

*Question 1*: [10 points]  
 What is the uniqueness of the word “Allāh”?

*Question 2*: [10 points]  
 (a) Which part of the kalimah tells a Muslim that it is humiliating for
him to worship inanimate objects?

(b) Describe in your own words how the kalimah instills a sense of
dignity, equality, justice and brotherhood among Muslims.

*Question 3*: [24 points]  
 From the attributes of God listed below, circle those that cannot be
found in God.  
 1. Gracious.

2. Resident.

3. Incarnation.

4. Almighty.

5. Creator.

6. Just.

7. Visible.

8. Divisible.

9. Partner.

10. Overwhelming.

11. Inventor.

12. Compound.

13. Subject to change.

14. Eternal.

15. Forgiving.

16. Merciful.

17. Vengeful.

18. Protector.

19. Everlasting.

20. All-Knowing.

*Question 4*: [6 points]  
 Explain in your own words the concept of “additional quality” and why
this attribute is incompatible with the concept of Divinity.


