Key Forces in the Madinah Community
===================================

At Madinah, the Prophet (s.a.w.), settled in a society whose control
was shared by the tribes, material interests and conflicting ideas. The
chief forces at Madinah were the following:

1. Muslims

They were Ansar (supporters) and Muhajirin (migrants). The Prophet
(s.a.w.) called the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj, the inhabitants of
Madinah (the Ansar), as they supported and defended the new faith.

The Aws and Khazraj were two tribes named after the two sons of
Harithah bin Tha'labah 'Anqa'. Their mother was Qilah, the daughter of
Kahil. They lived in Yemen.

Shortly after the destructive flood of al-Aram, which destroyed the
great dam of Ma'rib, the Aws and Khazraj left Yemen and settled at
Yathrib. All the people of Saba' scattered in the surrounding lands.

Their descendants became farmers because the soil was fertile but
economically, their condition was bad. As a result, they fell prey to
greedy Jews.

With the passage of years and generations, differences arose between
the descendants of the Aws and their cousins, the descendants of the
Khazraj, due to mostly personal causes. The burning desire to avenge
themselves over one another widened the gap between them. Many wars were
waged between the two. The key ones included: The Day of Spring, the Day
of al-Baqi' , the First Fujjar, the Second Fujjar and the Day of Bu'ath.
The latter, was the last waged and was followed shortly by the migration
of the Prophet (s.a.w.) to Madinah. Their displeasure, hate and boredom
to warfare were so much that they unanimously agreed, in the wake of the
war of Bu'ath, to crown Abdullah bin Abi-Salul, as their king.(57) But,
no sooner was Abdullah crowned than the Prophet (s.a.w.) arrived in
Madinah.

The immigrants were the pioneers of faith who had fled Mecca to
preserve Islam after the unspeakable torture they were subjected to
there. They settled at Madinah after their inhabitants opened their
hearts to the Divine Message and guidance. For the sake of their faith,
they parted with their land, wealth, houses, and even their relatives.

Meeting the new fresh challenge in the historical movement of Islam,
constructive plans, both short-term and long-term, were laid on the
basis of the new religion.

The migration, however , did not pass unobserved. It cast its shadow
and left its imprint on the life of the followers. Taking into
consideration the new social structure, Islam created necessary communal
ties never known before to man of the pre-Islamic era. It lays stress on
the concept of brotherhood for the cause of Allah. It took a strategic,
historical line: "O people! surely We have created you of a male and a
female, and made you tribes and families that you may know each other
surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most
careful (of his duty);..."

Holy Qur'an (49: 13)

The Messenger of Allah, in clarifying this Qur'anic concept said:

"Allah has, certainly freed you from pre-Islamic era's fanaticism and
the pride over the status of their forefathers. You are either a pious
faithful or a miserable dissolute. You are the sons of Adam and from
dust Adam was created".(58).

Through this vivid concept, Islam swept away all the remnants of the
pre-Islamic era, of which were the pride over one' s lineage and similar
defects. In its place, Islam made piety and the fear of Allah a standard
to evaluate man in Islamic life. The concept of brotherhood was provided
and exemplary expressed in the prophetic order to the Ansar to choose
brothers for themselves from among the Muhajirin and implement the
ensuing duties of brotherhood in all domains of life. The process of
fraternity being fulfilled, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) proclaimed Ali bin
Abi-Talib his brother.(59) He said to him; "You are my brother in this
life and the hereafter"(60)

So vividly was the principle of fraternity endorsed that it has stood
unique and unprecedented throughout history. It is suffice to say every
one of the Muhajirin was made entitled to inherit that of his brother
from the Ansar, after his death, while the deceased's relatives had no
such entitlement.(61) It was not until after the battle of Badr that
this situation was abrogated by this holy verse.

"...and the possessors of relationships are nearer to each other in the
ordinance of Allah;..."

Holy Qur'an (8:75)

The Ansar took the principle of brotherhood to heart so
enthusiastically that they vied with one another to make a Muhajir their
brother, and in certain cases they resorted to casting lots to decide
the winner. Many of the Ansar gave up half of their property in favour
of their brother among the Muhajirin.

It comes as no surprise that history has recorded some cases, in which
a man from the Ansar asked his brother from the Muhajirin to choose any
one of his two wives, so that he divorced her to become free to marry to
the brother from the Muhajirin. This is after the end of the legal
obligatory period of probation observed by women after divorce
(al-Uddah).(62)

The process of fraternity helped to settle the pressing economic
problems faced by the Muhajirin, due to their migration to Madinah in a
simple and natural way.

It should be noted here that the Muhajirin did not choose to take
advantage of their brothers' flooding sentiment towards them but worked
to secure the gratification of their needs.(63) Most of them in fact,
fortunately worked in profitable domains like trade and the like.

All of the followers of the Prophet (s.a.w.) were busily worked except
a small group of the faithful. This group were neither from the
Muhajirin nor from the Ansar. They were called Al-A'rab (Dwellers of the
desert). They were neither able to find work nor had the money to
satisfy their Deeds. A part of the mosque was made, by the Prophet, as a
refuge for them. By activating the principle of general responsibility,'
the Muslims shared helping them.

Thus the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) based the Muslim community on firm and
sound grounds.

2. The Jews

They were four groups of Jews: The tribe of Qainuqa' inside the city
(Madinah), the tribe of al-Nadir, the Jews of Khaibar and the tribe of
Quraidah, living outside the city.

In reality, the Jews constituted a special community which was a far
cry from the inhabitants with regard to their religion, objectives and
sentiments. Residents of Madinah though they were, yet socially,
psychologically and practically they were far removed.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) signed truces with them so that he could build the
state, spread the faith and make it firm inside for his followers. Their
share in the constitution, which he made for the state, was
considerable. The following are some provisions from it:

1. Muslims from the tribe of the Quraish and the city of Yathrib, with
those who joined their ranks and fought along side them, are one
undivided community.

2. All Muslims, the weakest among them included, are under the
protection of Allah. Unlike other people, the faithful, both men and
women, are guardians for each other.

3. The Jews of the tribe of Bani-Awf are a community of the faithful.
Jews can follow their own religion as Muslims do. Only those who wrong
others inflict harm and punishment upon themselves and their
households.

4. Jews spend from their own money and Muslims spend from theirs. They
should link hands together in fighting anyone who might oppose this
agreement.

5. Should any disagreement or discord arise among the parties signatory
to this agreement, they have to consult with Allah, the Mighty and
Powerful, and Muhammad (s.a.w.) His Messenger.

6. Whoever leaves the city of Madinah or stays in it should be secure.
But those who transgress the limits would certainly be punished.

These are but a few of the provisions of the constitution drawn up by
the Prophet (s.a.w.) for Muslims and Jews to live together harmoniously.
For more information, the reader can refer to the Life of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) by Ibn Husham.(64) The majority of the Jews signed this
agreement, that included the tribes of Bani Awf, Bani al-Najjar, Bani
al-Harith, Bani Sa'idah, Bani Jash'am, Bani Tha'labah and the Jews of
al-Aws. The tribes of Bani Quraidah, Bani al-Nadir, and Bani Qainuqa'
opposed the agreement only to sign similar agreements drawn up by the
Prophet (s.a.w.) later on and accept their provisions.

3. The Hypocrites

These were a group of the Madinites who embraced Islam reluctantly,
holding a grudge against the Muslims. They had no other choice except
proclaiming their acceptance of Islam when it became undoubtedly clear
that Islam was victorious. They buried their ill-intentions deeply
waiting for any suitable opportunity to act against Islam.

The reasons behind the animosity of the hypocrites against Islam were
various. Some of them were cut off from their materialistic interests.
Some found in Islam a very potentially dangerous enemy to their
paganism. Some came under the influence of the doubts raised by the Jews
about the new faith. Others were narrow-minded. They regarded the
immigrants as foreigners who were strangers in Madinah.

All these groups pretended to be Muslims. They took part in the
congregational prayers, and fasted during the holy month of Ramadan.
But, internally, they were the prime foes of Islam and the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.).

They busily fabricated and aired harmful stories to revile Islam and
the Prophet (s.a.w.). At one point, for instance, they accused A'i'shah,
a wife of the Prophet, with adultery. But no matter how actively they
worked to abuse the Muslims, all of their hatched plots failed. The Holy
Qur'an always exposed their true intentions and disclosed their devilish
schemes and plans. Another reason for their failure was the progressive
growth of Islam that left the hypocrites helplessly cornered and unable
to stem its spread and power.

The hypocrites could hardly do anything harmful to the Muslims during
the life of the Prophet (s.a.w.). They remained paralyzed and
ineffective. But, from time to time, they would raise troubles for the
Muslims.

4. Polytheists

They were the least in number of Madinites, and their harmful role in
the new-built community was very effectively narrowed by the trend
towards Islam.
They tightly held to their paganism and their ways of life, but they
were powerless against the Islamic wave, too tremendous to be faced.


