Prophet's Military Policy
=========================

From the outset of the blessed da'wah to Islam, the methods adopted by
the Prophet (s.a.w.) to effect a complete change in the new community
were renewed and moderated every at times.

At one point the Prophet (s.a.w.) kept in security his da'wah to Islam
and was working heavily to instruct new converts in the principles of
Islam at a certain place.

At another time he called only his relatives to Islam: "And warn your
nearest kin". Then he called on all of the tribe of the Quraish, at the
house of Allah, to accept Islam. To gain new ground for Islam, he, later
ordered his followers to migrate to Abyssiniah.

Outside the city of Mecca, he held many meetings with Arab tribes. At
al-Ta'if he stayed for one month propagating the new faith and rallying
support for it.

Eventually he met with the pilgrims coming from Yathrib. His efforts
yielded fruits when the people of Yathrib embraced Islam and pledged
their support to the new faith. It was in Yathrib that the Prophet
(s.a.w.) and the early converts found the practical base for the spread
of Islam.

Great sources of power fell into the hands of Muslims, as the result of
the migration and who became more ready to face up to aggression and
fight their enemies.

The first and foremost fruit of the migration was the establishment of
the Islamic state headed by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

With its emergence, Muslims adopted a military policy and the chance
offered itself, as provided a good way of communicating Islam to the
thirsty, dried-up souls seeking the truth.

The key objective underpinning the Islamic military policy was first to
grant people a chance to be acquainted with the Divine Message. The
manner was to call them quietly and convincingly.

But many obstacles were placed between mankind and the Divine Message
and adoption of the military policy by the Muslims sought to demolish
these impediments to leave man free to choose for himself. It was a
strategy, not only realized by the leadership, but even by the smallest
member of the Muslim community.

Ami'r bin Rub'i, a Muslim soldier who took part in the war of
liberation against the Persians, addressed Rustum, the commander of the
Persian army, in these words,(65) "...Allah has certainly raised us and
made us come to free people from worshipping of the servants of Allah to
worshipping Allah; from the narrowest view of life to the most
comprehensive; from the injustice of other religions to the justice of
Islam. He has sent us, carrying His Message to His servants, calling
them to it. Should anyone respond positively to our call we accept that
from him, turn away and leave him ruling his own land without our
intervention. Should anyone refuse this, we fight him incessantly till
Allah judges between us."

The military policy never took one form but practically it took two
distinct shapes:

1. Jihad of liberation and the calling to the path of Allah. The reason
behind its legitimacy is that Islam is Allah's Message to His servants
on earth. And naturally the road to Islam is full of obstacles, which
are states, forces and rulers. Islam should be preached after overcoming
these obstacles. If these barriers block the way of Islam, they should
be removed by force.

2. Defensive Jihad. This is ordained for the purpose of preserving the
Islamic Message, the Islamic state and the Muslims. Islam should be
defended from the plots and schemes of its enemies, the opportunists and
those threatened its existence.

Although the strategic and main target of the Muslim military
operations, was the removal of barriers from the path of the Islamic
da'wah, it can be seen, clearly, the afore-mentioned forms of jihad
coloured all Islamic military operations and wars.

The battles of Badr, Khaibar, Hunain and the liberation of Mecca fall
into the first category while the battles of Khandaq, Mu'tah, Tabuk and
others are of the second form.

Now let us examine a few examples of the two forms of jihad.

**THE GREAT BATTLE OF BADR**

Since the beginning of the blessed Islamic da'wah until the eighth year
after Hijra, Mecca stood firmly in the face of Islam. The well-to-do and
influential leaders of the city worked hard to keep the status quo, to
serve their interests, syphoning off more wealth and wielding more
power.

That is why these pre-Islamic leaders did their utmost to stem the
emergence of the da'wah, stifle its voice, and extinguish its radian
light. They tortured the Muslims beyond endurance, inflicted unspeakable
atrocities on them and created a reign of terror, in Mecca, to prevent
the great process of converting people to Islam which was initiated by
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) The most glorious of the victories of
Islam was the accomplishment of liberating Mecca, as it didn't change
its position towards Islam and its leaders did not change their
attitudes.

For such consideration, the Message of Allah the Exalted, saw the
pre-Islamic rulers of Mecca as the sworn enemy to be destroyed in order
to put an end to their arrogance and conceit.

Strong and mighty in opposing to the Divine Message though Mecca was,
it had nothing other than trade and trade routes. The leaders of Mecca
reviled the Message and appointed themselves the defenders of the
pre-Islamic entity in defense of their vested material wealth
ever-swelled by commercial caravans.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) focused on pounding the Quraishi
positions directly through laying an economic siege on Mecca by
ambushing the Quraish's commercial caravans and threatening its
strategic trade routes. Accordingly, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.),
started sending armed units to damage the Quraish's interests in the
first year of Hijra. This was carried out both inside the city itself
and on the trade routes used by the Quraishi-commercial caravans.

During the year, the Prophet (s.a.w.) sent a military expedition led by
his uncle Hamzah, another led by Ubaidah bin al-Harith, a third by led
by himself and a fourth led by Abdullah bin Jahsh....and others.

Though these attempts were not conclusive in themselves and no direct
skirmishes ever took place, except once, they struck fear in the
Quraishis by the threat they represented economically.

One could easily imagine the scope of the Quraish's fears and annoyance
at the Muslims when recalling the fact that the commercial caravans were
the life-blood of Mecca. Furthermore moving military units strengthened
the Muslims' confidence in themselves and their ability to face the
enemy.

In the second year of Hijra, during the month of Ramadan, the Muslims
learnt that a caravan of the Quraish was en route to Mecca, led by
Abu-Sufyan. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) lost no time in dispatching a
small army of 300 Muslims with little equipment. They had only 70 camels
making every two, three or four people to take turns to ride on each.

News of the Prophet's expedition leaked out and Abu-Sufyan directed the
caravan to another route to keep it out of danger. Furthermore, he also
asked for help and the Quraish responded by sending an army three times
greater than the total number of the faithful.

The matter, for the Muslims, turned to be a face-to-face confrontation
with the Quraish. They had either to confront the Quraish or retreat
back. It was no longer the question of being able to ambush the
commercial caravan.

With the sudden change in the situation, the Prophet (s.a.w.) consulted
his companions, putting responsibility directly with them, when
explaining the challenge.

Al-Muqdad bin Amru declared:

"By Allah, if you ordered us to walk on the embers of tamarisk(66) or
the thorns of al- haras(67) we would walk with you. By Allah we will not
say to you what the Israelites had said to Musa (Moses), 'Go you and
your Lord, then fight you both, surely we will here sit down' but, 'Go
and carry out your Lord's order, surely we are fighting with you."

The representative of the Ansar, Sa'd bin Ma'ath also expressed his
views by saying:

"...just order us to do whatever you want, take from our money whatever
amount you need and leave whatever amount you wish. By Allah, if you
ordered us to cross this sea we would go with you. May Allah show you
what delights your eyes. Advance under the blessing of Allah."(68)

The Prophet (s.a.w.) said at length:

"Advance under the blessing of Allah, for Allah promised to grant me
one of two things. Allah never breaks His promise. By Allah, it is as if
I look at the death of Abu-Jahl, Utbah, Shaiba, so-and-so and
so-and-so."

Then he ordered them to advance to the well of Badr. There, the two
armies faced each other. The Prophet (s.a.w.) and Muslims invoked Allah
for help. Allah aided them with angels from heaven:

"When you sought aid from your Lord, so He answered you: I will assist
you with a thousand of the angels following one another."

Holy Qur'an {(8:9)

Allah granted victory to His Messenger and the faithful. The Quraish
were severely defeated. Their noses were rubbed in the dust and they
were dishonored.

The battlefield witnessed the head-rolling of the polytheists and
deviants. Only the traces of their shame and disgrace were the legacy on
the pages of history and across the life of their followers.

**THE BATTLE OF UHUD**

The battle of Uhud took place only one year after Badr, in the third
year of Hijra, in the month of Shawwal.

After the Battle of Badr, the Quraish felt humiliated and disdained
among the Arabs. They recognized the fast growing power of Islam among
the people, and therefore began gathering their men and leaders in order
to take revenge by attacking and destroying the Muslims in Madinah. The
polytheists were blinded by the wealth of Abu Sufyan who after his
escape from the Muslims on the day of Badr, had vowed to spend this
wealth on nothing except for fighting Muhammad. Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib
the Prophet's uncle who was still in Mecca having learnt about the real
intention of the Quraish, wrote a letter to the Prophet informing him
about the Polytheists' plans for attacking Madinah. On receiving the
letter, the Prophet informed his companions of its contents. And it
happened that the Prophet of Allah had a dream, which he explained as
follows: one of his companions will be killed; one of his household will
be wounded and the 'diri' al-Haseen' is Madinah.

Then the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) began to consult his companions and
in the end they all agreed to fight the polytheists outside Madinah
without letting the city to be a field for fighting; therefore the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) wore his war dress and went with his
companions but later on, his companions regretted and asked him to
return for Madinah and fight the enemy from there as he (s.a.w.)
suggested at first but the Prophet of Allah refused that.

With one thousand fighters the Prophet marched to Uhud outside Madinah
to meet the attacking force of three thousands polytheists led by the
arch-enemy of Islam, Abu Sufyan. He gave the banner of the Muhajirin to
his valiant cousin and son in-law Imam Ali (a.s.) and the banner of the
Ansar to Sa'id bin Ubadah.

However, the actual number of fighting men of the Prophet were only
seven hundred, because when the Muslims began to leave Madinah, the
three hundred hypocrites and plotters, who existed in the army of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) under the leadership of Abdullah bin Ubai
bin Salalul withdrew themselves from the army.(69)

The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) arranged the Muslims in battle-ranks,
positioning fifty archers of the Ansar over the hill pass in order to
deter the enemy from ambushing the Muslims from behind. He put one of
them as their leader and advised them not to leave their position at any
cost. Soon the fighting started and after a pitched battle the Muslims
put the polytheists to flight. Some of the companions of the Prophet
began to plunder the well stocked camp of the infidels and when the men
at the mountain-pass saw their greed gave away and they said: "Those men
will take (all) the spoils if we stay (here)." They asked their leader:
"We want to take part in the plunder like the others." He replied: "The
Prophet of Allah has ordered us not to leave this position." "He ordered
you to do that without knowing that the matter would come to what we now
see, " they bluntly told him and went off towards the booty leaving him
behind. He remained in his position till he was martyred.

The polytheists led by Khalid bin Walid, seeing the hill-pass
undefended, attacked the Muslims from behind catching by surprise the
majority of companions of the Prophet who were occupied the grab for the
spoils. The Prophet was left only with a small troop of his devout
companions such as Imam Ali (a.s.), his uncle Hamzah and Mus'ab bin
Umair, who nevertheless they continued to bravely fighting the
polytheists. The Prophet of Allah was overcome by faintness as a result
of a wound which he received, while his uncle Hamzah bin Abdul-Muttalib
was martyred by a man called 'Wahishi' (savage) the slave of Abu
Sufyan.

Hind, the wife of Abu Sufyan who was encouraging the polytheists to
attack the Muslims, with her lusty songs, ordered Hamzah's stomach to be
split open, and chewed his liver like a blood-thirsty bitch. She even
cut off his nose and ears and wore them around her neck in savage
exultation.

Despite the Prophet's call to stay firm in the battlefield most of his
companions fled the scene, leaving him alone with Imam Ali (a.s.) and a
few other, like Abu Dajjassa.

Indeed the main reason for the Muslim's set back in this battle is
their disobedience of the orders of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.)
because had they obeyed him and fought the polytheists in Madinah as
suggested before, and if the men at the mountain-pass had not disobeyed
his orders, they would surely have become victorious.

After this set back, on the second day, the Muslims were ordered the
Muslims to go out and fight the Quraish in spite of their sufferings
from the wounds lest the polytheists again attack them. Therefore, the
Muslims responded and the Prophet of Allah gave Imam Ali (a.s.) the
banner of the Muhajirin. They reached a place called 'Hamra' al-Asad'
wishing to fight the polytheist and also prove to the people that they
are still strong and able to attack the enemy, but seeing that Abu
Sufyan and his army had returned to Mecca, the Prophet of Allah and his
companions also returned to Madinah.

**THE BATTLE OF KHANDAQ**

If the Battle of Badr was an example of the offensive military policy
of the Prophet (s.a.w.), the battle of Khandaq, was a defensive strategy
waged in defense of the Divine Message and the nascent camp of Islam.

It happened that in the fifth year of Hijra, a number of Jewish leaders
in Mecca campaigned among the polytheists to wage a war against the
Muslims. Abu-Sufyan discovered their plan.

However the Quraish hesitated before responding to the call for war
against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). Some of the Quraishi leaders asked
themselves," Isn't Muhammad right in his call that he is risking his
life for the sake of defending it?"

They thought of asking the Jews about the matter, for they knew that
the Jews were the followers of the first Divine Book. They posed this
question to a delegation of the Jews. They asked them, "O Jews! You are
the followers of the first Book and the past knowledge. You know the
faith brought by Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the faith we believe in is our
faith better than his or is it that he is right?"

"It is your faith", the Jews replied, "that is better than his. You are
more entitled to the truth than him"(70)

By responding so, the Jews committed an unpardonable crime in favouring
the false religion of paganism at the expense of the right religion of
monotheism. They wanted to win over the Quraishis to their side to wage
a war against the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). Therefore, Allah, the
Exalted, revealed this verse to His Messenger (s.a.w.):

"Have you not seen those to whom a portion of the Book has been given?
They believe in idols and false deities and say of those who disbelieve:
These are better guided in the path than those who believe".

Holy Qur'an (4:51)

The Jews went on with their efforts to instigate the tribes against the
Prophet (s.a.w.). They succeeded in winning over to their cause the
tribes of Bani Fazarah, Ashja', Murrah, Salim, Bani As'ad and Bani Asad
among others.

Under the standard of Abu-Sufyan bin Harb al-Amawi, 10,000 militants,
gathered to advance and engage the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

The forces of injustice set out for Madinah. Learning of this military
offensive, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) decided to remain inside the city
and defend it.

From both the eastern and western sides, the houses of Madinah were
closely built like an impregnable fortress. The eastern southern blank
of the city was inhabited by the Jews of Bani Quraidah, who had earlier
signed an agreement of good neighbourliness with the Prophet (s.a.w.).
So, only the northern part of the city was open to the enemy.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) consulted his companions over the
matter. Salman, the Persian, may Allah be pleased with him, came up with
a proposal. He said:"

In Persia, we were used to dig a ditch around us when we were
besieged."
He suggested a similar tactic be used in the open part of the city. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) appreciated the idea and the Muslims spent
six days to complete the digging of the ditch.

The houses facing the enemy were satisfactorily fortified and the women
and children were kept in them.

The Messenger (s.a.w.) mobilized his forces. His army, which was
3,000 - strong, advanced forward and encamped behind the ditch. The
Quraish and their allies approached the city. They were amazed to see
the ditch, which was never used before as a military means of defense.
So they encamped near the ditch.

Only a few days passed, however, when the invading army became bored
because of the ditch, with the coldness and the blistering wind.

The Quraish wanted now to give up the whole plan and return to Mecca.
When the Jews learnt of the Quraish's intention, their leader Huyah bin
Akhtab assured them that he would coax the Jews of Bani Quraidah to
revoke their treaty with the Messenger (s.a.w.) and enter the war on
their side. This being accomplished, he said to them, that the front
line of the Muslim army would be thrown into confusion, the whole camp
would be shaken from within and their supply route would be cut off.

Huyah bin Akhtab contacted the Barn. Quraidah, but Ka'b bin Asad shut
the gate of the fort in his face and refused to receive him. Ibn Akhtab
did not give up. He persisted in seeing him and kept reminding him of
their . mutual relationship. He told him that it was time they avenged
themselves over the Muslims and that the great forces gathered there
could easily crush the Muslims. He talked with him at length about the
impending victory and other similar alluring words and promises.

The Bani Quraidah, being assured of the coming victory, unilaterally
revoked the treaty and tore it into pieces.

No sooner did the Messenger (s.a.w.) hear of their turn-about then he
sent a delegation to them to check the matter. But being carried away
with excitement they were rudely impolite. For, when the delegation
called on them to abide by the treaty they asked the Muslims to allow
the Jews of Bani al-Nadir, whom the Messenger (s.a.w.) earlier had
turned out of the city, to return to their neighbourhood. Brazenly they
had attacked the Messenger (s.a.w.) and Islam. When the delegation
washed their hands of them; they returned to Madinah to inform the
Prophet (s.a.w.) of the whole truth.

The Muslims were extremely alarmed by these developments. Their eyes
turned dull and their hearts rose in their throats, as the Qur'an
(33:10-13) described them. So blunt and rash were the Bani Quraidah that
they attacked some Muslim families and frightened them. Moreover, they
mobilized their forces to launch war on the. side of their new
alliance.

The attack was spearheaded, by Amru bin Abd-Wid al-Amiri, one of the
Quraish's leaders and a handful of his soldiers crossing the ditch. They
threatened the Muslims inside their city. Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.),
accompanied by a number of Muslims, hurried to the place where Amru and
his soldiers crossed the ditch, to prevent any further attempts.(71)

Amru bin Abd-Wid arrogantly, went on galloping in front of the Muslims,
issuing, threat and menacing them. He spoke proudly about his claimed
bravery, calling out:

"Anyone ready to fight?"

Imam Ali (a.s.) stood up and said to the Prophet (s.a.w.):

"I can fight him, O Prophet of Allah".

"Sit down", the Prophet (s.a.w.) ordered him, "he is Amru".

Ibn Abd-Wid repeated his call. He scolded the Muslims and mocked them
saying:

"Where is your paradise you claim where anyone among you goes to
inhabit if you are killed? Won't you nominate someone from among you to
fight me?"

"I can fight him, O Messenger of Allah", Ali, said for the second time,
rising to his feet.

"Sit down", the Prophet (s.a.w.) ordered him again, "he is Amru".

Imam Ali (a.s.) did not care whether he was Amru or someone else. So,
he said to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.):

"Even if he is Amru!"

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) finally conceded and gave his
permission to Ali (a.s.) and handed over his sword Dhul-Fiqar to him. He
made him put on his (the Prophet's) coat of mail and wear his turban.
Then, the Prophet (s.a.w.) raised his hands in prayer:

"O Lord! This is my brother and cousin. Do not leave me alone. You are
the best of inheritors".(72)

Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the battlefield and said Ibn Abd-Wid:

"O Amru! You have made covenant with Allah that whenever a man from the
Quraish offers you two choices respecting a combat you accept one of
them".

"Yes" , said Ibn Abd-Wid.

"Then," Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "I call you to Allah and His Messenger
(s.a.w.) and Islam".

"I do not need that", he said.

"Then", the Imam said, "I call you to fight".

"I hate to shed your blood," Amru replied "your father was a friend of
mine".

"But", the Imam retorted, "by Allah I like to kill you".

Amru got very angry and attacked Ali (a.s.). The Imam repulsed his
assault with his usual aplomb. He killed him and shouts of
"Allahu-akbar" and "Praise be to Allah" rose from the ranks of the
Muslims.(73)

When Ali (a.s.) returned triumphantly, the Messenger received him by
saying:

"The combat of Ali bin Abi-Talib with Amru bin Abd-Wid is better than
the deeds of my ummah till Doomsday." (74)

After Amru bin Abd-Wid's death, the enemies tightened their circle
around Madinah. The fighting went on in full swing from midday till
midnight.

In the meantime, Na'im bin Mas'ud al-Asha'i(75) arrived and embraced
Islam, without the knowledge of his tribe. As such, the Prophet (s.a.w.)
ordered him to make use of his status as a man from the tribe of
Ghatafan which was respected by all parties. He lost no time and went to
the Bani Quraidah, with whom he had close (elation’s. He reminded them
of his closeness with them and said:

"The Quraish and the Ghatafan are no ready to remain for along period.
They will undoubtedly depart. Should you remain in Madinah, Muhammad
will most certainly punish you. So that the Quraish and the Ghatafan
will not leave you alone when fighting breaks out, you should take
hostages from the Quraish and keep them."

The Bani Quraidah approved of his suggestion.

Na'im, then, went to the Quraish and said to them:

"The Bani Quraidah regret breaking their treaty with Muhammad. They are
doing what they can to satisfy him. They will take a number of men from
the Quraish as hostages whom they win put to death. Never hand your men
over to them".

Finally, he went to the Ghatafan and said the same thing he had said to
the Quraish.

Next day, Abu Sufyan contacted Bani Quraidah asking them to begin
attacking(76) the Muslims. As it was Saturday (the Jewish holy day), the
Bani Quraidah excused themselves and declined the offer.

Abu Sufyan persisted in demanding that they spearhead the attack but
they did not change their position referring to the question of
hostages. At that point, he felt sure that what Na'im bin Mas'ud had
said was the truth. When he presented the matter to the Ghatafan he saw
that they were hesitant also.

At night, a blistering, bitter wind blew. It overturned pots, plucked
out tents and extinguished their fires.

As terror struck at the hearts of the infidel they took to their heels
in the direction of Madinah.

The next morning, when the Muslims looked around them, there was no
trace of the enemy. Their confidence and trust in Allah grew. This was
one example of the defensive military policy of the Islamic state,
adopted by the Messenger Muhammad (s.a.w.)

**HUDAYBIYYAH PEACE TREATY**

The battle against the allies at Khandiq, was virtually the last of the
Quraish's attempts to confront Islam and the great Messenger (s.a.w.).
Afterwards they began to fear the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

The Jews of Bani Quraidah were actually got rid of after the siege that
lasted 15 days. In its wake, the Messenger began, to think of suitable
ways of consolidating the power of the state, strengthening the pillars
of the Islamic community, weakening enemies and spreading the call of
Islam to larger areas.

It was during this time, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) heard of a
fresh attempt being prepared secretly by the Quraish and the Jews of
Khaibar to invade Madinah. Thus, he made up his mind to make a truce
with the Quraish in order to wean them away from the Jews. He also moved
to convey Islam among the Arabs other than the Quraish.

To carry this out, he thought the season of hajj (pilgrimage) was the
appropriate time, for the Arabs greatly respected holy months, including
that of hajj.

When the hajj season arrived, the Messenger (s.a.w.), accompanied by
15000 of his followers, set out for Mecca. From a place called
Dhul-Halifah, he and his followers raised their voices in a special
recitation for pilgrims, "Here I am, my Lord, here I am. Praise and
grace and the worlds are Yours. No partner is set with You...".

Any passer-by would have understood that the Prophet came along only to
perform hajj and not to fight. Swords were kept in their scabbards and
prior to his departure for Mecca, he had made it clear to the other
Arabs, other than the Quraish, that he would go to perform hajj and
called on them to follow suit.

It was evident that he wanted the Arabs to know of his peaceful
intention, otherwise, there was no point in going out in broad daylight
and calling other Arabs to join him in the march to Mecca, particularly
when they were among his enemies. It was a bid, made by the Messenger,
to convince public opinion, if the Quraish blocked his way to visit the
Holy House of Allah. This is why he informed the Arabs of his march
towards Mecca.

Fearing it was a scheme made by the Messenger (s.a.w.) merely to enter
Mecca, the Quraish mobilized a great army, led by Khalid bin al-Walid,
to stop his way. The army covered along distance going towards Mecca to
confront the Muslims, but even such extraordinary preparations to
challenge them, did not discourage the Messenger. He decided to keep to
his peaceful plan. He, consequently, turned off the main road and took a
coarse one that led to the southern part of Mecca at a place called
Hudaibiyyah.

When Khalid bin al-Walid heard of the Messenger's diversion, he rapidly
retreated to Mecca with fear and uncertainty hanging over the army.(77)
He entered Mecca with the purpose of keeping the Muslims out. The two
armies faced each other, with the Quraish avoiding to engage the Muslims
in a new battle, but refusing to allow them to enter the city any
cost.

After only a few days passed, the Quraish sent a delegation to hold
talks with the Messenger (s.a.w.) to know specifically his real
intention. The delegation became convinced, shortly after the talks
started, that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and the Muslims came only
to perform hajj.

But when the delegation returned and informed the Quraish of their
impression, they were accused of being cowards and sympathizers with the
Muslims.

Another delegation then was sent. This time it was headed by the leader
of the Abyssinians. The Quraish plan was to pit him against the
Messenger (s.a.w.) if the talks failed so that he would side with
them.

No sooner had the Messenger (s.a.w.) heard of the advent of the
Abyssinian leader, then he proceeded with the ritual offerings where
animals are brought in the valley to be slaughtered during the hajj.
When the leader of the Abyssinians saw garlands hanging from the animal
necks - it was an Arab tradition to put garlands around the necks of the
offerings - and that the Muslims were arrayed in hajj robes, dutifully
remembering the Lord, he went back without meeting the Messenger out of
awe and respect.

On his return, he addressed the Quraish in the following words, "By
Allah, we will never ally ourselves with you in preventing people from
visiting the House of Allah who have come to glorify it, and pay due
respects"(78) He then advised them to permit the Messenger (s.a.w.) and
his followers to perform their hajj. If not, he warned them that he
would fight them.

For the same purpose, the Quraish then sent Urwah bin Mas'ud
al-Thaqafi, whom the Messenger (s.a.w.) told he had not come to wage a
war against them but to visit the House of Allah. Urwah noticed how the
Muslims dearly loved the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and how eagerly
they obeyed him.

When he returned, he explained what he saw:

"O people! I waited on the kings and visited Qaisar (Caesar), Kusra
(Chosroes) and al-Najashi. By Allah I have never seen people extol their
King as greatly as the followers of Muhammad do. If he orders them they
hurry to obey him. If he does his ablutions, they virtually fight one
another to get some of the water he used. If they talk, they only talk
with low voices in his presence. They do not look him sharply in the eye
out of respect and awe. He has offered you a reasonable proposal, so
accept it..."(79)

The Messenger (s.a.w.) then sent, an envoy whose name was Kharrash
al-Khiza'i. But, the Quraish hamstrung his camel and wanted to kill him
if the Abyssinian leader had not interfered and saved him.

Seeing their unmanly reaction to his envoy, the Messenger (s.a.w.) sent
Uthman bin Affan, who entered Mecca under the protection of his cousin
Ibban bin Sa'id bin al-As. He assured the Quraish that the Messenger
(s.a.w.) had come only to perform the hajj. But the Quraish showed
unlimited hastiness, for they imprisoned Uthman for three days during
which time it was rumored he was put to death. The Messenger (s.a.w.)
the decided to call upon his followers to make a covenant with him to
fight the Quraish. They responded positively, vied with each other to
swear their allegiance, put on their military outfits and prepared
themselves for war. This was called the pledge of al-Ridwan (mercy)
(80), the participants of which were praised by Allah in the Holy Book
of the Qur'an:

"Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts,
so He sent down tranquility on them and rewarded them with a near
victory."

Holy Qur'an (48:18)

The Quraish feared grave consequences when they heard of the pledge
between the Messenger (s.a.w.) and his followers. The bravery of the
Muslims was not a secret to them, and the Quraish were acquainted with
the steadfastness during the wars they had fought with them.

Seeking a peaceful solution to the matter, the Quraish sent a
delegation headed by Suhail bin Amru. A long dialogue ensued between the
Messenger (s.a.w.) and Suhail at the 2nd of which an agreement was
arrived at to make a peaceful treaty between the Muslims and the
infidels in Mecca.

The Messenger (s.a.w.) ordered Ali(a.s.) to write down the text of the
agreement between the two sides. He dictated to him the following:

"Write in the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful," said the
Messenger (s.a.w.).

Suhail, the representative of Quraish, protested at that, and said:
"stop! I do not know the Compassionate, the Merciful!

Write, in Your Name, our Lord."

"Write in Your Name, our Lord", the Messenger (s.a.w.) told Ali (a.s.).
Then he said, "Write this is what Muhammad the Messenger of Allah had
agreed upon with Suhail bin Amru".

"Stop" said Suhail. "Had I witnessed that you are the Messenger of
Allah I would not have fought you. So, write only your name and your
fathers".

"Write", the Messenger (s.a.w.) said, "This is on which Muhammad bin
Abdullah made peace with..." and dictated the articles of the agreement,
which stated that:(81)

1. The agreement is essentially a truce between the two parties for a
period of 10 years.

2. Whoever embraces Islam and joins the Messenger (s.a.w.) without the
consent of the Quraish is returned to the Quraish by the Messenger
(s.a.w.). But whoever renounces Islam, among the followers of Muhammad
(s.a.w.), and rejoins the Quraish, can remain there without any
molestation.

3. Any Arab tribe that tends to ally with Muhammad (s.a.w.) can freely
do so and they are similarly free to ally with the Quraish.

4. Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his followers have to return to the place from
where they came. But, next year, during the season of hajj, they can
visit the Holy House of Allah on condition that they stay only three
days in Mecca with sheathed swords.

On behalf of the Muslims, the Messenger (s.a.w.) signed the agreement
while Suhail bin Amru signed it on behalf of the Quraish. Shortly
afterwards, the tribe of Khuza'ah allied themselves with the Messenger
(s.a.w.) and the tribe of Bani Bakr allied themselves with the
Quraish.

Many Muslims protested at the conclusion of the agreement. Among the
protestors was Umar bin al-Khattab, for what, he thought, the toleration
and resilience on the part of the Messenger (s.a.w.). Not grasping the
hidden meaning of the agreement was the cause of the protests. The
protestors found fault with the agreement till the revelation of the
Qura'nic Surah of al-Fath (the victory) which after its signing
disclosed the philosophy of the agreement. It was a sweeping victory for
the Muslims and their Message.

So great was the positive effects of the agreement on the historical
movement of Islam that it opened closed doors for the Muslims to convey
their da'wah to non-Quraishi Arabs, building and solidifying their state
and strengthening their nascent community against the pressures being
exerted by the Quraish on the Muslims, including their wars.

The Divine da'wah, began to win over the public support of the Arabs
after the signing of the agreement. The faithful took the liberty of
contacting the Arabs in their own house to convey Islam to them. Another
advantageous outcome of the agreement was that the Muslims, now turned
their attention to the Jews with whom they were engaged for 15 days
after the return of the Messenger (s.a.w.) from Hudaibiyyah.

These are some of the fruits of Hudaibiyyah Pact which was a
significant turning point in the movement of the da'wah.

**THE BATTLE OF KHAIBAR**

As we noted before, the Jews in Madinah were cooperating with the
hypocrites and the polytheists against the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.),
his companions and his Islamic da'wah (call). Indeed the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) had to fight them three times in the places called Banu
Nadhir, Banu Quraidah and Banu Quwainiqa' in order to frustrates their
conspiracies.

The Jews had also incited the polytheists to attack Madinah and fight
the Muslims in the battle of Khandaq or Ahzab in the fifth year of
hijra.

Therefore on 7 A.H., in the month of Rajab, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.), in order to rid Islam and Muslims of their evil plots and
spying, decided to attack their six fortress cities in which they had
assembled more than 20,000 fighters.

The Muslims forces took the outlying forts with ease, before laying
siege to Fort Qamus, the impregnable Jewish stronghold, which was manned
by their renowned champions.

Incidentally, Imam Ali, because of having sore eyes was left behind in
Madinah.

During the siege, daily, a companion of the Prophet used to lead the
attacks on the fort without achieving anything.

One day, the Prophet summoned Abu Bakr and gave him the standard of
Islam with instructions to attack the fort. The latter and men under him
suffered defeat and fled back to the Muslim camp, with Abu Bakr
vigorously denouncing the people under him while they were just as
vigorously blaming him for the failure. The next day, Umar ibn Khatab
was given the standard, but he too, soon fled the battle scene accusing
his followers of cowardice while they in turn were calling him coward.
Then the Prophet (s.a.w.) uttered those famous words:

"Tomorrow, I will entrust this standard to a man who is an intrepid
attacker and who never flees. Who loves Allah and His Messenger and (in
turn) is loved by Allah and the Messenger. Allah, the Glorious will
deliver Khaibar at his hand."(82)

All the companions wished to be the man that the Prophet described and
spent the night hoping to have that honour.

The next day, to their surprise the Prophet asked:

"Where is Ali bin Abi Talib?" He was told that he had sore eyes.

"Show him to me and you will show a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and whom Allah and His Messenger love. He takes things up in
the right way and he will not flee." replied the Prophet.

Then Imam Ali came from Madinah, and the Prophet applied his saliva
into the eyes of his beloved cousin and cured him with Allah's
permission.

"Take this standard and go forth with it till Allah grants victory to
the Muslims through you."(83)

Bukhari, the Hadith compiler, also narrates the events, by saying:

"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said at Khaibar: 'The next day I shall
give the standard to a man through whom Allah will bring victory.' The
companions spent the night asking each other: Who is this man whom the
Holy Prophet meant? They came in the morning to the Messenger and every
one of them was hoping that he would be the man of the standard. 'Where
is Ali bin Abi Talib?' the Prophet asked. 'He is suffering from
inflammation of the eyes,' they said. The Prophet sent for him. When Ali
was brought to the Prophet he treated Ali's eyes with his blessed saliva
and prayed for him. Ali's eyes cured instantly as if they had not been
sore. On receiving the standard from the Prophet, Ali asked: 'O
Messenger of Allah, shall I fight them until they become Muslims like
us?' The Messenger said: 'Go on, until you reach their fortress. Invite
them to Islam and inform them of their duty towards Allah and Islam. By
Allah, if He guides one single soul through you to the right way, it
would be better for you than to own a huge treasure.'"(84)

Then the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali set out with the standard
until he reached the fortress. There, Marhab the leading Jewish warrior
was rather surprised at the courage of the young Muslim standard-bearer,
who unlike his predecessors of the past few days, was not showing any
sing of nervousness, and seemed intent to challenge the Jewish champions
to combat. Marhab, dad in heavy armour, at last charged out from the
fort on his steed to test his skills with the new-comer. The dialogue
which ensued between the two combatants will seem out of context here.

In short, after telling the Jewish warrior that his mother had named
him 'Haider' (lion), Imam Ali exchanged blows with Marhab, and soon
dispatched his wretched soul to hell, with one stroke of his famous
sword 'Dhulfiqar', which cut man and his horse in two.

The Jewish force, seeing their champion fell rushed back to the fort
and bolted its strong doors in face of the Muslim army. However, Imam
Ali marched forth right up to the forth, and with a jerk of his strong
hand tore down the gate from its binges, and fleeing it across the
trench to be used as a bridge for the rejuvenated Muslim army. Thus, by
the Grace of Allah, Khaibar was conquered by the Muslims, ending once
and for all, Jewish power and intrigues in Arabia.

**NEW HORIZONS**

Shortly after its birth in Mecca, the Islamic Message began to take on
its human and international identity.

It is a Message that provides for man all the opportunities for growth
and prosperity. It balances all aspects of man such a delicate way that
none receives attention at the expense of another one. Success cannot be
achieved without the recognition, on the part of Islam, of man as an
entity possessing various powers and demands. Maybe the most expressive
Qur'anic text concerning the human quality of Islam is the following
verse:

"Then set up your face upright for religion in the right state- the
nature made by Allah in which He has made them men; there is not
altering of Allah's creation; that is the right religion, but most
people do not know-."

Holy Qur'an (30:30)

Islam, the faith of human nature, does not try to divert nor does it
ignore this nature. On the contrary, it acknowledges its existence, and
its demands.

Apart from Islam's declaration of its human identity, it has a
pronounced international dimension as well. The verses, which were
revealed at Mecca point out this quality clearly and strongly.

"And We have not sent you but as a mercy to the worlds."

Holy Qur'an (21:107)

"And We have not sent you but to all the people as a bearer of good
news and as a warner..."

Holy Qur'an (34:28)

The address 'O people' occurs often in the Meccan verses.

From the outset, the march of Islam, embodied its world quality. The
vanguard in the calling to Islam was an entity that transcended
geographical, national, and tribal barriers.

Among the callers to Islam were both the wealthy and the destitute, the
whites and the blacks, the Arab and the non Arabs. There were Hamzah bin
Abdul-Muttalib, Ammar, Bilal, the Abyssinian, Suhaib, the Roman, Mus'ab
bin Umair, and so on.

After the blessed migration, Islam expressed its international quality
in many ways, during the first chance that offered itself. Following the
freezing of the struggle between the Muslims and the polytheists of the
Quraish in accordance with the Pact of Hudaibiyyah, contacts were
initiated with the Arabs outside the Quraish and the leaders of the
neighbouring states.

If on hand, the Messenger (s.a.w.) sent men bearing the Message to the
neighbourhoods of Arabs and Arab tribes, calling them to the new faith,
on the other, did not forget dispatching messengers to the kings and
leaders of the world at that time extolling them to enter Islam.

And so he sent letters to Caesar, the Roman emperor, Chosroes, the
Persian emperor, al-Muqawqis, the Egyptian ruler, al-Najashi, the
Abyssinian king, al-Harith al-Ghassani, king of Damascus, al-Harith
al-Himyari, king of San'a of Yemen, the kings of Oman, Bahrain,
al-Yamama and other leaders.

The responses from the various rulers were as follows:

Caesar, the Roman emperor, put the matter to Roman leaders for
consideration, but they flatly and decisively refused the offer. Caesar
agreed with them.

Chosroes, the Persian emperor, tore the letter of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) into pieces. He wrote to his governor in Yemen, named
Bathan, to dispatch a group of men to capture the Messenger (s.a.w.) and
then send him to him. Bathan did not hesitate to carry out the order. He
sent two men from among his courtiers. When they meet the Messenger
(s.a.w.) he detested their unmanliness.

"Who ordered you to do so?", he inquired of them.

"Our Lord," they said, referring to Chosroes.

"Tell your companion," the Messenger (s.a.w.) said in reference to
Bathan, "that my Lord has killed your lord this night".

They returned and told Bathan about their mission and what the
Messenger (s.a.w.) had said to them. No sooner had they arrived than
word came that Chosroes had died. At that, Bathan and his Persian
followers in Yeman submitted to Islam.(85)

Al-Najashi, the king of Abyssiniah, on the other hand, accepted Islam
and put the letter of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) in front of him,
descended from his throne and sat on the ground in honour of the Holy
Messenger (s.a.w.). Then he wrote a letter to him announcing his
conversion to Islam and his faith in the Message of Allah.

As for the chief of the Copts, he valued the letter of the Prophet
highly and kept it. He treated the envoy of the Prophet (s.a.w.) most
generously and sent a soft-worded letter to the Apostle (s.a.w.) along
with two slave girls, one of whom, Mariyah whom was taken as his wife, a
garment and a mule. The Prophet (s.a.w.)accepted his present.

Al-Harith al-Ghassani flung the letter of the Prophet (s.a.w.) in great
fury. He decided to use force against the Messenger (s.a.w.) and
approached Caesar about joining hands in fighting him but Caesar
rebuffed him.

The King of Yamamah wrote to the Prophet (s.a.w.) suggesting that he
would enter Islam only if the Prophet (s.a.w.) appointed him as king.
The Prophet (s.a.w.) cursed him.

The King of Bahrain embraced Islam as soon as he received his letter
from the Prophet (s.a.w.). Similarly, al-Harith al-Himyari, the king of
San'a', also became a Muslim.

And so, the leaders and kings at the time adopted different positions
towards the Prophet's call on them to accept Islam. Some of them were
roughshod in their response whilst others were receptive and
polite.(86)

By writing to the leaders of his time, the Prophet (s.a.w.) had adopted
a very practical way in spreading the Islamic call. The Prophet
(s.a.w.), as a matter of course, based his attitudes towards these
leaders in proportion to their responses. He also laid his future
military plans in this context.


