The Comming of Allah's Help and Victory
=======================================

As Relations between Muhammad the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) and the
Quraish eased, the tribe of Bani Bar made an alliance with the Quraish
whereas the tribe of Khuza'ah allied themselves with the Muslims. The
Quraish, after a time of economic deterioration due to the wars that
flared up between them and the Muslims, moved to restore its financial
strength through trade.

In contrast, the Muslims, under the leadership of the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w .) made use of the peace in calling others to Islam and carrying
the Message as far as possible. They worked hard to solidify the home
front, make the basis of the Islamic state in the Arabian Peninsula firm
and see off the last dangerous entity of the Jews by way of the exploit
of Khaibar. They contacted the non-Muslim kings and rulers and, as we
have just mentioned, called on them to enter Islam.

It was not long, however, fighting broke out between the tribes of
Khuza'ah and Bani Bakr reviled the Prophet (s.a.w.) in the presence of a
man from the tribe of Khuza'ah. The latter gave him a good beating(87)
and that stirred the buried feelings of animosity between the two
sides.

The Bani Bakr, with the unreserved military support of the Quraish,
attacked Khuza'ah. There were numerous casualties.

The Khuza'ah were shocked and alarmed by its losses and sought the help
of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). They sent Amru bin Salim, one of their
leading figures, to him. He told the Prophet all about the treachery of
the Quraish and its flagrant aggression on the Khuza'ah. Amru went into
the mosque, where the Prophet (s.a.w.) was inside, and recited these
lines of verse:

O Lord, I am pleading with Muhammad, by the old alliance between our
father and his.

You had been a son and we a father. Then we embraced Islam and never
renounced our faith.

Help us and may Allah give you guidance with all your might, call the
servants of Allah, they will answer you in great numbers...

Among them is the Messenger of Allah, who committed himself to the
faith. If subjected to humiliation, his face darkens with fury. He will
come at the head of a division, like a sea, throwing up froth. The
Quraish did not keep their word. They have broken the firm covenant with
you. They ambushed us in the desert, claiming that I won't dare ask help
from anyone.

They are surely humiliated and less in number. "They let us sleep
peacefully on the road at the foot of the mountain and massacred us
while we were bending and prostrating in prayer."(88)

O Amru bin Salim', the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said, 'certainly, we
shall help you'. Then he went into his house saying aloud, "May Allah
never give me victory over my enemies if I refrain from helping
Khuza'ah."

The Quraish heard of the intentions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and became
disconcerted and restless. As a bid to emphasize their commitment to the
covenant with the Muslims and ward off the wrath of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) they sent Abu Sufyan to see the Prophet (s.a.w.) and have
a dialogue with him.

By the time Abu Sufyan arrived at Madinah, the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.) had full details of the latest steps of the Quraish. He knew
how deeply they were worried, so when Abu Sufyan offered to renew the
truce the Prophet (s.a.w.) turned a deaf ear to him and refused to
listen to his false promises.

Abu Sufyan, upset as he was, thought of asking for the help of the
companions of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) to change his position. He
called on Abu Bakr, and explained the matter to him, but he refused to
help him. He went from there to the house of Umar bin al-Khattab, who
likewise, disappointed him.

Abu Sufyan went to the room of his daughter, Um Habibah, the wife of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).There he found that when he wanted to
sit down his daughter rolled back the mattress. "This is the mattress of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)," she said to him. "you certainly can't,
be seated on it while you are an unclean polytheist."

From there he went to the daughter of the Holy Prophet, Fatimah
al-Zahra' (a.s.) who also rebuffed him. When he put forth his problem to
Ali (a.s.), Ali (a.s.) said to him:

The Messenger of Allah has set his mind to do something. We can't talk
to him about it." Hopelessly and helplessly, he returned to Mecca.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) proceeded to prepare himself for war
and ordered the people to get ready. He implored Allah, saying:

O Lord, blind the spies of the Quraish to the news of our arrangements,
till we overcome them in their land."(89)

Under the leadership of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.), the Muslim army
marched towards Mecca. It was 10,000- strong. When the army reached the
outskirts of the city, the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) ordered each and
every single Muslim to build a fire, so the darkness of the spacious
desert turned into bright daylight.

Meanwhile, Abu Sufyan and a small group of his companions were on their
way out of Mecca. They were in pursuit of news of the Muslims as they
had heard nothing about them for some time due to the blackout on
information imposed by the Prophet (s.a.w.). He wanted to reach Mecca
without their people's knowledge.

Abu Sufyan and his companions were startled at the sight of the burning
fire. They paused looking astonished at the dazzling sight. They tried
to guess what the cause of the matter was but they knew nothing for
certain.

At the same time, al-Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib was heading towards Mecca
searching for a someone from the Quraish to tell him about the approach
of the Muslim army in order to make the Quraish seek peace before they
were engaged in a war that would certainly lead to their total defeat.

Al-Abbas halted and listened to voices coming to him in the darkness.
He recognized that of Abu Sufyan and called out:

Abu-Handhalah!"

Abul-Fadhl? ," Abu Sufyan asked.

Well," al-Abbas said.

May my father and mother be your ransom. What are you up to?"

This is the Messenger of Allah. He has come at the head of an
insuperable force. They are ten thousand Muslims".

What do you order me to do?"

Ride behind me on this she-camel. I will ask security for you from the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.).

Abu Sufyan followed al-Abbas on his she-camel and went to the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.). He asked safety for him from Prophet (s.a.w.). The
Prophet (s.a.w.) said:

Off you go. He is safe, but bring him to me tomorrow in the
morning"(90)

The following morning, al-Abbas took Abu-Sufyan with him to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.).

Abu Sufyan", the Messenger scolded him "woe to you! Isn't it time for
you to know that there is no god but Allah?"

May my father and mother be your ransom," Abu Sufyan muttered. "How
generous, how kind, how merciful, how forbearing you are. By Allah, I
thought that if there is another god beside Him, he would have certainly
helped us at the battle of Badr".

Abu Sufyan," the Prophet (s.a.w.) replied reprovingly.

Woe on you! Isn't it time for you to know that I am the Messenger of
Allah?"

May my father and mother be your ransom. Spare me this one. I have
misgivings about it," he told the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.).

Al-Abbas turned to him and said, "Woe to you! pronounce the witness of
right before your neck is cut off."

This was how Abu Sufyan pronounced the two testimonies. It was under
threat of death that he professed Islam but his heart was still brimming
with grudge and evil.

The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) finally said to al-Abbas (may Allah be
pleased with him): "Go away now, Abbas, and keep him at the place where
the valley narrows, so that the soldiers of Allah should pass by
him"(91).

Battalion after battalion, the soldiers of Allah paraded past him,
hopeful of the victory of Allah, secure in putting their trust in Allah,
shouting their praise to Allah, and reciting in unison 'Allah is Great'
and 'There is no god but Allah.' When Abu Sufyan caught sight of the
battalion in which included the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), the
Muhajirin and the Ansar, he asked al-Abbas about it.

This is the green battalion of the Prophet of Allah", al Abbas told
him., "This is the Prophet of Allah and these are the Muhajirin
(migrants) and the Ansar (Helper)".

Abul-Fadhl", Abu Sufyan responded, "The power of your brother's son has
become very great".

But al-Abbas scolded him saying: "It is the Prophethood".

Well, then," Abu Sufyan said.

Hakim bin Hizan and Budail bin Warqa' came in the presence of the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) and recited the two testimonies. They pledged
their allegiance to him.

The Prophet of Allah then issued a statement, granting safety to the
Quraish. It read in part:

Whoever enters the house of Abu Sufyan (which was uptown) is safe.
Whoever enters the house of Hakim bin Huzam (which was downtown) is
safe. Whoever closes the door of his house and does not use force is
safe..."(92)

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) sent Abu Sufyan and Hakim to tell the
Quraish of the general amnesty.

Then he went to the centre of Mecca as the Muslim army meanwhile
surrounded the city from all sides in case the polytheists should try to
create any riots.

On this historical day, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) was anxious
lest one single drop of blood be shedded. That is why he relieved Sa'id
bin Ubadah from the command of one of the military divisions when he
threatened the Quraish and said something unseemly. He is quoted to have
said:

Today there will be a horrible bloody war. Today women will be taken
prisoners."(93)

The Holy Prophet took the standard from him and gave it to Ali bin Abi
Talib, who entered Mecca without provoking any one.(94) When the
Messenger (s.a.w.) entered the city, he stopped in front of the gateway
of the Ka'ba and said:

...there is no god except Allah Who has no equal. He made His promise
come true, gave victory to His servant and defeated the parties with no
help from whosoever. Let alone, every memorable feat or blood or money
claimed are under these feet of mine except the guardianship of the
Ka'ba and the watering of the pilgrims."

Then he proceeded to say:

O assembly of Quraish, Allah certainly has made you for get the
arrogance of pre-Islamic era and its glorification of forefathers.
People are from Adam and Adam is created from dust."

O people! surely We have created you of a male and a female, and made
you tribes and families that you may know each other surely the most
honourable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his
duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware."

Holy Qur'an (49:13)

Then he asked them: 'O assembly of Quraish! What do you say? What do
you think I will do for you?'

Good", they replied. "You are a kind brother and a kind son of a
brother."

I should say what my brother Yusuf had said:

He said: ('There shall be) no reproof against you this day Allah may
forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful."

Holy Qur'an (12:92)

"Off you go. You are free."(95)

By these words the Messenger (s.a.w.) won over their hearts, and opened
their souls to Islam.

Then he started smashing the idols. He obliterated two pictures on the
inside walls of the Ka'ba with the hems of his garment. He ordered the
people to destroy what idols they had and recited the following verse:

And say: The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely
falsehood is a vanishing (thing)."

Holy Qur'an (17:81)

Imam Ali (a.s.) worked shoulder to shoulder with the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.) in destroying the idols. The last one that remained was that of
the tribe of Khuza'ah. It was on the top of the Ka'ba. The Messenger
(s.a.w.) ordered Ali (a.s.) to break it up and he himself carried
Ali(a.s.) on his shoulder, who reached for the idol and threw it to the
ground and so it broke into pieces.(96) On that day, after noon prayers,
the Quraish - all of the Quraish - men and women pledged their
allegiance to the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) and promised to obey him.

And so the most challenging fortress of the polytheists, the strongest
obstacle in the way of Islam, fell. It was a glorious victory for the
Muslims as Mecca joined the rest other cities of Islam.

The Messenger (s.a.w.), after staying 15 days at Mecca, appointed
Hubairah bin Shibl al-Thaqafi as its ruler and gave Ma'ath bin Jabal the
assignment of teaching its people the Holy Qur'an and fiqh. Then he left
and headed for al-Ta'if, to subjugate the last pocket of resistance of
the polytheists.

**VICTORIES THAT FOLLOWED**

Allah bestowed victory on his servants who liberated Mecca. The tribe
of Hawazin heard of the glorious, sweeping triumph of the Muslims and
made its chief mobilize a tremendous army to face them.

As soon as he heard of the Hawazin's readiness to fight him, the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) moved against them at the head of a 12,000 -
strong army. But the Hawazin were alert and ready to engage the Muslims.
They took their positions at the summit of the Hunain mountains and in
the narrowest point of the valley.

The Muslims, upon advancing into the erea, were taken aback by a rain
of arrows. Panic struck at them and their ranks were in disarray. They
took to their heels leaving the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) with Ali bin
Abi-Talib, al-Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib, a group from the tribe of
Bani-Hashim, Usamah bin Zaid and Ayman bin Ubaid.(97)

The Messenger of Allah called out to the Muslims: "O people! Come unto
me. I am the Messenger of Allah. I am Muhammad bin Abdullah...".(98) But
no one answered him.

Before long, the Messenger (s.a.w.) ordered his uncle, al-Abbas, a man
with a sonorous voice, to call the Muslims to him and remind them of the
pledge they gave to the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.). AI-Abbas called, at
the top of his voice, to them:

O assembly of the Muhajirin (migrants) and the Ansar (Helpers)! O the
companions of the Surah of al-Baqarah! O those who pledged their
allegiance under the tree! where are you escaping? This is the Messenger
of Allah..."(99)

It did not take long for the Muslims to return to the battlefield after
they had heard the call of al-Abbas. Some of them come back, and rushed
to the scene of the battle brandishing their weapons and shouting: "Here
we are at your service. Here we are at your service."(100) Soon the
fighting tilted in the Muslims' favour. They took to the offensive and
they fought bravely and cast their fate in the heartfelt hope of Allah's
victory. Their foe ran for their lives, not even to look back.

The defeated polytheists hurried to al-Ta'if, which was inhabited by
the tribe of Thaqif. The town was perfectly fortified as the Muslims
laid siege to it. The defenders of al-Ta'if rained the Muslims with
arrows, causing many casualties and were forced to retreat some distance
to tighten their siege.

The month of Dhul-Qi'dah came and the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) left
the outskirts of al-Ta'if and headed for Mecca to perform Umrah (the
lesser pilgrimage). The tribes of Hawazin and Thaqif, however, began to
realize that it was time to surrender and sent their leader, Malik bin
Awfal-Nadari, to meet the Messenger (s.a.w.) on his way to Mecca. The
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) had promised to forgive him on a previous
occasion, if he would profess Islam. The Prophet (s.a.w.) again kept his
word. He forgave him and gave him back his property after he embraced
Islam.

Other members of the tribe of Hawazin also began to submit to Islam.
Then they sent a delegation of 14 men to the Prophet (s.a.w.) announcing
their conversion. He restored their property and set their prisoners
free.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) went on with his journey to Mecca.
Performing Umrah. He returned to the holy city of Madinah.(101)He had
appointed Attab bin Usaid as its ruler and then came back, with the
Muhajirin (migrants) and the Ansar (Helpers), to the Madinah. There they
progressed in the task of building the Islamic society and the Islamic
state and bringing about change they wanted in the light of the all
embracing principles of Islam.

**EXPEDITION OF TABOOK AND THE MARCH TOWARDS THE ROMANS**

At this time, the Messenger (s.a.w.) was informed that the Romans were
mobilizing troops to invade the northern parts of the Arabian peninsula
which formed the northern territory of the Islamic state.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) decided to take the field himself and gave
his orders to mobilize Muslims in Madinah and the neighbouring areas. No
Muslim failed to join the army, except, of course, veteran hypocrites
and those who professed Islam out of their fear of the Muslims' might,
after the liberation of Mecca. They started making up their excuses so
that they would not fight the Romans.

The most repeated two reasons they brought forth to justify remaining
behind were the sweltering heat and the great distance between Madinah
and the Roman territories. The Qur'an condemned and attacked them in the
following verse:

...and do not go forth in the heat. Say: The fire of hell is much
severer in heat. Would that they understand (it)."

Holy Qur'an (9:81)

The hypocrites, however, did not stop at this but went on urging the
people to stay out of the army and made one of their houses as their
meeting-place. The Messenger (s.a.w.) heard about their treachery and
set fire to the house during one of their meetings. They took to their
heels and it proved to be a good lesson for them.

The Muslim army marched forward under the command of the Prophet
(s.a.w.). It was 30,000 - strong. It was called "the army of hardships"
due to the excessive heat, the great distance between the starting-point
and the destination and the scarcity of provisions. But it was a
necessary way of putting men through trials to toughen and harden them,
and examine the depth of their faith.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was picked by the Messenger (s.a.w.) to remain in
Madinah as his deputy during his absence. He told him to administer the
affairs of the town. Imam Ali (a.s.) wanted eagerly to take part in the
expedition but the Prophet (s.a.w.) ordered him to stay behind. He said
to him:

Are you not satisfied with being my brother and holding in respect to
me the rank of Haroon to Musa? But there is no prophet after me."(102)

The army of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) marched until it reached
Tabook, a place located on the borders between the Arabian Peninsula and
the Roman Empire. Yet many days before the arrival of the Muslim army,
the Romans had fled into their own territories because of their
overpowering fear of the Muslims.

Seeing this, the Messenger (s.a.w.) decided not to go far into Roman
territories and returned to his blessed town. At this point the surah of
al-Tawbah was revealed. It exposed the true colours of the hypocrites
and their accomplices, uncovered their vile plans and scolded those who
did not join the Muslim army out of fear and dolence.

The Messenger (s.a.w.) chose to burn down the mosque of Dhirar which
was built by the hypocrites. They had made it a base for hypocrisy and
the hostile group which worked to enfeeble the Islamic state.


