Footnotes
=========

1. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Ibn Hisham, vol. l,
p.205.

2. Historians gave different dates for the Prophet's birth. Some said
he was born on the 17th of the month, while others said on the 12th of
it.

3. The year of the Elephant coincided with the year 570 AD.

4. Nahj al-Balaghah (Peaks of Eloquence) - Commander of the faithful,
Imam Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.), Subhi al-Salih, 1st ed., 1967, p.300.

5. Bihar al-Anwar (Seas of Lights), Shaikh al-Majlisi, vol. 15, Tehran,
p.363.

6&7 Al-Wafa bi-Ahwal al-Mustapha (Detailed Account of the Life of the
Chosen Prophet), Ibn al-Jowzi, vol. l, p.133; Al-Bihar vol. 15, p.410.

8. Historians said that Abdul-Muttalib himself chose his son, Abu-Talib
to be the guardian of the Prophet (s.a.w.), even though he was neither
his elder son nor the wealthiest, but he was the full brother of
Abdullah the father of the Prophet (s.a.w.).

9. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad (Images from the Life of Muhammad), Amin
Duwaidar, Dar al-Ma'arif - Egypt, p.76.

10. Ibid.

11. Ibid.

12. Al-Bihar , vol. 16, p.13; Sirat Ibn Hisham, vol. l, p.201 :
al-Hamis (The Margin), 1936.

13. Many historians agreed that Khadijah was not a virgin when the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) took her as his wife. She was, they
asserted, forty years old. But many other historians had other versions:
Ibn Shahr Ashub in his book, Ahmad al-Baladhari and Abul-Qasim al-Kufi
in their books; Al-Murtada in his book al-Shafi (The Curer), and
Abu-Ja'far in his book al-Talikhis (Summarization) stressed that the
Prophet (s.a.w.) married Khadijah and she was a virgin. In the two books
of al-Anwar (The Lights) and al-Bida' (The Innovations) it is mentioned
that Ruqayyah and Zainab were, in fact, the daughters of Halah, the
sister of Khadijah and not Khadijah's. Many historians claim that
Ruqayyah and Zainab were the daughters of Khadijah from her previous
husband. As far as her age at the time of marriage is concerned
historians differed about it. They put her age at 25, 28, 30, 35, 40 and
45 years. The author of the book Kashf al-Ghummah (Removal of Grief)
relates on the authority of Abu-Muhammad Abdul-Aziz al-Janabidhi
al-Hanbali the author of Ma'alim al-Itrah al-Nabawiyyah (Milestones of
the Prophetical Household), on the authority of Ibn Hammad and Ibn Abbas
that the Messenger of Allah married Khadijah when she was 28 year old.
Her dowery was fixed at 12 ounces of gold.

14. A'lam al-Wara bi-A'lam al-Huda (Informing people of the Guides of
Righteousness), al-Tabrisi, p.37.

15. Fiqh al-Sirah (Understanding the Life of the Prophet), Dr. Muhammad
Sa'id Ramadan al-Buti, p.63 quoting from Sahih Muslim (Muslim's book of
traditions).

16. Ibid. For more information see Suwar min. Hayat Muhammad (Images
from the Life of Muhammad), Amin Duwaydar, pp. 90-91.

17 The Al-Fujjar war broke out between the Quraish and its allies on
one side and the Hawazin on the other side. It lasted about 20 years.
The Prophet (s.a.w.) took part in it.

18. A type of camel that was highly valued.

19. Muhammad Rasulullah (s.a.w.) (Muhammad the Messenger of Allah),
Muhammad Rida, p.37 al-Kutub al-Arabiyyah publishing house, Beirut,
1975. Tahdhib Sirat Ibn Hisham (Revision of History of Ibn Hisham),
Abdul-Salam Harun, 3rd ed., 1964, Cairo, p.41.

20. A'lam al-Wara, p.36.

21. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 15, (How divine revelation began).

22. Al-Mizan Exegesis, vol. 18, research based on traditions about ayah
51 of Surah of al-Shura.

23. Masnad Ibn Hanbal (Book of Traditions by Ibn Hanbal), vol. 2,
p.368: Mustdrak al-Hakim (Revision of al-Hakim), vol. 4, p.336; Al-Kamil
fi al-Tarikh (The complete Book of History); Ibn al-Athir, vol. 2, p.22.
al-Istia'b (Comprehension), vol. 2, p.459, and many other books.

24. Al-Kamil, vol. 2, p.24. al-Bihar, vol. 18, p.164. Fiqh al-Sirah,
Sheikh Muhammad al-Ghazali, p.102.

25&26. This tradition is related by al-Bayhaqi in al-Sunan (Practices)
and al-Dala'il (The Signs); Al-Tha'labi and al-Tabari in their Qur'anic
exegesis of Surah of al-Shua'ra'. Al-Tabari in his History, vol. 2,
p.217. Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil, vol. 2, p.22; Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah
(Life of the Prophet), vol. l, p.381: Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. l, p. 11
and p.59; al-Nisa'i in al-Khasa'is (Attributes), p.6, Kanz al-Ummal,
vol. 6, Tradition No. 6008, and other books. It is related in slightly
different words.

27&28. Al-Rasul (The Messenger), Sa'id Hawwa, vol. l, pp. 93-94-95.

29. Sirat al-Rasul (Life of the Messenger), Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin
al-Amili, pp. 41-42.

30. Ibid.

31. Al-Tha'labi quoted it, in his exegesis, from Muqatil, Abdullah bin
Abbas, al-Qasam bin Mahdarah and Ata' bin Dinar: Also see: Khazanat
al-Adab (Treasure of Literature), al-Baghdadi, vol. l, p.261: Tarikh Ibn
Kuthayr (History of Ibn Kuthayr), vol. 2, p.42. al-Isabah (The hit),
vol. 4, p.116; Al-Mawahib (talents), vol. l, p.61: Al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah, vol. l, p.305: Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the
Prophet), Zaini Dahlan; Hamish al-Halabiyyah (Margin on the Life of the
Prophet), vol. l, p.91 and p.211. Commenteries on Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abul-Hadid, vol. 3, p.306...etc.

32. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad, p.151.

33. Ibid, p.157: Sirat al-Rasul, p.43.

34. Sabil al-Huda wa al-Rashad (Path of Enlightment and Guidance), vol.
2, Ch. 15., p.476.

35. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad, p.156, quoting from al-Bukhari and Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 18.

36. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad, p.185. Sirat al-Rasul, pp. 44-45.

37. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd (The Groups - Ibn Sa'd), vol. l, p. 173 and p.192.
Tarikh al-Ya'qubi, vol. 2, p. 22. al-Rowd al-Anif (The Fresh Garden),
vol. l, p.231; Khazanat al-Adab al-Baghdadi, vol. l, p.252; Tarikh Ibn
Kuthair. vol. 3, p.84.

38. In the third year after the rise of the Prophet (s.a.w.) to
prophethood. Other dates were also given by historians.

39. Muhammad Rasul Allah, p. 111. Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. l, p.16;
Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 2, p.222; Tarikh Ibn 'Asakir (History of Ibn
'Asakir), vol. l, p. 284; Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 2, p.622; Tarikh Ibn
Kuthair, vol. 3, p. 122.

40. Al-Wafa bi-Ahwal al-Mustafa, vol. 1. p.311; Sirat Ibn Hisham, vol.
3, p.60.

41. Muhammad Rasul Allah, p.113.

42. A'lam al-Wara bi-'Alam al-Huda.

43. Al-Wafa bi-Ahwal al-Mustafa, vol. l, p.334. al-Mizan Exegesis, vol.
9, Surah of al-Anfal.

44. Ibid.

45. I'lam al-Wara bi 'Alam al-Huda, p.59.

46. Al-Mizan Exegesis. Research based on traditions. vol. 9, pp. 79.

47. Ibid, p.81.

48. Ibid, p.80.

49. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19, pp. 107-109; Rawdat al-Kafai (Garden of
al-Kafi), p.339.

50. A'yan al-Shi'a (Outstanding Shi'ite Personalities), vol. 3, 3rd
ed., p.155.

51. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19. Rawdat al-Kafi, p.339.

52. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Ibn Hisham, vol. l,
p.145.

53. The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) married Um Salamah after the death of
her husband in Madinah.

54. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Ibn Hisham, vol. 2,
p. 112-113.

55. Al-Wafa bi-Ahwal al-Mustafa (Detailed Accounts of the Chosen
Prophet), Ibn al-Jawzi, vol. l, p.254.

56. Bihar al-Anwar (Seas of Lights), Sheikh al-Majlisi, vol. 19, pp.
124-125.

57. Muhammad Rasul Allah (Muhammad the Messenger Of Allah), Muhammad
Rida, p.136.

58. Muhammad al-Mathal al-Kamil (Muhammad the Perfect Example),
Muhammad Jad al-Mawla, p.313, Beirut-1972.

59. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Dahlan, vol. 2, p.150
" Fraternization of the Muhajirin and the Ansar".

60. Sahih al-Tirmithi (Al-Tirmithi's Book of Traditions), vol. 2,
p.299, on the authority of Abdullah bin Umar; Mustadrak al-Sahihain
(Revision of the Authentic Two Books of Traditions), vol. 3, p.14.;
Al-Riyad (The Gardens), al-Muhib al-Tabari, vol. 2, p.167; Al-Tabaqat
(The Classes), vol. 3, part 1, p.13. For more information see: Fada'il
al-Khamsah min al-Sihah al-Sittah (Excellences of the Five i.e. the
Prophet (s.a.w ), Fatimah, Ali, Hassan and Hussein (upon whom be the
blessings of Allah) from the six Books of Traditions), vol. l, pp.
318-333, Sayyid al-Fayruzabadi.

61. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19, p.130; Al-Mizan (Exegesis of Qur'an), vol.
9, Surah of al-Anfal, p.142. A research based on traditions, p.143.

62. Al-Rasul (The Messenger of Allah), Sa'id Hawwah, vol. l, 3rd ed.,
p.223. al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, Dahlan, p.170.

63. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad (Images from the Life of Muhammad), p.264.
Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, Dahlan, p.175.

64. Vol. 2, pp. 147-148.

65. Lamahat fi al-Thaqafal al-Islamiyyah (Glimpses from Islamic
culture), Umar Awda al-Khatib, p.287, 1st edition, 1973, Beirut.

66. Tamarisk's embres remain red-hot for a long time

67. Al-Haras is a kind of bush with long thorns.

68. Al-Bihar, vol. 19, p.218; Al-Mizan, exegesis of the surah of
al-An'fal.

69. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyya (Life of the Prophet), Ibn Hisham, vol. 3, p.
68.

70. Al-Irshad, Sheikh al-Mufid, p.56, al-Haidariyyah press, Najaf, 3rd
ed., 1973.

71. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Dahlan, vol. 2, pp.
67; Al-Irshad, Shaikh al-Mufid, p.58.

72. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 2, pp. 6-7. "Expedition of
al-Khandaq."

73. Ibid.

74. Mustadrak al-Sahihayn (Supplement to the Two Authentic Books of
Traditions), vol. 2, p.32, on the authority of Sufyan al-Thawri.
Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi related it also in Tarikh Baghdad (History of
Baghdad), vol. 13, p.19.

75. Fiqh al-Sirah (Understanding the Life of the Prophet (s.a.w.)),
al-Ghazali, p. 330.

76. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad (Images from the Life of Muhammad), Amin
Duwaidar, p.429. And Fqh al-Sirah, al-Ghazali, p.330.

77 See "Suwar min Hayat Muhammad", p.453 and al-Sirah, Dahlan, vol. 2,
p.8, and al-Sirah, Ibn Husham, and other books.

78. Sirat al-Rasul, Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin al-Amili, "Truce of
al-Hudaibiyyah".

79. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 20, expedition of al-Hudaibiyyah and the
pledge of al-Ridwan.

80. Majma' al-Bayan (Qur'anic Exegesis ), Allama al-Tabarsi, commentary
of the sura of al-Fath.

81. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p.357; Suwar min Hayat Muhammad,
al-Hudaibiyyah pact.

82. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah (Life of the Prophet), Ibn Hisham, vol. 3,
p. 349, Beirut Edition, Dar Ihhya' al-Turath al-Arabi.

83. Ibid.

84. Bukhari, Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 5, p.22, Beirut Edition, Dar Ihhya'
al-Turath al-Arabi.

85. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 20, the chapter of the Prophet's
correspondence with the kings.

86. Ibid, and Fiqh al-Sirah, al-Ghazali.

87. Bihar al-Anwar, chapter of the liberation of Mecca, vol. 21.

88. Muhammad Rasool Allah, Muhammad Rida, p.304, and al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah, Dahlan, p.77 with slightly different words.

89. Sirat al-Rasool, Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin al-Amili, the Liberation of
Mecca.

90. Al-Mizan, vol. 20, exegesis of surah of al-Nasr. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 21, Liberation of Mecca.

91. Al-Mizan, vol. 20, surah of al-Nasr.

92. Al-Bihar, vol. 21, Liberation of Mecca; Hayat Muhammad, Muhammad
Hussein Haikal, Liberation of Mecca.

93. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, Dahlan. p.86; Al-Mizan, p.20, exegesis of
surah of al-Nasr.

94. Al-Bihar, vol. 21, Liberation of Mecca; Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah,
Dahlan, p.87 and Al-Mizan, p.20, exegesis of surah of al-Nasr.

95. Al-Bihar, vol. 21, Liberation of Mecca. Suwar min Hayat Muhammad,
liberation of Mecca.

96. Al-Kashshaf, al-Zamakhshari, exegesis of the verse: "And say: The
truth has come and the falsehood has vanished: surely falsehood is a
vanishing (thing)". (Holy Qur'an (7:81))

97. Sirat al-Rasool (s.a.w.), Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, quoted from
al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah; Al-Ma'arif (Knowledge), Ibn Qutaibah; Al-Mizan,
Sayyid al-Tabatabai', vol. l0, exegesis of ayah 25 of surah of
al-Tawbah.

98. Sirat al-Rasool, Sayyid al-Amin, p.127. Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah,
Dahlan, p.110, in different words.

99. Al-Mizan, vol. 10, exegesis of ayah 25 of surah of al-Tawbah and
the following study based on traditions, p.231.

100. Fi Dhilal al-Qur'an, vol. 10, Sayyid Qutb, exegesis of ayah 25 of
surah of al-Tawbah.

101. Sirat al-Rasool, Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, p.132.

102. Masnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, p.330; Khas'is al-Nisa'i p.14; Tabaqat
Ibn a'd, vol. 3, p.14; Hilyat al-Awliya', vol. 7 p.195; Tarikh Baghdad,
vol. 7 p.452; Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 3, p.154; Al-Irshad, Sheikh al-Mufid,
expedition of Tabook, and many other references.

103. Khasa'is al-Nisa'i, p.20, Sahih al-Tirmithi, vol. 2, p.283; Musnad
Ibn Hanbal, vol. 13, p.283; Al-Dur Al-Manthoor, al-Suyooti; Tafsir Bin
Jarir, vol. 10, p.46; Mustadrak Al-Sahihain, vol. 3, p.51, and others.
For more information, see Fada'il al-Khamsah min al-Sihah al-Sittah,
vol. 2, p.343-57.

104. Hayat Muhammed, Muhammed Hussein Haikal; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 21,
Chapter of how surah of al-Bara'ah was revealed.

105. Al-Irshad, Sheikh al-Mufid, the valedictory hajj; Hayat Muhammad,
Muhammad Hussein Haikal.

106. Tuhafal-'Ugool an Asl al-Rasool, Ibn Shu'bah al-Harrani, 5th
edition, 1974, p.39.

107. Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah (Burning Thunderbolts), quoted from
al-Tirmidhi, al-Nisa'i, and Ahmad bin Hanbal; Ahmad bin Ahnabal, in his
book of traditions, mentioned it and said that it was reported by thirty
companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.); al-Nisa'i, in his book, al-Khasa'is,
reported it through many chains of transmission; Ibn Majah related it in
his book of traditions, in the chapter which spoke about the merits of
the companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.), p.12. It was reported also by:
Mustadrak al-Sahihain, vol. 3, p.116. al-Irsahd, Sheikh al-Mufid.
Al-Tabarani, quoting Zaid bin Arqam; Al-Fakhr al-Razi in his exegesis of
the ayah "O The Messenger deliver what has been revealed to you from
your Lord;..." (Holy Qur'an 5:67); Hilyat al-Awliya' vol. 5, p.26;
Tarikh Baghdad, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, vol. 7, p.377, reported by Abu
Hurairah; Kanz al-Ummal, vol. l, p.48. For more information see
"Al-Ghadir", vol. l, where this version was reported by 110 companions
of the Prophet (s.a.w ) and 84 Muslims of later generations.

108. Manaqab al-Khawarizimi (Outstanding Merits of al-Khawarizmi),
quoting A'ishah; Thakha'ir al-Uqba (savings for the Next world),
al-Muhib al-Tabari, p.73; Kifayat al-Talib (What suffices the student);
al-Kanji al-Shafi'i, p.133; Masnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 2, p.300.


