Part One : Prophet's Life Before His Prophethood
================================================

**THE BLESSED BIRTH**

Amidst that tumultuous environment of pre-Islamic Arabia, filled with
all manifestations of misguidance, perversion and oppression, Muhammad
bin Abdullah bin Abdul-Muttalib (s.a.w.) was born.

For some divine purpose, he did not see his father who had passed away
while returning from Syria with a caravan. Muhammad (s.a.w.) was, at
that time, only an embryo in the womb of his mother Aminah daughter of
Wahab, may Allah be pleased with her.(1)

His blessed birth took place in the month of Rabi'ul-Awwal(2) one month
or more after the annihiation of the army headed by the elephants which
went out to attack the Holy Ka'ba(3). The story is recorded in one whole
surah (chapter) in the Qur'an called al-Fil. Thuwaibah, the woman
servant of Abu Lahab, suckled him for a few days with her baby Masrooh
before the arrival of the wet-nurses from the deserts. It was a long-
established habit for the people of Mecca to leave their babies in the
care of the desert's wet-nurses so that they were brought up brave
eloquent and in touch with the realities of desert life. As was
expected, 10 wet-nurses from the tribe of Sa'd bin Bakr, arrived at
Mecca and everyone of them found a baby to take care of except Halimah,
daughter of Abu Dhu'aib Abdullah. Muhammad (s.a.w.) was offered to her,
but due to his being an orphan, which meant little profit for her, she
was reluctant to take him.

Being uncertain about what to do, she consulted her husband, who was
with her. "I hate to return empty-handed", she told him, "But there is
no baby left to me except this orphan." Her husband advised her to take
him, for Allah may bless him. No sooner did she place the nipple of her
breast into the baby's mouth, her milk began to flow abundantly. Before
that her own baby was always half-hungry because of the scarcity of his
mother's milk.

The blessedness of the Prophet began to spread all over the
neighborhood. The verdure of the meadows greatly increased, as before
the area was waterless and barren.

Two years later, Halimah had weaned the baby and brought him back to
Mecca to visit his mother and relatives. She told them bow the baby was
blessed, and how her life was changed after taking him. Then she
returned, accompanied by the baby, to the neighborhood.

**DIVINE FOSTERAGE OF THE PROPHET**

The interesting point in the early years life of the Prophet (s.a.w)
for whoever wants to study his life, is the fact that Allah adopted him,
not only in maintaining his health, preparing him for the great role he
was to have later.

The books written about the life of the Prophet (s.a.w.) are filled
with events that corroborate the fact that he was under the direct care
of Allah and this enabled him to shoulder the future responsibility of
prophethood.

Imam Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.) refers to this point in one of his
sermons in Nahj al-Balaghah:

"From the time of his birth, Allah had appointed the archangel among
all the angels, to always be with him. And this archangel was leading
him towards exemplary qualities and high moral values by night and
day..."(4)

Referring to this fact, Imam Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir was related to
have said:

"Allah had appointed the archangel to be with Muhammad, since he was
weaned, leading him to the way of graces, the best of morals, and
leading him away from evil and vices."(5)

One major trace of the divine care for the Prophet (s.a.w.) was that he
was, from early age, a monotheist. He used to unequivocally proclaim his
hostility to the idols(6). He used to perform hajj without eating the
meat which was slaughtered at the feet of the idols. He would to mention
the name of Allah before having his food'(7) and praise Allah when he
finished. Muhammad, He was widely known among Arabs to be upright and
virtuous. He would keep his word, and for that he was known as "the
truthful and the faithful".

**UNDER THE GUARDIANSHIP OF HIS GRANDFATHER**

The Prophet was five years old when Halimah al-Sa'diyyah brought him
back to his family in Mecca. Abdul-Muttalib, his grandfather, showered
him with care and fatherly love. He ate with him, spoke with him kindly,
sat on his bed, and provided him with special attention and warmth.

It was not out of sentiment that Abdul-Muttalib cared so much for
Muhammad (s.a.w) as the son of his deceased son Abdullah, but because he
felt deeply that he would be a prominently great man in the future. It
was for this reason that he would ask his son Abu-Talib, and Umm-Ayman
to look after him and provide him with whatever he needed.

At the age of six, his mother Aminah, took him with her, accompanied by
Umm-Ayman, to visit his uncles from the tribe of Uday bin al-Najjar in
Madinah. After one month they decided to return to Mecca. But, en route
to Mecca, his mother, Aminah, passed away. She was laid to rest at
al-Abwa', a village halfway between Mecca and Madinah. Umm-Ayman resumed
the journey alone, and in Mecca she was devoted to him as his mother
was, while his grandfather looked after him as if he were his son. But,
it was not long before Abdul-Muttalib died. The Prophet was, at the
time, eight years old.

**UNDER THE CARE OF ABU TALIB**

Abu Talib,(8) his uncle, took him and treated him very kindly. He even
gave him precedence over his sons. Muhammad (s.a.w.) would sleep in the
bed of his uncle, sit next to him, eat with him, and go out with him.

**ADULTHOOD**

As soon as he came of age, Muhammad (s.a.w.) began to work to earn his
living. First, he became a shepherd. Jabir bin Abdullah, may Allah be
pleased with him, related that he was with the Prophet (s.a.w.) with
other Muslims, picking al- Kabath (a kind of fruit). The Prophet
(s.a.w.) said:

"Pluck the black ones. They are sweetest. I used to gather it while
pasturing my sheep".

"You were pasturing the sheep, O Messenger of Allah?", we asked him.

"Yes", he replied, "every prophet was at sometime a shepherd".(9)

Allah, the Most High, was able to spare His Prophet (s.a.w.) the
tiresome task of working. He willed to set the Prophet (s.a.w.) as an
example for the people so that nobody would rely on anybody else for
earning his living.

Islam stressed the importance of work. The Prophet (s.a.w.) is reported
to have said:

"Cursed be who throws his burdens on other people".(10)

"Worship is of seventy kinds, the best of which is earning one's living
righteously".

"An excellent help to guard against evil is wealth."(11)

**MARRIAGE**

At the age of twenty-five he went to Syria on a mercantile mission on
behalf of Khadij ah the daughter of Khuwailid, may Allah be pleased with
her. Khadijah was the best among the women of Quraish. She was the
richest, the noblest and the most beautiful among them. She was called
"the chaste", and the mistress of Quraish. She would hire men to work in
trade for her in return for a fixed percentage of the profit.

When the Prophet (s.a.w.) became to be widely known for his
faithfulness and the smoothness of his manners, she offered him money to
go to Syria and promised him a good share in the profits, more than any
share given to any man before him.

He set out for Syria, leading a big caravan. Maisarah, her slave, went
with him. They sold articles and bought merchandise and returned with
profuse sums of money. Fascinated by the Prophet, Maisarah began to tell
Khadijah of his attributes. She was attracted to him, for his
high-mindedness, righteousness, faithfulness and kindness and decided
that he would be her husband. She preferred him to the rich dignitaries
of the Quraish who promised her immeasurably great riches. For that
purpose, she sent Nafisah the daughter of Munabbih to talk to him about
it.

"What makes you refrain from getting married?", Nafisah asked him. "I
have no money", he replied.

"If you were given that, and were asked to marry a beautiful, rich,
honest and noble woman, would you accept the offer? "

"What is the name of the woman?" "Khadijah!". "How could I manage
it?"

"Leave everything to me", she promised him.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) then sent his uncle Abu Talib(12), to ask
Khadijah's hand to marriage. As her father was dead by then, Abu Talib
broached the subject to her uncle. Both parties agreed, and so the
marriage took place. The Prophet (s.a.w.) was twenty-five years old, at
the time. As for Khadijah, historians have disagreed about ,her age. But
they agreed that they got married(13) after the Prophet's (s.a.w.)
return from Syria.

The newlyweds moved to the house of Khadijah, and achieved the most
perfect union, perfumed with love, loyalty and mercy. Amid hardships and
troubles, she helped him, encouraged him and alleviated his worries.

Apart from her love for him, she was a chaste women with deep insight,
she managed their affairs patiently and skillfully. She was,
furthermore, the first ever to believe in his message.(14) For the sake
of his call, she spent all her riches. He loved her as she loved him. He
did not marry any other women until after she died.

Whenever he remembered her, he praised her and mentioned her good deeds
to his wives, so much so that 'A'ishah' said: "I never felt envious of
any of the Prophet's wives, except of Khadijah, whom I did not see."

She, further, added: "Whenever the Messenger of Allah slaughtered a
sheep, he ordered his attendants to distribute the meat among the
friends of Khadijah. One day I made him angry by saying mockingly
'Khadijah!', he said to me: 'I was given her love by Allah'" (15)

A'ishah also reported: "The Messenger of Allah would hardly leave the
house without mentioning Khadijah in good words. One day he mentioning
her and so I felt deeply envious and blurted out; she was nothing but an
old woman. Allah has replaced her with better than her.'

"No by Allah," he said indignantly; "Allah did not replace her with
those who better than her, she had faith in me when the people rejected
my call. She believed me when the people charged me with falsehood. She
consoled me with her wealth when the people deprived me theirs, and
Allah gave me, by her sons and daughters."(16)

Diligence and toil were characteristics of his life from an early age.
His marriage with Khadijah, may Allah be pleased with her, gave his life
some rest and comfort. The kindness and true love Khadijah showered on
the Prophet (s.a.w.) compensated him for the fatherly love and motherly
kindness which he was deprived of, during childhood.

During that phase of his blessed life, the first signs of prophethood
began to surface. It was for this reason that he was preparing himself
by restoring to the cave of Hira during certain days. He would remain
there, worshipping and mediating for a whole month every year. He would
remain there far away from the pre-Islamic perversions and the corrupt
city atmosphere. Muhammad was on the threshold of bearing the divine
message.

He went on with his meditations and worship till he became 40 years
old. Then, the holy revelation shone on his soul and heart delivering
the first statement of the seal of divine messages:

"Read in the name of your Lord Who created..."

Holy Qur'an (96:1)

It is worth mentioning here that the divine books announced the good
news of the advent of the message of Allah (s.a.w.). The Jewish
Christian scholars were aware of this fact, but they were swept with the
fanaticism of jealousy and prejudice when the truth arrived, but no one
could have any doubts about this new reality.

The Qur'an mentions what they would tell the tribes of al-Aws and
al-Khazraj in this respect:

"And when there came to them a Book, confirming what was with them, and
aforetimes they used to pray for victory against those who disbelieved,
but when there came to them (Prophet) that which they did not recognize,
they disbelieved in him; so Allah's curse is on the unbelievers."

Holy Qur'an (2:89)

And so good news of the coming of the Prophet (s.a.w.) became
widespread. The main topic of popular discussion was this. The Christian
monks and Jewish rabbis were already reading in their divine books of
the coming of a new Prophet who would fill the world with light,
guidance and bless.

**SOCIAL STATUS**
Prior to his rise to prophethood, during the previous 1520 years, his
social status was high. He was known to be well-mannered, high-minded,
truthful and trustworthy.

The power was clearly mainfested during the rebuilding of the Holy
Ka'ba. After it caught fire, the Ka'ba was flooded with sweeping
torrents. Great damage was done and the tribe of Quraish made their
minds to rebuild it, al-Walid bin al-Mughirah, accompanied by a number
of the Quraishis, went to Jidda and bought the timber of a ship that had
wrecked on its shore. The wood was bought to make the roof of the Ka'ba.
A carpenter, Baqum by name and a slave of Sa'id bin al-Aws, was charged
with rebuilding the Ka'ba.

All the clans of the Quraish took part in the process. But, finally,
when the time came to put the black stone in its place a difference
arose among them over who should win the honour of putting it in its
place. Every clan of the Quraish eagerly wanted to do that.

The difference grew to a .quarrel and had not Abu Umayyah bin al-
Mughirah, the eldest among them, suggested the first one to enter the
Ka'ba from the door of Bani Shaibah arbitute on the matter the situation
would have gotten out of hands. They imptiently awaited the man. Before
long Muhammad (s.a.w.) came into the Ka'ba. Upon seeing him, they
unanimously agreed, " This is the trustworthy. We accept him as the
arbitrator. This is Muhammad." When they told him of the problem he
ordered them to bring him a piece of cloth. He spread it on their
ground, then placed the Black stone on it. "Let every group hold the
cloth then carry it up," lie told them. He, then, carried it, with his
blessed, and restored the stone to its place.

**PACT OF AL-FUDUL**

Shortly after the tragical war of al-Fujjar a pact was signed between
the warring Arab tribes.(17) The agreement did achieve a victory for the
wronged parties. All the sides agreed on the principle of warding off
wrongs, and cooperating to back what was right and defend the oppressed
The Prophet (s.a.w.) praised the pact in these words:

"If I were given red camels, I would not have been more pleased than to
be a participant in their pact at the house of ibn Jada'an.(18) The
tribes of Hushim, Zahrah and Taym agreed forever to be on the side of
the oppressed. If I were invited now, I would respond affirmatively. It
was the pact of al-Fudul."(19)


