Rise To Prophethood
===================

Never was the Prophet (s.a.w) surprised when Jibril (the angel Gabriel)
revealed to him the first divine statement. His life went through many
stages so that he would be prepared to bear the divine message. From the
early part of his life, His Lord nurtured him kindly and closely as he
was the future Prophet. To this fact, Imam Ali (a.s.) referred him his
sermon named al-Qasi'a. as well as Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) in a statement
reported from him.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) began to spend more time in the cave of Hira' for
worship and meditation. Those devotions in the cave of Hira', located at
the top of Mt. Hira' northeast of Makka, was a manifestation of
preparing him for the heavy task awaiting him. The longest period he
would remain in the cave was a whole month, and that would be the month
of Ramadhan. During other months, he would spend whole nights there. He
began to hear the voice, and see the light, and have dreams that were to
come to pass exactly as he saw them in the world of dreams.(20)

**THE PROPHET AND MESSENGER**

At the age of forty, Jibril (a.s.) descended to reveal to him the seal
of messages beginning with the first divine verses:

"Read in the name of your Lord Who created. He created man from a clot.
Read and your Lord is Most Honourable, Who taught (to write) with the
pen, Taught man what he knew not..."

Holy Qur'an (96:1-5)

It was so great, so majestic and so glorious an experience to receive
the revelation, that he felt a little tired, and so he lay down on his
bed to have some rest. During these critical moments Jibril appeared to
him for the second time:

"O you who are clothed! Arise and warn, And your Lord garments do
purify, And uncleanness do shun,..."

Holy Qur'an (73:1-5)

Thus, Allah ordered His Prophet to carry His message to all people.

**KINDS OF REVELATION**

It is interesting to note how the message was revealed to the Prophet
(s.a.w.).

Allah mentions the manifestations of the holy revelation in the
following verses:

"And it is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to him except by
revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger and
revealing by His permission what He pleases; Surely He is High, Wise.
And thus did We reveal to you an inspired book by Our command. You did
not know what the Book was, nor (what) the faith (was), but We made it a
light, guiding thereby whom We please of Our servants; and most surely
you show the way to the right path.

Holy Qur'an (42:51-52)9

In this respect, we understand from the Qur'anic texts and the holy
sunna that Allah revealed to the Prophet (s.a.w.) His message in many
ways.

One way was that Allah, the Most Exalted and High, would reveal to him,
directly and without any other means, the truth. It is said that this
kind of revelation was the most majestic and so moving that his mule
would sink to the ground(21), and that his forehead would break into
sweast even if it is . was bitterly cold.(22)

Another way was that Allah would send a messenger to His Prophet. He
would appear in his angelic shape, or in the shap of a human being.

Another method was the true vision, for the Prophets never saw false
dreams. Whatever they saw in their dreams they saw in reality, because
of the immense spiritual powers they had, through which they perceived
the truth during sleep and wakefulness. That was in addition to the
divine inspiration and the guidance of the Holy Spirit.


