Prophet Begins Call Too Islam
=============================

The Prophet, first of all, chose Ali (a.s.) to come to Islam(23). Ali
was, at the time, a pure boy, unsullied by the practices of the
pre-Islamic era. He was under the care of the Prophet (s.a.w.) who
showed him with love and affection. Ali (a.s.) responded
enthusiastically and his soul method in the new faith. The Prophet
called his wife to Islam and she accepted it. This done, the first
nucleus of the faithful community on earth took shape.

He proceeded with his call to Islam and his companions grew in number.
They were 40 men, the majority of whom were young. These people were
from different walks of society. Among them were the poor, the rich, the
socially powerful and the downtrodden. First of all they would learn the
Qur'an and the principles of the new faith. In the defiles, far away
from the eyes of Quraish, they used to offer their prayers. The new
convert, with the assistance of one of the old converts appointed by the
Prophet (s.a.w.). would continue studying and comprehending the
teachings of Islam.

**THE HOUSE OF AL-ARQAM**

As they grew in number, the Muslims feared lest their affair might be
disclosed. As a precautionary measure, they made the house of al-Arqam
al-Makhzumi a school and a meeting-place where they used gather to know
more about Islam. There, they sat together learning the Qur'an, offering
their prayers, contemplating the ayas and signs of Allah, examining the
creation, gathering patience and fortitude and sublimating their wills
to Allah and His Messenger.

**CALLING THE RELATIVES**

Three years passed before Allah ordered His Prophet (s.a.w.) to take
advantage of the prevailing tribal atmosphere and call his relatives to
Islam.

"And warn your nearest relations, And be kind to him who follows you of
the believers, But if they disobey you, then say: Surely I am clear of
what you do.."

Holy Qur'an (26:214-216)

The Prophet (s.a.w.) invited his relatives, numbering 40, to a feast.
Before the Prophet could broach the subject to them, his uncle
Abdul-Uzzah bin Abdul-Muttalib, also Abu-Lahab warned the Prophet
(s.a.w.) from going on with the task of spreading the new faith. The
invitation was a failure and the guests hastened to leave, and so the
chance slipped out of the Prophet's hands. Once again, after the passage
of many days, the Prophet (s.a.w.) invited his relatives to a feast. His
guests being satisfied, he addressed them:

"O sons of Abdul-Muttalib, Allah has sent me, as His Messenger, to all
people and particularly to you. He ordered me: 'And warn your nearest
relations'. I invite you to accept two short sentences. They are easy on
the tongue, but in the balance of action they are heavy and difficult.
By them you will be the masters of the Arabs and non-Arabs. Nations will
yield to you. Enter paradise and be saved from hell. They are the
testimony of: There is no god but Allah and that I am the Messenger of
Allah. Whoever answers me and helps me in this affair and in carrying it
on will be my brother, trustee helper, inheritor and the successor after
me."

Murmuring rose from among the people. Abu-Lahab condemned and warned
the Prophet (s.a.w.) from carrying out his mission. Abu Talib expressed
his full support to the Prophet (s.a.w.) and said to him:

"Proceed with your task you are charged with. By Allah, I will protect
you and prevent others from harming you."(24)

Ali, the youngest of all, come to his feet and said in a resonant
voice:

"O Messenger of Allah, I will help you in this affair."

But the Prophet (s.a.w.) ordered him to sit down.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) repeated, once again, his proposal, and no one
except Ali responded. The third time when Ali answered the Prophet
(s.a.w.), he said to him:

"Sit down. You are my brother, trustee, helper, inheritor, and the
successor after me."(25)

The people stood up and, upon leaving they said to Abu Talib
mockingly:

"Today, be happy at entering your nephew's religion. He made your son a
commander over you!"(26)

**PUBLIC CALL TO ISLAM**

The Prophet (s.a.w.) called all of the Qurayash to Islam, in obedience
to Allah' s order:

"Therefore declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists..."

Holy Qur'an(15:94)

He ascended the mountain of al-Safa and called out "It is daybreak! it
is daybreak!" That was the custom of the Arabs when there was something
critical to discuss together. The Quraysh gathered around him asking in
wonder, "What is it?" "If I were to tell you, the Prophet (s.a.w.) asked
them, that horsemen were descending from the mountains to attack you, in
the morning or in the evening, would you not believe me?"

"We do," they replied.

"Then," he said to them, "I should warn you of the terrible punishment
that lies in wait for you. O son of Abdul-Muttalib, O son of Abd-Manaf,
O son of Zahrah...Deliver yourselves from the fire of hell. I can do
nothing for you if you disobey to attack his home and people, so he
hasten towards warning them."

"Shame on you!," Abu-Lahab interrupted him, "Was it for this you
invited us?"

And so Allah, the Most Blessed and High, revealed to His Prophet the
following chapter (surah):

"Perdition overtake both hands of the Abu Lahab, and he will perish.
His health and what he earns will no avail him. He shall soon burn in
fire that flames, And his wife, the bearer of fuel, Upon her neck a
halter of strongly twisted rope."

Holy Qur'an (111:1-5)

This attempt was not in vain, for a number of the Quraishis entered
Islam under the banner of "There is no god but Allah." Furthermore, the
news of the faith forced itself into every house. This statement made by
the Prophet (s.a.w.) was, indeed, to usher in a new era of bitter
struggle between the new faith and the wounded pride of the pre-Islamic
Arabs.


