Glimpses of Hope
================

During the season of hajj every year the Prophet was busy offering the
new faith to the tribes. In the eleventh year after his rise to
prophethood he met a group of the tribe of al-Khazraj. He asked them to
allow him to have a talk with them. They accepted that and he talked to
them about Islam. He called them to believe in Allah, and recited verses
from the Qur'an. Upon hearing that they murmured one to another:

"...By Allah, he is the Prophet the Jews have promised. See to it that
no one should follow him before you.." (42)

They responded positively and entered Islam. After returning back to
Yathrib, they began to propagate Islam till a great number of their
people embraced it.

In the following year, twelve people from Madina came to a place called
al-Aqaba, and there, they pledged their allegiance to the Prophet
(s.a.w.) and swore that they would not "set up a partner with Allah, or
commit adultery, or kill their children, that they should never cast
calumnies against others nor should they disobey him (the Prophet) when
he orders them to do good. Should they be true to their word their
reward would be Paradise, but if they, however, went back on their word,
Allah will be the Arbitrator. It is upto Him to punish them or to
forgive them.."

So the converts of Madinah could become acquainted with Islam's
teachings, the Prophet (s.a.w.) sent Mus'ab bin Umayr with them. Mus'ab
was still young. Helped by those who embraced Islam among the people of
Madinah he toured Madinah calling the people to Allah and the Divine
message. Two of the prominent figures of the city, Sa'd bin Ma'adh and
Usaid bin Hudair converted to Islam. By their entering Islam, the doors
were wide open for the people of Madinah to open their hearts to
Islam.

**ALLEGIANCE OF AL-AQABAH**

Mus'ab stayed in Madinah one year, during which he called the Madinites
to Islam, instructed them in its teachings and recited to them the
Qur'an. During the next season of hajj, thirteen years after the
Prophet's rise to prophethood, Mus'ab came at the head of a delegation
consisting of 70 men and two women.

They promised the Prophet (s.a.w.) to meet him secretly at al-Aqabah.
The first third of the night passed and the pilgrims retired to their
beds. These men and women made their way to the meeting-place. The
Prophet (s.a.w.) came there escorted by his uncle al-Abbas bin
Abdul-Muttalib, al-Abbas was the first to speak:

"..Muhammad's place among us is well-known to you. We protect him from
our people. He enjoys a high status among his people and he is secure in
his city. But he has insisted on joining you. Now, if you think that you
will fulfil your promise to him and defend him against his opponents
then you should do your best. But if you think of handing him over to
his enemies and failing him, then from this point leave him enjoying the
power and protection of his people."(43)

"We have heard what you said," they said in unison. O Messenger of
Allah, speak out, and state what obligations you and Your Lord want from
us."

The Prophet (s.a.w.) then recited verses from the Qur'an and invited
them to Islam and said,

"Pledge your allegiance to me. Listen to me and obey me during the
periods of activity and lethargy, Spend of your money during ease and
difficulty, enjoin the good and forbid the evil, convey the words of
Allah fearing no blame from anyone, help me and give me, should I resort
to you, the same protection you give to yourselves and your own wives
and offspring. Your reward will certainly be Paradise..."(44)

They agreed to these conditions and pledged their allegiance to him one
after the other.

Compared to the first allegiance of al-Aqabah, this one, the second
allegiance of al-Aqabah, bad tremendous effects on the souls of the
faithful. On the horizon they saw the harbingers of an imminent victory.
After a prolonged period of oppression, suppression and terror, ever in
the span of thirteen years in Mecca, now the doors of hope were flung
wide open before them.

The Quraish, on hearing the news of the allegiance of al-Aqabah, were
startled, and filled with fear. Hurriedly they held a meeting at which a
decision was arrived at: Track down the Madinites who met the Prophet
(s.a.w.) at al-Aqabah. After much effort, they arrested al-Mundhir bin
Amru but he broke away from them. Sa'd bin Ubada was also captured. They
tied his hands to his neck and dragged him by his hair. Heavily beating
him, they brought him to Mecca. But, luckily, Mut'im bin Uday and
al-Harith bin Harb bin Umayyah saved him, due to business relation they
had with him.


