The Muhajirin's Afflictions
===========================

As the Quraish stepped up their cruelties and torture against the
fledgling community, the Muslims began to immigrate in groups or as
individuals to Yathrib, where people were receptive to the message of
Islam. Thus these people became known as Muhajirin (Immigrants). When
the Muslim men and women began to emigrate from Mecca, their once
bustling houses became deserted and dreary places, of which the lovers
lament and the poets sing. The year as the divine message took a crucial
turn, the Quraish increased their harassment, to seize the possessions
and houses of the Muslims and detaining their women and children as
captives. Some of the prominent houses including those of Banu Madh'un,
Banu Jahash, Banu Bakr were closed down by the infidels.

**Plundering the Houses and Wealth**

The house of Banu Jahash was emptied of all its habitants including
Abdullah bin Jahash, his family and his brothers by Abu Sufyan who
seized it by force. The silent house was a testimony to the afflictions
of the oppressed people on earth, and was also a proof of the firm and
steadfast ideology of a Muslim.

The owners of these houses complained to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) who answered them by saying:

"O servant of Allah, have you not been satisfied that Allah will give
you a house better than this in paradise..."(52)

The history relates to us other miseries and tortures suffered by the
Muhajirin in the way of Allah. History also tells us about the
sufferings of a woman who with her husband migrated, first to Abysssinia
and then to Madianah.

That women in question is Umm Salama, the wife of Abdul-Assad bin
Hilal. Abu Salama who was the first among the companions of Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the first from Banu Makhzum to immigrate to
Madinah. When Abu Salama decided to emigrate, he took his wife, Umm
Salama(53) and their son Salama along with him and seated them on a
camel. But when her tribesmen saw her riding the camel, they knew that
she wanted to emigrate with her husband too. They stopped Abu Salama
from taking his family with him to Madinah and separated her from him by
force. However, when the men of Banu Abd al-Assad tribe saw that Umm
Salama was being taken by force along with her son, they became angry
and told them: Indeed this boy is our son and we will not let you
separate him from us. Both sides began to quarrl among themselves
concerning the son, each tribe began to pull the child towards himself
to the extent that they dislocated one of his hands. Then one of the
uncles of his mother took him away by force. As for Umm Salama, her
tribe imprisoned her because she was planning to immigrate with her
husband. Likewise, many other families were scattered because of the
oppression and injustice of the Quraish.

Umm Salama (may Allah be gracious with her), who later in life after
she became a widow married the Messenger of Allah, says:

"My husband set out for Madinah and thus they caused separation between
me, my husband and my son."

She continues:

"I used to go out every morning and sit near a savanna till the evening
just weeping and it took more than one year till a man from my uncle
(one of the Banu Mughirah) passed and saw me and took pity upon me and
said to Banu Mughirah: 'Will you not let this woman to go out. You have
caused separation between her, her husband and her son.' She said that
they told her: 'you can follow your husband if you wish'. Banu Abd-Assad
returned my son and I took a camel and travelled alone in searching of
my husband till I reached a place called Tan'im (11 kilometers away from
Mecca) where I met a man called Uthman bin Abi Talhah, a brother of Banu
Abdul-Dar who said to me: 'Where are you going, O daughter of Abi
Ummayyah?'

"I replied that I want to go to my husband in Madinah. Thus, the man
helped me till we reached a Village called Amru bin Awaf in Quba and
found my husband. The man left the place. She adds saying that she has
never seen a man more kind than Uthman bin Talhah".(54)

Thus in Madinah, the Message entered a new phase. In the second book,
God willing, we will shed light on the movement of Islam step by step.

Praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.


