The Author:
===========

Al-Allamah al-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Tabataba'I (1281 -
1360/1901-1980) is one of the greatest and the most original thinkers of
the contemporary Muslim world. He was a prolific writer and an inspiring
teacher, who devoted whole of his life to Islamic studies. His interests
were varied and the scope of his learning was vast. His books number
about forty-four, three of which are collections of his articles on
various aspects of Islam and the Qur'an. His major contributions are in
the fields of tafsir, philosophy and history of the Shi'ah faith.

In philosophy the most important of his works is Usul-e falsafah wa
rawish-e-riyalism (The Principles of Philosophy and the method of
realism), which has been published in five volumes with explanatory
notes and commentary of Martyr Murtada Mutahhari. It deals with the
Islamic outlook of the world, which is not only opposed to idealism that
negates the reality of the corporeal world, but is also opposed to the
materialistic conception of the world, which reduces all reality to
ambiguous materialistic myths and fabrications. The point is established
that while the Islamic world-outlook is realistic, both the idealistic
and materialistic outlooks are unrealistic. His other major
philosophical work is a voluminous commentary of al-Asfar al-'arba'ah,
the magnum opus of Mulla Sadra, the last of the great Muslim thinkers of
the medieval age. Besides these, he wrote extensively on philosophical
issues. His humanist approach is underlined by his three books on man -
before the world, in this world and after this world. His philosophy is
overloaded with sociological treatment of human problems. His two other
works, Bidayat al-hikmah and Nihayat al-hikmah, are considered among
works of a high order in Muslim philosophy.

He wrote several treatises on the doctrines and history of the Shi'ah.
One of these books comprises his clarifications and expositions about
Shi'ah faith in reply t the questions posed by the famous French
orientalist Henry Corbin. Another of his books on this topic Shi'ah dar
Islam was translated into English by Sayyid Husayn Nasr under the title
The Shi'ite Islam. These books serve as a good means of removing popular
misconceptions about the Shi'ah and can pave the way for a better
inter-sectarian understanding among Muslim schools.

If a single work is to be named as his masterpiece,*al-Mizan* can be
mentioned without hesitation, which is the outcome of the 'Allamah's
lifelong labour in the sphere of Qur'anic studies. His method, style and
approach are uniquely different from those of all other interpreters of
the Qur'an. The present article is an introduction to this unique and
brilliantly original tafsir. Though very sketchy, this article is
selected for translation into English from among numerous articles
written on his works and life, for it exclusively deals with the
contents of*al-Mizan* . Recently a Persian translation of*al-Mizan* was
published by the Intisharat-e Amir Kabir in twenty volumes corresponding
with the twenty-volume set of the original Arabic text of the tafsir.
Six volumes of*al-Mizan* have so far appeared in English, translated by
Mawlana Sa'id Akhtar Ridwi, and it is hoped that the other volumes would
be rendered into English by the same translator in the near future.

Among aspect of 'Allamah Tabataba'I's personality is his unprecedented
success as a great teacher. Among his pupils we find a group of such
luminaries and thinkers of eminence in their own right as Martyr Murtada
Mutahhari, Martyr Beheshti, Hasan Hasanzadeh Amuli and Husayn Nasr.

The 'Allamah was also a good poet. He composed the poetry mainly in
Persian, but occasionally in Arabic also.


