The History of Al-Mizan:
========================

Before giving an account of its salient features and contents, we shall
record a short history of*al-Mizan* . 'Allamah Tabataba'I, who came to
the Hawzah of Qum in 1325 A.H., wrote and lectured extensively on
different branches of Islamic sciences. Commentary and exegesis of the
Qur'an was one of the topics of his discussions, which he held with the
scholars and students of the Howzeh-ye 'Ilmiyyah of Qum. About the
motive of writing*al-Mizan* , 'Allamah Tabataba'I himself states that
when he came to Qum from Tabriz, he tried to evaluate the requirements
of the Islamic society as well as the conditions prevailing in the
Howzeh-ye 'Ilmiyyah of Qum, and after due consideration of the matter he
came to the conclusion that the school was badly in need of a commentary
of the Qur'an for a better understanding and more effective instruction
of the sublime meanings of the purest of all Islamic texts and the
highest of all Divine gifts. On the other hand, since materialistic
notions were gaining prevalence, there was a great need for a rational
and philosophical discourse to enable the Howzah to rise to the occasion
for elaborating the intellectual and doctrinal principles of Islam with
the help of rational arguments in order to defend the Islamic position.
He thus considered it his duty to make efforts in fulfilling these two
urgent needs with the help of God., the Most High. The lectures on
exegesis of the Qur'an were planned according to this scheme. Perhaps
'Allamah Tabataba'I might have delivered lectures on the entire Qur'an
for his students for several times, and in the meanwhile he might have
written a commentary. During these sessions of well-thought out
discourse he might have rendered these lectures into his terse and
eloquent prose, which was later printed in a number of volumes.

The first edition of*al-Mizan* in Arabic was printed in Iran and then it
was printed in Beirut. Till now more than three editions have been
printed in Iran and in Beirut in large numbers, and very few of the
public and private libraries will be found without a complete set of it.
All other libraries, too, at least have some of the volumes of this
commentary on their shelves.

The original text of*al-Mizan* is written in Arabic, consisting of
twenty volumes, and each volume has about four hundred pages of big
size. It was intended that all those interested in reading the exegesis
of the Qur'an may be properly benefited from this treasure of the
Qur'anic teachings. Some of the pupils of 'Allamah Tabataba'I have
translated this book into Persian under his able direction and
supervision, and each one of the Arabic volume was translated in two
volumes of the Persian, making a total number of forty. The share of
this responsibility was shouldered by Aqa Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Musawi
Hamadani. With the view that the entire Persian translation of*al-Mizan*
should not appear in different styles, which would have affected the
book's readability, 'Allamah Tabataba'I gave him the beginning volumes
of*al-Mizan* also for retranslation. We hope that this fine exegesis of
the Divine words of the Qur'an will be translated into other living
languages of the world also, and will be made accessible to all those
who want to quench their thirst for divine knowledge and who are eager
to be familiar with the life-giving principles of Islam. It would be in
the fitness of things that this exegesis is placed in the hands of the
committed

individuals and scholars who are familiar with the language of the
Qur'an also. It will be a great service if the universal message of the
Qur'an is projected in such a manner that humanity is delivered from the
unholy clutches of pagan cultures. The monotheistic culture of the
Qur'an alone is capable of emancipating human beings from all kinds of
servitude and indignities.


