A Brief Survey of the Contents of al-Mizan:
===========================================

For a thorough understanding of this valuable, great and cyclopaedic
book about Islamic learning, it is necessary to have a bird's eye-view
of the whole book in order to know the diversity of its issues. I
confess again my own limitations of understanding, which may have
rendered my comprehension of the profound meanings and the vast span of
the history of ideas covered by*al-Mizan* defective and inadequate.

Each one of the twenty volumes of*al-Mizan* we intend to discuss
separately.

The First Volume:
-----------------

'Allamah Tabataba'I has written a preface to the book consisting of
approximately eleven pages, in which he has suggested some important
points:

1- The meaning of the science of exegesis and reference to its
historical developments since the era of revelation of the Qur'an to
this day.

2- An account of various exegeses of the Qur'an written by different
Muslim scholars with reference to the causes of difference among them.
He believes that every exegete of the Qur'an has viewed the Qur'an from
his own intellectual point of view and presented his interpretation in
accordance with it. 'Allamah Tabataba'I has also pointed out their
individual weaknesses and has written a compendious criticism of them.

3- In the end he has referred to the style of his own exegesis, which he
considers to be based on a new approach, that is, interpreting the
Qur'an by the Qur'an itself. Then he gives a snapshot view of the
various aspects of his method and approach employed in the exegesis, and
concludes the preface.

He begins the exposition of the first surah, Fatihat al-Kitab, with a
brief commentary on: "In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful".

He discusses several Qur'anic, philosophical and psychological issues in
the light of this surah. At first, he unfolds the meaning of al-hamd
(praise) in the context of God, the Most Holy, and the word al-sirat-
the path to hidayah (guidance). The other discussion is about the
meaning and use of the terms jary (lit. intending something; a term
repeatedly occurring in the sayings of the Imams [A]) and intibaq (the
application of the Qur'anic verses to specific situations by the Imams
[A]) in the Qur'an which is based on the traditions. From page 43 to the
end of this volume, which contains 414 pages, he covers 182 verses of
the second surah, al-Baqarah.

He has expounded some of the profoundest themes of the Qur'an in the
light of these verses in a comprehensive and lucid way in the following
order:

1- In the beginning there are two philosophical discussions about the
supersensible perception and the necessity of sciences. Then are
discussed the causes of kufr (infidelity), the nature of miracles, and
the miraculous qualities of the Qur'an. In this context various aspects
of the Qur'an have been discussed in a detailed and logical way. This
discussion begins from the page 58 and continues till the page 86 of
this volume.

2- After this some other important issues are taken up, such as the
meaning of prophetic mission, metaphorical meaning of the concretisation
of certain deeds, determinism (jabr) and delegated freedom (tafwid), amr
bayna al-'amrayn -(the intermediate stage between two extreme
positions), the meanings of the acts of making (ja'l) and creation
(khalq), instruction of the Names to Adam (A), and the creation of
heaven for him.

3- The most important of the discussion of this book is the one about
the problem of intercession (shafa'ah). It can be said with certainty
about this discussion that such a logical and detailed analysis of the
issue was never attempted in any of the Islamic books on this subject.
'Allamah Tabataba'I has divided the issue of intercession into six
subtitles and has made it a subject of extensive study. In the end of
this discussion, he has dealt with the psychological, philosophical and
sociological aspects of intercession.

4- The other discussions of this volume include the Sabeans; the revival
of the dead; metamorphosis; refutation of the doctrine of Sonship of
Christ; the meaning of the Imamate-spiritual leadership- its proofs, and
other important issues related to it; magic and the obsolete occult
sciences; the laying of the foundation of the Holy Ka'bah and the
legislation concerning the Qiblah; the meaning and stages of islam and
the iman; meaning of dhikr (remembrance of God); the world of Barzakh
(intermeidary stage between death and Resurrection); detachment of the
self; morality; dependence of man-made things upon God Almighty; the
meaning of love and its relations to God; perpetuity and eternity of
punishment; taqlid (spiritual following or imitation in religious
matters) and its meaning; the meaning of ibraz (producing or bringing
out certain proofs); and lastly the issue of qisas (the law of
retaliation) with reference to the objections raised against the laws of
qisas and their refutation.

The Second Volume:
------------------

It begins with the exposition of the 183rd verse of the Surat al-Baqarah
(the Cow), and the exposition of this surah continues till the end of
this volume, which has 448 pages.

The other discussions of this volume are concerning the following
subjects:

The revelation of the Qur'an in the month of Ramadan and on the Night of
Power (laylat al-qadr) with special emphasis on its stage by stage
revelation; meaning of du'a'-supplication; private ownership as one of
the permanent social institutions; jihad, as enjoined by the Qur'an; the
social necessity of defence; mut'ah (temporary marriage);
hajj-generality of its laws; the problem of raj'ah (resurrection) and
refutation of the doubts expressed by some people against it. There is a
comprehensive discussion about the reality of human existence, and the
history of mankind, the origin of human existence and general human
characteristics, emergence of differences among human beings, human life
in the Hereafter and other such issues have been fully investigated.
'Allamah Tabataba'I has expressed his

scholarly opinion regarding these issues and analysed them with
remarkable insight.

There is another significant discussion regarding the problem of
prophethood, which has been discussed from various angles, such as the
Qur'anic, philosophical and social. He has analysed in detail the
purport of the verse:

"….And whoso becomes a renegade and dies in his disbelief: such are they
whose works have fallen both in the world and Hereafter…." (2:217)

With reference to this verse, he has dealt with the problem of the
futility of actions. In this context he has discussed the Qur'anic
injunctions concerning the acts and other related problems at a high
academic level and estimated them carefully. This discussion covers
almost 54 pages from page 118 to 172.

Other topics of the discussion that have Qur'anic, scientific,
sociological and philosophical implications are as follows:

The meaning of the 'heart' (qalb) in the Qur'an; the use of words like
'ilm (knowledge) and idrak (perception, cognition) in the Qur'an; the
position and rights of woman in Islam and other civilisations with
regard to marriage and divorce; the meaning of sakinah (tranquillity of
mind); the struggle for existence and natural selection; the meaning of
salam; the meaning of existence; the Existence of God; Permanence of the
Divine Command and Sovereignty; the negation of compulsion in religion;
the concept of benevolence and Divine Guidance; the refutation of
injustice and misguidance on the part of God Almighty. At the end are
discussed two important economic issues: disbursement and usury (riba)
from the stand-point of the Qur'an. With this discussion the second
volume concludes.

The Third Volume:
-----------------

It commences with the exposition of the beginning verses of the Surat Al
'Imran (the third chapter of the Qur'an), which contains 200 verses, out
of which 120 are commented upon in this volume till the page 361.

The various issues discussed in this book consists of: the Qur'anic
meaning of chastisement; an elaborate discussion about the problem of
the al- 'ayat al'muhkamat and the al- 'ayat al-mutashabihat and ta'wil
(interpretation), distributed in five sections (these three issues of
significance in the Qur'an have been discussed logically and analysed
carefully in an unprecedented manner); these five sections are
summarised under ten subjects, and in their context the problem of
interpretation by conjecture (tafsir bi al-ra'y) has also been discussed
from the Qur'anic and traditionalist (riwa'I) points of view. Then there
are comparatively short discussions about certain other problems like
the Qur'anic notions of sustenance, property; validity (I'tibar) and its
Qur'anic basis (istinad); and all other matters related to these issues.

After that, there is a comprehensive discussion regarding Jesus (A),
Mary (A) and the concept of trinity (tathlith). These matters have been
studied from various angles. Then, there are two separate discussions of
historical nature concerning the Old Testament, the New Testament,
Christ and the Four Gospels (Luke, Mathew, Mark and John). All of their
different aspects have been carefully studied and analysed.

This volume comes to an end with the Qur'anic and historical account of
the history of the Holy Ka'bah and other related matters.

The Fourth Volume:
------------------

This volume opens with the exposition of the 121st verse of the \`Surat
Al 'Imran, which continues till the page 133. From the page 134 begins
the exposition of the Surat al-Nisa' (Women), which has 186 verses, and
it continues till the end of this volume which has 424 pages.
Seventy-six verses of this surah are discussed in this volume. Some of
the important subjects discussed in this volume are as follows: the
teaching of the Qur'an and their role in the reconciliation of knowledge
and action; the trial or test and its real meaning; the remission of
sins and forgiveness in the Qur'an; the problem of tawakkul (resignation
to the Divine Will); with reference to the verse 172 of the Surat Al
'Imran and its preceding and following verses dealing with the Battle of
Uhud, a list of the names of the 77 martyrs of Uhud is given from page
74 to 77; a philosophical discussion based on a comparative study of the
Qur'an and the Old Testament regarding the rights of women; and the
Qur'anic view of social relations in Islam - in fifteen sections. This
is the most important discussion of this volume which commences from
page 92 and ends at page 131. It may be considered to be one of the
profoundest and the most original of the discourses of*al-Mizan* , which
brings to light some very sensitive and subtle points about Islamic
sociology in the light of the relevant verses of the Surat al-Nisa'
(Women) pertaining to the age of human beings, the emergence of the
first man, the process of creation and evolution and other related
matters. Afterwards, there is a discussion about marriage from a
scientific point of view, divided into three sections. The third section
is devoted to the issue of polygamy in Islam with reference to the
question of the number of the wives of the Prophet (S). The
philosophical implications of these issues are discussed thoroughly.

Subsequent to it, the issue of inheritance and succession is discussed
from different angles in eight sections. Besides, there are several
brief discussions about repentance, mortal sins (kaba'ir), venial sins
(sagha'ir), atonement of sins, specification of the relatives with whom
it is lawful to marry, and the meaning of the authority of men over
women. The last discussion of this volume concerns the Qur'anic view of
ghayrah (the sense of honour) and 'asabiyyah (prejudice).

The Fifth Volume:
-----------------

It commences with the exposition of verse 77 of the surat al-Nisa' and
concludes with the exposition of verse 54 of the Surat al-Ma'idah on
page 402. The following subjects are discussed in this volume: a
discussion about determining the nature of sins and virtues in relation
to Divine injunction; discussions concerning three Qur'anic terms:
tahiyyah (variously meaning salutation, compliment, congratulation,
prayer, benediction), mustad'af (the oppressed), and 'ismah
(infallibility or freedom from sins).

The exposition of the Surat al-Ma'idah begins from page 158. The first
discussion under this surah concerns the Qur'anic sense of 'aqd
(contract). With reference to the verse, "…. The cattle quadrupeds are
allows to you …. " of the Surat al-Ma'idah (5:1) and its following
verse, the permissibility of the flesh of various animals is discussed.
He discusses this issue logically and scientifically in three sections,
and the Islamic view in this respect is compared with those of other
religions.

The other significant discussion concerns the problem of right approach
to the Qur'an and to the history of Islamic thought. In this context the
meaning of perception and thinking is discussed from various angles.
Then follow the following discussions: the Qur'anic account of the sons
of Adam (A) and its comparison with the Biblical version of the story;
the Qur'anic conception of Shari'ah (Islamic law) and the difference
between shari'ah, din and millah, the afflictions of the heart; and an
account of the incidents that will occur during the age of the Twelfth
Imam, according to the Qur'anic verses and traditions.

The Sixth Volume:
-----------------

The sixth volume commences with the exposition of verse 55 of the Surat
al-Ma'idah, "Only Allah is your Vali and Apostle those who believe, …"
and ends with the last verse of the surah. This volume which consists of
381 pages gives the exposition of 65 verses.

It deals with the following issues in the light of these verses: the
meaning of tawhid in the Qur'an in the light of the tradition and
history; a scientific and historical analysis of the knowledge of the
self (in nine sections); witness (shahadah) and justice ('adalah) and
taking of oath (qasam) with reference to its brief history; propriety of
conduct and training (an ethical discourse in eight sections, containing
the conduct of the prophets of God in general and the moral aspects of
the teachings of our Prophet (S) in detail, enumerating 183 of his moral
qualities in the light of the tradition).

In the context of verse 118 of the Surat al-Ma'idah "If thou shoudst
chastise them, then surely they are thy servant…" the problem of slavery
is discussed in its social and historical perspectives. 'Allamah
Tabataba'I has analysed this problem in the light of the verses of the
Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet (S) and the Imams (A). Like
many other discourses of*al-Mizan* this study possesses a rare quality
and originality reflecting the 'Allamah's profound vision and subtlety
of style.

The last section deals with the issue of punishment (mujazat) and
forgiveness ('afw), comprising seven sections. It is a profound
discussion held in the light of the Qur'anic verses. Various issues
arising from these two subjects are discussed logically in a
comprehensive manner. With this discussion the volume and the exposition
of the Surat al-Ma'idah concludes.

The Seventh Volume:
-------------------

This volume commences with the exposition of the first verse of the
Surat al-'An'am (Cattle). This volume, which extends over 397 pages,
deals with the exposition of 165 verses of this surah.

Among the significant discussions of this volume, the first is about
animals and their social system, and is based on the Qur'anic outlook.
There are two other discussions: one about the subject of command,
elucidating the point that it belongs exclusively to God, and the other
about the meaning and reality of the Divine Act and Command.

Then, the story of Abraham (A) with an account of his personality is
discussed in six chapters covering the Qur'anic, scientific and
historical views. Subsequently, six other subjects are discussed in the
following order: the meaning of the Book (the Kitab), Command and
blessing (barakah) in the Qur'an; daughter and her children are also
considered to be descendants and heirs in Islam; the phenomenon of
creation and its applicability to all beings; and the Divine Guidance.

The Eighth Volume:
------------------

This volume consists of 387 pages and deals with the exposition of the
Surat al-'A'raf, which has 206 verses.

The first discussion of this volume is about the Devil (Iblis), his
actions and the objections he raised claiming his superiority over Adam.

The problem of sa'adah and shaqawah (felicity and misery) is discussed
in the light of the Qur'an and the tradition, and has been studied and
analysed in an elaborate manner. The meaning of A'raf (the heights) in
the Qur'an is discussed, and after that in the context of the verse, "He
sat on the Throne", the 54th verse of the Surat al-A'raf, there is an
analysis of the term 'arsh (the Throne) and its referent is determined
in the light of the Qur'an and the tradition. On the same lines the
Qur'anic concept of ru'yatal-qalb (inner vision) is discussed. In the
context of the verses "And Allah's are the fairest Names", the 180th
verse of al-'A'raf, there is a discussion about 'the fairest Names'
based on the verses of the Qur'an and rational arguments, and can be
considered as one of the most significant parts of this volume; it
consists of seven sections. With the support of Qur'anic verses and
traditions this subject is discussed in a comprehensive way. Without
letting himself to be swayed away by secondary issues, like the problem
of meanings of the Names of God, 'Allamah Tabataba'I has embraced all
important aspects of this subject.

The Ninth Volume:
-----------------

This volume covers the exposition of two complete surahs: al-'Anfal (175
verses) and al-Tawbah (129 verses). Significant discussions of the book
are as follows:

1- In the context of the verse: "And when Allah promised you one of the
two parties… "), the seventh verse of the Surat al-'Anfal and its
following verses about the Battle of Badr, 'Allamah Tabataba'I has given
a list of the names of the martyrs of Badr, who were fourteen in number:
six from among the Muhajirun (immigrants) and eight from among the Ansar
(helpers, who were the natives of al-Madinah).

2- A disucssion about the meaning of 'ahd (promise, or treaty), qasam
(oath), and ahkam (commands or injunctions), and their implications.
This issue is discussed in four sections.

3- A dialectical and philosophical study of the relationship of
succession between the acts and their causes.

4- In the context of the verse: "certainly Allah helped you in many
battlefields and at Hunayn…", the 25th verse of the Surat al-Tawbah and
its following verses concerning the Battle of Hunayn, the names of the
martyrs, who were approximately ten in number, are metnioned.

Under two separate headings kanz (treasure or accumulation of wealth)
and zakat and other kinds of almsgiving and deeds of charity are
discussed in the light of the Qur'anic verses and the tradition.
'Allamah Tabataba'I has in a way elucidated basic economic problems from
Islamic viewpoint.

The Tenth Volume:
-----------------

This volume which consists of 384 pages gives the exegesis of all 109
verses of the Surat Yunus and 99 verses of the Surat Hud. Most of the
discussions bear the Qur'anic, historical and philosophical facets. The
first discussion which is philosophical in nature and is based on the
Qur'anic verses is about the power possessed by prophets of God and
Divinely inspired persons. Then, there is an elaborate discussion about
Noah (A) in seven sections dealing in detail with various aspects of
this subject. In this context there is a discussion conerning the Flood,
and as to whether the entire earth was engulfed by it or only a part of
it was affected. The 'Allamah has taken into account the geological
evidence of this event in eight sections, and sought to interpret
scientifically the Qur'anic verses about Noah's Flood in a comprehensive
manner.

The second significant topic of this volume is about the practice of
idol worship, studied in ten sections in the light of different
viewpoints, viz. Qur'anic, traditional, historical and philosophical.

From among the last ten sections of this volume, two sections are about
the defence of the principle of tawhid in Islam, the struggle against
idol worship, the rejection of infidelity and affirmation of the
principle of twahid as the basis of the Prophet's character. It throws
light on the above-mentioned issues from all angles, and is free from
any aimless and ambiguous distraction. Afterwards we come to the concept
of transmigration of soul among idolaters and the infiltration of this
idea into some religions and its rejection by Islam. In the end, the
notion of intercession and redemption in Islam has been discussed.

The third topic of discussion in this volume is the life and times of
Hud (A), which is divided into two parts: one about the people of 'Ad,
to whom Hud was sent, and the other about his own personality. The
fourth topic of discussion concerns Salih (A), the people of Thamud, and
the mission and personality of Salih. The fifth discussion of this
volume deals with the story of Lot (A), his people and his personality,
as narrated by the Qur'an and the Bible. At the end of the volume, the
story of Shu'ayb and his people is described in three sections.

The Eleventh Volume:
--------------------

It consists of 390 pages and commences with the exposition of the 100th
verse of the Surat Hud. The exposition of this surah concludes on page
72 of this volume. Exposition of the Surat Yusuf, which has 111 verses,
begins from page 73 of this volume and ends on page 282. It is followed
by the exposition of the Surat al-Ra'd, which has 43 verses, and the
volume concludes with this surah.

Among the significant topics of discussions in this volume, the first
one is as to how falsehood cannot save any human being. This is a
discussion

based on the verses of the Qur'an and rational arguments This is
followed by a discussion about religious piety and its various grades,
in three sections. 'Allamah Tabataba'I has expounded this instructive
and useful subject with great profundity. The third discussion of this
volume concerns the history and life of Yusuf (A), divided into three
sections.

The fourth discourse is about dreams, discussed in four sections. The
interpretation of different kinds of dreams is discussed from various
scientific angles, and the Qur'anic standpoint in this regard is also
clarified.

The Twelfth Volume:
-------------------

It consists of 382 pages and includes the exposition of three complete
surahs, that is, the Surat Ibrahim (52 verses), the Surat al-Hijr (99
verses) and al-Nahl (128 verses).

In the first discourse of this volume, the subject of vengeance is
discussed with respect to God Almighty.

The second discourse is among the most profound of the discussions
of*al-Mizan* , and deals with the issue of tahrif (falsification or
transposition) and alteration in the Qur'an. This issue is discussed
rationally in the light of the traditions and the historical facts. It
is divided into seven sections. The 'Allamah has logically refuted all
possibilities of tahrif in the Qur'an with great philosphical and
analytical insight into the contents of the Qur'an. He has answered
various questions and objections raised in connection with the matter of
tahrif in the Qur'an.

The third discussion is about the verdict concerning the creation of man
in the context of the exposition of verse 26 of the Surat al-Hijr. It
comprises the interpretation of ten Divine verdicts occurring in the
Qur'an.

The fourth and the last discussion of this volume is about duty, its
various modes and its persistence, dealt with in a philosophical way.

The Thirteenth Volume:
----------------------

It consists of 408 pages and contains exposition of two complete surahs,
that is, al-'Isra' or Bani 'Isra'il (111 verses) and al-Kahf (110
verses).

The first and the most significant discussion of this volume is about
the problem of justice. The issue is approached both philosophically and
traditionally, and covers three sections. Then, in the context of the
verse "And come not near unto adultery. Lo! It is an abomination and an
evil way", the 32nd verse of the Surat Bani Isra'il, there is a
discussion about the prohibition of adultery (hurmat al-zina), which is
approached from both sociological and Qur'anic points of view,
highlighting the detrimental effects of this act, studied and compared
from different angles. In the same way, other issues like that of the
superiority of man over angels or vice versa, place of evil and its
relation to the Divine destiny (qada') homogeneity or necessary
relationship between deeds and the doer also have been discussed with
reference to the verse of the Surat Bani Isra'il.

The issues associated with the exposition of the Surat al-Kahf are
mostly based on Qur'anic verses and history, for they are concerned with
the story of the Companions of the Cave (Ashab al-Kahf) The problems
related to it are dealt with in four sections. Similarly, the story of
Moses (A) and Khidr

(A) and that of Dhu al-Qarnayn are discussed from various viewpoints.
This volume concludes with these discussions.

The Fourteenth Volume:
----------------------

This volume has 416 pages and contains the exposition of four surahs:
(1) the Surat Maryam (Mary) (98 verses); (2) the Surat Ta-Ha (135
verses); (3) the Surat al-'Anbiya' (112 verses)' and (4) al-Hajj (78
verses).

The important discussions of this book are about the incidents and
events of the lives, histories and personalities of four of the prophets
of God, viz. Zakariyya (A); Yahya (A); Ismai'l (A) the truthful, and
Idris (A), which are based on the Qur'anic verses, the tradition and
history. In the course of these discussions, with reference to the
verse, "…Then We sent Our Spirit, and there appeared to her a well-made
man.." the 17th verse of the Surat Maryam , there is a profound
discussion about resemblance (in an allegorical sense) with reference to
the appearance of Gabriel in human form. This is one of the most
valuable discourses of*al-Mizan* .

The other significant discussion of this volume concerns the meaning of
the necessity of Action, and its propriety and impropriety in relation
to God Almighty. This issue is discussed from a rational point of view.
There is another discussion about the problem of contingency or eternity
of Kalam Allah, that is, the Qur'an. The various aspects of this problem
are taken into consideration with an emphasis on the traditions. The
discussion consists of four sections.

At the end of the volume, there is a very important discussion about
Divine Wisdom. This is a philosophical discussion based on the Qur'anic
verses, and 'Allamah Tabataba'I has treated this subject with great
scholarship and insight.

The Fifteenth Volume:
---------------------

This volume has 408 pages and contains the exposition of five complete
surahs in the following order: 1. The Surat al-Mu'minun (118 verses); 2.
The Surat al-Nur (64 verses); (3) the Surat al-Furqan (77 verses); (4)
the Surat al-Shu'ara (227 verses); (5) the Surat al-Naml (93 verses).

The general and significant topics of this volume are as follows:

The first discussion is about the effects of faith and its practical
application. From this study issues a sociological and judicial
discussion which covers the laws of Islam and their significance for
human society. This discourse is followed by three philosophical and
rational studies: (1) the causality of the Divine Being in relation to
things; (2) the relationship of particular beings with the knowledge of
God; (3) similar study of the meaning and implications of the negation
of Divine injustice. 'Allamah Tabataba'I probes these thre profound
issues with his characteristic meticulousness and penetrating insight as
he has done in other such discussions.

The last discussion of this volume concerns Sulayman (A) in the light of
the verses of the Surat al-Naml, and it consists of four sections
dealing with the life and personality of Sulayman (A) in the Qur'anic
perspective. Similarly all ancient sources are also studied and the
legends and reports

about him in the ancient literature are discussed in their proper
historical perspective.

The Sixteenth Volume:
---------------------

This volume consists of 395 pages and contains the exposition of seven
complete surahs: (1) al-Qasas (88 verses); (2) al-'Ankabut (69 verses);
(3) al-Rum (60 verses); (4) Luqman (34 verses); (5) al-Sajdah (30
verses); (6) al-'Ahzab (73 versres); (7) Saba' (54 verses).

The significant issues taken up in this volume are as follows:

At first, in relation with the Surat al-Qasas, the anecdotes pertaining
to Moses (A) have been discussed in four sections. This is a discussion
based on historical facts and the Qur'anic verses encompassing various
aspects of the subject.

Then, in the context of the 30th verse of the Surat al-Rum: "Then set
your face upright for religion in the right state-the nature made by
Allah in which He has made men;.."

there is a comprehensive and logical discussion about religion and faith
as a natural propensity of human mind. It consists of four sections,
from page 189 to 193. None of the exegeses of the Qur'an contains such a
profound discussion about this subject.

Subsequent to it, in the context of the Surat Luqman, there is a
discussion about the anecdote of Luqman (A) the wise, and some of his
wise sayings and parables have been expounded. The last discourse, which
is considered to be one of the most valuable discussion of*al-Mizan* ,
is about the creation of the First Man, and is undertaken in the context
of the Verse:

"Who made good everything that He has created, and He created man from
clay."(32:7)

From the Qur'anic, philosophical, traditional and historical angles this
problem is studied and expounded. In the beginning of this discussion,
'Allamah Tabataba'I refers to his earlier discussion of this subject in
detail in the beginning of his exposition of the Surat al-Nisa'. It
commences from page 225 and concludes on page 260 of this volume

The Seventeenth Volume:
-----------------------

It consists of 407 pages, and contains the exposition of seven complete
surahs: (1) Fatir (45 verses); (2) Ya sin (83 verses); (3) al-Saffat
(182 verses); (4) Sad (88 verses); (5) al-Zumar (75 verses); (6)
al-Mu'min (85 verses); (7) Ha Mim (Fussilat) (54 verses).

Foremost in importance is a discussion in the context of the first verse
of the Surat Fatir:

"Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who
appoints the angels, messengers having wings two, three and four. He
increases in creation what He pleases, surely Allah has power over all
things."

This discussion about angels covers all the verses about them in the
Qur'an as well as all kind of issues related to this subject. Afterward,
there is a discussion about the subject of prognostication, with
reference to the prophets of God with reference to the 10th verse of
al-Saffat:

"Except him who snatches off but once, then there follows him a brightly
piercing flame."

This verse is about Satan, and as a subsidiary issue the meaning and
nature of meteors or shooting stars is discussed.

Then, the anecdotes of different prophets of God, like Ilyas (A), Jonah
(A), David (A), Ayyub (A), Jesus (A) and Dhu al-Kifl (A) have been
discussed according to their Qur'anic version and in the light of the
tradition. This is the lengthiest discussion of this volume which covers
most of the issues taken up in this volume.

In the concluding part of the volume there is a discussion about the
meaning of rida and sukht (satisfaction or displeasure with God). This
discussion is based on the Qur'anic verses and rational arguments. There
is a discussion about the heaven; and then the issue of the
all-embracing knowledge of God Almighty about the living beings is
discussed from the Qur'anic and philosophical points of view.

The Eighteenth Volume:
----------------------

This volume which consists of 392 pages contains the exposition of ten
complete surahs of the Qur'an: (1) al-Shura (53 verses); (2) al-Zukhruf
(89 verses); (3) al-Dukhan (59 verses); (4) al-Jathiyah (37 verses); (5)
al-'Ahqaf (35 verses); (6) Muhammad (38 verses); (7) al-Fath (29
verses); (8) al-Hujurat (18 verses); (9) Qaf (45 verses); (10)
al-Dhariyat (60 verses).

The significant discussions of this volume relate to four subjects. The
first discussion is about the subject of the knowledge possessed by the
Prophet (S) and the Imams (A),which includes refutation of a doubt in
this regard. The second discussion is about faith and how it is
strengthened. The third discussion is about the subject of fraternity
and brotherhood, while the fourth discussion of this volume is about the
equal distribution of provisions, property and wealth. All the
discussions of this volume are remarkable for their scholarly and
comprehensive nature and rationalist approach.

The Nineteenth Volume:
----------------------

Now, gradually we are coming nearer to the last surahs of the Qur'an.
This one and the following volume deal with a large number of the
Qur'anic surahs. This volume which consists of 407 pages contains the
exposition of eighteen complete surahs: (1) al-Tur (49 verses); (2)
al-Najm (62 verses); (3) al-Qamar (55 verses); (4) al-Rahman (78
verses); (5) al-Waqi'ah (96 verses); (6) al-Hadid (29 verses); (7)
al-Mujadalah (22 verses); (8) al-Hashr (24 verses); (9) al-Mumtahinah
(13 verses); (10) al-Saff (14 verses); (11) al-Jumu'ah (11 verses); (12)
al-Munafiqun (11 verses); (13) al-Taghabun (18 verses); (14) al-Talaq
(12 verses); (15) al-Tahrim (12 verses); (16) al-Mulk (30 verses); (17)
al-Qalam (52 verses); (18) al-Haqqah (52 verses).

The first important discussion of this volume, which is short one, is
about the miracle of the Prophet (S) resulting in the splitting of the
moon (shaqq al-qamar). The most significant discussion of this volume
concerns the lucky and unlucky effects of the days which consists of
three sections: 1. lucky and unlucky effects of the days; 2. lucky and
unlucky influences of the stars; 3. good omens and bad omens.

There is a discussion concerning the Divine providence or decree
"qadar", which is followed by the analysis of the meaning of 'the
teaching of wisdom' (ta'lim al-hikmah) , and uses both the Qur'anic
verses and rational arguments.

The last discussion of this volume is concerned with the subject of
hypocrisy (nifaq) during the early days of Islam. This discussion is
based on the Qur'anic verses and historical facts in the context of the
Surat al-Munafiqun. Like other discussions of*al-Mizan* , this also
reveals the keen observation of the author and his understanding of the
most sensitive points, which uncover the ugly visage of the hypocrites
and their unholy aims and losses inflicted by them on the Muslims and
Islam during the course of history of Islam.

The Twentieth Volume:
---------------------

After outlining the general principles according to which 'Allamah
Tabataba'I has discussed and analysed various subjects in the nineteen
volumes of*al-Mizan* , we open its twentieth and last volume with a view
to enumerate the special subjects discussed in it.

This volume, which has 339 pages, contains the exposition of the last 45
short surahs of the Qur'an, that is, from the Surat al-Ma'arij, which is
the seventieth surah of the Qur'an, to al-Nas'. the last and the hundred
and fourteenth surah. The various subjects discussed in this book in the
context of the surahs of the Qur'an are as follows:

5- A discussion about the Jinn.

6- A discussion about hypocrisy (nifaq), which is complementary to the
discussion started in the nineteenth volume.

7- A discussion about the nature of man from the viewpoint of the
Qur'an.

8- A discussion about the oaths in the Qur'an, that is, a list of the
things and beings by which God swears in His Holy Book.

9- A discussion about the meaning of soul (ruh) in the Qur'an.

10- A discussion as to how angels serve as the agencies of
administration in the system of existence.

With these studies the exegesis*al-Mizan* concludes. Benedictions be on
the blessed soul of 'Allamah Tabataba'I for its guiding us in exploring
and understanding this unfathomable ocean of meaning and ideas. We read
it and benefit from it according to our limited talents and capacities.
We hope that great efforts will be made to publish and distribute this
encyclopedic exegesis, which is unparalleled in the history of the
commentaries of the Qur'an.


