Is the Messiah Good Or Not?
===========================

In Matthew 19:16, we read the following:

**"Now a man came up to Jesus and asked, "Teacher, what good thing must
I do to get eternal life?" "Why do you ask me about what is good?" Jesus
replied. "There is only One who is good. If you want to enter life, obey
the commandments."**

In Mark 10:17, we read this:

**"As Jesus started on his way, a man ran up to him and fell on his
knees before him, "Good teacher," he asked, "what must I do to inherit
eternal life?" "Why do you call me good?" Jesus answered. "No one is
good except God alone."**

Also in Luke 18:18, we read:

**"A certain ruler asked him; "Good teacher, what must I do to inherit
eternal life?” "Why do you call me good?" Jesus answered. "No one is
good except God alone."**

Then in John 10:11, he contradicts all of the previous statements by
saying:

**"I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the
sheep."**

There is no doubt that the simultaneous denial and approval of anything
is clearly a contradiction. See Luke 6:45 for further contradiction:

**"The good man brings good things out of the good stored up in his
heart, and the evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in
his heart. For out of the overflow of his heart his mouth speaks."**

This means that good can and does exist in many of the Messenger's
followers as well as in the Messengers themselves. And as you see, it
contradicts the previous speeches of the New Testament.

New Testament Says Jesus (P) Drinks Wine
----------------------------------------

In Matthew 26:26, we read the following:

**"While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it,
and gave it to his disciples, saying, "Take and eat; this is my body.
Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, saying, "Drink
from it, all of you. This is my blood of the new covenant, which is
poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. I tell you, I will not
drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink
it anew with you in my father's kingdom."**

This is another example from the New Testament, of misleading today's
believers, creating a bad image of God's Prophets, claiming they drink
wine, which is forbidden in all the major religions. With regard to this
subject, there are some features and issues that are unbelievable and I
will clarify for the readers so that they see for themselves that this
book is not Gospel from God, and to show them that its authors either
wanted to attack the Holiness of God and the dignity of His Prophets, or
they were in fact ignorant about religious ethics. Thus, they introduced
into their writings things that cannot be believed to be God's Gospel.
Here are some of the points:

(1) About the bread that Jesus (P) divided and gave to the disciples
saying it was his body; this must be untrue. Even two wise persons could
not agree on such a false issue. The reason being that he was sitting
with them with his physical body. What Jesus (P) gave them was

nothing but bread made from flour to eat and they ate it together. His
complete body was there nothing has changed at all.

2. The wine in the cup, described as Jesus’ blood is similarly quite
untrue. His blood was flowing through his body. None was shed. In
addition, Jesus (P) did tell them clearly that what was in the cup was
in fact the fruit of the vine (wine).

3. His thankfulness for the drinking of wine - which is forbidden by
God's Gospel - is not sensible. Such a thing is impossible for God's
Prophet, thank God.

However, if we compare this to another Verse, it would appear that he in
fact took the cup and became drunk. See Matthew 11:19:

**"The Son of Man-tame eating and drinking, and they say, "Here is a
glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and "sinners." But
wisdom is proved right by her actions."**

The Holiness of the Lord's Prophet is far above accusations of drinking
wine or committing such sins. Also, the true New Testament (Engeel),
which was reveled by God to Jesus (P), is more Exalted than to be
tainted by such worthless contradiction.
