The Books With the Christians Are Not Gospel
============================================

If the Christians and Jews who have these books think about the
contradictions and false information therein, they will realize that
these books cannot be Gospel and cannot be said to come from God.

We know for sure that the Messiah's book is True and faultless.
Christians themselves have complete evidence that Jesus (P) did not put
the Bible together. The Books of the New Testament are proof that Jesus
(P) himself did not put the books together, and are proof that those who
did compile it were not perfect humans. They could make mistakes and
could possibly lie. In addition, it may be of little significance to
them if they construe the words or change them whether intentionally or
unintentionally. These faults, however, are unable to discredit Jesus
(P) or his true "Engeel."

### We Demand With the Proof of the Authenticity of This Bible

We appeal to the Christians of today; we demand of you the following:
first, bring us the scientific evidence proving that what Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John have written is THE true GOSPEL.

Second, assuming that the first demand is met, though I say this merely
to facilitate matters, how could Matthew, Mark, Luke and John collate
this amount of information? Was it collected by Jesus (P) himself or
under his

command? If it was collected by Jesus (P) himself or under his
supervision, then how is it that the books of the Bible contain an
abundance of contradictions and obscenities aimed at God and his pure,
clean Prophets, certainly not by Jesusâ€™ command!

Anyone making these allegations against Jesus (P) is stabbing him as
well as his religion in the back.

All wise people know that any religious information intended for the
general public ought to have been written either by Jesus (P) in person
or by someone delegated by him to carry out the work under his
supervision thus ensuring that the work be both free of error and to
avoid corruption. Since none of the information was apparently collated
in this way, it is time for you to wake up to the truth! This has been
my aim - to awaken you from evil, to steer you away from these wicked
ways and contradictions; God is above all of such!

### The Unity of the Bodies of Man and His Wife

In Matthew 19:3, we read the following:

**"Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, "Is it lawful for
a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?" "Haven't you read,"
he replied, "that at the beginning the Creator made them male and
female, and said, "For this reason a man will leave his father and
mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh?" So
they are no longer two, but one. Therefore what God has joined together,
let man not separate."**

Let the Christians with their wisdom look closely at this judgement.
They will see that it totally opposes all physical laws. A man and his
wife are two individuals. They cannot become one body. God gave them
love and

compassion, which may, or may not, later be eroded. This is how it has
been since Creation. How would the argument be if there were two or even
three wives and one man? Could they, too, be one?

### Another Contradiction

In Matthew 19:8, we read the following:

**"Jesus replied, "Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because
your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning."**

Here there are two points I would like to make. The first is that Jesus
(P), by now forbidding divorce, is changing and opposing the law of
previous Prophets. The second is that hard-heartedness is a poor excuse
for divorce, but it does prove the point that the bodies of the husband
and wife are two when they divorce. They are two people who through the
sanctity of marriage may become physically one, which divorce would not
allow.

We see around us today much hard-heartedness, wars, bloodshed, the
killing of millions of people in poor nations to fulfill one's hunger
for power. Also cruelty, while the New Testament screams, **"If someone
strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also."** (Matthew
5:39) Look at the world today and you will see Christians fighting with
evil. This is worth notice.
