Jesus (p) and Gods
==================

See St John 10:34, where Jesus (P) spoke to the Jews about ‘gods’ as
plural, not one God:

**"Jesus answered them, "Is it not written in your Law, "I have said you
are gods" If he called them ‘gods,’ to whom the word of God came (and
the Scripture cannot be broken) what about the one whom the Father set
apart as his very own and sent into the world?"**

Compare this to his prayer in 17:3, where he contradicts himself by
saying:

**"Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God,
and Jesus, whom you have sent."**

I wonder what Christians would say about this issue? Is it really wise,
in terms of religion, for Jesus (P), God's Messenger, to mention other
Gods, and then to contradict himself by saying there is only one God?
How could this be Gospel?

### Christians Are In A Bind With Nowhere To Go

We are going to impress on the Christians in such a way that they cannot
shun this matter. As we see it, they have two matters, which need to be
confronted:

(1) We have shown that these Books, the Old and New Testaments of their
Bible have clearly deviated from the Truth, and in their present form,
cannot be considered to be Gospel, the Word of God; therefore, they must
condemn them, renounce them.

(2) To acknowledge that Jesus (P), who brought these books full of
blatant contradictions, is not the Messenger of God.

If you accept our first argument, that the Books are not Gospel, then
your religion is clearly wrong. The Gospel from the Lord should not
contain contradictions, false allegations and scandal. Their ‘Gospel’
clearly contains all of the aforementioned. My advice is that they
should turn to the clean, pure, faultless religion of Islam, and hasten
to become Muslims. Thus, they should believe in Muhammad (P), the Last
Messenger of God.

We have shown that the Bible alleges that God's Prophets drink wine and
commit unthinkable sins, causing God's angels to scream loudly and cry
in shame. There is mention of the existence of other Gods.

To believe in the second point, that Jesus (P) who brought these books
is not a Messenger would justify your relaxed attitude about the
allegations made against him and the contradictions contained in the
Books! May we ask Christians why they hold so fast to this Book? Are
there no educated, knowledgeable people among you? Are you unable to
distinguish right from wrong and acknowledge that this Book is not from
God?

It is impossible for such a great person as Jesus (P) to be a liar! I
summon every educated, open-minded Christian how you can believe in God
and gods simultaneously, and how you can believe that Jesus (P) came,
not to change the laws of previous Prophets, then did just that?

### Is the Testification of Jesus (P) and God Accepted in the New Testament

In John 8:17, we read the following:

**"In your own Law it is written that the testimony of two men is valid.
I am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the one who sent
me - the Father.”**

If this statement was true and everyone could testify for himself using
God as his witness, morals would be lost, crime would spread, oppression
and robbery would become everyone's business. So, injustice would spread
in society and people would have no security as regards their money,
family or life. Show us how such a terrible law could be revealed from
God and be Gospel!

### The Trinity (Three-In-One) Is Not True

The Trinity was invented by some narrow-minded people whose ability to
think was quite limited but the idea has become accepted through
history. People who belong to the Dark Ages, mindless imita­tion, using
no logic or wisdom or brain, have imitated it. If they would give it
some thought, they would find themselves definitely wrong and their
belief to be uncertain.

What is more astonishing is that this poison of Trinity flows in their
veins and in their brains. Surprisingly, in this age of scientific
techn­ology, with today's knowledge and the era of traveling to the
moon, space­ships, atoms and electronic brains, I do not know how they
can accept it, especially when it was rejected by all Prophets among
whom was God's Messenger, Jesus (P).

In John 17:3, we read the following:

**"Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God,
and Jesus, whom you have sent."**

See also John 20:17:

**"Jesus said, "Do not hold on to me, for I have not yet returned to the
Father. Go instead to my brothers and tell**

**them: I am returning to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God."**

From these statements, you see that Jesus (P) is equal to his brothers,
God being their God and his God, no more, no less.

See also Matthew 10:40:

**"He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives the
one who sent me."**

From this statement, you understand that Jesus (P) is God's Messenger.
He is not united with God; no one is united with HIM. Also, it is
impossible for the sender, and the one sent to be one. God and Jesus (P)
are therefore two separate identities.

In Matthew 17:22, we read:

**"When they came together in Galilee, he said to them, "The Son of Man
is going to be betrayed into the hands of men. They will kill him, and
on the third day he will be raised to life." And the disciples were
filled with grief."**

We summon you, our dear Christian friends, look with your wisdom's eye,
ask, is it possible for the Son of Man to be Almighty God, with such
traits as omniscience and eternal existence? Are we to suppose then that
Jesus (P) was God, being hung on the cross to die?

In Mark 10:17, we read the following:

**"As Jesus started on his way, a man ran up to him and fell on his
knees before him. "Good teacher," he asked, “what must I do to inherit
eternal life?" “Why do you call me good?" Jesus answered. "No one is
good except God alone.”**

Do you not understand from this statement that Jesus (P) denies the word
‘good’ for anyone, even himself, but for

God alone. He is therefore neither God nor united with God. In reality,
if we are ‘good,’ it is due to God, and God, Who makes others good, is
Himself good.

The reason therefore why Jesus (P) denied being good is to show that he
is merely a Messenger.

### The Word ‘Son Of Man’ Is Another Disproof of Trinity

In Mark 12:28, we read:

**"One of the teachers of the law came and heard them debating. Noticing
that Jesus had given them a good answer, he asked him, "Of all the
commandments, which is the most important?" "The most important one,"
answered Jesus, "is this: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is
One.”**

Then in Verse 32:

**"Well said, teacher," the man replied. "You are right in saying that
God is one and there is no other but him."**

In Mark 14:21, Jesus (P) calls himself the ‘Son of Man,’ which disproves
the Trinity:

**"The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to
that man for him who betrays the Son of Man! It would better for him if
he had not been born."**

### Jesus' Prayer Disproves the Trinity

If we look at Mark 14:35, we read the following:

**"Going a little farther, he fell to the ground and prayed that if
possible the hour might pass from him. “Abba, Father,” he said,
“Everything is possible for you. Take this cup from me. Yet not what I
will, but what you will.”**

Had the Messiah been joined with God, or IS God as some Christians
claim, then to whom was Jesus (P) praying? To whom was he calling out
and pleading with? For whom did he fall on the ground, in prostration?
Would a wise man say he was praying to himself and not to God, or was he
praying to the other part that unites him with God? The Lord is Mightier
than to be blasphemed!

Also, in Mark 14:62, we read the following:

**"I am," said Jesus, "and you will see the Son of Man sitting at the
right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven."**

Also read Jesus’ words in Luke 4:24:

**"I tell you the truth," he continued, "no prophet is accepted in his
home town."**

In Luke 6:12, we read the following:

**"One of those days Jesus went out into the hills to pray, and spent
the night praying to God."**

From the Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, we conclude -and have
given quotations as evidence- that Jesus (P), like the rest of God's
great faithful servants, spent his nights in prayer in order to gain
closeness to God. Can this be Trinity?

Why do Christians then deviate from logic and from what the Gospel tells
them? How can Christians disobey Jesus (P) and believe in the Trinity
after clear statements from the abovementioned chapters clearly disprove
it!

### Christians' Belief In Trinity Has Two Meanings

To isolate and examine this point, we can say that the Trinity has two
meanings:

(1) Christians may argue that each of the three identities—God, Jesus
(P) and the Holy Spirit—does not have an independent personality. If the
ego were to be taken from each one of them, then the unity could occur
and they could be one, or

(2) They may argue that each one does have an independent personality,
an ego.

If they argue with the first point, the Trinity will be disproved. We
know that each of the identities exists independently. Each one is
distinguished from the others with special traits and different
characteristics making each one a unique entity. Therefore, it is
impossible for the three of them to be one. The concept of Trinity is
thus unfounded.

On the other hand, if they put forward the second argument, the Trinity,
oneness and unity will also be disproved. We have already shown that
each of the identities has a unique personality, making him differ from
the others. So again, it is impossible for them to be three and one
simultaneously, just as it is impossible for them to be one and three
simultaneously. Philosophically speaking, the above statement regarding
the Trinity is the equivalent of saying that an egg is larger than the
earth, or one is half of four, or a part is larger than a whole, and the
darkness of night is white, and the light of day is black… etc.

These are impossibilities, indeed quite unthinkable. The Trinity also is
unbelievable!

### St John and His Strange Words About The Word

Now read a statement that will really surprise you! See John 1:1:

**"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. He was with God in the beginning."**

It is not right for St John to make such a statement without thinking
about it. Likewise, it is not right for anyone to believe in it without
thinking about its meaning. I will show you, dear reader, how worthless
these words are, just to awaken you and let you move towards the
Knowledge of Truth and to believe in the right principle.

To analyse the ‘Word was with God’ means that the ‘word’ is a thing that
exists and God is another thing that, too, exists. It is like saying,
‘Abraham has a dime and Moses has a dollar.’ Each has its own existent
characteristics. This leads us to two points for discussion:

(1) The aforementioned ‘Word’ is eternal, absolute, rich, knowledgeable
and can do everything just as God can, and

(2) The ‘Word’ is not as described in the first argument; rather it is a
creature depending on God's support in its existence.

If we are to believe the first point, then this means that the ‘Word’ is
another god, which would be vain to say. The statement in John 17:3 ‘the
only true God’ would be contradictory.

If we are to believe the second point, then this means that the ‘word’
was created by God and is under his power. In

this case, it cannot be a god in itself because it is impossible to say
that the creator is the created and the created is the creator. They
must be two complete beings, being opposites.

### Jesus’ Death Was not For the Forgiveness of Others' Sins

Christians believe that Jesus (P) agreed on his crucifixion and by his
own freewill gave his life for the forgiveness of the believers’ sins.

If we are to suppose that the crucifixion of Christ was true, it would
still not be justified nor would it be sufficient for the forgiveness of
the sins of all followers. To argue this point, let us look at Matthew
6:14:

**"For if you forgive men when they sin against you, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you."**

See also Luke 11:4:

**"Forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against
us."**

As you can clearly see from the two previously mentioned quotations, it
is written that sinners will not be forgiven their sins unless they
forgive those who have sinned against them. If they do not have it in
their hearts to forgive, then God in turn will not forgive them.

In St John 20:23, it is stated that Christ said:

**"If you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven, if you do not
forgive them, they are not forgiven."**

As we have seen, these Books of the Bible do agree that the crucifixion
of Christ was not for the forgiveness of sins of his followers or
others. This fact is supported by Matthew 26:37:

**"He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him and he began
to be sorrowful and troubled. Then he said to them, "My soul is
overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch
with me. Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and
prayed, "My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me.
Yet not as I will, but as you will."**

This statement of Jesus (P) is clear evidence that he was not ready for
death, let alone to carry people's sins. Also, how can they say he
agreed to it when we see him sad and sorrowful pleading with the Lord
not to take his life?

Also, see Matthew 27:46:

**"About the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, "Eloi, Eloi,
lama sabachthani?" meaning, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?
When some of those standing there heard this, they said, "He's calling
Elijah." Immediately one of them ran and got a sponge. He filled it with
vinegar, put it in the stitch, and offered it to Jesus to drink. But the
rest said, "Leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to save him." and
when Jesus cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit."**

This cry shows that Jesus (P) did not want death. No further explanation
is needed.

St Mark, in 15:34, repeats the same words as Matthew 27:46 “My God, my
God, why have you forsaken me?”

Matthew 26:39 and Luke 22:42 repeat the same words:

**“Father, if you are willing, take this cup from me; yet not my will,
but yours be done."**

If you think about the previous quotations, you will see that had Jesus
(P) been willing to be crucified and agreed willingly, then why had he
repeatedly asked the Lord to

spare him? This surely opposes his agreement? Let me give you other
examples and evidences that refute the Christians’ claims that Jesus’
crucifixion guarantees forgiveness of the believers' sins.

In Matthew 26-24, Mark 14:21 and in Luke 22:22, we find the following
words:

**“The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to
that man who betrays the Son of Man. It would be better for him if he
had not been born.”**

You surely see that if that man, Judas, who betrayed Jesus (P) had not
been born, then Jesus (P) would not have been killed at all! If Jesus
(P) were satisfied with the fact that he was going to die on the cross
anyway, he would not condemn Judas, as he did not commit a sin to
deserve damnation.

Also, if Jesus (P) really was giving up his life willingly and God loved
him too, then he should be blessed for having saved all the sons of
Christianity from their sins.

### Christ Himself Is the Reason For the Crucifixion

In Matthew 26:28, we read:

**"This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many
for the forgiveness of sins."**

In Mark 14:24, we read:

**"This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for
many."**

In Luke 22:20, we read:

**"This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for
you."**

Why then should Jesus (P) damn the traitor, when he knew that by his
death, the sins of others would be forgiven?

In John 19:11, we read the following:

**"Jesus answered, "You would have no power over me if it were not given
to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty
of greater sin."**

In contradiction to this last quotation, read John 18:3-8:

**"So Judas came to the grove, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some
officials from the chief priests and Pharisees- They were carrying
torches, lanterns and weapons. Jesus, knowing all that was going to
happen to him, went out and asked them, "Who is it you want?" "Jesus of
Nazareth," they replied. “I am he,” Jesus said. (And Judas the traitor
was standing there with them.) When Jesus said, "I am he,” they drew
back and fell to the ground. Again he asked them, "Who is it you want?"
And they said, "Jesus of Nazareth." "I told you that I am he," Jesus
answered. "If you are looking for me, then let these men go."**

Let the Christians read this conversation and they will find that is he,
Jesus (P) himself, who discloses his identity, therefore betraying
himself to the killers. In this case, is it Jesus (P) who is ‘guilty of
a greater sin’ and for whom ‘it would be better for him if he had not
been born?’ God Forbid!

In view of all these contradictions, do you, as a free, educated
individual, see that these words cannot be Gospel?

### How Could We Distinguish the True Jesus Christ

Christians say that Jesus (P) proves he is God's Messenger due to the
miracles that he performs. If we look at the contemporary Bible, our
doubts are raised, due to several statements.

In Matthew 24:23, we read the following:

**"At that time if anyone says to you, "Look, here is the Christ”! or
"There he is!” do not believe it. For false Christs and false prophets
will appear and perform great signs and miracles to deceive even the
elect if that were possible."**

These words are repeated in Mark 13:21. How can a person believe that
this Jesus (P) is the true? How can we judge and determine the genuine
Jesus (P)? With all the previously men­tioned contradictions, these
Books of the Bible do not help us to find him!

### The One Crucified Was Not Jesus (P)

In order to clarify this point and prove that Jesus (P) was neither
crucified nor killed, we look at Matthew 26:63:

**"Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus, "Are you not going
to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against
you?" But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, "I charge
you under oath by the living God: Tell us if you are the Christ, the Son
of God." "Yes, it is as you say," Jesus replied. "But I say to all of
you: In the future you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand
of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven."**

Also in Luke 22:70 we read:

**"They all asked, "Are you then the Son of God?" He replied, "You are
right in saying I am."**

If we analyse critically the answers, we see that Jesus (P) at no point
stated that he was Jesus (P) but agreed with them when they said so.
This is a worthy indication for us in determining that this man was not
in fact Jesus (P) himself and that they crucified someone else in his
place. This was actually happened.

Further Evidences
-----------------

Here is a further piece of evidence as proof that the one crucified was
not Jesus (P) as previously mentioned in Matthew 26:63.

Please see Luke 22:66:

**"At daybreak the council of the elders of the people, both the chief
priests and teachers of the law, met together, and Jesus was led before
them, "If you are the Christ, tell us." Jesus answered, "If I tell you,
you will not believe me, and if I asked you, you would not answer. But
from now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the
mighty God."**

These paragraphs really unveil the truth. Were they so ignorant that
they did not recognise him? The one crucified tried to show them that he
was not Christ. They did not believe him, even when he told them, and
while they were taking him to be crucified, Jesus (P) was sitting at the
‘right hand of the power of God.’ How much evidence do you need to
convince you that the man crucified was not Jesus (P)? It is as is
exactly written in the Holy Quran. Jesus (P) was substituted, that is
why the answer ‘You are right in saying I am’ is given.

Even back in Jesus' home, there was confusion as his identity. See Mark
6:3:

**"Isn't this the carpenter? Isn't this Mary's son and the brother of
James, Joses, Judas and Simon? Aren't his sisters are here with us?"**

We say that the crucified one was not Jesus (P).

### Jesus Christ Goes To Wedding and Drinks Wine

In John 2 1-11, we read the following:

**"On the third day a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus'
mother was there, and Jesus and his disciples had also been invited to
the wedding. When the wine was gone, Jesus' mother said to him, "They
have no more wine." "Dear woman, why do you involve me?" Jesus replied,
“My time has not yet come.” His mother said to the servants, "Do
whatever he tells you." Nearby stood six stone water jars, the kind used
by the Jews for ceremonial washing, each holding from twenty to thirty
gallons. Jesus said to the servants, "Fill the jars with water;" so they
filled them to the brim. Then he told them, "Now draw some out and take
it to the master of the banquet." They did so, and the master of the
banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. He did not
realize where it had come from, though the servants who had drawn the
water knew. Then he called the bridegroom aside and said, "Everyone
brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the
guests have had too much to drink; but you have saved the best till
now." This, the first of his miraculous signs, Jesus performed in Cana
of Galilee. He thus revealed his glory, and his disciples put their
faith in him."**

It is written in all of God's religions that liquor is the root of all
the sins and evil, all the troubles, and problems and God has forbidden
it through His Prophets and Messengers. It can also be proven logically
and scientif­ically that liquor makes for social health and economic
problems. Read the statement in Habakkuk 2:5:

**"Indeed, wine betrays him; he is arrogant and never at rest. Because
he is as greedy as the grave and like death is never satisfied, he
gathers to himself all the nations and takes captive all the peoples."**

Also in Hosea 4:11, we read the following:

**“To prostitution, to old wine and new, which take away the
understand­ing of my people..."**

I add that it also destroys wisdom, brings indignity to a person and
angers the Lord.

See also Isaiah 5:11:

**“Rise earl in the morning to run after their drinks who stay up late
at night till they are inflamed with wine.”**

See also Luke 1:13-15:

**"But the angel said to him: "Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer
has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to
give him the name John. He will be a joy and delight to you, and many
will rejoice because of his birth, for he will be great in the sight of
the Lord. He is never to take wine or other fermented drink, and he will
be filled with the Holy Spirit even from birth."**

See also Proverbs 20:1:

**"Wine is a mocker and beer a brawler; whoever is led astray by them is
not wise."**

These and a great deal more statements from the Old and New Testaments
lead us to believe in the prohibition of wine.

We read in Proverbs that the one who drinks is not wise. The one who is
not wise is not fit to be a Prophet as Prophecy entails a higher degree
of wisdom.

The reality is that in both the Old and New Testaments, Jesus (P) is
accused of drinking and sinning, God forbid! Jesus (P) is above that.
These stories, therefore, are not Revelation!

### Why Were These Books of the Bible Written?

It should now be clear to you dear Christian readers that the people who
wrote these Books of the Bible had no other intentions but to deceive
the people, conceal Reality and to curve the Truth in order to convince
the people that this is the religion which came with Jesus (P) by
pushing them away from the True religion as sent by God through Jesus
(P).

Jesus (P) himself did warn the people about false Christs and false
Prophets; so, it is not surprising to see how some of the writers of the
Bible humiliate Christ, raising all sorts of allegations as they come to
mind, just to make money. After all, religion was a form of
profit-making business!

What surprises us, however, is how can they believe in these lies? How
can they allow themselves to be cheated by these detestable, disgusting
stories and say ‘it is Gospel’ and accept it as their religion without
questioning, without knowing and without feeling.
