Introduction and Awakening
==========================

A book cannot be Holy unless there is evidence to prove that it is from
the era of the prophet in which the book has been written. Imagining or
thinking that it is from that era is not enough to prove God's Word.
Proof can neither be hatred nor emotional anger. If a book contains
blatant atheism, contradiction or thoughts reflected by the mind or if
it is illogical either in relating certain events or regarding specific
laws for the people of the same religion, these factors are firm
evidences in proving that either:

(1) this book is not from God; or

(2) the book is from God, but it has been changed from its original
form.

If we know that the book has been changed, this will affect its degree
of importance and it can no longer be used as a reference because there
is a possibility that any section of the book may not be true.

If there were two books and there was the possibility that one of them
were not true without knowing which one, then both of them would be
unreliable. Why? Because there is a probability that each of the two
books is wrong. These errors can be detected by the healthy human mind
and brain.

So, we say to the Christians: do not expect Muslims to prove to you that
the Bible (the Old and New Testaments) that you have, has not been
changed and is the true Word

of God. It is definitely not a Revelation sent from the Lord.

Muslims deny that these Books are an Inspiration from Almighty God.

If one who denies the facts is in doubt about their authenticity, then
proof must be brought forward in justification of the fact by the one
who claims to be telling the truth. This statement has been made and
agreed upon by the wisdom of humankind.

Muslims are not called upon to bring evidence that their Holy Book is
true because the Truth and legitimacy of the Holy Quran has yet to be
questioned. However, Christians must prove to the Muslims that their
Holy Book is true.

Picking up the Quran for propagation purposes would not be right for the
following two reasons:

 1. Christians do not believe that the Quran is the true Word of God in
the first place, so they are unable to raise objection about it. If you
believe in the authenticity of the Quran, then you must use it as a
reference and hurry to become a Muslim.

2. There is no single Ayah (Verse) in the Quran, which states that the
original Torah and Ingeel (Old and New Testaments), the Inspiration as
revealed to Prophets Moses and Jesus (P)**[1]**, are the versions that
the Jews and Christians are using today.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For maintaining readability, (P) is an acronym for “Peace by
upon him/her/them". When it is used after the holy name of  --\>

Remember that an opponent cannot play the role of the judge. In
addition, we should use the opponent's own words to disprove him. Yet
until today, Christians have had no proof whatsoever to convince us that
the Bible in its present form is a Revelation.

There is, however, a lot of evidence to prove the contrary; that the
present Bible is neither Inspiration nor Revelation from Almighty God.
It would appear more convenient for them to accept the modern words of
man, which are not God-inspired.

Here we have produced some evidence as a summary to prove that the
so-­called Old Testament is not the original Old Testament as was
revealed to Moses (P) and was not written for him in his own era. Look
at what has been recorded in the Book of Deuteronomy Chapter 34, Verse
5:

**"And Moses the servant of the Lord died there in Moab, as the Lord had
said. He buried him in Moab, in the valley opposite Beth Peor, but to
this day no-one knows where his grave is."**

This frank statement clearly shows the time-span between Moses' era and
the writing of the Old Testament.

Also in Kings II 22:8:

**"Hilkijah the high priest said to Shaphan the secretary, 'I have found
the Book of the Law in the temple of the Lord.' He gave it to Shaphan,
who read it."**

It is clear from this text that the Book of the Law, the Old Testament,
was lost before Yoshia's time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\<-- Prophet Muhammad, it means 'Peace be upon him and his family.'

Now let us read what is written in Kings II 24:13 and compare it to
Kings II 25:9:

**"As the Lord had declared, Nebuchadnezzar removed all the treasures
from the temple of the Lord and from the royal palace, and took away all
the gold articles that Solomon, king of Israel, had made for the temple
of the Lord."**

**He set fire to the temple of the Lord, the royal palace and all the
houses of Jerusalem."**

Please note the obvious contradiction. You can see that the Muslim
belief that the Old Testament is nothing but propaganda and that the
Original Bible has been altered, is true. I will clarify this point by
adding for the sake of the reader other evidence that leads us to the
certainty that it has been changed.

1)  For obvious mistakes in the Bible, proving that it cannot be
Revelation, look for an example in Genesis 46:15, when he named Daniel's
sons and daughters, there were 34, and then it is written:

**"All sons and daughters of him were thirty -three in all."**

2)  For a clear contradiction, which should be impossible in God's Book
and inspiration, see Exodus 33:23, where it is written:

**"Then I will remove my hand and you will see my back; but my face must
not be seen."**

Also in Verse 20, it is clearly written:

**"But, he said, if you cannot see my face, for no-one may see me and
live."**

Now read Verse 11:

**"The LORD would speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his
friend."**

1)  Another contradiction appears in the Book of Chronicles I 7:6:

**"Three sons of Benjamin: Bela, Beker and Jediael."**

In 8:1 of the same Book:

**"Benjamin was the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second
Aharah the third, Nohah the fourth and Rapha the fifth."**

Now check Genesis 46:21:

**"The sons of Benjamin, Bela, Beker, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh
Muppim, Huppim and Ard."**

In this instance, Benjamin has 10 sons.

Other contradictions arise in several places in the Old Testament, such
as Genesis 5:1:

**"When God created man, he made him in the likeness of God."**

Then in Isaiah 40:18:

** "To whom, then, will you compare God?"**

Isaiah 46:5:

**"To whom will you compare me or count me equal?"**

Each one of these subjects and many more are worthy evidence for people
who have some understanding and a living conscience. They can surely
determine that the original Books have been destroyed and today's
versions cannot be held as reliable.

What I have shown you is a drop in the ocean, the tip of the iceberg.

However, this amount should be sufficient for the wise, non-fanatic
human being to determine that this Old

Testament (Torah) is not God's words and that it could not have been
sent by Him.

By the same token, the Christian's New Testament (Ingeel) is also not
the original New Testament as sent to Jesus (P). It is impossible that
it be the Revelation from the Mighty God for the following reasons:

1. First in St Luke 1:1, we read:

**"Many have undertaken to draw up an account of things that have
fulfilled among us..."**

An "account"? Tales cannot be taken as evidence or proof of Revelation.

 2. A difference of opinion appears between St Matthew and St Luke as
regards Jesus' ancestry. If we look in St Matthew 1:6, we find Jesus (P)
is related to Solomon, son of David (P) and the number of his
forefathers from Joseph to Abraham (P) 40 generations.

Then in St Luke 3:31, Luke relates him to Nathan, son of David, and made
the number of forefathers 55 generations.

3. According to St John 21:24:

**"This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them
down. We know that his testimony is true. Jesus did many other things as
well. If every one of them were written down, I suppose that even the
whole world would not have room for the books that would be written."**

It is clear from this text that John did not assort the Book, but claims
to have done so. You see that his claim is not correct and that it is
not acceptable to the logical human brain, let alone if he were a
Prophet with Revelation.

Let us suppose that Jesus (P), every second of his life, performed a
miracle and each one was noted down, the pages would not fill a house,
let alone the whole world, as suggested by John.

These two verses place substantial doubt on the Book of St Luke. As far
as reliability goes, it is comparable to the Book of St Mark.

 Let us now look at Corinthians I 7:25:

**"Now about virgins; I have no command from the Lord, but I give a
judgement as one who by the Lord's mercy is trustworthy."**

Is that not clear testimony that he was making laws based on his own
ideas, desires and thoughts, regardless of Revelation or Inspiration,
using guesswork and supposition? So we must presume that his book is
entirely guesswork, otherwise, how can we differentiate between Truth,
Revelation and man­made writings?

Many other pieces of evidence in the Bible show that the people who
wrote it had not carried out research or investigated thoroughly.
Therefore, it is clear proof and evidence that the Old and New
Testaments are not God's Words.

But since the Old and New Testament is still a Holy Book for the Jews
and Christians, a book they believe in and insist that it has come from
the Lord, we hold this against them. We have proofs and evidence for our
debate.

Let us now look at the statements of the Old and New Testament
testifying the coming of the Last Messenger of the Lord --the one who
would be the seal of the Prophets --Prophet Muhammad after Jesus (P).
Such testimonies

are mentioned in several places. In Deuteronomy 18:18 it is written:

**"I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their
brethren; I will put my words in his mouth, and he will tell them every
thing I command him."**

These words do not apply to anyone but Prophet Muhammad (P) for the
following reasons:

(1) If we look at Deuteronomy 34:10, we see:

**"Since then, no prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord
knew face to face"**

Taking this analytically, we see that it could mean that Moses was
better than Jesus (P) because Jesus (P), unlike Moses, was from Israel
only on his mother's side. Therefore, the Bible meant someone other than
Jesus (P). That person is Prophet Muhammad (P).

Also in Deuteronomy 18:18:

**"I will put my words in his mouth"**

This is a clear reference to the Holy Quran, the Miracle and the Word of
God as spoken by Prophet Muhammad (P). From the beginning, Almighty God
has challenged the whole world with it and He will continue to do so
until the end of time. No one can, or ever will, be able to reproduce
even one small verse (Ayah) or chapter (Surah), or anything resembling
the words and their meanings.

In Deuteronomy 18:19 it is written:

**"If anyone does not listen to my words that the prophet speaks in my
name, I myself will call him to account"**

If you look at Prophet Muhammad's life, you will see that God did take
his revenge. The people who disobeyed

Prophet Muhammad (P) and fought against him lost the war against
remarkable odds; and his religion, Islam, spread throughout the Arabian
Peninsula in a short period of time.

If we look back at Deuteronomy 18:18 and the phrase "among their
brothers" and trace Prophet Muhammad's (P) ancestral tree, we see that
it goes back to Ishmael, the brother of Isaiah (P). Therefore, who else
could the Last Messenger be, other than Prophet Muhammad (P)?

Now let us look at Deuteronomy 33:1:

**"The Lord came from Sinai and dawned over them from Seir; he shone
forth from Mount Paran. He came with myriads of holy ones from the
south, from his mountain slopes."**

Now let us consider the order in which the Prophets of the Lord
appeared. Moses came from Sinai bringing God's Laws, and religion rose
with the arrival of Jesus (P) from Seir, which is in the Palestine
Mountains beside Bethlehem. The one who **"shone forth from Mount
Paran"** of the Mecca Mountains was the last of the Messengers, Prophet
Muhammad (P), with the greatest miracle of all, the Holy Quran. This
statement is so clear and obvious that it cannot be denied.

What we read in Psalms 72:1-17 describes the characteristics of the
Prophet Muhammad:

**1. Endow the king with your justice, 0 God, the royal son with your
righteousness.**

**2. He will judge your people in righteousness, your afflicted ones
with justice.**

**3. The mountains will bring prosperity to the people, the hills and
the fruit of righteousness.**

**4. He will defend the afflicted among the people and save the children
of the needy; he will crush the oppressor.**

**5. He will endure as long as the sun, as long as the moon, through all
generations.**

**6. He will be like rain falling on a mown field, like showers watering
the earth.**

**7. In his days, the righteous will flourish; prosperity will abound
till the moon is no more.**

**8. He will rule from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the
earth.**

**9. The desert tribes will bow before him and his enemies will lick the
dust.**

**10. The kings of Tarshish and of distant shores will bring tribute to
him; the kings of Sheba and Seba will present him gifts.**

**11. All kings will bow down to him and all nations will serve him.**

**12. For he will deliver the needy who cry out, the afflicted who have
no­ one to help.**

**13. He will take pity on the weak and the needy and save the needy
from death.**

**14. He will rescue them from oppression and violence, for precious is
their blood in high sight.**

**15. Long may he live May god from Sheba be given to him. May people
ever pray for him and bless him all day long.**

**16. Let corn abound throughout the land on the tops of the hills may
it sway. Let its fruit flourish like Lebanon; let it thrive like the
grass of the field.**

**17. May his name endure forever; may it continue as long as the sun.
All nations will be blessed through him, and they will call him
blessed.**

I have written it out in its entirety to show that it contains Prophet
Muhammad's (P) characteristic and no one else's. If you search, you will
see that these traits can only correspond to him.

In Isaiah 42:1-4, there is further description:

**1. "Here is my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom I
delight; and he will bring justice to the nations.**

**2. He will not shout or cry out, or raise his voice in the streets.**

**3. A bruised reed he will not break, and a smouldering wick he will
not snuff out. In faithfulness, he will bring forth justice;**

**4. He will not falter or be discouraged till he establishes justice on
earth. In his law the island will put their hope."**

This last sentence has also been quoted in another translation of the
Bible as **"and Israel shall await his laws"**, which leaves us in no
doubt that Prophet Muhammad (P) is the subject.

5. In Habakkuk 3:3, we have:

**"God came from Teman, the Holy One from Mount Paran."**

Mount Paran is another name for the Mecca Mountains, so since no other
Messenger came from Mecca, the Holy One must be Prophet Muhammad (P)

6. In John 14:16, Jesus (P) himself says:

**"And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Counsellor to
be with you for ever - the Spirit of truth."**

He means here a Prophet whose religion will stay till the Last Day,
meaning Prophet Muhammad (P).

7. In John 14:26, we read:

**"But the Counsellor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my
name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have
said to you."**

Again, this can only apply to Prophet Muhammad (P) as God taught him
everything, teaching him Judgement in all matters.

A couple of matters may need clarification:

A. The words "Holy Spirit" should not be misunderstood. A "Holy Ghost"
or "Holy Spirit" could be any holy person or holy living being, such as
Angels.

B. We should point out that God has never sent an Angel or Spirit as a
Prophet or law-giver for the people of all nations.

The **"Counsellor, the Holy Spirit"** is explained as Prophet Muhammad.

8. Let us now look at a statement made by Jesus (P) in John 14:30:

**"I will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world
is coming."**

The "prince of this world", whom Jesus (P) announces will succeed him is
Prophet Muhammad (P).

9. In John 15:26, there is further mention of a successor:

**"When the Counsellor comest whom I will send to you from the Father,
the Spirit of Truth who goes out from the Father, he will testify about
what does it mean to me; "**

This statement clearly requires no explanation. What does it mean to you
when you read it? **"I will send to you from the Father,"** of course it
means from God, as no other can send Prophets. **"He will testify about
me,"** means that he believes in the teachings of Jesus (P). All of
these sections

of the Bible proclaim loudly the coming of Prophet Muhammad (P). It is
proof for everyone, and they must therefore follow Prophet Muhammad's
(P) law and his religion, being Islam. Otherwise they will be judged and
punished on the Day of Judgement for failing to accept what is written
in their own Holy Book i.e. to follow the teachings of Prophet Muhammad
(P) and to believe and apply the Islamic religion.
