God's Description in the Bible
==============================

What kind of God do you think is the God of the Bible? If God has a body
and hair; and resides in a certain place; and does not know what is
hidden behind a tree; and deceives people and breaks a promise, then
what would a man be?

#### 1. The Bible says: God has a human form

In the Bible, according to Genesis 1:26-27:

**"Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and
let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over
the livestock, over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move
along the ground." So God created man in his own image, in the image of
God he created him; male and female he created them."**

#### 2. The Bible says: God has hair and wears garments

Daniel 7:9:

**"As I looked, thrones were set in place, and the Ancient of Days took
his seat. His clothing was as white as snow; the hair of his head was
white like wool. His throne was flaming with fire, and its wheels were
all ablaze."**

#### 3. The Bible says: God has feet

Exodus 24:10-11:

**“And that saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was something like a
pavement made of sapphire, clear as the**

**sky itself. But God did not raise his hand against these leaders of
the Israelites; they saw God and they ate and drank."**

#### 4. The Bible says: God has a place where He is seen

Revelation 4:2:

**"At once I was in the Spirit, and there before me was a throne in
heaven with someone sitting on it. And the one who sat there had the
appearance of jasper and carnelian. A rainbow, resembling an emerald,
encircled the throne."**

#### 5. The Bible says: God walks

Genesis 3:8:

**"Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was
walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the Lord
God among the trees of the garden."**

#### 6. The Bible says: God comes down upon a place

Exodus 19:20:

**"The Lord descended to the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the
top of the mountain. So, Moses went up... "**

#### 7. The Bible says: God descends on a cloud and passes before a man

Exodus 34:5:

**"Then the Lord came down in the cloud and stood there with him and
proclaimed his name, the Lord. And he passed in front of Moses,
proclaiming, "The Lord, the**

**compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in love and
faithfulness."**

#### 8. The Bible says: God chose a place to stay

Psalms 132:13:

**"For the Lord has chosen Zion, he had desired it for his dwelling."**

#### 9. The Bible says: God is ignorant; He does not know the house of the believers except by token of blood on the houses

Exodus 12:12-13:

**"On that same night I will pass through Egypt and strike down every
firstborn - both men and animals - and I will bring judgment on all the
gods of Egypt. I am the Lord. The blood will be a sign for you on the
houses where you are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you. No
destructive plague will touch you when I strike Egypt."**

#### 10. The Bible says: God does not know where a man was hidden or who taught the man

Genesis 3:9-11:

**"But the Lord God called to the man, "Where are you?" He answered, "I
heard you in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I
hid." And he said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten
from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?"**

#### 11. The Bible says: God breaks His promises

Samuel I 2:30-31:

**"Therefore the Lord, the God of Israel, declares, "I promised that
your house and your father's house would**

**minister before me for ever." But now, the Lord declares: "Far be it
from me. Those who honour me I will honour, but those who despise me
will be disdained. The time is coming when I will cut short your
strength and the strength of your father's house, so that there will not
be an old man in your family line"**

God is far from this false accusation. For example, God is said to have
promised Eli that his priesthood would be forever, for him and his
descendants, but later He did not fulfill that promise.

Also in Samuel I13: 13-14:

**"You acted foolishly," Samuel said. "You have not kept the command the
Lord your God gave you; if you had, he would have established your
kingdom over Israel for all time. But now your kingdom will not endure,
the Lord has sought out a man after his own heart and appointed him
leader of his people, because you have not kept the Lord's command."**

God is far from such a false accusation i.e. promising Saul that his
kingdom would be forever, but later breaking it and giving his kingdom
to another man.

#### 12. The Bible says: God is foolish and weak

Corinthians I 1:25:

**"For the foolishness of God is wiser than man's wisdom, and the
weakness of God is stronger than man's strength."**

#### 13. The Bible says: God grieves

Samuel I15:10:

**"Then the word of the Lord came to Samuel: "I am grieved that I have
made Saul king, because he has turned away from me and has not carried
out my instructions."**

#### 14. The Bible says: God repents

Exodus 32:14:

**"Then God repented and did not bring on his people the disaster he had
threatened."**

#### 15. The Bible says: God feels sorry for what He has done

Genesis 6:6-7:

**"The LORD was grieved that he had made man on the earth, and his heart
was filled with pain. So, the LORD said, "I will wipe mankind, whom I
have created, from the face of the earth - men and animals, and
creatures that move along the ground, and birds of the air - for I am
grieved that I have made them."**

#### 16. God is said to have wrestled with a man

Genesis 32:24-30:

**"So Jacob was left alone, and a man wrestled with him till daybreak.
When the man saw that he could not overpower him, he touched the socket
of Jacob's hip so that hi hip was wrenched as he wrestled with the man.
"Let me go, for it is daybreak." But Jacob replied, "I will not let you
go unless you bless me." The man asked him, "What is your name?"
"Jacob," he answered. Then the man said, "Your name will no longer be
Jacob, but Israel, because you have struggled with God and with men and
have overcome. Jacob said, "Please tell me your name." But he replied,
"Why do you ask my name?" Then he blessed him there. So Jacob called the
place Peniel, saying, "It is because I saw God face to face, and yet my
life was spared."**

#### 17. God tells a lie, while the serpent speaks the truth

Genesis 3:3-5:

**"But God did say, "You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the
middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die." "You
will not surely die," the serpent said to the woman, "For God knows that
when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God,
knowing good and evil."**

The chapter continues by saying that Adam and Eve went on to eat from
the forbidden fruit and events ensued which cannot be attributable to
Almighty God.

#### 18. The Bible says: God came down from heaven to break the people's unity

God is said to have come down from heaven in order to break the unity
between the people by making them unable to understand each other's
language. Is it for that reason that God is afraid of their unity?

**"Now the whole world had one language and a common speech. As men
moved eastwards, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there. They
said to each other, "Come, let's make bricks and bake them thoroughly."
They used bread instead of stone, and tar instead of morter. Then they
said, "Come, let us build ourselves a city, with a tower that reaches to
heavens, so that we may make a name for ourselves and not be scattered
over the face of the whole earth." But the LORD came down to see the
city and the tower that the men were building. The LORD said, "If as one
people speaking the same language they have begun to do this, then
nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them. Come, let us go
down and confuse their language so they will not understand each other."
So, the LORD**

**scattered them from there over all the earth, and they stopped
building the city. That is why it is called Babel - because there the
LORD confused the language of the whole world. From there the LORD
scattered them over the face of the whole earth."**

#### 19. God contradicts himself by his actions

Genesis 6:3:

**"Then the LORD said, "My Spirit will not contend with man forever, for
he is mortal; his days will be a hundred and twenty years."**

Let us look at Genesis 9:28 to see if God abided by his words or if in
fact He contradicted Himself:

**"After the flood, Noah lived 350 years. Altogether, Noah lived 950
years, and then he died."**

It is thus clear that the 120 years already specified as man's lifetime
by God have been surpassed.

#### 20. God is described as an angel, or vice versa

Genesis 16:9:

**"Then the angel of the LORD told her, "Go back to your mistress and
submit to her. The angel added, "I will so increase your descendants
that they will be too numerous to count. The angel of the LORD also said
to her, "You are now with child and you will have a son. You shall name
him Ishmael, for the LORD has heard of your misery. He will be a wild
donkey of a man; his hand will be against everyone and everyone's hand
against him, and he will live in hostility towards all his brothers."
She gave this name to LORD who spoke to her: "You are the God who sees
me," for she said, "I have now seen the One who sees me.”**

How can these statements be Gospel or Revelation? Wisdom alone tells us
that this cannot possibly be the case. These traits cannot be associated
with Almighty God. The statements are therefore all wrong.

### Old Testament Denies Gods' Knowledge that Adam was Naked

According to Genesis 3:11, God is said to have asked Adam, "Who told you
that you were naked?" If God did not know that Adam was naked, then why
was he questioning him about it? If we read further into the verse, we
see that God apparently did not know that Adam had for sure eaten from
the forbidden tree and, too, questioned him about that. Adam explains
that Eve had given him the fruit.

How can we therefore raise the Old Testament to the level of God's
Gospel? The only level it should attain is that of ignorance.

Now, as regards the serpent. The Lord; Almighty God damned the serpent
in the Old Testament for showing Adam (God's chosen Creation) the way to
the knowledge of good and evil. Knowing the difference between good and
evil is a great virtue and we should thank the ones who show us how to
attain this great virtue, which will show us the way to Heaven.
Therefore, this indeed cannot be Gospel from God.

### God Making another God

Progressing through the Old Testament, we come across another
astonishing point:

Exodus 7:1:

**"Then the LORD said to Moses, "See, I have made you like God to
Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron will be your prophet."**

Are we to assume from this statement that God is not the only God,
because He Himself sees others as partners for Himself, and they in turn
have prophets?

You may, by now, have some feeling as to how the writers of the Old
Testament have injured the Lord God and how bravely they have changed
His words, construing them and even turning them into lies. Please give
it careful consideration and you will see that anyone with a little
wisdom would ask, 'Why should God create another God besides Himself and
give him a prophet?' Are these not blind statements and man-made lies?

Dear Christian friend, how could you believe such a thing to be the
Gospel from God?

### A Short Summary on Why God Cannot be Seen

Every matter or body is a physical property that has been created. It
cannot be considered a creator. Everybody or physical matter that we can
see depends on several things; first, a place; this the law of physics,
to fill a certain area, and, second, light, which has to be reflected
from its body and enter our eyes in order for us to see other forms such
as shape, direction, colour or other things, such as temperature and
pressure in order to beget form.

This is not the place to give a course in physics but we see from the
aforementioned discussion that if God were matter, He would need all of
the above and much more. This is surely impossible for God. Besides, a
body is limited by three dimensions. To be in one place, God

would need to walk, but God is everywhere, so how could he be a physical
body. Almighty God is independent of all needs.

In Genesis 3:8, the following is written:

**"Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the LORD God as he was
walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the LORD
God among the trees of the garden."**

This idea may be good for making movies, but not for the wise, thinking
human being.

### The Old Testament Has Several Gods

In Genesis 3:22 it is written:

**"And the LORD God said, "The man has now become like one of us,
knowing good and evil."**

Once again, we cannot relate these words to Glorious God. This phrase
means, quite clearly, that other gods exist besides God, and that Adam
is going to be like one of them, knowing good and evil. This cannot be
Gospel from God by any means.

The Old Testament also implies that God is afraid of Adam, as we see
from Genesis 3:22:

**"He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the
tree of life and eat, and live for ever."**

This is truly amazing. Could God not make Adam blind, so as not to see
the tree, or take the power from Adam's hands so that he could not reach
it? Maybe the Old Testament is saying that God is powerless! No wise man
would ever think that. More than that, it is saying that God is holding
grudges against Adam (P) and even hates him. By no means can this be
Gospel.

In verse 24, we read:

**"After he drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden
of Eden cherubim and a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard
the way to the tree of life."**

If we analyze this statement we may ask this question: What is the use
of driving Adam out of the garden when such a powerful guard existed to
guard the tree of life? The guard is a flaming sword turning in every
direction to protect the tree. Are we to believe that the flaming sword
would not have affected Adam? And if so, it would have been little more
than a toy the Lord was playing with. What kind of Gospel is this?

### How Does the Old Testament Respect its Prophets?

In Genesis 9:20 we read the following:

**"Noah, a man of the soil, proceeded to plant a vineyard. When he drank
some of its wine, he became drunk and lay uncovered inside his tent."**

Could even the lowest degree of believers be accused of such behavior?
Let alone such a great Prophet, God's messenger, whose words and actions
are an example to all people for total obedience to God. What I mean is
that Noah is the symbol of Truth and Reality. People of the Book look up
to him, his Holiness would not permit him to behave in such a way,
especially the consumption of wine. I will explain the prohibition of
wine later.

Only the wisest human being can be a Prophet, a messenger of God. A
drunk cannot be a prophet and this is certainly not a wise man's
behaviour.

Let us see what kind of prophets the Bible has.
