Traits of the Prophets in the Bible
===================================

#### Jesus (P)

1. The Bible, in John 7:2-10, accuses Jesus (P) of lying:

**"But when the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles was near, Jesus' brothers
said to him, "You ought to leave here and go to Judea, so that your
disciples may see the miracles you do. No one who wants to become a
public figure acts in secret. Since you are doing these things, show
yourself to the world." For even his own brothers did not believe in
him. Therefore Jesus told them, "The right time for me has not yet come;
for you any time is right. The world cannot hate you, but it hates me
because I testify that what it does is evil. You go to the Feast. I am
not yet going up to this Feast, because for me the right time has not
yet come." Having said this, he stayed in Galilee. However, after his
brothers had left for the Feast, he went also, not publicly, but in
secret."**

2. The Bible in John 13:23 says that Jesus (P) set his disciple on his
bosom and loved him:

**"One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to
him. Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, "Ask him which one
he means." Leaning back against Jesus, he asked him, "Lord, who is
it?"**

3. In Galatians 3:13, Jesus (P) is accursed:

**"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for
us, for it is written: "Cursed is everyone who is hung on a tree."**

4. The Bible says that Jesus (P) is the son of God. Does a man's son
become his Lord?

Matthew 1:1:

**"A record of the genealogy of Jesus the son of David, the son of
Abraham…"**

See now Matthew 22:41-45:

**"While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, "What
do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?" "The son of David,"
they replied. He said to them, "How is it then that David, speaking by
the Spirit, calls him "Lord" For he says, "The Lord said to my Lord,
"Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet." If then
David calls him "Lord", how can he be his son?"**

#### Prophet David

In the Bible, Prophet David is accused of committing adultery and other
sins.

Samuel II 11:2-27:

**"One evening, David got up from his bed and walked around on the roof
of the palace. From the roof, he saw a woman bathing. The woman was very
beautiful, and David sent someone to find out about her. The man said,
"Is this Bathsheba not the daughter of Eliam and wife of Uriah the
Hittite?" Then David sent messengers to get her. She came to him, and he
slept with her. (She had purified herself from her uncleanness.) Then
she went back home. The woman conceived and sent word to David, saying,
"I am pregnant." So, David sent this word to Joab: "Send me Uriah the
Hittite." And Joab sent him to David. When Uriah came to him, David
asked him how Joab was, how the soldiers were and how the war was going.
Then David said to Uriah, "Go down to your house and wash your feet."**

**So, Uriah left the palace, and a gift from the king was sent after
him. But Uriah slept at the entrance to the palace with all his master's
servants and did not go down to his house. When David was told, "Uriah,
did not go home," he asked him, "Have you not just come from a distance?
Why did you not go home?" Uriah said to David, "The ark and Israel and
Judah are staying in tents, and my master Joab and my lord's men are
camped in the open fields. How could I go to my house to eat and drink
and lie with my wife? As surely as you live, I will not do such a
thing!" Then David said to him, "Stay here one more day, and tomorrow I
will send you back." So, Uriah remained in Jerusalem that day and the
next. At David's invitation, he ate and drank with him, and David made
him drunk. But in the evening Uriah went out to sleep on his mat among
his master's servants; he did not go home. In the morning, David wrote a
letter to Joab and sent it with Uriah. In it he wrote, "Put Uriah in the
front line where the fighting is fiercest. Then withdraw from him so
that he will be struck down and die. So, while Joab had the city under
siege, he put Uriah at a place where he knew the strongest defenders
were. When the men of the city came out and fought against Joab, some of
the men in David's army fell; moreover, Uriah the Hittite was dead. Joab
sent David a full account of the battle. He instructed the messenger:
"When you have finished giving the king this account of the battle, the
king's anger may flare up, and he may ask you, "Why did you get so close
to the city to fight? Didn't you know they would shoot arrows from the
wall? Who killed Abimelech son of Jerub-Besheth? Didn't a woman throw an
upper milestone on home from the wall, so that he did in Thabes? Why did
you get so close to the wall?" If he asks you this, then says to him,
"Also, your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead." The messenger set out,
and when he arrived, he told David everything Joab had**

**sent him to say. The messenger said to David, "The men overpowered us
and came out against us in the open, but we drove them back to the
entrance to the city gate. Then the archers shot arrows at your servant
from the wall, and some of the king's men died. Moreover, your servant
Uriah the Hittite is dead." David told the messenger, "Say this to Joab:
"Don't let this upset you; the sword devours one as well as another.
Press the attack against the city, and destroy it." Say this to
encourage Joab." When Uriah's wife heard that her husband was dead, she
mourned for him. After the time of mourning was over, David had her
brought to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But
the thing David had done displeased the LORD."**

Have you ever heard such a story of cunning as the killing of Uriah, of
how David committed adultery with the wife of Uriah and then made him
drink wine so that he could lay with his wife, and then finally sent him
to the battlefield to be killed, and how he was killed!

Now let us read about the offspring of that married woman who committed
adultery with David! In Matthew 1:6, we have:

**"And Jesse the father of King David. David was the father of Solomon,
whose mother had been Uriah's wife."**

In Samuel II 12:9, we read:

**"Why did you despise the word of the LORD by doing what is evil in his
eyes? You struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword and took his wife
to be your own. You killed him with the sword of the Ammonites."**

Now see how God seeks revenge, in Verse 11:

**"This is what the LORD says: "Out of your own household I am going to
bring calamity upon you. Before your very**

**eyes I will take your wives and give them to one who is close to you,
and he will lie with your wives in broad daylight. You did it in secret,
but I will do this thing in broad daylight before all Israel."**

According to Chapter 16:22, the threat was carried out:

**"So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof, and he lay with his
father's concubines in the sight of all Israel."**

#### Prophet Lot

Later on, a hair-raising accusation about Prophet Lot will be given in
details.

#### Prophet Jacob

In Genesis 29:11, Prophet Jacob is accused of kissing a strange woman:

**“Then Jacob kissed Rachel and began to weep aloud.”**

Then, in Genesis 27:1-35, he is accused of deceiving. Later on, this
story will be discussed with details.

It is a strange accusation that a prophet should kiss a woman or drink
wine, or deceive his father in order to get blessing. Is it possible
that these words are True? No, because these are NOT Revelation.

You, yourself, read the Bible. See for yourself the accusations made
towards the children of the Prophets. Even if we suppose them to be
true, it is not appropriate to mention them. Read how Dinah, the
daughter of Prophet Jacob is accused of adultery in Genesis 34:1:

**"Now Dinah, the daughter of Leah had borne to Jacob, went out to visit
the women of the land. When Shechem son of Hamor the Hivite, the ruler
of that area, saw her, he took her and violated her.”**

These are not God’s words, indeed.

#### Prophet Solomon

See Kings I 11:1-10 for the following report:

**"King Solomon, however, loved many foreign women besides Pharaoh's
daughter—Moabites, Ammonites, Sidonians and Hittites. They were from
nations about which the LORD had told the Israelites, "You must not
intermarry with them, because they will surely turn your hearts after
their gods." Nevertheless, Solomon held fast to them in love. He had
seven hundred wives of royal birth and three hundred concubines, and his
wives led him astray. As Solomon grew old, his wives turned his heart
after other gods, and his heart was not fully devoted to the LORD his
God, as the heart of David his father had been. He followed Ashtoreth
the goddess of the Sidonians, and Molech the detestable god of the
Ammonites. So Solomon did evil in the eyes of the LORD; he did not
follow the LORD completely, as David his father had done. On a hill east
of Jerusalem, Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the detestable god
of Moab, and for Molech the detestable god of the Ammonites. He did the
same for all his foreign wives, who burned incense and offered
sacrifices to their gods. The LORD became angry with Solomon because his
heart had turned away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared
to him twice. Although he had forbidden Solomon to follow other gods,
Solomon did not keep the LORD's command.”**

How can God accuse a Prophet of things admonishable?

These are not God's words.

#### Prophet Moses

Though previously mentioned, let us re-state the allegations made
against Moses (P). Is it possible that there could be so much hatred
between God and his Prophet that God sought to kill him? It is
impossible, yet the Bible claims that this was the case and that Moses’
life was saved by Zipporah

Exodus 4:14:

**"Then the LORD's anger burned against Moses and he said, "What about
your brother, Aaron the Levite? I know he can speak well. He is already
on his way to meet you, and his heart will be glad when he sees you."**

Exodus 4:24:

**"At a lodging place on the way, the LORD met Moses and he was about to
kill him. But Zipporah took a flint knife, cut off her son's foreskin
and touched Moses' feet with it. "Surely you are a bridegroom of blood
to me," she said.**

Now let us consider whether it is credible that a Prophet can be such a
tyrant person that he commanded children and others to be killed, and
cities be destroyed. It is impossible and incredible that a Prophet does
such things and oppresses people. But the Bible clearly says that Moses
did that.

Numbers 31:7:

**"They fought against Midian, as the LORD commanded Moses, and killed
every man. Among their victims were Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba—the
five kings of Midian. They also killed Balaam son of Beor with the
sword. The Israelites captured the Midianite women and children and took
all the Midianite herds, flocks and goods as plunder. They burned all
the towns where the Midianites had**

**settled, as well as all their camps. They took all the plunder and
spoils, including the people and animals, and brought the captives,
spoils and plunder to Moses and Eleazar the priest and the Israelite
assembly at their camp on the plains of Moab, by the Jordan across from
Jericho. Moses, Eleazar the priest and all the leaders of the community
went to meet them outside the camp. Moses was angry with the officers of
the army - the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds - who
returned from the battle. "Have you allowed all the women to live?" he
asked them. "They were the ones who followed Balaam's advice and were
the means of turning the Israelites away from the LORD in what happened
at Peor, so that a plague struck the LORD's people. Now kill all the man
who has slept with a man, but save for yourselves every girl who has
never slept with a man. All of you who have killed anyone or touched
anyone who was killed must stay outside the camp seven days. On the
third and seventh days, you must purify yourselves and captives. Purify
every garment as well as everything made of leather, goat hair or wood.
Then Eleazar the priest said to the soldiers who had gone into battle,
"This is the requirement of the law that the LORD gave Moses. Gold,
silver, bronze, iron, tin, lead and anything else that can withstand
fire must be put through the fire and then it wall be clean. But it must
also be purified with the water of cleansing. And whatever cannot
withstand fire must be put through that water. On the seventh day, wash
your clothes and you will be clean. Then you may come into the camp."
The LORD said to Moses, "You and Eleazar the priest and the family heads
of the community are to count all the people and animals that were
captured. Divide the spoils between the soldiers who took part in the
battle and the rest of the community. From the soldiers who fought in
the battle, set apart as tribute for the LORD one out of every five
hundred,**

**whether persons, cattle, donkeys, sheep or goats. Take this tribute
from their half share and give it to Eleazar the priest as the LORD's
part. From the Israelites' half, select one out of every fifty, whether
persons cattle, donkeys, sheep, goats or other animals. Give them to the
Levite who are responsible for the care of the LORD's tabernacle." So,
Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD commanded Moses. The
plunder remaining from the spoils that the soldiers took was 675,000
sheep, 72,000 cattle, 61,000 donkeys and 32,000 women who had never
slept with a man."**

The number of those killed is greater than the number of those spared!
On another occasion, no lives were spared!

Deuteronomy 2:31:

**"The LORD said to me, "See, I have begun to deliver Sihon and his
country over to you. Now begin to conquer and possess his land." When
Sihon and all his army came out to meet us in battle at Jahaz, the LORD
our God delivered him over to us and we struck him down, together with
his sons and his whole army. At that time, we took all his towns and
completely destroyed them - men, women and children. We left no
survivors. But the livestock and the plunder from the towns we had
captured we carried off for ourselves."**

Here the Bible alleges that Moses killed men, women and children at
God's command!

Deuteronomy 20:13:

**"When the LORD your God delivers it into your hand, put to the sword
all the men in it. As for the women, the children, the livestock and
everything else in the city, you may take these as plunder for
yourselves. And you may use the plunder the LORD your God gives you from
your enemies. This is how you are to treat all the cities that are**

**at a distance from you and do not belong to the nations nearby.
However, in the cities of the nations the LORD your God is giving you an
inheritance; do not leave alive anything that breathes. Completely
destroy them -the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites
and Jebusites- as the LORD your God has commanded you."**

What kind of humanity is the Bible teaching? Nothing that breathes shall
be saved!

Can a Prophet be angry with God enough to request that God blot him from
his Prophethood? No, he cannot!

In Exodus 32:31, we find Moses saying:

**"So Moses went back to the LORD and said, "Oh, what a great sin these
people have committed! They have made themselves gods of gold. But now,
please forgive their sin - but if not, then blot me out of the book you
have written."**

#### Prophet Isaiah

The Bible in Isaiah 20:2 accuses Prophet Isaiah of walking naked:

**“At that time, the LORD spoke through Isaiah son of Amoz. He said to
him, "Take off the sackcloth from your body and the sandals from your
feet." And he did so, going around stripped and barefoot. Then the LORD
said, "Just as my servant Isaiah has gone stripped and barefoot for
three years, as a sign and portent against Egypt and Cush, so the king
of Assyria will lead away stripped and barefoot the Egyptian captives
and Cushite exiles, young and old, with buttocks bared - to Egypt’s
shame."**

Is this Gospel? CERTAINLY NOT!

#### Prophet Abraham

The Bible, in Genesis 15:1-11, accuses Abraham of doubting God:

**"After this, the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision: "Do not
be afraid, Abram. I am your shield, your very great reward.” But Abram
said, "O, Sovereign LORD, what can you give me since I remain childless,
and the one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus? And Abram
said, "You have given me no children; so a servant in my household will
be my heir." Then the word of the LORD came to him: "This man will not
be your heir, but a son coming from your own body will be your heir." He
took him outside and said, "Look up at the heavens and count the stars -
if indeed you can count them." Then he said to him, "So shall your
offspring be." Abram believed the LORD, and he credited it to him as
righteousness. He also said to him, "I am the LORD, who brought you out
of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it."
But Abram said, "O Sovereign LORD, how can I know that I shall gain
possession of it?" So the LORD said to him "Bring me a heifer, a goat
and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon."
Abram brought all these to him, cut them in two and arranged the halves
opposite each other; the birds, however, he did not cut in half. Then
birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away."**

#### Prophet Ezekiel

According to the Book of Ezekiel 4:12, Prophet Ezekiel is asked by God
to eat bread baked with human excrement! Why should God command such a
thing?

**"Eat the food as you would a barley cake; bake it in the sight of the
people, using human excrement for fuel." The**

**LORD said, "In this way the people of Israel will eat defiled food
among the nations where I will drive them." But Prophet Ezekiel was wise
enough - how could he eat bread baked over human excrement? "Then he
said, "Not so, Sovereign LORD I have never defiled myself. From my youth
until now I have never eaten anything found dead or torn by wild
animals. No unclean meat has ever entered my mouth." "Very well," he
said, "I will let you bake your bread over cow manure instead of human
excrement."**

Is this Gospel?

Later we see that Prophet Ezekiel is commanded by God to shave his head
and his beard. Why would God command his Prophet to do such a
nonsensical thing while a Prophet is a role model for all people? After
commanding him to cook over human excrement, then changing it to cow
manure, and now commanding him to shave his head and beard. Why? This is
nonsense!

See Ezekiel 5:1:

**"Now, son of man, take a sharp sword and use it as a barber's razor to
shave your head and your beard. Then take a set of scales and divide up
the hair. When the days of your siege come to an end, burn a third of
the hair with fire inside the city. Take a third and strike it with the
sword all around the city. And scatter a third to the wind. For I will
pursue them with drawn sword."**

Now let us ask ourselves, would it be appropriate for God to cause the
death of the Prophet’s wife as a sign for the people, when it would have
been possible for Him to explain in words? We would argue that this
would not be appropriate; however, we see in the Bible that Prophet
Ezekiel is twice subjected to this.

Ezekiel 24:15:

**"The word of the LORD came to me: "Son of man, with one blow I am
about to take away from you the delight of your eyes. Yet do not lament
or weep or shed any tears. Groan quietly; do not mourn for the dead.
Bind your turban upon you and put your sandals on your feet; do not
cover the lower part of your face or eat the customary food of
mourners." So I spoke to the people in the morning, and in the evening
my wife died. The next morning I did as I had been commanded. Then the
people asked me, "Won't you tell us what these things have to do with
us?" So I said to them, "The world of the LORD came to me: Say to the
house of Israel, "This is what the Sovereign LORD says: I am about to
desecrate my sanctuary - the stronghold in which you take pride, the
delight of your eyes, the object of your affection. The sons and
daughters you left behind will fall by the sword. And you will do as I
have done. You will not cover the lower part of your face or eat the
customary food of mourners. You will keep your turbans on your heads and
your sandals on your feet. You will not mourn or weep but will waste
away because of your sins and groan among yourselves. Ezekiel will be a
sign to you; you will do just as he has done. When this happens, you
will know that I am the Sovereign LORD."**

#### Prophet Hosea

How is it appropriate that God should command His Prophet to take an
adulterous wife? Why is it that? Is it because the nation was
fornicating, departing from the way of the LORD? Or was it a warning to
the children of Israel by naming the children born to that woman? Or was
it just for the sake of mentioning the fornication of the Prophet? God
would NEVER command any of his prophets to behave in such a way!

Yet we read in Hosea 1:2:

**"When the LORD began to speak through Hosea, the LORD said to him, "Go
take to yourself an adulterous wife and children of unfaithfulness,
because the land is guilty with adultery and departing from the LORD. So
he married Gomer daughter of Diblaim, and she conceived and bore him a
son. Then the LORD said to Hosea, "Call him Jezreel, because I will soon
punish the house of Jehu for the massacre at Jezreel, and I will put an
end to the kingdom of Israel."**

Then in Chapter 2:2, we read further:

**"Rebuke your mother, rebuke her, for she is not my wife, and I am not
her husband. Let her remove the adulterous look from her face and the
unfaithfulness from between her breasts. Otherwise I will strip her
naked and make her as bare as on the day she was born; I will make her
like a desert, turn her into a parched land, and slay her with thirst. I
will not show my love to her children, because they are the children of
adultery. Their mother has been unfaithful and has conceived them in
disgrace. She said, "I will go after my lovers, who give me my food and
my water, my wool and my linen, my oil and my drink."**

Then in Chapter 3:1, we read still further:

**"The LORD said to me, "Go, show your love to your wife again, though
she is loved by another and is an adulteress. Love her as the LORD loves
Israelites, though they turn to other gods and love the sacred
raisin-cakes." So I bought her for fifteen shekels of silver and about a
homer and a half of barley. Then I told her, "You are to live with me
for many days, you must not be a prostitute or be intimate with any man,
and I will live with you." For the Israelites will live for many days
without king or prince, without sacrifice or sacred stones, without
ephod or idol."**

It is a disgrace for such a story to be written in an ordinary book, let
alone THE HOLY BOOK! If a Prophet behaves like this, how would others
behave? Is it proper to attribute such words to God?

### The Illegitimate Prophets!

Can a Prophet be a bastard or the son of an adulteress?

NO, HE CANNOT!

This is because it is a disgrace for a child to be born out of wedlock.
He will be disgraced before the people. Therefore, people will neither
listen to him, nor accept his words. As this is not in accordance with
Prophethood, God did not send any bastard to be His Prophet!

In Deuteronomy 23:2, the Bible clearly states:

**"No one born of a forbidden marriage nor any of his descendants may
enter the assembly of the LORD, even down to the tenth generation."**

Hence, NO PROPHET CAN BE A BASTARD.

In contradiction to this statement, the Bible says that certain Prophets
WERE bastards!

Judges 11:1 says the following:

**"Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty warrior. His father was Gilead;
his mother was a prostitute. Gilead's wife, also bore him sons, and when
they were grown up, they drove Jephthah away. "You are not going to get
any inheritance in our family," they said, "because you are the son of
another woman.”**

Now see Verse 29:

**"Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah. He crossed Gilead and
Manasseh, passed through Mizpah of**

**Gilead, and from there he advanced against the Ammonites.”**

This means that he WAS a Prophet, an inspired one!

We have already mentioned the allegations made against Prophet David, of
how he committed adultery with Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, and how he
made Uriah drunk so that he could lay with his wife and then sent him
off to the battlefront to be killed. Therefore, according to the Bible,
Solomon is, God forbid, an illegitimate son of David!

See Samuel II 12:24:

**"Then David comforted his wife Bathsheba, and he went to her and lay
with her. She gave birth to a son and they named him Solomon. The LORD
loved him."**

Now see how the Bible alleges that Jesus (P) also is of the descendants
of Pharez, an illegitimate son of Judah, born to his daughter-in-law,
Tamar.

Matthew 1:1-16:

**"A record of the genealogy of Jesus the son of David, the son of
Abraham: Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob,
Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, Judah the father of Perez
and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar, Perez the father of Hezron, Hezron
the father of Ram, Ram the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of
Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon, Salmon the father of Boaz, whose
mothers was Rahab, Boaz the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth, Obed
the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of King David. David was the
father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah's wife, Solomon the
father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, Abijah the father of
Asa, Asa the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of**

**Joram, Joram the father of Uzziah, Uzziah the father of Jotham, Jotham
the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah, Hezekiah the father of
Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amon, Amon the father of Josiah, and
Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile
to Babylon. After the exile to Babylon: Jeconiah was the father of
Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel the fathr of
Abiud, Abiud the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor, Azor the
father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Akim, Akim the father of Eliud,
Eliud the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Matthan, Matthan the
father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, of
whom was born Jesus who is called Christ.**

May Allah (GOD) forgive us for reproducing these blasphemies! But it is
necessary to do so in order to show how the Bible makes allegations
against God and His Holy Prophets and to enable us to wean people out of
disbelief and correct their transgressions. We DO NOT believe these
stories to be the Word of God or Revelation. They are man-made
fabrications!

### Old Testament Accuses Prophet Lot of Incest with His Daughters after Drinking

In the Book of Genesis 19:30-38, the following allegation is made
against Prophet Lot:

**"Lot and his two daughters left Zoar and settled in the mountains, for
he was afraid to stay in Zoar. He and his two daughters lived in a cave.
One day the older daughter said to the younger, "Our father is old, and
there is no man around here to lie with us, as is the custom all over
the earth. Let's get our father to drink wine and then lie with him and
preserve our family line through our father." That night they got their
father to drink wine,**

**and the older daughter went in and lay with him. He was not aware of
it when she lay down or when she got up. The next day the older daughter
said to the younger, "Last night I lay with my father. Let's get him to
drink wine again tonight, and you go in and lie with him so we can
preserve our family line through our father." So, they got their father
to drink wine that night also, and the younger daughter went and lay
with him. Again, he was not aware of it when she lay down or when she
got up. So both of Lot's daughters became pregnant by their father. The
older daughter had a son, and she named him Moab; he is the father of
the Moabites of today. The younger daughter also had a son, and she
named him Ben-Ammi; he is the father of the Ammonites of today."**

Did you ever hear a story such as this, such lies in the Old Testament,
such immorality! The Old Testament is hurting Prophet Lot with this
allegation of incest with both of his daughters who had never known a
man, as stated by Prophet Lot earlier in Genesis 19:8:

**"Look, I have two daughters who have never slept with a man."**

How can Prophet Lot, a man of God, a Prophet sent to divert people from
sins and evil, commit incest with his virgin daughters? I summon all you
Christians; do you believe such a story? This is the act of the most
sinful human being.

### In the Old Testament Jacob Cheats the Lord

In Genesis 27:1-25, we read that Isaac was old and his eyesight was
weak. He told his eldest son, Esau, to go hunting and to prepare the
kill as savory meat; such as he loves, so that he may bless his son.

Rebecca, Esau and Jacob's mother, overheard the conversation between
father and son and instructed Jacob, the younger son, to bring two
goats, which she would prepare as savory meat for his father, in order
to take the blessing. He was to wear the goatskins in order to fool his
father into believing that he was his brother. Jacob was afraid the plan
would fail and that he would be cursed, but his mother reassured him.

So, they did as they planned, and Jacob took the food to his father.
Isaac wondered that the task had been accomplished so quickly. He also
wondered that he was hearing Jacob's voice and not Esau's. He could not
see well, so he wanted to touch his son. Although the voice was Jacob's,
the skin he felt was Esau's, so he took the meat, and blessed Jacob
unknowingly.

When Esau came back, his father realised that he had been tricked, but
it was too late, as the blessing had already gone to Jacob. Jacob was
not the master.

This story resembles one of the stories of "One Thousand and One
Nights", not words from the Creator of the Heavens and Earth. Therefore,
I summon to you, clear-minded people. It is clear that these stories
have been put together by someone who does not care about religion.
These stories are not God's Gospel. If we analyze this story, we can be
sure that these Statements are not Revelation. Let us look at these
points:

1. The blessing was made, based solely on the preparation of the food,
to please Isaac. We surely know that the only goal of God's Prophet is
to obey God's command. Their desire is to spread God's Word amongst the
people, not to enjoy food, for the sake of blessing someone and making
him into a Prophet. The emphasis should be strictly on

the qualified person being a man of God and having spiritual
cleanliness.

2. The Old Testament claims that the blessing of the Prophethood went to
the wrong person because it was Esau's right and not Jacob's, but
through trickery and cheating, Jacob acquired the blessing.

Cheating cannot undo what God has commanded. Cheating alone would not
enable Jacob to take the blessing and to become a Prophet.

3. The Old Testament shows Isaac to be a fool, not knowing the
difference between human skin and animal skin worn as clothing!

4. It portrays Prophet Isaac as being unwise. Although he was in doubt
as to the identity of the person, he did not investigate further. He
could have called a reliable, trustworthy third person as a witness
regarding such as important issue.

5. In Verse 25 we read:

**"Jacob brought it to him and he ate; and he brought some wine and he
drank."**

If we look in the Book of Proverbs 20:1 we read:

**"Wine is a mocker and beer a brawler; whoever is led astray by them is
not wise."**

Therefore, it would not make sense for a Messenger to drink, when the
Bible itself advises against wine. Also in Luke 1: 15 we read as part of
John the Baptist's story, son of Zachariah:

**"For he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He is never to take
wine or other fermented drink, and he will be filled with the Holy
Spirit even from birth."**

This is enough proof as to why the consumption of wine is forbidden.
Why, then, would a Prophet consume it?

#### Judah Commits Adultery with His Daughter-in-Law

See the Book of Genesis 38:13-28:

**"When Tamar was told, "Your father-in-law is on his way to Timnah to
shear his sheep," she took off her widow's clothes, covered herself with
a veil to disguise herself, and then sat down at the entrance to Enaim,
which is on the road to Timnah. For she saw that, though Shelah had now
grown up, she had not been given to him as his wife. When Judah saw her,
he thought she was a prostitute, for she had covered her face. Not
realizing that she was his daughter-in-law, he went over to her by the
roadside and said, "Come now, let me sleep with you.” "And what will you
give me to sleep with you?" she asked. "I'll send you a young goat from
my flock," he said. "Will you give me something as a pledge until send
it?" she asked. He said, "What pledge should I give you?” “Your seal and
its cord, and the staff in your hand," she answered. So he gave them to
her and slept with her, and she became pregnant by him. After she left,
she took off her veil and put on her widow's clothes again. Meanwhile
Judah sent the young goat by his friend the Adullamite in order to get
his pledge back from the woman, but he did not find her. He asked the
men who lived there, "Where is the shrine prostitute who was beside the
road at Enaim?" "There hasn't been any shrine prostitute here," they
said. So he went back to Judah and said, "I didn't find her. Besides,
the men who lived there said, "There hasn't been any shrine prostitute
here." Then Judah said, "Let her keep what she has, or we will become a
laughing-stock. After all, I did send her this young goat, but you
didn't find her." About three months later Judah was told, "Your
daughter-in-law Tamar is**

**guilty of prostitution, and as a result she is now pregnant." Judah
said, "Bring her out and have her burned to death.” As she was being
brought out, she sent a message to her father-in-law. "I am pregnant by
the man who owns these," she said. And she added, "See if you recognise
whose seal and cord and staff these are." Judah recognized them and
said, "She is more righteous than I, since I wouldn't give her to my son
Shelah." And he did not sleep with her again. When the time came for her
to give birth, there were twin boys in her womb."**

Do you not see how the Old Testament insult, degrade, humiliates and
strips God's Prophets of their dignity, bringing them down to the level
of the most evil sinners?

When they found out about her prostitution, why was she not killed? Then
Judah says, **"She is more righteous than I"** - how does this make
sense? Did she not put herself in the position, selling herself to him?
He simply found her there. What is more astonishing and very strange in
this ugly story is the fact that he did not recognise her when he
removed her cover! Is the fact that Judah ordered her to be burnet, but
released her in order to keep her dignity when he knew the reason for
her action—was this fact the reason why Judah says, **"She is more
righteous than I?"**

### In the Old Testament God Sought to Kill Moses

God sent Moses to Pharaoh to perform miracles, but in Exodus 4:24, we
read:

**"At a lodging place on the way, the LORD met Moses and was about to
kill him."**

Is it plausible that God is sending Moses to Pharaoh to lead them to the
unity of God? Then when he met him,

God wanted to kill him? What made Him think of making Moses a messenger
in the first place, then wanting to kill him without Moses having
committed any sin warranting such punishment? Moses was only going to
obey God's order. What for is such a contradiction people have put in
the Bible—a contradiction that is not acceptable by anyone!

Among the individuals who deserve some sort of credit for evilness was
Aaron, and of course, the Old Testament did not forget to give him his
due! What kind of an insult is it to say that Aaron made a god in the
form of a calf of gold for the people to worship?

In Exodus 32:21, we read:

**"He said to Aaron, "What did these people do to you that you led them
into such great sin?"**

### The Old Testament and Getting Married with Aunt

In Exodus 6:20, we read:

**"Amram married his father's sister Jochebed who bore him Aaron and
Moses. Amram lived 137 years.”**

I guess the people who wrote the Bible stories did not think! Why should
they attach such terrible sins to such great Prophets? To marry such a
close relative is against wisdom and religion. How can it be gospel and
revelation?

### Moses Becomes God and Aaron is His Prophet

Let us read the following in Exodus 7:1:

**"Then the LORD said to Moses, "See, I have made you like god to
Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron will be your prophet."**

See how brave the writers of the Bible are! How dare they change God's
words and replace them with such irony, and then claim that it came from
God? How can a wise man say that God made another god with him, and made
a Prophet for the other god? Is this not the product of someone’s
imagination—someone who has had the support of other, like-minded
persons in producing this story?

My Christian friends, how can you believe that this comes from God?
