Contradiction in the Old Testament (torah)
==========================================

In the Book of Exodus 33:20, we read the following:

**"But, he said, “You cannot see my face, for no one may see me and
live."**

Now compare this to what is written in the Book of Genesis 32:30:

**So Jacob called the place Peniel, saying, "It is because I saw God
face to face, and yet my life was spared."**

Everyone can for sure see this blatant contradiction. Is this
contradiction acceptable? Now we must question whether God can in fact
be seen or not! If He CAN be seen, then why not before Moses? And if He
CANNOT be seen, then why did he appear before Jacob?

Now, for a further contradiction regarding Moses, see Exodus 33:11:

**"The LORD would speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his
friend.**

What are we to believe?

Many great scientists and philosophers have proven that God cannot be
seen because of the limitations and weaknesses that humans have. Many
things exist but the human eye cannot see them. Human eyesight is weaker
than that of some animals.

How therefore can the Old Testament say that people have seen God? This
contradicts all knowledge that we have!

The Old Testament Allows the Killing of Women and Innocent Children
-------------------------------------------------------------------

In the Book of Numbers 31:17, we read the following:

**"Now kill all the boys. And kill every woman who has slept with a
man.”**

Also, see Deuteronomy 2:34:

**"At that time we took all his towns and completely destroyed them
­men, women and children."**

The thought of this terrible holocaust drains the eyes of tears and
fills the human heart with pain and sorrow. We could relate such acts of
destructions to the likes of Genghis Khan, but surely not to Moses, the
Messenger of God (P). Think about it, what is the use of killing women
and innocent children? What sin have they committed to deserve such
massacre? And what kind of wisdom and religion would allow such a
miserable thing to happen? I am sure that the people who wrote the Old
and New Testaments did so to allow the killing and murdering of the
people of Palestine, especially in support of Zionism today. Their
excuse will be that the Bible allows them to take such acts of
oppression, putting them out of their own homes and their own country
and killing them.

Can this be considered Gospel? No, by any means!
