Strange Case When Becoming a Prophet
====================================

In the Old Testament, Samuel I 10:5, we read the following:

**"After that you will go to Gibeah of God, where there is a Philistine
outpost. As you approach the town, you will meet a procession of
prophets coming down from the high place with lyres, tambourines, flutes
and harps being played before them, and they will be prophesying. The
Spirit of the LORD will come upon you in power, and you will prophesy
with them; and you will be changed into a different person.‚Äù**

What is really strange, and I must question it, is the relationship
between the musical instruments and prophesy? Prophecy is about taking
God's message to the people. Musical instruments are the devil's work!

If you find this surprising, then look now at Samuel I 19:19, where we
read the following:

**"Word came to Saul: "David is in Naioth at Ramah;" so he sent men to
capture him. But when they saw a group of prophets prophesying with
Samuel standing there as their leader, the Spirit of God came upon
Saul's men and they also prophesied. Saul was told about it, and he sent
more men, and they prophesied too. Saul sent men a third time, and they
also prophesied. Finally, he himself left for Ramah and went to the
great cistern at Sechu. And he asked, "Where are Samuel and David?"
"Over at Naioth at Ramah. But the Spirit of God came even upon him, and
he**

**walked along prophesying until he came to Naioth. He stripped off his
robes and also prophesied in Samuel's presence. He lay that way all that
day and night. This is why people say, "Is Saul also among the
prophets?"**

Now, if you can, please tell me the meaning of this prophecy? Why all
the playing and fooling around? What is this joke? Even the lowest of
men would not think about doing this. So how could the New Testament
allow such a thing to be related about God's messengers; the highest and
wisest of all humankind?

After all, is it possible that Christians still do not doubt its
authenticity as Gospel?

Things We Should Warn Ourselves and the People of
-------------------------------------------------

1. We ask the Jews and Christians to look deeply with their wisdom and
clear vision at what we have said about the Old and New Testaments. We
have shown clearly the contradictions as well as how God's dignity and
Holiness have been attacked.

2. The accusations and allegations aimed at the Prophets and God's
messengers should convince the Jews and Christians that these words
cannot be Gospel, could not have been sent by the Lord. Almighty God is
complete; therefore, the Revelation should be one hundred percent
PERFECT, without a SINGLE contradiction, or mistake, and should be void
of evil in relation to the Prophets.

No wise man would doubt that they have deviated from the Truth. The
hands of evil have changed the Holy Book, construed its words and
falsified the Book. Wise people should think carefully and know that
this is wrong.

Considerable doubt therefore emerges regarding the remainder of the Old
Testament. Presumably, the remainder, likewise, is full of falsehoods!

People who believe that this Book is Holy, or from God, do so for one of
two reasons; either ignorance or insanity.

Due to all of these obvious mistakes, Muslims rightly condemn the Jews
and Christians as they associate themselves with these mistakes.

We have just finished a small portion of what exists in the Old
Testament.

Now let us look at the New Testament to see why it is not fit to be
called Gospel from God, and to let the Jews and Christians know that
these lies cannot be taken as any reference. They are wrong, they are
evil, and they deviate from the Truth.
