Contradictions in the New Testament (engeel)
============================================

I would like to write to the intelligent, enlightened Christian people
about the strange contradiction they have called the New Testament
(Engeel), to let them know that it is not a Holy Book and that it cannot
be from Almighty God.

### Jesus (P) Approves Prophets Law and Disapproved it

In Matthew 5:17, we read:

**"Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I
have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. I tell you the truth,
until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the least
stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law until
everything is accomplished - Anyone who breaks one of the least of these
commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in
the kingdom of heaven, but whoever practices and teaches these commands
will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I tell you that
unless your righteousness surpasses that of the Pharisees and the
teachers of the law, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of
heaven."**

But if you read from Verse 31 onwards, you will see that Jesus (P)
contradicts what he has just said. You will see that he wipes out former
laws and introduces new ones:

**"It has been said, "Anyone who divorces his wife must give her a
certificate of divorce." But I tell you that anyone who**

**divorces his wife, except for marital unfaithfulness, causes her to
commit adultery, and anyone who marries a woman so divorced commits
adultery. Again you have heard that it was said to the people long ago,
"Do not break your oath, but keep the oaths you have made to the Lord."
But I tell you, do not swear at all, either by heaven, for it is God's
throne, or by the earth, for it is His footstool; or by Jerusalem, for
it is the city of the great king. And do not swear by your head, for you
cannot make even one hair white or black. Simply let your “yes" be "Yes"
and your "No" be "No"; anything beyond this comes from the evil one.
"You have heard that it was said, "Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth."
But I tell you, Do not resist an evil person. If someone strikes you on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if someone wants to sue
you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well. If someone
forces you to go one mile, go with him two miles. Give to the one who
asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from
you. You have heard that it was said, "Love your neighbour and hate your
enemy." But I tell you: Love your enemy, bless those who curse you, do
good to those who hate you, and pray for those who persecute you."**

Surely, you see that in the first section it was written that Jesus (P)
did not come to change the laws, and in the second section, he actually
did change the laws.

### Jesus (P) Denies Faith from His Disciples and Contradicts it

In Matthew 5:14, we read the following speech from Jesus (P) to his
disciples:

**"You are the light of the world. A city on a hill cannot be hidden."**

Then, in 17:20, we read the following:

**"He replied, "Because you have so little faith. I tell you the truth,
if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this
mountain, "Move from here to there" and it will move. Nothing will be
impossible for you."**

Undoubtedly, everyone can see how he reassures his disciples of their
faith and then contradicts himself. It is very clear.

### Jesus (P) Praise Simon Peter Then Contradicting it

In Matthew 16:15, we read the following:

**"But what about you?” he asked. "Who do you say I am?" Simon Peter
answered, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Jesus
replied, "Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah, for this was not revealed
to you by man, but by my Father in heaven. And I tell you that you are
Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades
will not overcome it. I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven;
whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you
loose on earth will be loosed in heaven."**

Now see Verse 23:

**"Jesus turned and said to Peter, "Out of my sight, Satan! You are a
stumbling block to me; you do not have in mind the things of God, but
the things of men."**

Look carefully at this contradiction. Jesus (P) says to his disciples
that they are the light of the world because they lead people to the
Knowledge, the Truth, and then at other times he accuses them of being
very unfaithful. He says that Peter is the best of his followers, says
he shall have the keys of the kingdom of heaven and then later

calls him ‘Satan!’ How does one's mind accept such a contradiction and
say that it is Gospel from God in its present form?

### Messiah's Coming was not to Bring Peace Then Contradicting it

In Matthew 10:34, we read the following:

**"Do not suppose that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I did
not come to bring peace, but a sword. For I have come to turn a man
against his father, a daughter against her mother, a daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law, a man's enemies will be the members of his
own household."**

 Now compare this with Chapter 5:44:

** "But I tell you: Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do
good to those who hate you and pray for those who persecute you."**

Everyone knows that God's Gospel contain NO contradictions! If, on his
arrival, he was set man at variance against his nearest and dearest, let
alone his enemies, then why did he contradict himself?

Another Contradiction
---------------------

If the previous contradiction surprised you, then look at the following
and you will be in no doubt that this cannot be Gospel. In Matthew
19:19, we read the following:

**"Honour your father and mother and love your neighbour as yourself."**

Now see Luke 14:26:

**"If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his
wife and children, his brothers and sisters - yes, even his own life -
he cannot be my disciple."**

In Mark 10:19, we read the following:

**"You know the commandments: "Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do
not steal, do not give false testimony, do not defraud, honour your
father and mother.”**

Now see Matthew 10:37:

**"Anyone who loves his father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me; anyone who loves his son or daughter more than me is not worthy of
me.”**

Now see Mark 10:29:

**"I tell you the truth," Jesus replied, "no one who has left home or
brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for me and
the gospel will fail to receive a hundred times as much in this present
age (homes, brothers, sisters, mothers, children and fields ­and with
them, persecutions) and in the age to come, eternal life."**

As you have seen, these are some of the contradictions to be found in
the Books of St Matthew, St Mark and St Luke.

### St Mark and His Strange Speech

What is strange in St Mark's speech is that he claims Jesus (P) says in
Chapter 12:31:

**"...Love your neighbour as yourself."**

In Chapter 10:30, he has mentioned the rewards a man receives for
leaving his family:

**"No one who has left home or brothers or sisters or mother or father
or children or fields for me and the gospel will fail to receive a
hundred times as much in this present age (homes, brothers, sisters,
mothers, children and fields and with them persecutions) and in the age
to come, eternal life."**

The basic contradiction aside, I suggest that the idea of having two
mothers and fathers, let alone hundredfold, is unimaginable to the human
mind unless the New Testament can see that it is biologically feasible
to have more than one set of parents! The Lord is above making such
statements!

Jesus Sees All the Prophets as Thieves
--------------------------------------

In the Book of St John Chapter 10:7, Jesus (P) said:

**"Therefore, Jesus said again, "I tell you the truth, I am the gate for
the sheep. All whoever came before me were thieves and robbers, but the
sheep did not listen to them."**

IS THIS NOT A CLEAR DENIAL OF THE OLD TESTAMENT?

This is clearly opposite to Matthew 5:17, where Jesus (P) says:

**"Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the Prophets; I
have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them."**

How do Christians accept such talk; God's Prophets are thieves and
robbers! And believe this to be GOSPEL?
