Introduction
============

As contemporary Western theologians consider the relationship between
theology and philosophy they are aware as never before of the presence
of the many highly sophisticated non-Western traditions of intellectual
reflection on religious themes that show many similarities to those
central to Western theology, such as revelation, God, creation, and the
nature and destiny of the human person.  Is it legitimate, important,
useful or even possible for contemporary Christian theology to engage
with such non-Western philosophy?

Before we can consider this question further it is necessary to make
clear how the key terms are going to be used in this chapter. First,
‘theology’ and ‘non-Western’ are taken to denote both origin and
geography.  ‘Theology’ here means that Christian theology which has
historically developed in Europe and America, whether it has remained in
these areas or not.  ‘Non-Western’ thus includes Jewish and Muslim
philosophy as it developed in Islamic Spain as well in the Middle East,
as well as Eastern philosophy, such as that found in Hinduism and
Buddhism.  If the distinction is not tied to both origins and geography,
it becomes impossible to know what counts as a contrast between
‘theology’ and ‘non-Western,’ since Christianity is itself by origin a
non-Western religion, and non-Western philosophy has also developed in
Europe and America over the centuries.  Moreover, ‘philosophy’ is taken
to be intellectual reflection or ‘thought’ in general, specifically
religious thought, or ‘theology’ as this term is often used.
‘Philosophy’ is a Western term, often contrasted with ‘theology’ in the
Western context and use of the term poses particular problems when
applied to non-Western traditions where the contrast is not made.  In
this chapter ‘philosophy,’ ‘thought’ and ‘theology’ are used
interchangeably, though always with the core theme in mind of how reason
serves religious faith.

In contemporary Western theology the discipline that argues most
emphatically that theology should engage with non-Western philosophy is
the emergent one of ‘comparative theology,’ which one of its leading
advocates, the American Catholic theologian, Francis Clooney S.J.
(1950-), has characterised as the ‘theologically conscious study of
religions other than one’s own.’[^1] Such a general definition of
comparative theology suggests and indeed encompasses a considerable
variety of actual approaches.  Comparative theology is practised by
theologians belonging to different Christian denominations, who promote
different understandings of what the theological task is and who make a
variety of greater or lesser claims about the aims and achievement of
engagement with non-Western philosophy.  They also differ in what kind
of engagement they prefer, with some studying a single text or single
tradition of another religion and others surveying a number of
traditions centred on a major theological theme.  All, however, claim
that engagement with non-Western philosophy is possible, interesting and
useful for the doing of Western Christian theology.

Nonetheless, contemporary comparative theologians face some serious
questions about the success of their work.  One area of challenge
centres on the question of whether the work of comparative theologians
shows sufficient continuity with Christian theology defined as a
reasoned exploration of Christian revelation and faith, in critical
engagement with other positions and subject to scrutiny and validation
by the theologian’s own ecclesial community.[^2]   Comparative
theologians are routinely academics working in a university context
where there is the freedom to develop a theological account as he or she
chooses.  Can such comparative theology qualify as Christian theology in
the sense above or does it translate into a form of religious studies,
in which claims about the truth and the demands of faith and of faith
communities are marginalised and excluded?

A second area of challenge concerns the epistemological issues involved
in any Western theology engaging with a non-Western philosophy and
relates to objections from contemporary critiques of intercultural
engagement, especially Western interaction with Eastern culture.
Comparative theology might appear to be as just a contemporary
manifestation Orientalism, the intellectual subjection of the East for
purposes of Western colonial power and domination.[^3]   Comparative
theology has, moreover, to deal with the wider objections of cultural
incommensurabilists and post-liberal theologians, for whom there are
considerable obstacles in the way of any meaningful communication or
theological interaction between cultures.[^4]   Contemporary reflection
on the relation between rationalities and cultures has highlighted the
ways in which any intellectual system or rationality is formed within a
particular tradition, which conditions the reasoning of those within
that tradition and their perspective on other cultures.  There would
seem to be no neutral or common rationality that all share. Emerging
from a rationality embedded in a particular tradition terms and concepts
found in one tradition often do not have equivalents in another
tradition into which they can be translated or compared.[^5]   To what
extent do comparative theologians shows an awareness of these issues and
address them or do they merely assume that all religious traditions have
the same rationality or can be reduced to one that is neutral and common
to all?

In this chapter we shall first consider Christian theological engagement
with non-Western philosophy in the mediaeval period as represented by
the work of St Thomas Aquinas (1224/25-74).  The work of Aquinas has
been a major paradigm for understanding the relationship between faith
and reason in Christian theology generally.  It has also been a
particular model for those Catholic Christian theologians who have
sought to engage with Eastern philosophy, such as those working in India
from at least the time of Roberto de Nobili S.J. (1577-1656) to the
present.[^6]   In the contemporary Western academy there has also been a
retrieval of Aquinas’ theology as a model for modern engagement with
other religions.[^7]   Second, we shall consider two leading and
representative contemporary comparative theologians, Francis Clooney and
the British Anglican theologian, Keith Ward (1938- ), and consider both
how their work relates to that of Aquinas and how they address
contemporary theological and cultural concerns about engagement with
non-Western philosophy.

We shall argue with reference to the first challenge that contemporary
comparative theology should be regarded as the continuance of a
longstanding Western Christian theological engagement with non-Christian
and non-Western thought, especially as found in the theology of
mediaeval Scholasticism, and above all in the work of Thomas Aquinas.
Contemporary comparative theology thus stands within an established
understanding of how Christian theology may be done.  Comparative
theologians are certainly keen to categorise their work as theology
rather than religious studies.  Nonetheless, contemporary comparative
theologians are rightly criticised for showing a reluctance to make
critical judgements, especially negative ones, about the truth and value
of the traditions they study, in marked contrast to the approach of
earlier engagements such as Scholastic theology.[^8]   Moreover, the
radical diversity of Christian theological traditions and positions in
the modern period that form the basis on which different comparative
theologians work result in theologies that are often incompatible with
the Christian theology found in earlier engagements as well as that
found in other contemporary theologies, comparative or otherwise.

With regard to the second challenge, contemporary comparative theology
does promote a dialogical understanding of theology that encourages
accountability and mutuality in theological conversations across
religions.  This reflects and addresses modern concerns about both the
Orientalist nature of Western approaches to non-Western cultures and
goes some way itself to address the anxieties about intercultural
communication in incommensurabilist and post-liberal theological
perspectives.  At the same time, in continuity with the Scholastic
approach, contemporary comparative theologians advocate a basic
confidence in the universal and natural capacity for humans to reason
and to have a reasoned conversation about truth across religious or
cultural divides that stands radical objections to any intercultural and
interreligious communication, although compatible with contemporary
affirmation of the conditioned nature of all rationalities.  Here again,
however, there is considerable variety in viewpoint between comparative
theologians and the greater the assumption or claim to neutral
categories the more vulnerable their accounts become to criticism.


