1. Scholastic Theology and Non-Western Philosophy: the work of Thomas Aquinas
=============================================================================

Western Christian Scholasticism bears testimony to a substantial
engagement between Christian thinkers and non-Western philosophy in the
mediaeval period.  The mediaeval West was surrounded by what Marshall
Hodgson has referred to as the  ‘Islamicate,’ Muslim dominated
territories, but where there were Jewish, Christian as well as Muslim
philosophers active.[^9]   Western Christian scholastics knew and used
Muslim and Jewish commentaries on and adaptations of the works of Greek
philosophy, as well as independently composed Jewish and Muslim
philosophical and theological treatises.   Christian scholastics were
able to regard Jewish and Muslim thinkers as having something
intelligible and useful to say about the fundamental themes of God,
creation and human nature, even though Christian attitudes towards
Judaism and Islam at that time were routinely very negative and
condemnatory. It was, after all, a period that witnessed both crusades
against Islam and persecutions of Jews.[^10]

The most influential of all Christian scholastics, Thomas Aquinas, was
remarkable for the extent to which he used Jewish and Islamic philosophy
and for the respect and courtesy he showed his sources.  Aquinas makes
reference in his works to Muslim thinkers such as Avicenna (Ibn Sina, d.
1037) and Averroes (Ibn Rushd, d.1198), to Jewish thinkers such as Moses
Maimonides (1138-1204), as well as to the*Liber de Causis* , a Latin
work of considerable importance in the Christian West based on an Arabic
reworking of Proclus, (*Kitab al Khair* ,*The Book of Pure Goodness* ),
on which Thomas wrote a commentary at the end of his life.[^11]   Their
philosophy exercises a considerable and positive influence on the
development of his theology throughout the whole course of his work.

Sacra Doctrina and the Relationship of Faith and Reason
-------------------------------------------------------

What account, then, does Aquinas himself give of the relationship
between theology and non-Western philosophy?  At the beginning of
the*Summa Theologiae* Aquinas defines*sacra doctrina* as a science that
takes the articles of faith, the revelation received from God, as its
principles.[^12]  *Sacra doctrina* is probative (*argumentativa* ),
working from these principles to demonstrate other things, both through
the exercise of human reasoning and the use of authorities, namely
Sacred Scripture, the doctors of the Church and those philosophers, who
have come to knowledge of truth by natural reason.[^13]   For Aquinas
the shape of such reasoning and the nature of the authorities appealed
to depends on what those involved have in common, what principles drawn
from revelation or human authorities they can agree on and hence reason
from.  Because Jews accept the Old Testament, discussion with them can
draw on this part of revelation as well as human reason and
philosophical authorities.  In the case of Muslims, there is no shared
revelation and so discussion is limited to reasoning and use of
philosophical authorities alone.[^14]

Thus, Aquinas develops a scheme in which engagement with non-Western
philosophy has a place within theology as the science of*sacra
doctrina.*   This clearly does not make Aquinas an advocate of a liberal
theology or a pluralist theology*avant la lettre* .  In his account
Islamic thought is given the same status as Greek philosophy, part of
natural human philosophy.[^15]   His comments about Muhammad reflect the
extreme negativity of his time.[^16]    Moreover, in his discussion of
the probative work of*sacra doctrina* the emphasis is on disputation and
the refutation of the views of others.   However, Aquinas’ actual use of
Muslim or Jewish philosophy testifies to the importance they did have
for his own theology.  Aquinas does not, in fact, just set out to refute
what Muslim or Jewish thinkers have to say.  He also agrees with many of
the points he finds in their accounts.  Muslim and Jewish philosophy
helps to shape and clarify his Christian theology as it develops and
matures.  Their commentaries and independent works themselves become
authorities to which he refers and with which he reasons as he
constructs a Christian theology.

Aquinas’ Engagement with Islamic and Jewish Philosophy
------------------------------------------------------

The American Thomist, David Burrell C.S.C., is one of the leading
advocates of Aquinas as a model for a contemporary Christian theological
engagement with non-Western philosophy.[^17]   He has made clear both
the extent of Aquinas’ engagement with Muslim and Jewish thinkers,
especially Avicenna (Ibn Sina) and Moses Maimonides, and the way such
non-Western philosophy makes a positive contribution to his theology.
Aquinas treats Muslim and Jewish thinkers as fellow travellers and as
interlocutors into common theological concerns, especially the desire to
find the right relationship between what they maintain on the basis of
faith and what can and should be said by the reason found in Greek
philosophy:

Aquinas’ intellectual inquiry bridged the divide initially posed by
alien faiths, allowing him to discover and exploit cognate strategies
for explicating shared perspectives on creation, providence, and often
parallel trajectories towards the goal of human fulfilment[^18]

Burrell follows Louis Gardet’s characterisation of Aquinas’ approach as
one in which Muslim philosophy is seen as a resource to be mined for
‘conceptual strategies.’[^19]   He also notes that Aquinas appropriates
and transforms the ideas he finds in this philosophy as he thinks it to
be useful and necessary for the development of his own theology
determined by the principles of Christian faith, just as he does with
Aristotle and other Greek thought.[^20]

Thus, in order to express the distinction between God as creator and
created being Aquinas takes from Avicenna the distinction between
essence and existence as a useful conceptual strategy for distinguishing
creatures, in whom there is composition of essence and existence and
hence dependent being, from the creator, whose existence is his
essence.  Yet he rejects the implication he finds in Avicenna that
existence should be classified as a form of accidental being that comes
to an essence and instead recasts the distinction as being one between
the potential and the actual being of a substance.  In his mature
theology the simple non-compositeness of essence and existence in God’s
unique case continues to be affirmed, while his final expression of
creation is as the production of the whole being of a thing, wherein
‘being created’ is the relation of a substance has as a whole to the
creator.[^21]

Likewise, it is an Islamic rendition of the Neo-Platonic work, the*Liber
de Causis* , which provides Aquinas with conceptual strategies for
articulating the*sui generis* relation of creation.  The*Liber de
Causis* is a source for some of Aquinas’ most distinctive ways of
depicting creation, such as the idea of God as the first and universal
cause of the being of all things and the idea of creation as the
emanation and participation in being.   In his mature work on creation
Aquinas continues to depict creation as the emanation and participation
in being.  At the same time, Aquinas consistently rejects Muslim
acceptance of secondary creators from the Neo-Platonic scheme.[^22]

In common with the Jewish philosopher, Moses Maimonides, Aquinas
endorses a generally apophatic approach to knowledge of God, yet he
rejects Maimonides’ negative understanding of divine predication,
instead developing his account of analogy.  With Maimonides Aquinas
accepts that unaided human can establish that the world is created, but
not that it has a beginning, as revelation informs us.  On this question
Aquinas refers to and considers the different Muslim views that
developed as they inform the discussion, noting, for instance, that they
felt it reasonable to affirm both the eternity of the world and its
createdness.[^23]

Non-Western philosophy, then, is clearly important to Aquinas as a
resource for reasoning about faith, in the engagement between theology
and philosophy.   Later Christian tradition has received and accepted
this engagement as making a legitimate contribution to the expression of
Christian faith.  Aquinas takes it for granted both that the reasoning
found in*sacra doctrina* is conditioned by the articles of Christian
faith and the authorities of Christian tradition and that human
reasoning can cross cultural boundaries.  Aquinas unbending commitment
to the objectivity of truth encourages such openness, while also, and
along with his commitment to the truth of Christian revelation, leads
him to critically appraise Jewish and Muslim philosophy as a conceptual
resource for acceptance, rejection, appropriation and transformation.


