2. Contemporary Comparative Theology
====================================

Contemporary comparative theology, as a self-conscious commitment to do
theology in a positive encounter with other religious traditions, might
seem the least likely of all modern theological disciplines to present
as the heir of mediaeval Scholasticism.   Yet contemporary comparative
theology has considerable common ground with the approach found in
Aquinas. Christian comparative theologians also see theology as the
reasoned exploration of faith, in which their perspectives and
commitments are shaped by their being members of their Christian
communities.   Moreover, their engagement with other religious
traditions is remarkably similar to Aquinas’ account of the probative
science of*sacra doctrina* .  Other religious traditions function as
authorities, which along with human reasoning become the resources out
of which the theological account is constructed.

The work of Francis Clooney and Keith Ward helps us grasp something of
the character and variety of contemporary comparative theology and to
consider its relationship to Scholastic theology.  These two theologians
differ markedly in terms of the scope of their engagement with
non-Western philosophy and in their understanding of the task of
Christian theology and of central Christian doctrines.  Nonetheless,
they share a commitment to theological engagement with non-Western
philosophy that has much in common with the approach of Aquinas, while
their work also reflects and addresses contemporary concerns about
Western engagement with non-Western culture in a way that cannot be
expected of Aquinas.

Francis Clooney
---------------

For Francis Clooney comparative theology takes the form of a Christian
theological engagement with particular texts from different Hindu
traditions.[^24]    Clooney is an accomplished and recognised
Indologist, fully competent in Sanskrit and Tamil.  He undertakes
detailed and precise studies of Hindu texts, which are then set in
comparison with other texts from the Christian tradition.  This
manifests his own preference that comparative theology should resist the
temptation to make grand statements about religions in general and
instead proceed by way of individual case studies.   Clooney is very
attentive to contemporary reflection on hermeneutics and its application
to such textual study, as expounded by such figures as Hans-Georg
Gadamer and Roland Barthes.[^25]   Clooney’s main model for the
theological act is, in fact, as a form of attentive spiritual reading.
Comparative theology is an exercise in which the texts from the two
traditions form an expanded narrative and where the theologian learns
and is transformed through reading texts from a number of different
traditions together.  However, Clooney is also concerned to explore such
engagement as an exercise in theological reasoning across traditions
about central themes in theology.[^26]

Thus, in*Theology After Vedanta* (1993) Clooney compares texts from one
of the most influential of Hindu theological traditions, Advaita
Vedanta, with Aquinas’*Summa Theologiae* and its commentaries. He
characterises his own work as Indological, comparative and
theological.[^27]   As ‘Indological,’ such engagement with Hindu texts
has to meet the standards of good scholarship and give an accurate
account of that Hindu text.  As ‘comparative,’ it is concerned to
consider carefully the relation between the accounts, being open to
dissimilarities as well as similarities.  As ‘theological,’ such work is
properly ‘faith seeking understanding,’ in which the theologian is
concerned about the truth of what is being studied, about what is being
learned about God and the human relationship with God, and about the
identity of the faith of the theologian and his and her community after
the encounter.[^28]

Accordingly, Clooney first undertakes a detailed study of the sacred
texts and commentarial traditions of Advaita Vedanta.  He identifies the
textual character of the Advaitic tradition and its theology, in which
the theological account is built up as a rich text woven from layers of
sacred scripture and commentaries and in which religious truth is
realised through transformative reading, through study and meditation on
scriptural texts as interpreted by the commentaries.  Advaita is centred
on forms of textual reasoning, since it is driven on by exegetical and
textual strategies for understanding and connecting sacred texts and
sections of commentaries together.[^29]   Second, and in the light of
this, Clooney considers how Aquinas himself constructs the*Summa
Theologiae* and how authoritative texts are important to his theological
method, as well as the pedagogical character of the construction of
the*Summa* as a whole. He also considers the importance of a
commentarial tradition on the*Summa* in Catholic Thomist theology.  In
this comparative section Clooney draws on modern Western discussions of
hermeneutics and reading theory, in order to explore what it means to
read the textual traditions of Advaita and Thomism together.[^30] Third,
Clooney considers what implications this has for the faith and identity
of the theologian and for his relation to his religious community. The
theology that emerges after Vedanta is for the most part simply a
greater understanding of the textual character of both theological
traditions.  For a Christian Thomist theologian this may well mark a
retrieval of an aspect of the Thomist tradition that has tended to be
obscured by an emphasis on the*Summa* as simply a mine for doctrines and
reasoned arguments rather than as a text to be read in its entirety. The
Christian theologian engaging with Advaita Vedanta has, meanwhile, a
role as the mediator for such comparative engagement for the service of
the whole community.[^31]

In*Hindu God, Christian God* (2001), Clooney develops a somewhat
different emphasis, this time exploring the work of reasoning about
major themes across religious traditions.  Here Clooney describes
comparative theology as ‘interreligous, comparative, dialogical and
confessional.’[^32] These last two terms are important elements in
understanding Clooney’s work as a whole and build on the approach taken
in*Theology After Vedanta* .  Comparative theology is ‘dialogical’ in
that such theology should be accountable to others.  What is said about
them should be accurate and the goal is a genuine conversation between
theologians and theologies.  The expectation of Christian theologians is
that members of other religious traditions will also engage in the same
type of theological conversation, using Christian texts as their other
tradition for study.  It is ‘confessional’ in that the comparative
theologian is a committed believer within his or her own tradition and
the purpose of comparative theology is to seek a deeper understanding of
his or her faith, but that this process of understanding now includes
engagement with another religious tradition.  The theologian will still
hold to the faith claims of his or her own tradition and critically
appraise others, challenging and rejecting, as well as accepting some of
the ideas encountered.[^33]

In this book Clooney considers what a number of Hindu and Christian
theologians have had to say about five central theological themes:
rational proofs for the existence of God, the nature of God, the
possibility of divine embodiment and the relation of revelation to
reason.  Thus, for instance, he considers and compares the fact that
theologians in both Christian and Hindu traditions have developed forms
of the cosmological proof for the existence of God, as well as accounts
that reject this proof.[^34]   All these arguments are of interest and
importance to any theologian who seeks to resolve this particular issue:

Since the arguments cross cultural and religious boundaries, theologians
of all traditions regardless of their faith positions must decide where
they stand on issues related to reasoning about God’s existence. They
must discern which theologians from which religious traditions are their
real allies and then pose their arguments in forms that are
comparatively and dialogically intelligible and credible. Nor do the
sides, once recognized, remain entirely stable. Arguments may actually
lead somewhere; persuasion may work; theologians may change their minds;
intellectual and religious conversion becomes possible.[^35]

In these five case studies what emerges is both that there is reasoning
within these traditions about these themes and that a rational
conversation can take place across the traditions.  The positions
theologians develop and the reasons they give for them are open to
scrutiny by others.  They are accountable to others and are likely to be
better reasoned accounts if they take into account what others say.

Thus comparative theology is simply theology that considers all the
views and arguments available to it.  Clooney argues that in the
contemporary context where religious traditions are in such close
proximity it is difficult to justify limiting theology to the study of
just one tradition and to ignore these other traditions:

Religions are unique and truths are revealed, while theology remains in
large part a more mundane, complex and interreligious activity in which
there is no substitute for comparative and dialogical practice.

While individual theologians might be excused due to their narrow
specializations, on the whole no theologian can intelligently avoid
theology’s interreligious implications.  Consequently, good theologians
are inevitably involved in reconstructing theology as a comparative and
dialogical project that thereafter can be seen as confessional,
attentive to specific traditions’ views and confident in asserting
arguable religious truths.[^36]

For his own part Clooney does not attempt to develop a systematic
theology out of the interreligious engagements he undertakes.  He is
primarily concerned to explore what is involved in such comparative
theology itself, what methods are to be employed and what counts for
good practice. He is content to point to the presence of what seem to be
common themes and methods across traditions, be they textual or
discursive in nature, rather than make any major claim about any
theological account that might be constructed out of this encounter.

Clooney’s view of comparative theology has much in common with Aquinas’
approach, though the scope has now widened to include Hindu traditions.
Both use texts from non-Western philosophy as authorities and enter into
reasoned discussion with the views found in them.   Both show a
confidence that communication can take place.   At the same time,
Clooney differs from Aquinas both in the attention he gives to modern
hermeneutical theory and, related to that, the emphasis he places on the
dialogical character of good comparative theology.  He is sensitive to
questions about whether, or to what degree, someone outside a tradition
can enter into it and understand it.[^37]   He is aware of the fact that
such comparative study uses and reads texts in a way that is different
from their traditional role and understanding.  This is where the
dialogical character of such theology is very important.  A theologian
should attempt to get an authentic and accurate understanding of the
traditions he or she is studying and be accountable to members of those
traditions.   Such a theological conversation is not intended to be a
one-sided exploitation of another tradition, but a mutual, positive and
respectful interaction, open to such transformation as the faith
commitments of theologians and their traditions allow and encourage.

How well, then, does Clooney’s work meet the challenges facing
comparative theology?  In terms of the degree to which comparative
theologians are Christian theologians, Clooney does identify himself as
a Catholic Jesuit theologian and is concerned that his theology is
communicated to and received by the Catholic community.  At the same
time, his work remains almost entirely articulated within the context of
the academy and received by fellow academics.  In any case, Clooney
concludes very little by way of substantial constructive developments of
any aspect of Catholic theology in the light of the engagements he has
undertaken, so that it becomes difficult to make any assessment about
the difference such engagement might make to reflection on Catholic
faith.  Rather the focus of his work is almost entirely on the process
of doing comparative theology as such.  Thus it remains to be seen what
degree of acceptance his comparative theology gains within the Catholic
community and what contribution it actually makes to Catholic
theology.   Clooney likewise argues that comparative theology should be
concerned with the truth and value from a Christian perspective of what
it studies, but refrains in practice from any substantial reading of the
Hindu accounts through the interpretative and critical lens of Catholic
faith or from making much by way of specific judgement about the truth
or value of the Hindu accounts he considers.[^38]   For Clooney, the
focus of comparative theology is primarily on what the Christian
theologian learns from other traditions about his or her own faith in
the light of the other tradition, even though it does not exclude
questions of appraisal of the other tradition as well.  Moreover, he
argues that the larger questions of the meaning and truth of other
religions as such is more the task of theology of religions than of
comparative theology.[^39]

In terms of epistemological concerns, Clooney’s work is many ways a
model for good practice.  His outstanding Indological scholarship itself
is matched by a sensitivity to the dialogical and hermeneutical issues
involved in such comparative reading.  He acknowledges that a Christian
theologian’s entry as an outsider into Hindu traditions will be limited
and imperfect, but argues that there can still be a real understanding
of the texts and genuine rational discussion across the traditions.
However, his work remains a product of a particular tradition, Western
Christian theology.  As the Hindu academic, Parimal Patil points out in
his response to*Hindu God, Christian God,* from a Hindu perspective the
work is one clearly framed by the expectations and categories of a
Christian theology done in the modern Euro-American academic context,
one that extracts and transforms the Hindu materials in the
process.[^40]

Keith Ward
----------

Keith Ward’s approach is at once different from that of Clooney because
his comparative work is set in a much grander frame of enquiry.  Ward
takes major theological themes and considers them in the light of a
number of different religious traditions, as well as more recent
developments in Western scientific, philosophical and historical
perspectives.  His major and mature work is found in a four volume
series,[^41] which he describes as a ‘systematic Christian theology,
undertaken in a comparative context.’[^42]

In the first volume of the series,*Religion and Revelation* (1994) Ward,
like Clooney, argues that the comparative approach in theology is the
proper theological response to the contemporary world.  Theology is
faced by an awareness of the diversity of religious traditions and hence
of convergent and divergent accounts of the major themes with which
theology is concerned.  In this context theology should consider and
engage with other religions just as in the past it has engaged with the
ideas and cultures current at the time:

I think the time has come when it is positively misleading to consider
religious traditions in isolation. Theologians have in fact always taken
their interpretative clues from philosophical and cultural factors not
confined to Christianity.  Aquinas, for example, took Aristotelian
philosophy, well seasoned with Platonism, and used it to rethink
Christian doctrine in the thirteenth century. For a short time, his
works were even banned from the University of Paris; but it was not long
before they became definitive for the Roman Catholic Church. Does it
make sense to treat the content of a religion as a self-contained
corpus, as though it at least was immune from external influence, and as
though light could not be thrown upon it by a consideration of claims
made by other faiths?[^43]

Ward argues that to meet the different contemporary challenges there is
need for a modification of Aquinas’ concept of theology as*sacra
doctrina* .  While accepting a definition of theology as the ‘rational
elucidation of revelation,’[^44] he argues that since contemporary
theology is faced by a variety of claims for divine revelation, as well
as by critical objections to any claim for revelation by developments in
modern historical and scientific knowledge, theology cannot be content
just to assume the self-evident truth of a given revelation, as Aquinas
does, but has to go further back and consider the origins and status of
revelation itself and only then to offer a reasoned account justifying a
particular revelation.[^45]   In regards to other major themes, theology
likewise should be open to rethinking beliefs in the contemporary
context.  For Ward, theology is, thus, a ‘*self-critical* discipline,
aware of the historical roots of its own beliefs,*a pluralistic
discipline* , prepared to engage in conversation with a number of living
traditions; and*an open-ended discipline* , being prepared to revise
beliefs if and when it comes to seem necessary.’[^46]

To some extent, Ward wants to differentiate comparative theology from
confessional theology.   He states that confessional theology is the
exploration of a given revelation by those who fully accept it and live
by it, whereas comparative theology is ‘an intellectual discipline which
enquires into ideas of ultimate value and goal of human life, as they
have been perceived and expressed in a variety of religious
traditions.’[^47]   Ward’s concern is, however, to widen the scope of
theology rather than reject the value and importance of faith commitment
as such.  When he comes to sum up what he has achieved in the last of
the four volumes,*Religion and Community* (2000), he makes it clear that
the result for a Christian theologian is meant to be a better Christian
theology:

The first result of the investigation in these volumes has been to
provide an interpretation of Christian faith that remains recognizably
mainstream, while being modified by its response to both critical and
complementary insights from non-Christian traditions.  The second result
is, I hope, to provide a comparative investigation of the concepts of
revelation, God, human nature and destiny, and of the nature of a
religious community.  It is precisely because that comparative study is
undertaken from a Christian viewpoint (and all such study must be
undertaken from some viewpoint, acknowledged or not) that it comes to
constitute a positive Christian theology.[^48]

Like Clooney, Ward is also concerned about the dialogical character of
such theology.  He stresses that comparative theology is a ‘co-operative
enterprise.  It is a way of doing theology in which scholars holding
different world-views share together in the investigation of concepts of
ultimate reality, the final human goal, and the way to achieve it.’[^49]
What theologians say about other traditions should also be something
that members of those traditions can accept as an accurate description,
without excluding critical evaluations from being possible and
acceptable.

Ward is also a leading contemporary philosophical theologian and his
work is a sustained exercise in carefully reasoned constructive
theology.   Ward’s aim here is again more ambitious than Clooney.  Ward
intends, we have seen, to produce a ‘systematic Christian theology
undertaken in a comparative context.’  Thus in an earlier work,*Concepts
of God* (1998), he argues that there is an understanding of an ultimate
Reality as transcendent, eternal and immutable being, but also as the
source of the world, present in all the classical or pre-modern accounts
of five major religious traditions, including Advaita Vedanta and
Thomist Christianity.[^50]   In*Religion and Creation* (1996), on the
other hand, he considers four twentieth century theological accounts in
which the ultimate Reality is understood as having a more dynamic and
responsive relationship with the world than the classical accounts
allow.  For his part, Ward finds the classical account paradoxical to
the point of incoherent and suggests that the modern development
provides both a better account philosophically, as well as one that
accords with the picture of God found in the sacred texts and spiritual
experience of members of these traditions.  He thus promotes a ‘dual
aspect theism,’ in which God is affirmed to have both an immutable,
eternal aspect and a dynamic, responsive and relational aspect.   This
he finds already implicit in the classical traditions, but only fully
acknowledged and developed in modern accounts.[^51]

Ward’s type of comparative theology is thus clearly one that results in
an account rather different in theological method and contents from that
of Aquinas.  His approach is also one that is strikingly different in
scope and aims from that of Clooney.  Ward is keen to argue that his
approach is theology rather than religious studies and is that of an
Anglican clergyman working within the tradition of liberal Protestant
theology, which is marked by a rejection of the inerrancy of authority
and by an openness to significant revision of Christian doctrine and
claims in the light of the encounter with other religious traditions,
general philosophical reflection and recent scientific discoveries.[^52]
Like Clooney, Ward argues that comparative theology engages with
questions of truth and value, but for Ward this means the critical
examination of all the religious traditions he deals with according to
the same principles of revision as he applies to Christian doctrine and
claims.

Ward’s general epistemological stance coheres with his liberal
Protestant theology.  While affirming that the comparative theologian’s
work is done from the perspective of the tradition to which he or she
belongs, Ward is keen to argue that there can and should be a neutral
comparative theology that is distinct from confessional theology.  He
also argues that there are neutral criteria for rationality that people
in different religious traditions share, against the idea that
rationalities are particular to the religious tradition a person belongs
to.[^53]   Here he refers and rejects an argument put forward by Gavin
D’Costa that all theology about other religions is done according to the
criteria and standards of one’s own tradition, in other words,  the kind
of confessional theology from which Ward wants to distinguish
comparative theology.[^54]   Ward seems here, however, to create a
dichotomy that is unnecessary.  In the case of the confessional and
tradition conditioned theology of Aquinas and Clooney the ability to
reason across religious traditions is depicted as part of a common human
nature, but still formed by the tradition of revelation and faith to
which the theologian belongs.  In fact, Ward’s comparative theology is
as much conditioned by the categories of his own Christian tradition as
Clooney’s is.  The decision to write a systematic theology, the choice
of the major themes for the volumes within it and the type of concepts
and terms used to discuss the different traditions are all drawn from
liberal Christian theology as done in the Western academy.

Ward’s own approach is then one very much formed by and consistent with
the criteria of a theologian working within the liberal Protestant
tradition.  However, the kind of revisions Ward makes to central
Christian doctrines and claims, especially about revelation, God, and
Christology, mean that the content of his theological account is
unattractive to those outside the liberal tradition, while his
epistemological approach seems both to understate the importance of
particular traditions in shaping theology and in any case to be
unnecessary, in order to secure the possibility of theological openness
to other traditions.


