Conclusion: Theological Engagement with Non-Western Philosophy
==============================================================

At the beginning of this chapter we noted a number of objections to
contemporary comparative theology and to the engagement with non-Western
philosophy it promotes. Part of our response has been to point to the
continuity between Scholastic theology and such contemporary
engagements.  In itself theological engagement with non-Western
philosophy has for long been an accepted and valued part of the work of
Western Christian theology. Contemporary comparative theology may be
viewed just a modern application of this, widening the scope of such
engagement to include further non-Western philosophies such as Hinduism
and Buddhism.  Thus to object to Western Christian engagement with
non-Western philosophy in principle is to object to the whole history of
encounter with non-Christian philosophy and culture, including Greek
philosophy.

However, even if the continuity of contemporary comparative theology
with longstanding traditions of Christian theology is granted, this
still leaves some major challenges that contemporary comparative
theology must meet if it is to become a component of mainstream theology
in the future.  A*sine qua non* is that the particular Christian
community to which the comparative theologian belongs receives his or
her work as a legitimate and useful part of its own theological
reflection.  This depends on what the scope and task of theology are
perceived to be within that community, and also on the exercise of an
ecclesial responsibility on the part of a theologian who belongs to that
community.   In the case of Clooney and Ward, they work in different
Christian traditions and the divergence of their comparative theology
reflects this.  Nonetheless, they do show a concern to locate their
theology within the tradition to which they belong.  Yet the
accountability of contemporary comparative theology in general to
Christian communities is often weak because of the academic context in
which comparative theology is done. The modern university setting makes
comparative theologians immune to how well their theology is understood
and received by these communities and can be conducive to the
comparative theologian developing theological accounts that are fairly
free-floating experiments in theological speculation, without any
mooring in any particular ecclesial community.[^55]

When it comes to the wider issues of intercultural communication and the
particular charge of Orientalism, the emphasis contemporary comparative
theology gives to the dialogical aspect of such engagement is a helpful
and important further development.  Any form of cultural or
interpersonal communication would seem to involve an element of
subjective interpretation and involves a fusion rather than simply a
meeting of cultures.  What is at stake is not whether such interaction
should occur, but what principles of good practice should govern it.
There should at least be an attempt to develop an account of another
culture that is recognisable as such by that culture.  It is such a
commitment to good practice that is emphasised in the dialogical aspect
of contemporary comparative theology. However, in order to gain fuller
acceptance for their work they still need to address more fully the
epistemological as well as the cultural objections to the interpretation
and use of non-Western and non-Christian texts by Western and Christian
theologians, as well the contested nature of assertions of common
rationality or concepts across traditions.  One way forward is for
comparative theologians to acknowledge more fully the ways in which any
attempt to translate and use concepts from one tradition by another is
in reality a transformation both of those concepts as used in their own
tradition and a transformation of the new tradition in which they come
to be used.[^56]

If Scholastic theology provides a precedent for contemporary comparative
theology, the Thomist engagement with non-Western philosophy itself
remains of considerable continuing interest and value for contemporary
theology.   Indian and other Eastern philosophies have much to
contribute both to contemporary Thomist reflection on doctrines such as
the nature of God and creation.  The identification that there are
non-Western forms of Scholastic enquiry may, likewise, contribute to the
understanding and promotion of this theological genre in the
contemporary academy.  The Thomist is committed in principle to such an
encounter, open to disagreement as well as agreement, as good reasoning
in the pursuit of truth demands. [57]


