The Shari'ah
============

The Place of Shari'ah in Islam
------------------------------

The word *"shari'ah"* literally means "a way." In Islamic terminology,
it means the legal system of Islam. In this book, however, we will
translate the word *shari'ah* as the laws of Islam or the Islamic laws.

"Islam is a *din --* a religion." What does a Muslim mean when he uses
the word *din* or religion in this sentence? Does it mean just
"believing" in the funda­mentals of Islam? Or does it mean just "living"
accord­ing to the teachings of Islam without actually believing in God?
No, both these explanations are incomplete. The word *din* or religion,
when used for Islam, means believing in the fundamentals as well as
living according to the Islamic laws.

This concept of religion is beautifully conveyed in the terms used by
Islamic scholars to describe the fundamental beliefs and the practical
laws of Islam. The "beliefs" are described as "the roots of religion"
*(usulu 'd-din).* The "*shari'ah* laws" are described as "the branches
of religion" *(furu’ 'd-din).* Beliefs without practice is incomplete
Islam; and practice without belief may be useful in this world but not
of much use in the hereafter.

The shari'ah is a complete way of life; no aspect of human life is
outside its domain. Islam expects a Muslim to follow its laws in every
aspect of life: personal and familial, religious and social, moral and
political, eco­nomic and business, etc. After all, "Muslim" means one
who submits to God.

The Qur'an says:

When Allah' and His Messenger have decreed a matter, it is not for any
believing man or believing woman to have a choice in their affair. And
whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger has gone astray into clear
error. (Surah Al-Ahzaab, 33:36)

What is the need for the Shari'ah?
----------------------------------

Man's nature dictates that he can only function prop­erly within a
society, and a society depends for its existence on laws and
regulations. Islam teaches that God has sent a series of messengers and
prophets with divine laws for man's guidance from the very first day of
his creation. The last Messenger was Prophet Muham­mad (may peace and
blessings of God be upon him and his family) who brought the final and
the perfect mes­sage, Islam, as a guide for mankind till the end of
time.

Many people think there is no need for God-made laws, we can make laws
by ourselves. Islam believes that human being is a very sophisticated
creature; and since he has not made his own body, nor did he create the
world in which he lives, he, therefore, is not the best candidate for
making laws about himself. Common sense says that when you a buy a
complicated equipment (for example, a computer), you should use it
according to the "instruction manual" prepared by the manufacturer of
that particular machine. To learn the computer by trial and error is not
the smart way. Similarly, God as the Creator of man and the earth knows
better how the human being should live.

The "instruction manual" that God sent for us is known as the Qur'an.
But human being is not just any ordinary machine; rather he is more
complicated than the most advanced computer a human can ever produce. So
God did not only send the Qur'an -- He also sent an instructor known as
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). The Prophet of Islam brought the Qur'an to us
and also provided practical examples in his own life. According to
Shi'ah Islam, after the Prophet, the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt are the
protectors of the Qur'an and the interpreters of its laws.

The Superiority or God-made Laws over the Man-made Laws
-------------------------------------------------------

At this point, I would like to point out the superiority of the Islamic
laws over the man-made laws. Man-made laws are by necessity influenced
by the law-makers' social and racial biases. The United Nations
Organisa­tion is the best example of how policies are enforced only when
it suits the interest of the super-powers. The rule of the game in
man-made laws is not honesty and justice, it is "the might is right".

God-made laws are superior because of the following facts:  
 God is above class status;  
 God is above racial prejudice;  
 God is above the gender rivalry;  
 God, as the Creator, fully knows the humans as well as the world in
which they live.

God-made laws will be just and based on fully informed decision. Let me
demonstrate the superiority of God-made laws by using the example of
capital punishment.

The secular system always swings according to the mood of the people:
sometimes, the people feel that capital punishment for murder is not
right and so they pressure their representatives to vote against capital
punishment. But when crime rates increase and serial murder cases occur
more frequently, public opinion changes and the legislators are
influenced in favour of capital punishment.

Actually both sides of this issue reflect the Judeo-­Christian basis of
the Western society. Judaism, on the one hand, insists on the principle
of justice which demands "an eye for an eye". On the other hand,
Chris­tianity promotes the principle of mercy by saying "turn thy other
cheek."

Islam, the final version of God-made laws, takes a balanced look at the
issue of capital punishment and has beautifully accommodated both the
principles of justice and mercy in its system. The Western system did
not realize the difference between the two principles of justice and
mercy: while justice can be demanded and legislated, mercy cannot be
forced or made into a law. You can always plead for mercy but you can
never demand mercy.

Islam takes this difference into full consideration, and, therefore, it
talks about the capital punishment on two different levels: legal and
moral. On the legal level, it sanctions the principle of justice by
giving the right of retaliation to the victim. But, immediately, the
Qur'an moves on to the moral level and strongly recommends the victim to
forgo his right of retaliation and either to forgive the criminal or to
settle for a monetary compen­sation. This issue has been clearly'
mentioned in the following verse of the Qur’an:

In it (the Torah), We wrote to them: "A life for a life, an eye for an
eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and
there is retaliation for wounds." But (before you act according to your
right, remember that) whosoever forgoes (his right of retaliation), it
shall be an expiation for him (against his own sins). (Surah al-Maaida,
5:45)

Thus Islam has very beautifully provided the legal safeguard for human
life on the social level and also encouraged mercy from a moral point of
view on the individual level. If human beings are left on their own in
this issue, they will always swing between the two extremes of justice
and mercy -- only Islam, the final version of God-made legal system can
accommodate both these principles.


