How to Live by the Shari'ah?
============================

During the Days of the Prophet
------------------------------

The Muslims during the days of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) lived by the
shari’ah by following the Qur’an and the *sunnah*. *Sunnah* means the
example of the Prophet.

Was not the Qur'an enough on its own? The Qur'an is a book of guidance
which was sent for the entire human world till the end of time. As such,
it only deals with the general issues and mentions only the basic
principles underlying the Muslim way of life. The Qur'an is more like a
constitution than a book of law. The details were left to the Prophet
(PBUH). This is quite clear from the following verses of the Qur'an:

***He raised up among the common people a Messen­ger from among
themselves to recite to them His revelations, to purify them, and to
teach them the Book and the wisdom. (Surah al-Jumu’a, 62:2)***

And We have revealed to you (0 Muhammad) the Reminder (that is, the
Qur'an) so you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to them,
and so that they may reflect (Sura an-Nahl, 16:44).

These two verses definitely prove that Prophet Mu­hammad (PBUH) was not
just a 'mail-man' whose only job was to deliver the Qur’an to us. He was
a teacher and a commentator of the Qur'an. Even his actions are a source
of guidance for Muslims:

You have a good example in Allah's Messenger for whosoever hopes for God
and the last day, and remembers God oft (Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:21).

The obedience to the Prophet (PBUH) has been considered as the proof of
loving Allah (SWT):

Say (OMuhammad), 'If you love Allah, then follow me; (if you do so)
Allah will love you and forgive for you your sins.' (Surah aal-‘Imraan,
3:31).

To show the importance of obeying the Prophet (PBUH), Allah (SWT)
further says,

Whoever obeys the Prophet has surely obeyed Allah. (Surah an-Nisaa,
4:80)

The Qur'an is not only silent on the details of things which can change
over time, it is also silent on the rules of worship which can never
change. For example, the Qur'an in twenty-five different places commands
the Muslims to say the daily prayers *(salat),* but not once has Allah
(SWT) explained how the Muslims are to say their prayers. (The only
exception is that of *salatu 'l-khawf,* the prayer said in a
battle-field or when one is in danger.) This silence on the part of the
Qur'an, I believe, was for the specific purpose of forcing the people to
go to the Prophet (PBUH), ask him for details and follow his example.

During the Days of the Imams
----------------------------

After the Prophet's death, the Muslims were very much divided on the
issue of leadership. This gave birth to the two groups known as the
Shi'ahs and the Sunnis. The Shi' ahs believed in the leadership of Imam'
Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and the Sunnis believed in the leadership of
Abu Bakr.

The Shi'ahs lived by the shari'ah by following the Qur’an, and the
sunnah of the Prophet and of the imams.

The *sunnah,* in Shi'ah definition, means "the sayings, deeds and silent
approval of the Prophet and the twelve Imams of Ahlul-Bayt." Although
the issue of the lead­ership is beyond the scope of this study, I would
like to mention one reason why the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt are preferable as
the source of the shari' ah than anyone else.

The Muslims of the early days realized the impor­tance of the Prophet's
sunnah and started to memorize his sayings known as *hadith.* Later
generations pre­served the saying they had heard from the companions of
the Prophet in the books of hadith. Even the actions of the Prophet,
observed by his companions, were pre­served in writing. But this process
of preserving the sunnah of the Prophet was not immune from mistakes and
forgery. Many sayings were invented and wrong­fully attributed to the
Prophet during the early period of the Islamic history, specially during
the Umayyid era. At times, the rulers bribed the companions to fabricate
'hadith' in their favour. At other times, some people invented ahadith
for apparently good causes not realiz­ing that they were using wrong
means of trying to make people more religious!

In this background of the early development of hadith, we must find an
authentic and informed source for the sunnah of the Prophet. When you
look at the Muslims of the Prophet's days, you can find no one who was
more knowledgeable, informed, reliable and closer to the Prophet than
the Ahlul-Bayt, the family of the Prophet: Fatimah, 'Ali and their sons.
After all, it is the Qur' an which testifies to their spiritual purity
of the highest form by saying,

“'Verily Allah intends to purify you, O Ahlul-Bayt, a thorough
purification." (Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:33)[^1]

Combine this verse about the Ahlul-Bayt's purity with the following:

"It is the holy Qur'an in a preserved tablet, none shall touch it but
the purified ones." (Surah al-Waqia, 56:79)

The real sense of this verse is that the Qur’an which is "in a preserved
tablet" is not accessible to anyone except those who are purified by
Him. This shows that the Ahlul-Bayt could understand the Qur'an better
than any other Muslim. It is for this very reason that Allah (SWT)
commanded His Messenger to ask the people to love his Ahlul-Bayt:

“Say (0 Muhammad), 'I do not ask from you any reward (for teachinf Islam
to you) except to love my near ones.'” (Surah ash-Shura, 42:23)[^2]

This love was made obligatory because it would automatically entail
obedience of those whom one loves. If the Ahlul-Bayt were not truthful,
reliable, and worthy of following, would Allah(SWT) command us to love
them?

These few verses are enough to show that the best commentators of the
Qur' an and the most authentic source for the Prophet's sunnah are the
Imams of Ahlul-Bayt. The Prophet (PBUH) himself said, *"I am leaving
among you two worthy things. As long as you hold fast on to them both,
you will never go astray after me. One is greater than the other: the
Book of Allah (which is a rope suspended from the heaven to the earth)
and my descen­dants, my Ahlul-Bayt. They will not separate from each
other until they come to me at the (fountain of) Kawthar (in the
hereafter). Therefore, see how you recompense me by the way you deal
with them."*

This is not the place to discuss the authenticity of this hadith, but it
will suffice to quote Ibn Hajar al-Makki, a famous Sunni polemicist.
After recording this hadith from various companions who had heard it
from the Prophet at vari­ous places and times, Ibn Hajar says, "And
there is no contradiction in these [numerous reports] since there was
nothing to prevent the Prophet from repeating [this statement] at those
various places because of the impor­tance of the holy Book and the pure
Family.”[^3]

We can conclude from these verses and the hadith mentioned above that
the Ahlul-Bayt are the divinely appointed commentators of the Qur' an,
and the most authentic and the best source for the sunnah. It is for
this reason that we prefer them to all other sources. Even when we quote
a hadith from the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt, it is actually the hadith of the
Prophet which they have preserved as the true successors of the last
Messenger of God.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says, "My hadith is the hadith of my father,
the hadith of my father is that of my grandfather, the hadithof my
grandfather is that of Husayn [bin' Ali], the hadith of Husayn is that
of Hasan [bin 'Ali], the hadith of Hasan is that of Amiru ‘l-mu’minin
['Abi bin Abi Talib], the hadith of Amiru ‘l-mu’minin is that of the
Messenger of God (s.a.w.), and the hadith of the Messenger is a
statement of Allah, the Almighty, the Great.” [^4]

The historical circumstances did not allow the op­portunity to the first
three Imams of Ahlul-Bayt to teach and train their followers in the
matters of the shari'ah. It was after the tragedy of Karbala that the
Imams, especially the fifth and the sixth Imams, got the oppor­tunity to
formally train their followers in the shari'ah laws. The training by
these Imams actually laid the foundation for the development of
*ijtihad* and *taqlid* among the Shi'ahs after the occultation of the
twelfth Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.).

During the Ghaybat of the Present Imam
--------------------------------------

During the Minor Occultation *(ghaybat)* of the pre­sent Imam, it was
still possible for the Shi'ahs to present their problems to the Imam
through his specially ap­pointed representatives. These representatives
were 'Uthman bin Sa'id al-'Amri (260-265 A.H./ 875-879 C.E.), Muhammad
bin' Uthman al-'Amri (265-305 A.H./ 879-917 C.E.), Husayn bin Ruh
(305-326 A.H. /917-937 C.E.) and 'Ali bin Mu­hammad al-Samiri (326-329
A.H./ 937-940 C.E.).

However, after the Imam went into the Major Occul­tation, the problems
of the shari'ah were resolved through the process known as *ijtihad* and
*taqlid* -- the two most important ways of living by the shari'ah.

Summary
-------

During the days of the Prophet (PBUH), the Muslims lived by the shari'ah
by following the Qur'an and the sunnah.

During the days of the eleven Imams and the Minor Occultation of the
Present Imam, the Shi'ahs lived by the shari'ah by following the Qur'an
and the sunnah of the Prophet and the Imams.

During the Major Occultation of the Present Imam, the Shi'ahs, based on
the training given to them by the previous Imams, developed the system
of *ijtihad* and *taqlid.* Under this system, one group of the community
studies the science of Islamic laws, specializes in that field and
produces mujtahids. The non-mujtahid Shi'ahs, who obviously forms the
majority, follows the opinions of the mujtahids of their time in
shari'ah matters.

[^1]: For details on this verse, see Rizvi, S.S.A., Imamat: the
Vicegerency of the Prophet (Tehran: Wofis, 1984) pp.49-54

[^2]: For details on the love for the Ahlul Bayt, see Mutahhari, M.,
Wilayah: the Station of the Master (Tehran: Wofis, 1982) p.50-62.

[^3]: Al-Makki, Ibn Hajar, as-Sawd'iqu 'l-Muhriqah, chapter 11, section
1. Also see S.S.A. Rizvi, Imamat; Sharafu 'd-Din a1-Musawi, The Right
Path; and S.M.H. Jafry, The Origin and Early Development of Shi'a Islam.

[^4]: In Shi'ah sources, see al-Kulayni, al-Usul mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 1
(Tehran: Daru ‘l-Kutubi 'l-Islamiyyah, 1388 AH) p. 52; in Sunni sources,
see ash-Sha'rani, at-Tabaqatu 'l-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 28; Abu Nu'aym,
Hilyatu 'l-Awliya', vol. 3, p. 193, 197.


