Taqlid, Following The Expert
============================

Note: This chapter was first published in al-Serat (London: vol. IX, No.
2, 1983); then it was published as a booklet in 1985/ 1405 in Vancouver.

The Meaning of Taqlid
---------------------

*Taqlid* literally means "to follow someone", "to imi­tate someone". In
Islamic legal terminology it means "to follow the *mujtahid* in
religious laws." However, this following is based on an informed
decision taken by the individual Shi'ah man or woman. Before you start
fol­lowing the opinions of a mujtahid in the shari' ah laws, you have to
ascertain that he has the required expertise and that he is of upright
character.

*Taqlid* of a mujtahid, as explained in previous chap­ter, is only when
we do not have direct access to our Present Imam (a.s.). If the Imam had
been accessible to us, then we do not have to follow any mujtahid.

Is Taqlid Reasonable?
---------------------

It is not always unreasonable to follow others and to hold uncritical
faith in them. We can logically distin­guish four possible forms of
imitation:

that of an ignorant person by an ignorant person;  
 that of a learned person by a more learned person;  
 that of an ignorant person by a learned person;  
 that of a learned person by a less learned person.

It is quite clear that the first three forms of imitations are
unreasonable and can serve no purpose. However, the fourth kind of
imitation is obviously not only rea­sonable, but also necessary and
matter of common sense; in our everyday life we follow and imitate
others in many things; we like to feel that we are taking the advice of
experts in matters outside our own knowledge.

Someone who wishes to build a house explains the basic idea of what he
wants to the builder and then submits to his advice as to how he should
go about the actual construction. The patient follows the treatment
advised by his doctor; a litigant consults a lawyer when drawing up his
case for a court. The examples are abundant; in most cases the advice is
taken voluntarily, but sometimes the citizen may be required by law to
seek expert advice and act upon it, before, for example, he is allowed
to take some particularly dangerous drug. The clearest example is
obviously in case of a legal dispute between two parties, when they are
required to take their grievances before a judge and abide by his
decision if they cannot settle their dispute amicably.

The practise of *taqlid* is an example of the same kind: the person who
is not an expert in Islamic jurisprudence is legally required to follow
the instructions of the expert, that is, the mujtahid. And in this case,
the require­ment is an obligation which must be observed, for it is an
essential part of the divine law.

Once a person has come to accept Islam, it follows as a necessary
consequence that he must adhere to the shari'ah either by following a
mujtahid *(taqlid)* or by undertaking the acquisition of learning and
piety to such a degree that he becomes a mujtahid himself (*ijtihad*).

Support from the Qur'an & Sunnah
--------------------------------

This sensible practise of following the mujtahid in shari'ah laws has
been endorsed by Islam.

The Qur' an strongly exhorts at least a group of Muslims to devote their
time and energy in studying religion. This obligation is of such
importance that Allah (SWT) has exempted such persons from the duty of
jihad.

He says:

"It is not (right) for the believers to go forth all together (for
jihad). So why should not a party from every section of them (the
believers) go forth to become learned in the religion?..." (Surah
at-Tawba, 9:124).

More interesting is the reason and purpose of their knowledge: *" ...
to* ***warn*** *their people when they return to them, hopefully they
may* ***beware**." (Surah at-Tawba, 9:124)* This verse divides the
people into two groups: those who are learned in religious sciences and
those who are not. It is the duty of the learned to "warn" (a broad term
which implies advice and guidance) the common people, and it is expected
of the common people to "beware" (take heed of the learned persons'
advice and follow). In shari'ah matters, this process of guiding the
common people is technically known as "*ijtihad*," and the process of
following the guidance by the common people is technically known as
"*taqlid*".

The Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (peace be upon them all) have endorsed this
system in theory as well as in prac­tise:

**In** **Theory:** In a famous hadith, 'Umar ibn Hanzalah asked Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) about the legality of two Shi'ahs seeking a
verdict from an illegitimate ruler (or a judge appointed by such a
ruler) in a dispute over a debt or a legacy. The Imam's answer was that
was absolutely forbidden to do so; and then he read the following verse:

" ... (Yet in a dispute) they desire to summon one another to the
judgment of the taghut[^1] though they were commanded to reject and
disbelieve in him.”(Surah an-Nisaa, 4:60)

Then 'Umar ibn Hanzalah asked, "What the two (Shi'ahs) should do then?"
The Imam replied, "They must seek out one of your own who narrates our
tradi­tions, who is versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden,
who is well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as
judge and arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you. If the ruling
which he based on our laws is rejected then this rejection will be
tantamount to. ignoring the order of Allah (SWT) and rejecting us and
rejecting us IS the same as rejecting Allah (SWT), and this is the same
as polytheism. [^2]

In another hadith, Abi Khadijah relates that Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
sent him to his companions with the following message: "If a dispute or
a difference occurs among you about a property, then take care not to
seek judgment from those illegitimate [judges]; in­stead, you must seek
a person who knows what is permissible and what is forbidden by us, for
I appoint him as a judge over you. And take care that you do seek
judgement against one another with an unjust ruler.”[^3]

The least that these two narrations prove is that the Shi'ahs are not
allowed to refer to unauthorized judges for solution to their problems,
instead they are advised to seek the guidance of those who are
well-versed in the teachings of the Ahlul-Bayt. In these ahadith, the
prac­tise of seeking the advice of experts in shari'ah laws is taken for
granted.[^4]

**In** **Practise:** There are several documented cases of Shi'ahs who
asked the Imams of their time to appoint someone to adjudicate between
them in religious prob­lems. Such questions were raised by those who
lived far from Medina or those who could not gain access to their Imam
in Medina itself.

1. 'Ali ibn al-Musayyab asked Imam 'Ali ar-Riza (a.s.): "I live far away
and cannot always come to you, so from whom should I take the guidance
for my relig­ion?" The Imam replied, "From Zakariyyah bin Adam al-Qummi
..."

2. 'Abdu ‘l- ‘Aziz and Hasan bin 'Ali bin Yaqtin asked Imam 'Ali ar-Riza
(a.s.), "I cannot always reach to you to ask about our problems about
religious teach­ings. Is Yunfis bin' Abdu 'r-Rahman trustworthy enough
for seeking religious guidance?" The Imam replied in affirmative.

3. 'Abdullah bin Abi Ya'fur asked Imam Ja'far as­-Sadiq (a.s.), "I do
not meet you all the times nor is it possible for me to come [to you],
and at times one of our friends would come to ask a question from me for
which I would have no answer." The Imam said, "What does prevent you
from [seeking guidance from] Muhammad bin Muslim ath-Thaqafi, for he has
heard [many ahadith] from my father and was respectable in his views."

4. Shu'ayb al-'Aqraqufi asked Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.), "Sometimes we
need to ask about certain things, so whom should we ask?" The Imam
replied, "Take guidance from [Abu Basir] al-Asadi.”[^5]

These few examples prove beyond doubt that the practise of seeking the
guidance of those who are well­ versed in religion has been practically
endorsed by the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.).

Let me end this section with the statement of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi
(a.s.) in answer to a letter sent by Ishaq bin Ya'qub. The Present Imam
(a.s.) says, "As for the newly occurring circumstances, you should turn
(for guidance) to the narrators of our hadith, for they are my proof
over you and I am Allah's proof."[^6]

Qualifications of a Mujtahid
----------------------------

Becoming an expert in fiqh and other Islamic sci­ences is not in itself
enough for qualification as a *mujta­hid* whom the lay Shi' ahs can
follow.

In addition to this expertise, the Shi' ah laws lay down that a mujtahid
should be an Ithna-'Ashari Shi'ah and *‘Adil*. *'Adil* can be translated
as "just", but it includes other moral and legal qualities such as piety
and absten­tion from all that the shari'ah forbids and fulfillment of
all its obligations.

Imam Hasan al-'Askari (a.s.) quotes a long hadith from Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) in which the latter condemned the Jews for following the
rabbis. Then the Imam said, "And, similarly, if the lay people of our
ummah know in their *fuqaha*’ [^7] open sinfulness, strong racial
solidarity, greed for the vanities of this world and its forbidden
things, opposition to their opponents who deserve to be helped, and help
to their supporters who deserve to be opposed, then whoever from our
people follow such *fuqaha’,* then they are like the Jews who have been
condemned for following their rabbis."

Then the Imam says: "But if there is anyone among the *fuqaha’* who is
in control over his own self, protects his religion, sup­presses his
evil desires and is obedient to the com­mands of his Master, then the
people should follow him *(yuqalliduhu).*”

"And these qualities will not be found except in some Shi’ah
*fuqaha’*,not all of them…”[^8] These condi­tions in general and the
above hadith in particular, make it incumbent upon the believers to be
vigilant.

How Can a Believer Know who is a Mujtahid?
------------------------------------------

There are three recognized ways by which a person can discover who is a
mujtahid:

by his own personal knowledge if he is himself a religious scholar;  
 by the testimony of two *‘adil* and knowledgeable persons to someone's
being a mujtahid;  
 by a degree of popularity which leaves no doubt about a person's being
a mujtahid.

Once a mujtahid is followed by the Shi’ah commu­nity, he is known as
***marja'u ’t-taqlid*** *--* one to whom people refer in taqlid.

Most present day 'ulama' maintain that it is highly desirable not to
just follow any mujtahid but to follow a mujtahid who is *al-a'lam.* In
a general sense this means "the most learned", but in this specific
context it means the mujtahid who has the greatest expertise in deriving
the rulings of the shari' ah from its sources. The *a'lam* may be
recognized in any of the three ways mentioned above.

However, it is sometimes difficult for the Shiah 'ulama' to distinguish
who among all the prominent mujtahids is the most learned, and, as a
result, more than one mujtahid may be followed in taqlid at one time
(though not, of course, by the same person). This has been the case in
the seventies and the eighties; but such multiplicity rarely results in
any practical disagreement on legal matters within the Shi'ah community.

Differences among the Mujtahids in their Legal Opinions
-------------------------------------------------------

Many people wonder why it is that the mujtahids sometimes differ in
their religious opinions, or fatwas, when the bases of their ijtihad are
the same.

Firstly, any difference in the *fatwas* is never such as to be
contradictory; it is almost impossible to find a case of one mujtahid
saying some action is wajib and another saying it is haram.

Take, for instance, the case of the Friday prayer *(salatu 'l-jum'ah).*
All Shi'ah mujtahids believe that in the presence of the *ma'sum* Imam,
this *salat* is obliga­tory on Fridays because it is the Imam or his
repre­sentative who has the right to call the people to the Friday
prayer; but they differ as to what is the correct course of action when
the Imam is in Occultation.

The late Ayatullah Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim (d. 1970) was of the opinion
that *salatu 'l-jum'ah* is not obligatory during the Occultation of the
Imam, but it does not matter if someone performs it supposing that it is
expected of him, if he also prays the noon prayer *(salatu 'z-zuhr).*
Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim al-Khu'i says that "one can choose between
performing *salatu 'z-zuhr* or *salatu 'l-jum'ah;* but once the latter
is estab­lished with all its conditions (fulfilled), then it is
precau­tionarily obligatory *(ihtiyat wajib)* to participate in it."

Ayatullah Sayyid Ruhullah al-Khumayni says that "one can choose between
performing *salatu 'z-zuhr* or *salatu 'l-jum'ah;* but if one chooses
the latter, then it is advis­able *(mustahab)* to precautionarily
perform *salatu 'z-­zuhr* also." Although there are differences in the
opinions of these mujtahids, there is no clash that would, for example,
prevent the followers of one of them par­ticipating in *salatu
'l-jum'ah* if it were established.

Secondly, the existence of differences in scientific opinions is not to
be taken as a sign of a substantial defect in the quest for knowledge
and a reason for abandoning it altogether; it is, rather, a sign that
knowl­edge moves in progressive steps towards perfection. Differences of
opinions are to be found in all sciences, not just in *fiqh*.

There may, for example, be more than one opinion about the therapy for a
particular patient's disease, and all of these opinions may be
superseded later on by the development of a new method of dealing with
that disease. Thus these observations can be seen to be relevant not
only to differences between the opin­ions of contemporary scientists but
also to historical differences, and all these differences should be
regarded as signs of the dynamism within a science and as stages to be
passed in its route to perfection.

It should be remembered that the mujtahid formu­lates his opinions after
pushing his research and study as far as he can; that is all that is
expected of him, for he is neither inerrant *(ma'sum)* nor knower of the
unseen *(‘alimu ‘l-ghayb).* If the available sources of the shari'ah
lead a mujtahid to a particular conclusion and, let us suppose that on
the judgement, he comes to know that the actual shariah law was
something else -- then neither will he be punished for issuing that
*fatwa* nor will his followers be punished for acting accordingly,
because both had done what was humanly possible for them to do.

[^1]: "Taghut" means any thing or person who is followed without
authorization of God or his representatives. It is used for Satan, an
Idol or even a human being who misleads others.

[^2]: Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Usul mina ‘l-Kafi, vol. 1 (Tehran: Daru
‘l-Kutubi ‘l-Islamiyyah, 1379 AH) p.67; al-Furu’ mina ‘l-Kafi, vol.7,
p.412. In al-Hurr al ‘Amili, Wasa’ilu ‘sh-Shi’ah, see vol.18 (Beirut:
Dar Ihyai ‘t-Turathi ‘l-‘Arabi, 1391 AH) p.99.

[^3]: A1-'Amili, Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'ah, vol. 18, p. 100 who has quoted it
from at-Tusi, Tahzibu 'l-Ahkam, vol, 6, p. 303.

[^4]: Both the narrations quoted above are accepted by most of the
Shi’ah scholars of fiqh and hadith. The hadith narrated by ‘Umar ibn
Hanzalah is considered as a "maqbulah " (acceptable) and that by Abi
Khadijah is considered as a "mash-hurah" (famous) hadith, See, for
example, the par excellent mujtahid of the last century, Shaykh Murtaza
al-Ansari, Kitabu ‘l-Makasib (Tabriz: 1375 AH) p. 154. Moreover, these
ahadith have been used here as a secondary argument in favour of taqlid;
they are not initiating a process but just endorsing it.

[^5]: Wasa’ilu sh-Shi’ah, vol. 18, pp. 106, 107, 105, 103.

[^6]: Shaykh as-Saduq, Kamalu ‘d-Din wa Tamamu ‘n-Ni’mah (Tehran:
Maktabatu 's-Saduq, 1395 AH) p. 484; Shaykh at-Tusi, Kitabu ‘l-Ghaybah
(Najaf: Maktabatu 's-Sadiq, 1385 AH) p. 177; at-Tabrasi, al-Ihtijaj,
vol. 2 (Najaf: Daru ‘n-Nu’man, 1966) p. 283. The text quoted above is
from at-Tabrasi (c 6th cent. AH). There is a variation in the last part
of this hadith in books of at-Tusi (385-460 AH) and as-Saduq (d. 381).
Shaykh at-Tusi's version says, " ... and I am Allah's proof over you"
referring to all Shi'ahs whereas Shaykh as-Saduq’s version says, " ...
and I am A1lah's proof over them" referring to the mujtahids only.
Saduq’s version, who lived before Tusi, leaves absolutely no room for
the speculation done by a contemporary writer (Sachedina, Islamic
Messianism, p. 101) that Tusi's version "seems to have been tampered
with" by the 'ulama' of later or Safavid period (10th cent. AH) to
promote their own power and status!

[^7]: Fuqaha’ is plural of faqih which means expert of Islamic laws,
mujtahids.

[^8]: At-Tabrasi, al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 264.


