The Tendency of Rationalizing The Shari’ah Laws
===============================================

Note: This chapter was first published in 1984 (Vancouver), and then in
1985 (Vancouver).

Why we have to pray five times a day? Why dogs and pigs are regarded as
ritually impure animals? Why an animal slaughtered un-Islamically is
forbidden and ritually impure? These are but a few of the many
ques­tions asked by our youths about the shari' ah laws. They want to
rationalize every law of the shari'ah; they want to know the reason and
purpose of the legislation of these laws.

This chapter deals with this tendency and attempts to explain the
validity or otherwise of such a trend. Before explaining the validity or
otherwise of rational­izing the shari' ah laws, I would like to clarify
the fun­damental attitude of a Muslim towards the shari'ah.

The Scope of Rationalization
----------------------------

Islam is a *din* -religion. *Din* means a complete way of life
consisting of beliefs and laws (both legal and moral). To find the
Islamic attitude about understanding religion, we have to study the Qur'
an and the sunnah. In the Qur' an and the sunnah, we find two different
atti­tudes towards two different aspects of *din*. These two aspects of
*din* are:

(a) the fundamental beliefs known as *usul* ' *d-din --* the roots of
religion,

(b) the shari' ah laws known in general as *furu'u* ' *d-din --* the
branches of religion.

As for the "roots" of religion, Islam expects the Muslims to hold their
belief in the fundamentals of their religion after attaining conviction
of their truth through examination and reflection. The Qur’an clearly
con­demns those who follow others blindly in matters of beliefs:

***There is no compulsion in the religion (of Islam because) truly the
right path has become clearly distinct from error. (Surah al-Baqara,
2:256)***

Again the Qur'an says:

***And when it is said to them, "Come to what Allah has sent down, and
(to) the Messenger," they say, "Enough for us is what we found our
fathers do­ings." What, even if their fathers had knowledge of naught
and were not rightly-guided? (Surah al-Maaida, 5:104)***

This strong condemnation of the idol-worshippers for following their
fore-fathers blindly has been re­peated elsewhere:

***And when it is said to them, "Follow what Allah has sent down," they
say, "No, but we will "follow such things as we found our fathers
doing." (Surah al-Baqara, 2:170; Surah Luqman, 31:20)***

Islam says that one may consider the views and opinions of others, but
that one should only accept that which is reasonable to believe:

***“So (O Muhammad) give good tidings to My servants who give ear to the
word and follow the fairest of it. Those are the ones whom Allah has
guided, and those are men possessed of minds." (Surah az-Zumar,
39:17)***

Likewise, in the books of ahadith we find the Prophet and the Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt using intellectual arguments in matters of belief to convince
their oppo­nents or the seekers of truth. This itself is an example and
sunnah for the Muslims to base their belief on understanding and
conviction.

But as for the "branches" of religion, Islam expects absolute obedience
from the Muslims. The reason for this expectation is very obvious: Once
a person has believed, by his own free-will, in Allah as the Creator and
the Wise Author of laws, in Muhammad as the infallible Messenger of
Allah, and in the Qur'an as the authentic message of Allah-then it
follows as a neces­sary consequence that he must adhere to the shari' ah
laws.

This absolute obedience about the shari'ah laws can be inferred from the
following verses:

***“It behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their affairs when Allah and His Messenger
have decided a matter; and whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger,
he surely has strayed off a manifest straying.” (Surah al-Ahzaab,
33:36)***

***“O you who believe! Do not take precedence before Allah and His
Messenger (in shari'ah matters), and fear Allah; surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing.” (Surah al-Hujuraat, 49:1)***

***“O you who believe! Obey Allah, obey the Messenger and those who are
in authority among you (i.e., the Imams).” (Surah an-Nisaa’, 4:59)***

***“We have not sent a Messenger but to be obeyed.” (Surah an-Nisaa’,
4:64)***

To summarize: In Islamic beliefs, a Muslim is ex­pected to believe only
after reflection; and in Islamic laws, he is expected to follow them
without any reser­vations.

The Categories of Shari' ah Laws
--------------------------------

Now we come to the problem that why such and such law of the shari'ah
was legislated. Considering the rea­sons and purposes of the laws, the
shari'ah can be divided into four categories:

1. The laws whose **reasons and purposes are self** **­evident**: For
example, helping the needy is highly rec­ommended; killing is forbidden;
lying is evil; paying taxes like khums and zakat is obligatory. One does
not need any expertise or extraordinary intelligence to know that
helping the needy is good, paying taxes is necessary for preserving the
financial equilibrium in the society; and that killing and lying is
evil.

2. The laws whose **reasons and purposes have been explained in the
Qur'an and hadith**: For example, intoxicants are forbidden, interest is
prohibited, fasting in Ramadhan is obligatory and prayers are a must.

The Quran and hadith have said that intoxicant is one of the main causes
of evil because an intoxicated person is no longer in control of
himself. Although it took the world a long time and a bitter experience
to realize the wide-spread harm of drunkenness, Islam declared its harm
and evil fourteen centuries ago by saying

***"its sin is greater than its profit." (Surah al-Baqara, 2:219)***

Interest is forbidden in Islam. The Qur' an and hadith have explained
the harm of interest. Interest leads to destruction of the poor section
of the society, and all wealth gravitates towards the already wealthy
group.[^1]

Fasting is a physical and spiritual training which brings the servants
of Allah (SWT) nearer to Him and makes them more obedient to the
shari’ah.

Prayers is a means of expressing our gratitude to Allah (SWT):

***“O you who believe! Eat of the good things that We have provided you
with and thank Allah.” (Surah al-Baqara, 2:172);***

it is an important way of achieving peace of mind*:*

***“surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest.” (Surah
ar-Ra’ad, 13:28);***

and it is also a very effective method of making the believer more
obedient to the laws of Islam*:*

***“ surely the prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil.” (Surah
al-Ankaboot, 29:45)***

There are many ahadith of our Imams explaining the reasons and purposes
of many laws of the shari'ah. Shaykh as-Saduq, the famous Shi'ite
scholar, has col­lected many of these ahadith in his *‘Ilalu
‘sh-Sharaya’.*

3. The laws whose reasons and purposes have not been explained in the
Qur'an or hadith, but the rising horizon of human knowledge have helped
in under­standing their purpose and usefulness. For example, why pork is
forbidden[^2]; why circumcision is highly recommended by the shari'ah,
and why only the fish which have scales is permitted in Shi'ah fiqh.

For the benefit of circumcision, we quote Sherman Silber who says that:
"There are a number of reasons why circumcision is beneficial and why it
ought best be performed in infancy. First, it prevents cancer of the
penis in later life. Cancer of penis generally occurs when there has
been carelessness in taking care of one's foreskin. A second benefit of
circumcision is that the wives of circumcised men are less commonly
afflicted with cancer of the cervix. The most common benefit of
circumcision is that it prevents accumulation of oils and secretions
(called smegma) under the foreskin, which lead to infection, swelling,
and sometimes contraction of the foreskin so the tip of the penis is
trapped inside.[^3]

About the fish, it has been said that the fish that do not have scales
are harmful to human beings. Based on that research, American troops in
the east were directed that "tropical marine fishes without scales were
to be left alone."

It must be mentioned here that the reasons of the shari'ah laws which
have been discovered by human knowledge cannot be regarded as the actual
reason *(ra­tio legis)* for the legislation of those laws, because the
human knowledge is still in its infancy whereas Islam, the final shari'
ah of Allah (SWT), is to stay in practise up to the end of this world.
However, the scientific facts can be used to explain the usefulness and
benefits of the shari'ah laws.

4. The laws whose reasons and purposes have neither been explained in
the Qur'an and hadith, nor the new advancement in human knowledge has
been able to explain them: For example, why four rak'ats (cycles) in
noon, afternoon and night prayers while only three in evening and two in
*subh* prayers.

The Right Approach
------------------

As far as the first three types of shari'ah laws are concerned, there is
not much problem in explaining their reasons and purposes. The problem
arises when one starts to rationalize the laws which come under the
fourth category.

On the laws of the fourth category, the only thing which can be said is
that a Muslim should have complete faith that there surely are useful
purposes in these types of laws. The purpose can be of material or
spiritual nature, or both. Why should we have such a confidence in these
laws of the shari'ah?

Because, we, the Shi'ah Ithna 'Ashari Muslims, believe that all the
actions of Allah (SWT) have purpose, and that they are for the benefit
of human beings; and this includes the laws of the shari'ah.[^4] On
basis of this belief, we must have confi­dence that all His laws
(including those whose purposes are still unknown to us) have a purpose
and benefit for human beings.

One more thing which must be clarified at this point is that it is not
only the responsibility of the *‘ulama’* (the scholars of Islamic
religious sciences) to discover and explain the purpose and reason
underlying the shari'ah laws. Their primary duty is to explain the
shari'ah laws to the people. The responsibility for discovering and
explaining the purposes of the shari' ah laws must equally be shared by
the Muslim intellectuals who are experts of modern science.

Unfortunately, very few of the Muslim intellectuals are interested in
this aspect of the shari'ah, and those who are interested lack the
knowledge of the Qur'an and hadith. A bridge must be built between the
religious and worldly sciences; and, thanks be to Allah, some small
steps in that direction have been taken in last few years.

The belief that although we might not know the reason and purpose of a
certain shari' ah law, it surely has a good reason and useful purpose
behind it can be understood from the following episode in the Qur' an.
This episode also shows that if we are made aware of its reasons, we
would readily admit that it was the very right thing to do.

One day while preaching to his people, Prophet Musa (a.s.) thought about
himself that Allah has given him a great privilege and that he is the
most learned among the mankind. Allah was not pleased with even such a
slight indication of pride in Musa's mind, and so Jibrail was sent to
inform Musa that there is a person, among the servants of Allah, who is
more learned than him. He was also given an address to go and meet this
more learned person. Musa, along with one of his disci­ples, went to
meet the learned person who has not been named in the Qur'an but our
ahadith identify him as Khizr.

The Qur'an narrates in (*Surah al-Kahf, 18:60-82*) the details of their
meeting:

***Musa: "Can I follow you so that you may teach me the right knowledge
of what you have been taught (by Allah)?"***

***Khizr: "Surely you cannot have patience with me. How can you have
patience in (the things or*** ***actions) of which you do not have a
comprehen­sive knowledge?"***

***Musa: "If Allah wills, you will find me patient and I shall not
disobey you in any matter."***

***Khizr: "If you would follow me, then do not question me about
anything until I speak to you about it."***

***So they went their way until they reached a river where they embarked
on a boat. When they were close to their destination, Khizr made a hole
in the boat.***

***Musa: "Have you made a hole in it to drown its inmates? Surely you
have done a grievous thing."***

***Khizr: "Did I not say that you will not be able to have patience with
me?"***

***Musa: "O Khizr, do not blame me for what I forgot, and do not
constrain me to a difficult thing in my affair."***

***Then they went on until they met a young man. Khizr killed that
person.***

***Musa: "Have you killed an innocent person who had not killed anyone?
Certainly you have done an evil thing."***

***Khizr: "Didn't I say to you that you will not be able to have
patience with me."***

***Musa: "If I ask you about anything after this, then do not keep me in
your company; indeed, you shall then have found an excuse in my case (to
dismiss me from your company)."***

***They went on until they came to a town. They asked food from the
people of that town, but no one accepted them as guests. In that town,
they found a wall which was on the point of falling in ruin, so Khizr
repaired the wall and put it into the right state.***

***Musa: "If you had wished, you might certainly have taken a payment
for this work."***

***Khizr: "This is the parting between you and me. But before you leave,
I will inform you of the signifi­cance of my actions which you could not
under­stand:***

***- As for the boat, it belonged to some poor men who worked on the
river. I wished to make the boat slightly defective because a king was
com­ing behind them who seized every perfect boat by force.***

***- As for the young man, his parents were believ­ers and I feared lest
he would oppress them by rebellion and disbelief. And we desired that
their Lord might give them in his place a better one than him in purity
and nearer to having compas­sion.***

***- As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them; so I rebuilt the wall
because your Lord desired that when they attain maturity, they should
take out their treasure, which was a mercy from your Lord.***

***"And moreover, I did not do it of my accord. This is the significance
of that on which you could not have patience."***

***(Surah al-Kahf, 18:60-82)***

There are many morals in this story. What is relevant to our discussion
is that if a great Prophet of Allah like Musa (a.s.) could not fully
comprehend the significance of the actions of a fellow human being who
was more learned than him, then how can we expect to know the wisdom and
purpose of every shari'ah law which has been legislated by Allah (SWT),
the Wise, the Omniscient and the Omnipotent Creator of the humans and
the world in which they live!

[^1]: For a detailed discussion on interest, see 'Allamah Tabataba’i,
al-Mizan trans. S.S.A. Rizvi, vol. 4 (Tehran: Wofis, 1982) pp. 295-303.

[^2]: For a detailed discussion on pork, see S.S.A. Rizvi, Pork,
(Tehran: Wofis, 1971).

[^3]: Sherman Silber, The Male (New York: 1981) pp. 115-116.

[^4]: See ‘Allamah Hilli, al-Babu ‘l-Hadi ‘Ashar trans. W.M. Miller,
(London: Luzac, 1958) pp.45-46; S.S.A. Rizvi, Justice of God (New
Jersey: Pyam-e Aman, 1992) chap. 1.


