The System of Ijtihad
=====================

Some Important Terms
--------------------

*Ijtihad* literally means "to endeavor, strive, put one­self out, work
hard." In Islamic legal terminology it means “the process of deriving
the laws of the shari'ah from its sources.”

*Mujtahid* means a person who does ijtihad or who is an expert of
Islamic laws.

*Fiqh* literally means knowledge, and in Islamic ter­minology it means
the science of Islamic laws.

*Faqih* (pl. *fuqaha')* means the expert of fiqh. The terms
"*mu­jtahid*" and "*faqih*" mean the same.

The Importance of Ijtihad
-------------------------

Is ijtihad necessary? If Islam is a religion which is to stay till the
end of time, then there must always be some people who can guide the
Muslims in the changing circumstances of time and of place. After the
Prophet of Islam (PBUH), the most ideal persons to guide Muslims were
the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt. However, the Present Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi
(a.s.) has gone into the Occultation and will re-appear when Allah (SWT)
wishes him to appear. So what is to be done in the mean-time? Are the
Shi'ahs to suspend the shari'ah? No, of course, not! Islam is the
religion for all times and places.

The Imams of Ahlul-Bayt had foreseen the time of the Occultation and had
prepared their followers for the situation in which they will not be in
direct contact with their Imam. This preparation was done by training
the Shi'ahs in the science of Islamic laws, or in other words, in
ijtihad. Ijtihad is an essential phenomenon for the survival of the
Islamic shari'ah during the Occultation of the Imam (a.s.). Without the
system of ijtihad, we would not be able to apply Islamic laws in the
rapidly changing circumstances of human society.

Ijtihad is not only permissible, but essential from the Islamic point of
view. It is an obligation in Islam to study everything which is
necessary for the spiritual develop­ment and material well-being of the
Muslim community. However, this obligation is of the category which is
known as *wajib kifa’i,* meaning “an obligation which is on every member
of the community as long as it is unfulfilled; but as soon as some
person or persons has fulfilled it, it is no longer an obligation on
those who have not fulfilled it.”

In the present instance, for example, Islamic society needs experts in
the medical sciences, in physics and chemistry, in engineering,
edu­cation; and as long as there is a lack of expertise in these areas,
it is an obligation on the community as a whole to acquire it. This
means that a group of Muslims must devote themselves to research so as
to benefit the Islamic people. Similarly, an Islamic society without
experts in the shari'ah cannot properly consider itself Islamic, and so
it is an obligation for a group of persons from this society to devote
themselves to the study of the religious sciences to provide proper
guidance to all Muslims.

This is such an important obligation that Allah (SWT) has exempted those
who go to seek religious knowledge from the duty of jihad. He says:

***"It is not (right) for the believers to go forth all together (for
jihad). So why should not a party from every section of them (the
believers) go forth to become learned in the religion, and to warn their
people when they return to them-so that haply they may beware?" (Surah
at-Tawba, 9:124)***

It is clear from many narrations that the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.)
used to be pleased whenever any of their companions taught religion or
gave legal rulings (fatwa) to others. There are several documented cases
of Shi'ahs who lived far from Medina asking the Imam of their time to
appoint someone in their area to adjudicate between them in religious
problems: Zakariyyah ibn Adam al-Qummi and Yunus ibn' Abdu 'r-Rahman,
for example, were named by Imam 'Ali ar-Riza (a.s.), to solve disputes
in their own districts. [^1]

In a famous hadith, 'Umar ibn Hanzalah asked Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
about the legality of two Shi'ahs seeking a verdict from an illegitimate
ruler in a dispute over a debt or a legacy. The Imam's answer was that
it was absolutely forbidden to do so. Then Ibn Hanzalah asked what the
two should do, and the Imam replied:

“They must seek out one of your own who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is
well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge
and arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you…”[^2]

Besides these ahadith, we have quite a few sayings of the Imams which
tell us what to do if we come across two ahadith which are contradictory
or semi-contradic­tory and solving the contradictory ahadith is one of
the functions of ijtihad. These types of ahadith are known as *al-akhbar
al-‘ilajiyyah*, the ahadith which solve the problems in the process of
ijtihad.

What we have mentioned above clearly shows that ijtihad is necessary for
the perpetuity of the Islamic legal system.

Was not Ijtihad forbidden in the Early Shi’ah Sources?
------------------------------------------------------

There are some sayings of the Shi'ah Imams (a.s.), some writings of
their companions and that of our early 'ulama which severely condemn the
use of ijtihad. This has created confusion among non-specialist readers
and has given rise to the question whether or not ijtihad was permitted
in Shi'ah Islam.

This confusion can be easily sorted out by studying the changes
undergone by the word "*ijtihad*". The word ijtihad was used for the
first time by a Sunni school of fiqh in the meaning of *ra'iy*: Ra'iy
means "a subjective opinion, an opinion based on one's personal
judgement as opposed to that of the Qur'an and the hadith." In this
sense, "*ijtihad*" was by itself an independent source of the shari'ah
laws besides the Qur'an and the sunnah. Abu Hanifah, the founder of the
Sunni Hanafi school of fiqh, was the main proponent of this system of
ijtihad.[^3] The term *ijtihad* continued to be used exclusively in the
meaning of *ra'iy* up until the early seventh Islamic century.

In the seventh Islamic century, some of the Shi'ah 'ulama' started using
the term *ijtihad* in a different and new meaning. They used the term
“*ijtihad*” for "the process of deriving the laws of the shari'ah from
its sources". In the first meaning, "*ijtihad*" stands alongside the
Qur' an and the sunnah as an independent source of the shari'ah laws; in
its new meaning, "*ijtihad*" is a process of deriving the shari' ah laws
from the Qur' an and the sunnah. The first Shi'ah scholar to use the
term "ijtihad" in its new meaning was Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d. 676 A.H.) in
his *al-Ma’arij*. Al-Hilli says, "ijtihad means to strive for deriving
the shari'ah laws from their sources."[^4]

The change through which the meaning of "ijtihad" has undergone clears
the confusion about the legality of ijtihad: some of the sayings of the
Imams (a.s.), the writings of their companions and the early Shi'ah
ulama condemn ijtihad in its pre-7th century meaning of "*ra'iy*"; they
are not opposing the ijtihad in the post-7th century meaning of "the
process of deriving the shari'ah laws from their sources". The condemned
ijtihad is a source of the shari'ah laws, while the recommended ijtihad
is only the process of deriving the shari'ah laws from their sources.
The permissibility of ijtihad in its post-7th century meaning is beyond
any doubt.

The Process of Ijtihad
----------------------

The process of deriving the shari'ah laws from their sources is based on
two main branches of Islamic sci­ences: *usulu’l-fiqh* and *fiqh.*
"*Usulu’l-fiqh* " is the science of the method of deriving the shari'ah
laws -- it is the methodology of ijtihad. "*Fiqh*" is the practice of
ijtihad -- it is the process of deriving the shari'ah laws. In
*usulu'l-fiqh*, the mujtahid studies the method of ijtihad; in *fiqh*,
he uses that method to derive the shari'ah laws. Thus, *usulu’l-fiqh* is
the theory of ijtihad whereas *fiqh* is the practice of ijtihad.

In the following pages, I would like to give an outline of
*usulu’l-fiqh* and *fiqh* to familiarize the reader with the system of
ijtihad.

A. Usulu’l-Fiqh
---------------

The first and fore-most issue to be discussed in usulu’l-fiqh is about
“the binding authority of conviction” (*hujjiyyatu’l-qat’*). The
validity of conviction is determined by intellectual reasoning. This is
the corner-stone of ijtihad; it means that the main basis of determining
a source of shari’ah is to see whether or not one can achieve conviction
about the laws derived from that source.

If a mujtahid finds that a particular source for ex­ample, the Qur' an,
is such that he can achieve conviction about the laws derived from it,
then such a source is considered by him as a valid and reliable source
for ijtihad. This process divides the potential sources of shari'ah laws
into two: convincing and non-convincing.

### Convincing (Qat’i) & Non-Convincing (Dhanni) Souces

In examining the potential sources of the shari'ah, a mujtahid may find
two kinds of sources: either the source creates conviction about the
laws derived from it or not. In the first case, it is known as *dalil*
qat'i – a convincing proof, a cogent proof, a proof which creates
conviction about the proven laws. In the second case, the source is
named as *dalil dhanni--* a presumptive proof, a proof based on mere
assumption.

The mujtahid will consider the *dalil qat'i* (the con­vincing proof) as
a valid source for the shari'ah laws. But he will not consider the
*dalil dhanni* as such because *dalil dhanni* does not create conviction
it just gives rise to assumption. A mujtahid cannot rely on a *dhanni*
proof or source for deriving laws unless the shari'ah itself approves
its use for this purpose. Below I will give examples of two *dhanni*
sources, one approved by the shari'ah and another disapproved by it.

**The First Example:** Among the various categories of hadith, there is
a category known as *khabar wahid thiqah* - a hadith reported by a
single reliable person. *Khabar wahid thiqah* is a dhanni source. Why?
Because a hadith reported by a single person does not create conviction
about its contents even if the reporter is reliable; there is the chance
of forgetting, misunder­standing or unintended misquotation on the part
of the truthful, reliable reporter.

However, in spite of being a *dhanni* source, *khabar wahid thiqah* is
considered by most of Shi'ah mujtahids as a valid source for the
shari'ah laws. Why? Because the shari'ah itself has approved it. Verse
six of Chapter forty nine (*Surah al-Hujuraat, 6:49*) says that if a
single report *(khabar wahid)* comes from an unreliable *(fasiq)*
reporter, then it should not be accepted without further verification.
The impli­cation of this verse is that if a single report comes from a
reliable *(thiqah)* reporter, then accept it without any need for
further verification. Therefore, the mujtahids accept the single hadith
narrated by a reliable reporter as a source for shari'ah laws because
the Qur'an has implicitly approved it.

**The Second Example:** One of the *dhanni* sources for the shari'ah
laws is *qiyas.* In Islamic laws, *qiyas* means analogy. In *qiyas,* you
look at a shari'ah law for one issue and then apply it to another issue
because of the similar­ity that exists between the two. Let us suppose
that "wine is haram" is a proven law of the shari'ah. You then look at
beer and say that 'beer is like wine'; and then you apply the law of
wine on beer -- here the prohibition of beer has been proved on basis of
*qiyas.*

*Qiyas* is a *dhanni* proof, it does not create conviction because one
cannot always know the real reason *('illah* in Arabic, *ratio legis* in
Latin) of the shari'ah laws. And since the *qat'i* sources of the
shari'ah have not approved the use of *qiyas* as a way of deriving
Islamic laws, *qiyas* is not accepted by our mujtahids as a valid source
for shari' ah laws.[^5]

However, according to most mujtahids, if the shari'ah has explicitly
explained the ratio legis *('illah)* of a particular law, then the
mujtahid can generalize that law for other similar things by the means
of *qiyas.* And in such cases, it is known as *qiyas mansusi’l-illah* --
an analogy based on the ratio legis explicitly explained (by the
shari'ah).

### Legal (Shar’i) & Rational ('Aqli) Proofs

All sources of the shari'ah, whether *qat'i* or *dhanni,* can be of two
types: *dalil shar'i* and *dalil 'aqli. Dalil Shar'i* means a source
which emanates from religious texts; we may translate it as "legal
proof'. *Dalil 'aqli* means a source which emanates from intellectual
argu­ments.

#### 1. Dalil Shar’i

*Dalil Shar'i* or the Legal Proof. The *dalil shar'i* consists of the
Qur' an and the sunnah -- the two main sources of the shari'ah. The
*dalil shar'i* is divided into two: (a) Oral Proof like the Our'an and
the hadith. (b) Non-Oral Proof like the practice of the *ma'sum* and his
'silent approval' of the action done in his presence. The silent
approval of a ma'sum is known as *"taqrir".* How*­*ever, even the
non-oral proof reaches to us through the oral reports of the witnesses;
therefore, for all practical purpose, both the oral and non-oral proofs
are on the same level.

In order-to use the Legal Proofs in ijtihad, the mu­jtahid has to study
the following issues in Usulu’l-Fiqh:

#### (A) The Linguistic Problems

Some of the questions studied in this area are:

Should I take all the words in *dalil shar'i* in their literal
meaning?  
 Are metaphorical meanings of any use in *dalil shar'i* or not?  
 What are the imperative forms of words and what are their implications:
does a command to do something automatically means the one is for­bidden
from its opposite?  
 What are the implications of the unconditional use of the word: do we
generalize its contents?  
 What is the implication of a conditional sentence: do we restrict its
application?  
 What are the implications of a *nass*? (*N ass* means an oral proof
containing a word which has only one meaning.)  
 What are the implications ofa *mujmal*? (*Mujmal* means an oral proof
containing a word which has more than one meaning and is used in those
meanings equally.)  
 How do we use the context of the sentence to understand the *mujmal*
word? For example, the word *"yad"* is used in the Qur'an in the verses
of wudu, tayammum and punishment for theft. The word *"yad"* means
palms, forearm and hand. So how do you interpret the word *"yad"* in
such verses? Well, in the verse of wudu it is simple because we have a
context; the verse says that wash your *"yad* up to the elbows". The
context ("up to the elbow") helps us in under­standing the meaning of
*"yad"* in the verse of wudu.

#### (B) The Problems of Authenticity:

The mujtahid has also to study the ways of determin­ing the authenticity
of the Legal Proofs. This problem has given rise to the development of
two sciences known as *'Ilmu 'r-Rijal* and *Dirayatu 'l-Hadith.*

*'Ilmu 'r-Rijal* literally means 'knowledge about men,' it deals with
the biography and character of the narrators of hadith. On basis of this
knowledge, the 'ulama' classify the narra­tors in different categories;
and these categories in turn help in classifying the hadith as authentic
or acceptable or weak or fabricated or unreliable, etc. There are at
least 38 different classifications of hadith.

*Dirayatu* ' *l-Hadith* means the science of hadith, and it deals mostly
with the "chain of narration" as a whole instead of the individual
narrators. This science helps the mujtahid in classifying certain
narrators into groups and expedites their judgement about hadith
narrated through those particular channels.

#### Examples of how a mujtahid comes to know of a Legal Proof:

i. *Tawatur:* a narration reported by so many people that the very
number of its reporters is enough to create conviction about the truth
of its contents. A hadith or an account of a ma’sum’s narrated in such a
way is known as *mutawatir.*

ii. *Khabar wahid thiqah:* a hadith narrated by a single reliable
narrator. We have already mentioned *khabar wahid thiqah* earlier.

iii. *Siratun mutasharri'ah:* the general attitude or practice of the
religiously-minded companions of our Imams about a particular issue
which is not found in the existing hadith literature. This' general
attitude or prac­tice' is known as siratun mutasharri'ah. This *sirah*
indicates that an oral proof must have existed during their time. For
example, if the prominent companions of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) did
not attend the Friday prayers led by persons appointed by the rulers,
then their attitude proves that the Friday prayer behind a person
appointed by an illegitimate government is not valid­ otherwise, the
Imam would have objected to the actions of his companions.

iv*. Ijma’:* 'means consensus. In Usulu’l-Fiqh, it refers to the
consensus of the early Shi'ah 'ulama' on an issue which is not found in
the existing hadith literature. Such an *ijma'* indicates that an oral
proof must have existed in their time on which they based their ruling.
In Shi'ah jurisprudence, *ijma'* is not by itself a source of the
shari'ah; instead, it is a means of proving the existence of an oral
proof which is now extinct.

#### 2. Dalil 'Aqli:

*Dalil 'aqli* means the intellectual reasoning or ra­tional argument. In
Usulu'l-Fiqh, *dalil 'aqli* means the intellectual prepositions which
can be used as a source of deriving shari'ah laws. However, the scope of
intel­lectual prepositions in  
 shari'ah is limited; it is not like *ijtihad bi 'r-ra'iy* (application
of independent opinion). The intellectual prepositions are only used for
deriving the details of the shari'ah laws which exist.

For example, one such intellectual preposition says, "If an act is made
obligatory (wajib) by the shari'ah, then it automatically follows that
its essential preliminaries are also wajib." This intellectual
preposition is known in Arabic as *"muqaddimatu 'l-wajib, wajibun",* So
if the shari'ah says, "Hajj is wajib," then the mujtahid can use the
above mentioned intellectual preposition and derive the following laws:
to travel to Mecca is wajib; to acquire the means of transportation is
wajib, and to apply for a passport is wajib -- because without these
preliminaries, hajj would be not be possible.

The intellectual prepositions which are used in ijti­had are formed by
studying, among other things, the following relationships between the
shari'ah laws:

i. The relationship between haram (forbidden) and batil (invalid): if an
act is haram, is it automatically batil also?

ii. The relationship between haram (forbidden) and sahih (valid): can an
act be valid but haram at the same time?

iii. The relationship between legislation of a law *(ja'l)* and its
application on an individual *(fi'liyyah).*

iv. The relationship between the laws and those on whom they are to be
applied.

v. The relationship between laws and its essential preliminaries as
explained in the example of hajj.

### The Procedural Rules (Al-Usulu'l-'Amaliyyah)

After defining the sources of the shari'ah, the mujta­hid has to set up
a mechanism to solve the problems which have not been mentioned in the
Qur'an and the sunnah. For example, when a mujtahid looks into his
sources for the ruling on smoking, he does not find anything specific on
it. In Usulu 'l-Fiqh, the mujtahid establishes some "procedural rules"
or "practical prin­ciples" which he will use in such cases. These rules
or principles are known as *"al-usulu 'l-‘amaliyyah"*.

The Usulu ‘l-‘Amaliyyah are four: asalatu ‘l-istishab; asalatu
‘l-bara’ah; asalatu ‘l-ihtiyat; and asalatu ‘t-takhyir.

*Asalatu ‘l-Istishab* means the principle or rule of continuity. This
principle is used in a case in which a person has "a previous certainty"
and "a present doubt" about the same thing. For example, there is a
glass of water on my table. I am sure that it was ritually pure (tahir)
in the morning, but now I doubt in its ritual purity. The principle of
*istishab* says that act on your previous certainty and ignore your
present doubt because doubt cannot over-ride certainty.

This procedural rule has been taken from the following hadith of Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) who said in the answer to Zurarah that “doubt
cannot over-ride certainty; it can be over-ridden only by another
certainty.”

*Asalatu 'l-Bara'ah* means the principle of exon­eration. This
procedural rule is applied in a case which has not been mentioned,
explicitly or implicitly, in the sources of the shari'ah. *Asalatu
‘l-Bara’ah* says that since the shari'ah has no opinion in this issue,
the Muslims are free to do whatever they like. For example, when dealing
with the question of smoking, the mujtahid does not find any opinion
about it in the sources of shari'ah. In such a case, he would apply the
principle of exoneration and say that "Smoking is not haram."

*Asalatu* ' *l-Ihtiyat* means the principle of precau­tion. This
principle is applied in a case where there is only partial knowledge
about the law; that is, in cases of *al-‘ilmu ‘l-ijmali* -- where there
is a semi-doubt and a semi-certainty. In such cases, the shari'ah
expects us to act precautionarily. A most familiar example where this
principle is applied is the case of Friday prayer during the major
occultation of the Present Imam. We know that on Fridays, one of the two
prayers -either Friday prayer or noon prayer- is definitely wajib, but
we do not know which one. Application of *asalatu ‘l-ihtiyat* in this
case would mean that it is precautionarily better to pray both prayers
to ensure that we have performed what was expected of us.

The last procedural rule is known as *Asalatu ‘t-Takhyir. Asalatu
‘t-Takhyir* which means the principle of choice. This principle is
applied in cases similar to that of *asalatu ‘l-ihtiyat*, that is,
semi-doubt and semi certainty. However, the principle of choice is
applied where it is not possible to act on both sides of the issue. For
example, when dealing with the noon or Friday prayer issue, some
mujtahids may conclude that saying both prayers is not practical and
specifying one without a clear evidence is not correct -- therefore,
they apply the principle of choice and say that one can say either
Friday prayer or noon prayer.

### The Problem of Contradiction

The last topic to be discussed in Usulu 'l-Fiqh deals with the problem
of contradiction in the proofs of the shari'ah. The mujtahid has to
layout a mechanism which he will use in case he comes upon contradiction
in his sources. Our Imams have given quite a few guidelines to solve
such problems; as mentioned earlier, the ahadith dealing with these
problems are known as *al-akhbaru ‘l-ilajiyyah.*

The contradiction between the proofs can be found in different forms and
has to be solved in different ways: (a) The contradiction between two
oral-proofs can occur in following ways:

(a) The contradiction between two oral-proofs can occur in following
ways:

A *nass* and a hadith with an "apparent" meaning: the former is
preferred over the latter. For example, one hadith says, "Pray *(salli)*
the mid-night prayer;" and another hadith says, “Mid-night prayer is
recommended *(mustahab).”* The first example is of a hadith with an
"apparent" meaning: it contains the word "pray" in imperative form which
is used both for obligatory acts as well as for recommendation. The
second example is of a hadith which is a *nass:* it contains the words
"rec­ommended" which only means that the act is recom­mended and not
wajib. In this case, the *nass* will be preferred and used as a
qualifier for the "apparent" hadith.

One is of a general nature and the other is conditional: the conditional
proof curbs the generaliza­tion of the former. For example, one hadith
says, "If you break your oath, then you must free a slave;" whereas
another hadith says, "If you break your oath, then you must free a
Muslim slave." The second hadith will be preferred and used to curb the
general implication of the first hadith.

One deals with the legislation of laws and the other restricts its
application on certain individuals: the later over-rides the former. For
example, one hadith says, "Respect the 'ulama;" while another hadith
says, "Do not respect the fasiq 'ulama." The latter hadith limits the
application of the former hadith.

(b) If two authentic ahadith contradict each other in such a way that it
is not possible to reconcile them together, then both are to be
discarded.

(c) If the contradiction is between "convincing oral­proof' and an
non-oral, non-convincing proof, then the former is preferred.

(d) If there is contradiction between a convincing proof and a *dhanni*
proof on the one hand and a proce­dural rule on the other, then the
former is accepted because the latter is applied only when there is no
proof at all.

(e) If there is a contradiction between the principles of *bara’ah* and
of *istishab,* then the latter is preferred.

B. Fiqh
-------

In fiqh, the mujtahid derives the shari'ah laws from the sources
determined by him in Usulu 'l-Fiqh.

All the issues discussed in fiqh are traditionally classified into four
main groups. This classification was made by Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d. 676
A.H.) in his famous work of jurisprudence *Sharaya’u ‘l-Islam,* The
follow­ing is a list of the subjects discussed in fiqh according to the
traditional classification:

Group One: *‘Ibadat* -- the Acts of Worship:

Cleanliness  
 Prayers  
 Fasting  
 Wealth Tax  
 Annual Tax  
 Pilgrimage  
 Jihad  
 Bidding the good and forbidding the evil.

Group Two: *‘Uqud* --Mutual Contracts:

Business transaction *(bay')*  
 Mortgage *(rahn)*  
 Bank­ruptcy *(muflis)*  
 Limitation of one's legal competence *(hajr)*  
 Liability *(ziman)*  
 Compromise in financial dis­putes *(sulh)*  
 Partnership *(shirkah)*  
 Silent Partnership in trade *(mudarabah)*  
 Silent Partnership in agriculture *(muzara’ah & musaqat)*  
 Trusts (wadi'ah)  
 Lending ('ariyah)  
 Hiring (ijarah)  
 Representing Others *(wikalah)*  
 Endowments *(waqf)*  
 Deeds of Gifts *(hibah)*  
 Making of Wills *(wisayah)*  
 Marriage *(nikah)*.

Group Three: *‘Iyqa’at* --Unilateral Instigations:

Divorce (talaq)  
 Marital Disputes (khul’, mubarat, dhihar, ly’an, iyla’)  
 Emancipation of slaves *(itq)*  
 Con­fessions in legal matters *(iqrar)*  
 Reward (ja'alah)  
 Vows (yamin).

Group Four: *Ahkam* -- Miscellaneous:

Hunting and Slaughtering *(sayd and dhibahah)*  
 Eat­ing and Drinking (at’imah and ashribah)  
 Misappropria­tion *(ghasb)*  
 Neighbour's and Partner's first right to buy *(shaf’ih)*  
 Revival of virgin land *(ihya’u ‘l-mawat)*  
 In­heritance *(irth)*  
 Arbitration *(qada)*  
 Testimony (sha­hadah)  
 Punishment *(hudud)*  
 Retaliation *(qisas)*  
 Blood-money or indemnity for bodily injury *(diyah).*

This was the old classification which has been used with slight changes
till the present time. Here I would like to present a modern
classification of fiqhi issues done by the late Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
as-Sadr in his *al-Fatawa al-Wadihah.*[^6] Ayatullah as-Sadr of Najaf,
Iraq was a shinning star among the new generation mujtahids;
unfortunately the Shi'ah world was deprived of his knowledge and
leadership when he was tortured and killed by Saddam's regime in 1981.
According to his classification, which we hope will be adopted by the
fiqhi circles of our time all the shari'ah laws are divided into four
groups:

Group One: *‘Ibadat --* the Acts of Worship:

Cleanliness  
 Prayers  
 Fasting  
 Pilgrimage to Mecca

Group Two: Financial Laws:

On Social Level:

Zakat  
 Khums  
 Land Tax *(khiraj)*  
 Tax on the non-Muslims under the protection of an Islamic government
*(jaziyyah)*  
 Spoils of war *(anfal)*.

 (b) On Individual Level:

The laws about the means of possession:  
 revival of virgin land  
 hunting  
 by-products of one's own property  
 inheritance  
 loan  
 mortgage  
 deeds of gifts  
 etc.

The laws about the use of possessions:  
 Business transactions  
 Exchange of commodities based on compromise  
 Partnership  
 Endowment  
 Legacy  
 etc.

Group Three: Personal Laws:

Marriage  
 Divorce  
 Marital affairs  
 Eating  
 Drinking  
 Dressing  
 Vows  
 Oaths  
 Hunting  
 Slaughtering  
 Bidding good and forbidding evil  
 etc.

Group Four: Social Laws:

Governance  
 Judiciary  
 Penal Code  
 Jihad  
 etc.

We may add in the list of "social laws" the new chapter started by
Ayatullah al-Khu'i known as *Kitabu ‘l-Mushtarikat* (the Book of Public
Property)'[^7] which deals with the laws about public road, mosques,
schools, welfare homes, rivers and streams, lakes and oceans, and mines.

[^1]: Al-‘Amili, Shaykh Hurr, Wasa’ilu ‘sh-Shi’ah, vol. 18 (Beirut: Dar
Ihyai ‘t-Turathi ‘l-Islami, 1391 AH) p.106-107.

[^2]: Al-Kulayni, al-Furu’ min al-Kafi, vol. 7, p.412

[^3]: Istihsan, istislah or maslahah, and ta’awwul are different forms
of ijtihad in the meaning of ra’iy. All these terms mean the application
of personal discretion in legal decisions.

[^4]: See as-Sadr, S. Muhammad Baqir, Durus fi ‘Ilmi ‘l-‘Usul, vol. 1
(Beirut: Daru 'l-Kitab, 1978) pp, 55-60; also see Mutahhari, M.,
"Ijtihad dar Islam," in Bahsi dar-barah-e Marji'iyyat wa Ruhaniyyat
(Tehran: Shirkat-e Intishar, 2nd edt.) pp. 37-42. Mutahhari mentions
'Allamah Hilli (d. 726 AH) as the first user of the term ijtihad in its
new meaning but Sadr has shown that it was used before ‘Allarnah by his
uncle the Muhaqqiq al-Hilli.

[^5]: For the saying of the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt in rejection of Qiyas as
a source of the shari’ah laws, see the last chapter of Wasa’ilu
‘sh-Shi’ah, vol. 18.

[^6]: Sadr, S.M. Baqir, al-Fatawa al-Wadihah (Najaf, 1976) pp. 46-47.

[^7]: Khu’i, S. Abu ‘l-Qasim, Minhaju ‘s-Salihiyn, vol.2 (Najaf, 1394)
pp. 174-181.


