A Look into the Future of Ijtihad
=================================

The sciences of usulu ‘l-fiqh and fiqh, like any other science, have
evolved and expanded with the passage of time. But during the last
hundred years, especially since the emergence of Shaykh Murtaza
al-Ansari (1214-1281 A.H.), these two sciences have expanded greatly and
rapidly. In light of this positive development, an idea has been
floating among the experts of fiqh since the death of Ayatullah Husayn
Burujardi about compartmentaliza­tion of ijtihad.

The first person who raised this issue was Shaykh ‘Abdu ‘l-Karim Ha’iri
Yazdi (1276-1355 A.H.), who has the credit of revitalizing the Hawza
'Ilmiyyah of Qum. Shaykh Ha’iri’s student, Shahid Murtaza Mutahhari
brought this idea in a public forum for the first time in a speech at
the seminar organized after the demise of Ayatullah Burujardi in early
sixties. He says, "It is better that fiqh be divided into different
compartments, and that each group, after attaining the general ability
of ijtihad, should specialize in one particular area of fiqh."[^1]

This idea is very noble. But two recent developments in the Shi'ah world
have made this idea into a necessity. First, the Islamic revolution in
Iran has availed an un­precedented opportunity for the Shi'ah mujtahids
to work on political, economic, social and moral problems which the
Shi'ah community faces in Iran. Second, the large scale migration of
Muslims to the West has given rise to issues and problems which were
unheard of before. Expecting a single person to fully and
compre­hensively provide guidance for all problems is asking for too
much. The only solution for the future of the shari'ah is nothing but
the compartmentalization of ijtihad.

However, this is not something which can emerge or be created overnight;
it has to take its due course. After a couple of generations, hopefully,
we might have mu­jtahids specializing in four different areas of fiqh:

1. Acts of worship *(‘ibadat);*  
 2. Economic problems;  
 3. Personal laws;  
 4. Social and Political issues.

And the Shi'ahs of that time will be doing taqliq of either four
different mujtahids or of a council of ijtihad composed of mujtahids
specializing in their respective fields.

In short, the dynamic spirit inherited by the Shi'ah 'ulama from their
Imams will keep the light of ijtihad shining in one form or another. The
future, *al-hamdulillah,* is bright.

[^1]: Mutahhari, “Ijtihad dar Islam,” p. 61.


