Pleasant Fragrance of The Holy Prophet
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ : يا أُمّاهُ إِنّي أَشَمُّ عِندَكِ رائِحَةً طَيِّبَةً كَأَنَّها
رائِحَةُ جَدِي رَسُولِ اللهِ ( صلى الله عليه وآله ) ، فَقُلتُ : نَعَم
إِنَّ جَدَّكَ تَحتَ الكِساء ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

**I replied. "O mother," he said, "I can smell a pleasing scent as if it
is the scent of my grandfather the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his Household."**

**"Yes, it is," I answered, "Your grandfather is now under the cloak."**

After the exchange of pure greetings between the Master Lady of the
Universe and the Master Youth of Paradise, Imam Hasan (AS) remarks that
he smells a pleasant scent at home which resembles the fragrance of his
grandfather - the Prophet (SA). This is the second time in the
*Tradition of the Cloak* that the Holy Prophet (SA) is described
physically with a positive attribute.

The first being his shining face that resembles a full moon, and the
second being the good scent which emanates from his pure being.

It is not surprising as all the prophets and messengers have good
fragrance and there was never anything shameful or humiliating ever
displayed from them. Then one can imagine the Seal of Prophets and
Messengers who is the best of creation! Surely, he must enjoy physical
and materialistic purity that complements the spiritual purity.

This is proven by virtue of the purification verse in Verse 33 of Surat
Al Ahzaab, *“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purification.”*

Every person in this world has two aspects of his life, apparent and
concealed which are physical and spiritual, respectively. The balance in
the development of a good human being is obligatory for both activities.
Islam is a clean religion and prefers a person to be clean physically
and have pure thoughts. Physical purity provides a person respect and
honor in the eyes of the world.

Allah (SWT) advises the believers to clean themselves for such a
condition suits their spiritual state and nature. Cleanliness is
considered a form of worship by believers, and is therefore a source of
great relief and pleasure to them. In many verses of the Qur’an, Allah
(SWT) draws attention to the believers’ spiritual and physical purity.

Prophet Muhammad (SA) often stressed the importance of being clean as he
said, “*Cleanliness is half of faith*”. (Sahih Muslim) The Holy Qur’an
also refers to the importance of wearing clean clothes,

***“Purify your garments. And*** ***shun uncleanness.” (74:4-5)***

Furthermore, physical cleanliness is important because it shows one's
respect for other people. Indeed, respecting other people requires
taking care of one's physical appearance.

Having a pleasant fragrance is certainly a sign of cleanliness and the
Prophet (SA) is the best exemplar for both physical and spiritual
cleanliness combined together and has apparently attained the reputation
of having good scent as it is narrated that a beautiful scent of musk
used to emanate from his drops of sweat. This is similar to the scent of
musk from Lady Fatima (SA) which came from Paradise, and in that context
the Prophet (SA) used to smell his daughter and remark that *“Whenever I
yearned for the smell of Paradise, I would smell the fragrance of my
daughter Fatima”.* (Muntakhab Kanz Al-‘Omaal)

So Imam Hasan (AS) recognized his grandfather’s presence at home just by
his purified scent. Sure enough, Lady Fatima (AS) confirms that
deduction and informs Hasan that his grandfather is indeed under the
cloak.


