Imam Husain –Intercessor of The Nation
======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ : وَ عَلَيكَ السَّلامُ يا وَلَدِي وَ يا شافِع أُمَّتِي قَد
أَذِنتُ لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My father replied, "Peace be upon you too, O my son and intercessor of
my people. I allow you."*

The Holy Prophet (SA) returns back the greetings of his grandson Imam
Husain (AS) by stressing that he is his “son” as he did with his brother
Hasan. Furthermore, he refers to Husain as **يا شافِع أمتي**”intercessor
of my people”. As we know, the Prophet (SA) himself will have the right
of intercession over his nation and this is authentically narrated in
both Sunni and Shi’a narrations.

The Qur’an confirms the validity of the concept of Shafa’at
(intercession) where the Prophet (SA) can seek forgiveness of others on
their behalf, by virtue of his excellence and proximity to Allah (SWT):

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger had (also) asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning (to
mercy), Merciful.” (4:64)***

To seek a medium or an intermediate for your affairs is not only
logically acceptable but is very practical in our mundane matters.
Seeking proximity towards Allah (SWT) via an intermediate is no
different and Allah (SWT) approves that in this holy verse,

 ***"O you who believe! Fear Allah and seek an intermediate (Al-Wasilah)
unto Him..." (5:35)***

Both scholars Raghib Isfahani and 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn
Tabataba'i are of the opinion that *Al-Wasilah* means to reach a certain
goal through desire, inclination or willingness, and in fact *wasilah*
towards God means observance of His path with knowledge and worship
through adherence to the Shari'ah. In other words, *wasilah* is a means
of communication and spiritual link between mankind and God.

It is not only Prophet Muhammad (SA) who attains the privilege of
intercession, it is also other prophets and messengers as well as divine
guides whom Allah (SWT) has preferred over creation due to their piety
and excellence. The purified household of the Prophet (SA) also share in
the honor of having the liberty to exercise intercession in this life
and in the Hereafter. Imam Husain (AS) is notably one of the members of
the Prophet’s family who has earned a great status in the eyes of Allah
(SWT) and one of the rewards which He (SWT) has bestowed him is the
intercession of the Muslim nation.

The story of “Fitrus the angel” clearly demonstrates how Imam Husain
(AS) was granted the honor of intercession since he was a baby in his
cradle. When Imam Husain (AS) was born, Allah (SWT) sent down the angel
Jibrael (AS) to congratulate the family of the Prophet (SA). On the way
down from the heavens, Jibrael (AS) passed by an island on which the
Fitrus was sent to by Allah (SWT) because he had delayed in executing a
command. As a punishment, Fitrus also had his wings taken away by Allah
(SWT).

When Fitrus saw Jibrael (AS) he asked him where he was going. Jibrael
(AS) told him that he was going to congratulate the Holy Prophet (SA)
and his family on the birth of Imam Husain (AS). Fitrus asked if he
could join him and Jibrael (AS) agreed with the permission of Allah
(SWT) and so carried him down to earth. When the angels reached Prophet
Muhammad (SA) and congratulated him and his family, the Prophet (SA)
told Fitrus to go to Imam Husain (AS). When Fitrus touched Imam Husain's
(AS) cradle, his wings were miraculously given back to him by Allah
(SWT) who had forgiven him.

The moral of this story is to demonstrate the permissibility of
intercession in general, and specifically for Imam Husain (AS) whose
blessings were manifested from the moment he was born. It is interesting
to note that angel Fitrus was instructed to seek blessing by rubbing his
wing on the cradle of Imam Husain and not Imam Husain himself.

Why was that the case?

It is as if Allah (SWT) intentionally tailored this detailed to
demonstrate to us that the object (in this case the cradle) which was
associated with a holy and divine personality has attained such honor
and sanctity such that it became the manifestation of miracle and
blessings. Hence, we should be cognizant of the fact that certain items
or physical signs can attain the status of sanctity and we should treat
such relics with veneration due to the fact that this relic is
associated with the original source of sanctity – in this case, the
infallible guide.

If such miracles and blessings are attained by seeking intercession from
a holy item, then one can imagine the abundant blessings that one can
attain by seeking intercession from a personality who is the original
*source* of sanctity – like Imam Husain (AS).

The divine intermediate is certainly closer to Allah (SWT), so if we
wish to secure for ourselves a higher percentage of acceptance or
guarantee of our prayers, then logically speaking, we should seek those
who are closer to Allah (SWT) who can speak on our behalf and raise our
needs.

This is similar to our practice in mundane matters such as getting a
recommendation for a job or reaching out to a connection in our network
that may accelerate our application process or grant us acceptance of
our need by virtue of our close association with the source whom we are
targeting.


