Imam Ali – Commander of The Faithful
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلتُ : وَعَلَيكَ السَّلامُ يا أَبَا الحَسَن وَيا أَمِيرَ
المُؤمِنينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Peace be upon you too, O Abul-Hasan and Commander of the Faithful," I
replied.**

After Imam Husain (AS), Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) enters and conveys
his greetings to the Holy Prophet (SA) who replies back to him by
pronouncing the *Salam* and addressing him as “Abal Hasan” (the father
of Hasan) and “Ya Ameer Al Momineen” (Commander of the Faithful). The
label of “Ameerul Momineen” exclusively belongs to Imam Ali (AS) and has
been divinely bestowed from above the heavens.

In his book *Al Kafi*, Al Kileeni narrates from Fudail ibn Yassaar that
Imam Al Baqir (AS) said: *“Oh Fudail, any person who names himself with
this title other than Ali is a liar.”* According to the Sunni School of
thought, Umar ibn Al Khattab was the first to use that title, however
that is false information.

In fact, it was the Holy Prophet (SA) who gave Imam Ali (AS) that title
and this is cited in many traditions such as, “*Oh Ali, you are Ameerul
Momineen (Commander of the Faithful) and the Imam of the Muslims, and*
**قائد الغر المحجلين***(the Leader of the Resplendent),* *and* **يعسوب
المتقين** *(the dragonfly of the pious).”* (Amaali)

It is also narrated consecutively by Imam Al Sadiq (AS) that his father
Imam Ali (AS) said: *“The Prophet (SA) said to me, O Ali You are Ameerul
Momineen and the leader of the pious, O Ali you are chief of the
successors and heirs of the Prophets and the best of the truthful
(sidiqeen).*” (Kanz Al Fawaed)

According to the Sunni School of thought as narrated by Al Hafiz Abu
Na’eem Al Asfahani in his book *Helyat Al Awliyaa*, that Qasem ibn
Jundub ibn Anas said: The Prophet (SA) said: *“Oh Anas, help me prepare
for ablution.”* Then he got up and prayed two-unit prayer, then he said,
*“Oh Anas, the first person who will enter from that door is Ameerul
Momineen and the Master of the messengers, and* **قائد الغر المحجلين**
*(the Leader of the Resplendent) and the Seal of Successors.”* That
person was none other than Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS)!

Hence, it is not appropriate to use that title even to the other
Infallible Imams from the sons of Ali, including Imam Hasan who actually
became Caliph after his father. That is because attaining the position
of Caliphate is not the criteria for being named Ameerul Momineen even
though the person may be infallible such as Imam Hasan (AS).

This title is unique only to Ali and no one can share that title with
him. The great scholar Ibn Tawoos has actually written a book called *Al
Yaqeen Bi Ikhtisaas Mawlana Ali Bi Emrat Al Momineen* (Faith in the
uniqueness of Mawla Ali with the title of Ameerul Momineen) which aims
to verify the specialization of Ali with this title.

In fact, there is an interesting story where the title of “Ameerul
Momineen” was granted officially to Ali. It is narrated by one of the
close companions of the Prophet (SA), Hudaifah ibn Al Yaman, as cited in
*Irshad Al Qulub*, that in his conversation with a lad he said: “O lad,
since you asked and wanted to investigate, then listen and understand
what I am going to tell you. As for those caliphs who were before Ali
ibn Abi Talib (AS), who were called Ameerul Momineen; the people called
them by that title.

But Ali ibn Abi Talib was called with this name by Archangel Gabriel
(AS). It was an order from the Prophet (SA) who bore witness of
Gabriel’s (AS) salutation to Ali by the title of Ameerul Momineen, and
the companions (Sahaba) of the Prophet were calling Ali (AS) with the
title of Ameer Al-Momineen during the life and presence of the Prophet
(SA).”

The Lad said: “Tell us how this came to be, may Allah have mercy on
you.”

Hudhayfah answered: “The people used to enter upon the Prophet (SA)
whenever they wanted. The Prophet (SA) then prohibited them from
entering upon him while he was in meeting with Dihyatul Kalbi. The
Prophet (SA) used to exchange letters with Caesar and Bani Hanifah and
the kings of Bani Ghassau through him (Dihya). Jibrael (AS) would
sometimes descend to the Prophet (SA in the image of Dihya. Therefore,
the Prophet (SA prohibited the Muslims from entering upon him, if he was
in meeting with Dihya.”

Hudhayfah added, “One day I came to the Prophet (SA) for some matter
hoping to meet him alone. When I arrived at the door, I looked and found
a curtain covering the door. I raised it and was about to enter. That’s
what we were accustomed to do. Then I saw Dihya sitting beside the
Prophet (SA) who was sleeping and his head was on the lap of Dihya. When
I saw that, I left. Then I met Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) on my way. He
said, ‘Oh Ibn Al Yaman, where did you just come from?’ I answered him
and said, ‘I wanted to enter but I found Dihya with him.’

I asked Ali’s help with the matter I had wanted to speak with the
Prophet (SA). Then Imam Ali (AS) suggested me to come back with him. So
I returned back with him and when we arrived at the door of the Prophet
(SA), I sat beside the door and Imam Ali (AS) lifted the curtain. He
entered and greeted. Then I heard Dihya reply and say, ‘And peace be
upon you O Ameerul Momineen and Allah’s blessings and mercy be upon
you.’ Then Dihya told him, ‘Sit down and take the head of your brother
and cousin from my lap, for you are the most deserving of him than other
people.’ So Imam Ali (AS) sat and took the head of the Prophet (SA),
placed it on his lap, and Dihya then left the house.

Then Imam Ali (AS) asked me to enter so I entered and sat down. Soon
after that, the Prophet (SA) woke up and he smiled when he saw the face
of Imam Ali (AS). Then he told him, ‘Oh Abul Hasan, from whose lap did
you take my head?’ Ali answered, ‘From the lap of Dihyatul Kalbi.’ Then
the Prophet (SA) replied, ‘This was Gabriel (AS). So what did you tell
him when you entered and what did he tell you?’

Imam Ali (AS) answered, ‘I entered and said *Assalamu Alaikum* and he
answered *Wa alaika assalam O Ameer Al-Momineen*, and Allah’s mercy and
blessings be upon you.’ Then the Prophet (SA) said, ‘O Ali, the angels
of Allah and the dwellers of His heaven have greeted you by the title of
Ameer Al-Momineen even before the dwellers of the earth. O Ali, Gabriel
(AS) did that by orders from Allah, Glory be to Him. And Gabriel (AS)
has revealed to me from my Lord before you entered that I impose it upon
the people. And I will do that God-willing.’”

“The next day, the Prophet (SA) sent me (Hudhayfah) to Fadak for some
matter. I stayed there for some days. Then I came back and I found the
people saying that the Prophet (SA) had ordered them to greet Ali by the
title of Ameerul Momineen and that Jibrael had ordered him from Allah
(SWT) to do so. When I heard that, I said to the people that the Prophet
(SA) had spoken the truth and that I heard Jibrael (AS) greet Imam Ali
(AS) using the title Ameerul Momineen and I narrated to them the whole
story. (Irshad Al Qulub)

Unfortunately, the title of “Ameer Al Momineen” was used instead of the
term “Caliph of the Prophet” after Umar ibn Al Khattab ordered that the
latter be replaced with the former. It is sad to note that as with other
rights of Imam Ali (AS) that was confiscated unjustly, some of his
unique titles were also stolen such as “Ameerul Momineen” and used by
others who are not worthy of that title.


