Imam Ali – Successor And Flag Bearer Of The Prophet
===================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ لَهُ وَ عَلَيكَ السَّلامُ يا أَخِي وَ يا وَصِيّيِ وَ خَلِيفَتِي
وَ صاحِبَ لِوائِي قَد أَذِنتُ لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**My father replied, "Peace be upon you too, O brother, successor,
vicegerent, and bearer of my Flag. I allow you." Ali thus went with them
under the cloak.**

In the *Tradition of the Cloak*, the Holy Prophet (SA) also defines the
position of Imam Ali (AS) by mentioning four different roles which he
assumes in relation to the Prophet. They are as follows: 1) Brother 2)
Successor (Wasi) 3) Vicegerent (Caliph) 4) Bearer of the standard or
flag

Each of these roles is great in its scope and is in itself enough to
bring immense honor to the person who assumes that role. One can only
imagine how great and virtuous such person who assumes all four roles
is.

Role Of Brotherhood
-------------------

After migrating to Al-Madinah the Muhajiroon (the Migrants) and the
Ansar (The Local Helpers) became so friendly with one another as if
there was no difference of the tribe or the place of origin between
them. It appeared that all of them belonged to one large family. They
treated their properties as common, their honor and respect as common,
and shared their happiness and sorrows together. This was a true example
of unity and integrity. To make these bonds stronger, the Prophet (SA)
repeated the establishment of brotherhood between individuals of the two
groups as he had done with those in Makkah.

In the view of experts, brotherhood can be strong only between
individuals of the same nature. If the natures are different, and the
individuals come together for whatever reason, the togetherness will be
temporary. The Prophet (AS) kept this factor in mind when he established
brotherhood between individuals from the two groups. He closely studied
the natures of the individuals before declaring them brothers. When he
saw that any two persons had a lot in common, he named them brothers.

According to many narrations including Al Hakim in his *Mustadrak*, Ibn
Abbas said: “The Holy Prophet (SA) assigned brotherhood among his
companions, so he assigned Abi Bakr to Umar, Talha to Zubair, and
‘Uthman ibn A'ffan to Abdul Rahman ibn Uof. So Ali ibn Abi Talib said to
the Prophet, *“Oh Messenger of Allah, you have designated brotherhood
among your companions, so who is my brother?*” The Prophet (SA)
answered, *“Oh Ali, are you not pleased that I become your brother?*” So
Ali said, *“Yes, Oh Prophet of God!”* The Prophet (SA) replied, *“You
are my brother in the life of this world and in the hereafter.”*

Certainly, it is not a coincidence that the Prophet (SA) left Imam Ali
(AS) to be the last to assign brotherhood so that his case stands out in
front of all the companions and the question is raised as to “Who is the
brother of Ali?” One can imagine that no one expected for the Prophet
(SA) to declare himself as the ‘brother’ of Ali. What a great honor for
Imam Ali (AS) which speaks volumes of the great status which he enjoys
in the eyes of Allah (SWT)! It is not possible for the Prophet (SA) to
designate Imam Ali (AS) as his brother without prior divine approval in
this regards, so his declaration in the event of brotherhood is
certainly a sign and indication of Allah’s pleasure towards Ali and his
superiority in His eyes.

Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the purpose of assigning
brotherhood in this event was to pair up a companion from the Muhajireen
with a companion from the Ansar. However, in the case of Imam Ali (AS)
and the Prophet (SA), they do not fulfill the criteria of being from the
two groups. This is yet an indication that the brotherhood between them
is not random and is rather intentional and without mistake.

One must also understand that this brotherhood does not only signify the
common Islamic brotherhood that is mentioned in the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Believers are all brothers.” (49:10).***

This brotherhood is of a superior level and a reflection of the nearness
and attachment between two individuals.

If this was just a common bond of friendship, then Imam Ali (AS) already
enjoyed it because of being a Muslim and of the same descent as the
Prophet (AS). What was the need of public declaration of their
brotherhood? Certainly, this event signifies the eternal spiritual
brotherhood between the two which will translate itself into the
position of successorship after the Prophet’s demise. It also
highlighted the similarity between the superior character and nature of
Imam Ali (AS) as that of the Prophet (AS).

When Imam Ali (AS) was been declared by the Prophet (AS) to be his
brother, it proved that he was the only person amongst the Muslims
deserving of that position! This choice is not because of the ancestral
affinity but it is on the basis of identical qualities of the two
individuals.

Role of Wasi (Guardian) and Caliph (Vicegerent)
-----------------------------------------------

The proven track record of the Almighty Creator (SWT) confirms that most
if not all of the past prophets and messengers appointed a successor(s)
before they departed this world for the purpose of overlooking the
affairs of the nation at their time and the message which they have
delivered.

The idea of assigning a “backup” is logical and prevalent in our
practical lives. For example, when a manager plans a vacation, he leaves
behind a second person in command to assume his management
responsibilities, and when the President of a country is absent, the
Vice President steps forward to take over. If this is the natural course
of action when it comes to mundane matters, then isn’t it all the more
important that the idea of successorship be implemented in religious and
eternally important affairs?

Isn’t it logical and rather necessary that a prophet or messenger
appoint a successor and guardian after him to protect and look after the
message which he has delivered? The Holy Prophet (SA) confirms this
logic as he said: *“For every prophet there is a Wasi and heir, and my
Wasi and heir is Ali.”* (Kifayat al Talib)

Throughout the course of the Prophet’s life, he took every opportunity
to set the stage for Imam Ali (AS) to become his successor, guardian,
and Caliph. Ali (AS) has been tested in many occasions and has proven to
be worthy of that honorable status. The Messenger of Allah (SA) also
told his daughter Fatima (AS) in this regards, *“I am the last of the
prophets, and the best of them, and the most beloved of creatures to
Allah the Exalted and your father. My Wasi is the best of the Awsiyaa
(guardians) and the most beloved of them to Allah, and he is your
husband.”*

Furthermore, Ibn Abbas narrates: “I was sitting with a young man from
Banu Hashim with the Holy Prophet (SA) when a star dropped. The Prophet
(SA) said, ‘Whoever this start descends on his house is my Wasi after
me.’ The young Hashemite rose and followed the start and found it
descending on Ali’s house. (Tarikh Dimashq)

It was on the day of Ghadeer which took place on the 18th of Dhul-Hijjah
year 10 A.H. when the Prophet (SA) officially announced and inaugurated
Ali ibn Abi Talib to become his successor after receiving divine
revelation ordering him to appoint Ali for this position,

***“O Messenger! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.” (5:67)***

Sure enough, the Prophet (SA) executed the command of Allah (SWT) and he
stopped at the place of Ghadeer Khum on his way back from the Farewell
pilgrimage. He gathered all the Muslims and announced the divine
appointment of Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) to be his successor, Wasi
(guardian), and Caliph. He delivered an exceptional lengthy sermon where
he enumerated the virtues of Ali.

Hafiz Abu Ja'far Muhammad Bin Jarir Tabari writes in his book *Kitabul
Wilaya*h that the Prophet (SA) stated in the beginning of his renowned
address at Ghadir Khum:

*"The angel Gabriel has conveyed Allah's command to me that I stop at
this place and inform the people that Ali Bin Abu Talib is my brother,
my successor, my Caliph (Vicegerent) after me. O men! Allah has made Ali
your Wali (guardian), and Imam (guide). Obedience to him is obligatory
on each one of you; his command is supreme; his utterance is truth;
curse be on him who opposes him; Allah's mercy be on him who befriends
him."*

It is also interesting to observe that the Prophet (SA) mentioned the
titles *Wali*, *Mawla*, and *Imam* for Ali (AS) in his sermon over 27
times, whereas he used the word *Khalifa* for him only three times. Even
under the Sunni implication of the word *Khalifa* (successor)—which
limits it to political rule—it is clear that the Prophet (SA) stressed
spiritual leadership in his speech, which would guarantee the salvation
of those who follow the Imam and would lead them towards Paradise.

Worldly issues never took priority for the Prophet (SA) and his
successors. Imam Ali (AS) himself has said: “*By Allah, this world of
yours is more despicable in my eyes than a pig bone in the hand of a
leper.”* (Nahjul Balagha, maxim 236)

Thus, Imam Ali’s exclusive qualification for political rule is only one
of the natural outcomes of the guardianship (*Walaya*) that the Prophet
(SA) established for him on behalf of Allah (SWT) on the day of Ghadeer.
In this manner, authority of Imam Ali (AS) and his pure descendants is
still effective over the remaining believers until the Day of Judgment,
irrespective of the support of the majority of people for them or their
political authority.

Role of Standard-Bearer
-----------------------

Throughout the course of the battles and battalions which took place in
the early days of Islam as the minority group of believers tried to
stand up against the supporters of falsehood and the idolaters, there
was one consistent person who was always at the forefront and was the
superstar and hero behind all the victories in the battlefield.

He was none other than the courageous Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) who become
very well-known for his unmatched excellence and his heroic
accomplishments such that all of Arabia feared to face him in war. Imam
Ali (AS) was almost always the standard bearer of the Prophet (SA) who
carried the symbol which represented Islam and the Muslims.

In general, the flags that were raised in war between two opposing
groups held such importance in those days such that if the flag dropped
to the ground, the whole morale and spirits of the army fell down and
the sign of defeat was insinuated. Hence, the role of “standard-bearer”
was very important in the battlefield and it was usually given to the
individual who is honorable in the eyes of his people and who most
closely represents the values and principles of that which the army is
fighting for.

It was no coincidence that Imam Ali (AS) was usually the standard bearer
in the battlefield as the Prophet (SA) would say to Ali, *“You are the
bearer of my standard in the hereafter, just as you are its bearer in
the life of this world.”* (Al Fada’el)

It is narrated in *Tarikh Dimashq* that Anas ibn Malid asked the Prophet
(SA) who would the bearer of his flag on the Day of Resurrection. He
(SA) answered, *“The bearer of my flag in this* *life (and he pointed to
Ali ibn Abi Talib).”* In another tradition in regards to Ali, the
Prophet (SA) said to him *“I prayed to Allah (SWT) that He (SWT)
designate you as my standard bearer and it is the greatest flag of
Allah. It has written on it, ‘The victorious are the ones who win the
Paradise.’”*

Logically speaking, the person whom the Prophet (SA) appoints to become
his standard-bearer must possess very noble traits that are aligned with
what the Prophet (SA) would expect and be pleased with. The
standard-bearer of Islam must be the *most* pious Muslim among the
Prophet’s companions, just as we expect that the standard-bearer of the
polytheists to be one of the most staunch disbelievers among the party
of falsehood. The status of being the holder of the Prophet’s flag is
certainly a grand position which speaks volumes of the rank which Imam
Ali (AS) has attained, not only in this life but also in the hereafter.


