Lady Fatima – Flesh Of The Holy Prophet
=======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ : وَ عَليك السَّلامُ يا بِنتِي وَ يا بَضعَتِي قَد أَذِنتُ لَكِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**My father replied, "Peace be upon you too, my daughter and part of my
flesh. I allow you." I thus went with them under the cloak.**

After Imam Ali (AS), the last member of the household who sought
permission to enter the cloak is Lady Fatima and she greets her father
by saying “Peace be upon you O father O Messenger of Allah”. Here, we
are to be reminded of an interesting story which took place after the
revelation of this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تَجْعَلُوا دُعَاءَ الرَّسُولِ بَيْنَكُمْ كَدُعَاءِ بَعْضِكُمْ
بَعْضًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling upon
one another.” (24:63)***

Imam Al Sadeq (AS) narrates that Lady Fatima (AS) said when this verse
was revealed *'I feared to call the Messenger of Allah, \`Father'; so I
began calling him Messenger of Allah. He ignored me two or three times
and finally said:* *'Fatima, this verse was not revealed about you or
your family, nor does it include your progeny; for you are from me and I
am from you. Rather, this verse was revealed regarding the vain and
crude Quraishans who are arrogant and spendthrifts. Call me Father; it
surely is better for the heart and more satisfying to the Lord.'"*
(Bihaar Al Anwaar)

The love and respect that the Prophet (SA) had towards his daughter
Fatima is apparent in this incident and thereafter she used to call him
‘Father’ and this is what she did in the *Tradition of the Cloak* where
she presented the greeting “father” first and foremost before “Messenger
of Allah”.

The Prophet (SA) greets Fatima (AS) by highlighting the fact that she is
his “daughter” and “part of his flesh”. As for him mentioning that she
is his daughter, it is not a new piece of information to her or to us
who will recite and propagate this tradition till the end of time. Then,
why does the Prophet (SA) stress what is already obvious?

The reason may be related to the fact many individuals including his own
companions will intentionally “forget” this fact after his departure
from this world. His one and only daughter who is the Master Lady of the
Universe will one day have her right of Fadak (which she received as a
gift from her father) confiscated. Lady Fatima (AS) will find herself in
a position where she has to sadly remind those people around her that
she is the daughter of the Prophet (SA) who had gifted the land of Fadak
to her.

When that argument is denied, she attempts to use the argument of
‘inheritance’ that she at least had right over that land by virtue of
her association to her father and inheritance from him. But again, the
supporters of falsehood denied her that right and instead issued a false
testimony that the Prophet (SA) had said that the prophets do not
inherit and cannot be inherited.

This is despite the fact that the Holy Qur’an (27:16) clearly states
that Prophet Sulaiman inherited from his father Prophet Dawood.

Her status of “daughter of the Prophet” was shamefully forgotten when
some of the companions tried to deny her the right to weep and mourn
over her deceased father and they tried to negotiate with her when she
would engage in mourning and when she wouldn’t. The simple right of a
human being – a normal human being – to mourn over their loved ones is
usually granted with shared sympathy and condolences.

But in the case of Fatima Al Zahra (AS), they expressed their annoyance
at her constant mourning and desired to stop her from shedding her
purified tears over her father. Not any father, but the best father and
the most superior human being in the whole universe from the beginning
till the end of time!

Lady Fatima’s position as daughter of the Messenger of God was forgotten
when a group of unjust individuals from the Prophet’s companions
attacked her house and entered it without her permission. And when one
of them warned that it is the house of Fatima, the 2nd Caliph answered,
“So what!” Causing intentional and aggressive physical harm to the
purified body of the Master Lady of the universe was yet another
reminder that her status as the daughter of the Seal of Messengers was
overlooked and ignored just a few months if not less, after the demise
of her father.

That physical aggression caused the abortion of her unborn baby whom the
Prophet called Mohsin and her bodily injuries included fracture of her
ribs that ultimately caused Lady Fatima to become very sick in her last
days and die as a martyr as a result of her injuries.

In fact, it is not only the father-daughter relationship between Lady
Fatima (AS) and her father that was forgotten, but also, her status as
the Master Lady of the Universe! After all, if all the injustices
committed against her happened to the Master Lady of the universe and
the daughter of the Prophet, then we wonder what aggression may happen
to any other person with lower status?!

Fatima (AS) is the one whom the Prophet (SA) emphasized in numerous
occasions that *“***Fatima** *is* **part of me*****;*** **whoever**
*annoys her annoys* **me** *and* **whoever** *harms her harms*
**me***."* (Sahih al-Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi, Musnad Ahmad)

The fact that the Prophet (SA) reminds us in the *Tradition of the
Cloak* as well as in this narration that “Fatima is a part of me” and is
from his own flesh should make us recognize that the great status which
Fatima has to her father exceeds the boundaries of that between any
daughter and father.

The whole existence of Lady Fatima (AS) is from the purified existence
of the Prophet (SA), and her flesh is derived from the purified flesh of
the Prophet! Here, we are to be reminded of how her birth came about
after she was conceived following the event when her mother Lady Khadija
ate from the fruits of Paradise and united with her husband in a
divinely planned manner so that her purified existence be created from
the clay of Paradise.

Thus, her position is equivalent in importance to the Prophet (SA) such
that any person who angers her, attacks her, opposes her, or challenges
her is directly doing the same to the Prophet (AS). This correlation is
clear and is the intent behind the Prophet’s words as displayed by this
narration. With that in mind, one can imagine what great retribution and
castigation the unjust oppressors deserve from the Almighty Allah (SWT)
whose pleasure is aligned with the pleasure of the Prophet which is also
aligned with the pleasure of Lady Fatima (AS).


