Prayer For Thorough Purification
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اَذهِب عَنهُمُ الرَّجسَ وَ طَهِّرهُم تَطهِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Remove from them any impurity and purify them a thorough
purification.**

Thereafter, the Prophet (SA) presents the grand request which
encompasses *all* the bounties and blessings of the life and the
hereafter. He prays that Allah (SWT) removes from them (he and his
AhlulBayt) any impurity. This is the keynote request and prayer and
which will prove to be the main reason for the gathering under the
cloak.

The question to ask now is: What exactly is the Prophet (SA) asking for?
What will the Prophet and Imams (AS) be purified from? In his brief
article titled *Taharah & ‘Ismah of The Prophets, Messengers, Awsiyaa,
And Imams,* Dr. Hatem Abu Shahba presents a thorough research analyzing
the two concepts of purification (Taharah) and ‘Ismah (infallibility)
and we present an excerpt of that discussion in this paper as follows:

Before we attempt answering this question, let us first present an
example from our everyday lives to clarify the topic of purification
(Taharah). If you want to clean a knife or a pair of scissors that will
be used in a surgical operation on a human body, what will you clean
that knife or scissors from? In this case, you will be sanitizing it
from germs, microbes, and viruses. This will be your main concern so
that the wound of the patient does not get contaminated and lead to
death of the patient due to his contaminated wound.

Thus, after the process of sanitization and purification, the knife or
scissors will become qualified to perform its duty, which requires a
great amount of efficiency and care as possible. In other words, the
process of Tat-heer (purification) is essentially for the purpose of
making the *Mutahar* (the subject that will be purified) more fit and
proficient in carrying out its task in the best form possible. This is
logical, reasonable, and very clear as we use it many times in our daily
lives.

Let us now apply this same logic to our proposed question, as we will
find that the purification of our Prophets and Imams (peace be upon
them) should be from the things that may prevent or hinder the
performance of their God-given roles. This purification should result in
them being more proficient and capable of successfully fulfilling their
jobs and responsibilities.

So, in order for us to know what they will be purified from, we must
first identify and specify their jobs and responsibilities. We must know
what its consequences and implications are so that we can logically
deduce the answer based on our expectations. If we reflect on what
exactly are the major roles and responsibilities of the Prophets,
Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams, we will conclude the following:

**First**: Relay and convey the orders and commands of Allah (SWT) to
the people.

**Second**: Advise and urge the people to follow and obey the orders of
Allah (SWT) and to carry out the instructions and teachings of the
divine message.

**Third**: Obey and carry out the orders of Allah (SWT) with absolute
care in the individual and specific roles that are assigned to each one
of them, in addition to their general responsibilities, without any
addition or subtraction.

**Fourth**: Set a good example and become roles models for the people in
obeying the rules of Allah (SWT) and not disobeying Him under any
circumstances (such that the people imitate and follow their example).

**Fifth**: Rule justly between the people according to what Allah (SWT)
revealed and His orders, and thereby set the example to the people how
to judge between others in that same manner.

**Sixth**: Specify the guidelines and foundations which the human
society will be built on including its relation with its surroundings
and its interior (exactly as Allah commanded), and to execute it out to
the best of their abilities.

**Seventh**: Teach the people the wisdom, the lessons, and the laws of
the religion as Allah (SWT) commanded, with what Allah (SWT) instructed,
and with what they received from Him.

After quickly and briefly displaying the roles and responsibilities of
the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams (AS) on Earth, what do
*you* think are the things that they should be cleansed and purified
from in order for them to perform their jobs in the best way possible?

If we take a closer look at the seven responsibilities mentioned
earlier, we will find that the common ground or factor between all of
them is: the command of Allah (SWT). Hence, the Tat-heer and ‘Ismah
should be from the thing(s) that may interfere, hinder, or obstruct the
meaning of this word. Naturally, what interferes with a word is always
its opposite and what hinders it is always what's against it.

If we realize and understand this point, it will become easy for us to
draw the conclusion that the most important thing that the Prophets,
Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams *MUST* be purified and protected from is:
**disobedience of the orders and commands of Allah** **(SWT).**

This is exactly what Allah (SWT) mentioned in the Qur’an Al-Kareem,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ
بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! They are honored servants. They do not precede Him in speech
and (only) according to His Commandment do they act.” (21:26-27)***

Since their responsibilities is of highest degree of importance and
vitality as it deals with the fate of a person in his Hereafter and the
life of this world, it is incumbent and necessary that their success in
their responsibilities and roles is guaranteed to a percentage that
reaches an accuracy of 100%. And for that to happen, they must be
cleansed and purified from anything that might cause their failure or
hinder their success.

**Note:** You may refer to the rest of this article for further analysis
related to this topic:

<http://www.al-islam.org/taharah-ismah-masumeen-dr-hatem-abu-shahba>


