The Divine Declaration
======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ : يا مَلائِكَتي وَ يا سُكَّانَ سَماواتي
إِنّي ما خَلَقتُ سَماءً مَبنَّيةً وَ لا أرضاً مَدحيَّةً وَ لا قَمَراً
مُنيراً وَ لا شَمساً مُضيِئةً وَ لا فَلَكاً يَدُورُ وَ لا بَحراً يَجري
وَ لا فُلكاً يَسري إِلاّ في مَحَبَّةِ هؤُلاءِ الخَمسَةِ الَّذينَ هُم
تَحتَ الكِساء
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Meanwhile, Allah the Almighty and All-majestic said, "O My angels and
inhabitants of My heavens! Verily, I have not created any
well-established sky, extended land, glowing moon, shining sun,
revolving planet, flowing ocean, or moving on ark except for the love of
these five (individuals) who are now under the cloak."**

The Prophet (SA) has just supplicated to his Lord after his members of
the Household – Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain – have gathered under the
cloak with him at this momentous and historical occasion. The grand
request for thorough purification was made and Allah (SWT) sees and
hears the prayer of his most close servant on the face of earth. What
happens next? And what do we expect for Allah (SWT) to do?

In regards to the other requests such as blessings, benedictions, and
pleasure etc., they have been granted to the Prophet (SA) as we
discussed. But what about this grand and unique request for
purification?

The *Tradition of the Cloak* now changes scenes and the speaker now is
none other than the Almighty Creator. He (SWT) addresses His speech to
the angels and the inhabitants of the heavens. One may wonder how the
narrator who is Lady Fatima (AS) received knowledge that this dialogue
took place between Allah (SWT) and the angels such that she is narrating
the incident as if she is witnessing it.

Could this be a sign or hint of divinely bestowed authority (Wilayah
Takweeniya) which granted her the knowledge of the unseen? That is
something to be pondered over and Allah (SWT) knows better.

One may also question why the angels are being addressed when the
monologue which just took place was a supplication by the Prophet (SWT)
who directed his prayer to his Lord. Hence, we should expect that if
Allah (SWT) responds back then He would respond back directly to Prophet
Muhammad (SA). But that didn’t happen in that exact fashion. Instead,
Allah (SWT) chooses to direct His Words to the angels for two reasons.

The first reason is so that they and the other creatures in the heavens
may act as witnesses and testify to what Allah (SWT) is about to say.
And the second reason is that Allah (SWT) has directed His Speech to the
angels, but in reality, His Words are directly to us and to all of
mankind till the end of time. As the Arab proverb goes, “The speech is
directed to you, O’ Neighbor”. Allah (SWT) is intentionally creating an
opportunity to pronounce His divine declaration that will ring in the
ears of all those who come across this unique tradition.

Allah (SWT) presents seven of His greatest creations which any person
can relate to and recognize, and they are the:

1) Heavens  
 2) Land  
 3) Moon  
 4) Sun  
 5) Planet  
 6) Ocean  
 7) A sailing Ark

If we take a look around us, we will notice that we are standing on land
and above us are the heavens. During the day, the sun shines and brings
light to us, and during the night, the crescent of the moon becomes
apparent in the beginning of every lunar month. We recognize that the
home address that we live in is the Earth which is one out of nine
planets that the Almighty God created.

And one of the key resources of life without which the creatures and
plants would not live is water, and the source of water is the rainfall
which gathers into oceans and seas. It is interesting to note that the
seventh creation which Allah (SWT) mentions – a sailing Ark – is
different in nature compared to the other creations which He (SWT)
mentioned such as the planet and the ocean.

An Ark is a vehicle of transportation which is man-made but it cannot
proceed and sail in the ocean without the availability of wind to push
the ship forward in the right direction that the sailor is intending to
sail and in the presence of appropriate weather that does not impede the
journey of the Ark. But how can the wind be controlled and who
determines what the weather will be?

Surely, it is Allah (SWT) who is the Almighty Creator and the One who
makes the impossible possible and the incapable capable. The reason why
Allah (SWT) mentions a sailing Ark is to present an example of a
man-made creation which is dependent on Allah’s Power and Will as is the
case with all other creations.

In this manner, Allah (SWT) has included in His seven examples of
creation the most important and the most comprehensive such that nothing
is excluded, and He (SWT) describes each of those creations with its
most obvious characteristic or function that we as humans can identify
and recognize.

Allah (SWT) begins His speech by may making a negating statement “*I
have not created “,* and this method of expression conveys a sense of
urgency and importance to what He (SWT) is about to say and that is: *“I
have not created any well-established sky, extended land, glowing moon,
shining sun, revolving planet, flowing ocean, or moving on ark
except…”.*

Allah (SWT) could have simply and straightforwardly stated the fact and
then the reason behind it, as in *“I have created such and such so
that….”.* But He doesn’t do that; rather Allah (SWT) utilizes a more
eloquent way of speech to give a powerful introduction for the key point
that He (SWT) is about to deliver.

What is that reason which the Almighty Creator has created the universe
with all the creation in it? What is the exception which Allah (SWT) has
made without which He wouldn’t have created any of His creation?
Certainly it is a grand statement that Allah (SWT) is making and anyone
hearing this powerful declaration should open their ears and eyes to
what He (SWT) is about to convey. The answer Allah (SWT) provides is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلا في محبة هؤلاء الخمسة الذين هُم تحت الكِساء
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“..except for the love of these five (individuals) who are now under
the cloak.”*

Who are those five individuals who are loved by Allah (SWT)? The
Almighty Creator identifies them with one phrase *“those who are now
under the cloak”*. At this point, we begin to understand the
significance behind the gathering under the cloak, and the purpose
behind the *Tradition of the Cloak* becomes obvious.

Allah (SWT) has intentionally planned the sequence of events which took
place so far where Lady Fatima (AS) receives each one of her purified
family and they each seek the permission from the Prophet (SA) to enter
the cloak, after the Prophet himself had requested his daughter to bring
a cloak to cover him due to physical discomfort he felt, and all these
seemingly unimportant details were for the purpose of setting the stage
for a grand event and an important declaration.

The five personalities under the cloak whom Allah (SWT) is referring to
are none other than Prophet Muhammad, Lady Fatima, Imam Ali, Imam Hasan,
and Imam Husain (may Allah be pleased with them)! They are the creations
whom Allah (SWT) has created the rest of the universe for their sake.

They are the best of creations in Allah’s eyes. They are the love of
Allah (SWT) and the most beloved to Him. They were five in number who
were alive at that time but their total number are fourteen which
includes nine members from the descendants of Imam Husain (AS) who were
not present under that cloak since they were not yet alive. The five
individuals under the cloak in fact represent all the fourteen divine
personalities whom Allah (SWT) has chosen and preferred over the whole
universe.

How great is their status and how high is their station is such that the
Almighty Creator Himself has publicly expressed His eternal Love for
them that has translated itself into action – the creation of the whole
universe! How beautiful is that relationship between the Master and the
Servant – the Creator and the Creature, such that the strong bond of
love and admiration between them has exemplified itself in such a manner
that the Lord of the earth and heavens have decided to make a grand
announcement confessing the love relationship and the deep affection
which no words can properly describe or draw a picture of.

It is a love that is unmatched, a relationship that has no similarity,
and an example that is the model for all examples. So great and intense
is that divine love that it is narrated by a number of companions
including Ibn Abbas who testified that he saw the Prophet (SA) enter in
the state of prostration (Sujood) five consecutive times without
performing genuflection (Rukoo’).

So Ibn Abbas asked him about the reason and the Prophet (SA) answered,
*“Yes, Jibrael came to me and said ‘O Muhammad, the Almighty Allah loves
Ali and so I prostrated and raised my head. Then he said ‘The Almighty
Allah loves Fatima’ and so I prostrated and raised my head. Then he said
‘The Almighty Allah loves Hasan’ and so I prostrated and raised my head.
Then he said ‘The Almighty Allah loves Husain’ and so I prostrated and
raised my head. Then Jibrael said to me ‘The Almighty Allah loves those
who love them and so I prostrated and raised my head.”* (Mohadaraat Al
Odabaa’)

The profound meaning which Allah (SWT) declares in the *Tradition of the
Cloak* has also been conveyed in a sacred narration as we cited earlier
where Allah (SWT) says, *“If it was not for you Oh Prophet, I would not
have created the planets and God’s analogues”.*

It has also been cited in the book *Shifaa Al Sodoor* that Ali ibn Abi
Talib (AS) heard that the Prophet (SA) said that Allah (SWT) has said in
a sacred narration: *“O Ahmad, by My Honor and Majesty, if it were not
for you, I would not have created my land nor my heavens, and I would
not have* *raised this celestial green, nor have made this land flat,
nor have created the heavens and earth nor created a length or
width...”*

There are a number of Sunni narrations which are in agreement with the
idea that Allah (SWT) has not created the creation except for the
Prophet (although these narrations do not include his holy household)
such as the following three traditions:

Hadith 1
--------

Al-Hakim in his *Mustadrak*, Baihaqi in *Dalail an-Nubuwah*, Tabarani in
his *Kabeer*, Abu Na’eem in his *Hilya* and Ibn Asakir in *Tarikh
Damishq* report that'Umar ibn al-Khattab relates that:

The Prophet (SA) said: “Allah said: When Adam ate from the forbidden
tree, he asked: O Allah! I ask you for the sake of Muhammad to forgive
me. Allah said: O Adam! How do you recognize Muhammad when I have not
yet created him? Adam said: O Allah! When you created me and blew into
me the spirit, I lifted my head and saw written on the ‘Arsh "*La ilaaha
illallah Muhammadur Rasoolullah*". So, I got to know that you would only
join your name with him who is most beloved to you. Allah (SWT) then
said: O Adam! You have spoken the truth. Indeed Muhammad is more beloved
to me than anything and when you asked me for his sake, I pardoned you.
If Muhammad was not in existence, I would not have created you” (also
narrated by Imam Subki in *Shifaa as-Siqam* and Shihab in *Naseem*)

Hadith 2
--------

Hakim in *Mustadrak* and Abu as-Shaykh in *Tabaqaat al-Isfahani*’ in a
report from Abdullah ibn Abbas that:

“Allah revealed to Prophet ‘Isa *‘* (AS) that: O ‘Isa! Have faith
(*imaan*) in Muhammad and order your Ummah to do the same. If Muhammad
was not in existence, I would not have created Adam nor would I have
made heaven or hell”. (also narrated by Shaykh Taqi ad-Din Subki in
*Shifaa as-Siqam* and Shaykh al-Islam al-Bulqini in his *Fatawa* and Ibn
Hajar in *Afdal al-Qur’an*).

Hadith 3
--------

Ibn Asakir reports from Salman Al Muhammadi (may Allah be pleased with
him) that he said:

“Jibra’il came to the Holy Prophet (SA) and said that Allah says: I have
not created anyone who is more honored to me than you. I have created
the world and all that is therein so that they may know the rank that
you possess. I would not have created the world if I had not created
you”.

For those who belittle or mitigate the status of the Prophet’s
household, this divine declaration about the purpose of creation is
essentially a ‘wake-up call’ which elevates their status and remove any
doubts regarding their position in front of Allah (SWT). And for those
believers who are already blessed with their love and Wilayah in their
hearts, this declaration further intensifies their love and status in
our eyes and leaves us with a feeling of guilt that we have not given
them their due rights of love, veneration, and service.

Furthermore, this divine declaration makes us realize that if Allah the
Almighty Creator proved His Love to these selected personalities by
offering nearly everything to them when He (SWT) didn’t have to, then
shouldn’t *we* as God’s servants and the followers of the AhlulBayt (AS)
exert all our efforts to serve their cause, defend them, prove our love
to them, and propagate their ideologies to the best of our abilities,
aside from the fact that it is an obligation on us?


