Divine Identification of The Members of The Cloak
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ الأَمِينُ جِبرائِيلُ : يا رَبِّ وَ مَنْ تَحتَ الكِساءِ ؟ فَقالَ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ : هُم أَهلُ بَيتِ النُّبُوَّةِ وَ مَعدِنُ الرِّسالَةِ
هُم فاطِمَةُ وَ أَبُوها ، وَ بَعلُها وَ بَنوها
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Gabriel the Honest Archangel asked, "O my Lord! Who are those under
the cloak?"**

**The Almighty and All-majestic Lord answered, "They are the household
of Prophethood and the core of the Message. They are namely Fatima, her
father, her husband, and her sons."**

As we mentioned before, the dialogue between Allah (SWT) and Angel
Jibrael (AS) is for the purpose of conveying the information which Allah
(SWT) wants us to hear. Jibrael (AS) asks Allah (SWT) about the identity
of those who are under the cloak and He (SWT) responds back with one
brief phrase informing us the identity of the individuals whom He is
referring to. This way, no one after this event will ever have doubt of
who was under the cloak and who was not. No one can dare to fabricate
the facts or add / subtract to the individuals under the cloak.

When Jibrael (AS) asks Allah (SWT) who are under the cloak, Allah (SWT)
answers with an interesting expression which further sheds some light on
an interesting angle that we should pay attention to. Instead of
providing the names of the members of the cloak (as in Muhammad, Ali,
Fatima, Hasan, and Husain), Allah (SWT) chooses a different concise and
unique method to identify them. He (SWT) says: “*They are the household
of Prophethood and the core of the Message. They are namely Fatima, her
father, her husband, and her sons."*

First, Allah (SWT) identifies them as a whole – one identity – that is,
they are **أهل بيت النبوة** (the Prophetic household) and **معدن
الرسالة** (the core of the Message). Why is there the need to identify
them as “AhlulBayt”? As history proves later, there has indeed been a
controversy as to who are included among the “members of the Prophet’s
household”. Who exactly are the AhlulBayt?

The mainstream Muslim population includes the wives of the Prophet among
the AhlulBayt and some even include any blood relation of the Prophet to
be from the “AhlulBayt”. However that is false and incorrect and here
Allah (SWT) is taking the opportunity to clarify any misunderstanding or
misinterpretation until the end of time. He (SWT) Himself is speaking to
testify the truth regarding the identity of AhlulBayt who are
exclusively Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain (May Allah be pleased with
them).

The next question to ask is: What the significance of “AhlulBayt” in
Allah’s eyes? The answer to that is conveyed in the second part of
Allah’s answer and that is - **معدن الرسالة** (the core of the Message)

As we know, Allah (SWT) has revealed the message of Islam as the final
revelation to mankind till the end of time. In the words of the Prophet
(SA), he has left behind two weighty things - the Holy Qur’an and his
*‘Itrah* (AhlulBayt) – which will always accompany each other and will
never separate until they reach the Pool of Hawd. We as Muslims are
ordered to adhere to the Qur’an and AhlulBayt which together serve as
our lanterns of guidance for salvation.

The Qur’an consisting of the word of God coupled with the infallible
teachers and divinely appointed guides represented in the AhlulBayt (AS)
and the Imams who will clarify the message of Islam and act as the
“speaking Qur’an” and the “walking Qur’an” is the correct formula and
prescription for us to abide by if we wish to achieve spiritual success
and proximity to God.

The AhlulBayt (AS) is the model for human perfection and the template
which we should follow and take our example from. In fact, all of the
prophets and messengers before the Seal of Prophets understood their
position of Wilayah and superiority over them and that they are the part
and parcel of the unified message which Allah (SWT) intended for mankind
to embrace. They are the heart of the religion and the core of the
message as Allah (SWT) testifies, hence there cannot be any doubt or
argument over this fact.

After all, if the whole universe was created for the sake of the Prophet
and his AhlulBayt (AS), then we shouldn’t be surprised that they are the
core and essence of the religion of Islam. If we have accepted the
former after hearing the words of Allah (SWT) in their regards, then
accepting the latter is natural and necessary. After all, Allah (SWT)
reminds us in the Qur’an that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah knows best knows where He places His message. (6:124)***

After properly introducing their title and significance to the religion,
Allah (SWT) then identifies them personally by presenting only one of
the five personalities who are under the cloak – and she is Lady Fatima.
Allah (SWT) says: “*They are namely Fatima, her father, her husband, and
her sons."*

Wouldn’t it have been easier and more transparent for Allah (SWT) to
spell out the names of the members of the cloak especially since the
angels and inhabitants of the heavens are well-aware of who the Prophet
(SA) and his AhlulBayt (AS) are?

It is very interesting to note that Allah (SWT) chooses Fatima in
particular as the core person to identify the rest of the members of the
cloak who are her father, husband, and sons.

One must reflect and contemplate why Allah (SWT) mentions Lady Fatima
(AS) as the reference point when He could’ve used the Prophet (SA) and
that would have been more expected. Allah (SWT) could’ve said, *“They
are Muhammad, his daughter, his cousin, and his grandsons”*.

This would’ve have been more acceptable to the mind since the status of
the Prophet (SA) is above all ranks and the name of the Prophet (SA) has
always been the core identifier as we recite in our obligatory *prayers
“Allahuma Sali ‘ala Muhammad wa Aali Muhammad”* (Oh Lord send your
blessings on Muhammad and his household).

In this example, we begin the recitation of this prayer by mentioning
the name of the Prophet and then associating his family to him.

Or Allah (SWT) could’ve selected Imam Ali (AS) as the reference point by
saying, *“They are Ali, his wife, his sons, and his cousin.”* But
neither was the case! Surely, this divine selection to present the
members of the cloak via Lady Fatima (AS) is an honor and virtue for her
and for the purposes of demonstrating her high station and position.

We are to be reminded that the other members of the cloak are very close
in blood relation to her; either her own beloved father who is the Seal
of Messengers, or her dear husband and the successor and Wasi of the
Prophet and the Commander of the Faithful, or her beloved sons who are
the Master Youth of Paradise. What a great virtue she possesses to be
blessed with such pure family whose origins and roots are one and the
same and are the most noble and purest that it can be!

If we analyze each personality who has been granted permission to enter
the cloak, we will easily recognize that the divine approval for them to
become a member of the AhlulBayt was not random or a mistake as they all
possess unique and extraordinary characteristics of honor, nobility, and
excellence that cannot be matched. In fact, their physical presence
under the cloak collectively in the same gathering must be a hint that
something grand is about to happen and that their gathering is not just
any family gathering.

Furthermore, one may also expect that with the unmatched qualities that
each of the members of the cloak possess, it is not possible to expect
another member to join who is not equally qualified in nobility, purity,
and excellence, even if he or she is in overall good standing
religion-wise, such as Umm Salamah.

It is not surprising that Allah (SWT) choses Lady Fatima (AS) to be the
core of the People of the Cloak when she is the one whom Imam Hasan
Al-Askari (AS) said: “*We are Allah’s Hujjah (proof) over you and Fatima
is Hujjah over us”.*

Fatima is the one whom the following supplication is known to be
recommended for the acceptance of prayers after sending benedictions to
the purified household through her name, as narrated by Ibn Tawoos via
the infallible Imam (AS):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صلي على فاطمة وأبيها وبعلها وبنيها والسر العظيم المستودع فيها أن
تصلي على محمد وأل محمد وتفعل بي ما أنت أهله ولا تفعل بي ما أنا أهله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O Allah, I beseech you in the name of Fatima, her father, her husband,
her sons, and the secret she is buried with: shower your blessings upon
Muhammad and his Progeny, and do unto me that which is worthy of Your
mercy, and not that which is worthy of my actions."*

When asked what is the meaning of **السر المستودع فيها** (the secret she
is buried with), our scholars have provided a number of possible
interpretations. The “secret” may be referring to the Imams who are from
her lineage, or it may refer to her aborted son Mohsin who has become a
symbol for the oppression committed against the Imams (AS) and a proof
of their right for Imamate.

It may also refer to the 12th Awaited Imam (who is from her sons) who
will fill the earth with equity and justice after it will be filled with
tyranny and injustice. In other interpretations, the “secret” refers to
her position being the connecting point between the Prophethood and
Imamate. As we know, Imamate is an extension of Prophethood so if it
were not for the connecting point or “link” between them, the
Prophethood and Message that was delivered would not have sustained
without the institution of Imamate.

In light of this perspective, the commencement of Imamate began in her
lap as she accompanied and stood alongside her husband Imam Ali (AS)
defending his right for the successorship and raising her sons Imam
Hasan and Husain (AS). Thus, she became considered the “mother of the
Infallible Imams”.

With the grand status of Lady Fatima (AS) in mind, it becomes necessary
and inevitable to seek intercession from her and desire her proximity by
virtue of that “hidden secret” that is buried in her essence and has
become the reason for her distinct position in the *Tradition of the
Cloak*.

It is worth noting that Allah (SWT) identifies the sons of Fatima to be
"**بنيها**" (Baneeha) instead of "**إبنيها**" (Ebnayha), and the
difference between the two words is that the former term is the plural
form while the latter refers to a pair (two in number). The divine use
of the word *Baneeha* indicates that all the sons of Lady Fatima (AS),
Hasan and Husain, as well as her grandsons from the lineage of Imam
Husain (AS) are included with the members of the cloak, by virtue of
their divinely bestowed infallibility.


