Archangel Jibrael Seeks Proximity
=================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ جِبرائِيلُ : يا رَبِّ أَتَأذَنُ لي أَن أَهبِطَ إلىَ الأَرضِ
لأِكُونَ مَعَهُم سادِساً ؟ فَقالَ اللهُ : نَعَم قَد أَذِنتُ لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"O my Lord," Gabriel asked, "Will You allow me to descend to the earth
to be the sixth of them?" Allah the Almighty and All-majestic said,
"Yes, I allow you."**

Upon hearing and absorbing this divine declaration from Allah (SWT), one
can imagine how Jibrael (AS) felt elated as his existing love and
veneration to the Prophet (SA) intensified further and thus he wisely
made a request which displays his sense of yearning and appreciation to
the position of the AhlulBayt (AS). He requested from Allah (SWT) that
he descend to the earth and join them under the cloak!

It was a bold request as one can imagine even though Jibrael (AS)
himself must have realized that the door is not opened for just anyone
to enter the cloak. It is only the most closest and beloved creatures to
the Lord whom the universe has been created for and only they attain the
honor of entering the cloak. Jibrael (AS) recognized that the members of
the cloak are already ‘completed’ and there is no any other person alive
at that time who deserves to be in that position but has not yet
entered. Then why did he make that request?

Although he knows that his rank among the angels is the highest and he
has attained an exceptional proximity towards Allah (SWT), Jibrael (AS)
is reminded of the incident of Me’raj which took place on the 27th of
Rajab in the year 621 A.D. when he accompanied Prophet Muhammad (SA) in
the journey towards the heavens and he was made to stop at a position
that was very close to the divine throne of Allah (SWT). At that point,
Jibrael (AS) was commanded by Allah (SWT) not to proceed and instead,
the Prophet (SA) was given permission to continue forward at a position
which no one else was ever given permission to enter. As the Holy Qur’an
describes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّى فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَىٰ. وَهُوَ
بِالْأُفُقِ الأعلى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When he was on the highest part of the horizon, Then he approached
and came closer, Till he was at a distance two bows' length or even
nearer.” (53:7-9)***

Even Archangel Jibrael (AS) couldn’t cross past the seventh heaven at
the place called *Sidrat Al Muntaha* (Lote-Tree)! When the Prophet (SA)
asked him if he would abandon him at this stage, Jibrael (AS) excused
himself and assured him that only the Prophet (SA) was given the
permission to proceed due to his exceptionally great rank in the eyes of
Allah (SWT). Hence, Jibrael (AS) was well aware that the Prophet (SA)
has attained a very high station as well as his AhlulBayt (AS) whom he
had witnessed their holy names inscribed near the Throne of Allah (SWT).

Yet, Jibrael proceeded to make that request to join the AhlulBayt (AS)
under the cloak in this very blessed gathering.

The only thing he seeks is proximity and service of the chosen ones whom
Allah (SWT) has raised their station above all stations. He recognized
the fact that when a creature associates himself and draws himself
closer to that which is honorable and esteemed, then he also will
benefit by his association to that pure good. In essence, Jibrael (AS)
acted upon the idea of seeking Qurba (proximity) to the AhlulBayt (AS)
as Allah (SWT) has ordered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.” (42:22)***

It was an immediate and spontaneous reaction of any being that
recognizes the truth, appreciates it, and desires to come closer to the
symbol of righteousness. Jibrael (AS) requested to become the “sixth
member” even though he knows very well that the members of the cloak are
only five without an addition.

As a side note, it is worth reflecting on the fact that angel Jibrael
(AS) sought the permission of Allah (SWT) and the permission of the
Prophet (SA) to enter his house. Now compare this example with that of
certain companions of the Prophet (SA) who with all audacity barged in
the house of Lady Fatima (AS) without her permission and against her
will, as they intentionally squeezed her behind the door causing her
immense pain and abortion of her unborn child and setting her house on
fire! May Allah (SWT) punish the transgressors and enemies of the
AhlulBayt (AS)!

Allah’s answer to Jibrael’ s request was an approval and a granted
permission for him to join the Prophet (SA) and his AhlulBayt (AS) under
the cloak! The divinely-bestowed infallibility which Jibrael (AS) has
(as an angel) from committing disobedience may be a reason why Allah
(SWT) qualified him to join the blessed caravan of the Prophet (SA) as
there is no harm in him being an addition to this gathering.

This is contrary to the position of Umm Salamah whom the Prophet (SA)
testified to be in good standing; however she is not infallible and
hence was not granted permission to join the AhlulBayt (AS).

What a great honor Jibrael (AS) has just attained!! Surely, he has
achieved a status that no other creature, whether human or angel, will
ever achieve, simply by being blessed with the opportunity to physically
join them under the cloak, even if it is just as an unofficial member of
the cloak. We will come to understand shortly what is the main wisdom
behind the divine permission for Jibrael (AS) to descend to the earth
and join this momentous occasion.


