Revelation of The Purification Verse
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ لأِبي : إِنَّ اللهَ قَد أَوحى إِلَيكُم يَقولُ : ﴿ … إِنَّمَا
يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**He thus said to my father, “Allah has revealed to you saying, ‘Allah
only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the
House, and to purify you a thorough purifying.’”**

After entering the cloak, Jibrael (AS) then delivers the most important
message which represents the climax of the message and the ultimate
purpose behind event of the cloak. Lady Fatima (AS) narrates that
Jibrael (AS) delivers to her father the revelation of the Qur’anic verse
instantaneously:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a thorough purifying.” (33:33)***

The purpose of the *Tradition of the Cloak* is now obvious as the sun
and the divine aim has been reached. The Purification verse (Ayat Al
Tat-heer) has been revealed to be stamped in the Holy Qur’an till the
end of time. Allah (SWT) has expressed the *Irada* (desire) and as we
know, whenever Allah (SWT) desires something it immediately happens
according to his will,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, when He intends a thing, His Command is, “Be”, and It is!*

Allah (SWT) has intended to purify the Prophet (SA) and his AhlulBayt –
those who are under the cloak – from any impurity whatsoever, whether
physically, spiritually, or otherwise. It is not just an attempt for
purification which may or may not be complete. Rather, Allah (SWT)
states that He desires “to purify you a thorough purification”. This
purification as Allah (SWT) describes it as thorough and complete
reaching 100% success.

What is exactly this purification from? What is that thing which Allah
(SWT) wants to purify them such that He (SWT) is declaring this event in
the Holy Qur’an till the end of time? As we logically concluded earlier,
it must be purification from disobeying Allah (SWT) and committing any
sins, mistakes, or falters. It must be protection from having any
shortcoming, deficiency, or weakness.

As we explained earlier, the grand role and duties of the divine guides
demands that they be protected from sinning or failing in their
responsibilities. Otherwise, their position as role models and examples
will be scathed and there will be no point in trusting them as divine
representatives if they themselves make mistakes or exercise poor
judgment, even if it is a minor falter or a once in their lifetimes.

What is the natural effect of thorough purification which Allah (SWT)
has intended? It is none other than infallibility (‘Ismah)! In fact, the
Purification verse has descended to introduce the idea of
“infallibility” (‘Ismah) of the Prophet and his household.

Only a few people witnessed the Prophet (SA) casting his cloak over the
purified AhlulBayt (AS), so in order to disseminate that news as broadly
as possible among the people and make them aware of the special position
of his progeny, the Prophet (SA) would pass by the house of Imam Ali
(SA) for a period of nine months and he would call out: *“Peace be upon
you, O People of the House!”* and then he would recite the:
“purification verse.”

Whenever the AhlulBayt (AS) found it necessary to draw attention to
their unique spiritual rank, they would proudly refer to this verse.
This particular verse is one of the scriptural proofs for the inerrancy
of the Household of the Prophet which points to their utter purity and
unique character.

The Prophet (SA) himself has testified that, *“The verse of purification
was revealed concerning five people: myself, Ali, Hasan, Husain, and
Fatima."* (Sahih Muslim) According to the well-known exegesist Agha
Mahdi Pooya, the word *Innama* (verily or only) in this verse signifies
exclusive distinction.

To emphasize this exclusiveness, the second object of the verb
*yudh-hiba* (keep off)-the phrase *ankum* (from you)-has been put before
the first object *rijs* (uncleanness); and for further emphasis, the
phrase *Ahl ul Bayt* has been mentioned to explain the pronoun *a’nkum*
(from you). The grammatical structure of the whole clause indicates that
this is a unique privilege or distinction granted to the Ahlul Bayt
only, excluding all others.

Pooya further explains that the verb *yuridu* implies that the
continuous will or intention of Allah is His creative will or intention,
not legislative. To interpret the will as the legislative will as in
verse 6 of Surat Al Maedah, *“Surely Allah orders what He desires”*
distorts the whole fabric of the verse and renders meaningless the
exclusive particle and the constructional arrangement. Even then it
means that only the Ahlul Bayt exclusively achieved the standard.

This verse is also a preface to verses 77 to 79 of Surat Al Waqi’ah:
*"Verily this is an honourable (Karim) Qur’an, in a hidden (preserved)
book, which no one can touch save the purified."* The AhlulBayt (AS) had
only been thoroughly purified by Allah because of their total submission
to Allah's will and their state of being always in communion with Allah.

For a more detailed research on the analysis of the purification verse
titled, *“To Whom Does the Purification Verse Refer To?”* you may refer
to this link:
<http://www.al-islam.org/ayat-at-tat-heer-dr-hatem-abu-shahba/>


