Imam Ali Seeks Explanation
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ : عَلِيٌّ لِأَبِي : يا رَسُولَ اللهِ أَخبِرنِي ما لِجُلُوسِنا
هَذا تَحتَ الكِساءِ مِنَ الفَضلِ عِندَ اللهِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

**\`Ali then said to my father, “O Allah’s Messenger! Please tell me;
what is the value of this gathering of us under this cloak in the sight
of Allah?”**

The natural course of an intellectual person who recognizes the
significance of an event is to seek knowledge of the virtues, rewards,
and blessings of such event. That is exactly what Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS)
did as he posed the following question upon the revelation of the
purification verse. *“What is the value of this gathering under the
cloak in the sight of Allah?”* It is a wise and timely question for Imam
Ali (AS) to ask and he does so as a service to his followers and
devotees who will come in the later generations till the end of time and
ponder over that question.

There is no doubt that the person whom the Prophet (SA) referred to as
the Gate of Knowledge in the well-known tradition, *“I am the city of
knowledge and Ali is its Gate”* must already know the answer to the
question he is posing.

How can that not be the case when Imam Ali (AS) is the one who
frequently stated in his sermons:

*“Ask me before you lose me. By Allah, if you ask me about anything that
could happen up to the Day of Judgment, I will tell you about it. Ask
me, for, by Allah, you will not be able to ask me a question about
anything without my informing you. Ask me about the Book of Allah, for
by Allah, there is no verse about which I do not know whether it was
sent down at night or during the day, or whether it was revealed on a
plain or in a mountain.”* (Tarikh al-Khulafa)

The role of Imam Ali (AS) in this gathering is not passive and he is the
means by which the Prophet (SA) informs the audience of the eternal
significance and bounties of the *Tradition of the Cloak* which they
have just experienced. In fact, we owe our due thanks and gratitude to
Imam Ali (AS) who posed this very important question on our behalf so
that we gain the knowledge and insight behind this historical event.

Up till now, the purpose and significance of the *Tradition of the
Cloak* have manifested itself and become obvious to the listener after
hearing the divine speech about the purpose of creation and deducing its
indications, and capping it with the revelation of the purification
verse in the Holy Qur’an.

However, Allah (SWT) presents yet another opportunity for the minds that
don’t comprehend and the eyes that don’t see and those who may belittle
or misunderstand the significance of this event under the cloak by the
presentation of Imam Ali’s question.

The message we extract simply by the posing of this question by a person
like Imam Ali (AS) is in itself an indication that this gathering is not
random neither is it a coincidence. The *Tradition of the Cloak* is not
merely a story that is pleasant to hear, and Allah (SWT) is not a teller
of stories without presenting its lessons, morals, and significance that
will be effective till the end of time and not just for the
contemporaries of that event.

It is interesting to note that when Imam Ali (AS) poses his question to
the Prophet (SA), he does not ask “if” there is a reward and value
behind their gathering under the cloak. Instead, he asks “what” is the
reward and value of this gathering.

Imam Ali (AS) already concluded and knows with certainty, as the
successor of the Prophet and the 1st Imam, that *there is indeed*
significant merit and value behind this gathering. It is only a matter
of gaining that knowledge and understanding and making it available to
the public. This is the response of Allah (SWT) through the tongue of
Imam Ali (AS) to anyone who wishes to devalue the *Tradition of the
Cloak* or dilute its significance.

As Allah (SWT) testifies on behalf of the truthfulness of Imam Ali (AS),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ عَلِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We granted them lofty honor on the tongue of truth.”***
***(19:50)***

According to *Tafsir Bayan Al Sa’ada* by Al Janabidhi, what is intended
by "**عليّ**" as mentioned in this verse is in reference to Ali ibn Abi
Talib (AS), for he possessed a truthful tongue and there was no other
tongue more honorable than his. As Imam Ali (AS) himself said in this
regards, *“Allah (SWT) makes the truthful tongue of a person in front of
the people better than wealth and inheritance.”*

It is cited in the book of *Manaqib Aal Abi Talib* by Ibn Shahr Ashoob
that Abu Baseer narrates that Imam Al Sadeq (AS) said that the Prophet
(SA) said that, “I prayed to Allah (SWT) to bestow me with a “truthful
tongue” (Lisaan Sidq). so Allah (SWT) revealed these verses in Surat
Maryam (19:49-50)”. Just as Allah (SWT) bestowed Prophet Is-haaq (Isaac)
to Prophet Ya’qoob (Jacob), He (SWT) bestowed Imam Ali (AS) as the
“truthful tongue” to Prophet Muhammad (SA).


