Spiritual Rewards of The Tradition of The Cloak
===============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ النَّبيُّ ( صلى الله عليه وآله ) : وَالَّذي بَعَثَنِي بِالحَقِّ
نَبِيّاً وَ اصطَفانِي بِالرِّسالَةِ نَجِيّاً ، ما ذُكِرَ خَبَرُنا هذا
فِي مَحفِلٍ مِن مَحافِل أَهلِ الأَرَضِ وَ فِيهِ جَمعٌ مِن شِيعَتِنا وَ
مُحِبِيِّنا إِلاّ وَ نَزَلَت عَلَيهِمُ الرَّحمَةُ ، وَ حَفَّت بِهِمُ
المَلائِكَةُ وَ استَغفَرَت لَهُم إِلى أَن يَتَفَرَّقُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Prophet, peace be upon him and his Household, said, "I swear this
by Him Who has sent me with the truth as Prophet and chosen me, as
holding communion, to convey the Message; whenever the tale of this
gathering of us is mentioned in an assembly of the people of the earth
in which a group of our adherents and lover are present, the (divine)
mercy shall certainly be poured down on them and the angels shall
certainly surround them, asking forgiveness for them until they
depart."**

What was the Prophet’s answer to Imam Ali’s question? Interestingly, he
begins his response by swearing, just as Allah (SWT) did before him.
Again, the purpose behind swearing is to convey importance to the
statement that will follow that swear. As we know, it is highly disliked
that a person swears in general, but if he has to swear, then he cannot
swear about anything but Allah (SWT).

In this case, the Prophet (SA) swears by Allah (SWT) but does so in an
eloquent way. He swears by the Lord who sent him as prophet and chose
him as holding communion to convey the Message.

The reason why the Prophet (SA) choses to swear in that manner is to
remind us (through Imam Ali) that he is the Seal of Messengers who is
the representative of God. Hence, he does not speak out of his own free
will and whatever he is about to say, is not from his personal wishes or
an exaggeration from him. Everything the Prophet (SA) utters is directly
the word of God without addition or subtraction.

After the swearing by Allah (SWT) who appointed him to his position, the
Prophet (SA) answers the question by presenting a condition, and that
is, *“Whenever the tale of this gathering of us is mentioned in an
assembly of the people of the earth in which a group of our adherents
and lover are present…”*

He lists a series of blessings in two separate statements which shall
benefit those devotees. Before familiarizing ourselves with these
blessings, it is important to first understand that the condition for
reaping the benefits of reciting this tradition is contingent upon two
major criteria and that is:

1) The servant must be a lover and Shi’a (devout follower) of the
purified AhlulBayt (AS)

2) The servant would join a gathering of devotees to the Prophet’s
purified household where the *Tradition of the Cloak* is being recited.

There is no other criteria or qualification to this gathering except the
above conditions. The attendees don’t have to be residing in any
particular location such as a mosque or holy sanctuary. They don’t have
to be living in a Muslim country or belong to a certain racial group.
The skin of their color doesn’t matter neither does their educational or
intellectual backgrounds.

All that matters is their love and devotion to the Prophet’s AhlulBayt
(AS) which unifies the Shi’as at every level. It is interesting to note
that the narration makes a distinction between the “Shi’as” and the
“lovers”. What exactly is the difference between the two groups? Isn’t
every Shi’a of AhlulBayt also a lover? And isn’t every lover of
AhlulBayt also a Shi’a?

Our Infallible Imams (AS) have described to us who exactly are the true
Shi’as (supporters and followers) of the AhlulBayt. It is narrated that
one time a man went to his wife and said to her, “Go to Fatima the
daughter of the Prophet and ask her if I am from their Shi’a or not”.
The wife went to ask Lady Fatima (AS) and she answered, “Tell your
husband that if he acts according to our commands and keeps himself away
from what we forbid, then you are from our Shi’a; otherwise, you are
not.”

The wife returned back and conveyed the message to her husband who
exclaimed, “Woe be to me! And who is not free of sins and mistakes?! I
am surely in Hell-Fire for whoever is not from the Shi’a is truly in
Hell-Fire!” The man’s wife returned back to Lady Fatima and conveyed her
husband’s remarks.

Lady Fatima (AS) then said, *“Tell him that is not the case. Our Shi’a
are the best of the people of Paradise. All our lovers and those who
support our supporters, and those take our enemies as their enemies, and
those who surrender to us by their hearts and tongues, are not from our
Shi’a* *IF* *they disobey our orders and prohibitions at any time.
Despite that, they are still going to Paradise. However, some of them
will purify themselves from their sins by experiencing calamities and
tragedies, or they may undergo hardships on the Day of Resurrection, or
they may be placed at the upper level of Hell-Fire until they are
purified and their love to us would save them and transfer them to our
domain.”* (Bihaar Al Anwaar)

In another tradition, a man came up to Imam Hasan (AS) claimed, “I am
from your Shi’a”. So Imam Hasan (AS) replied, *“Oh Abdullah, if you obey
our commands and abide by our prohibitions, then you are truthful. And
if you are not, then do not increase in your sin by falsely claiming a
great and honorable position that you don’t deserve. Do not say “I am
from your Shi’a”. Rather say “I am from your supporters, lovers, and
those who take your enemies as our enemy. You are in a good position and
are heading to a good position”.*

Another man said to Imam Al Sajjad (AS), “Oh son of Messenger of Allah,
I am from your sincere Shi’a.” So the Imam (AS) replied back to him, “If
you are like Prophet Ibraheem *Khaleelullah* whom Allah (SWT) has said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإن من شيعته لابراهيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Verily among those who followed his Way was Abraham.) (37:83)***

and if your heart is like his heart, then you are from our Shi’a. And if
your heart is not like his heart but it is free from deceit and
animosity, then you are from our lovers.”

From these narrations by our Imams (AS), it becomes clear to us that the
station of “Shi’as” and the station of “lovers of AhlulBayt” are
different although they are both blessed and are include among the party
of the good. Every Shi’a is also a lover of AhlulBayt (AS), however not
every lover is considered to be a Shi’a. The rank of the Shi’as is
certainly above the lovers of AhlulBayt (AS) due to their strict
obedience and abidance to the path of AhlulBayt (AS) and their high
level of piety.

The stronger the love to the AhlulBayt (AS), the more obedient and
righteous actions will be manifested by the lover and that will
certainly bring him closer to the rank of the Shi’as. As lovers of
AhlulBayt (AS), we hope and pray that we are given success to reach the
station of the Shi’as and deserve to be called with that honorable
title. It is the intercession of the infallible AhlulBayt (AS) which
manifests the mercy of Allah (SWT) on the devotees which brings them
salvation by virtue of their moral and spiritual support to the divinely
appointed guides.

The reward behind joining the gathering where the *Tradition of the
Cloak* is being recited includes both the Shi’as and lovers. What are
the three benefits that the Prophet (SA) mentions in this regard? The
first statement covers three rewards which focus on the spiritual
bounties related to the hereafter as they are most important and they
are:

1) They will be encompassed with divine mercy.

2) The angels shall surround them.

3) The angels will seek forgiveness on their behalf until they depart
from their gathering.

The bestowal of divine blessings manifested in Allah’s infinite mercy is
conveyed in the short phrase of Basmalah known as *Bimillah Ar-Rahman
Ar-Raheem*. These two words, *Rahman* and *Raheem* express slightly
different variations of meaning. Imam As-Sadiq (AS) says that *Rahman*
is a special name for a general attribute while *Raheem* is a general
name for a specific attribute. And Prophet Isa (AS) states that *Rahman*
is a type of mercy related to this world while *Raheem* is related to
the hereafter.

The term *Rahman* describes that aspect of the source of all creation
which is endlessly radiating and nourishing, regardless of whom or what
is receiving the endless flow of blessings. On the other hand, the term
*Raheem* describes that aspect of mercy which is issued forth only in
response to the actions and behavior of the recipient. It is in this
manner that God takes ten steps toward us when we take even a single
step toward God.

Allah (SWT) is *Raheem* with our religion, our worldly affairs, our
hereafter and He (SWT) has made it easy for us with least amount of
burden (Tafseer Saafi). According to many narrations, the mercy
associated with *Raheem* is specific to the believers only who are the
devotees and followers of the Prophet’s AhlulBayt (AS) and divinely
appointed Infallible Imams.

It is that mercy highlighted in the word “Raheem” that is referred to in
the *Tradition of the Cloak*. Since the followers of AhlulBayt (AS) have
embraced the path of the truthful and its representatives who were
chosen by Allah (SWT), they deserve His infinite mercy and are its
recipients whenever they gather to recite this tradition.

We may also deduce that any gathering in general which involves
commemoration or remembrance of the AhlulBayt (AS) such as the Tradition
of the Cloak does, whether it be their virtues, merits, tragedies, or
autobiographies, will yield divine blessings and bounties for its
participants.

In fact, this is deemed a highly recommended act as Imam Al Sadiq (AS)
has said, *"Our Shi’a are compassionate amongst each other. When they
hold a private meeting they remember Allah. Verily, the remembrance of
us is of the remembrance of Allah. When we are remembered, Allah has
been remembered, and when our enemy is remembered, Satan has been
remembered.”*

In another tradition, it is recorded that Imam al-Sadiq (AS) asked one
of his companions Fudhail Ibn Yasaar, "Do you assemble with your friends
and narrate traditions?" He said, "Yes, may I be sacrificed for you." He
(AS) said, *"I hold dear such gatherings as it will revive our matter.
May Allah have mercy on he who revives our matter. O Fudhail! He who
remembers us or being reminded about us and this brings tears out of his
eyes even to the extent of a wing of a fly, Allah will forgive his sins
even if they are greater than the scum of the sea."*

The second reward mentioned in this tradition is that the angels
surround that believer who has participated in a gathering of devotees
to the holy household where the *Tradition of the Cloak* is being
recited. It is a known fact that “angels” generally represent good while
its antonym, “devils” symbolize bad.

Hence, the presence of angels in a location such as a holy sanctuary
indicates goodness, purity, and righteousness, while the presence of
devils in a place like a haunted house indicates evil, deceit, and
falsehood. So, we can imagine that if a person is accompanied by devils,
they are likely to be possessed with evil, are misguided, and have
deviated away from the path of the good.

On the other hand, if we are told that a person is accompanied by
angels, we can safely assume that they are in good standing and have
attained a high level of piety. We have examples in history such as Lady
Maryam (AS) and the prophets and messengers who interacted with angels,
something which normal human beings don’t. In the case of the *Tradition
of the Cloak*, the reward of the believer who recites or attends such
blessed gathering will be the proximity of the angels to him.

Not only that, the third reward will be that the angels seek forgiveness
for him not just once or ten times, but rather continuously until the
believers depart this gathering! It is narrated that Imam Al-Sadiq (AS)
once said to Dawud Ibn Sarhan, "O Dawud, offer my greetings to my
friends and deliver this message to them that Allah blesses a servant
who gathers with another to make the remembrance of our matter, and in
that case, the third among them is an angel who asks forgiveness for
them.

When two servants gather for our remembrance Allah reminds His glory to
His angels (for having such servants). Thus, when you gather, spend your
time on remembering (us) since your gathering and your remembering sets
our matter alive. And the best people after us are those who remind
others of our affair and invite others to our remembrance." (Bihaar Al
Anwaar)

What a great blessing and reward for the Shi’a and lover of AhlulBayt!
We are given the opportunity to have intercession performed on our
behalf by the angels of God who are closer to Him than we are and are
more purified than us. Surely, their performance of “Istighfaar”
(repentance) for us will reach its target quicker with a higher degree
of acceptance than our own individual repentance.

The same is the case if we seek intercession from those who are even
closer to Allah (SWT) and higher in rank than the angels, who are the
Prophet (and his AhlulBayt) who was given permission to cross the
heavens at a point where Archangel Jibrael (AS) couldn’t. In fact, we
are encouraged by Allah (SWT) to seek repentance to Him and ask
forgiveness of our sins by intercession via the Holy Prophet (SA), as
indicated in the Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger had (also) asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning (to
mercy), Merciful.”*** ***(4:64)***

As indicated in this verse, a servant will find Allah (SWT) to be
forgiving if he enhances his own repentance by seeking intercession of
the Prophet (SA) whose prayers will be answered by virtue of his close
proximity to the Almighty Creator.


