The Cry of Victory
==================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ عَلِيٌّ- عليه السَّلام: إذَاً وَاللهِ فُزنا وَ فازَ شِيعَتنُا
وَ رَبِّ الكَعبَةِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

**\`Ali, peace be upon him, commented, “Then, by Allah I swear it; we
have won. So have our adherents. I swear it by the Lord of the
Ka\`bah.”**

Upon hearing the Prophet’s response to his question regarding the reward
and value of the gathering of the purified household under the cloak,
Imam Ali (AS) is amazed but not surprised. He is elated and filled with
joy not as much for himself but more so for his Shi’a, lovers, and
supporters! He swears by Allah (SWT) and the Imam as an infallible being
would not swear except for a very important matter. *“We have won and so
have our adherents!”*

The Imam (AS) presents the conclusion of the event of the cloak
regarding the gatherings where the devotees of AhlulBayt (AS) recite
this tradition.

The key word here is “victory” and Imam Ali (AS) makes it a point to
make a distinction between the two parties who have won. The first party
are the Prophet and his AhlulBayt (AS) whom the Imam says "**فزنا**" (we
won), and the second party are the Shi’a and devotees of the AhlulBayt
(AS) whom the Imam testifies that "**وفاز شيعتنا"** (our Shi’as have
won).

One can easily understand why the Prophet and his AhlulBayt (AS) achieve
victory by virtue of their superior position and high rank such that
Allah (SWT) created the whole universe out of love for them. Hence, it
is not a surprise that they have won a great victory in this life and
the hereafter.

But the amazing news of glad tidings that is presented to us is that the
Shi’as and lovers of AhlulBayt (AS) will also be victorious! Surely,
their victory is attributed to their devotion and association to the
purified AhlulBayt (AS) whom Allah (SWT) have appointed as vicegerents
on His earth.

Furthermore, the words which Imam Ali (AS) exclaimed in this event rings
a bell and reminds us of a similar phrase which he uttered on the night
he was struck by the most miserable person of his time, leading to his
long awaited martyrdom. It was the call that resonated in the earth and
heavens such that everyone in the city of Kufa heard his cry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فزت ورب الكعبة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*By the Lord of the Ka’ba, I have succeeded!* “

This memorable phrase burst out from his lips the day when Imam Ali (AS)
was struck with the fatal blow by the assassin’s poison-soaked sword. An
immortal phrase, it has continued to goad human conscience for almost
the past fourteen centuries! It has made those with even a grain of
intellect dumbstruck at the dynamism of the person who pronounced it in
the early hours of the 19th of Ramadhan, 40 AH corresponding to the year
660 of the Christian calendar.

What was the success that Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) felt at that
moment? And why was he elated when all passages to life abruptly closed
for him and he was about to enter the apparently unknown and uncharted
realm of death? Only the ignorant would pose such a question concerning
the man who says in one of his sermons: *“The Son of Abu Talib is more
enthusiastic for death than an infant for the mother’s breast.”*

If we were to say that Imam Ali (AS) merely longed for death rather than
the seemingly beautiful world of life and its transient pleasures, then
we have missed the finer points of the delicate phrase he chose to
express, when on being struck the deathblow he said: *By the Lord of the
Ka’ba I have succeeded!*

The Imam of Pious (AS) was indeed thrilled at meeting the Almighty
Creator in such a noble state after having accomplished all tasks
entrusted to him and so he said in jubilation that unique statement and
out of longing to meet his beloved Creator. From his birth till his
martyrdom every single breath of his 63-year life was for God and for
the promulgation of the universal laws of Islam.

In view of these undeniable facts, he serves as the everlasting
barometer for the faithful in every age and era to discern truth from
falsehood. No wonder the Prophet (SA) had remarked to his companion
Ammar ibn Yasser: *“O Ammar! If all people take one path and Ali takes
another path, you follow the path of Ali, for he will lead you to
salvation.”*

With that same spirit of jubilation, Imam Ali (AS) uttered the words of
victory after recognizing the immense blessings and significance which
the Event of the Cloak carries. He cries out the statement of victory so
that we and all people across time have our attentions lifted to this
unique *Tradition of the Cloak*.

We are to mention and remember this event every opportunity we get in
every gathering where the believers are congregated. All praise be to
Allah for it is by His grace we find today that many of the gatherings
where the programs of key celebrations of Islamic events and the
birthdays of the infallible Imams (AS) commence with the recitation of
*Hadeeth Al Kisaa*.

It is important to note here that Imam Ali (AS) could’ve only said “We
won” (**فزنا**) without swearing by the Lord of the Ka’ba. After all, he
is truthful without needing to swear and there is no question about the
validity of whatever he says. However, Imam Ali (SA) still sought to
begin his exclamatory statement by swearing “Wallahi” (By Allah) and
ending it also by swearing by the Lord of the Ka’ba (**ورب الكعبة**).

Rarely do we find a statement where it is sandwiched with an expression
of swear in the beginning and end. This is exactly the case here which
conveys the point that what Imam Ali (AS) is about to say is *extremely*
important and he is very serious about delivering it. Thus, there should
not be any shred of doubt whatsoever in our minds regarding the accuracy
and precision of the Imam’s words in regards to the reward and value of
the Event of the Cloak.


