Jabir Ibn Abdullah Al Ansari – The 1st Narrator
===============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن جابر بن عبد الله الأنصاري
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Tradition of the Cloak has been narrated by the tongue of one of the
very close and pious companions of the Holy Prophet (SA), Jabir ibn
Abdullah Al Ansari, as related by many sources of the School of
AhlulBayt, e.g. Sheikh Al Bahrani in his book *A’walem Al Uloom*. Jabir
narrates this important incident through the tongue of the Master Lady
of the Universe, Fatima Al Zahra (AS). It is imperative to familiarize
ourselves with the character of this noble companion as he is the main
narrator of this well-known and important tradition. It is commonly
agreed that the higher the level of trust and degree of confidence we
gain in the narrator, the higher is the confidence we will have in the
tradition relayed by that narrator.

*Who exactly is Jabir ibn Abdullah Al Ansari and what is notable about
him?*

He was the son of 'Amru\` b. Huzam al-Ansa\`ri al-Khazraji. He devoted
his life to the members of the House of the Prophet (SA). He was the
last survival among the Companions of the Prophet (SA) and he was a
prominent companion of Imam Al Baqir (AS). He is unique in that he had
the honor of delivering the greetings of the Prophet (SA) to his
grandson Imam Al Baqir (AS).

Jabir took part in eighteen campaigns headed by the Prophet and fought
in the Battle of Siffeen headed by the Commander of the faithful Imam
Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS). Jabir loved Ali (AS) very much and he was very
obedient to the members of the House (AhlulBayt). He would walk through
the streets of Medina and say: "'Ali is the best of all mankind. Whoever
denies that is an unbeliever. O People of Ansar, educate your children
to love Ali."

In testimony to the piety of Jabir ibn Abdullah Al Ansari, Imam Al-Sadiq
(AS) reported on the authority of his grandfathers, “Allah revealed this
verse:

‘***Say I demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of preaching)
except the love of my relations*****.’” (42:22)**

Then the Prophet (SA) rose and said: 'A right for me has been imposed on
you. Will you pay it to me?' No one answered him, so he went away. On
the following day, he stood up and asked the same question. No one
answered him, so he left them and went away. On the third day, he also
asked the same question. Then he explained: 'The right is neither gold
nor silver nor food nor a drink.'

'Therefore, say it,' they demanded. 'Allah has revealed these Words of
His: *'Say I demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of
preaching) except the love of my relations.*' 'This is the best right,'
they said" Then Imam Al Sadiq (AS) remarked: "By Allah, no one was loyal
to this right except seven persons. They are Salman, Abu Dharr, Ammar,
al-Muqdad ibn Al-Aswad, Jabir ibn 'Abdullah al-Ansari, the retainer of
Allah's Apostle (SA), and Zayd ibn Arqam.

The Prophet (SA) asked Allah (SWT) twenty-five times to forgive Ja\`bir.
He died at the age of ninety-four.

Recognizing the great status of the noble companion Jabir ibn Abdullah
Al Ansari, we can now understand why he was honored to narrate the
famous Hadeeth Al Kisaa which will resonate in the ears of all Muslims
till the end of time.


