Exchange of Greetings
=====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَخَلَ عَلَيَّ أبي رَسُولُ اللهِ ( صلى الله عليه وآله ) فِي بَعضِ
الأيَّامِ فَقَالَ : أَلسَّلامُ عَلَيكِ يا فاطِمَةُ ، فَقُلتُ : وَ
عَلَيكَ السَّلامُ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

**One day, my father the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
Household, visited me, "Peace be upon you, O Fatimah!" he said. "Peace
be upon you, too." I answered.**

When one of us meet a friend or neighbor, we typically exchange hellos
and convey our greetings to that person. And the other person usually
replies back with a ‘good morning’ or ‘Walaykum asalam’ (Peace be upon
you). But what really is the extent and degree of that ‘salam’ (peace)
that is extended between two different people? And is there any
guarantee that two Muslims who are exchanging greetings of peace will
actually achieve the practical and spiritual peace with each other?
Often times, we find two individuals exchanging expressions of greetings
or peace in the morning, yet in the afternoon they are busy fighting
with each other over petty issues or otherwise. Thus, we may agree that
it is not necessarily the case that all the words and actions of the
layperson or common Muslim is always true and/or achieved.

However, when we speak about an infallible personality, we must
recognize that all their words and actions are exactly on the dot and at
the highest level of accuracy without exaggeration or underestimation.
So, if they make a judgment, it is a just verdict, and if they make a
decision, it is a wise course of action. Along the same lines, if an
infallible guide who has been purified and divinely appointed as a guide
for mankind, performs a simple action such as greet or convey ‘salam’ to
another person, then we should not interpret that greeting as ‘routine’
or trivial. Rather, the peace which an infallible personality conveys to
another person is to be interpreted as glad tidings and a guarantee for
exceptional peace at all levels. Surely, those who represent Allah (SWT)
cannot exchange peace with a person whom Allah (SWT) is displeased with
or has committed injustice to others.

Furthermore, one can logically deduce that if the two individuals
exchanging peace and greetings are *both* infallible and divinely chosen
for the guidance of mankind, then the product of such greetings must be
at a grand level which one cannot comprehend. The degree of peace, the
percent of guarantee, and the secrets behind that greeting is beyond our
ability to fathom or reason.

In the *Tradition of the Cloak*, the narration begins with greeting of
peace by the Holy Prophet (SA) after he has entered the presence of his
daughter Fatima Al Zahra (AS) who replies back affirming the peace to
her father.

As discussed, this exchange of peace by two holy and exceptional
personalities, the Seal of Messengers and the best of Creation,
Muhammad, along with the Master Lady of the universe, Fatima, yields
nothing but unbreakable unity between two purified souls which carries
with it all the meanings of peace, tranquility, attachment, love, and
devotion, etc. Such feeling of peace is not bound by time or place nor
is it conditional on mundane factors. This expression of peace by the
Prophet (SA) to Fatima (AS) and vice versa is in fact an act of worship
that is blessed by Allah (SWT) as He (SWT) instructed the believers in
Surat Al Ahzaab, Verse 56:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ يَا أَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تسليما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely*** ***Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who
believe! call for (Divine) blessings on him and salute him with a
(becoming) salutation. (33:56)***

In this verse*,* it is interesting to note that Allah the Almighty
Creator first announces that He Himself along with the angels are
praying on the Prophet. Then He (SWT) conveys His order to those who
believe (hence excluding nonbelievers) to call for the blessings upon
him and to salute him. This action of benediction and salutation to the
Holy Messenger (SA) is an act of worship and obedience and is in fact
obligatory upon all believers.

Furthermore, the verse highlights that only a true believer is given the
permission to share in this blessed action of salutations and the
servant is the one honored by having the ability and success in
delivering these greetings to the beloved one.

If this is the grand station of Prophet Muhammad (SA) as depicted by
verse 33:56, what about the station of Lady Fatima? Besides recognizing
the fact that she is the Master Lady of the universe, we are to recall
the authentic and well-known narration in all schools of thought where
the Prophet (SA) emphasizes, *“Fatima is a part of me, whoever harms her
harms me,* *and whatever pleases her pleases me.”*

So, if Lady Fatima (AS) is from the self of the Prophet (SA), then by
the rules of logical correlation, we can deduce that when Allah (SWT)
and the angels are sending their blessings on the Prophet (SA) as
mentioned in verse 33:56, they are *also* sending their blessings and
salutations to his daughter Fatima! That is not surprising as the angels
are known to accompany Lady Fatima in numerous occasions and descend
upon her home regularly.


