Station of The Yememite Cloak
=============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ : يا فاطِمَةُ إِيتيني بِالكِساءِ اليَمانِيِّ فَغَطّينِي بهِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is the significance of the *Kisaa* (cloak)? It is a piece of cloth
or sheet which the Prophet (SA) requested to cover him to ease his
discomfort. Here, one may think that it is so insignificant that history
records the Prophet (SA) experiencing exhaustion or discomfort and
requesting a cloak. Furthermore, why is the Prophet (SA) specifically
asking for a cloak to cover him when he could’ve asked for something to
eat or drink?

As believers, we are to be reminded that the wisdom of the Almighty
Creator (SWT) is greater than what our minds perceive and He (SWT) does
not do anything in vain. If it were not for the Yeminite Cloak (Kisaa)
which the Prophet (SA) requested, the *Tradition of the Cloak* would not
have existed, and the purification verse (Ayat Al Tat-heer) which is the
ultimate result of this event wouldn’t have been revealed in this
incident. The *Kisaa* is the means by which the members of his household
are gathered to set the stage for the revelation of the Purification
verse (33:33).

As we will discuss later, it is narrated in the *Tradition of the Cloak*
that the total individuals who were granted permission to enter under
the cloak with the Prophet (SA) were four: Ali ibn Abi Talib, Lady
Fatima, and their sons Hasan and Husain. In addition, archangel Jibrael
(AS) was also given divine and prophetic permission to join the holy
five in this exceptional setting. With the knowledge that all these
divine personalities were under the cloak and didn’t enter its
protection without the permission of the Prophet (SA), we can better
appreciate the significance of the cloak. Though it may be a
materialistic item, the *Kisaa* is a symbol of protection, a sign of
unity and purity, and the representation of the infallibility of the
Holy Five.

The cloak can be seen as analogous to the “Cave of Refuge” (**كهف
الورى**) as they are described in the beautiful invocation of *Salawat
Sha’baneyah*. It is similar to the Arc of Prophet Nuh (AS) which the
Prophet (SA) resembles to his purified household, as narrated in the
famous *Hadith As-Safinah* by Anas ibn Malik that the Messenger of Allah
(SWT) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مثل أهل بيتى كمثل سفينة نوح من ركبها نجا ومن تخلف عنها غرق."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Surely the likeness of my AhlulBayt is similar to Noah's Ark, whoever
boards it will attain salvation and whoever remains behind is drowned.*
(Al Durr Al Manthur) Whoever rides the Arc of Noah or more appropriately
the Arc of the AhlulBayt (AS) of Prophet Muhammad (AS) will be saved and
will attain salvation in both worlds.

In this context, we can view the Cloak of the Prophet to be similar to
the Arc of the Prophet (SA) in that whoever recognizes the significance
behind the immaculate personalities *under* the cloak who have been
*purified* by divine command, will also attain the blessings of the
cloak! An example of such blessings is demonstrated at the conclusion of
this narration where Imam Ali (AS) asks the Prophet (SA) what is the
significance of this blessed gathering under the cloak and he replies
back with the rewards that the Shi’as and lovers of AhlulBayt (AS) will
attain if they recite and appreciate this gathering. We shall discuss
this aspect in detail later.

Even though only the infallible guides are admitted entrance under this
purified cloak, we as the lovers and devotees of the Prophet (SA) and
his holy household can also aim to seek permission from Allah (SWT) and
the Messenger (SA) to join them under the cloak. We can follow the
example of Archangel Jibrael (AS) who recognized that his station was no
were close to that of the AhlulBayt (AS) despite his high rank in
Allah’s eyes, yet he still expressed his devotion to them by seeking
their unity and proximity.


