Radiance Of The Holy Prophet
============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَتَيتُهُ بِالكِساءِ اليَمانِيِّ فَغَطّيتُهُ بِهِ وَ صِرتُ أَنظُرُ
إِلَيهِ وَ إِذا وَجهُهُ يَتَلَأ لَأ كَأَنَّهُ البَدرُ فِي لَيلَةِ
تمامِهِ وَ كَمالِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**I brought him the Yemeni cloak and covered him with it. I then kept on
looking at his face, which was glittering like a moon at the night of
its fullness and perfection.**

Lady Fatima (AS) brings the cloak to her father and she covers him. A
parent in general appreciates and prefers the service of their children
more than a stranger or even a housemaid. There is no comparison to the
feeling that the parent gets when they experience care and affection
from their own children compared to others. Lady Fatima (AS) went on
looking and gazing at him as she covered her father.

According to the Islamic code of conduct, it is highly recommended for a
person to look at the faces of their parents and persist in doing so.
(Fiqh Al Zahra) On the other hand, it is narrated that he who gives his
parent an abhorrent look, Allah (SWT) will not accept anything from him.
With that in mind, imagine if the father of a person is the prophet of
God, never mind the Seal of Messengers and best of creations! It is also
recommended to look at the face of a knowledgeable scholar or even at
the door of a scholar.

From these traditions, we come to understand that there is indeed a
positive effect that we acquire from “looking” at a scholar or parent,
and that effect is not limited to the materialistic aspect but is rather
spiritual and long-lasting. Same is the case regarding the Holy Ka’aba
which we are encouraged to gaze upon.

That is because looking at someone who have reached the stage of
perfection or has come close to it will in turn make that person
approach the stage of perfection that is personified in that person or
thing. That’s why it is recommended to look at the face of an infallible
person such as Imam Ali (AS) as the Prophet (SA) said in his regards,
*“Looking at the face of Ali is worship”.* (Wasa’el Al Shi’a)

If gazing at the face of a scholar is recommended, then it is not
surprising that he who is the gate of knowledge be one whom the Prophet
(SA) would specifically identify him as deserving of such merit.

Upon observing her father, Lady Fatima (AS) observed that his face was
“glittering like a moon at the night of its fullness”. It is interesting
that this is how the Prophet (SA) appeared even though he just expressed
physical weakness.

It may seem like a contradiction but the reality is that Lady Fatima
(AS) became preoccupied and captured by the beauty and splendor of her
father. She knew very well that her father was not like any father or
man; her father was the best of creation and the Seal of Messengers who
is delivering the final revelation to all of mankind till the end of
time! In her mind, Lady Fatima (AS) was not simply looking at her
father, but rather, the divine representative of her time who has
authority on her and all the believers.

Words could not describe what she observed upon looking at the Prophet
(SA) under the cloak. However, the analogy Lady Fatima (AS) presents
gives a hint and draws a good picture of what magnanimity of appearance
emanated from her father’s face. She testifies that her father’s face
“was glittering like a moon at the night of its fullness and
perfection”. It is the course of nature that when the lunar month
reaches the middle, the moon becomes full and thus, we observe it to be
radiating from the sky like a piece of diamond in the midst of a black
sea.

The scene is beautiful and sensational as it urges us to reflect on the
Almighty Creator who has brought into existence every beautiful creation
of His and bestowed us the ability to observe and recognize that. Due to
the exceptionally beautiful scene of the full moon in the midst of the
sky, it has become the tradition of the Arabs in particular to draw an
analogy of the full moon to anything that is distinctly beautiful and
radiant.

The blessed face of the Prophet (SA) which constantly appears to be
radiant with the glow of light emanating from him is certainly analogous
to the full moon at the middle of the month. Actually, the radiance of
splendor from the Prophet’s appearance is *much* greater than that of a
full moon glittering at the night of its fullness and perfection!

Furthermore, it should be noted that the physical or materialistic
beauty can only be recognized by those who have eyes of the heart that
can be able to identify that beauty. If we compare that physical beauty
emanating from the Prophet (SA) to his inner and spiritual beauty, we
will surely recognize that the latter is much greater and cannot be
measured by a normal human being. It is certainly quite interesting that
the person who is testifying on behalf of the Prophet (SA) about his
splendor in appearance is *herself* the manifestation of the splendor of
creation!


