Preface
=======

A general review of the Islamic system demonstrates that rituals and
acts of worship play an important role in deeds, behavior, words,
ceremonies and anniversaries.

Rituals and acts of worship in Islam are inseparably related. Rituals
(*sha‘ā’ir*)—defined as ceremonies, rules of etiquette, and activities
that distinguish the Muslim nation from other nations—are mixed with the
Islamic practice of worship in both form and content. Islamic practices
of worship are rituals, such as prayer, fasting, Hajj, and *zakat*, and
Islamic rituals are practices of worship, such as the celebrations on
the feast days and other days related to Islamic occasions.

Even social ceremonies, such as marriage and the like, not to mention
social activities, such as offering salutations and beginning with the
*basmalah* (i.e. utterance of *bismi-llahir-rahmanir-rahim*), are
originally acts of worship through which nearness to Almighty Allah is
sought.

In the Holy Qur'an, acts of worship during the Hajj Pilgrimage have been
described as rituals on more than one occasion, such as the following:

> إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ ۖ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
> الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَنْ يَطَّوَّفَ
> بِهِمَا ۚ وَمَنْ تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ شَاكِرٌ
> عَلِيمٌ {158}

***Behold! Safa and Marwah are among the RITUALS of Allah. So, there
shall be no blame on those who visit the House in the Month or at other
times and go round them. And if anyone does good deeds voluntarily, be
assured that Allah is He Who recognizes and knows. (2:158)***

> وَالْبُدْنَ جَعَلْنَاهَا لَكُمْ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ لَكُمْ فِيهَا
> خَيْرٌ ۖ {36}

***As for the camels, We have made them RITUALS of the religion of Allah
for you. For you, therein is much good. (22:36)***

Discussing the obligatory practices of the Hajj Pilgrimage, the Holy
Qur'an says:

> ذَٰلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
> الْقُلُوبِ {32}

***Such is his state. And whoever holds in honor the RITUALS of Allah
(in the sacrifice of animals) this is surely from piety of heart.
(22:32)***

Discussing the situation of al-Muzdalifah, where we are commanded to
mention Almighty Allah, the Holy Qur'an calls it al-mash’ar al-haram
(the Sacred Place of Rituals) saying:

> فَإِذَا أَفَضْتُمْ مِنْ عَرَفَاتٍ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ عِنْدَ
> الْمَشْعَرِ الْحَرَامِ ۖ وَاذْكُرُوهُ كَمَا هَدَاكُمْ وَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ
> مِنْ قَبْلِهِ لَمِنَ الضَّالِّينَ {198}

***When you pour down from Mount ‘Arafat, then celebrate the praises of
Allah at the Sacred Place of Rituals, and celebrate His praises as He
has directed you, even though before this, you went astray. (2:198)***

The distinctive battle cry upon which all the individuals of a party in
a war agree and which distinguishes them from the other party, is called
*shi’ar* (i.e. a slogan). This word is derived from the root *sh-’-r*,
which is also the root of the word *sha‘ā’ir* (rituals).

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is thus reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شِعَارُنَا يَا مُحَمَّدُ يَا مُحَمَّدُ. وَشِعَارُنَا يَوْمَ بَدْرٍ يَا
نَصْرَ اللهِ إقْتَرِبِ إقْتَرِبْ. وَشِعَارُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ يَوْمَ
أُحُدٍ يَا نَصْرَ اللهِ إقْتَرِبْ. وَيَوْمَ بَنِي النَّضِيرِ يَا رُوحَ
الْقُدُسِ أَرِحْ، وَيَوْمَ بَنِي قَيْنُقَاعٍ يَا رَبَّنَا لاَ
يَغْلِبَنَّكَ، وَيَوْمَ الطَّائِفِ يَا رِضْوَانُ، وَشِعَارُ يَوْمِ
حُنَيْنٍ يَا بَنِي عَبْدِ اللهِ يَا بَنِي عَبْدِ اللهِ، وَيَوْمِ
الأَحْزَابِ هُمْ لاَ يُبْصِرُونَ، وَيَوْمِ بَنِي قُرَيْظَةَ يَا
سَلاَمُ أَسْلِمْهُمْ، وَيَوْمِ الْمُرَيْسِيعِ وَهُوَ يَوْمُ بَنِي
الْمُصْطَلَقِ أَلاَ إِلَى اللهِ الأَمْرُ، وَيَوْمِ الْحُدَيْبِيَةِ
أَلاَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ، وَيَوْمِ خَيْبَرَ يَوْمِ
الْقَمُوصِ يَا عَلِيُّ آتِهِمْ مِنْ عَلٍ، وَيَوْمِ الْفَتْحِ نَحْنُ
عِبَادُ اللهِ حَقّاً حَقّاً، وَيَوْمِ تَبُوكَ يَا أَحَدُ يَا صَمَدُ،
وَيَوْمِ بَنِي الْمُلَوَّحِ أَمِتْ أَمِتْ، وَيَوْمِ صِفِّينَ يَا
نَصْرَ اللهِ، وَشِعَارُ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ يَا مُحَمَّدُ،
وَشِعَارُنَا يَا مُحَمَّدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our shi’ar (war cry) is ya-Muhammad ya-Muhammad (O Muhammad, O
Muhammad). Our shi’ar in the Battle of Badr was ya nasrallahi iqtarib
iqtarib (O victory of Allah, come nigh! Come nigh!) The Muslims shi’ar
in the Battle of Uhud was ya nasrallahi iqtarib (O victory of Allah,
come nigh!) Their shi’ar in their battle against Banu’l-Nadhir was ya
ruha alqudusi arih (O Holy Spirit! Give us rest!) Their shi’ar in their
battle against Banu Qaynuqa’ was ya rabbana la yaghlibunnaka (O Our
Lord! Let them not overcome You!) Their shi’ar in their battle in
al-Ta'if was ya ridhwan (O All-pleasing!) The shi’ar in the Battle of
Hunayn was ya bani ‘abdillah ya bani ‘abdillah (O sons of Allah’s
Servant! O sons of Allah’s Servant!) The* *shi’ar in the Battle of
al-Ahzab (the Allies) was hum la yubsirun (They cannot see!) The shi’ar
in their battle against Banu-Qurayzah was ya salamu aslimhum (O Source
of peace! Make them surrender!) Their shi’ar in the Battle of
al-Muraysi’ (i.e. their battle against Banu’l-Mustalaq) was ala ilallahi
al-amru (Verily, Allah’s is the whole command). Their shi’ar on the
Hudaybiyah Encounter was ala la’natullahi ‘ala alzzalimin (Verily, the
curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers). Their shi’ar in the Battle of
Khaybar (the day of the phalanx) was ya ‘aliyyu atihim min ‘aliyyin (O
All-high! Come to them from above). Their shi’ar on the Day of Conquest
was nahnu ‘ibadullahi haqqan haqqan (We are the servants of Allah;
truly, truly). Their shi’ar in the Battle of Tabuk was ya ahadu ya
samadu (O One and Only! O Eternally Besought of all!). Their shi’ar in
their battle against Banu’l-Mulawwah was amit amit (Cause to die! Cause
to die!). Their shi’ar in the Battle of Siffin was ya nasrallahi (O
Allah’s victory!). The shi’ar of Husayn was ya Muhammad (O Muhammad!).
Our shi’ar is also ya Muhammad (O Muhammad!).*[^1]

About the exegesis of the following holy verse:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُحِلُّوا شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ وَلَا
> الشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ {2}

***O you who believe, violate not the RITUALS of Allah nor of the sacred
month… (5:2)***

The author of the Arabic-Arabic dictionary of *Lisan al-’Arab* has
quoted al-Zajjaj as saying that, the *rituals* of Allah stand for all
practices through which Almighty Allah is worshipped. Almighty Allah has
made these practices rituals (i.e. symbols) for us. They thus include
all rituals of the Hajj Pilgrimage, such as the situations whereon a
pilgrim should halt, perform *sa’y* (walk between al-Safa and
al-Marwah), and perform *dhabh* (slaughter animals offered as sacrifice
for the sake of Almighty Allah)… etc.[^2]

This concept of rituals shows that Islamic rituals stand for all the
acts of worship that require a special and distinctive congregation by
which Muslims are distinguished from others, such as the ritual Hajj
Pilgrimage, the Friday Prayer, and other congregational prayers.

There are some rituals that Muslims alone celebrate that distinguish
them from other nations, such as the feast days, especially the Lesser
Bairam (‘Id al-Fitr) and the Greater Bairam (‘Id al-Adhha). Then there
are those rituals performed at certain places dedicated to Islamic
litanies and devotional acts which Muslims deem sacred and
reverential—such as mosques, especially the Sacred Mosque in Makkah, the
Prophet’s Mosque in al-Madinah, and the Furthest Mosque in al-Quds
(Jerusalem). In addition to these, are places whereon pilgrims are
commanded to stop, such as Mount ‘Arafat, al-Muzdalifah, and the Hills
of Safa and Marwah. Other religious acts, both verbal and practical, on
which Muslims agree unanimously and use to get to know each other and be
distinguished from other communities, include forms of salutation and
greeting.

Acts of worship are the formulae and special practices that Almighty
Allah has established for His servants to express their relation with
Him and bring them nearer to Him. These include prayers, supplications,
fasting, almsgiving, defraying of the *zakat* and *khums* taxes, and
expressions of praise that glorify and magnify the Lord within certain
formulae and at certain times.

Almighty Allah, out of His grace and favor, has opened the door wide for
human beings to dedicate all their acts to seek nearness to Him and
worship Him. In turn, they respond to the divine command and appeal for
divine guidelines. The acts of worship mentioned in this discussion are
specific prescribed formulas.

Before we start, let us refer, albeit briefly, to the significance of
rituals and acts of worship, as well as their roles in Islam and the
logic for their legislation.[^3]

Significance of Rituals
-----------------------

Rituals are one of the consistent strategies in the religious code of
Islamic law because they point out invariable social needs in human
life. For this reason, such rituals are not subject to variability when
the methods of social lives or the circumstances of civil progress in
human life change. This becomes clear by pursuing the following four
needs:

**First**: These rituals signify a framework that safeguards the
virtuous community from loss, and guarantees its persistence and unity
against breakup and disunion. This, of course, indicates an invariable
social need in the existence of humanity.

**Second**: These rituals pinpoint the genuineness of the Muslim nation
and its identity among other nations and enhance the feelings of glory
and dignity in relation to Islam, such feelings being the invariable
need of humanity.

**Third**: These rituals play a role in the achievement of the essential
objective of the divine mission of Islam. This objective is to grant
success to the processes of divine enlightenment and bring about a
social shift towards righteousness. The rituals, at an individual level,
through sustained verbal or practical repetition produce an effect on
the mental (i.e. sensory, emotional, and rational) substance of man,
creating conformity of the interior with the exterior, the form with the
content.

They also play a role on the social level, by creating a general
tradition that can influence people more than laws and enactments. In
other words, these rituals contribute effectively in creating a state of
constancy, steadiness, and public harmony in both the individual and
society.

**Fourth**: The rituals influence numerous immutable needs.

In the field of education, they create a public custom that contributes
to controlling the social behavior of individuals.

In the field of politics, they manifest the power, coherence, dignity,
and honor of the Muslim community through collective practices, such as
the congregational prayers, Friday prayers, and the Hajj Pilgrimage,
which build the confidence of insecure individuals by participating in
collective movements with others.

In the field of social relations, they strengthen social relations among
Muslims and create a spirit of collective responsibility, cooperation,
mutual understanding, and cordiality among them, in addition to
reciprocity of benefits and interests, as is in the Hajj Pilgrimage
about which Almighty Allah says:

> لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ {28}

***…That they may witness benefits for them. (22:28)***

In the field of propagation, these rituals provide doctrinal contents
and intellectual and moral concepts. In addition, they can provide the
best means of expressing political and social ideas.

The Role of Acts of Worship
---------------------------

In the religious code of Islamic law, acts of worship do not change when
social lifestyles or the circumstances of civil progress in human life
change.[^4]

This indispensable invariability stems from the fact that worship gives
expression to the relationship between man and his Lord, which is an
invariable, perpetual, and innate relationship. This urgency can be
better manifested through the following points:

**First**: Humanity is in urgent need of association with Allah, the
Perfect in excellence, so that people can continue to progress and avoid
exposing themselves to deviation due to a state of aloofness or
stagnancy. Sometimes, people fall in the swamp of paganism and
immoderation when they change their relatively tight allegiances into
boundless allegiances, thus causing the advance towards perfection to
stop.

Representing a balanced practical expression of affiliation, worship
develops a belief in Almighty Allah by means of devotional acts that
strengthen affiliation and, at the same time, give a boost to refutation
of all other boundless allegiances and deities.

**Second**: For practical (i.e. social) progress, humanity is required
to do certain acts intended for the good of the community as a whole.
However, at times, individuals carry out other acts for their personal
interest. In the former acts (i.e. acts intended to achieve public
interests), the matter is the opposite. In these acts, the efforts
exerted may not be compatible with the personal advantage that one might
be able to gain within the community; rather, they can be at the expense
of personal interests. Such being the case, acts of worship play a
significant role in urging human beings to act for the sake of Almighty
Allah alone, thus playing a significant role in encouraging people to do
things for the sake of public interest, leaving behind egoism and
personal interests.

**Third**: Human society is always in need of undertakings that bind
individuals to abide by the system that rules their society. These
undertakings, at times, take the form of material and physical
punishments enacted by society against those who violate its regulations
and, at other times, they take the form of an inner feeling of
responsibility towards these regulations and laws. However, the penal
law has limited influence since it is impossible for this law to pursue
all the actions and movements of individuals, whereas an inner feeling
of responsibility is always present. Worship can develop this feeling of
responsibility because worship can enhance in man his relationship with
Almighty Allah and his feeling that he is under an incessant monition of
Him *“from Whom is not hidden the least little atom in the heavens or on
earth.”*

### Distinctive Features of Worship in Islam

There is also another set of distinctive features marking worship in the
religion of Islam. These distinctive features are as follows:

### All-inclusiveness

In the religion of Islam, worship includes all aspects of human
life—personal, social, and political. In addition, Islam expects its
believers to demonstrate devotion to divine worship in every act
(drinking, eating, enjoying entertainment and appetencies, etc.),
opening the door to seek nearness to Almighty Allah and confirming one’s
connection with Him in all his deeds and activities.

### Transcendentality

For each act of worship, there is a psychological and spiritual, visible
and observable, external and material, or generally social explanation.
Sometimes, scientific advancement proves this fact because it presents
new horizons of understanding the transcendental role of acts of
worship.

In addition to this, in the ritual acts of worship, like prayer,
fasting, and Hajj, we observe an aspect of transcendentality in
devotional behavior, the objective of which is to strengthen people’s
relationships with the unseen world and escalate belief in it. For
instance, such transcendental aspects can be witnessed in the number of
the cycles (or units) of each prayer, as well as the circumambulation of
the Holy Ka’bah (*tawaff*), the walking between Safa and Marwah (*sa’y*)
and other acts, which cannot be explained by any word except devoutness
or compliance with divine commands.

### Physical Awareness

In addition to transcendentality, we observe physical awareness in the
Islamic acts of worship, since man is a compound of spirit and material.
In order to bring the acts of worship within the fold of these two
aspects, Islam has laid much emphasis on intention and sincerity on one
hand, and compliance with Allah’s commands on the other. Attention to
Almighty Allah (i.e. presence of heart) and compliance with His commands
represent the spiritual aspect of the human self.

Islam has laid equal emphasis on the aspect of physical awareness in
acts of worship, as is noticed in the performance of the ritual prayer
and Hajj Pilgrimage. Details like the necessity of directing the face
towards the Holy Ka’bah, standing erect, genuflecting, prostrating in
prayers, circumambulating the Holy Ka’bah, walking between Safa and
Marwah, and throwing pebbles at the statues of Satan in the ritual Hajj
Pilgrimage, explain this aspect, which is also visible in other
obligatory and supererogatory acts.

Islam is a religion unlike the other two extremist trends seen today.
One of these cancels out the physical embodiment of devotional acts,
supposing them to be a purely spiritual and psychological state, while
the other trend considers worship to be no more than an external,
physical practice that is devoid of any intentional and spiritual
significance, thus changing it into a pagan state.

### Social Aspect

In addition to those things mentioned, a social aspect can be observed
in the majority of Islamic devotional acts which intends to establish
and cement mutual relationships between the individuals of society. It
is true that the basic objective of worship is to cement the
relationship between humanity and the Lord, but the social aspect is
still a secondary yet vital objective in some acts of worship, such as
the ritual Hajj Pilgrimage, the congregational prayers, the Friday
prayer, the ‘«d prayers, *jihad*, *zakat*, and others.

Additionally, the rituals themselves have a social aspect. They aim at
unifying the Muslim nation and establishing its identity by acts such as
turning ones face towards the Ka’abah in prayer, celebrating two feast
days, and participating in the Friday prayers.

In keeping with the Islamic theory, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) encouraged
their followers to pay much attention to this aspect and emphasized it
in an exhaustive and splendid way. They presented examples and models
and explained details of these rituals and acts of worship to make them
encompass the daily, weekly, and annual life of every Muslim individual.
Through such means, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have been in a position to
strengthen the spiritual and social structure of the virtuous community,
deepen the Shi’ite Muslim’s connections with Almighty Allah, and build a
righteous entity inside the Muslim community.

In the coming discussion, I will not deal with such well-known Islamic
models of devotional acts like the ritual prayer, fasting, Hajj
Pilgrimage, *zakat*, and *jihad*, or such rituals like celebrating the
two feast days, the ritual offering of salutation, or like matters,
which are obviously familiar to all. I will take up the rituals and acts
of worship exclusively discussed by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in their
endeavors to build a virtuous community.

### The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and Public Rituals

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), through their discourses and methods of education,
took much interest in the congregational rituals of Islam. They are thus
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُنِيَ الإِسْلاَمُ عَلَى خَمْسٍ: عَلَى الصَّلاَةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ
وَالصَّوْمِ وَالْحَجِّ وَالْوِلاَيَةِ، وَلَمْ يُنَادَ بِشَيْءٍ كَمَا
نُودِيَ بِالْوِلاَيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Islam is based on five things: salat (performance of obligatory
prayer), zakat (poor-rate), hajj (pilgrimage to the Holy House in
Makkah), sawm (observance of fasting), and wilayah. Nothing stands
confirmed like the confirmation of wilayah.*[^5]

According to an authentic narration that is reported from ‘Ali ibn
Ibrahim, Zurarah has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بُنِيَ الإِسْلاَمُ عَلَى خَمْسَةِ أَشْيَاءَ: عَلَى الصَّلاَةِ
وَالزَّكَاةِ وَالْحَجِّ وَالصَّوْمِ وَالْوِلاَيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Islam is based on five things: salat (performance of obligatory
prayer), zakat (poor-rate), hajj (pilgrimage to the Holy House in
Makkah), sawm (observance of fasting), and wilayah.*

Zurarah asked, “What is the best among these things?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوِلاَيَةُ أَفْضَلُ، لأَِنَّهَا مِفْتَاحُهُنَّ، وَالْوَالِي هُوَ
الدَّلِيلُ عَلَيْهِنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The best of them is the wilayah, because it is the key to the others
and the wali (divinely designated leader) is the guide for them.*

Zurarah asked, “What is next in being the best?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاَةُ; إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ:
الصَّلاَةُ عَمُودُ دِينِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Then comes the prayer, for the Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘Prayer
is the pillar of your religion.’*

Zurarah asked, “What is next?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّكَاةُ، لأَِنَّهُ قَرَنَهَا بِهَا وَبَدَأَ بِالصَّلاَةِ قَبْلَهَا.
وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الزَّكَاةُ
تُذْهِبُ الذُّنُوبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Zakat. Almighty Allah has coupled it with prayer and mentioned prayer
first. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘Defrayment of the zakat
relieves one of sins.’*

Zurarah asked, “What is next?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَجُّ، قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَلِلَّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ
> سَبِيلًا ۚ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنِ
> الْعَالَمِينَ {97}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ:
لَحِجَّةٌ مَقْبُولَةٌ خَيْرٌ مِنْ عِشْرِينَ صَلاَةً نَافِلَةً، وَمَنْ
طَافَ بِهَذَا الْبَيْتِ طَوافاً أَحْصَى فِيهِ أُسْبُوعَهُ وَأَحْسَنَ
رَكْعَتَيْهِ غَفَرَ اللهُ لَهُ. وَقَالَ فِي يَوْمِ عَرَفَةَ وَيَوْمِ
الْمُزْدَلِفَةِ مَا قَالَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hajj. Almighty Allah has said,

***‘Pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of Allah,
upon every one who is able to undertake the journey to it. Whoever
disbelieves, then surely Allah is Self-sufficient above any need of the
worlds. (3:97)’***

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘One accepted Hajj is better (in
reward) than offering twenty supererogatory prayers. Whoever
circumambulates this House seven times and follows it with offering a
correctly-done two-unit prayer, Almighty Allah shall forgive him his
sins.’ He (S) has also said many things about the ‘Arafat Day and the
Muzdalifah Day.

Zurarah asked, “What is next?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّوْمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Then comes fasting.*

Zurarah asked, “Why has fasting come last of all?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ
مِنَ النَّارِ. إِنَّ أَفْضَلَ الأَشْيَاءِ مَا إِذَا فَاتَكَ لَمْ
تَكُنْ مِنْهُ تَوْبَةٌ دُونَ أَنْ تَرْجِعَ إِلَيْهِ فَتُؤَدِّيَهُ
بِعَيْنِهِ. إِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ وَالزَّكَاةَ وَالْحَجَّ وَالْوِلاَيَةَ
لَيْسَ يَقَعُ شَيْءٌ مَكَانَهَا دُونَ أَدَائِهَا. وَإِنَّ الصَّوْمَ
إِذَا فَاتَكَ أَوْ قَصَّرْتَ أَوْ سَافَرْتَ فِيهِ أَدَّيْتَ مَكَانَهُ
أَيَّاماً غَيْرَهَا وَجَزَيْتَ ذَلِكَ الذَّنْبَ بِصَدَقَةٍ وَلاَ
قَضَاءَ عَلَيْكَ. وَلَيْسَ مِنْ تِلْكَ الأَرْبَعَةِ شَيْءٌ يَجْزِيكَ
مَكَانَهُ غَيْرُهُ. ذُرْوَةُ الأَمْرِ وَسَنَامُهُ وَمِفْتَاحُهُ
وَبَابُ الأَشْيَاءِ وَرِضَا الرَّحْمَنِ الطَّاعَةُ لِلإِمَامِ بَعْدَ
مَعْرِفَتِهِ. إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ وَمَنْ تَوَلَّى فَمَا
> أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا (80)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا لَوْ أَنَّ رَجُلاً قَامَ لَيْلَهُ وَصَامَ نَهَارَهُ وَتَصَدَّقَ
بِجَمِيعِ مَالِهِ وَحَجَّ جَمِيعَ دَهْرِهِ وَلَمْ يَعْرِفْ وِلاَيَةَ
وَلِيِّ اللهِ فَيُوَالِيَهُ وَيَكُونَ جَمِيعُ أَعْمَالِهِ
بِدِلاَلَتِهِ إِلَيْهِ، مَا كَانَ لَهُ عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ حَقٌّ
فِي ثَوَابِهِ وَلاَ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الأِيـمَانِ. أُولَئِكَ
الْمُحْسِنُ مِنْهُمْ يُدْخِلُهُ اللهُ الْجَنَّةَ بِفَضْلِ رَحْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘Fasting is an armor against
Hellfire.’ The best of all things is a duty that if you miss it, you do
not need to repent; rather, you can later carry it out exactly as you
are required to do. As for the prayer, the zakat, the Hajj Pilgrimage,
and wilayah, nothing can compensate for them when they are missed, while
you can make up for the fasting if you miss it, fail to observe it, or
travel during its days. Such being the case, you can recompense the sin
of missing fasting with almsgiving, without need for fasting during
other days as compensation. As for the other four pillars, nothing at
all can replace them and save you from failing to do them. After
recognition of Almighty Allah, the prime act, acme, key, door to all
things and the pleasure of the All-beneficent Lord is the obedience to
the Imam. Allah, the Exalted and Majestic says,*

***‘Whoever obeys the Messenger, indeed he has obeyed Allah, and as for
those who turn away, We have not sent you as a keeper over them.
(4:80)’.***

*Verily, if one spends his nights in acts of worship, fasts during the
days of his lifetime, gives his entire fortune as alms, and goes on Hajj
Pilgrimage every year of his lifetime, but does not* *recognize loyalty
to the Representative of Allah on Earth, and does all his deeds without
this basis, he will not have any right to receive the reward of Almighty
Allah nor be regarded as one of the people of true faith. The doers of
good among these people (i.e. those recognizing the loyalty to the
Imams) will enter Paradise by Almighty Allah’s mercy.*[^6]

Sulayman ibn Khalid reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أُخْبِرُكَ بِالإِسْلاَمِ أَصْلِهِ وَفَرْعِهِ وَذُرْوَةِ
سَنَامِهِ؟ أَمَّا أَصْلُهُ فَالصَّلاَةُ وَفَرْعُهُ الزَّكَاةُ
وَذُرْوَةُ سَنَامِهِ الْجِهَادُ. إِنْ شِئْتَ أَخْبَرْتُكَ بِأَبْوَابِ
الْخَيْرِ. الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَالصَّدَقَةُ تَذْهَبُ
بِالْخَطِيئَةِ، وَقِيَامُ الرَّجُلِ فِي جَوْفِ اللَّيْلِ بِذِكْرِ
اللهِ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> تَتَجَافَى جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنِ الْمَضَاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا
> وَطَمَعًا (16)

May I inform you about the foundation, branch, and pinnacle of Islam?
The foundation of Islam is prayer, its branch the zakat, and its
pinnacle jihad. I can also inform you about the doors to goodness, if
you wish… Fasting is a protective shield against Hellfire. Almsgiving
and spending the late hours of the night in remembrance of Almighty
Allah, remove sins. Almighty Allah says,

***“Who forsake their beds to cry unto their Lord in fear and hope…”
(32:16)”***[^7]

It seems important to consider the fact that *jihad* is a branch of the
pillar of *wilayah*, which is one of the foundations of Islam, as has
been mentioned in the abovementioned tradition. The same is applicable
to the duty of enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong. Moreover,
the duty of defraying the *khums* tax is also a component of the pillar
of *wilayah*, even if it is not attached to the *zakat.* The one who
alone has the right to command *jihad*, enjoin the right and forbid the
wrong is the religious referential authority, and the basis of paying
the *khums* tax is loyalty to the divinely designated leadership of the
Holy Imams (‘a).

We, thus, understand why *jihad* is the pinnacle of the religion in the
same way as *wilayah* and obedience to the Imam is its pinnacle also,
because *jihad* is one of the examples of obedience to the Imam (‘a).

In fact, various statements confirm this about each of the other Islamic
public devotional acts as well.

### Prophetic Tradition and Sectarian Rituals

In the sphere of rituals and devotional acts in which the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) took great interest, the following question arises:

Can the mentioned rituals and acts of worship be considered innovations
(*bid’ah*) because they are not familiar to Muslims in general?

Such questions have been raised by some people, especially the Wahhabi
sect. They are answered in detail within the sectarian aspect of this
discussion.[^8] However, let us present two brief synoptic answers here:

First Answer: As has been confirmed in many Prophetic traditions that
are reported by both Sunni and Shi’ite narrators, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
represent the other Weighty Thing, besides the Holy Qur'an, that
interprets the Holy Qur'an and explains the Prophet Tradition (Sunnah)
and the religious code of Islamic law. They are also the one and only
referential authorities of Islam in its genuine form, to whom the Holy
Prophet (S) explained all the details of the code of Islamic law and the
Holy Qur'an and ordered Muslims to refer to them. As has been proven in
my research about the referential authority of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in
the field of the exegesis of the Holy Qur'an,[^9] they are the most
acquainted with the Islamic mission, the most truthful of all people,
the most knowledgeable, and the most accurate in understanding and
recognizing the religion of Islam.

In this field, Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of authority,
has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

Archangel Gabriel brought down from Heaven two pomegranates to the Holy
Prophet. Imam ‘Ali (‘a) met him and said, “What are these in your hand?”
He answered, “This one is for Prophethood; so, you have no share in it.
The other is for knowledge.” The Holy Prophet (S) then split the second
pomegranate into two halves, gave Imam ‘Ali (‘a) one half, took the
other half for himself, and said, “You are my partner in knowledge and I
am yours.” Accordingly, each single item of knowledge that the Holy
Prophet (S) received from Almighty Allah was taught by him to ‘Ali. This
knowledge then came to us.

While saying ‘us’, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) put his hand on his chest (i.e.
referred to himself and the other Holy Imams).[^10]

Rituals and acts of worship exclusively practiced by the Shi’ah have
been mentioned and highlighted in many traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). They enjoy the highest level of legality and consideration in
their capacity as genuine Islamic traditions, because the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) are more knowledgeable than anybody else regarding Islam, its
fundamentals, secondary issues, traditions, and etiquettes.

**Second Answer**: The rituals and acts of worship exclusively practiced
by the virtuous community include no single item that violates Islamic
rituals in form or content, nor deflects or draws them away from their
goals, roles, or previously mentioned features. Rather, these rituals
have come to confirm, deepen, and follow other Islamic rituals in method
and manner.

These rituals and acts of worship represent a general line of conduct
approved by Islam, such as in the different varieties of prayers,
supplications, and *ziyarah* (a body of statements uttered while
visiting the tomb of a holy person, usually reported from the Holy Imams
(‘a)). They also commemorate and celebrate any occasion that is firmly
connected to Islam and its events and figures, such as the anniversaries
of the Holy Prophet’s birthday, the Holy Prophet’s Mission, the Day of
Ghadir, and the like. They often confirm and sublimate an Islamic
thought or missionary activity, such as dedicating to worship the months
of Ramadhan, Sha’ban, and Rajab, and the Nights of Qadr (the Nights of
Power on one of which the Holy Qur'an was first revealed; 19th, 21st,
and 23rd of Ramadhan).

The Ahl al-Bayt’s interest in these special rituals was concordant with
the general role of these rituals. They wanted the virtuous community
and their followers to be distinguished in particularities and identity
at least at the physical, spiritual, and mental levels. In fact, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) wanted their followers to coexist with people without
blending in with their conditions; rather, they wanted them to be
distinguished from others by acting as excellent exemplars. However, the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were not allowed to practice the
general rituals and devotional acts of Islam freely and efficiently
because of certain political factors. We have referred to some of these
in the previous book of the security system of the virtuous community.

In the coming pages, we will discuss the system of rituals used in the
building of the virtuous community, dividing our discussion into a
prelude and two chapters. The first chapter is dedicated to discussing
the **rituals of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)** while the second to discussing
the **general rituals of Islam**.

[^1]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 11:105, H. 1.

[^2]: - Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-’Arab 4:414.

[^3]: - I have discussed in some detail the role of rituals within my
thesis on the Basmalah in my exegesis of Surah al-Fatihah and Surah
al-Jumu’ah, which is now in print. Our mentor, Martyr Sayyid al-Sadr,
has also discussed the acts of worship in an independent thesis attached
to his Risalah (a thesis on the practical laws of Islam) entitled
al-Fatawa al-Wadhihah under the title of ‘A General Glance at Acts of
Worship’. For more information in this regard, it is advisable to refer
to these theses.

[^4]: - In the discussion of this topic, it may be useful to benefit by
the essay of our mentor, Martyr Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, which is
included in his Risalah in the chapter entitled, A General Glance at
Acts of Worship.

[^5]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:18, H. 1.

[^6]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 2:18-19, H. 5.

[^7]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 2:23, H. 15.

[^8]: - Such topics are discussed in the volume dealing with the
doctrinal aspect although they have also been discussed in many other
books, especially the writings of the Sunnite and Shi’ite writers who
have considered the doctrines of the Wahhabi faction.

[^9]: - For further details, the reader is advised to refer to my book
of ‘Ulum al-Qur'an, Chapter: al-Tafsir wa’l-Mufassirun fi ‘Ahdi
Rasulillah (Exegesis and Exegetes of the Holy Qur'an in the Age of the
Holy Prophet).

[^10]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:263, H. 3. There are also tens of
traditions demonstrating the same topic about the knowledge of the Holy
Imams (‘a).


