Prelude
=======

A general review of the books of traditions, supplications, and formulas
of *ziyarah*, as well as the actual practices of the Ahl al-Bayt’s
followers, gives us a set of major rituals that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
were concerned about and urged their partisans and followers to
practice. These rituals rally around the Ahl al-Bayt’s confirmations
regarding practicing the general rituals of Islam and were also
confirmations of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) themselves.

As true defenders of Islam and the natural extension of the Islamic
Mission, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) emphasized the practice of the general
rituals of Islam, considering them the most significant foundation in
building a virtuous community. They (‘a) expressly and widely maintained
the practice of the general rituals of Islam (including prayers, Hajj
Pilgrimage, *zakat*, and fasting) and commanded their followers to
establish them under all circumstances, no matter how difficult it might
be.

As for the second confirmation, it is founded on the Ahl al-Bayt’s view
of Islamic theory which is based on five pillars: prayer, *zakat*,
fasting, Hajj Pilgrimage, and *wilayah*. The most important of these
five pillars is the *wilayah*, according to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) because
no confirmation has been made on any of these five pillars that compares
with the confirmation made on *wilayah*, which is the protector of the
other four pillars and the *wali* (authority) is the guide towards the
other pillars being conversant with them. Moreover, prayer, *zakat*,
fasting, and the Hajj Pilgrimage depend upon *wilayah* to be accepted.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are the pivot and purport of *wilayah*. Many verses
of the Holy Qur'an confirm this— the Verse of *Mawaddah* (love),[^1] the
Verse of *Tathir* (purification),[^2] the Verse of *Khums*,[^3] the
Verse of *Wilayah*,[^4] and many others—in addition to many traditions
of the Holy Prophet (S) that were reported without interruption, such as
Hadith al-Ghadir,[^5] Hadith al-Thaqalayn,[^6] Hadith al-Safinah,[^7]
and many other Hadith.

Hence, expressing love, affection, and loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
becomes one of the devotional pillars of Islam and one of the Islamic
rituals when and if it is practiced within the legal and reason-based
formulas and methods prescribed by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

For this reason, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have not left the virtuous
community and the other Muslims without identifying and explaining a set
of general formulas and methods to be used as rituals expressing this
love as a sign of loyalty to them.

With respect to the two major kinds of rituals, we must discuss a set of
topics including the rituals of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the activities on
general days and nights, etiquettes and manners, mosques and holy
places. Independent chapters will discuss each of these topics.

[^1]: - The Holy Qur'an reads: قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا
إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَى(23)Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it, but love for my near relatives. (42:23)

[^2]: - The Holy Qur'an reads: إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا (33)Allah
only desires to keep away impurity from you, O people of the House, and
to purify you a thorough purifying. (33:33)

[^3]: - The Holy Qur'an reads: وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُمْ مِنْ
شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى
(41)Know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah, and
for the Messenger and kinsmen of the Messenger… (8:41)

[^4]: - The Holy Qur'an reads: إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ
الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ (55)Only Allah is your real leader and His
Messenger and those who believe; those who keep up prayers and pay the
poor-rate while they bow in prayer. (5:55)

[^5]: - The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said: أَيُّهَا
النَّاسُ، مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَهَذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ. اَللَّهُمَّ
وَالِ مَنْ وَالاَهُ، وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ، وَانْصُرْ مَنْ نَصَرَهُ،
وَاخْذُلْ مَنْ خَذَلَهُ، وَأَحِبَّ مَنْ أَحَبَّهُ، وَأَبْغِضْ مَنْ
أَبْغَضَهُ.O people, whoever has taken me as master, ‘Ali is now his
master. O Allah, (please) be the friend of him who takes ‘Ali as master,
be the opponent of him who antagonizes ‘Ali, give victory to him who
supports ‘Ali, disappoint him who disappoints ‘Ali, love him who loves
‘Ali, and hate him who hates ‘Ali.Al-Hakim al-Hasakani, Shawahid
al-Tanzil 1:191.

[^6]: - The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said: إِنِّي أُوشَكُ
أَنْ أُدْعَى فَأُجِيبُ، وَإِنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: كِتَابَ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَعِتْرَتِي. كِتَابُ اللهِ حَبْلٌ مَمْدُودٌ مِنَ
السَّمَاءِ إِلَى الأَرْضِ، وَعِتْرَتِي أَهْلُ بَيْتِي. وَإِنَّ
اللَّطِيفَ الْخَبِيرَ أَخْبَرَنِي أَنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى
يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ. فَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ تُخَلِّفُونِي فِيهِمَا.I
am about to be called, and I shall certainly respond. I am thus leaving
behind amongst you the two weighty things—the Book of the Exalted and
Majestic Allah and my progeny. The Book of Allah is a rope extending
from the heavens to the earth. My progeny are the members of my
household. The All-subtle and All-aware Lord has informed me that these
two shall never separate from each other until they join me on the
Divine Pond. Now, consider how you shall regard me through these two
things.Ahmad ibn Hanbal, al-Musnad 3:17.

[^7]: - The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said: إِنَّمَا أَهْلُ
بَيْتِي مِثْلُ سَفِينَةِ نُوحٍ: مَنْ رَكِبَهَا نَجَا وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ
عَنْهَا غَرِقَ.Verily, the parable of my Household is like the parable
of Noah’s ark—whoever embarks on it shall be saved, but he who fails to
join it shall be drowned.Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-’Ummal 6:216. For
further details, refer to al-Fayruzabadi’s Fadha'il al-Khamsah
fi’l-Sihah al-Sittah.


