Chapter 1: Rituals of The Ahl Al-Bayt
=====================================

The majority of private rituals practiced by the virtuous community
directly or indirectly relate to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). However, in this
discussion, we aim at dedicating our discussion to the rituals that
basically focused on the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in their capacity as persons
of a superior standing with Almighty Allah and enjoying the position of
Imamate and divinely designated leadership of the Muslim community.
Thus, the following topics fall under this title:

1. Commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s Martyrdom

2. Commemorating Anniversaries of the Holy Infallibles (‘a)

3. Visiting Tombs and Shrines of the Holy Infallibles (‘a)

Ceremonies of commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s Martyrdom
------------------------------------------------------

Besides expressing loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in general and Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) in particular, the ceremonies of commemorating Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom, as well as the anniversaries appertaining to the
Holy Infallibles (‘a), are actually meetings which discuss doctrinal,
moral, social, historical affairs, and issues related to the daily and
current affairs of Muslims. In one aspect of their content, the social
aspect, these ceremonies resemble the Friday Prayers during which
Muslims gather to listen to the sermons delivered by the preacher who
usually discusses various aspects of their current affairs and reminds
them of Almighty Allah.[^1] In another aspect, these ceremonies are held
to deliberate knowledge and ethics.

We have previously discussed the ceremonies commemorating Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom in the Second Book of this series which discussed
the cultural aspect of building a virtuous community. We have also
discussed the philosophy of such ceremonies, their spiritual, cultural,
and political outcomes, rituals recommended by the Holy Imams (‘a) and,
other rituals invented by people.

Although the ceremonies commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom,
represent an anniversary of one of the Holy Imams (‘a), an independent
chapter has been dedicated to discussing this anniversary due to its
significance and particularities. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) gave this
anniversary so much importance and consideration that it has turned into
a cultural, spiritual, and behavioral school for building a virtuous
community.

Hereafter, I will briefly discuss the ceremonies and the times when the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) solemnly commemorate Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom. These ceremonies can be classified into five major classes:

### 1. The First Ten Days of Muharram

The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) hold special ceremonies on the
first ten days of Muharram (the first month in the Islamic Calendar).
Wherever they are, the individuals of the virtuous community gather to
condole with and weep for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) as well as discuss current
cultural and doctrinal issues. For them, the commemoration of this
anniversary is almost a doctrinal duty, since some individuals of the
virtuous community may not participate in any other doctrinal
celebration the whole year, but never miss commemorating this
anniversary. During this commemoration, they concern themselves with
serving others with food dedicated to this occasion, meeting together,
and expressing their grief for Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom by a
demonstration of sorrow.

The focus of the individuals of the virtuous community, in commemorating
this anniversary, varies according to the variety of their cultural,
intellectual, and social levels as well as the surrounding political
circumstances. Therefore, some of them hold ceremonies and spend large
amounts of money to gather as large a congregation as possible. They
select the most skillful orators, speakers, and lecturers. At the same
time, the virtuous community attends and participates in such sessions
to benefit culturally, spiritually, and emotionally.

At the same time, there is immense desire to become close to Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) by presenting oneself at his holy shrine or, from
afar,[^2] by offering him salutations and greetings, complaining to him
about personal problems, pledging allegiance to him, and renouncing his
enemies, cursing them, and rejecting their barbarian acts.

On such days, both the ordinary and the elite media of the individuals
of the virtuous community weep for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and demonstrate
grief and pain on the cruelties perpetrated upon him and his companions
in Karbala.

Another practice that manifests itself particularly in this season and
on these days is the pubic serving of food and drink dedicated to Imam
Husayn (‘a) in remembrance of the three days and nights of his thirst
and hunger.

Traditions from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) report these practices in the first
ten days of the holy month of Muharram.

Some other practices through which the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers express
their grief for Imam al-Husayn’s tragic saga bear no supportive evidence
from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). They are:

• organizing public processions and marches

• roaming in streets to express loyalty to and grief for Imam al-Husayn
(‘a)

• holding theatrical performances aimed at representing some aspects of
Imam al-Husayn’s tragic saga—his journey to Karbala, the burning of the
tents of the women and children after massacring his companions, the
journey of those who were taken as captives after the battle, or other
grievous events to which Imam al-Husayn (‘a) was exposed—or all the
events that took place in Karbala

All of the above are inventions of ordinary people to express their
emotions and feelings.[^3]

On the tenth day of Muharram, these rituals and ceremonies attain their
climax when markets are shut down and almost all the individuals of the
virtuous community participate in the condolence ceremonies and food is
prepared to feed all the participants.

### 2. The Months of Muharram and Safar

The rest of the days of Muharram and Safar (the second month in the
Islamic calendar) have a secondary place of importance for holding
sessions for condolence ceremonies of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom. Public
condolence meetings are organized by individuals and communities in
private and public places. Each ten days of these two months are taken
as a new term similar to the first ten days of Muharram, dedicating each
day and night to a certain occasion for which its special ceremonies are
held.

These terms end on the twentieth of Safar, the day of Arba’in, which is
the fortieth day after Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom. Hence, the last ten
days are dedicated to the occasion of the arrival of the captives in
Madinah, followed by the demise of the Holy Prophet (S), which falls on
the twenty-eighth day of Safar and which we shall mention later.

The general mark of the ceremonies held on the rest of the days of
Muharram and Safar is the holding of assemblies (*majalis*; sing.
*majlis*). The ceremonies on the day of Arba’in, include processions and
marches organized and destined for the two holy shrines in Karbala, Imam
al-Ridha’s holy shrine in Mashhad, the shrine of Lady Fatimah, the
daughter of Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) in Qum, or for public places of
worship, such as mosques, Husayniyyahs, and religious places. These
processions and marches are organized for the purpose of commemorating
Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom, pledging allegiance to him, and
commemorating the anniversary of the captives’ return to Karbala, as
maintained by some reports.

### 3. Weekly Sessions

The third category are weekly or monthly assemblies that the followers
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) hold regularly in public places or in their
houses, as a response to the Holy Imams (‘a) who, according to many
traditions, called their followers to hold such sessions and meetings.

The issues of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom and loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) have become the pivot of these sessions, as instructed by the Holy
Imams (‘a). However, discourses in such sessions can also be about a
variety of doctrinal, ethical, behavioral, historical, erudite topics,
etc.

Communities and individuals choose a certain day or night in the week or
the month for holding such sessions as much as their conditions allow.
These sessions and meetings have thus become a continuously open school
throughout the year. The individuals of the virtuous community and the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) arrange days and times among them so
that everybody can benefit from these meetings although the majority may
choose Thursday nights and Fridays because these nights and days enjoy a
special significance among the other days of the week.

By virtue of these meetings, social relations among the followers of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) become well-established and positive and many religious
and worldly benefits are gained. For instance, after orators mention the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and discuss religious topics, the sessions for
knowledge-seekers turn into scientific researches, for men of letters
into literary forums, and for merchants into exchange of commercial
viewpoints.

### 4. Sessions in the Month of Ramadhan

The fourth category of ceremonies commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom are assemblies during Ramadhan, when nights of this blessed
month of devotion turn into educational seasons. During the public
sessions, the most distinctive feature is the remembrance of Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom in addition to discussion regarding, most
comprehensively, Islamic issues and topics concentrating on ethical,
spiritual, and behavioral issues, the laws of Islam and the recitation
of the Holy Qur'an. However, intellectual, doctrinal, and historical
issues are also discussed in such sessions.

From a cultural aspect, there can be found an equipoise between the
sessions of Ramadhan and the sessions of Muharram and Safar. The latter
sessions concentrate on political issues and the uprising against
oppression, tyranny, and corruption, and their historical goals,
factors, and causes, in addition to the sentimental and emotional
aspects of Shi’ite beliefs. The former assemblies concentrate on ethical
and spiritual issues, laws of Islam appertaining to human behavior,
especially the issues of prayer, fasting, almsgiving, and the like. In
addition to the recitation of the Holy Qur'an, doctrinal aspects
regarding the fundamentals of religion, such as monotheism, Prophethood,
divine revelations, and eschatology are discussed. The common points
between these two types of sessions pertain to the general conditions of
the virtuous community and the issue of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom and
uprising.

### 5. Private Occasions

The fifth and last grouping include assemblies held on special occasions
to commemorate Imam al-Husayn (‘a). The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), in their plan of building a virtuous community, took great
interest in the issue of holding meetings to gather their followers on
various occasions. In these meetings, discourses revolve around the
issue of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom and uprising. For instance, in
funeral eulogies ceremonies are held for solacing the relatives of the
deceased. In these ceremonies, the Holy Qur'an is recited and the
tragedy of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his companions is mentioned to seek
nearness to Almighty Allah and alleviate the grief of the bereaved.

On other occasions, such as returning from the Hajj Pilgrimage or long
journeys, moving to a new house, opening a private or public foundation,
recovering from a disease, or private issues that socially require the
holding of a meeting, assemblies are held to seek nearness to Almighty
Allah, to gain blessings by mentioning Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and to
commemorate Imam al-Husayn (‘a). Thus, such meetings have become one of
the distinctive features of the virtuous community.

Commemorating The Anniversaries Of The Holy Infallibles
-------------------------------------------------------

Commemoration of the anniversaries of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) is of
two kinds:

Commemorating their deaths and martyrdoms

Celebrating their birthdays and their joyful occasions

### Commemorating the deaths and martyrdoms of the Holy Infallibles (‘a)

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) counseled their followers to keep
their memories alive and memorialize their anniversaries. The
individuals of the virtuous community, therefore, commemorate the deaths
and martyrdoms of the thirteen Infallibles; namely, the Holy Prophet
(S), Lady Fatimah al-Zahra, and the eleven Imams, before Imam al-Mehdi
(‘a), who is still living. The anniversaries of some eminent figures
among their followers such as, Lady Khadijah al Kubra, Muslim ibn ‘Aqil,
Lady Zaynab bint Ali, Zayd ibn ‘Ali ibn Husayn, Abu-Talib, Umm al-Banin,
and others are also commemorated.

According to the belief of the virtuous community, Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (‘a) and his son Imam al-Husayn (‘a) were slain by the sword,
while the other Holy Imams (‘a), with the exception of the Awaited Imam
al-Mahdi (‘a), who is still alive, were poisoned to death. Although this
general concept has not been proven through historical events except for
Imam Hasan, Imam al-Kazim, and Imam al-Ridha (peace be upon them all),
orators and preachers accept it as truth on the basis of a validly
reported tradition that quotes Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنَّا إِلاَّ مَقْتُولٌ أَوْ مَسْمُومٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Not one of us—the Ahl al-Bayt—died, except that he was slain or
poisoned to death.*[^4]

Another fact is that there is not complete consensus upon the dates of
their martyrdoms and deaths. Nevertheless, the individuals of the
virtuous community have generally committed themselves to certain
traditions in this respect, relying upon the inference of their scholars
and historians.

More or less, the dates of the Holy Infallibles’ deaths and martyrdoms
are distributed over the months of the year (on the Islamic calendar)
except for the month of Sha’ban[^5]. Thus, associated ceremonies form an
annual cycle, soundly entrenched in the social milieu of the virtuous
community.

The related assemblies concentrate on the life of the commemorated Imam
and the injustice he had to encounter. In addition, an analysis of the
historical events that took place during his lifetime is presented.
Other Islamic or Shi’ite beliefs and some of the ethical instructions
and sermons of the commemorated Imam are also recalled. Usually, such
meetings end by recounting the martyrdom of the commemorated Imam or
some tragic aspects of Imam al-Husayn’s saga.

These meetings are another form of commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom (*al-Majalis al-Husayniyyah*) with some concentration on the
life of the commemorated Imam (‘a).

In the general milieu of the virtuous community, there is special
interest in commemorating the Holy Prophet, Imam ‘Ali, Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra', Imam Hasan, in addition to Imam al-Husayn—peace be upon them
all. Special commemoration rituals of the other Imams (‘a) are often
performed in the regions where they are buried. For instance, there is
special interest in commemorating the anniversary of the martyrdom of
Imam al-Kazim (‘a) in the city of al-Kazimiyyah, Iraq, whose people, on
that day, hold special ceremonies and rituals, shut down the marts, and
participate in public processions. The same thing is applicable to the
people of Mashhad, Iran, when they celebrate the anniversary of Imam
al-Ridha’s martyrdom and the people of Samarra' on the anniversary of
Imam al-Hadi’s martyrdom.[^6]

Let us now mention a list of the familiar dates on which the deaths and
martyrdoms of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) have been recorded and are well
known by the individuals of the virtuous community:

1. Death of the Holy Prophet (S): 28th of Safar

2. Martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (‘a): 19th-21st of Ramadhan
because he was injured on the nineteenth of Ramadhan and passed away on
the twenty-first

3. Martyrdom of the All-veracious Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (the Luminous)
(‘a): 8th of Rabi’ II, 15th of Jumada I, and 3rd of Jumada II. There are
several traditions mentioning various dates of her martyrdom. Ceremonies
of commemorating her martyrdom are usually held on the last two dates
although, sometimes, such ceremonies continue for twenty days between
these two dates. In Iraq, some ceremonies are held on the earlier date.

4. Martyrdom[^7] of Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali (‘a): 7th of Safar (in Iraq) and
28th of Safar in Iran, (which falls on the same date of the anniversary
of the Holy Prophet’s demise).

5. Martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (‘a): 10th of Muharram.

6. Martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a): 25th of
Muharram. This anniversary is also commemorated on the twelfth of
Muharram.

7. Martyrdom of Imam Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir (‘a): 7th of
Dhu’l-Hijjah.

8. Martyrdom of Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (‘a): 25th of Shawwal.

9. Martyrdom of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (‘a): 25th of Rajab.

10. Martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (‘a): 17th of Safar (in
Iraq), or the last day of Safar (in Iran).

11. Martyrdom of Imam Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Jawad (‘a): the last day of
Dhu’l-Qa’dah.

12. Martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi (‘a): 3rd of Rajab.

13. Martyrdom of Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-’Askari (‘a): 8th of Rabi’ I.

### Celebrating the Birthdays and Glad Occasions of the Holy Infallibles (‘a)

In addition to commemorating the anniversaries of the deaths and
martyrdoms of the Holy Infallibles (‘a), the individuals of the virtuous
community celebrate their birthdays and glad occasions, creating some
equilibrium between the grievous occasions and joyful ones.

Of course, celebrating such joyful occasions differs from celebrating
grievous ones; therefore, the individuals of the virtuous community
celebrate these joyful occasions in a way different from celebrating the
deaths and martyrdoms of the Holy Infallibles (‘a). These celebrations
are therefore characterized by the following features:

1. Colorful decorations replace black flags of grief and sorrow.

2. Performances and discourses concentrate on remembering the virtues of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) by means of sermons and recitation of laudatory
compositions and hymns with the participation of the audience.

3. Literary expressions of happy emotions is the general feature of
these celebrations. Festivals and carnivals are held, and numerous
poets, men of letters, and orators participate therein. However, on
certain occasions, such as the birthday of the Awaited Imam al-Mahdi
(‘a), educational and doctrinal discourses are delivered, because this
anniversary is regarded as the best opportunity to put forth the topic
of his blessed birth. Hence, these occasions bring together the two most
required kinds of discourse.

Unlike commemorating the deaths and martyrdoms, which does not exclude
any of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) who were martyred, the celebrations of
the anniversaries of their birthdays are usually dedicated to some of
them, because the individuals of the virtuous community aim at bringing
into view the injustice, oppressions, and ordeals to which the Holy
Infallibles (‘a) were exposed more than their joyful occasions. This is
because injustice and oppression were the most eminent phenomena in the
history of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) as well as the history of their
followers.

Besides, the tragedies and sorrows of the Holy Infallibles further equip
the individuals of the virtuous community with patience and
steadfastness, and make them follow the examples of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
exactly as they are required to do.

Moreover, such interest may have come from instructions of the Holy
Imams (‘a) such as the following sayings of Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَعْيَادُنَا مَآتِمُنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, our festivals are commemorations of our deaths.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْقَتْلُ لَنَا عَادَةٌ وَكَرَامَتُنَا مِنَ اللهِ الشَّهَادَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Being slain is our propensity, and martyrdom is the honor that Almighty
Allah confers upon us.*

Finally, the most accurate understanding of these festivals and days of
joy is to spend them doing acts of worship and true recognition of
Almighty Allah, serving people and expecting rewards only from the
Almighty.

A view at these joyful occasions demonstrates that they are utterly
intermixed with the anniversaries of deaths and martyrdoms, except for
the two months of Muharram and Safar, which are totally dedicated to
grievous occasions, and the month of Sha’ban, which is dedicated to
joyful occasions. However, the dates of the Holy Imams’ (‘a) birthdays
are more expansive. Accordingly, equilibrium between the two kinds of
occasions can be found in a better and more expansive way although there
is a preponderance of the grievous occasions over the joyful ones.

Let us now mention a list comprising the dates of the Holy Infallibles’
(‘a) birthdays generally celebrated by the individuals of the virtuous
community:

1. Birthday of the Holy Prophet (S): 17th of Rabi’ I, which coincides
with the birthday of Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (‘a). Although
there are many narrations holding that the Holy Prophet (S) was born on
the twelfth of Rabi’ I, which is celebrated by our non-Shi’ah brothers,
the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) always celebrated the anniversary
of his birthday on the seventeenth of the same month.[^8]

2. Birthday of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (‘a): 13th of Rajab.

3. Birthday of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (‘a): 20th of Jumada II.

4. Birthday of Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Mujtaba (‘a): 15th of Ramadhan.

5. Birthday of Imam al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a), the martyr: 3rd of Sha’ban.

6. Birthday of Imam ‘Ali ibn Husayn, Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a): 5th of
Sha’ban.

7. Birthday of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (‘a): 11th of Dhu’l-Qa’dah.

8. Birthday of the Awaited Imam al-Mahdi (‘a): 15th of Sha’ban.

It would certainly be asked why these holy Infallibles have been given
such special interest other than the others—peace be upon them all—as
regards celebrating their birthdays.

The answer is that the birthdays of the other holy Imams (‘a) are
celebrated, yet limitedly. As for the previously mentioned Infallibles
(‘a), the anniversaries of their births have been given special interest
because definite historical events and moral particularities expressly
appertain to these Imams (‘a), which highly motivate the individuals of
the virtuous community.

The Holy Prophet (S), is the last Messenger of Almighty Allah to
humanity.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a), being the first of the Holy Imams (‘a) and the successor
of the Holy Prophet (S), represents the doctrinal epitome of the
virtuous community.

Imam Hasan (‘a), the first grandson of the Holy Prophet (S), represents
the first point in the extension of the Holy Prophet’s progeny.

Imam al-Husayn (‘a) is the martyred grandson of the Holy Prophet (S)
whose birth was accompanied by grief and sorrow.

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin’s birthday falls a day after the birthday of his
father, Imam al-Husayn (‘a). The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
celebrate the birthdays of Imam al-Husayn, ‘Abbas ibn ‘Ali (‘a), and
Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) on three successive days respectively; the
third, fourth, and fifth of Sha’ban. These three persons are gathered
under one topic: the tragedy of Karbala'.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) represents the doctrinal and jurisprudential school
to which the virtuous community belongs.

Imam al-Ridha’s birthday is widely celebrated in Iran because of the
period of time he spent in the country and the existence of his grave
therein. He therefore represents a symbol of the loyalty of the Iranian
people to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

The awaited Imam al-Mahdi (‘a) represents the everlasting symbol of the
divinely commissioned leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), who still
exists among the Muslim nation.

Visiting The Tombs And Shrines Of The Holy Infallibles
------------------------------------------------------

### Legitimacy of visiting the graves

Visiting the tombs of the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Imams (‘a), the
prophets (‘a), the saints, and the descendants of the Holy Imams (‘a) is
regarded as the most important ritual emphasized by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
and dutifully observed by the virtuous community. Such visits (or
pilgrimages) are a significant phenomenon in the lives of the virtuous
community.

In their capacity as a sort of Hajj (i.e. pilgrimage), these visits, in
both content and form, are considered one of the general rituals of
Islam, since traditions have described them as a complementary part of
the ritual Hajj Pilgrimage.

On the other hand, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and his followers known
as Wahhabis discommend and even forbid visiting or going on pilgrimage
to tombs or building structures and domes on them. Nevertheless,
numerous are the traditions that are uninterruptedly reported from the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), not to mention the Holy Prophet (S) and the honorable
companions, confirming the recommendation of visiting the tombs.

Hereinafter, I will mention some traditions reported from the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a), confirming the act of visiting the tombs as one of the
highly advisable acts and the leading mottos of the virtuous community.

Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Saduq, in *‘Uyun Akhbar
al-Ridha* and *‘Ilal al-Ahkam*, and Ibn Qawlawayh, in *Kamil
al-Ziyarat*, have reported through a valid chain of authority that Imam
al-Ridha (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِكُلِّ إِمَامٍ عَهْداً فِي عُنُقِ أَوْلِيَاءِهِ وَشِيعَتِهِ،
وَإِنَّ مِنْ تَمَامِ الْوَفَاءِ بِالْعَهْدِ وَحُسْنِ الأَدَاءِ
زِيَارَةَ قُبُورِهِمْ. فَمَنْ زَارَهُمْ رَغْبَةً فِي زِيَارَتِهِمْ
وَتَصْدِيقاً بِمَا رَغِبُوا فِيهِ كَانَ أَئِمَّتُهُمْ شُفَعَاءَهُمْ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The disciples and followers of every Imam (‘a) are connected to him
with a binding covenant that they must fulfill. Among the elements of an
excellent fulfillment of these covenants is indeed the visiting of the
Imams’ (‘a) tombs. Hence, if one visits their tombs eagerly and with the
intention of gaining their (the Imams’) desire, the Imams will intercede
for him on the Day of Resurrection.*[^9]

According to another validly reported tradition, Zayd al-Shahham has
reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “What is the reward of one
who visits (the tomb of) one of you?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَنْ زَارَ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He (who visits one of us) will be rewarded the same reward of one who
has visited the Messenger of Allah (S).*[^10]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ خَلْقاً أَكْثَرَ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ، وَإِنَّهُ
لَيَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ كُلَّ مَسَاءٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ
يَطُوفُونَ بِالْبَيْتِ لَيْلَتَهُمْ، حَتَّى إِذَا طَلَعَ الْفَجْرُ
إنْصَرَفُوا إِلَى قَبْرِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
فَسَلَّمُوا عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ قَبْرَ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ قَبْرَ
الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ عَلَيْهِ،
ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ
عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَعُرِجُونَ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَطْلُعَ
الشَّمْسُ. ثُمَّ تَنْزِلُ مَلاَئِكَةُ النَّهَارِ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ
مَلَكٍ فَيَطُوفُونَ بِالْبَيْتِ الْحَرَامِ نَهَارَهُمْ، حَتَّى إِذَا
دَنَتِ الشَّمْسُ لِلْغُرُوبِ إنْصَرَفُوا إِلَى قَبْرِ رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ
قَبْرَ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ
عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ قَبْرَ الْحَسَنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ
فَيُسَلِّمُونَ عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ يَأْتُونَ قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ فَيُسَلِّمُونَ عَلَيْهِ ثُمَّ يَعْرِجُونَ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ
قَبْلَ أَنْ تَغِيبَ الشَّمْسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has not created a category of creatures greater in
number than angels. Verily, seventy thousand angels descend every day to
circumambulate the Holy House (of God). Then,* *they circumambulate the
Holy Ka’bah. Then, they visit the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) to offer
greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) to offer greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of Imam
Hasan (‘a) to offer greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of Imam Husayn
(‘a) to offer greetings. They then ascend back to the skies before
sunrise. Then, the angels of daylight descend to circumambulate the Holy
House (of God) all the day. Before sunset, they leave to visit the tomb
of the Holy Prophet (S) to offer greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of
Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) to offer greetings. Then,
they visit the tomb of Imam Hasan (‘a) to offer greetings. Then, they
visit the tomb of Imam Husayn (‘a) to offer greetings. They then ascend
to the skies before sunset.*[^11]

According to another tradition that is reported through numerous chains
of authority, Abu-’Amir al-Tabbani, the preacher of Hijaz, has reported
that he visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and asked, “O son of Allah’s
Messenger, what is the reward of one who visits the tomb of the
Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ali) (‘a) and those who construct it?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا عَامِرٍ، حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ جَدِّهِ
الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ
لَهُ: وَاللهِ لَتُقْتَلُنَّ بِأَرْضِ الْعِرَاقِ وَتُدْفَنُ بِهَا.
قُلْتُ: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، مَا لِمَنْ زَارَ قُبُورَنَا وَعَمَّرَهَا
وَتَعَاهَدَهَا؟ فَقَالَ لِي: يَا أَبَا الْحَسَنِ، إِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى
جَعَلَ قَبْرَكَ وَقَبْرَ وَلَدِكَ بِقَاعاً مِنْ بِقَاعِ الْجَنَّةِ
وَعَرَصَةً مِنْ عَرَصَاتِهَا، وَإِنَّ اللهَ جَعَلَ قُلُوبَ نُجَبَاءَ
مِنْ خَلْقِهِ وَصَفْوَةٍ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ تَحِنُّ إِلَيْكُمْ
وَتَحْتَمِلُ الْمَذَلَّةَ وَالأَذَى، فَيُعَمِّرُونَ قُبُورَكُمْ
وَيُكْثِرُونَ زِيَارَتَهَا تَقَرُّباً مِنْهُمْ إِلَى اللهِ وَمَوَدَّةً
مِنْهُمْ لِرَسُولِهِ. أُولَئِكَ، يَا عَلِيُّ، الْمَخْصُوصُونَ
بِشَفَاعَتِي الْوَارِدُونَ حَوْضِي، وَهُمْ زُوَّارِي غَداً فِي
الْجَنَّةِ. يَا عَلِيُّ، مَنْ عَمَّرَ قُبُورَكُمْ وَتَعَاهَدَهَا
فَكَأَنَّمَا أَعَانَ سُلَيْمَانَ بْنَ دَاوُدَ عَلَى بِنَاءِ بَيْتِ
الْمَقْدِسِ، وَمَنْ زَارَ قُبُورَكُمْ عَدَلَ ذَلِكَ ثَوَابَ سَبْعِينَ
حِجَّةً بَعْدَ حِجَّةِ الإِسْلاَمِ، وَخَرَجَ مِنْ ذُنُوبِهِ حَتَّى
يَرْجِعَ مِنْ زِيَارَتِكُمْ كَيَوْمِ وَلَدَتْهُ أُمُّهُ، فَأَبْشِرْ
وَبَشِّرْ أَوْلِيَاءَكَ وَمُحِبِّيكَ مِنَ النَّعِيمِ وَقُرَّةِ
الْعَيْنِ بِمَا لاَ عَيْنٌ رَأَتْ وَلاَ أُذُنٌ سَمِعَتْ وَلاَ خَطَرَ
عَلَى قَلْبِ بَشَرٍ. وَلَكِنَّ حُثَالَةً مِنَ النَّاسِ يُعَيِّرُونَ
زُوَّارَ قُبُورِكُمْ كَمَا تُعَيَّرُ الزَّانِيَةُ بِزِنَاءِهَا!
أُولَئِكَ شِرَارُ أُمَّتِي، لاَ أَنَالَهُمُ اللهُ شَفَاعَتِي وَلاَ
يَرِدُونَ حَوْضِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abu-’Amir, my father narrated to me on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather, Husayn ibn ‘Ali, on the authority
of (Imam) ‘Ali, that the Messenger of Allah (S) said to him (i.e. Imam
‘Ali), “By Allah I swear this: you shall be slain in the land of Iraq
and you will be buried therein.” Imam ‘Ali (‘a) asked, “O Allah’s
Messenger, what will be the reward of one who visits our tombs,
constructs them, and protects them?” The Holy Prophet (S) answered, “O
Abu’l-Hasan, Almighty Allah has verily chosen your tomb and the tomb of
your son to be sites and courtyards of Paradise. He has also made the
hearts of excellent persons from amongst His creatures and choice
persons from amongst His servants long for you and endure humiliation
and harm for your sake.*

*They will thus build your tombs and frequently visit them, to seek
nearness to Allah and show love for His Messenger. O ‘Ali, it is these
who shall deserve my intercession exclusively and who shall join me at
the Divine Pond. In Paradise, they shall be my visitors. O ‘Ali, whoever
constructs and protects your graves, is regarded as if he has helped
(Prophet) Solomon the son of (Prophet) David build the Sacred Mosque of
Jerusalem. Whoever visits your tombs will be given the reward of going
on Hajj Pilgrimage seventy times after the obligatory Hajj, and he will
be free of sins like the day on which his mother gave birth to him until
he returns home after visiting your tombs.*

*So, receive these glad tidings and convey to your loyalists and
devotees the glad tidings of bliss and delight of the eye in such a way
that no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard, and no heart has ever
imagined. However, dregs of the society will impute dishonor to the
visitors of your tombs in the same way as dishonor is imputed to an
adulteress for her sin. These are the evilest of my nation. May Allah
never allow them to enjoy my intercession and may they never approach my
Pond.*[^12]

Traditions especially emphasize visiting the tombs of the Holy Prophet
(S), Imam al-Husayn (‘a), and Imam ‘Ali (‘a) because the Holy Prophet
(S) and these two holy Imams (‘a) represent the epitome of the beliefs
of the virtuous community, in addition to the special outcome in the
field of cultural, spiritual, and political education gained from
visiting them.

In the coming chapter of *Ziyarah*, we will notice that all emphasis has
been generally laid on visiting the Holy Prophet’s tomb, while visiting
the tombs of the Holy Imams (‘a) has only been attached to this visit.
Special visits have been emphatically mentioned for Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi-Talib and Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon them.

### The Cultural Content of Visiting the Tombs

In the previous discussion of the cultural foundations under the title
of visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb, we have looked into the spiritual,
political, and social outcomes of such visits. They also stand for a
practical and spiritual embodiment of the interrelation between the
individuals of the virtuous community and the Holy Infallibles (‘a). A
visitor of their tombs believes that he is visiting that Imam (‘a) in
his house. Almighty Allah “*has permitted them to be exalted so that His
name may be remembered in them*”. The visitor, by reciting the
paragraphs of the *Ziyarah* formula, believes he is talking to the Imam
who, beyond doubt, can hear his words, understand what he says, and
answer him.

The best presentation of this fact is the following formula of seeking
permission (*isti'dhan*) by a visitor before entering any of the holy
shrines of the Holy Infallibles (‘a). This form reads as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي وَقَفْتُ عَلَىٰ بَابٍ مِنْ ابْوَابِ بُيُوتِ
نَبِيِّكَ صَلَوَاتُكَ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَقَدْ مَنَعْتَ النَّاسَ اَنْ
يَدْخُلُوا إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِهِ فَقُلْتَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{يَا اَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاََ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتَ النَّبِيِّ
إِلاَّ اَنْ يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمْ.}
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي اَعْتَقِدُ حُرْمَةَ صَاحِبِ هَذَا الْمَشْهَدِ
الشَّريفِ فِي غَيْبَتِهِ كَمَا اَعْتَقِدُهَا فِي حَضْرَتِهِ وَاَعْلَمُ
اَنَّ رَسُولَكَ وَخُلَفَاءَكَ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ اَحْيَاءٌ عِنْدَكَ
يُرْزَقُونَ يَرَوْنَ مَقَامِي وَيَسْمَعُوَن كَلاَمِي وَيَرُدُّونَ
سَلاَمِي وَاَنِّكَ حَجَبْتَ عَنْ سَمْعِي كَلاَمَهُمْ وَفَتَحْتَ بَابَ
فَهْمِي بِلَذِيذِ مُنَاجَاتِهِمْ وَإِنِّي اَسْتَأْذِنُكَ يَا رَبِّ
اَوَّلاًَ وَاَسْتَأْذِنُ رَسُولَكَ صَلَّىٰ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
ثَانِياً وَاَسْتَأذِنُ خَليفَتَكَ الإِمَامَ الْمَفْرُوضَ عَلَيَّ
طَاعَتُهُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, I am standing at one of the doors of Your Prophet’s Houses—may
Your blessings be upon him and his Household—and You have prevented
people to enter there before they obtain his permission. You have thus
said,* ***“O ye who believe! Enter not the Prophet's houses until leave
is given you.”***

*O Allah, I believe in the sanctity of the owner of this holy shrine in
his absence just as I believe in it in his presence. I also know with
certainty that Your Messenger and Your Representatives—peace be upon
them—are alive, finding their sustenance in Your presence. They can see
my place, hear my words, and respond to my greetings. You have prevented
my hearing from receiving their words, but You have opened the door of
my understanding to taste the sweetness of my confidential speech with
them. I thus ask Your permission—O my Lord—first of all, and secondly
the permission of Your Prophet—peace be upon him and his Household—and
the permission of Your Representative, the Imam, obedience to whom is
incumbent upon me…*

You may here mention the name of the visited person, and then continue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَلاَئِكَةَ الْمُوَكَّلينَ بِهَذِهِ الْبُقْعَةِ الْمُبَارَكَةِ
ثَالِثاً اَاَدْخُلُ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ اَاَدْخُلُ يَا حُجَّةَ اللهِ
اَاَدْخُلُ يَا مَلاَئِكَةَ اللهِ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ الْمُقِيمِينَ فِي
هَذَا الْمَشْهَدِ فَأْذَنْ لِي يَا مَوْلاَيَ فِي الدُّخُولِ اَفْضَلَ
مَا اَذِنْتَ لأَِحَدٍ مِنْ اَوْلِيَائِكَ فَإِنْ لَمْ اَكُنْ اَهْلاًَ
لِذَلِكَ فَاَنْتَ اَهْل ٌ لِذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*…and thirdly (permission of) the angels commissioned to supervise this
blessed area. May I enter, O Messenger of Allah? May I enter, O Proof of
Allah? May I enter, O angels of Allah—the intimate, the residing in this
shrine? So, (please) permit me to enter, O my Master, with the best of
permission that you have ever conferred upon any of your intimate
adherents. If I do not deserve such permission, then you are worthy of
not conferring it upon me.*[^13]

All formulas of *ziyarah* uttered at the tombs of the Holy Infallibles
(‘a) carry doctrinal, monotheistic, Islamic, and spiritual aspects. They
are: repeating the *takbir* statement (*allahu-akbar*: Allah is the Most
Great) one hundred times, and uttering the two statements
(*shahadatayn)* of Islam—I bear witness that there is no god save Allah
and that Muhammad is His messenger. They all offer salutation to the
Holy Imams (‘a), mention them by names, and utter words of praise,
glorification and gratitude to Almighty Allah for granting the bliss of
visiting the shrine—all these are direct doctrinal, moral, and spiritual
lessons given to the visitors of these tombs.

Encyclopedias of traditions (i.e. *Hadith*) have dealt with this subject
matter so expansively that the encyclopedias of the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and the virtuous community have been characterized by
expatiating upon this topic. Since the first century of Shi’ite
writings, many books dealing exclusively with the formulas of *ziyarah*
and supplicatory prayers have been written. Some are: *Kamil al-Ziyarat*
by Ibn Qawlawayh, *Misbah al-Mutahajjid* by Shaykh al-Tusi, *Al-Mazar
al-Kabir* by Shaykh Muhammad al-Mashhadi, *Al-Mazar* by al-Shahid
al-Awwal, *Al-Misbah* by Shaykh al-Kaf’ami, and many others. All these
books substantiate the special interest in the ritual and devotional
*ziyarah* and supplicatory prayers.[^14]

In this discussion, we will refer, yet generally, to the major sections
of *ziyarah* and to some of the most important times and occasions
observed by the individuals of the virtuous community, leaving the
details to the extensive books on this topic. Basically, we will depend
upon the well-known book of *Mafatih al-Jinan*.

There are general etiquettes and manners for *ziyarah,* which a true
faithful believer must observe because they correspond to an aspect of
the blessed rite of *ziyarah*. The most important in this connection is
spiritual purity, attained by ritual bathing and ablution, and the
material cleanliness of body and clothes, attained by removing
impurities and dirt. Another is the frequent remembrance of Almighty
Allah, by repeating words of glorification, praise, and thanks to Him
for granting this blissful boon.

It is worth mentioning that there are certain manners and etiquettes in
this regard, including saying certain supplications, offering certain
prayers, and choosing certain times for traveling (i.e. going on
pilgrimage for visiting a holy shrine). Because traveling is the first
step towards *ziyarah*, these manners and etiquettes have been mentioned
as a prelude to the etiquettes of pilgrimage and *ziyarah*.[^15]

### Pilgrimage to the Tombs of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (‘a) Buried in al-Baqi’ Cemetery

Many corroborated traditions have confirmed great reward for visiting
the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) while others have deemed it obligatory
upon those who can do it after accomplishment of the obligatory rites of
the Hajj Pilgrimage. Other traditions sternly forbid shunning a visit to
the Holy Prophet’s tomb as a sort of alienation from him. Many other
traditions assert that visiting his tomb results in entrance into
Paradise.

Among these traditions, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا حَجَّ أَحَدُكُمْ فَلْيَخْتِمْ حَجَّهُ بِزِيَارَتِنَا; لأَِنَّ
ذَلِكَ مِنْ تَمَامِ الْحَجِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any one of you who goes on the Hajj Pilgrimage must conclude his Hajj
by visiting us, because it is the completion of the Hajj.*[^16]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتِمُّوا بِرَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ حَجَّكُمْ
إِذَا خَرَجْتُمْ إِلَى بَيْتِ اللهِ; فَإِنَّ تَرْكَهُ جَفَاءٌ
وَبِذَلِكَ أُمِرْتُمْ، وَأَتِمُّوا بِالْقُبُورِ الَّتِي أَلْزَمَكُمُ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ زِيَارَتَهَا وَحَقَّهَا، وَاطْلُبُوا الرِّزْقَ
عِنْدَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you go on pilgrimage to the House of Allah, complete your Hajj by
visiting the Messenger of Allah(S) because to avoid doing so is a sort
of alienation from him which you have been ordered to avoid. Also,
complete your Hajj with visitation of the tombs that Almighty Allah has
ordered you to visit and carry out your duties towards them. Seek
sustenance therein.*[^17]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَنِي حَيّاً أَوْ مَيِّتاً كُنْتُ لَهُ شَفِيعاً يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever visits me in my lifetime or after my death, will receive my
intercession on the Day of Resurrection.[^18]

Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have asked the Holy Prophet (S),
“O father, what is the reward of one who visits you?” The Holy Prophet
(S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بُنَيَّ، مَنْ زَارَنِي حَيّاً أَوْ مَيِّتاً أَوْ زَارَ أَبَاكَ
أَوْ أَخَاكَ أَوْ زَارَكَ، كَانَ حَقّاً عَلَيَّ أَنْ أَزُورَهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ فَأُخَلِّصَهُ مِنْ ذُنُوبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O son, he who visits me in my lifetime or after my death, or visits
your father, your brother, and you, will put me under the duty of
visiting him on the Day of Resurrection to deliver him from (the
consequences of) his sins.*[^19]

According to another tradition that is reported through a valid chain of
authority, the Holy Prophet (S) said to Imam al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بُنَيَّ، مَنْ أَتَانِي زَائِراً بَعْدَ مَوْتِي فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ،
وَمَنْ أَتَى أَبَاكَ زَائِراً بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِ فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ،
وَمَنْ أَتَى أَخَاكَ زَائِراً بَعْدَ مَوْتِهِ فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ،
وَمَنْ أَتَاكَ زَائِراً بَعْدَ مَوْتِكَ فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O son, whoever comes to me to visit me after my death will be awarded
Paradise. Whoever comes to your father to visit him after his death will
be awarded Paradise. Whoever comes to your brother to visit him after
his death will be awarded Paradise. Whoever comes to you to visit you
after your death will be awarded Paradise.*[^20]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have
quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَنِي فِي حَيَاتِي أَوْ بَعْدَ مَوْتِي فَقَدْ زَارَ اللهَ
تَعَالَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who visits me in my lifetime or after my death has in fact visited
Almighty Allah.*[^21]

Zayd has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as to what the reward
of one who visits the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) would be.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَنْ زَارَ اللهَ فِي عَرْشِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It shall be as if he has visited Almighty Allah on His Throne.*[^22]

It is also reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) was once asked, “Is it
lawful to visit (the tomb of) your father?” “Yes, it is,” answered the
Imam (‘a). “What is then the reward of one who visits him?” he was
asked. He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْجَنَّةُ إِنْ كَانَ يَأْتَمُّ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The reward will be Paradise for those who believe in (and follow) his
Imamate.

“What is the punishment of one who shuns visiting him out of purposeful
alienation from him?” he was asked. The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَسْرَةُ يَوْمَ الْحَسْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The punishment will be intense regret on the Day of Regret.*[^23]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَنِي غُفِرَتْ لَهُ ذُنُوبُهُ وَلَمْ يَمُتْ فَقِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever visits me will have his sins forgiven and will be saved from
dying in poverty.*[^24]

Because of its priority over all other visits and because it is the
criterion and example of visiting the tombs of the other Holy
Infallibles (‘a), confirmations have been made regarding visiting the
tomb of the Holy Prophet (S).

It goes without saying that visiting the tombs of the Holy Prophet and
the Holy Imams—peace be upon them—is one of the best activities and
rites that is practiced by the individuals of the virtuous community who
pay more interest to such visits in the seasons of Hajj Pilgrimage and
‘Umrah (minor Hajj). They therefore endure various sorts of suffering
and harm, especially in the days when the custodians and keepers of
these shrines exert pressure on the visitors and accuse them of baseless
charges.

### Visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb

Visiting the holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) at all times is very
highly recommended, whether directly by presenting oneself at his holy
shrine,[^25] or indirectly, by saluting him from afar. However, to visit
Imam al-Husayn (‘a) in his holy shrine, or from the holy shrines of Imam
‘Ali (‘a) or the other Holy Imams (‘a), or any other shrine would bring
about a bigger reward, as has been held by some traditions that identify
certain places from which one may visit Imam al-Husayn (‘a).

Other traditions assert that the reward of visiting any of the Holy
Imams (‘a) is the same as visiting the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S).

Other traditions read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَ وَاحِداً مِنَّا كَانَ كَمَنْ زَارَ الْحُسَيْنَ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever visits any one of us will be as if he has visited Husayn
(‘a).*[^26]

Accordingly, the same merits and rewards are gained when any of the
tombs of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) is visited.

The most famous formula of *ziyarah* that can be recited upon visiting
the eleven martyred Holy Imams (‘a) is the formula known as *aminullah*,
which begins with this statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكَ يَا اَمِينَ اللهِ فِي اَرْضِهِ وَحُجَّتَهُ عَلَىٰ
عِبَادِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you; O trustee of Allah on His lands, and proof of Allah
for His servants.

This formula has been described by ‘Allamah al-Majlisi as the best
formula in both text and chain of authority. It is highly advisable to
repeat this formula of *ziyarah* perseveringly at all the holy shrines.

Through a valid chain of authority, Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah has reported
that Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) made a pilgrimage to the tomb of Imam
‘Ali (‘a) and uttered this very formula of *ziyarah* therein.[^27]

It is also noteworthy that visiting the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) has
been given the greatest emphasis in the uninterruptedly reported
traditions that have also mentioned a great reward ensuing from visiting
his tomb. According to other traditions, visiting the tomb of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) may be more favorable than visiting the tombs of the
succeeding Imams (‘a). Through numerous chains of authority, some
traditions have identified certain times of visiting Imam al-Husayn’s
tomb with certain formulas of *ziyarah*, while others have mentioned
other general formulas that can be uttered when his tomb is visited at
any time. Great rewards have been reported for visiting his tomb at
these identified times or at all times.

The compilations of formulas of *ziyarah* have identified certain times
for visiting his tomb. Hereinafter, a list of the best times at which
Imam al-Husayn’s tomb can be visited is provided according to
chronological sequence based on the Islamic calendar:

1. *Ziyarah* of ‘Ashura' on the tenth of Muharram with a special
formula[^28]

2. *Ziyarah* of Arba’in on the twentieth of Safar with a special formula

3. *Ziyarah* on the first of Rajab with a special formula that is
identical to the formula dedicated to the fifteenth of Sha’ban

4. *Ziyarah* on the fifteenth of Rajab night and day with a special
formula that is identical with the formula to be said on the first of
Rajab

5. *Ziyarah* and invocation of blessings upon Imam al-Husayn (‘a) on his
birthday, the third of Sha’ban with a special formula

6. *Ziyarah* on the fifteenth of Sha’ban night and day, which is the
same formula as that of the first of Rajab

7. *Ziyarah* on the Qadr Nights (19th, 21st, and 23rd of Ramadhan) with
a special formula

8. *Ziyarah* on the nights of ‘Id al-Fitr (the first of Shawwal) and ‘Id
al-Adhha (the tenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah) with a special formula

9. *Ziyarah* on the days of ‘Id al-Fitr and ‘Id al-Adhha with a special
formula

10. *Ziyarah* on the Day of ‘Arafat, the ninth of Dhu’l-Hijjah, with a
special formula

Among all these times, the *ziyarah* for the night of the fifteenth of
Sha’ban and the Day of ‘Arafat enjoy a special significance concerning
the great reward that is gained by those who go on *ziyarah* pilgrimage
to the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) at these two times. The individuals
of the virtuous community specially wish to go for *ziyarah* at these
two times. Some traditions hold that visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb at
these two times may have more rewards than a recommended Hajj or ‘Umrah
and that Almighty Allah looks with the eye of mercy and forgiveness at
the visitors of Imam al-Husayn’s tomb before he takes a similar look at
those halting on Mount ‘Arafat.

The two *ziyarah* of ‘Ashura' and Arba’in also acquire a special
interest for the individuals of the virtuous community because they are
connected with commemorating the anniversary of Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom when large ceremonies and large well-organized processions are
held. In addition to these timed *ziyarah*, there are other formulas
addressed to Imam al-Husayn (‘a) at different times from near or afar.
In *Mafatih al-Jinan*, Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi has mentioned seven such
general formulas of *ziyarah* the most famous of which is the one known
as *ziyarah* *al Warith*.[^29]

Besides these formulas, there are general etiquettes and manners
observed by one who visits the holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), the
most important of which is that a visitor must be ritually pure, by
performing the ritual ablution before entering the holy shrine, and
physically clean, by putting on clean clothes and ridding oneself of all
impure items. Within these etiquettes are praying to Almighty Allah,
making every effort to become closer to Him, and repeating phrases
glorifying, praising, and thanking Him. It is also required to observe
all the etiquettes that need to be done in the presence of the Imam. Of
course, these etiquettes must also be observed when visiting the Holy
Prophet and the other Holy Imams, peace be upon them all.[^30]

### Visiting the Tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a)

In the previously cited traditions about visiting the tomb of the Holy
Prophet (S), we have come to know the great reward and the fabulous
outcomes resulting from visiting the tomb of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib
(‘a).[^31] Herein, we will present other traditions in this regard.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that Abu-Wahab al-Qasri visited Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) in Madinah and said, “May Allah accept me as ransom for
you! I have come to visit you, but I have not visited the tomb of the
Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ali).”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِئْسَ مَا صَنَعْتَ! لَوْلاَ أَنَّكَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا مَا نَظَرْتُ
إِلَيْكَ! أَلاَ تَزُورُ مَنْ يَزُورُهُ اللهُ مَعَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ
وَيَزُورُهُ الأَنْبِيَاءُ وَيَزُورُهُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So evil is what you have done. Were it not that you are one of our
partisans, I would never look at your face. You should have visited him
who is visited by Almighty Allah along with His angels, the Prophets,
and the faithful believers.*

“I did not have any idea about that,” Wahab apologized.

The Imam (‘a) added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ أَفْضَلُ
عِنْدَ اللهِ مِنَ الأَئِمَّةِ كُلِّهِمْ، وَلَهُ ثَوَابُ أَعْمَالِهِمْ،
وَعَلَى قَدْرِ أَعْمَالِهِمْ فُضِّلُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So now, be it known to you that the Commander of the Faithful is more
favorable in the view of Almighty Allah than all the other Imams, and he
has the reward of their good deeds. They have preference to one another
according to each one’s deeds.*[^32]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ خَلْقاً أَكْثَرَ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ، وَإِنَّهُ
لَيَنْزِلُ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ فَيَأْتُونَ الْبَيْتَ
الْمَعْمُورَ فَيَطُوفُونَ بِهِ، فَإِذَا هُمْ طَافُوا بِهِ نَزَلُوا
فَطَافُوا بِالْكَعْبَةِ، فَإِذَا طَافُوا بِهَا أَتَوْا قَبْرَ
النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَسَلَّمُوا عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ
أَتَوْا قَبْرَ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَسَلَّمُوا
عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ أَتَوْا قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ
فَسَلَّمُوا عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ عَرَجُوا. وَيَنْزِلُ مِثْلُهُمْ أَبَداً
إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has not created a category of creatures bigger in number
than angels. Verily, seventy thousand angels descend every day to
circumambulate the Much-Frequented House. Then, they circumambulate the
Holy Ka’bah. Then, they visit the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) to offer
greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a), to offer greetings. Then, they visit the tomb of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) to offer greetings. They then ascend back to the skies.
Every day and up to the Day of Resurrection, a similar number of angels
descend and do the same thing.*

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَارَ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَارِفاً بِحَقِّهِ غَيْرَ
مُتَجَبِّرٍ وَلاَ مُتَكَبِّرٍ كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ أَجْرَ مِائَةِ أَلْفِ
شَهِيدٍ، وَغَفَرَ اللهُ لَهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِهِ وَمَا
تَأَخَّرَ، وَبُعِثَ مِنَ الآمِنِينَ، وَهَوَّنَ عَلَيْهِ الْحِسَابَ،
وَاسْتَقْبَلَتْهُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ، فَإِذَا إنْصَرَفَ شَيَّعَتْهُ إِلَى
مَنْزِلِهِ، فَإِنْ مَرِضَ عَادُوهُ، وَإِنْ مَاتَ تَبِعُوهُ
بِالإسْتِغْفَارِ إِلَى قَبْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, if one visits the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) with full
recognition of his right*[^33] *without being arrogant or conceited,
Almighty Allah shall determine for him the reward of one hundred
thousand martyrs, forgive his past and coming sins, include him with the
secured group (on the Day of Resurrection), and make easy for him the
calling to account. He will be also received by the angels. As he
returns home (after the ziyarah), these angels will visit him when he is
ill. When he dies, these angels will follow him to his grave, imploring
Almighty Allah to forgive him.*

The Imam (‘a) also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ زَارَ الْحُسَيْنَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ عَارِفاً بِحَقِّهِ كَتَبَ
اللهُ لَهُ ثَوَابَ أَلْفِ حِجَّةٍ مَقْبُولَةٍ، وَأَلْفِ عُمْرَةٍ
مَقْبُولَةٍ، وَغَفَرَ لَهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِهِ وَمَا
تَأَخَّرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever visits Husayn (‘a) with full recognition of his right, Almighty
Allah will establish for him the reward of one thousand times an
accepted Hajj Pilgrimage and one thousand times an approved ‘Umrah
Pilgrimage, and will forgive all his sins, the past and the
coming.*[^34]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ عَرَضَ وِلاَيَتَنَا عَلَى أَهْلِ الأَمْصَارِ، فَلَمْ
يَقْبَلْهَا إِلاَّ أَهْلُ الْكُوفَةِ، وَإِنَّ إِلَى جَانِبِهَا قَبْراً
لاَ يَأْتِيهِ مَكْرُوهٌ فَيُصَلِّي عِنْدَهُ أَرْبَعَ رَكَعَاتٍ إِلاَّ
رَجَعَهُ اللهُ مَسْرُوراً بِقَضَاءِ حَاجَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah had offered the loyalty of our leadership to the people
of the countries, but none accepted it except the people of Kufah. To
the side of this city, there is a tomb which no aggrieved one comes to
visit and offers a four-unit prayer therein except that Almighty Allah
makes him return with the pleasure of having his request granted.*[^35]

Referring to Imam ‘Ali (‘a), Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بْنَ مَارِدٍ، مَنْ زَارَ جَدِّي عَارِفاً بِحَقِّهِ كَتَبَ اللهُ
لَهُ بِكُلِّ خُطْوَةٍ حِجَّةً مَقْبُولَةً وَعُمْرَةً مَبْرُورَةً. يَا
بْنَ مَارِدٍ، وَاللهِ مَا يُطْعِمُ اللهُ النَّارَ قَدَماً تَغَبَّرَتْ
فِي زِيَارَةِ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ مَاشِياً
كَانَ أَوْ رَاكِباً. يَا بْنَ مَارِدٍ، أُكْتُبْ هَذَا الْحَدِيثَ
بِمَاءِ الذَّهَبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O son of Marid, as for any one who visits the tomb of my grandfather
with recognition of his right, Almighty Allah shall decide for him the
reward of an acceptable Hajj and admissible ‘Umrah for each step he
takes. O son of Marid, I swear by Allah that He shall never give to
Hellfire a foot that was dusted in the course of visiting the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a), be he walking or riding. O son of Marid, write
down this saying with golden ink.*[^36]

General And Timed Visitations Of Imam ‘Ali’s Tomb
-------------------------------------------------

Visits to Imam ‘Ali’s tomb are classified into general (that are made at
any time) and timed (that are made at certain times).

### General Visits

Shaykh al-Qummi, in *Mafatih al-Jinan*, has mentioned seven formulas of
*ziyarah* of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) that may be said when his tomb is visited at
any time. The first formula is reported from Shaykh al-Mufid, Shaykh
al-Shahid, Sayyid Ibn Tawus, and other scholars. The second and most
important is the one known as *ziyarah of aminullah* to which a previous
reference has been made.

The earlier formula comprises some etiquettes to be carried out by the
visitor from the moment he leaves his house up to arriving in Kufah.
Afterwards, the visitor is advised to walk to the holy shrine of Imam
‘Ali (‘a) in the holy city of Najaf up to uttering the formula of
bidding the Imam farewell (known as *wada’*). This formula also includes
a form of *ziyarah* of Prophets Adam and Noah, the Holy Prophet
Muhammad, and Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon them all.[^37]

A greater number of general formulas of *ziyarah* has been mentioned by
‘Allamah al-Majlisi in *Bihar al-Anwar*.[^38]

### Timed Visitations

There are four formulas of *ziyarah* to be said while visiting the tomb
of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) at special times.

**First**, the formula of *ziyarah* to be said while visiting Imam
‘Ali’s tomb on the Day of Ghadir is regarded as the most comprehensive,
since it comprises the totality of concepts and merits related to Imam
‘Ali (‘a). On the Day of Ghadir, Imam ‘Ali (‘a), by divine command, was
appointed the next leader, Imam, and vicegerent of the Holy Prophet (S).
On this day, which falls on the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah, the Holy
Prophet (S) ordered all pilgrims to gather in a crossroad near a spring
called Khumm and declared the famous sermon that is known as Hadith
al-Ghadir.[^39]

In the words of Shaykh al-Qummi, this formula of *ziyarah* has been
reported through many valid chains of authority from Imam ‘Ali ibn
Muhammad al-Hadi al-Naqi (‘a) when he visited his grandfather, Imam ‘Ali
(‘a), and said this formula on the Day of Ghadir when Mu’tasim, the
‘Abbasid ruler, summoned him to Baghdad. Shaykh al-Mufid has also
reported this formula, yet without mentioning its transmitters, from
Imam Hasan al-’Askari (‘a) on the authority of his fathers, peace be
upon them.[^40]

About the merits of visiting Imam ‘Ali (‘a) on the Day of Ghadir, Imam
al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said to Ahmad ibn Abi-Nasr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بْنَ أَبِي نَصْرٍ، أَيْنَمَا كُنْتَ فَاحْضَرْ يَوْمَ الْغَدِيرِ
عِنْدَ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ; فَإِنَّ اللهَ
تَعَالَى يَغْفِرُ لِكُلِّ مُؤْمِنٍ وَمُؤْمِنَةٍ وَمُسْلِمٍ
وَمُسْلِمَةٍ ذُنُوبَ سِتِّينَ سَنَةً، وَيَعْتِقُ مِنَ النَّارِ ضِعْفَ
مَا أَعْتَقَ فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ وَفِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ وَلَيْلَةِ
الْفِطْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Listen, son of Abu-Nasr! Wherever you are, try your best to present
yourself at the tomb of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) on the Day of
Ghadir. Verily, Almighty Allah, on this day, forgives the sins of sixty
years of each faithful believer and Muslim individual, male and female.
On this day too, Almighty Allah releases from Hellfire two times as many
people as He releases during the month of Ramadhan, the Night of Qadr
Night, and the Night of ‘«d al-Fitr.*[^41]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi and Shaykh al-Qummi, in *Bihar al-Anwar* and
*Mafatih al-Jinan* respectively, have mentioned other formulas of
*ziyarah* to be addressed to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) on the Day of Ghadir. One of
these formulas is the famous *ziyarah* of *aminullah*.

**Second**, there is a special formula to be said on visiting the tomb
of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) on the anniversary of the Holy Prophet’s birthday.
Shaykh al-Mufid, Shaykh al-Shahid in *Al-Mazar* and Sayyid Ibn Tawus in
*Iqbal al-A’mal* have reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) addressed a
certain formula of *ziyarah* to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) on the anniversary of the
Holy Prophet’s birthday and then dictated it to Muhammad ibn Muslim
al-Thaqafi, his trustworthy companion.

This formula, which contains words ascribing virtue, knowledgeability,
and struggle for the sake of Almighty Allah to Imam ‘Ali (‘a), as well
as statements declaring loyalty to him, renunciation of his enemies, and
recognition of his divinely commissioned leadership, has been recorded
by ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, in *Bihar al-Anwar*, and Shaykh al-Qummi, in
*Mafatih al-Jinan*.[^42]

**Third**, there is a special formula that is reported to be addressed
to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) when he is visited on the night and the day of the
appointment of the Prophet to the Divine Mission (*al-mab’ath*), which
is widely and unanimously celebrated on the twenty-seventh of Rajab by
the individuals of the virtuous community.[^43]

This formula has been reported by Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Shahid, and Sayyid
Ibn Tawus from whom ‘Allamah al-Majlisi reported it. However, he then
commented that he had not been acquainted with its chain of authority
nor had he been informed about the dedication of a special formula to
this anniversary, although, he added, the matter is one of the facts
unanimously believed by the Shi’ah.[^44] Shaykh al-Qummi has mentioned
three different forms of this formula.

**Fourth**, a special formula has been reported to be addressed to Imam
‘Ali (‘a) on the day of his martyrdom, the twenty-first of Ramadhan.

Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Saduq, in *al-Amali*,
have reported that on the day when Imam ‘Ali (‘a) departed life as a
martyr, the place was convulsed with weeping and people were stunned
just like the day of the departure of the Holy Prophet (S). Weeping and
hurrying, a man came repeating the ritual statements of misfortune (i.e.
We are Allah’s and to Him shall we return) and saying, “This day has the
vicegerency of the Holy Prophet (S) been interrupted.” When he arrived
at the door of Imam ‘Ali’s house, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَكَ اللـَّهُ يَا اَبَا الْحَسَنِ كُنْتَ اَوَّلَ الْقَوْمِ
إِسْلاَماً وَاَخْلَصَهُمْ إِيـمَاناً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May Allah have mercy upon you, O Abu’l-Hasan (‘a). You were the first
of all in accepting Islam and the most sincere of all in faith…*

All the attendants kept silent until this man finished his words. He
then wept, causing all the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) to weep.
They then searched for the man, but in vain. It is believed that this
man was al-Khidhr (‘a).[^45]

### Visiting the Holy Imams (‘a)

In addition to their emphasis on visiting the Holy Prophet, Imam ‘Ali,
and Imam al-Husayn (peace be upon them all), the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have
laid similar emphasis on visiting the tombs of the Holy Imams (‘a) in
general. This emphasis has been reported by many traditions (some of
which have been previously cited under the topic of “Visiting the Holy
Imams’ (‘a) Tombs”) which validate each other, some of which a reference
will be made hereinafter.

Zayd has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about the reward of
one who visits the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S). The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَنْ زَارَ اللهَ فِي عَرْشِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It shall be as if he has visited Almighty Allah at His Throne.*[^46]

Zayd further asked, “What is the reward of one who visits any one of
you?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَنْ زَارَ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He (who visits one of us) will be rewarded the same reward of one who
has visited the Messenger of Allah.*[^47]

‘Isa ibn Rashid has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “May
Allah accept me as ransom for you! What is the reward of one who visits
the tomb of Husayn (‘a) and offers a two-unit prayer therein?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَتْ لَهُ حِجَّةٌ وَعُمْرَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He will be given the reward of one Hajj Pilgrimage and one ‘Umrah
Pilgrimage.

“Is the same reward given to one who visits the tomb of any of the
Imams, to whom obedience is obligatory?” asked the reporter. The Imam
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ كُلُّ مَنْ أَتَى قَبْرَ إِمَامٍ مُفْتَرَضَةٍ طَاعَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The same reward will be given to anyone who visits the tomb of any of
the Imams, obedience to whom is obligatory.[^48]

‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muslim has reported that he visited Imam al-Kazim
(‘a) and asked, “Which is better: to visit the tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a),
Imam al-Husayn (‘a), or one of the other Holy Imams (‘a)?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَبْدَ الرَّحْمَنِ بْنَ مُسْلِمٍ، مَنْ زَارَ أَوَّلَنَا فَقَدْ
زَارَ آخِرَنَا، وَمَنْ زَارَ آخِرَنَا فَقَدْ زَارَ أَوَّلَنَا، وَمَنْ
تَوَلَّى أَوَّلَنَا فَقَدْ تَوَلَّى آخِرَنَا، وَمَنْ تَوَلَّى آخِرَنَا
فَقَدْ تَوَلَّى أَوَّلَنَا، وَمَنْ قَضَى حَاجَةً لأَِحَدٍ مِنْ
أَوْلِيَاءِنَا فَكَأَنَّمَا قَضَاهَا لِجَمِيعِنَا. يَا عَبْدَ
الرَّحْمَنِ، أَحْبِبْنَا وَأَحْبِبْ فِينَا وَأَحْبِبْ لَنَا
وَتَوَلَّنَا وَتَوَلَّ مَنْ يَتَوَلاَّنَا وَأَبْغِضْ مَنْ يُبْغِضُنَا.
أَلاَ وَإِنَّ الرَّادَّ عَلَيْنَا كَالرَّادِّ عَلَى رَسُولِ اللهِ
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ جَدِّنَا، وَمَنْ رَدَّ عَلَى رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَقَدْ رَدَّ عَلَى اللهِ. أَلاَ
يَا عَبْدَ الرَّحْمَنِ، مَنْ أَبْغَضَنَا فَقَدْ أَبْغَضَ مُحَمَّداً،
وَمَنْ أَبْغَضَ مُحَمَّداً فَقَدْ أَبْغَضَ اللهَ جَلَّ وَعَلاَ، وَمَنْ
أَبْغَضَ اللهَ جَلَّ وَعَلاَ كَانَ حَقّاً عَلَى اللهِ أَنْ يُصْلِيَهُ
النَّارَ وَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نَصِيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muslim, he who visits the first of us has in fact
visited the last of us and he who visits the last of us has in fact
visited the first of us. He who shows loyalty to the first of us has in
fact shown loyalty to the last of us and he who shows loyalty to the
last of us has in fact shown loyalty to the first of us. He who grants
the needs of one of our loyalists, it is as if he has granted it for all
of us. O ‘Abd al-Rahman, bear love for us, bear love for others on the
basis of your love for us, and bear love for others for the sake of your
love for us. Show loyalty to us,* *show loyalty to those who are
loyalists to us, and detest those who detest us. Most surely, he who
objects to us is the same as those who object to our grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah, and he who objects to the Messenger of Allah (S) has
in fact objected to Almighty Allah. O ‘Abd al-Rahman, most surely, he
who detests us has in fact detested Muhammad (S), and he who detests
Muhammad (S) has in fact detested the All-exalted and All-majestic Lord,
and whoever detests the All-exalted and All-majestic Lord, it will be
then binding on Allah to expose him to Hellfire and for him there shall
be no helper.*[^49]

Moreover, many traditions have conveyed the merits of visiting the tombs
of each one of the Holy Imams (‘a). In the previous discussion of
visiting the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S), we cited some traditions
appertaining to the merits of visiting the tombs of the Holy Imams (‘a)
who are buried at al-Baqi’ Cemetery. Let us now refer to more traditions
in this respect.

Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Dawud reported Ibn Sinan to have asked Imam
al-Ridha (‘a) about the reward of one who visits the tomb of his father
(Imam al-Kazim (‘a)).

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْجَنَّةُ، فَزُرْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Paradise is the reward. Therefore, you should visit him.*[^50]

According to another tradition, Zakariyya ibn Adam al-Qummi is reported
to have quoted Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ نَجَّا بَغْدَادَ لِمَكَانِ قُبُورِ الْحُسَيْنِيِّينَ
فِيهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has delivered Baghdad from destruction because it
contains the tombs of the descendants of Husayn (‘a).*[^51]

According to a number of traditions, the visitation to Imam al-Kazim’s
tomb is similar in reward to visiting Imam al-Husayn’s.

According to another tradition, visiting the tomb of Imam al-Kazim (‘a)
is similar to visiting the tombs of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam ‘Ali
(‘a), although the latter enjoy special merits.[^52]

Confirming the validity of each other, many other traditions, some of
which have been validly transmitted, hold great merits for visiting the
tomb of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (‘a).

For instance, Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Imarah has reported on the
authority of his father that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), on the authority of his
fathers, quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَتُدْفَنُ بِضْعَةٌ مِنِّي بِأَرْضِ خُرَاسَانَ، لاَ يَزُورُهَا
مُؤْمِنٌ إِلاَّ أَوْجَبَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ الْجَنَّةَ وَحَرَّمَ
جَسَدَهُ عَلَى النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A piece of my flesh will be buried in Khurasan. No faithful believer
visits him but that Almighty Allah shall be bound to award him Paradise
and prohibit Hellfire from consuming his body.*[^53]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ مَا مِنَّا إِلاَّ مَقْتُولٌ شَهِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah I swear, all of us will be killed as martyrs.*

“Who will kill you, O son of Allah’s Messenger?” the Imam (‘a) was
asked.

He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرُّ خَلْقِ اللَّهِ فِي زَمَانِي يَقْتُلُنِي بِالسَّمِّ ثُمَّ
يَدْفِنُنِي فِي دَارِ مَضِيعَةٍ وَبِلادِ غُرْبَةٍ أَلا فَمَنْ زَارَنِي
فِي غُرْبَتِي كَتَبَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ أَجْرَ مِائَةِ أَلْفِ
شَهِيدٍ وَمِائَةِ أَلْفِ صِدِّيقٍ وَمِائَةِ أَلْفِ حَاجٍّ وَمُعْتَمِرٍ
وَمِائَةِ أَلْفِ مُجَاهِدٍ وَحُشِرَ فِي زُمْرَتِنَا وَجُعِلَ فِي
الدَّرَجَاتِ الْعُلَى مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ رَفِيقَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The wickedest of all the creatures of Allah in my time will kill me
with poison and will bury me in a lost place and a strange land. Verily,
whoever visits me in that far away land, Allah, the Almighty and
Majestic, will record for him the reward of one hundred thousand
martyrs, one hundred thousand veracious ones, one hundred thousand
performers of Hajj and ‘Umrah, and one hundred thousand strivers (i.e.
warriors for Allah’s sake), and he will be resurrected with us and made
our companion in the highest ranks of Paradise.*[^54]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), is reported to have
quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَتُدْفَنُ بِضْعَةٌ مِنِّي بِأَرْضِ خُرَاسَانَ مَا زَارَهَا مَكْرُوبٌ
إِلاَّ نَفَّسَ اللهُ كُرْبَتَهُ وَلاَ مُذْنٌِب إِلاَّ غَفَرَ اللهُ
ذُنُوبَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A piece of my flesh will be buried in Khurasan. No agonized person
visits him but that Allah shall certainly relieve him, and no sinful but
that Allah shall certainly forgive him.*[^55]

As for the merits of visiting the tombs of the other Holy Imams (‘a),
Imam Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-’Askari (‘a) is reported, within the formula of
*ziyarah* reported from to him, to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبْرِي بِسُرَّ مَنْ رَأَى أَمَانٌ لأَِهْلِ الْجَانِبَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My tomb shall be in Samarra'. It is safety for the people of the two
banks (of the river).*[^56]

Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (‘a) is reported to have taught one of his companions
a supplicatory prayer, one of whose introductory paragraphs reads as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ سَأَلْتاللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَلاَّ يُخَيِّبَ مَنْ دَعَا بِهِ فِي
مَشْهَدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have besought Allah, the Glorious and Majestic, not to disappoint
anyone who repeats this supplication at my shrine.*[^57]

Muhammad al-Himyari is reported to have received a document from Imam
al-Mahdi (‘a) comprising the method of visiting him and offering
salutation to him.

Apart from these unfamiliar reports, there have not been reported any
other traditions holding the merits of visiting the tombs of the other
Holy Imams (‘a) except the general traditions to which we have referred
in the previous discussions.

At any rate, the quotations of special formulas of *ziyarah* that are
dedicated to these Holy Imams (‘a) have been founded on the fact that
visits to their tombs are too clear to require special texts, since they
can be maintained by the large number of traditions that confirm,
generally or specifically, recommendation of such visits. This may be
the reason for the existence of special formulas of these Imams (‘a) in
reference books of *ziyarah*—such as Ibn Qawlawayh’s *Kamil al-Ziyarat*,
Shaykh al-Saduq’s *al-Mazar*, and Shaykh al-Mufid’s *al-Mazar*—whose
compilers lived close to the ages of the Holy Imams (‘a).

In plain words, the existence of numerous and detailed formulas as well
as other brief formulas that are reported from the Holy Imams (‘a)
themselves clearly prove that this trend was established by the Holy
Imams (‘a) in their plans of building a virtuous community. They then
taught their followers this trend and their followers, in turn, have
taken it up since then.[^58]

Epilogue
--------

Before closing this discussion, it seems suitable to mention, yet
briefly, two significant points, the details of which will be mentioned
in another volume about the doctrinal aspect in the Ahl al-Bayt’s role
in building a virtuous community.

A) When visiting the tombs of the Holy Infallibles (‘a), a visitor is
bindingly required to avoid doing any act that may be understood as
ascribing partners to Almighty Allah or worshipping the one buried in
the visited tomb.

Owing to the seriousness of this issue, the Holy Imams (‘a) have
emphatically warned against such practices. In this respect, Zurarah has
reported that he asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a) whether it was or was not
permissible to offer a prayer among tombs.

The Imam (‘a) therefore instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ بَيْنَ خِلاَلِهَا وَلاَ تَتَّخِذْ مِنْهَا شَيْئاً قِبْلَةً،
فَإِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَهَى عَنْ ذَلِكَ
وَقَالَ: لاَ تَتَّخِذُوا قَبْرِي قِبْلَةً وَلاَ مَسْجِداً; فَإِنَّ
اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَعَنَ الَّذِينَ إتَّخَذُوا قُبُورَ
أَنْبِيَاءِهِمْ مَسَاجِدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may offer a prayer in the empty areas between tombs but, you must
never take any tomb as kiblah, since the Messenger of Allah (S), warned
against doing thus, “Do not take my tomb as kiblah or as place of
prostration, because Almighty Allah has cursed those who had taken the
tombs of their prophets as places of prostration.”*[^59]

According to another validly reported tradition, it has been
instructively warned against circumambulating tombs. Al-Halabi has
reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَشْرَبْ وَأَنْتَ قَائِمٌ، وَلاَ تَطُفْ بِقَبْرٍ، وَلاَ تَبُلْ فِي
مَاءٍ نَقِيعٍ، فَإِنَّهُ مَنْ فَعَلَ ذَلِكَ فَأَصَابَهُ شَيْءٌ فَلاَ
يَلُومَنَّ إِلاَّ نَفْسَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not drink (water) while you are standing up, do not circumambulate a
tomb, and do not urinate in stagnant water. If one violates these
instructions and, as a result, something bad happens to him, he should
then blame none but himself.* [^60]

Beyond doubt, this warning against taking the tombs as kiblah or
prayer-places and against circumambulating them, means that it is
forbidden to make these tombs in themselves kiblah by turning ones face
towards them in prayer or prostrating before them, but there is no
objection when such tombs lie in the direction of the kiblah. There is
also no objection in establishing a mosque or a building around tombs.
As understood from the topic of the tradition and the ruling mentioned
therein, this warning is intended to avoid worshipping those buried in
the tombs and deem worship of Almighty Allah far above all
considerations.

Confirming this fact, all formulas of *ziyarah* are focused on believing
in Almighty Allah as the One and Only God. They begin with statements of
deeming Him greater than all things, praising Him, and thanking Him for
granting the opportunity to visit the tomb of such holy persons, which
is in fact a divine bliss. They strengthen the relationship between
people and their religious leaders, the Holy Prophet and Imams (peace be
upon them all) because they were the best individuals to establish the
prayers, give alms, enjoin the right, forbid the wrong, strive for the
sake of Almighty Allah just as striving should be, and convey the
messages of their Lord. In addition, these formulas include many other
concepts of true monotheism.

B) The tombs of the Holy Prophet and the Imams, peace be upon them all,
are visited because they carry the bodies of these great figures who
“*are alive and provided sustenance from their Lord*,” in the words of
the Holy Qur'an. As a result, they hear the words of their visitors and
respond to their greetings and salutations. A visitor is therefore
required to derive from them all that he can attain when he visits them
in their lifetimes, to express loyalty to them, love for them, and
feelings of contact with them, to show them respect, to obey them, and
to try his best to pattern his life after their examples.

A visit to their tombs must never be only a soulless, physical exercise
that expresses nothing but sanctification of dead, yet great,
individuals and must never be blind imitation of pagan practices that
are far removed from belief in Almighty Allah and the true eternal life
of these holy persons. Such visits express belief in the eternal
existence of these holy persons who embody a divine content and a
special relationship with Almighty Allah. Once again, visits must be in
response to the divine command of showing loyalty to them, following
their examples, supporting them, and showing them reverence.

According to a validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ نَبِيٍّ وَلاَ وَصِيِّ نَبِيٍّ يَبْقَى فِي الأَرْضِ أَكْثَرَ
مِنْ ثَلاَثَةِ أَيَّامٍ حَتَّى يُرْفَعَ رُوحُهُ وَعَظْمُهُ وَلَحْمُهُ
إِلَى السَّمَاءِ، فَإِنَّمَا تُؤْتَى مَوَاضِعُ آثَارِهِمْ لأَِنَّهُمْ
يُبَلَّغُونَ مِنْ بَعِيدٍ السَّلاَمَ وَيَسْمَعُونَهُمْ فِي مَوَاضِعِ
آثَارِهِمْ مِنْ قَرِيبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When a prophet or a successor of a prophet dies, his soul, bones, and
flesh are raised to the heavens in less than three days. However, their
graves are visited because they are conveyed the greetings of those who
greet them from a distance and they can hear those who visit them at the
place of their graves.*[^61]

Visiting Saints and the Imams’ (‘a) Descendants
-----------------------------------------------

Derived from the traditions that call attention to visiting the tombs of
the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams (‘a) and deal with the logic for and the
outcomes of such visits, a general trend of visiting, building, and
frequenting these tombs has been created among the milieus of the
virtuous community. Moreover, the founding of many cities has been the
result of a shrine or a tomb of an Imam or a descendant of an Imam
therein, such as the cities of Najaf, Karbala, Qasim, Hamzah, ‘Ali
al-Sharqi, ‘Ali al-Gharbi, and many other cities in both Iraq and Iran.
Thousands of well-constructed shrines of the Holy Imams’ (‘a)
descendants or those related to them, as well as many scholars and
saints, can be seen in Iraq. In Iran, as well as other Muslim countries,
thousands of shrines are established.

The most famous shrines after the shrines of the Holy Imams (‘a) are the
following:

• Al-’Abbas ibn ‘Ali (‘a) at Karbala

• Muslim ibn ‘Aqil at Kufa

• Al-Qasim the son of Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) in Iraq

• Lady Fatimah al-Ma’sumah the daughter of Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) in
the holy city of Qum[^62]

• Sayyid Ahmad the son of Imam al-Kazim (‘a) at Shiraz

• Sayyid ‘Abd al-’Azim al-Hasani at Ray, southern Tehran[^63]

• Lady Zaynab bint ‘Ali (‘a) in Syria

According to one tradition her shrine is in Damascus, but according to
another tradition her tomb is in Cairo, along with a shrine of Imam
al-Husayn’s head.[^64]

These tombs are frequently visited by the individuals of the virtuous
community who live in their vicinities. Usually and on certain nights
and days, they gather at these tombs, which are visited by people coming
from a distance and from other countries.

The practice of visiting the tombs and reciting the formulas of
*ziyarah* therein, by the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), is a
weekly—if not a daily exercise for those who live nearby.

### Common Times of Ziyarah

Although there are no certain times for visiting the holy shrines of the
Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Infallibles (‘a) and their descendants, there
are particular religious occasions on which these shrines are visited
with special interest and in large numbers because they provide the best
opportunities for people to make a visit.

For instance, the anniversaries related to the Holy Imams (‘a) or their
descendants—such as their birthdays, deaths, and martyrdoms—acquire a
special reason for visiting the celebrated Imam (‘a) or holy person.

Thursday nights and Fridays also hold a special significance because
they are ritually preferred to the other nights and days and because
they represent the weekend of Muslims. Traditions have mentioned great
reward and merit for those who visit Imam al-Husayn’s tomb on Thursday
nights.

Other important days are the feast days because they are blessed
holidays.

In addition, the summer holiday is also a factor of encouragement since
families find a good opportunity to travel and practice the religious
ritual of visiting, especially for those who live in remote regions.
Accordingly, on such occasions, some holy shrines, such as those of Imam
Ridha, Imam al-Husayn, Imam ‘Ali,[^65] and Lady Zaynab in Damascus,
peace be upon them all, witness a great presence of visitors that
sometimes amount to more than one million.

### Comprehensive Formulas of Ziyarah

In addition to the special formulas that are exclusively addressed to a
certain holy person while visiting his tomb, there are other
comprehensive formulas that can be addressed to all the Holy Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) at their holy shrines and the shrines of their
descendants without exception.

These comprehensive formulas comprise excellent texts, with respect to
their linguistic structure, and include lofty all-inclusive contents
with respect to denotation.

The most famous of these comprehensive formulas are the following:

1. The briefest among all the other comprehensive formulas of *ziyarah*,
the *ziyarah* of *aminullah*, to which a previous reference has been
made, is the most highly considered and most precise in content, in the
words of Shaykh al-Qummi. Although brief, this formula covers statements
of greetings addressed to the visited holy person, statements of praying
to Almighty Allah for oneself, and statements of confidential talk with
Him.

2. Most comprehensive and most famous, the Major Comprehensive Formula
of *Ziyarah* (*al-Ziyarah al-Jami’ah al-Kabirah*) is reported from Imam
‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi (‘a). Describing this formula, ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi states that it is the most accurate with respect to its chain
of authority, the most inclusive, the most eloquent with respect to its
expression, the most persuasive with respect to its meaning, and the
highest in standing.[^66]

A number of scholars have undertaken the mission of explaining,
elucidating, and construing the paragraphs of this formula in general
and the sections that give a somewhat false impression in particular,
trying their best to decode such mysterious meanings in order to close
the door in the face of any possible objection or criticism. Amongst
such scholars are ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, the father of the compiler of
*Bihar al-Anwar*, Sayyid Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Karim al-Tabataba'i, known
as Sayyid al-Borojerdi, Sayyid ‘Abdullah Shabbar, and many others.

3. The comprehensive formula of *ziyarah* known as *al-Ziyarah
al-Jami’ah li-A'immat al-Mu'minin* (the Comprehensive Formula of
*Ziyarah* of the Imams of the Faithful) has been reported by Sayyid Ibn
Tawus from the Holy Imams (‘a), in *Misbah al-Za'ir.* He mentions
certain etiquettes in this formula, practiced during the journey of
visit. Coming in the second place after the abovementioned Major
Comprehensive Formula, this formula includes highly considered
doctrinal, social, and political imports. It has been also reported by
‘Allamah al-Majlisi as the fifth formula.[^67]

4. Ibn Qawlawayh, in *Kamil al-Ziyarat*, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in
*al-Kafi*, and Shaykh al-Saduq, in *‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha* and
*man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, have reported that Imam al-Ridha (‘a), when
asked about presenting oneself at the shrine of Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a),
said:

“You may pray in the mosques surrounding his tomb. It is however
acceptable to say the following (form of *Ziyarah*) at all the shrines
of the Imams (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَى اَوْلِيَاءِ اللهِ وَاَصْفِيَائِهِ اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَى
أُمَنَاءِ اللهِ وَاَحِبَّائِهِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon Allah's friends and well-chosen ones! Peace be upon
Allah's trustees and beloved ones…

*This formula of ziyarah is acceptable at all visits. You may then
invoke Almighty Allah’s blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household, peace be upon them all, by mentioning their names
respectively. You may also imprecate His curse on their enemies and then
pray to Him for any thing you wish for yourself as well as for the
believing men and women.” This formula of ziyarah is brief and
all-inclusive.*[^68]

Amounting to fourteen, ‘Allamah al-Majlisi has referred to another set
of comprehensive formulas most of which have not been ascribed to any of
the Holy Imams (‘a); therefore, there is the probability that these
formulas have been composed by ordinary people.

Within the supplications on the Day of ‘Arafat, Shaykh al-Qummi has
mentioned another comprehensive formula of *ziyarah* ascribed by Sayyid
Ibn Tawus to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a). However, this formula is lengthy and
lacks confirmation.[^69]

In addition to these comprehensive formulas, the compilers of books
regarding *ziyarah* have mentioned other formulas dedicated to the days
of the week. They have therefore dedicated each day to one or more of
the Holy Infallibles. Saturday is dedicated to the Holy Prophet, Sunday
to Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Monday to Imams Hasan and Husayn, Tuesday to
Imams Zayn al-’Abidin, al-Baqir, and al-Sadiq, Wednesday to Imams
al-Kazim, al-Ridha, al-Jawad, and al-Hadi, Thursday to Imam al-’Askari,
and Friday to Imam al-Mahdi, **peace be upon them all**. The compiler of
*Misbah al-Za'ir* has added Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' to the Holy Prophet,
peace be upon them both, by dedicating an invocation of blessings upon
her.

The author of *Bihar al-Anwar* has also mentioned a tradition
corroborating this division of days along with formulas of *ziyarah*
that are dedicated to each Imam (‘a) on his day and formulas of
invocations of blessings upon each one of them.[^70]

[^1]: - Of course, meetings that are held for commemorating Imam Husayn
(‘a) can never be substitutes for the Friday Prayers that include
discourses and performance of prayer. Yet, they can represent an
extension of the ritual content of the Friday Prayer in which we can
find the root and the Islamic line of these rituals.

[^2]: - In the coming chapter about the ritual of ziyarah, we will refer
independently to the formulas of ziyarah of Imam Husayn (‘a) as well as
the other Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) that are recommended at
certain times from both near and afar.

[^3]: - Unfortunately, such activities, sometimes performed by
individuals of the vulgar or non-religious class of the community in
violation of good public sense, are basically disallowed and are in
whole or in part too far from the goals intended by the Holy Imams (‘a).
They believe that such activities inappropriately express sentiments and
emotions (such as the practice known as tatbir which entails striking
the head with sharp instruments so as to make blood flow as an
expression of mourning for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) whose blood was shed on
such days). The scholars, the jurisprudentially mindful people, and the
well-aware segment of the virtuous community do not participate in such
incompatible activities; rather, they deny them through their
statements, words, and lastly in their hearts when they cannot find
anybody to hear when they anticipate sedition, discrepancy, or dispute
which make the harm greater than the benefit. Because of certain
political circumstances through which these rituals passed when the
tyrannical and unjust rulers worked towards annihilating them to uproot
them from their origin, some ordinary people acted fanatically regarding
these rituals in the same way they did towards Imam Husayn (‘a). At the
same time, some scholars kept silent or even permitted the practice of
these rituals for the endurance of the commemoration. This was because
the public represented the popular power that stood against the
tyrannical rulers. In addition, scholars could not find any point of
evidence proving the forbiddance or the illegality of practicing such
rituals, so they deemed them legal according to the general
jurisprudential rule of the legality of all things unless there is an
evident proof demonstrating the opposite. Furthermore, under such
circumstances, the practice of these rituals achieved an advantage or
repelled a disadvantage not to mention the fact that they were the best
way to gather and attract the attention of the masses towards
commemorating Imam Husayn’s martyrdom. However, the correct stand,
towards the practice of such rituals, taken by Ayatollah Sayyid Muhsin
al-Hakim, Imam Khumayni, and his successor, Ayatollah Sayyid ‘Ali
al-Khamana'i, in addition to many Shi’ite master scholars, was that the
disadvantage caused by such rituals to the virtuous community has become
greater than their advantage nowadays. They deform the portrait of the
virtuous community and act as an obstacle between the guidance of the
Holy Imams (‘a) and the genuine understanding of Islam on the one hand,
and the general Muslim masses on the other. Besides, the practice of
these rituals arouses a spurious issue that is forbidden by Islam,
because some people consider the practice of these rituals to be a
devotional act intended to seek nearness to Almighty Allah, while there
is no authoritative evidence (i.e. mentioned in the Holy Qur'an and
Sunnah) proving this either particularly or generally. Such practices
fall under a general topic, and all its parts are considered acts of
worship. However, Almighty Allah best knows the truth.

[^4]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:32, H. 2.

[^5]: - The month of Sha’ban is considered to be the month of birthdays
and glad occasions.

[^6]: - In the past, processions were held in the city of Samarra' on
the occasion of Imam al-Hadi’s martyrdom and people from various regions
of Iraq would participate. However, the ruling authorities of the
tyrannical regime of the Baathists, out of their antagonistic attitude
towards the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers, suppressed and then
banned the activities of that day.

[^7]: - It is well-known that Imam Hasan (‘a) was poisoned to death; he
is therefore considered martyred. [Translator]

[^8]: - The Islamic Republic of Iran has been interested in both of
these dates and gathered them in one week, giving it the name of the
Muslim Unity Week, because the Holy Prophet (S) is the best
representation of unity among Muslims. More details about this topic
will be cited in the coming chapter about the distinctive days.

[^9]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:116, H. 1.

[^10]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:117, H. 5.

[^11]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:117, H. 8.

[^12]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:120, H. 22. The same
chain of authority of this tradition is mentioned for traditions No. 23,
24, and 25 of the same reference book.

[^13]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 311-312 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kaf’ami’s al-Balad al-Amin.

[^14]: - All-inclusive and relatively concise, the book of Mafatih
al-Jinan can be considered the best and most famous book ever written in
the field of rituals and etiquettes of ziyarah and supplicatory prayers.
It was compiled by the late master researcher and traditionist, Shaykh
‘Abbas al-Qummi, recently in Farsi, based upon a variety of the most
reliable reference books. Up to now, millions of copies of this book
have been published, being read by all milieus in all countries.
Moreover, the book has been translated into Arabic and Urdu, as well as
many other languages. For thorough acquaintance with the details of all
issues, etiquettes, and best times of ziyarah and supplications, it is
highly advised to refer to this book.

[^15]: - About the etiquettes of traveling and the etiquettes of
ziyarah, refer to Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 302-306 and 306-311
respectively, where these etiquettes are mentioned briefly.

[^16]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 14:324, H. 1.

[^17]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:139, H. 2.

[^18]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:139, H. 3.

[^19]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:140, H. 7.

[^20]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:144, H. 16.

[^21]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:139, H. 4.

[^22]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:145, H. 31.

[^23]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:145, H. 36.

[^24]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:145, H. 34.

[^25]: - According to some traditions, presenting oneself in the holy
shrine of Imam Husayn (‘a) is obligatory upon those who have the ability
to do so. Although we cannot name the scholars who have issued this
verdict, it is probable that such obligation has been decided according
to the political circumstances of a certain age which required the
issuance of such a verdict, or it has been determined in order to
confirm the obligation of love for, loyalty to, and connection with the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). At any rate, such a verdict can, in the least, act as
an indication of the extremely high recommendation and desirableness of
this act, just like the high recommendation of participating in
congregational prayers, although not obligatory, by the Holy Prophet (S)
who threatened setting on fire the house of those who would abstain from
participating in them.

[^26]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:118, H. 10.

[^27]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 350. Citing it
with the general forms of ziyarah to the tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), the
author of the aforesaid book added the following words of Imam al-Baqir
(‘a): مَا قَالَ هَذَا الْكَلاَمَ وَلاَ دَعَا بِهِ أَحَدٌ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا
عِنْدَ قَبْرِ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَوْ عِنْدَ قَبْرِ أَحَدٍ مِنَ
الأَئِمَّةِ إِلاَّ رَفَعَ اللهُ دُعَاءَهُ فِي دُرْجٍ مِنْ نُورٍ وَطُبِعَ
عَلَيْهِ بِخَاتَمِ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَكَانَ
مَحْفُوظاً حَتَّى يُسَلَّمَ إِلَى قَائِمِ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَلَيْهِمُ
السَّلاَمُ، فَيَلْقَى صَاحِبَهُ بِالْبُشْرَى وَالتَّحِيَّةِ
وَالْكَرَامَةِ.Indeed, any one of our adherents (Shi’ah) who pronounces
these words at the tomb of Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) or the tomb of one of
the Holy Imams (‘a) shall certainly have his prayer lifted up on a
ladder of light, carrying the seal of the Holy Prophet’s ring. It shall
be kept so until it will be delivered to the Rising Imam of Muhammad’s
Household, Imam al-Mahdi (‘a), who will receive the one who offered the
prayer with good tidings, greetings, and honor.

[^28]: - The formulas of ziyarah dedicated to certain times can be
viewed in the book of Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 438-469. The compiler of
this book has arranged them in chronological order beginning with the
ziyarah on the first of Rajab. As for ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, in Bihar
al-Anwar Vol. 98, he has dedicated an extensive chapter to these
formulas mentioning all narrations pertaining to visiting the tomb of
Imam Husayn (‘a).

[^29]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 422-430.

[^30]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 411-422; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:134-138.

[^31]: - Visiting Imam Husayn’s tomb has preceded visiting Imam ‘Ali’s,
although visiting the tombs of all the Holy Imams (‘a) is in itself
equal in merit with the virtue of the visited Imam (‘a). However, more
emphasis has been laid in traditions on visiting Imam Husayn’s tomb than
any other. This may be because of the nature of Imam Husayn’s tragedy as
well as the political and spiritual circumstances that have encompassed
visiting his tomb. On account of such highly emphasized instruction, the
individuals of the virtuous community have paid more interest to
visiting Imam Husayn’s tomb. Another reason may be the relatively many
formulas of ziyarah that have been reported by the Holy Imams (‘a) to be
addressed to Imam Husayn (‘a).

[^32]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:257, H. 3.

[^33]: - To recognize the right of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is to acknowledge his
divinely commissioned leadership, to carry out the obligation of
obedience to him and to accept him as the true successor of the Holy
Prophet (S). [Translator]

[^34]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:257, H. 1.

[^35]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:259, H. 7.

[^36]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:260, H. 10.

[^37]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 339-361.

[^38]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:263-354.

[^39]: - Hadith al-Ghadir reads, The Holy Prophet (S) said: أَلاَ مَنْ
كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَعَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ، اللَّهُمَّ وَالِ مَنْ وَالاَهُ
وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ، وَانْصُرْ مَنْ نَصَرَهُ وَاخْذُلْ مَنْ خَذَلَهُ
وَأَدِرِ الْحَقَّ مَعَهُ حَيْثُمَا دَارَ.Behold! ‘Ali is (now) the
master of every one who regards me as his master. O Allah, (please)
support whoever supports ‘Ali; and be the enemy of whoever incurs the
hostility of ‘Ali; and aid whoever aids ‘Ali; and forsake whoever
forsakes ‘Ali; and make truth and rightness follow ‘Ali wherever he
goes.

[^40]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:359, H. 6.

[^41]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:358, H. 2.

[^42]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:358; Shaykh ‘Abbas
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, p. 374.

[^43]: - It is historically known that the beginning of the Holy
Prophet’s Divine Mission is inseparably attached to the revelation of
the Holy Qur'an, which undoubtedly was in the month of Ramadhan and,
more specifically, on the Night of Qadr, as is maintained by the
following two verses of the Holy Qur'an: شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي
أُنْزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ (185)The month of Ramadhan is that in which
the Qur'an was revealed. (2:185)إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ
الْقَدْرِ (1)Surely, We revealed it on the grand night. (97:1)Therefore,
a question is always asked: On which date did the Holy Prophet’s Divine
Mission start? However, to answer we say that the public revelation of
the first part of the Holy Qur'an was on the twenty-seventh of Rajab,
while its revelation as a whole to the Holy Prophet was in the month of
Ramadhan and on the Night of Qadr. It is well-known that there were two
kinds of revelations of the Holy Qur'an: The first kind was the gradual,
progressive (i.e. partial) revelation, which lasted for a period of
twenty-three years beginning with the Holy Prophet’s Divine Appointment
up to His departure from the material world. The other kind was the
entire revelation that took place in the month of Ramadhan and on the
Night of Qadr, which is called the stage of perfection. Referring to
this division in the revelation of the Holy Qur'an, Almighty Allah has
said: كِتَابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آيَاتُهُ ثُمَّ فُصِّلَتْ مِنْ لَدُنْ حَكِيمٍ
خَبِيرٍ (1)This is a Scripture the revelations whereof are perfected and
then expounded. It comes from One Wise, Informed. (11:1)However,
Almighty Allah knows best.

[^44]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:383. Shaykh al-Qummi has
put forth a question as to why these two formulas of ziyarah that are
dedicated to the anniversaries of the Holy Prophet’s birthday and his
Divine Mission are exclusively addressed to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) rather than
the Holy Prophet (S) himself. He then answers that because Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) is of the same self as the Holy Prophet (S), to visit him should be
the same as visiting the Holy Prophet (S). Furthermore, this dedication
to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) has been made to stress the precedence of Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) over all the other companions of the Holy Prophet (S).
Nevertheless, he has been exposed to impartiality in this regard. Shaykh
al-Qummi then cites two traditions confirming this fact. See Mafatih
al-Jinan, pp. 378-379.

[^45]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:355-379. Shaykh al-Qummi
has noted that the words of this formula of ziyarah are greatly similar
to the words of the one dedicated to the anniversary of the Divine
Mission.

[^46]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:145, H. 31.

[^47]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:117, H. 5.

[^48]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 100:119, H. 18.

[^49]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 100:121, H. 26.

[^50]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:2, H. 5.

[^51]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:2, H. 6.

[^52]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:4, H. 19.

[^53]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:31, H. 1.

[^54]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:32, H. 2.

[^55]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:33, H. 10.

[^56]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:448, H. 2.

[^57]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 50:127, H. 5.

[^58]: - Such formulas of ziyarah can be found in Mafatih al-Jinan and
volumes 100-102 of Bihar al-Anwar.

[^59]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 100:128, H. 7, as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s ‘Ilal al-Shara'i’.

[^60]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 100:126, H. 3. Having cited
this tradition, the author of the book assumed that circumambulating a
tomb might have meant excreting on a tomb, because the Arabic word ‘taf’
may be interpreted as circumambulation or excretion. He then cites
points of evidence inferred from the Arabic language and from other
traditions to prove his claim. Actually, this assumption is closer to
reality than the earlier because it suits the other parts of the
tradition all of which concentrate on anticipation of a physical
contaminant. However, Almighty Allah knows best.

[^61]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 100:130, H. 13, as quoted
from Ibn Qawlawayh’s Kamil al-Ziyarat. Apart from the meaning of raising
to the heavens mentioned in this tradition and elaborately discussed by
‘Allamah al-Majlisi, the most important point in this tradition is the
last paragraph on which the Holy Imams (‘a) wanted to shed light.

[^62]: - About this great lady, some traditions hold that Imam al-Ridha
(‘a) has recommended visiting her tomb in Qum, saying: مَنْ زَارَهَا
فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.Paradise is the reward of one who visits her.This
tradition has been reported in the books of Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ibn
Qawlawayh and Thawab al-A’mal and ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh
al-Saduq. See ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:265, H. 1.

[^63]: - Some traditions, yet incompletely transmitted, hold that Imam
Hasan al-’Askari (‘a) has likened a visit to the tomb of ‘Abd al-’Azim
al-Hasani to a visit of Imam Husayn’s tomb. See ‘Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 102:268.

[^64]: - Historians disagree about the place of Lady Zaynab’s tomb. Some
say that she was buried in the outskirts of Damascus, others in Cairo,
Egypt, and others in other places. However, the first two burial places
are familiarly known by the followers and devotees of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) as well as by Muslims in general. About the burial place of Imam
Husayn’s head there is also disagreement. Some believe that the head was
buried in Damascus while others believe it to have been carried to Cairo
and buried there. However, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
generally believe that the head was buried in Karbala with the Imam’s
body by the captives when they returned from Kufah.

[^65]: - Under certain circumstances, the number of visitors to some
holy shrines decreases relatively because of the political conditions of
the country in which these shrines exist. For instance, there was a
remarkable decrease in the number of the visitors to the holy shrines in
Iraq because the criminal regime of the Baathists were hostile towards
the visitors, banned such visits, and exerted pressure on them and on
all people generally. In Iran during the days of the eight-year
Iraq-Iran war imposed on Iran and due to the blockade exercised on the
Islamic Republic of Iran by the governments of the countries where
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) live, the number of visitors to the
holy shrines decreased. However, it can be obviously observed that the
number has began to incredibly increase these days, as reports have it
that five million persons presented themselves in the holy shrine of
Imam Ridha (‘a) to participate in the pilgrimage of Arba’in last year,
and three million for the pilgrimage on al-Ghadir. On other occasions,
several million present themselves at this holy shrine to celebrate
other anniversaries.

[^66]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:144. Some details about
this formula of ziyarah have been mentioned in the pages 127-144 of this
reference book. It has been also mentioned in Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi’s
Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 544.

[^67]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:162; Shaykh ‘Abbas
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, Appendix, pp. 577.

[^68]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:126; Shaykh ‘Abbas
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 543.

[^69]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:126-209; Shaykh ‘Abbas
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 552.

[^70]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 102:210-230.


