Chapter 2: The General Rituals Of Islam Rituals Of Specific Days And Nights
===========================================================================

**1. The Night of Qadr**

**2. ‘Id al-*****fiṭr*** **and ‘Id al-A*****ﬁṭHā***

**3. Thursday Night and Friday**

**4.** **The Four NightsThe Four Nights**

**5. Day of ‘Ash*****ū*****r*****ā*****'**

**6. ‘*****AshūRā'*** **and the Umayyads**

**7. Other Days**

Rituals Of Specific Days And Nights
-----------------------------------

Islam has defined certain laws and duties to be performed as religious
rituals on specified days and nights. For all Muslims, the first of
Shawwal (‘Id al-Fitr), the tenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah (‘Id al-Adhha), and
Fridays are known to be days of performing certain Islamic rituals. On
the first two days, considered the most celebrated feast days in Islam,
a prayer similar to the congregational Friday Prayer is offered, but
with a slight difference.

The ritual sermon is delivered after completing the prayer, while the
sermon of the Friday Prayer is delivered prior to the performance of the
prayer. The other difference is that the Friday Prayer is offered after
midday, while the ‘«d Prayer is offered during the early hours of the
day.

On the two days of ‘Id, it is obligatory to give alms under a certain
title. On ‘Id al-Fitr, a poor-rate called *zakat al-fitrah*
(fast-breaking rate) must be paid, and on ‘Id al-Adhha, an offering must
be made by a pilgrim who is performing the obligatory Hajj. Furthermore,
it is highly recommended to give voluntary alms on these days,
especially in the form of slaughtering an animal as an offering by those
other than pilgrims performing the Hajj. Other rituals and acts of
worship, such as certain supplications and exchanging visits among
brethren-in-faith and relatives, are also highly advised and customarily
carried out by Muslims.

On Fridays, it is obligatory to hold the well-known Friday Prayer, of
which an indication has been made in the Holy Qur'an,[^1] which is
sometimes binding and at other times optional according certain
conditions mentioned by scholars in their theses of practical laws
(*Risalah*).

Suspending all their usual daily activities, Muslims dedicate the days
of ‘«d to acts of worship and righteous deeds.

The Night of Qadr is the most known amongst the nights specified for
performing specific rituals. It is the night that Almighty Allah has
bestowed with special honor and esteem, preferring it to one thousand
months. It is also the night on which He revealed the Holy Qur'an and
specified for decreeing the affairs of man and making clear every wise
affair. He has thus said:

> إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ (1) وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا
> لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ (2) لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ أَلْفِ شَهْرٍ
> (3) تَنَزَّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ فِيهَا بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ مِنْ
> كُلِّ أَمْرٍ (4) سَلَامٌ هِيَ حَتَّى مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ (5)

***Begin with the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
Surely, We revealed it on the grand night. And what will make you
comprehend what the grand night is? The grand night is better than a
thousand months. The angels and the Spirit descend in it by the
permission of their Lord for every affair. Peace prevails until the
break of dawn. (97:1-5)***

He has also said:

> إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ إِنَّا كُنَّا
> مُنْذِرِينَ (3) فِيهَا يُفْرَقُ كُلُّ أَمْرٍ حَكِيمٍ (4)

***Surely, We revealed it on a blessed night. Surely, We are ever
warning. Therein, every wise affair is made distinct, a command from Us.
Surely, We are the senders of messengers. (44:3-5)***

There is a consensus among Muslims on honoring this blessed night, which
falls in the month of Ramadhan as is understood from the Holy Qur'an,
although there is disagreement as to which night of Ramadhan it is.

### The Ahl al-Bayt’s Method Concerning the Rituals of Particular Days and Nights

In this discussion, I refer to the Islamic method preserved by the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and provided to the Muslim community through their
knowledge of the religious code of law—one of their distinctive
features.

The Night Of Qadr
-----------------

In terms of honor, significance, and standing, the Night of Qadr is
considered the most important night in the whole year, since Almighty
Allah has revealed an entire Surah (i.e. chapter of the Holy Qur'an)
with regard to it, introducing it as the night on which all wise affairs
are made clear. In addition, many traditions report the merit,
distinction, significance, and outcome of this night. Here are some
examples in which the Holy Imams (‘a) are reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ فِيهَا لَمْ تَزَلْ تَخْفِقُ بِأَجْنِحَتِهَا
بِالسَّلاَمِ وَالرَّحْمَةِ مِنْ لَدُنْ صَلاَةِ الْمَغْرِبِ إِلَى
طُلُوعِ الْفَجْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Night of Qadr, the angels keep on flapping their wings with
peace and mercy from the time of the sunset prayer (maghrib) up to the
break of dawn.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لِكَوْكَبٍ أَنْ يُرْجَمَ بِهِ فِيهَا حَتَّى يُصْبِحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Night of Qadr, no flaming asteroid is thrown until morning.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعِبَادَةُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ فِيهَا خَيْرٌ مِنْ عِبَادَةِ
أَلْفِ شَهْرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Night of Qadr, worship and righteous acts are more valuable than
the devotional acts of one thousand months.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْعَمَلُ فِيهَا يُعَادِلُ التَّهَيُّؤَ لِلْجِهَادِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ
أَلْفَ شَهْرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Devotional acts on the Night of Qadr are equal (in reward) to preparing
oneself to struggle for the sake of Allah for one thousand months.*[^2]

In conclusion, the merits of the Night of Qadr as inferred from the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah are:

1. The Night of Qadr is an opportunity and a bliss that Almighty Allah
has granted the individuals of this Muslim community so that they may
express their existence and embody their goals and aspirations by
performing righteous acts, showing repentance to Almighty Allah, and
reverently imploring His Mercy. When he chooses the most appropriate
time for performing a deed, man can achieve whatever he wishes to
achieve and then give to his deeds great and expansive aspects and
values that should be more extensive than the defined term of man’s life
in this world.

This fact is visible in some deeds performed under special circumstances
and regarded as the best time for doing them. For instance, the Holy
Prophet (S), describing the situation of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) when he
responded to ‘Amr ibn ‘Abd-Wudd’s mocking remarks against Islam and
bravely fought and killed him in the Battle of al-Khandaq (the ditch),
is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَرْبَةُ عَلِيٍّ يَوْمَ الْخَنْدَقِ تَعْدِلُ عِبَادَةَ الثَّقَلَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The stroke of ‘Ali on that day of the Battle of al-Khandaq is equal to
the total worship of both groups of creatures (men and jinn).*

This was because of its value in that specific time and under those
special circumstances.

2. The Night of Qadr is the night on which decrees about the affairs of
humans are decided. In plain words, it is the night wherein all divine
decisions for the whole year are taken. Generally, divine decisions are
made according to universal (i.e. material) order and discipline and
according to the divine system that rules the sequence of causes and
effects. At other times, divine decisions are made according to divine
commands that are beyond the limits of the universal system. To this
fact, the Holy Qur'an has referred in many verses, such as the
following:

> وَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ (50)

***Our command is but as the twinkling of an eye. (54:50)***

> إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
> فَيَكُونُ (82)

***His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it, “Be”
and, it is. (36:82)***

The month of Ramadhan is a time for the faithful to ascend the ranks of
perfection by performing acts of devotion, and also a time to gain
Divine decisions that are compatible with Divine mercy.

### The Date of the Night of Qadr

Although traditions reported from the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) agree that the Night falls in the month of Ramadhan, they
disagree about its precise date. Some traditions hold that such
disagreement, or concealment, has been done on purpose, and it is aimed
at making the righteous people practice as many righteous deeds,
supplications, whispered prayers, and implorations to Him as possible.
In this respect, one of the Infallibles (‘a), when asked which night was
the Night of Power (the twenty-first or the twenty-third of Ramadhan),
he did not identify it but said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَيْسَرَ لَيْلَتَيْنِ فِي مَا تَطْلُبُ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So easy it is to act on two nights in order to win one’s desire.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَلَيْكَ أَنْ تَفْعَلَ خَيْراً فِي لَيْلَتَيْنِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What will harm you if you act righteously on two nights?*

The nineteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-third nights of Ramadhan are
familiarly known to be the Nights of Qadr. However, the last is the most
confirmed, according to the many traditions available. This night is
also called the Night of al-Juhani, one of the Muslims who lived in the
outskirts of Madinah. When al-Juhani asked the Holy Prophet (S) to
identify for him a night in which he should occupy himself exclusively
in acts of worship, the Holy Prophet (S) named the twenty-third night of
Ramadhan. Using this as proof, traditions mention more acts of worship
to be practiced on this night than any other night.[^3]

### Devotional Acts on the Night of Qadr

Consistent with the nature of the Night of Qadr, the devotional acts
dedicated to this night are mostly common to the three nights. The acts
are divided into two categories: common (to the three nights) and
particular (to each night).

Traditions urge that the following acts be practiced on all three
nights, one of which is expected to be the Night of Qadr:

• Bathe

• Offer a two-unit prayer imploring divine forgiveness

• Utter the supplication of release from Hellfire and granting of all
requests in the name of the Holy Qur'an

• Utter the supplication of granting requests in the name of the Holy
Qur'an and the faithful believers and then beseech in the names of
Almighty Allah and the Fourteen Infallibles (‘a)

• Perform *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)

• Spend the whole night in acts of worship

• Offer one hundred units of prayer, utter as many appeals for divine
forgiveness as possible, and supplicate for worldly and religious
desires for oneself and one’s parents, relatives, friends, and other
believers, both alive and dead

• Utter as many invocations of blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household (S) as possible

• Utter litanies of praise, thankfulness, glorification, and exaltation,
exclaim God to be the Most Great, and profess Him as the One and Only
God:

Specific supplications have been mentioned for these nights. In this
respect, Shaykh al-Kaf’ami reports Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) prayed
using the supplication that begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي اَمْسَيْتُ لَكَ عَبْداً دَاخِراً لاَ اَمْلِكُ
لِنَفْسِي نَفْعاً وَلا ضَرّاً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: surely, I am on this evening Your passive slave; I have no
control over harm or benefit to myself…

Reading the famous *Du’a' al-Jawshan al-Kabir* and *Du’a' al-Jawshan
al-Saghir* supplications are also reported to be recommended on these
nights since these two supplications comprise verses expressing
glorification of Almighty Allah as well as proclamations of His
greatness and declarations that He is the One and Only God. These
supplications can fill the whole night and thus fulfill the recommended
act of spending the whole night in devotional acts.

• Seeking more religious knowledge—concerning religious laws, ethics,
and concepts—is regarded, in the words of Shaykh al-Saduq, as the best
act one may perform on these nights[^4]

Besides these, there are certain acts dedicated to each of these three
nights.

Imploring divine forgiveness (*istighfar*) one hundred times and
repeatedly invoking His curse on the slayers of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) are two
acts that are identified to be performed exclusively on the nineteenth
night. This is because on this night, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) was fatally wounded
by the poisoned sword of ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljam, the accursed
Kharijite.

There are also two other supplications generally repeated on every night
of Ramadhan, and on this night exclusively. The first supplication
begins with this statement:

O Allah: at the time of making decisions that are inevitable…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ اِجْعَلْ فِيمَا تَقْضِي وَتُقَدِّرُ مِنَ الاَمْرِ
الْمَحْتُومِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

The second begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا ذَا الَّذِي كَانَ قَبْلَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He Who has always been there before all things…

Being more probably the Nights of Power, the twenty-first and
twenty-third nights of Ramadhan are marked by additional devotional
acts. On the twenty-first night, the acts and supplications of the last
ten nights of Ramadhan, distinguished by devotional acts, also begin. On
these nights, the Holy Prophet (S) used to fold his bed and ready
himself for worship. He furthermore used to confine himself to the
mosque where a tent made of camel hair was set up for him.

Traditions have also laid emphasis on spending the twenty-first night of
Ramadhan with prayers, supplications, invocations of blessings upon the
Holy Prophet and his Household (S), and cursing their enemies and
oppressors. On this night, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) departed life as a martyr; it
is therefore advised to read his *ziyarah*.[^5]

The most probable Night of Qadr, the twenty-third night of Ramadhan has
other special acts, including recitations from the Holy Qur'an,
especially certain *surahs* such as *al-’Ankabut, al-Rum,* and
*al-Dukhan*, as well as repetition of Surah al-Qadr one thousand times.
It is also highly recommended to perform or read the *ziyarah* of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) on this night.

The following supplication to hasten the relief of Imam al-Mahdi (‘a) is
highly recommended:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ كُنْ لِوَلِيِّكَ الْحُجَّةِ ابْنِ الْحَسَنِ صَلَوَاتُكَ
عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَى آبَائِهِ فِي هَذِهِ السَّاعَةِ وَفِي كُلِّ سَاعَةٍ
وَلِيّاً وَحَافِظاً وَقَائِداً وَنَاصِراً وَدَلِيلاً وَعَيْناً حَتَّى
تُسْكِنَهُ اَرْضَكَ طَوْعاً وَتُمَتِّعَهُ فِيهَا طَوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, (say) “be” for Your representative, al-Hujjah (the Proof), the
son of Hasan—Your blessings be on him and on his forefathers—now and for
all time, as our Imam, guardian, leader, helper, guide, and watcher such
that You permit him to prevail on Your lands extending his reign
forever.

It is of course highly advisable to repeat this supplication at all
times.

Some short supplications mentioned in reference books of supplications
are also recommended for this night.

Finally, it seems important to say that the days that follow the Nights
of Qadr enjoy special value and significance similar to the Nights of
Qadr just as Thursday nights (the eves of Friday) acquire special
significance from Fridays. This is maintained by validly reported
traditions.[^6]

Id Al- Fitr and Id al-Adha
--------------------------

The two days of ‘«d merge with each other in a set of common laws:

• It is forbidden to fast on these two days.

• It is obligatory, or recommended under certain conditions, to perform
a special prayer the details and conditions of which are available in
the books of practical laws by scholars.

• It is obligatory, or recommended under certain conditions, to defray a
special poor-rate.

• It is recommended to supplicate Almighty Allah and exchange visits
with brethren-in-faith.

Moreover, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have emphasized other matters for these
two days:

• Carry out certain acts and utter certain litanies and supplicatory
prayers, especially on ‘Id al-Fitr: In *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah*,
there is a supplication to be read exclusively on these two days.

• Bathe

• Adorn oneself, use perfume, wear one’s best clothes, and be clean

• Perform the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)

• The special merit of these two days doubles the reward of any
recommended act

### Thursday Nights and Fridays

Thursday nights and Fridays excel all other days in eminence and honor.
In traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), Friday is described as
a most luminous day. Every hour Almighty Allah releases six hundred
thousand persons from Hellfire, doubles rewards for good deeds, erases
the punishments of the evildoings committed thereon, raises ranks,
grants requests, relieves people from agonies, responds to prayers,
forgives sins, accepts repentance, sends sustenance, and takes vengeance
against the offenders on behalf of the offended.

In this connection, let us cite three validly reported traditions:

1. Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ سَيِّدُ الأَيَّامِ؛ يُضَاعِفُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ فِيهِ الْحَسَنَاتِ وَيَمْحُو فِيهِ السَّيِّئَاتِ وَيَرْفَعُ
فِيهِ الدَّرَجَاتِ وَيَسْتِجِيبُ فِيهِ الدَّعَوَاتِ وَيَكْشِفُ فِيهِ
الْكُرُبَاتِ وَيَقْضِي فِيهِ الْحَوَائِجَ الْعِظَامَ. وَهُوَ يَوْمُ
الْمَزِيدِ؛ للهِ فِيهِ عُتَقَاءُ وَطُلَقَاءُ مِنَ النَّارِ. مَا دَعَا
فِيهِ أَحَدٌ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَعَرَفَ حَقَّهُ وَحُرْمَتَهُ إِلاَّ كَانَ
حَقّاً عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ يَجْعَلَهُ مِنْ عُتَقَاءِهِ
وَطُلَقَاءِهِ مِنَ النَّارِ. فَإِنْ مَاتَ فِي يَوْمِهِ أَوْ لَيْلَتِهِ
مَاتَ شَهِيداً وَبُعِثَ آمِناً، وَمَا إسْتَخَفَّ أَحَدٌ بِحُرْمَتِهِ
وَضَيَّعَ حَقَّهُ إِلاَّ كَانَ حَقّاً عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ
يُصْلِيَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَتُوبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Friday is the master of days. On Fridays, Almighty Allah
doubles the rewards (for good deeds), erases punishments (for
evildoing), raises ranks (of faith), responds to prayers, relieves
people from misfortunes, and grants grand requests. Friday is the day of
bonus. Almighty Allah, on Fridays, releases numerous individuals from
Hellfire. When a person prays to Him on Friday, believing in the true
standing and the sanctity of this day, it will be incumbent upon
Almighty Allah to release that person from Hellfire. If that individual
dies on that day or its eve, he or she will be considered like a martyr
and be secure when resurrected (on the Day of Judgment). Conversely, if
anyone belittles the sanctity of this day and disrespects its standing,
it will be incumbent upon Almighty Allah to cast that person into
Hellfire unless he or she repents thereafter.*[^7]

2. Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا طَلَعَتِ الشَّمْسُ بِيَوْمٍ أَفْضَلَ مِنْ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ.
وَإِنَّ كَلاَمَ الطَّيْرِ إِذَا لَقِيَ بَعْضُهَا بَعْضاً: سَلاَمٌ
سَلاَمٌ، يَوْمٌ صَالِحٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sunlight never fell on a day better than Friday. When birds meet each
other on this day, they greet each other, saying: Peace! Good day!*[^8]

3. Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ وَافَقَ مِنْكُمْ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ فَلاَ يَشْتَغِلَنَّ بِشَيْءٍ
غَيْرِ الْعِبَادَةِ، فَإِنَّ فِيهِ يُغْفَرُ لِلْعِبَادِ وَتُنَزَّلُ
عَلَيْهِمُ الرَّحْمَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On Fridays, do not engage yourselves with anything other than acts of
worship, for the servants’ shortcomings are forgiven and Divine mercy
descends on Fridays.*[^9]

When meeting the qualifications and conditions mentioned by master
jurisprudents in their theses of practical laws, it is also obligatory
to perform the Friday Prayer.

In addition, another set of recommended acts are performed on Thursday
nights and Fridays. The details of these acts can be referred to in
books on supplications and recommended acts. However, the following list
comprises the most prominent of these acts:

• Bathe (*ghusl*) on Fridays (some scholars deem this to be obligatory)

• Recite the Holy Qur'an, especially Surahs al-Kahf (No. 18), al-Rahman
(No. 55), al-Ahqaf (No. 46), al-Mu'minun (No. 23), and al-Waqi’ah (No.
56).

• Spend liberally on dependents, give alms, and do charitable acts,
especially for one’s family members

• Wear dressy clothes, be neat and tidy, and use perfume

• Offer special prayers, such as those attributed to the Holy Prophet,
Imam ‘Ali, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra', and Ja’far al-Tayyar (the
two-winged), peace be upon them all, as well as prayers attributed to
the Holy Imams (‘a). Repeat as frequently as possible the invocation of
blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household (S).

• Read supplications and litanies dedicated to Fridays, such as *Du’a'
Kumayl*, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin’s Supplication on Friday, *Du’a'
al-Simat*, and many others, such as the two supplications beginning with
the following two statements respectively:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ مَنْ تَهَيّأَ فِي هَذَا الْيَوْمِ اَوْ تَعَبَّأَ اَوْ
اَعَدَّ وَاسْتَعَدَّ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, if one, on this day, prepares oneself or takes pains or gets
ready …

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ يَا شَاهِدَ كُلِّ نَجْوَى وَمَوْضِعَ كُلِّ شَكْوَى…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, Witness of all the secrets of the hearts, Hearer of all
complaints…

• Repeat the Four Statements of Glorification (*al-Tasbihat al-Arba’ah*)
and the other famous litanies

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) on Thursday nights and the
Holy Prophet (S) and the other Holy Imams (‘a) on Friday mornings. Visit
graves and one’s brothers-in-faith.

• Learn about religious laws and affairs

### The Four Eves

The night before the Day of ‘Id al-Fitr, the night before the Day of ‘Id
al-Adhha, the eve of the 1st of Rajab, and the eve of the fifteenth of
Sha’ban are four nights having the same significance and merit and are
recommended to be spent in acts of worship.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported, on the authority of his fathers, that
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) liked devoting himself to worship four nights in the
year: the eve of the 1st of Rajab, the eve of the 15th of Sha’ban, the
night before ‘Id al-Fitr, and the night before immolation (‘Id
al-Adhha).

There are some common acts advised for these four nights. They are as
follows:

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)—an act performed on all
distinctive nights of the year, as is maintained from a general review
of this act

• Bathe on all these nights except the night before ‘Id al-Adhha

• Read the supplication that begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَائِمَ الْفَضْلِ عَلَى الْبَريِّةِ يَا بَاسِطَ الْيَدَيْنِ
بِالْعَطِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He Who is continuous in His Favor upon creatures! O He Who
openhandedly bestows gifts!....

Each one of these four nights is spent in worship.

### The Night Before ‘Id al-Fitr

Numerous traditions talk about the merits of spending this night in acts
of worship. Reports say that this night is not less significant than the
Night of Qadr. Recommended acts:

• Bathe

• Spend the night in acts of worship, such as prayers, supplications,
entreaties for divine forgiveness; stay overnight in mosques

• Utter the “Four Statements of Exclaiming Almighty Allah’s Greatness”
(*al-Takbirat al-Arba’ah*) immediately after Sunset, in the Evening, at
Dawn, and during ‘Id Prayers

• Offer a variety of prayers in order to pass the whole night in acts of
worship

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)

• Read the supplication that begins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَائِمَ الْفَضْلِ عَلَى الْبَريِّةِ يَا بَاسِطَ الْيَدَيْنِ
بِالْعَطِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He Who is continuous in His Favor upon creatures! O He Who
openhandedly bestows gifts!....

### The Night Before ‘Id al-Adhha

The doors of the skies are opened on this blessed night. Special
supplications are reportedly read on this night while stopping at
*al-mash’ar al-haram* (the Sacred Place of Rituals) by those performing
the Hajj Pilgrimage rites. Other devotional acts, in addition to
spending the night in acts of worship, offering prayers, and
supplicating include:

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)

• Read the supplication that begins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَائِمَ الْفَضْلِ عَلَى الْبَريِّةِ يَا بَاسِطَ الْيَدَيْنِ
بِالْعَطِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He Who is continuous in His Favor upon creatures! O He Who
openhandedly bestows gifts!....

• Offer a six-unit prayer with special recitations.[^10]

It is not improbable to say that bathing on this night is one of its
recommended acts, although no tradition confirms it. However, this act
has been seen as a phenomenon attached to the acts of all blessed nights
and days. Yet, Almighty Allah knows best.

It is also remarkable that nothing important has been mentioned in
traditions about the devotional acts on this night, nor have books on
devotional acts and supplications mentioned any special act for this
night. The reason may be that the acts of this night have come within
the rituals of the Hajj Pilgrimage.

### The Eve of the 1st of Rajab

A set of acts mentioned in books on recommended acts and supplications
on this blessed night are:

• Bathe. Some scholars report the Holy Prophet (S) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ إغْتَسَلَ فِي أَوَّلِ رَجَبٍ وَوَسَطِهِ وَآخِرِهِ خَرَجَ مِنْ
ذُنُوبِهِ كَيَوْمِ وَلَدَتْهُ أُمُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one bathes himself on the first, middle, and last of Rajab, he will
be released from all of his sins and return pure of sins just as on the
day of his birth.*

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)

• Offer a variety of prayers dedicated to this night

• Read some supplications dedicated to this night[^11]

### The Eve of the 15th of Sha’ban

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have honored and glorified this exceptionally
blessed night. For example, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported that when
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) was asked about the merits of the eve of mid-Sha’ban,
he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ أَفْضَلُ اللَّيَالِي بَعْدَ لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ، فِيهَا يَمْنَحُ
اللهُ الْعِبَادَ فَضْلَهُ وَيَغْفِرُ لَهُمْ بِمَنِّهِ، فَاجْتَهِدُوا
فِي الْقُرْبَةِ إِلَى اللهِ تَعَالَى فِيهَا; فَإِنَّهَا لَيْلَةٌ آلَى
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ أَلاَّ يَرُدَّ سَائِلاً فِيهَا مَا
لَمْ يَسْأَلِ اللهَ الْمَعْصِيَةَ. وَإِنَّهَا اللَّيْلَةُ الَّتِي
جَعَلَهَا اللهُ لَنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ بِإِزَاءِ مَا جَعَلَ لَيْلَةَ
الْقَدْرِ لِنَبِيِّنَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، فَاجْتَهِدُوا فِي دُعَاءَ
اللهِ تَعَالَى وَالثَّنَاءِ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is the most favorable night after the Night of Qadr. On this night,
Almighty Allah bestows His favors upon His servants and grants them His
pardon out of His conferral of benefit to them. Therefore, you should
exert all efforts to seek nearness to Him on this night, because He—the
Majestic and Honorable—has decided not to reject any asker as long as he
does not ask for an act of disobedience to Him. Almighty Allah has
chosen this night for us, the Ahl al-Bayt, in the same way as He has
chosen the Night of Qadr for our Prophet, peace be upon him. You should
thus pray and thank Him diligently.*[^12]

According to another validly reported tradition, Zurarah asked Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) to say something about the eve of mid-Sha’ban. The Imam
(‘a) thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَغْفِرُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهَا مِنْ خَلْقِهِ لأَكْثَرَ مِنْ
عَدَدِ شَعْرِ مُغْرَى كَلْبٍ، وَيُنْزِلُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهَا
مَلاَئِكَةً إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا وَإِلَى الأَرْضِ بِمَكَّةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On this night, Almighty Allah forgives as many of His creatures as the
hairs on the horses of the Kalb Tribe. He also orders angels to descend
to the lowest sky and to the earth—Makkah.*[^13]

One of the most magnificent blessings of the last hours of this night is
that the Twelfth Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his Relief, was born in
the year AH 255.

In addition to the general recommendation of passing this night in
devotional acts, specific acts reported are:

• Bathe, for it results in alleviating the punishments for one’s sins

• Read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a): many traditions have come
that lay stress on the significance of this *ziyarah*, as previously
cited.

• Read special supplications, one of which is the famous *Du’a' Kumayl*
Supplication, immediately after offering the Shaf’ Prayer during the
last hours of the night

• Invoke blessings of Almighty Allah upon the Holy Prophet and his
Immaculate Household (S)

• Offer special prayers, one of which is the famous prayer attributed to
Ja’far al-Tayyar

• Perform the prostrations the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have
performed on this night[^14]

The Four Blessed Days
---------------------

The four most blessed days of the year are the 27th of Rajab (the Day of
Divine Mission), the 17th of Rabi’ I (the Holy Prophet’s birthday), the
18th of Dhu’l-Hijjah (the Day of Ghadir), and the 25thof Dhu’l-Qa’dah
(the Day of Spreading the Earth).

These days enjoy great merits. It is therefore better to introduce them
according to the traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), and
present all the devotional acts dedicated to these days and mentioned in
books on devotional acts and supplications.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) reported fasting on these days as equal in reward
to fasting for sixty months.

### The Day of Divine Mission

The Day of Divine Mission, the 27th of Rajab is the day on which the
Holy Prophet (S) was practically designated as a Messenger of Almighty
Allah and his Prophethood was revealed to him. The recommended acts on
this day are as follows:

• Bathe

• Fast

• Repeatedly invoke blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Immaculate
Household (S)

• Read *ziyarah* of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam ‘Ali (‘a)

• Offer a special twelve-unit prayer, with each two units separated by a
*taslim* statement, done in a special way, followed by recitation of the
Holy Qur'an and a special litany

• Read the supplication that is reported from Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a)
who recited it on his way to Baghdad when Harun, the ‘Abbasid ruler,
ordered his police forces to summon the Imam (‘a) to Baghdad after being
arrested on this day

The eve of the Day of Divine Mission is also a blessed night for which
certain acts of worship are dedicated.[^15]

### The Holy Prophet’s Birthday

The 17th of Rabi’ I is a blessed day on which the Holy Prophet (S) was
born according to the most famous traditions believed as authentic by
the Twelver Imamiyyah Shi’ah.

The following devotional acts are recommended:

• Bathe

• Fast

• Perform the *ziyarah* of the Holy Prophet (S) directly by visiting his
holy tomb or indirectly by addressing him with definite statements of
salutation from afar. It is also recommended to perform or read
*ziyarah* of Imam ‘Ali (‘a).

• Offer a special prayer followed by a special supplication cited for
this day[^16]

### The Day of Ghadir

According to traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the Day of
Ghadir, the 18th of Dhu’l-Hijjah, is considered the most significant of
all festival days. On this day, Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), was appointed as the successor and Imam after the Holy Prophet
(S). Immediately after the completion of the last ritual pilgrimage of
the Holy Prophet (S), known as the Farewell Pilgrimage, this declaration
came and subsequently the Holy Prophet (S) ordered all Muslims to swear
allegiance to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as their next leader. This took place at a
crossroad where the Holy Prophet (S) ordered all Muslims to gather to
hear his declaration and appointment of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as their next
leader. At this very place, he received a divine revelation, saying:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ
> وَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ
> مِنَ النَّاسِ (67)

***O Messenger, deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord.
And if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message. And Allah
will protect you from the people. (5:67)***

Having received this divine command, the Holy Prophet (S) climbed a
pulpit made of the saddles of camels and stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَهَذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ. اللَّهُمَّ وَالِ مَنْ
وَالاَهُ وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Behold! ‘Ali is now the master of everyone who has regarded me as his
master. O Allah, (please do) support whoever supports ‘Ali and be the
enemy of whoever incurs the hostility of ‘Ali…*[^17]

This declaration came after the Holy Prophet (S) had called the audience
to witness that he had conveyed the Divine Message perfectly, and that
he had a greater claim on the faithful believers than they had on
themselves.

This event has been reported by Muslim traditionists and historians of
various sects.

After this declaration, Almighty Allah revealed the verse known as the
Verse of Perfecting the Religion, which reads,

> الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
> نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ الْإِسْلَامَ دِينًا (3)

***This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion. (5:3)***

Traditions that are reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have also
confirmed that making the Day of Ghadir a feast day is based on the Holy
Prophet’s instruction to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to do so. In this respect,
Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on the authority of ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
Salim that his father asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), whether Muslims have
other feast days besides ‘Id al-Fitr, ‘Id al-Adhha, and Fridays.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَعَمْ، أَعْظَمُهَا حُرْمَةً. الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي نَصَّبَ فِيهِ رَسُولُ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ وَقَالَ: مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَعَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Yes, they have. There is still the holiest feast day, which falls on
the day when the Messenger of Allah (S) appointed the Commander of the
Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (‘a), as his successor and the coming leader of the
Muslim community. On that day, the Holy Prophet (S) declared, ‘Whoever
has regarded me as his master must now regard ‘Ali as his master…’*

The Imam (‘a) was asked, “What are the acts that should be done on that
day?”

He (‘a) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَذْكُرُونَ اللهَ عَزَّ ذِكْرُهُ فِيهِ بِالصِّيَامِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ
وَالذِّكْرِ لِمُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ; فَإِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ أَوْصَى أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ
ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ عِيداً، وَكَذَلِكَ الأَنْبِيَاءُ كَافَّةً، لِذَا
يُوصُونَ أَوْصِيَاءَهُمْ بِذَلِكَ فَيَتَّخِذُونَهُ عِيداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On this day, mention Allah and Glorify His remembrance by fasting,
doing devotional acts, and mentioning the Holy Prophet and his Household
(S). The Holy Messenger of Allah (S) instructed the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) to celebrate this day as a feast day. Similarly, all the
prophets used to order their successors to celebrate the eighteenth of
Dhu’l-Hijjah as a feast day.*[^18]

Another tradition reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ الأَنْبِيَاءَ كَانَتْ تَأْمُرُ الأَوْصِيَاءَ الْيَوْمَ الَّذِي
كَانَ يُقَامُ فِيهِ الْوَصِيُّ أَنْ يُتَّخَذَ عِيداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The prophets used to order the days on which they nominated successors
to be taken as feast days.*[^19]

Other traditions have referred to a historical root for this day holding
that, on this day, Almighty Allah accepted the repentance of Prophet
Adam (‘a) who, as a result, observed fasting as an expression of
thanking Him for this grace. It is also the day on which Almighty Allah
delivered Prophet Abraham (S) from the fire—he therefore observed
fasting as an expression of thanking Him for this grace. On this day
too, Prophet Moses (‘a) appointed Prophet Aaron (‘a) as his successor
and he therefore observed fasting as an expression of thanking Him for
this grace.

It is also the day on which Prophet Jesus (‘a) declared Simon the Zealot
as his successor and observed fasting as an expression of thanking Him
for this grace. It is finally the day on which Prophet Muhammad (S)
declared Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as his successor, demonstrating ‘Ali’s
excellence and worthiness for this position. This day is therefore a day
of fasting, worship, establishment of good relations with
brethren-in-faith, and attainment of the All-beneficent Lord’s pleasure,
in addition to being a day of showing defiance to Satan.[^20]

In books of devotional acts and supplications, a set of acts has been
mentioned to be done on this day:

• Bathe

• Fast

• Perform or read the *ziyarah* of Imam ‘Ali (‘a)

• Offer certain prayers that are dedicated to this day

• Supplicate and thank Almighty Allah for this great grace of the
divinely designated leadership of Imam ‘Ali (‘a). In his book of *Iqbal
al-A’mal*, Sayyid Ibn Tawus has cited a set of long supplications to be
read on this day.

• Adorn, dress up, and express joy and pleasure

• Give generously, grant the requests of those asking for them, show
regard to relatives, present gifts to dependents, and serve food to the
faithful believers in general, and those observing fast on this day in
particular

• Visit one’s brethren-in-faith, shake hands with them, fraternize with
them, and send them presents

• Repeatedly invoke blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household
(S)

• Pay greater attention to acts of worship and obedience to Almighty
Allah[^21]

### The Day of Spreading the Earth

The 25th of Dhu’l-Qa’dah is celebrated as the Day of Spreading the Earth
because Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is validly reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الأَرْضَ دُحِيَتْ وَانْبَسَطَتْ مِنْ تَحْتِ الْكَعْبَةِ
الْمُشَرَّفَةِ فِي هَذَا الْيَوْمِ، وَفِي لَيْلَتِهِ وُلِدَ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ وَوُلِدَ فِيهَا عِيسَى بْنُ مَرْيَمَ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the twenty-fifth of Dhu’l-Qa’dah, Prophet Abraham, peace be upon
him, was born, and Prophet Jesus son of Mary (peace be upon them both)
was born, and the earth was spread on the water where the Holy Ka’bah is
now situated. Hence, if one observes fasting on this day, he will earn
the reward of fasting for sixth months.*[^22]

On this day, it is reported that the Holy Ka’bah descended from the
heavens down to earth and Divine mercy descended on Prophet Adam (‘a).

Thus we can recognize the significance of this day, which signifies the
creation of the earth and the Much-Frequented House and the descending
of Divine mercy down to the earth. Moreover, on this day, Prophets
Abraham and Jesus, peace be upon them, were born.

In books of devotional acts and supplications, a set of acts is
mentioned for this day:

• Fast

• Bathe

• Offer a special prayer of two units in each of which Surah al-Fatihah
is recited once and Surah al-Shams repeated five times. After completing
this prayer before noon, a special supplication is read.

• Read a supplication that is specified for this day and reported by
Shaykh al-Tusi in *Misbah al-Mutahajjid*

• Perform or read the *ziyarah* of Imam al-Ridha (‘a), as maintained by
Sayyid al-Damad in his epistle entitled *al-Arba’at Ayyam*

• Perform acts of worship and remember Almighty Allah as much as
possible. The same acts are recommended for the night before the Day of
Spreading the Earth.[^23]

The Day Of ‘Ashura’
-------------------

The 10th of Muharram, the Day of ‘Ashura' is the day on which Imam
al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a), the Holy Prophet’s grandson and the son of the
Veracious Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (‘a), was slain. The Imam (‘a) was
martyred in such an astounding way that it’s like cannot be found in the
history of humankind.

The Imam (‘a), eighteen family members, and approximately seventy
companions—among whom were old men, master scholars, grand Sahabah
(companions of the Holy Prophet (S)), Tabi’un (followers of the Holy
Prophet’s companions), as well as children, women, boys, youth,
adolescents, and an infant son of Imam Husayn (‘a). They were all slain
after they were besieged and prevented from obtaining water to drink
such that they departed this life thirsty—and this for no crime other
than their refusal to swear allegiance to Yazid, the notorious tyrant.

Along with his family members and companions, Imam al-Husayn (‘a) fought
bravely, showing the highest degree of resoluteness, steadfastness,
endurance, maintenance of principles, and high moral standards in
dealing with events, sparing no efforts in making clear the truth and
goals for which they were ready to sacrifice their lives. As a result,
they left a great impact on the progress of Islam and humanity.

We have already discussed the results of this event and explained the
rites related to it.

To the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt and the individuals of the virtuous
community, ‘Ashura' is seen as a day of expressing grief and sorrow.
Following the example of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), all the
individuals of the virtuous community, like no other day, participate in
such rites and hold large meetings.

There are certain etiquettes and rites for this day. The most important
of these are the following:

• Perform *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a). An earlier indication has
been made to the special formula of *ziyarah* on this day.

• Hold sessions commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom, express sorrow
and weep for him, read the story of his martyrdom, and practice other
acts of condolence previously referred to.

• Refrain from striving for any worldly benefit. In this respect, Imam
al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَرَكَ السَّعْيَ فِي حَوَائِجِهِ يَوْمَ عَاشُورَاءَ قَضَى اللهُ
لَهُ حَوَائِجَ الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ، وَمَنْ كَانَ يَوْمُ عَاشُورَاءَ
يَوْمَ مُصِيبَتِهِ وَحُزْنِهِ وَبُكَائِهِ جَعَلَ اللهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ يَوْمَ فَرَحِهِ وَسُرُورِهِ وَقَرَّتْ بِنَا فِي
الْجَنَّةِ عَيْنُهُ، وَمَنْ سَمَّى يَوْمَ عَاشُورَاءَ يَوْمَ بَرَكَةٍ
وَادَّخَرَ لِمَنْزِلِهِ فِيهِ شَيْئاً لَمْ يُبَارَكْ لَهُ فِي مَا
إدَّخَرَ وَحُشِرَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مَعَ يَزِيدَ وَعُبَيْدِ اللهِ
بْنِ زِيَادٍ وَعُمَرَ بْنِ سَعْدٍ لَعَنَهُمُ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one refrains from striving for any worldly benefit on the tenth of
Muharram, Almighty Allah will grant him all his needs for this world and
the world to come. If one considers the tenth of* *Muharram a day of
sadness and weeping, Almighty Allah will make the Day of Resurrection a
day of delight and happiness; and he will be delighted with us in
Paradise. If one considers the tenth of Muharram to be a blessed day and
stores up any annual nutriment on this day, Almighty Allah will not
bless that which he stored up and will add him to the gang of Yazid,
‘Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, and ‘Umar ibn Sa’d—may Allah curse them
all.*[^24]

• Exchange such words of condolence with believers: “May Allah magnify
our rewards for suffering the misfortune of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom,
and may He include you and us with the group of those who demand
vengeance for him with his heir, Imam al-Mahdi (‘a), successor of the
Household of Prophet Muhammad (S).”

• Serve food and water to the believers and participants of processions

• Curse and declare renunciation of those who slew Imam al-Husayn (‘a),
and those who approved of their crime and imitated them up to the Day of
Resurrection

• Repeat Surah al-Tawhid (*al-Ikhlas*, No. 112) as much as possible

### The Umayyads and ‘Ashura'

The Umayyads used to deem blessed the tenth of Muharram, i.e. the Day of
‘Ashura', and regard it as a day of feast and celebration. They set
themselves against the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to mislead the Muslims and
divert them from the reality of the events that took place on the tenth
of Muharram and the goals of Imam al-Husayn’s uprising against them.

They forged many lies against the Holy Prophet (S) in this connection
and fabricated many sayings with regard to fasting on this day and
getting its blessings. Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported Ibn ‘Abbas as
having said, “I have not seen the Prophet (S) laying so much stress on
fasting on any day like the day of ‘Ashura' or any month like the month
of Ramadhan.”

They also reported Abu-Musa al-Ash’ari as saying, “The (Jewish) people
of Khaybar used to fast on the day of ‘Ashura', taking it for a joyful
day and ordering their women to put on the best of their jewelry and
clothes. Seeing them, the Prophet (S) ordered us to fast on that day,
too.”[^25]

From the totality of the traditions reported in Sunni and Shi’ite
reference books of Hadith in this regard, we can conclude that the tenth
of Muharram was an exceptional day for the Arabs of the pre-Islamic era
and the Jews who used to take it as a feast day. The Holy Prophet (S)
also used to fast on this day, but when the obligatory fasting of the
month of Ramadhan was revealed, he abandoned fasting on this day.

However, the Umayyads, after slaying Imam al-Husayn (‘a), revived this
tradition and made it a day of feast, blessing, and celebration. To
further solidify the matter, they seduced some Sahabah under promise of
money to testify to such abandoned and abrogated traditions to wreak
vengeance upon the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and conceal the grave crime they had
committed.

Al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, and Ibn Dawud reported ‘A'ishah to have
said, “In the pre-Islamic era, the people of Quraysh, as well as the
Prophet (S), used to fast on the day of ‘Ashura'. When he settled in
Madinah, he sometimes fasted on that day and sometimes overlooked it.
When the fasting of the month of Ramadhan was decreed, the Prophet (S)
abandoned fasting on the day of ‘Ashura'. Therefore, you may fast on it
or forsake it.”[^26]

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that
Najiyyah ibn al-Harith al-’Attar asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a) about fasting
on the day of ‘Ashura'.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَوْمٌ مَتْرُوكٌ بِنُزُولِ شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ، وَالْمَتْرُوكُ بِدْعَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fasting on this day has been repealed by the divine command of fasting
in the month of Ramadhan. To perform an abrogated matter is considered
innovation (bid’ah).*

Najiyyah then asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about the same issue and received
the same answer given to him by Imam al-Baqir (‘a).

The Imam (‘a) then added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا إِنَّهُ صَوْمُ يَوْمٍ مَا نَزَلَ بِهِ كِتَابٌ وَلاَ جَرَتْ بِهِ
سُنَّةٌ إِلاَّ سُنَّةَ آلِ زِيَادٍ بِمَقْتَلِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, to take this day (of ‘Ashura') as a day of fasting is neither
determined by any Divine Book nor accepted as a norm, except as invented
by the Family of Ziyad on account of their slaying Husayn ibn ‘Ali,
peace be upon him.*[^27]

According to another well-reported (*hasan*) tradition, Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ صَامَهُ كَانَ حَظُّهُ مِنْ صِيَامِ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ حَظَّ ابْنِ
مَرْجَانَةَ وَآلِ زِيَادٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If one fasts on the day of ‘Ashura', he will be rewarded nothing but the
recompense of the son of Marjanah (i.e. ‘Ubaydullah) and the family of
Ziyad.

The reporter asked, “What was their recompense on that day?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّارُ! أَعَاذَنَا اللهُ مِنَ النَّارِ وَمِنْ عَمَلٍ يُقَرِّبُ إِلَى
النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fire! May Allah save us from the Fire and from any act that advances
one towards it.*[^28]

Shaykh al-Saduq, in *‘Ilal al-Shara'i’*, has reported that ‘Abdullah ibn
al-Fadhl al-Hashimi once asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) how it came about that
the people regarded the Day of ‘Ashura' as a day of celebration.

The Imam (‘a) wept and then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا قُتِلَ الْحُسَيْنُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ تَقَرَّبَ النَّاسُ
بِالشَّامِ إِلَى يَزِيدَ فَوَضَعُوا لَهُ الأَخْبَارَ وَأَخَذُوا
الْجَوَائِزَ مِنَ الأَمْوَالِ، فَكَانَ مِمَّا وَضَعُوا لَهُ أَمْرُ
هَذَا الْيَوْمِ وَأَنَّهُ يَوْمُ بَرَكَةٍ لِيَعْدِلَ النَّاسُ فِيهِ
مِنَ الْجَزَعِ وَالْبُكَاءِ وَالْمُصِيبَةِ وَالْحُزْنِ إِلَى الْفَرَحِ
وَالسُّرُورِ وَالتَّبَرُّكِ وَالإسْتِعْدَادِ فِيهِ. حَكَمَ اللهُ
بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When Husayn, peace be upon him, was slain, the people of Sham tried to
win the favor of and pay court to Yazid. They fabricated narrations to
his benefit and, in return, received financial prizes from him. One of
these fabricated matters was that they made up many things regarding
this day, introducing it as a day of blessing so that the people would
show joyful appearance, seek its blessings, and ready themselves for
festivals instead of showing sorrow and weeping, and taking this day as
an unfortunate day, and expressing sadness. May Allah judge between
us.*[^29]

It is therefore necessary for every righteous Muslim individual to be on
one’s guard against this perverted act that aims at misleading the
Muslims and driving them away from the historical truth and the noble
standing of this great day.

Other Specific Days
-------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) informed the individuals of the
virtuous community of other blessed days significant because of
incidents that took place thereon.

### Day of Mubahalah: Invoking Allah’s Curse upon the Lying Party

On the 24th of Dhu’l-Hijjah, the Holy Prophet (S) entered upon a mutual
invocation of curse (i.e. Mubahalah)[^30] with the Christians of Najran
saying that each party would invoke Almighty Allah’s curse upon the
lying party so that the truthful party would be distinguished and the
lying party cursed. Readying himself for this challenge, the Holy
Prophet (S) put on a garment, covered Imam ‘Ali, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra',
Imam Hasan, and Imam al-Husayn—peace be upon them—with it, and
supplicated Almighty Allah, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ مِنَ الأَنْبِيَاءِ أَهْلُ
بَيْتٍ هُمْ أَخَصُّ الْخَلْقِ إِلَيْهِ. اللَّهُمَّ وَهَؤُلاَءِ أَهْلُ
بَيْتِي؛ فَأَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ وَطَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, verily, each Prophet had family members who were the nearest
to him. O Allah, these are my Household, so (please) remove
uncleanliness from them and purify them with a thorough purification.*

Immediately after that, Archangel Gabriel descended carrying the Verse
of Purification (Ayat al-Tathir):

> إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
> الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا (33)

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a thorough purifying. (33:33)***

Subsequently, the Holy Prophet (S) accompanied this Household as his
partners in the invocation of Almighty Allah’s curse upon the lying
party. As soon as the Christians’ eyes fell on the Holy Prophet’s
Household (S), they realized that those individuals were the most
truthful and that chastisement would be the share of any one who opposed
them. They, therefore, did not dare to participate in that invocation
and, instead, they agreed to pay a tribute (*jizyah*) to the Holy
Prophet (S).

Recording this great incident, the Holy Qur'an says,

> فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
> تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَا
> وَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ
> لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ (61)

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah upon the
liars. (3:61)***

There are certain recommended acts to be carried out on this
anniversary, such as bathing, fasting, offering a special prayer, and
saying a special supplication.[^31] The method of this prayer can be
seen in Shaykh al-Tusi’s book of *Misbah al-Mutahajjid.*

On this day too, Imam ‘Ali (‘a), while offering a prayer and, more
precisely, in genuflection (bowing position), gave his ring as alms to a
poor man who was begging in the mosque. Therefore, Almighty Allah
revealed the following holy verses:

> إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
> يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ (55)
> وَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَإِنَّ
> حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ (56)

***Only Allah is your actual leader and His Messenger and those who
believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow
down. And whoever takes Allah and His messenger and those who believe as
guardians, then surely the party of Allah are they that shall be
triumphant. (5:55-56)***

### The Twenty-Fifth of Dhu’l-Hijjah

On this blessed day, Surah *al-Dahr* (or *al-Insan* No. 76) was revealed
praising the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) for they had observed fasting for three
consecutive days and given their fast-breaking food to a poor man, an
orphan, and a captive, respectively, for three days. In view of this,
the adherents of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are required to imitate their
leaders on these three days and give alms to the poor.

### The Day of ‘Arafat; the Ninth of Dhu’l-Hijjah

The Day of ‘Arafat is one of the most significant days of the year.
However, we will shed light on the rites of this day in a coming chapter
on the Hajj Pilgrimage.

Conclusion
----------

After this review of the most significant nights and days of the year,
it seems proper to discuss the general trend that can be concluded from
this review. In this connection, we may face a number of issues the most
important of which are the following:

**First Issue**: These holy nights are generally spent in acts of
worship, because the night enjoys the distinctive feature of privacy
with Almighty Allah through confidential prayers which are one kind of
devotional act. The other feature of such nights is physical and moral
purity represented by bathing.

**Second Issue**: The joyful holy days emphasize bathing, perfuming
oneself, and dressing up They are also marked by social activities that
affect even the prayers on these days, such as the Friday and the ‘«d
congregational prayers. On these days too, emphasis has been laid on
exchanging visits, spending, and doing charitable acts, as well as other
social activities.

**Third Issue**: These particular nights and days require us to express
our loyalty to and love for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) as well as bond
ourselves with them, pattern our acts after their examples, glorify
their deeds, and declare renunciation of their enemies. Such deeds
symbolize a general aspect that includes all the holy nights and days.
This can be seen obviously through confirmations in the visitations of
Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and Imam ‘Ali (‘a), invoking of Almighty Allah’s
blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household (S), and joining these
days and nights to anniversaries related to them.

**Fourth Issue**: Fasting, in its capacity as a devotional act, enjoys
distinction on such holy days. Although it is forbidden to observe
fasting on the two days of ‘«d, fasting on the other holy days is highly
advised. As for Fridays, no special confirmation for fasting has been
made in traditions except in special cases, such as when asking for
having one’s request granted or completing a three-day fast that begins
on Wednesdays.

**Fifth Issue**: Such holy days and nights are distributed among the
devotional seasons in most of the months of the year, including Rajab,
Sha’ban, Ramadhan, Shawwal, Dhu’l-Qa’dah, Dhu’l-Hijjah, and Rabi’ I. If
we combine the special anniversaries of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the holy
days and nights will cover almost the whole year.

**Sixth Issue**: The majority of these rites and recommended acts
represent part of the general sketch the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) have set forth for educating their followers spiritually and
morally, building unwavering willpower within them, taking them towards
self-perfection, and healing all their psychological and spiritual
defects.

**Seventh Issue**: Noticeably, these special days and nights, are seen
as extensions of Fridays, the two days of ‘«d, Thursday nights, and the
Nights of Qadr. In plain words, the rites and activities of these days
and nights form the origin from which the rites and activities of the
other holy days have branched out. This leads us to the conclusion that
the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) about the merits of these days
and nights have been the outcome of their expansive knowledge of the
Islamic law or their genuine and veritable view of Islamic law on the
strength of Imam ‘Ali’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَّمَنِي رَسُولُ اللهِ أَلْفَ بَابٍ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ، يَنْفَتِحُ لِي
مِنْ كُلِّ بَابٍ أَلْفُ بَابٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Messenger of Allah (S) taught me a thousand doors of knowledge each
door of which opens before me another thousand doors.*

[^1]: - The Holy Qur'an reads: يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا
نُودِيَ لِلصَّلَاةِ مِنْ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ فَاسْعَوْا إِلَى ذِكْرِ
اللَّهِ وَذَرُوا الْبَيْعَ ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ (9) فَإِذَا قُضِيَتِ الصَّلَاةُ فَانْتَشِرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَابْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُفْلِحُونَ (10)O you who believe, when the call is made for prayer on
Friday, then hasten to the remembrance of Allah and leave off trading.
That is better for you, if you knew. But when the prayer is ended, then
disperse abroad in the land and seek Allah's grace, and remember Allah
much, that you may be successful. (62:9-10)

[^2]: - Refer to the exegesis of Surah al-Qadr (No. 97) in the following
two reference books of tafsir: al-Durr al-Manthur and Nur al-Thaqalayn.

[^3]: - It is not inaccurate to say that these three nights are
interrelated in the sense that the first night is an introduction to the
third, the second a preparation for it, and the third the Night itself.
Thus, the manner is perfected on the night of the twenty-third of
Ramadhan.

[^4]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 225-226.

[^5]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 227-234.

[^6]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 236.

[^7]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 29.

[^8]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 30.

[^9]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 30.

[^10]: - Refer to al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 5:222. Although
this tradition has been reported in connection with the night of ‘«d
al-Fitr, it came to include the night of ‘«d al-Adhha, as maintained by
the expression “the night of ‘«d”.

[^11]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 140-141.

[^12]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 5:238, H. 3.

[^13]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 5:238, H. 1.

[^14]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 165-170.

[^15]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 148 & 152.

[^16]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 296.

[^17]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:292, H. 3.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:323, H. 1.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:323, H. 2.

[^20]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:327, H. 12. Apart from
the authenticity of these traditions as a whole or some of their
details, the Day of Ghadir is still one of the holy days in which the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took special interest, regarding it as a joyful day to
be celebrated by the Muslim nation and the virtuous community.

[^21]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 276-281.

[^22]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:322, H. 1.

[^23]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 248-250.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 10:394, H. 7.

[^25]: - Mansur ‘Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami’ lil-Usul 2:90. Other
traditions are found on pages 88-92 of the same book.

[^26]: - Mansur ‘Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami’ lil-Usul 2:89.

[^27]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 4:146, H. 4.

[^28]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:340-341.

[^29]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 44:270. A tradition that is
reported in Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 7:341, H. 7 demonstrates the same meaning.

[^30]: - Mubahalah is a method of exchanging curses between two parties
each of which claim truthfulness. Hence, a party challenges the other
and they agree on imprecating the curse of Almighty Allah on the lying
party. Following this method, the Holy Prophet (S) challenged the
Christians after they had denied his saying that Prophet Jesus (‘a) was
a mortal human being whom Almighty Allah created from dust, just like
Prophet Adam (‘a). Due to their denial, the Holy Prophet (S) called them
to enter upon a mutual invocation of curse with him so that the lying
party would be cursed by Almighty Allah. This incident has been
documented by the Holy Qur'an.

[^31]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 282.


