Chapter 3: Mosques And Holy Places
==================================

**The Ahl al-Bayt’s View about Holy Places**

**Rules of Mosques**

**1. The Holy House, the Sacred Mosque, and Makkah**

**2. The Prophet’s Mosque**

**3. Mosques of Madinah**

**4. Kufah and its Mosques**

**5. The Holy Shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)**

**6. Other Mosques and Holy Places**

Mosques and Holy Places
-----------------------

Mosques and holy places are privileged in the Ahl al-Bayt’s view and
characterized by expansiveness, all-inclusiveness, and profundity. A
‘holy place’ is one of the items upon which all Muslims agree
unanimously and all divine religions accept with admissibility. To the
Muslims, the general title of a holy place is mosque (*masjid*) which is
the Muslims’ place of worship to which the Holy Qur'an has referred many
times:

> إِنَّمَا يَعْمُرُ مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ
> الْآخِرِ وَأَقَامَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَى الزَّكَاةَ وَلَمْ يَخْشَ إِلَّا
> اللَّهَ فَعَسَى أُولَئِكَ أَنْ يَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُهْتَدِينَ (18)

***He only shall tend Allah's mosques that believes in Allah and the
Last Day and observes proper worship and pays the poor-due and fears
none save Allah. For such only is it possible that they can be of the
rightly guided. (9:18)***

**أَقِيمُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ عِنْدَ كُلِّ مَسْجِدٍ وَادْعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ
لَهُ الدِّينَ كَمَا بَدَأَكُمْ تَعُودُونَ (29)**

***Set your faces upright toward Him at every masjid and call upon Him,
making religion pure for Him only. As He brought you into being, so
return you to Him. (7:29)***

**وَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا
(18)**

***The mosques are only for Allah, so pray not to anyone along with
Allah. (72:18)***

### The Role of Mosque

The word **‘*****masjid***’ is the Muslim term for a place of worship.
For instance, a place for public worship for a Christian is a church, a
place for Jewish worship is a temple, and a place of meeting for Jewish
or Sabaean worship is a synagogue. Referring to all these terms, the
Holy Qur'an says:

> وَلَوْلَا دَفْعُ اللَّهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لَهُدِّمَتْ
> صَوَامِعُ وَبِيَعٌ وَصَلَوَاتٌ وَمَسَاجِدُ يُذْكَرُ فِيهَا اسْمُ
> اللَّهِ كَثِيرًا وَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
> لَقَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ (40)

***Had there not been Allah's repelling some people by others,
certainly, there would have been churches, temples, synagogues, and
mosques pulled down, in which Allah's name is much remembered. And
surely, Allah will help him who helps His cause. Most surely, Allah is
Strong, Mighty. (22:40)***

Mosques were not just restricted to worship but played a significant
role in Islamic legislation, Islamic culture, education, general
activities, and political and spiritual mobilization. In the earliest
period of Islam, mosques were used for administration of the affairs of
the Islamic state, administration of justice, and judgment of disputes.
Mosques were thus devotional, cultural, political and social foundations
that played effective roles in Muslim communities and gained the
sacredness, veneration, and respect of all.

Thus, we come upon a large number of traditions, reported from the Holy
Prophet and his noble Household (S), about the laws, etiquettes, and
affairs of mosques as well as how to venerate, sanctify, and construct
them materially and devotionally. Such traditions also include the
reward of frequenting, praying in, and occasional confinement to
mosques.[^1]

The Ahl al-Bayt’s View about Holy Places
----------------------------------------

In the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), other holy places are also
sacred, including the homes and holy shrines of the Holy Prophet and his
Household (S) and places that are historically associated with prophets
and saints who had offered prayers there or other events related to them
took place there.

Some holy texts show that the Holy Qur'an pays considerable attention to
historical sites and monuments that embody the movements, circumstances,
and deeds of these personalities, especially their praise of Almighty
Allah, and the necessity of strengthening such sites and events
historically.

This idea can be fundamentally concluded from the confirmation of some
historical events, the establishment and practice of some rites, and the
concepts that the Holy Qur'an has established as a part of the features
of the Islamic mission. It can be also concluded from some Prophetic
traditions.

Let us now refer to some features involved:

**First**: Relating the story of the Sleepers of Ephesus, the Holy
Qur'an confirms that the believers who prevailed on the affairs of the
people of that time, decided to erect a mosque over the graves of the
Sleepers as a sign of exalting the incident of these righteous men who
had rejected paganism and tyranny:

> وَكَذَلِكَ أَعْثَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ
> حَقٌّ وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهَا إِذْ يَتَنَازَعُونَ
> بَيْنَهُمْ أَمْرَهُمْ فَقَالُوا ابْنُوا عَلَيْهِمْ بُنْيَانًا
> رَبُّهُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِهِمْ قَالَ الَّذِينَ غَلَبُوا عَلَى أَمْرِهِمْ
> لَنَتَّخِذَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ مَسْجِدًا (21)

***Thus did We make their case known to the people, that they might know
that the promise of Allah is true, and that there can be no doubt about
the Hour of Judgment. Behold, they dispute among themselves as to their
affair. Some said, “Construct a building over them (their remains).
Their Lord knows best about them.” Those who prevailed over their affair
said, “Let us surely build a place of worship over them.” (18:21)***

**Second**: Prophet Abraham’s Standing-place, which is a place upon
which he stood while building the Holy Ka’bah, is highly praised in the
Holy Qur'an and it is deemed obligatory, on the consensus of all
Muslims, to offer a two unit prayer there after performing the ritual
circumambulation of the Ka’bah. The Holy Qur'an thus reads:

> اتَّخِذُوا مِنْ مَقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى (125)

***Take you the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. (2:125)***

**Third**: As unanimously agreed by Muslims, it has been made obligatory
to include the site that is called Hijr Isma’il (the fence built by
Prophet Ishmael (‘a) around the tomb of his mother) with the ritual
circumambulation even though it is not part of the Holy Ka’bah itself.
Likewise, it is recommended to offer prayers on that site because it is
the graveyard of Prophet Ishmael’s mother as well as a group of
prophets.

**Fourth**: The Holy Qur'an has confirmed the act of hastening between
the hills of Safa and Marwah as one of the rituals determined by
Almighty Allah. In this respect, the Holy Qur'an says:

> إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
> الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَنْ يَطَّوَّفَ
> بِهِمَا وَمَنْ تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ (158)

***Behold! Safa and Marwah are among the RITUALS of Allah. So, if those
who visit the House*** ***in the Hajj Season or at other times should
compass them round, there is no sin in it. And if any one obeys his own
impulse to good, be sure that Allah is He Who recognizes and knows.
(2:158)***

Historically, running seven times between Safa and Marwah, as a ritual,
is a repetition of the running of Hajar, Prophet Ishmael’s mother,
between these two hills in order to save her child from thirst, which
culminated in gaining the water of the Zamzam Spring.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid chain of authority that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

*When (Prophet) Abraham (S) left behind him his child Ishmael (‘a) at
Makkah, the child felt terribly thirsty. His mother walked towards Safa
and climbing it, cried out, “Is there any friend in these deserts?” As
she received no answer, she walked towards Marwah and repeated the same
words. She received no answer. She then returned to Safa and continued
running between these two places, which were full of trees, seven times.
Accordingly, Almighty Allah determined running back and forth seven
times at this site as a religious tradition.*[^2]

**Fifth**: In its capacity as the earliest kiblah (i.e. direction
towards which faces are turned in prayers), a place where past prophets
used to worship Almighty Allah, and the origin of the Holy Prophet’s
ascension into heaven, the Furthest Mosque (of Jerusalem) has been
determined to be an object of glorification and honor.

**Sixth**: Muslims unanimously agree upon the necessity of having a high
regard for the Quba Mosque “*whose foundation was laid from the first
day on piety*” as expressed in the Holy Qur'an. This mosque was also the
place where the Holy Prophet (S) offered a prayer on his way to Madinah
and resided for some time before he entered the city. Therefore, Muslims
erected a mosque at that place. Further details will soon follow.

**Seventh**: The Holy Qur'an has strongly asserted that there are
certain houses that Almighty Allah has permitted to be exalted and that
His Name should be mentioned therein. These are houses that the
righteous inhabit. The Holy Qur'an has thus said:

> فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
> يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ (36) رِجَالٌ لَا
> تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَإِقَامِ
> الصَّلَاةِ وَإِيتَاءِ الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ
> الْقُلُوبُ وَالْأَبْصَارُ (37)

***In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and in which His
name is remembered in the mornings and the evenings, therein are men who
glorify Him, whom neither merchandise nor selling can divert from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of
poor-rate. They fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn
about. (24:36-37)***

Rooted in this conception, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), familiar with the
history of the divine missions, took it upon themselves to revive the
features of the previous divine missions and the mission of Islam and
urge sanctification of these places and commemoration of the events that
took place in them.

The Sacred Mosque (in Makkah), the Prophet’s Mosque (in Madinah), and
the Furthest Mosque (of Jerusalem) are endowed with special veneration
and respect by all Muslims.

Some Muslim traditionists have reported that pilgrimages must not be
made to any places other than these three mosques,[^3] which are given
such exclusive respect and religious regard. In addition, the Holy
Qur'an has mentioned these three mosques, especially the Sacred Mosque
of Makkah.

As for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), they have endowed mosques with a vast and
all-inclusive concept quantitatively and qualitatively.

Concerning quality, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have ordered showing respect to
these holy places, explained their historical importance, and performed
many devotional acts there.

There are other holy places besides the abovementioned three mosques,
which have gained great respect and sanctity. These include: Masjid e
Kufah, Masjid e Quba, Masjid e Khif, Masjid e Sahlah (or Suhayl), Imam
al-Husayn’s shrine, the Valley of Peace (*wadi al-salam*) in Najaf, Imam
‘Ali’s shrine, Masjid e Buratha, Imam Ridha’s shrine in Tus (Khurasan),
and the other shrines of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Laws Of Mosques
---------------

Before entering upon the details of the most important mosques, it seems
appropriate to point out some general laws of mosques.

1. Offering prayers in mosques is a generally accepted act of worship
and the best mosque in this regard in the Sacred Mosque of Makkah. For a
single prayer there is a reward equal to one million prayers at other
places. In the Prophet’s Mosque, a single prayer is equal in reward to
ten thousand prayers at other places.

In the Kufah Mosque a single prayer is equal to one thousand prayers. In
the Furthest Mosque a single prayer is also equal to one thousand
prayers. In a mosque dedicated to congregational prayer, one prayer is
equal in reward to one hundred prayers at other places. In the mosque of
ones tribe (or the area where one lives), a single prayer is equal to
twenty-five prayers. Finally, in the mosque of a market or place of
business a single prayer is equal to twelve prayers at other places.

It is also recommended to set apart a place in one’s house for prayer
although the laws of mosques are not applicable to such places. For
women, it is better to offer prayers in their houses and the best part
of their home (for offering the prayers) is their private room.

2. It is recommended to offer prayers at the shrines of the Holy Imams
(‘a), which are houses that Almighty Allah has ordered to be exalted and
that His Name be mentioned therein. Moreover, these shrines are even
better than some mosques.

3. It is recommended to offer prayers at different places because each
place where one offers a prayer will testify on the Day of Resurrection.
It is reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) was asked whether one should
offer all the supererogatory prayers at the same place or at different
places.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ، بَلْ هُنَا وَهُنَا، فَإِنَّهَا تَشْهَدُ لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In fact, it is better to offer them at different places because each
place will testify for the offerer of the prayer on the Day of
Resurrection.*[^4]

4. It is discommended for the neighbor of a mosque to offer his prayers
at any other place than the neighboring mosque unless there is an
obstacle preventing him from doing so, such as rain or the like. In this
regard, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ صَلاَةَ لِجَارِ الْمَسْجِدِ إِلاَّ فِي مَسْجِدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No prayer is accepted from the neighbor of a mosque except those
offered therein.*[^5]

It is recommended to avoid sharing a meal or a drink with one who
abstains from presenting himself in mosques. It is further recommended
to avoid counseling with him, making any marriage contracts with him,
and even neighboring him.

5. It is discommended to leave a mosque untended, for Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاَثَةٌ يَشْكُونَ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: مَسْجِدٌ خَرَابٌ لاَ
يُصَلِّي فِيهِ أَهْلُهُ، وَعَالِمٌ بَيْنَ جُهَّالٍ، وَمُصْحَفٌ
مُعَلَّقٌ قَدْ وَقَعَ عَلَيْهِ غُبَارٌ لاَ يُقْرَأُ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Three will complain to Almighty Allah: an empty mosque that is not
attended by its locals, an educated person who lives among ignorant
people, and a copy of the Qur'an that is covered with* *dust because
nobody recites it.*[^6]

6. It is recommended to go habitually to mosques, for the Holy Prophet
(S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَشَى إِلَى مَسْجِدٍ مِنْ مَسَاجِدِ اللهِ فَلَهُ بِكُلِّ خُطْوَةٍ
خَطَاهَا حَتَّى يَرْجِعَ إِلَى مَنْزِلِهِ عَشْرُ حَسَنَاتٍ وَيُمْحَى
عَنْهُ عَشْرُ سَيِّئَاتٍ وَيُرْفَعُ لَهُ عَشْرُ دَرَجَاتٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever goes to any of the mosques of Allah walking, Allah shall record
for him ten rewards, erase ten of his evildoings, and raise him ten
ranks for each step he makes until he returns home.*[^7]

7. It is recommended to build a mosque, which brings about a great
reward. In this regard, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ بَنَى مَسْجِداً فِي الدُّنْيَا أَعْطَاهُ اللهُ بِكُلِّ شِبْرٍ
مِنْهُ مَسِيرَةَ أَرْبَعِينَ أَلْفِ عَامٍ; مَدِينَةً مِنْ ذَهَبٍ
وَفِضَّةٍ وَلُؤْلُؤٍ وَزَبَرْجَدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever builds a mosque in this world, Almighty Allah shall give him a
city of gold, silver,* *pearl, and aquamarine that is too vast to be
traversed with forty thousand years of walking for each hand span of
that mosque.*[^8]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ بَنَى مَسْجِداً بَنَى اللهُ لَهُ بَيْتاً فِي الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever builds a mosque, Almighty Allah shall build a house in Paradise
for him.*[^9]

8. It is forbidden to gild mosques and paint pictures in mosques.

9. It is impermissible to sell a mosque, be it sound or ruined, or to
add it to one’s personal property.

10. It is forbidden to defile a mosque. However, if a mosque becomes
unclean, it is then obligatory upon those managing it to remove the
impurity as immediately as possible. It is also forbidden to introduce
things into the mosque that violate its sanctity.

11. It is recommended for true believing men to take the lead in
presenting themselves in mosques and to stay there for as long a period
as possible, lagging behind the others while leaving.

12. It is recommended to offer services to mosques, such as lighting
lamps, cleaning up, sweeping, and dusting.

It is also recommended:

• to enter mosques by placing the right foot in before the left and to
leave them by placing the left before the right

• to take heed whether one’s shoe or sandal carries dirt or impurity

• to face the direction of the kiblah

• to supplicate and praise Almighty Allah and to invoke His blessings
upon the Holy Prophet and his Household (S)

• to be ceremonially pure and to have performed the ritual ablution
(*wudhu'*).

13. It is recommended to offer a two-unit prayer in the mosque
immediately after entering it. However, to offer the obligatory,
supererogatory, or other recommended prayers substitutes for this
prayer.

14. It is recommended to perfume oneself before heading for mosques and
to put on one’s best and cleanest clothes.

15. In mosques, it is discommended:

• to use them as one’s pathway unless one offers a two-unit prayer there
every time one passes through

• to give off one’s phlegm or mucus there

• to sleep there unless it is necessary to do so

• to raise one’s voice except for declaring the call to prayer (*adhan*)
or like things, such as giving a direction, or delivering a sermon, an
address, or a lecture

• to throw or fling pebbles

• to recite poetic compositions except exhortative poems and the like,
such as eulogies of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)

• to engage in trade

• to discuss personal worldly affairs, because a mosque is a place of
worship and public interest

• to show weapons and put them in the direction of the kiblah

• to allow those entrance into the mosque who have eaten malodorous
things, such as onion, garlic, and the like, because their smell will
annoy the attendants and performers of prayers

• to allow children or mad people into the mosque

• to take the mosque as a place of making tools and like crafts

• to take off one’s clothes, show the private parts—even if one is sure
that none can see him—and to uncover one’s navel, knee, or thigh

• to pass wind or do any other things that are in violation of general
civic behavior

The Holy House, the Sacred Mosque and Makkah
--------------------------------------------

The Holy House is the Ka’bah. In the words of the Holy Qur'an:

> إِنَّ أَوَّلَ بَيْتٍ وُضِعَ لِلنَّاسِ لَلَّذِي بِبَكَّةَ مُبَارَكًا
> وَهُدًى لِلْعَالَمِينَ (96) فِيهِ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ مَقَامُ
> إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمَنْ دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا وَلِلَّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ
> حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ سَبِيلًا (97)

***Most surely, the first house appointed for men is the one at Bakkah,
blessed and guidance for the nations. In it are clear signs; (for
example) the standing-place of Abraham. And whoever*** ***enters it
shall be secure. And pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for
the sake of Allah, upon every one who is able to undertake the journey
to it. (3:96-97)***

The Sacred Mosque is the great mosque surrounding the Holy Ka’bah.
Inside this mosque, there lies the standing-place of Prophet Abraham
(S), where the Holy Qur'an has ordered everyone visiting it to pray,
saying:

> اتَّخِذُوا مِنْ مَقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى (125)

***Take you the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. (2:125)***

Therefore, the Sacred Mosque is the earliest place of worship known by
humanity throughout history.

On many occasions, the Holy Qur'an has referred to this mosque as
*al-masjid al-haram* (the Sacred Mosque). It has also referred to other
issues and rites related to this mosque, such as the Holy Ka’bah, the
Holy House, its building, its designation as a refuge and sanctuary for
mankind, and its sanctification for those who compass it around and use
it to stand, genuflect, or prostrate therein in prayer. Moreover, other
issues like the Hajj Pilgrimage are also related to the Sacred Mosque,
since all these deeds are practiced therein.

In the coming chapter about the Hajj Pilgrimage, it will be cited that
the Holy House at Makkah was the objective of pilgrimage two thousand
years before the creation of Prophet Adam (‘a), the father of humanity.
Other traditions have confirmed that the place of this house was the
first thing created by Almighty Allah on this globe. Then, He, the
Almighty, spread the earth from beneath it.[^10]

From other traditions, we can conclude that the design of the Holy House
and the rite of circumambulating it had been determined since the
issuance of the divine decree to create Adam[^11] about which the Holy
Qur'an reads:

> وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ
> خَلِيفَةً (30)

***Behold, your Lord said to the angels, “I will create a vicegerent on
earth… (2:30)***

Furthermore, Almighty Allah has chosen a rough land—expressed by the
Holy Qur'an as “*a valley unproductive of fruit*”—to carry this house so
that He would test the obedience of His servants towards Him and the
scope of their compliance with His command of glorifying this house and
making pilgrimages to it.[^12]

Some other validly reported traditions reveal that the borders of the
Sacred Mosque erected by Prophet Abraham (S) were so vast that they
covered the whole area between Hazurah, an area in the vicinity of the
Sacred Mosque, and Mas’a, the location where the ritual of *sa’y* is
carried out. As some other traditions hold that the borders of the
Sacred Mosque extended between Safa and Marwah, this means that it was
more expansive than its current building.[^13]

At the time of Prophet Abraham (S), the area of the Holy Ka’bah was nine
cubits. At the time of the Quraysh, it was expanded to eighteen cubits,
and to twenty-seven cubits in the time of al-Hajjaj.[^14]

The site of Hijr Isma’il is not part of the Holy Ka’bah, rather a
graveyard of Hajar, Prophet Ishmael’s mother, and a group of prophets.
It was encircled because it was discommended to tread on the graves
within.[^15]

Other validly reported traditions indicate that the Black Stone was in
Paradise, but it was Almighty Allah Who put it in its current place
after He had made a covenant with all the creatures. On the Day of
Resurrection, this stone shall testify to those who kept this covenant
and fulfilled their pledge to the Lord. Accordingly, a pilgrim, when
kissing the Black Stone, is required to say the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ أَمَانَتِي أَدَّيْتُهَا وَمِيثَاقِي تَعَاهَدْتُهُ
لِتَشْـهَدَ لِي بِالْمُوَافَاةِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah, I have fulfilled my trust and I have performed my covenant so
that You may witness for me that I have fulfilled it.**[^16]

The Holy Ka’bah occupies a great status before Almighty Allah Who has
declared it and the Sacred Mosque as highly sacred by endowing it with
special creational effects, enacting certain religious laws for it, and
establishing a great reward for those who sanctify and circumambulate it
and offer prayers within the Sacred Precinct.

The Holy Qur'an has related the story of the owners of the elephants
whom Almighty Allah pelted with stones of baked clay by way of swarms of
flying creatures because they intended to demolish the Holy Ka’bah.
Before that, traditions report the divine punishment that afflicted the
people of Tubba’ when they devised to demolish the Holy Ka’bah. Later,
they changed their opinion and paid high regard to it.[^17]

It was Almighty Allah’s will to inflict a penalty on any tyrant who
intended any evil to the Holy Ka’bah.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَكَّةُ حَرَمُ اللهِ وَالْمَدِينَةُ حَرَمُ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَالْكُوفَةُ حَرَمِي؛ لاَ يُرِيدُهَا جَبَّارٌ إِلاَّ
قَصَمَهُ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Makkah is the sanctuary of Almighty Allah, Madinah is the sanctuary of
the Messenger of Allah (S), and Kufah is my sanctuary. There is no
tyrant that intends evil to these places but that Almighty Allah shall
shatter him.*[^18]

The Holy House and its interests precede all other interests in Makkah
because of this special sacredness, as maintained by some
traditions.[^19]

Almighty Allah has forbidden the polytheists from entering the Sacred
Mosque. As declared by the Holy Qur'an:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْمُشْرِكُونَ نَجَسٌ فَلَا
> يَقْرَبُوا الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ بَعْدَ عَامِهِمْ هَذَا (28)

***O you who believe, surely the idolaters are unclean, so they shall
not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. (9:28)***

Other validly reported traditions hold that whoever makes mischief in
the Holy Ka’bah should be sentenced to death.[^20]

Through a valid chain of authority, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَنْبَغِي لأَِحَدٍ أَنْ يَرْفَعَ بِناءً فَوْقَ بِنَاءِ
الْكَعْبَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is improper to build any edifice higher than the Ka’bah.*[^21]

There are many traditions asserting the distinctive status of the Holy
Ka’bah:

Through a valid chain of authority, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَا خَلَقَ بُقْعَةً فِي الأَرْضِ أَحَبَّ
إِلَيْهِ مِنْهَا، وَإِنَّ النَّظَرَ إِلَيْهَا عِبَادَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Allah the Exalted and Majestic has not created any area on the
earth dearer to Him than the Ka’bah. To take a look at it is a sort of
devotional act.*[^22]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ النَّظَرَ إِلَيْهَا يَهْدِمُ الْخَطَايَا هَدْماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Just looking at the Holy Ka’bah utterly knocks down sins.*[^23]

Through a valid chain of authority too, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported
to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ للهِ تَعَالَى حَوْلَ الْكَعْبَةِ عِشْرِينَ وَمِائَةَ رَحْمَةً،
مِنْهَا سِتُّونَ لِلطَّائِفِينَ وَأَرْبَعُونَ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ
وَعِشْرُونَ لِلنَّاظِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah has decreed one hundred and twenty mercies to
surround His Holy House; sixty for those who circumambulate it, forty
for those who offer prayers there, and twenty for those who look at
it.*[^24]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ نَظَرَ إِلَى الْكَعْبَةِ فَعَرِفَ مِنْ حَقِّنَا وَحُرْمَتِنَا
مِثْلَ الَّذِي عَرِفَ مِنْ حَقِّهَا وَحُرْمَتِهَا، غَفَرَ اللهُ لَهُ
ذُنُوبَهُ كُلَّهَا وَكَفَاهُ هَمَّ الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever looks at the Ka’bah and acknowledges that our standing and
sacredness is similar as the Ka’bah’s standing and sacredness, Almighty
Allah shall forgive him all of his sins and save him from the griefs of
this world and the Next.*[^25]

Prayers that are offered in the Sacred Mosque are the best of all
prayers, as also prayers offered in the Prophet’s Mosque, as maintained
by some traditions. One prayer that is offered in the Sacred Mosque is
equal in reward to one thousand prayers that are offered in the
Prophet’s Mosque, while one prayer in the Prophet’s Mosque is equal in
reward to one thousand prayers that are offered in other mosques or even
one hundred thousand prayers that are offered in other mosques.[^26]

According to another tradition, Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali has reported Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ صَلَّى فِي الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ صَلاَةً مَكْتُوبَةً قَبِلَ
اللهُ مِنْهُ كُلَّ صَلاَةٍ صَلاَّهَا مُنْذُ يَوْمِ وَجَبَتْ عَلَيْهِ
الصَّلاَةُ، وَكُلَّ صَلاَةٍ يُصَلِّيهَا إِلَى أَنْ يَمُوتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever performs an obligatory prayer in the Sacred Mosque, Almighty
Allah shall determine admissible all the prayers he had performed since
the time prayers were made obligatory upon* *him to perform and the
prayers he will perform up to his death time.*[^27]

Owing to the high regard of the Sacred Mosque and the Holy Ka’bah,
Almighty Allah has given preference to the holy city of Makkah over
other places. It has thus been reported that Makkah is the best of all
places, the Holy House the best of all parts of Makkah, and the area
between the Black Stone and the Station of Abraham (S) and the gate of
the Ka’bah the best areas of the Holy House. This area is also called
Hatim Isma’il (‘a).[^28]

Innumerable texts also report the merits of this city, the merits of
doing devotional acts and righteous deeds there, and the merits of
living in its vicinity. Also, painful chastisement is reported to be the
share of anyone who commits sins therein. In this respect, the Holy
Qur'an says:

> مَنْ يُرِدْ فِيهِ بِإِلْحَادٍ بِظُلْمٍ نُذِقْهُ مِنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
> (25)

***Whoever shall incline therein to wrong unjustly, We will make him
taste a painful chastisement. (22:25)***

Besides, Almighty Allah has decided Makkah to be a safe haven for every
one who enters there up to the Day of Resurrection. It is also
impermissible to hunt on land and to uproot trees of this city except in
a few cases. It is also inadvisable to carry weapons openly or to
frighten people therein. Moreover, many regulations have been instituted
with regard to this holy city.

There are certain etiquettes, manners, and rites to be done in the Holy
Precinct of Makkah, the Sacred Mosque, and the Holy Ka’bah. Some of
these rites have been cited in the previous chapter on the rites of the
Hajj Pilgrimage. However, the readers are advised to acquaint themselves
with the other laws, etiquettes, and recommended acts found in books on
the Hajj Pilgrimage.

**The Prophet’s Mosque (Masjid Al-Nabi)**

Situated in the holy city of al-Madinah, the Prophet’s Mosque is the
next in merit after the Sacred Mosque. As has been cited, to offer one
prayer in this mosque is equal in reward to one thousand prayers that
are offered in other mosques. According to other traditions, a single
prayer is even equal in reward to ten thousand prayers offered in other
mosques.[^29]

Within the area of the Prophet’s Mosque, there is a garden of Paradise,
which is the distance between his house, which is now his burial place,
and his minbar (pulpit).

In his book of *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid
chain of authority that Mu’awiyah ibn Wahab asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
about the authenticity of the following tradition that is ascribed to
the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَيْنَ بَيْتِي وَمِنْبَرِي رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The area between my house and minbar is a garden of Paradise.

The Imam (‘a) answered confirmatively and added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَيْتُ عَلِيٍّ وَفَاطِمَةَ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ مَا بَيْنَ
الْبَيْتِ الَّذِي فِيهِ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ إِلَى
الْبَابِ الَّذِي يُحَاذِي الزُّقَاقَ إِلَى الْبَقِيعِ. فَلَوْ دَخَلْتَ
مِنْ ذَلِكَ الْبَابِ وَالْحَائِطُ مَكَانَهُ أَصَابَ مِنْكَبَكَ
الأَيْسَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The house of ‘Ali and Fatimah, peace be upon them, lies in the area
between the house in which the Holy Prophet (S) is buried and the door
that is facing the street going to al-Baqi’ Cemetery. If you enter from
that door, the wall would hit your left shoulder if it was still there.*

The Imam (‘a) then referred to other houses and quoted the Holy Prophet
(S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاَةُ فِي مَسْجِدِي تَعْدِلُ أَلْفَ صَلاَةٍ فِي غَيْرِهِ إِلاَّ
الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ فَهُوَ أَفْضَلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A single prayer that is offered in my mosque is equal to one thousand
prayers that are offered in other mosques except the Sacred Mosque,
which is more meritorious (than my mosque).*[^30]

Another tradition holds that the Holy Prophet’s tomb is on a canal of
Paradise.[^31]

According to a number of traditions some of which are validly reported,
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has said that to offer a prayer in the house of Lady
Fatimah (‘a) is more preferable than offering prayers in the area
defined as a garden of Paradise and thus known as *Rawdhah*. Shaykh
al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi* has reported that Yunus ibn Ya’qub asked Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) whether it is better to offer a prayer in the house of
Lady Fatimah (‘a) or in the *Rawdhah*.

The Imam (‘a) answered, “To offer a prayer in Fatimah’s house is
better.”[^32]

According to another tradition, to offer prayers in the Holy Prophet’s
houses, one of which is of course the house of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), is equal
to offering prayers in the Prophet’s Mosque or even producing a bigger
reward.[^33]

As has been previously mentioned, the house of Imam ‘Ali and Lady
Fatimah, peace be upon them, is situated in the area between the house
in which the Holy Prophet (S) is buried and the door facing the street
that goes to al-Baqi’ Cemetery.[^34]

According to a narration deemed as valid by a group of scholars, the
area of the Prophet’s Mosque is three thousand and six hundred
cubits.[^35]

The borders of the Prophet’s Mosque and the *Rawdhah* have been
mentioned in two authentic traditions. Abu-Basir al-Muradi is reported
to have quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدُّ الرَّوْضَةِ فِي مَسْجِدِ الرَّسُولِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ إِلَى طَرَفِ الظِّلاَلِ، وَحَدُّ الْمَسْجِدِ إِلَى
الإسْطِوَانَتَيْنِ عَنْ يَمِينِ الْمِنْبَرِ إِلَى الطَّرِيقِ مِمَّا
يَلِي سُوقَ اللَّيْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The borders of the Rawdhah in the Prophet’s Mosque extend to Taraf
al-²ilal, and the border of the Prophet’s Mosque extends from the two
columns to the right of the minbar up to the public way behind Suq
al-Layl.*[^36]

Muhammad ibn Muslim is reported to have asked the Imam (‘a) about the
borders of the Prophet’s Mosque, and he was answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسْطِوَانَةُ الَّتِي عِنْدَ رَأْسِ الْقَبْرِ إِلَى
الإسْطِوَانَتَيْنِ مِنْ وَرَاءِ الْمِنْبَرِ عَنْ يَمِينِ الْقِبْلَةِ،
وَكَانَ مِنْ وَرَاءِ الْمِنْبَرِ طَرِيقٌ تَمُرُّ فِيهِ الشَّاةُ
وَيَمُرُّ الرَّجُلُ مُنْحَرِفاً وَكَانَ سَاحَةُ الْمَسْجِدِ مِنَ
الْبِلاَطِ إِلَى الصَّحْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It extends from the column that is situated near the head of the tomb
to the two columns lying behind the minbar to the right side of the
kiblah direction. Behind the minbar, there was a narrow way in which a
sheep could pass but a man must pass aslant. The yard of the mosque
extended from the court to the patio.*[^37]

### Other Holy Sites in the Prophet’s Mosque

In addition to the mosque, the *Rawdhah*, the houses of the Holy Prophet
(S), and the house of Imam ‘Ali and Lady Fatimah (‘a), which are highly
regarded and enjoy special merits, there are other sites inside the
Prophet’s Mosque that are considered blessed and meritorious, such as
the Prophet’s minbar and niche where he used to offer prayers.

Shaykh al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi* has reported through a valid chain of
authority that Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا فَرِغْتَ مِنَ الدُّعَاءِ عِنْدَ قَبْرِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَأْتِ الْمِنْبَرَ فَامْسَحْهُ بِيَدِكَ وَخُذْ
بِرُمَّانَتَيْهِ، وَهُمَا السُّفَلاوَانِ، وَامْسَحْ عَيْنَيْكَ
وَوَجْهَكَ بِهِ فَإِنَّهُ يُقَالُ إِنَّهُ شِفَاءٌ لِلْعَيْنِ. وَقُمْ
عِنْدَهُ وَاحْمَدِ اللهَ وَاثْنِ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلْ حَاجَتَكَ; فَإِنَّ
رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ قَالَ: مَا بَيْنَ قَبْرِي
وَمِنْبَرِي رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ وَمِنْبَرِي عَلَى
تُرْعَةٍ مِنْ تُرَعِ الْجَنَّةِ. وَالتُّرْعَةُ هِيَ الْبَابُ
الصَّغِيرُ. ثُمَّ تَأْتِي مَقَامَ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ فَتُصَلِّي فِيهِ مَا بَدَا لَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you accomplish your prayers near the tomb (of the Holy Prophet
(S)), you may come to the minbar, pass your hand over it, hold the two
lower pommels, and then rub your face and* *eyes, for this act brings
about eye healing. You may then offer prayers there, praise and thank
Almighty Allah, and implore Him for settling your needs. The Holy
Prophet (S) has said, “The area between my house and minbar is a garden
of Paradise and my minbar is standing on a canal of Paradise.” This
canal is the small door. You may then go to the Holy Prophet’s
standing-place and offer as many prayers as you like.*[^38]

One of the other places regarded special is Maqam Jibra'il (the
Standing-place of Archangel Gabriel) where the Archangel would stop to
gain permission from the Holy Prophet (S) to enter.

Shaykh al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi* has reported through a valid chain of
authority that Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

You may come to the standing-place of Gabriel, which is under a
drainpipe, because at this very place, Archangel Gabriel used to stop to
seek permission from the Holy Prophet (S) before he would visit him. You
may say these words at this place:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَيْ جَوَادُ اَيْ كَرِيمُ اَيْ قَرِيبُ اَيْ بَعِيدُ اَسْاَلُكَ اَنْ
تُصَلِّيَ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَاَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ وَاَنْ تَرُدَّ عَلَيَّ
نِعْمَتَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O All-magnanimous! O All-generous! O Nigh! O Remote! I beseech You to
send blessings upon Muhammad and his Household and to grant me this
blessing of Yours over again.**[^39]

Amongst the other consecrated places in the Prophet’s Mosque are the
three columns; namely, Abu-Lubabah’s[^40] Column, known as *Ustuwanat
Abi-Lubabah* or *Ustuwanat al-Tawbah* (The Repentance Column) and the
other two columns following it towards the Holy Prophet’s prayer-place,
standing-place, and niche. Those who visit the Holy Prophet’s tomb and
mosque perform certain rites at these columns.

These certain rites and recommended acts have been mentioned by Shaykh
al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi* and Shaykh al-Tusi in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* with
many traditions of valid chains of authority.

For instance, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan has reported on the authority of
Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

*While residing in Madinah for three days, you may observe fasting for
three days beginning with Wednesday. On Tuesday night, you may offer a
prayer at Abu-Lubabah’s Column, which is also called the Column of
Repentance to which Abu-Lubabah tied himself until he was excused by
Almighty Allah. You may spend Wednesday thereat. The next night and day
(i.e. Thursday), you may offer prayers near the next column, which is
situated behind the Holy Prophet's (S) standing-place.*

*Fasting on Thursday, you may spend the next night and day (i.e. Friday)
at the next column, offering prayers and sitting there. You may then
fast on Friday. If possible, you should abstain from talking except when
necessary. Do not leave the mosque except for an urgent need, and do not
sleep at all as long as you are there. If you do all that, you will gain
much reward. On Friday, thank and praise Almighty Allah and invoke His
blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household. Then, pray to Him to
grant you your requests. Include these words with your prayer:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ مَا كَانَتْ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ حَاجَةٍ شَرَعْتُ اَنَا فِي
طَلَبِهَا اَوْ إلْتِمَاسٍ اَوْ لَمْ اَشْرَعْ سَاَلْتُكَهَا اَوْ لَمْ
اَسْاَلْكَهَا فَإنِّي اَتَوَجَّهُ إلَيْكَ بِنَبِيِّكَ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَبِيِّ الرَّحْمَةِ فِي قَضَاءِ حَوَائِجِي
صَغِيرِهَا وَكَبِيرِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, whatever I need from You whether I have mentioned it or not,
whatever entreaty, which I have besought from You or not; I turn my face
towards You, beseeching You to grant it in the name of Your Prophet,
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his Household, the Prophet of Mercy.
Settle all my needs for me, be they insignificant or great.*

*If you do all that, then you will deserve to have your requests
granted, Allah willing.*[^41]

Other Mosques in al-Madinah
---------------------------

In the holy city of al-Madinah, there are other mosques that have the
honor to be places where the Holy Prophet (S) offered prayers, or which
he himself ordered to be built.

The most important and most preferred of these mosques is the Quba
Mosque about which Almighty Allah revealed the following verse of the
Holy Qur’an:

> لَا تَقُمْ فِيهِ أَبَدًا لَمَسْجِدٌ أُسِّسَ عَلَى التَّقْوَى مِنْ
> أَوَّلِ يَوْمٍ أَحَقُّ أَنْ تَقُومَ فِيهِ فِيهِ رِجَالٌ يُحِبُّونَ
> أَنْ يَتَطَهَّرُوا وَاللَّهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُطَّهِّرِينَ (108)

***Certainly, a mosque founded on piety from the very first day is more
deserving that you should stand in it. In it are men who love that they
should be purified, and Allah loves those who purify themselves.
(9:108)***

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَتَى مَسْجِدِي مَسْجِدَ قَبَا فَصَلَّى فِيهِ رَكْعَتَيْنِ رَجَعَ
بِعُمْرَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever visits Quba Mosque and offers therein a two-unit prayer, will
return with the reward of ‘Umrah.*[^42]

Another important site is Fadhikh Mosque, the place where the sun was
returned for Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and where the
Holy Prophet (S) offered prayers.

In Madinah, there are also Masjid e Ahzab (Mosque of the Allies), which
is the place where the Holy Prophet (S) prayed to Almighty Allah to
grant Imam ‘Ali (‘a) victory over ‘Amr ibn ‘Abd-Wudd al-’Amiri in the
Battle of the Allies (or *Khandaq*).

There is also the Ummu-Ibrahim’s Chamber (known as *mashrabat
ummi-ibrahim*), which is the residential place of the Holy Prophet (S)
during his residence in Quba on his way to Madinah. In this place too,
the Holy Prophet (S) offered prayers.

There are also the Uhud Mosque and the graves of the martyrs of the
Battle of Uhud among which is the grave of Hamzah ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib,
the Holy Prophet’s uncle and the master of martyrs.

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar
quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

Make sure that you will not leave any of the following sites unvisited:
Quba Mosque (the mosque founded on piety from the very first day),
Ummu-Ibrahim’s Chamber, al-Fadhikh Mosque, the graves of the martyrs,
and Masjid al-Ahzab, which is also called the Conquest (*fath*) Mosque.

We have been informed that the Holy Prophet (S), whenever visiting the
graves of the martyrs, would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ فَنِعْمَ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you because you were constant; how excellent is then the
issue of the abode!

Among the prayers that are performed at Masjid al-Ahzab are the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا صَرِيخَ الْمَكْرُوبِينَ وَيَا مُجِيبَ دَعْوَةِ الْمُضْطَرِّينَ
وَيَا مُغِيثَ الْمَهْمُومِينَ إِكْشِفْ عَنِّي ضُرِّي وَهَمِّي
وَكَرْبِي وَغَمِّي كَمَا كَشَفْتَ عَنْ نَبِيِّكَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ هَمَّهُ وَكَفَيْتَهُ هَوْلَ عَدُوِّهِ فِي هَذَا الْمَكَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O He Who aids the aggrieved! O He Who responds to the supplication of
the distressed! O He Who helps the depressed! (Please do) remove my
distress, my grief, my anguish, and my dejection in the same way You
relieved the grief of Your Prophet—peace be upon him and his
Household—and saved him from the horror of his enemies at this very
place.*[^43]

*‘Uqbah ibn Khalid is reported to have asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “When
we visit the mosques that are around Madinah, with which one should we
start?”*

*The Imam (‘a) instructed:*

*You should start with Quba Mosque where you should offer as many
prayers as you can, for this place is the first mosque of this area in
which the Holy Prophet (S) offered prayers. You may then go to
Ummu-Ibrahim’s Chamber and offer a prayer therein, for it was the
residence and prayer-place of the Holy Prophet (S). You may then go to
al-Fadhikh Mosque and offer a prayer therein, for your Prophet (S)
offered a prayer therein. After visiting all the sites at this side, you
may move to the other side of Mount Uhud and start with the mosque that
is situated on the side of al-Hirah wherein you may offer a prayer. You
may then pass by the tomb of Hamzah ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and offer him
salutation. Then, come to the martyrs and stop at their graves, greeting
them with the following statement:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا اَهْلِ الدِّيَارِ اَنْتُمْ لَنَا فَرَطٌ
وَإنَّا بِكُمْ لاََحِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O inhabitants of these graves. You have preceded us,
and we shall certainly join you.

You may then go to the mosque that lies in the vast place beside the
mountain on your right. Then, head for Mount Uhud and offer a prayer
therein. It is the place from where the Holy Prophet (S) started off to
contend with the polytheists at Mount Uhud. The army of the Muslims,
under the command of the Holy Prophet (S), resided there until the time
of prayer. They performed the prayer there. You may then return to the
graves of the martyrs and offer as many prayers as Almighty Allah has
determined for you. Then, head forward until you arrive at Masjid
al-Ahzab to offer prayers and supplicate before Almighty Allah there
because in the Battle of al-Ahzab the Holy Prophet (S) prayed to
Almighty Allah at this place. Ammar ibn Musa has reported Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) as saying that the incident of the sun recourse for Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
took place at Fadhikh Mosque.

There are some other famous mosques in Madinah, such as the following:

 Al-Kiblatayn Mosque wherein the following holy verse of changing the
direction of kiblah was revealed:

> قَدْ نَرَى تَقَلُّبَ وَجْهِكَ فِي السَّمَاءِ فَلَنُوَلِّيَنَّكَ
> قِبْلَةً تَرْضَاهَا فَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
> (144)

***Indeed, We see the turning of your face to heaven, so We shall surely
turn you to a kiblah which you shall like. Turn then your face towards
the Sacred Mosque. (2:144)***

 Masjid al-Ghumamah (Mosque of the Cloud), which is the place where a
cloud cast a shadow over the Holy Prophet (S) who had suffered from the
heat of the sun.

 The five mosques attributed to Abu-Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, Imam ‘Ali
(‘a), and Lady Fatimah (‘a).

 Masjid al-Mubahalah (Mosque of the Mutual Invocation of Curse), which
is the place where the Holy Prophet (S) challenged the Christians of
Najran and called them to invoke Almighty Allah’s curse upon the lying
party.

 Masjid e Salman al-Farisi (the Persian)[^44]

 The place of the Holy Prophet’s overnight stay (*mu’arras*) during his
journey back from Makkah to Madinah. At this place, he also offered
prayers.

About these places, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported a set of traditions,
in his book of *al-Kafi*, one of which is the following validly reported
one:

Mu’awiyah ibn ‘Ammar has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

When you leave Makkah and head for Madinah, you will pass by
Dhu’l-Halifah Mosque, which lies on the way between Makkah and Madinah.
There, you may visit the place of the Holy Prophet’s overnight stay. If
it is the time of an obligatory or supererogatory prayer, you must
perform it there. If not, you may reside there for a while, because the
Holy Prophet (S) used to stay overnight and offer prayers there.[^45]

On the way between Makkah and Madinah, there lies the Ghadir Khumm
Mosque, which is the place where the Holy Prophet (S) stopped and
declared Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as his successor and the next leader and Imam of
the Muslim nation.

In this connection, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid chain
of authority that ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj asked Imam al-Kazim (‘a)
about the merit of offering a prayer at al-Ghadir Mosque in daylight
during a journey. The Imam (‘a) answered:

You may offer a prayer there, because it is rewardable. My father used
to order me to do so.[^46]

This list of holy places and mosques at Madinah and other places proves
what has been previously mentioned in the introduction of this
discussion. The Ahl al-Bayt’s view about holy places is based on the
concept of maintaining those Islamic sites and sacred places associated
with the divine mission, since they enjoy special sacredness where
devotional acts are practiced as expressions of thanking Almighty Allah
and respecting His commands and prohibitions.

Al-Kufah And Its Mosques
------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) viewed the city of Kufah as distinctive because of
various significances.

As for its historical significance, this city is connected with previous
divine missions and prophets.

As for its political significance, this city has always been loyal to
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

As for its cultural significance, this city has played a significant
role in promulgating the culture of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

As for its future significance, this city is predicted to contribute
greatly to the advent of the Awaited Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his
reappearance.

In many traditions that are unanimously acceptable, the significance of
Kufah has been confirmed, apart from some details that cannot be proved
by scholarly methods.

The results of these truths, which are reported from the Holy Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), have been certified through some scientific
(archeological) surveys and some ancient texts found in divine books,
such as the Torah and the Psalms of David (‘a).[^47]

In this respect, Abu-Bakr al-Hadhrami has reported that he asked Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) to name the best region after the holy precincts of
Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet (S).

The Imam (‘a) thus answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكُوفَةُ; هِيَ الزَّكِيَّةُ الطَّاهِرَةُ. فِيهَا قُبُورُ
النَّبِيِّينَ وَالْمُرْسَلِينَ وَغَيْرِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ وَالأَوْصِيَاءِ
الصَّادِقِينَ. وَفِيهَا مَسْجِدُ سُهَيْلٍ الَّذِي لَمْ يَبْعَثِ اللهُ
نَبِيّاً إِلاَّ وَقَدْ صَلَّى فِيهِ، وَفِيهَا يَظْهَرُ عَدْلُ اللهِ،
وَفِيهَا يَكُونُ قَائِمُهُ وَالْقُوَّامُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ. وَهِيَ
مَنَازِلُ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالأَوْصِيَاءِ وَالصَّالِحِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is Kufah! It is the perfect and pure city. In this city, there are
the graves of the prophets—both messengers and non-messengers—and the
veracious successors (of prophets). There is also the* *Mosque of
Suhayl, in which all the Prophets that Almighty Allah had sent offered
prayers. From this city will the Justice of Allah appear; and in this
city will be His Rising Imam and the leaders who will succeed him. It is
also the abode of the prophets, the successors, and the righteous.*[^48]

Sulaym—the manumitted slave of Tirbal—and other reporters have reported
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَفَقَةُ دِرْهَمٍ بِالْكُوفَةِ تُحْسَبُ بِمِائَةِ دِرْهَمٍ فِي مَا
سِوَاهَا، وَرَكْعَتَانِ فِيهَا تُحْسَبُ بِمِائَةِ رَكْعَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To give as alms a single dirham at Kufah is recorded as giving one
hundred dirhams as alms in other cities. Likewise, to offer a two-unit
prayer thereat is regarded as offering one hundred-unit prayer.*[^49]

‘Asim ibn ‘Abd al-Wahid al-Madini has reported that he heard Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَكَّةُ حَرَمُ اللهِ، وَالْمَدِينَةُ حَرَمُ مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَالْكُوفَةُ حَرَمُ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ. إِنَّ عَلِيّاً حَرَّمَ مِنَ الْكُوفَةِ مَا
حَرَّمَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ مِنْ مَكَّةَ وَمَا حَرَّمَ مُحَمَّدٌ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مِنَ الْمَدِينَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Makkah is the sanctuary of Almighty Allah, Madinah the sanctuary of
Muhammad (S), and Kufah the sanctuary of ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib. ‘Ali has
deemed sacred the city of Kufah in the same way Abraham (S) had deemed
Makkah sacred and Muhammad (S) had deemed Madinah sacred.*[^50]

Ishaq ibn Yazdad has reported that a man came to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and
said that he had transferred all his property into gold and silver and
sold all his country estates, intending to migrate to another country.
“Should I move to Makkah?” the man asked.

“No,” said the Imam (‘a), “because the people of Makkah blaspheme
Almighty Allah publicly.”

“Should I move to the sanctuary of Allah’s Messenger (i.e. Madinah)?’
asked the man.

“No,” said the Imam (‘a), “because the people of Madinah are more wicked
than the people of Makkah.”

“Where should I move?” asked the man.

The Imam (‘a) suggested:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكَ بِالْعِرَاقِ الْكُوفَةِ; فَإِنَّ الْبَرَكَةَ مِنْهَا عَلَى
اثْنَيْ عَشَرَ مِيلاً هَكَذَا وَهَكَذَا، وَإِلَى جَانِبِهَا قَبْرٌ مَا
أَتَاهُ مَكْرُوبٌ قَطُّ وَلاَ مَلْهُوفٌ إِلاَّ فَرَّجَ اللهُ عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You should choose Kufah, Iraq because blessing is only twelve miles
away from this city to the side of which there is a tomb. Whoever
agonized or distressed comes to it shall be certainly relieved by
Almighty Allah.*[^51]

Abu-Usamah has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْكُوفَةُ رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ; فِيهَا قَبْرُ نُوحٍ
وَإِبْرَاهِيمُ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ وَقَبْرُ ثَلَاثَمِائَةِ نَبِيٍّ
وَسَبْعِينَ نَبِيّاً وَسِتُّمِائَةِ وَصِيٍّ وَقَبْرُ سَيِّدِ
الأَوْصِيَاءِ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Kufah is one of the gardens of Paradise where exist the tombs of
Prophets Noah and Adam—peace be upon them—as well as three hundred and
seventy prophets, six hundred successors (of prophets), and the tomb of
the master of the prophets’ successors; namely, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be upon him.*[^52]

In addition, there are other holy places in Kufah due to which this city
enjoys great importance, merit, and sacredness.

### The Great Mosque of Kufah

At the top of the list of holy places is the Great Mosque of Kufah whose
sacredness, as well as the merits of offering prayers and acts of
worship therein, have been mentioned in many traditions reported from
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) some of which are the following:

Shaykh al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Saduq in *al-Majalis* and
*al-Amali*, al-Barqi in *al-Mahasin*, Ibn Qawlawayh in *Kamil
al-Ziyarat*, and Shaykh al-Tusi in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, report Harun ibn
Kharajah as saying that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) once asked him, “O Harun ibn
Kharijah, what is the distance between your house and the Kufah Mosque?
Is it about a mile?”

“No,” answered Harun, “probably less than that.”

The Imam (‘a) further asked, “Do you perform all your prayers therein?”

“No,” answered Harun, “I do not.”

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا لَوْ كُنْتُ بِحَضْرَتِهِ لَرَجَوْتُ أَلاَّ تَفُوتَنِي فِيهِ
صَلاَةٌ، وَتَدْرِي مَا فَضْلُ ذَلِكَ الْمَوْضِعِ؟ مَا مِنْ عَبْدٍ
صَالِحٍ وَلاَ نِبِيٍّ إِلاَّ وَقَدْ صَلَّى فِي مَسْجِدِ كُوفَانَ،
حَتَّى إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لَمَّا
أُسْرِيَ بِهِ قَالَ لَهُ جَبْرَئِيلُ: أَتَدْرِي أَيْنَ أَنْتَ
السَّاعَةَ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ؟ أَنْتَ مُقَابِلُ مَسْجِدِ كُوفَانَ.
قَالَ: فَاسْتَأْذِنْ لِي رَبِّي حَتَّى آتِيَهُ فَأُصَلِّي
رَكْعَتَيْنِ. فَاسْتَأْذَنَ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فَأَذِنَ لَهُ. وَإِنَّ
مَيْمَنَتَهُ لَرَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنَّ وَسَطَهُ
لَرَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنَّ مُؤَخَّرَهُ لَرَوْضَةٌ
مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ الْمَكْتُوبَةَ فِيهِ
لَتَعْدِلُ أَلْفَ صَلاَةٍ، وَإِنَّ النَّافِلَةَ فِيهِ لَتَعْدِلُ
خَمْسَمِائَةِ صَلاَةٍ، وَإِنَّ الْجُلُوسَ فِيهِ بِغَيْرِ تِلاَوَةٍ
وَلاَ ذِكْرٍ لَعِبَادَةٌ، وَلَوْ عَلِمَ النَّاسُ مَا فِيهِ لأَتَوْهُ
وَلَوْ حَبْواً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Had I been present in the precinct of that mosque, I would have never
missed any prayer that I could perform there. Do you know the merits of
that place? All Prophets and virtuous saints offered prayers at the
Kufah Mosque, including the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S). When he was taken
to the heavens, Archangel Gabriel (‘a) said to him, ‘O Muhammad (S), do
you know where you are now? You are now opposite the Kufah Mosque.’ The
Holy Prophet (S) thus asked permission from his Lord to visit the mosque
and offer a two-unit prayer. He was thus permitted. Verily, to the right
side of this mosque is a garden of Paradise, in the middle of it a
garden of Paradise, and behind it also a garden of Paradise.*

*To offer an obligatory prayer therein is equal in reward to offering
one thousand prayers (at other places), to offer a supererogatory prayer
therein is equal in reward to offering five hundred prayers, and to sit
there without reciting or saying any devotional statement is considered
to be an act of worship. If people were to realize the merits of
visiting this place, they would certainly come to it, even
crawling.*[^53]

Shaykh al-Tusi in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*, and Shaykh al-Saduq in
*man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, have reported on the authority of ‘Ali ibn
Mahziyar that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدُّ مَسْجِدِ الْكُوفَةِ آخِرُ السَّرَاجِينِ خَطَّهُ آدَمُ، وَأَنَا
أَكْرَهُ أَنْ أَدْخُلَهُ رَاكِباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The border of the Kufah Mosque, as sketched by (Prophet) Adam, extends
to the end of the Sarajin quarter. As for me, I dislike entering there
riding.*

“Who changed the borders of the mosque, then?” asked the reporter. The
Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا أَوَّلُ ذَلِكَ فَالطُّوفَانُ فِي زَمَنِ نُوحٍ، ثُمَّ غَيَّرَهُ
أَصْحَابُ كِسْرَى وَالنُّعْمَانِ، ثُمَّ غَيَّرَهُ زِيَادُ بْنُ أَبِي
سُفْيَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*First of all, it was changed by Prophet Noah’s flood. It was then
changed by Khosrow, the Persian king, and al-Nu’man, the Arab king.
Finally, it was changed by Ziyad ibn Abi-Sufyan.*[^54]

Najm ibn Hatim has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ يَعْلَمُ النَّاسُ مَا فِي مَسْجِدِ الْكُوفَةِ لأَعَدُّوا لَهُ
الزَّادَ وَالرَّوَاحِلَ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ; إِنَّ صَلاَةَ فَرِيضَةٍ
فِيهِ تَعْدِلُ حِجَّةً، وَصَلاَةَ نَافِلَةٍ فِيهِ تَعْدِلُ عُمْرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If people were to realize the favors they might gain when they visit
Kufah Mosque, they would certainly travel to it from remote countries.
One obligatory prayer in this mosque is equal in reward to one Hajj and
to offer a supererogatory prayer therein is equal in reward to one
‘Umrah.*[^55]

Shaykh al-Saduq, in *man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, has reported Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُشَدُّ الرِّحَالُ إِلاَّ إِلَى ثَلاَثَةِ مَسَاجِدَ، الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ، وَمَسْجِدِ الرَّسُولِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
وَمَسْجِدِ الْكُوفَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Trips should not be taken except to three mosques—the Sacred Mosque of
Makkah, the Holy Prophet’s Mosque, and the Kufah Mosque.*[^56]

Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah has reported that Imam ‘Ali (‘a) addressed the
following words to the people of Kufah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكُوفَةِ، لَقَدْ حَبَاكُمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِمَا لَمْ
يَحْبُ بِهِ أَحَداً، مِنْ فَضْلِ مُصَلاَّكُمْ بَيْتُ آدَمَ وَبَيْتُ
نُوحٍ وَبَيْتُ إِدْرِيسَ، وَمُصَلَّى إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْخَلِيلِ،
وَمُصَلَّى أَخِي الْخِضْرِ، وَمُصَلاَّيَ، وَإِنَّ مَسْجِدَكُمْ هَذَا
لأَحَدُ الْمَسَاجِدِ الأَرْبَعَةِ الَّتِي إخْتَارَهَا اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ لأَهْلِهَا. وَكَأَنِّي بِهِ قَدْ أُتِيَ بِهِ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ فِي ثَوْبَيْنِ أَبْيَضَيْنِ يَتَشَبَّهُ بِالْمُحْرِمِ
وَيَشْفَعُ لأَِهْلِهِ وَلِمَنْ يُصَلِّي فِيهِ فَلاَ تُرَدُّ
شَفَاعَتُهُ. وَلاَ تَذْهَبُ الأَيَّامُ وَاللَّيَالِي حَتَّى يُنْصَبَ
الْحَجَرُ الأَسْوَدُ فِيهِ. وَلَيَأْتِيَنَّ عَلَيْهِ زَمَانٌ يَكُونُ
مُصَلَّى الْمَهْدِيِّ مِنْ وُلْدِي، وَمُصَلَّى كُلِّ مُؤْمِنٍ، وَلاَ
يَبْقَى عَلَى الأَرْضِ مُؤْمِنٌ إِلاَّ كَانَ بِهِ أَوْ حَنَّ قَلْبُهُ
إِلَيْهِ. فَلاَ تَهْجُرُوهُ وَتَقَرَّبُوا إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
بِالصَّلاَةِ فِيهِ وَارْغَبُوا إِلَيْهِ فِي قَضَاءِ حَوَائِجِكُمْ،
فَلَوْ يَعْلَمُ النَّاسُ مَا فِيهِ مِنَ الْبَرَكَةِ لأَتَوْهُ مِنْ
أَقْطَارِ الأَرْضِ وَلَوْ حَبْواً عَلَى الثَّلْجِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people of Kufah, Almighty Allah has bestowed something upon you that
He has not given to any other people. It is the merit of this
prayer-place of yours, which was the house of Adam (‘a), the house of
Noah(‘a), the house of Idris (Enoch)(‘a), the prayer-place of
Abraham(S), the Friend of Allah, the prayer-place of al-Khidhr (‘a), my
brother, and my prayer-place. Verily, this mosque of yours is one of
four mosques chosen by Almighty Allah for the people.*

*On the Day of Resurrection, I see this mosque brought forward, clad in
two white garments like the costume worn by Muhrims (i.e. those entering
into the sacred state before performing the ritual Hajj Pilgrimage). It
will then intercede for its people and for those who used to offer*
*prayers therein, and its intercession will not be rejected. Soon will
the Black Stone be installed in this mosque. In a coming age, this
mosque will be the prayer-place of Mahdi, one of my descendants, and the
prayer-place of all true faithful believers. At that time, there will be
no faithful believer on this globe but that he will be in this place or
will have his heart yearning for it. Should people come to know the
blessing found in this mosque, they would come to it from the furthest
regions of the world even crawling on snow.*[^57]

Moreover, some traditions have mentioned more merits and rewards for
visiting this mosque than those mentioned for the Furthest Mosque of
Jerusalem.

In this respect, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
narrating the following:

One day, a man came to Imam ‘Ali (‘a), who was in the Kufah Mosque, and
greeted him, saying, “Peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you,
O Commander of the Faithful.”

As the Imam (‘a) responded to his greeting, the man said, “I have
intended to head for the Furthest Mosque (of Jerusalem) and I thus
wanted to greet and bid you farewell before I leave.”

“What do you expect from this journey?” the Imam (‘a) asked.

“I expect to attain its reward and merit,” answered the man.

The Imam (‘a) advised:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِعْ رَاحِلَتَكَ وَكُلْ زَادَكَ وَصَلِّ فِي هَذَا الْمَسْجِدِ;
فَإِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ الْمَكْتُوبَةَ فِيهِ حِجَّةٌ مَبْرُورَةٌ
وَالنَّافِلَةَ عُمْرَةٌ مَبْرُورَةٌ وَالْبَرَكَةَ مِنْهُ عَلَى اثْنَيْ
عَشَرَ مِيلاً. يَمِينُهُ يُمْنٌ وَيَسَارُهُ مَكْرٌ. وَفِي وَسَطِهِ
عَيْنٌ مِنْ دُهْنٍ وَعَيْنٌ مِنْ لَبَنٍ وَعَيْنٌ مِنْ مَاءٍ شَرَابٌ
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ، وَعَيْنٌ مِنْ مَاءٍ طَاهِرٍ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ. مِنْهُ
سَارَتْ سَفِينَةُ نُوحٍ، وَكَانِ فَِيهِ (نَسْرٌ) وَ(يَغُوثُ)
وَ(يَعُوقُ)، وَصَلَّى فِيهِ سَبْعُونَ نَبِيّاً وَسَبْعُونَ وَصِيّاً
أَنَا أَحَدُهُمْ. مَا دَعَا فِيهِ مَكْرُوبٌ بِمَسْأَلَةٍ فِي حَاجَةٍ
مِنَ الْحَوَائِجِ إِلاَّ أَجَابَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَى وَفَرَّجَ عَنْهُ
كُرْبَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If so, you may sell your riding-animal, consume your provisions, and
pray at this mosque, for performing an obligatory prayer at this mosque
is equal (in reward) to performing one Hajj, and offering a
supererogatory prayer to performing one ‘Umrah. The blessed area is only
twelve miles away from the mosque where its right side is felicity while
its left side is ill omen. In its center, there is a spring of oil, a
spring of milk, a spring of fresh water for the believers, and a spring
of pure water for them, too. From this place, the ark of Prophet Noah
(‘a) set off, where there had been the idols Nasr, Yaghuth, and
Ya’uq.*[^58] *At this place too, seventy prophets and seventy successors
of prophets, one of whom is myself, offered prayers. No agonized person
prays to Almighty Allah for any request without his prayer being granted
by Allah and his agony relieved.*[^59]

It is maintained by many traditions that at the Kufah Mosque there are
stations ascribed to some prophets and Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
For instance, the station of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), is situated at the seventh column of the mosque, the station of
Imam Hasan (‘a) at the fifth, the station of Prophet Abraham (S) at the
third, and the station of Archangel Gabriel (‘a) at the fifth, directly
behind the Kindah Gate.[^60]

Books on supplications and formulas of *ziyarah* have mentioned special
devotional rites, prayers, supplications, and whispered prayers to be
practiced at the Kufah Mosque, such as the two-unit prayer of granting
requests. In each unit Surah al-Fatihah (No. 1), Surah al-Falaq (No.
113), Surah al-Nas (No. 114), Surah al-Tawhid (No. 112), Surah
al-Kafirun (No. 109), Surah al-Nasr (No. 110), and Surah al-Qadr (No.
97) are recited. Upon accomplishment, the famous Tasbih al-Zahra'
litany[^61] is said and then one’s request is made through supplication.
Once one does all that, his request will be granted by Almighty Allah
and his prayers will be responded to, Allah willing.[^62]

### Imam ‘Ali’s Tomb and Wadi al-Salam

In Kufah is the tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), which is situated at the back of
the city by the side of the white hills. This region is called Ghari and
Najaf. It was too dry to support vegetation. After the appearance of
Imam ‘Ali’s tomb in this area, the people of Kufah used to bury their
dead people there. The modern city of Najaf was established around the
tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) and then became the central city of the Najaf
Governorate. The city of Kufah became a district attached to it.

The method and merits of visiting the tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) have been
cited within the chapter on the virtues of this holy place.

Nasir al-Din al-Tusi has reported on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl, the nephew of Dawud al-Raqqi, that Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْبَعُ بِقَاعٍ ضَجَّتْ إِلَى اللهِ أَيَّامَ الطُّوفَانِ: الْبَيْتُ
الْمَعْمُورُ فَرَفَعَهُ اللهُ، وَالْغَرِيُّ وَكَرْبَلاءُ وَطُوسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the days of Noah’s flood, four regions cried to Almighty Allah: the
Much-Frequented House, which Almighty Allah thus raised, Ghari,
Karbala', and Tus.*[^63]

In his book, entitled *Fadhl al-Kufah*, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan
al-’Alawi reports, through a chain of authority connected to ‘Uqbah ibn
‘Alqamah Abu’l-Janub, that Imam ‘Ali (‘a) purchased the area between the
Khawarnaq Palace and Hirah in Kufah, (or the area between Najaf and
Hirah, according to another narration), with forty thousand Dirhams and
called some people to witness the contract. “Why have you, Commander of
the Faithful (‘a), purchased this land at such a high price while it is
barren?” they asked.

He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعْتُ مِنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَقُولُ:
كُوفَانُ كُوفَانُ؛ يُرَدُّ أَوَّلُهَا عَلَى آخِرِهَا، يُحْشَرُ مِنْ
ظَهْرِهَا سَبْعُونَ أَلْفاً يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ.
فَاشْتَهَيْتُ أَنْ يُحْشَرُوا مِنْ مِلْكِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I have heard the Messenger of Allah (S) saying, “Kufan! Kufan! The
first of it shall be returned to the last of it (because of complete
destruction to which this city will be exposed). From this region,
seventy thousand individuals shall be resurrected and allowed to enter
Paradise without settling an account with them.” I, therefore, would
like these people to be resurrected from my property.*[^64]

Badr ibn Khalil al-Asadi has reported on the authority of a man from
Sham that Imam ‘Ali (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَّلُ بُقْعَةٍ عُبِدَ اللهُ عَلَيْهَا ظَهْرُ الْكُوفَةِ، لَمَّا
أَمَرَ اللهُ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ أَنْ يَسْجُدُوا لآِدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا عَلَى
ظَهْرِ الْكُوفَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The first region (of the earth) on which Almighty Allah was worshipped
is behind Kufah. That was when Almighty Allah ordered the angels to
prostrate themselves before Adam (‘a); so, they did at the place behind
Kufah.*[^65]

Habbah al-’Arani has reported that he once accompanied Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to
Kufah. There, the Imam (‘a) stopped at Wadi al-Salam as if he were
talking to some people. Following him, I stood with him for so long that
I felt worn out. I then sat for a long time until I grew weary. So, I
stood up again until I felt tired and had to sit down again. Again, I
sat down for so long that I felt weary. The third time, I stood up,
gathered my garment, and said, “O Commander of the Faithful (‘a), I feel
pity for you because you have been standing for such a long time. Would
you like to rest for a while?” I then put the garment on the ground so
that he could sit on it.

The Imam (‘a) then said to me, “O Habbah, this has been no more than a
discourse with a faithful believer—a kind of pleasure.”

“O Commander of the Faithful (‘a),” I said, “Are they communicating?”

The Imam (‘a) answered, “Yes, they are. If you were now allowed to see
the unseen, you would see them in meetings speaking to one another.”

“Are they bodies or spirits?” I asked.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْوَاحٌ، وَمَا مِنْ مُؤْمِنٍ يَمُوتُ فِي بُقْعَةٍ مِنْ بِقَاعِ
الأَرْضِ إِلاَّ قِيلَ لِرُوحِهِ: إِلْحَقِي بِوَادِي السَّلاَمِ.
وَإِنَّها لَبُقْعَةٌ مِنْ جَنَّةِ عَدْنٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They are spirits. There is no faithful believer that dies in any region
on this earth except that his soul is allowed to join Wadi al-Salam,
which is also an area in the Garden of Eden.*[^66]

Safwan al-Jammal has reported that he once accompanied Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) on a journey from Madinah to Hirah. When they passed over Hirah,
the Imam (‘a) asked Safwan to lead the riding-animals to the road that
led to Ghari. When they reached that place, the Imam (‘a) took out a
thin rope made of coir which he had carried with him and then moved many
steps away from the road towards the west. He then stretched that rope
and stopped at its other end. He then tapped the ground with his hands
and took a handful of dust that he smelt for a long time. He then walked
towards the place where Imam ‘Ali’s tomb lay. On the tomb, he spread the
dust with his blessed hand, took a handful of it, smelt it, and sobbed
so heavily that I thought he had passed away. When he recovered
consciousness, he said, “This is, by Allah, the burial place of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a).”

The Imam (‘a) then drew a sketch.

I asked him, “O son of Allah’s Messenger (‘a), what had made the
rightful members of Muhammad’s Household (‘a) refrain from showing this
burial place to the people?”

The Imam (‘a) answered, “They feared lest the descendants of Marwan and
the Khawarij would damage this place.”

Safwan then asked the Imam (‘a) how to visit the tomb of Imam ‘Ali (‘a),
and the Imam (‘a) instructed:

To visit his tomb, you should bathe yourself, put on two new or clean
and ceremonially pure garments, and use a perfume, although it is
acceptable without this. When you are about to leave your house, you may
say, “I am leaving my house, seeking Allah’s bounty… etc.”[^67]

### Sahlah Mosque

Sahlah (or *Suhayl*) Mosque is one of the holy places of Kufah. Many
traditions report the merits of this mosque, such as Imam al-Sadiq’s
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ مَكْرُوبٍ يَأْتِي مَسْجِدَ السَّهْلَةِ وَيُصَلِّي فِيهِ
رَكْعَتَيْنِ بَيْنَ الْعِشَائَيْنِ وَيَدْعُو اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
إِلاَّ فَرَّجَ اللهُ كُرْبَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any aggrieved person who visits al-Sahlah Mosque, performs the Maghrib
and ‘Isha' Prayers thereat, and supplicates, Almighty Allah will most
certainly have his grief relieved by Him.*[^68]

Other traditions hold that Sahlah Mosque is the place where the prophets
and righteous persons offered prayers since the time of Prophet Abraham
(S) and even before that.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn Aban
that he, accompanied by others, visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) who asked if
any one of them had something to tell about Zayd ibn ‘Ali, the Imam’s
uncle. One the attendants thus related, “I do. One night, we gathered at
the house of Mu’awiyah ibn Ishaq al-Ansari who called us to visit Sahlah
Mosque and to offer a prayer thereat. However, something happened to
Zayd and prevented him from going there.”

Commenting on this event, the Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَاللهِ لَوِ اسْتَعَاذَ اللهَ بِهِ حَوْلاً لأَعَاذَهُ. أَمَا
عَلِمْتَ أَنَّهُ مَوْضِعُ بَيْتِ إِدْرِيسَ النَّبِيِّ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ الَّذِي كَانَ يَخِيطُ فِيهِ، وَمِنْهُ سَارَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ
إِلَى الْيَمَنِ بِالْعَمَالِقَةِ، وَمِنْهُ سَارَ دَاوُدُ إِلَى
جَالُوتَ، وَإِنَّ فِيهِ لَصَخْرَةً خَضْرَاءَ فِيهَا مِثَالُ كُلِّ
نَبِيٍّ، وَمِنْ تَحْتِ تِلْكَ الصَّخْرَةِ أُخِذَتْ طِينَةُ كُلِّ
نَبِيٍّ؟ وَإِنَّهُ لَمُنَاخُ الرَّاكِبِ… الْخِضْرِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah (I swear), if he had sought Almighty Allah’s protection in the
name of that place, he would certainly have been given protection for a
whole year at least. Do you not know that the Sahlah Mosque is the place
where Prophet Idris (‘a) lived and used to sew. From this place too,
Prophet Abraham (S) lead the Giants towards Yemen. Likewise, from this
place, Prophet David (‘a) moved to confront Goliath. In this place,
there is a green rock on which the picture of each prophet was carved
and from beneath this rock, the clay of every prophet (from which they
were created) was taken. The Rider also resided at this place… i.e.
al-Khidhr (‘a).*[^69]

Salih ibn Abi’l-Aswad has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا إِنَّهُ مَنْزِلُ صَاحِبِنَا إِذَا قَامَ بِأَهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahlah Mosque is the house where our Master (i.e. Imam al-Mahdi (‘a))
shall reside along with his family members.*[^70]

Imam Al-Husayn’s Sanctuary
--------------------------

In the previous section on pilgrimages to the tombs of the Holy Imams
(‘a), we have cited the great reward and merits of visiting the tomb of
Imam al-Husayn (‘a), the Master of Martyrs. This pilgrimage acquires a
distinctive importance with regard to the spiritual, cultural,
political, individual, and communal significance of the Event of
Karbala'.

Moreover, Imam al-Husayn’s sanctuary (also called *al-ha'ir al-husayni*;
the place where water would not flow over his tomb on various
occasions), represented by Imam al-Husayn’s holy shrine, enjoys great
merit that no other place can ever have.

Many traditions report the merits of this sanctuary, such as the
following one reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni, Shaykh Ibn Qawlawayh, and
Shaykh al-Tusi, through several chains of authority, from Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِمَوْضِعِ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ حُرْمَةً
مَعْرُوفَةً؛ مَنْ عَرَفَهَا وَاسْتَجَارَ بِهَا أُجِيرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The place of Husayn’s tomb enjoys a well-recognized sanctity. Whoever
recognizes and seeks refuge through it, shall be protected.*

The reporter then asked the Imam (‘a) to mark out the borders of that
place.

The Imam (‘a) answering him said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِمْسَحْ مِنْ مَوْضِعِ قَبْرِهِ الْيَوْمَ خَمْسَةً وَعِشْرِينَ
ذِرَاعاً مِنْ نَاحِيَةِ رِجْلَيْهِ وَخَمْسَةً وَعِشْرِينَ ذِرَاعاً
مِنْ نَاحِيَةِ رَأْسِهِ. وَمَوْضِعُ قَبْرِهِ مِنْ يَوْمِ دُفِنَ
رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ. وَمِنْهُ مِعْرَاجٌ تُعْرَجُ فِيهِ
بِأَعْمَالِ زُوَّارِهِ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ. وَمَا مِنْ مَلَكٍ فِي
السَّمَاءِ وَلاَ فِي الأَرْضِ إِلاَّ وَهُمْ يَسْأَلُونَ اللهَ أَنْ
يَأْذَنَ لَهُمْ فِي زِيَارَةِ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ،
فَفَوْجٌ يَنْزِلُ وَفَوْجٌ يَعْرُجُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*From the current place of his tomb, survey twenty-five cubits from the
side of his feet and twenty-five cubits from the side of the head. Since
the day he was buried, the place of his tomb has been a garden of
Paradise. From this place, the deeds of his visitors ascend to the
heavens. All the angels of the heavens and of the earth are always
asking Almighty Allah to permit them to visit Husayn’s tomb. Thus, a
group (of angels) is seen descending while another is ascending.*[^71]

On the authority of his father, ‘Umar ibn Thabit has reported Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ اللهُ كَرْبَلاَءَ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ الْكَعْبَةَ بِأَرْبَعَةٍ
وَعِشْرِينَ أَلْفَ عَامٍ، وَقَدَّسَهَا وَبَارَكَ عَلَيْهَا، فَمَا
زَالَتْ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ اللهُ الْخَلْقَ مُقَدَّسَةً مُبَارَكَةً
وَلاَ تَزَالُ كَذَلِكَ، وَجَعَلَهَا اللهُ أَفْضَلَ الأَرْضِ فِي
الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah had created Karbala' twenty-four thousand years before
he created the Ka’bah. Since then, He deemed it sacred and blessed it.
Karbala' has thus always been sacred and blessed even before He created
the creations and for all time to come. He has made it the best of all
the regions of the earth in Paradise.*[^72]

Muhammad ibn Sinan reports on the authority of someone he had not named
that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

One day, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) led some people on a journey. When he was about
one or two miles away from Karbala', he moved toward it. When he arrived
at the place where the martyrs of Karbala' would be martyred, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبْرٌ فِيهَا مِائَتَا نَبِيٍّ، وَمِائَتَا وَصِيٍّ، وَمِائَتَا سِبْطٍ
شُهَدَاءٌ بِأَتْبَاعِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is a place which contains the bodies of two hundred prophets, two
hundred successors of prophets, and two hundred descendants of prophets
along with their followers, all of whom were martyred.*

Circumambulating that place, the Imam (‘a) took out his feet from the
stirrup of his riding-animal and said repeatedly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُنَاخٌ وِكَافٌ وَمَصَارِعُ شُهَدَاءَ لاَ يَسْبِقُهُمْ مَنْ كَانَ
قَبْلَهُمْ وَلاَ يَلْحَقُهُمْ مَنْ كَانَ بَعْدَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is a residence where the martyrs who were never excelled by those
that existed before them and shall never be surpassed by those who will
exist after them will be martyred.*[^73]

### Imam al-Husayn’s Soil

In addition to the sacredness and the rewards obtained from visiting the
holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), Almighty Allah has given this place
further positive (i.e. material) particularities one of which is that
the soil of this place brings about healing for the sick. Accordingly,
master jurisprudents have permitted using a very small amount of this
soil for healing purposes even though it is generally forbidden to eat
any amount of soil.[^74]

Many traditions recommend seeking healing from the soil of Imam
al-Husayn’s tomb. For instance, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on the
authority of Yunus ibn al-Rabi’ that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِنْدَ رَأْسِ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ لَتُرْبَةٌ حَمْرَاءُ
فِيهَا شِفَاءٌ مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ إِلاَّ السَّامَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*At the head of Husayn’s tomb, there is red soil that holds remedy for
all maladies except death.*[^75]

‘Abdullah ibn Ya’fur reports that he once said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),
“Some people take a piece of the soil of Imam al-Husayn’s tomb and it
benefits them; however, when others do this, they do not find any
benefit. Why is that?”

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ وَاللهِ، لاَ يَأْخُذُهُ أَحَدٌ وَهُوَ يَرَى أَنَّ اللهَ يَنْفَعُهُ
بِهِ إِلاَّ نَفَعَهُ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is untrue. I swear it by Allah. Every one who takes from this soil
and believes that Almighty Allah will benefit him by it, will certainly
find benefit.*[^76]

Shaykh al-Tusi has reported on the authority of Zayd al-Shahham that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

Verily, Almighty Allah has made the soil of Husayn’s tomb a remedy for
all maladies and security against all feared matters. When you intend to
use any amount of it, kiss it, pass it over both your eyes and the other
body organs and then say the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ بِحَقِّ هَذِهِ التُّرْبَةِ وَبِحَقِّ مَنْ حَلَّ بِهَا
وَثَوَىٰ فِيهَا وَبِحِقِّ جَدِّهِ وَاَبِيهِ وَأُمِّهِ وَاَخِيهِ
وَالاَئِمَّةِ مِنْ وُلْدِهِ وَبِحَقِّ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ الْحَافِّينَ بِهِ
إِِلاَّ جَعَلْتَهَا شِفَاءً مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ وَبُرْءاً مِنْ كُلِّ
مَرَضٍ وَنَجَاةً مِنْ كُلِّ آفَةٍ وَحِرْزاً مِمَّا اَخَافُ وَاَحْذَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, for the sake of this dust, for the sake of him who resided in
it and occupied it, for the sake of his grandfather, his father, his
mother, his brother, and the Imams from his descendants (‘a), and for
the sake of the angels who surround him, [I beseech You to] make it a
remedy for all maladies, a cure for all diseases, a security against all
epidemics, and a refuge against whatever I fear.*

After that, one may use it.

Abu-Usamah commented, “Since I have used it from early times, I have
found it exactly as Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) had said. Since then, I have
never faced any misfortune, thanks to Almighty Allah.”

It is also recommended to use rosaries whose beads are made of the clay
of Imam al-Husayn’s tomb. One of the merits of such rosaries is that the
reward of praising and glorifying Almighty Allah is recorded for one who
carries such rosaries in the hand even if he is inattentive.

Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Himyari reports that he once wrote
a letter to a Jurisprudent asking him whether it is or not permissible
to use rosaries made of the clay of Imam al-Husayn’s tomb and whether
there is a merit in doing so.

My letter, he said, was answered back as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسَبِّحُ بِهِ، فَمَا فِي شَيْءٍ مِنَ السُّبَحِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْهُ،
وَمِنْ فَضْلِهِ أَنَّ الْمُسَبِّحَ يَنْسَى التَّسْبِيحَ وَيُدِيرُ
السُّبْحَةَ فَيُكْتَبُ لَهُ ذَلِكَ التَّسْبِيحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may use it (i.e. the clay) in making rosaries, for there are no
rosaries better than those made of this clay. One of the merits of
glorifying Almighty Allah using such rosaries is that when one, having
such a rosary in the hand, omits uttering words of glorification, the
reward of it is still recorded for him.*[^77]

### Response of Prayers under his Dome

Another distinctive merit of Imam al-Husayn’s holy shrine is that all
supplicatory prayers offered under the dome of this shrine will be
responded.

In the word of Ahmad ibn Fahad, it is reported that Almighty Allah has
compensated Imam al-Husayn (‘a) for his martyrdom with four
characteristics:

(1) He has made the clay of his tomb a remedy for ailments

(2) He responds to all prayers offered under the dome of his tomb

(3) He made the other Holy Imams (‘a) descend from him

(4) He has determined the days during which his tomb is visited to be
added to the lifespan of its pilgrims

Shu’ayb al-’Aqarqufi has reported that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
about the reward of visiting the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), and he
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا شُعَيْبُ، مَا صَلَّى عِنْدَهُ أَحَدٌ وَدَعَا دَعْوَةً إِلاَّ
اسْتُجِيبَ عَاجِلَةً وَآجِلَةً… أَيْسَرُ مَا يُقَالُ لِزَائِرِ
الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ: قَدْ غُفِرَ لَكَ فَاسْتَأْنِفِ
الْيَوْمَ عَمَلاً جَدِيداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Shu’ayb, whoever offers a prayer at his tomb or supplicates, will
certainly have his supplication responded sooner or later….The least
thing said to a pilgrim of Imam al-Husayn’s tomb is the following: You
are forgiven; therefore, make for yourself a new beginning on this
day.[^78]

Many other traditions have reported many rewards for those offering
prayers and performing devotional acts at the tomb of Imam al-Husayn
(‘a).

Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) to have
addressed the following words to someone:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَمْنَعُكَ إِذَا عَرَضَتْ لَكَ حَاجَةٌ أَنْ تَأْتِيَ قَبْرَ
الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَتُصَلِّي عِنْدَهُ أَرْبَعَ
رَكَعَاتٍ، ثُمَّ تَسْأَلُ حَاجَتَكَ؟ فَإِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ الْمَفْرُوضَةَ
عِنْدَهُ تَعْدِلُ حِجَّةً، وَالصَّلاَةُ النَّافِلَةُ عِنْدَهُ تَعْدِلُ
عُمْرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What prevents you, when you need any of your requests to be granted,
from coming to the tomb of Husayn (‘a), offering a four-unit prayer
there, and then imploring for what you need? Verily, an obligatory
prayer that is performed there is equal to one Hajj Pilgrimage and a
supererogatory prayer to one ‘Umrah.*[^79]

Abu’l-Numayr has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ وِلاَيَتَنَا عُرِضَتْ عَلَى أَهْلِ الأَمْصَارِ فَلَمْ
يَقْبَلْهَا قَبُولَ أَهْلِ الْكُوفَةِ شَيْءٌ، وَذَلِكَ أَنَّ قَبْرَ
أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فِيهِ، وَإِنَّ إِلَى
لُزْقَتِهِ لَقَبْراً آخَرَ، يَعْنِي قَبْرَ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ
السَّلاَمُ، وَمَا مِنْ آتٍ أَتَاهُ يُصَلِّي عِنْدَهُ رَكْعَتَيْنِ أَوْ
أَرْبَعاً ثُمَّ سَأَلَ اللهَ حَاجَتَهُ إِلاَّ قَضَاهَا لَهُ، وَإِنَّهُ
لَيَحُفُّهُ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ أَلْفُ مَلَكٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The (divinely designated) loyalty to our leadership was offered to the
people of all countries, but none accepted it like the acceptance of the
people of Kufah. This is because the tomb of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) lies there. Next to him, there is another tomb (that is
the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (‘a)). No visitor comes to that tomb, offers
a two or four-unit prayer, and then prays to Almighty Allah to grant him
his request but that He shall certainly grant him that request. Every
day, one thousand angels surround this tomb.*[^80]

### Optionality of Performing the Prayers in Complete or Shortened Form

The holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) is one of the four places where
it is optional to perform the obligatory prayers in complete or
shortened form by travelers.[^81] The other three places are the city of
Makkah (or the Sacred Mosque specifically), the city of Madinah (or the
Holy Prophet’s Mosque specifically), and the Kufah Mosque. This verdict
has been issued by a large number of scholars and well-qualified
jurisprudents.[^82]

In this connection, Hammad ibn ‘Isa has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ مَخْزُونِ عِلْمِ اللهِ الإِتْمَامُ فِي أَرْبَعَةِ مَوَاطِنَ:
حَرَمِ اللهِ، وَحَرَمِ رَسُولِهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
وَحَرَمِ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، وَحَرَمِ
الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Of the collective knowledge of Almighty Allah it is revealed to perform
the (obligatory) prayer in the complete form at four places; (1) the
Sanctuary of Almighty Allah, (2) the Sanctuary of His Messenger (S), (3)
the Sanctuary of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), and (4) the
Sanctuary of Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a).*[^83]

Similarly, Ziyad al-Qandi has reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying to
him:

**
**
يَا زِيَادُ، أُحِبُّ لَكَ مَا أُحِبُّ لِنَفْسِي وَأَكْرَهُ لَكَ مَا
أَكْرَهُ لِنَفْسِي; أَتِمَّ الصَّلاَةَ فِي الْحَرَمَيْنِ وَبِالْكُوفَةِ
وَعِنْدَ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ.

*O Ziyad, I love for you whatever I love for myself and I hate for you
whatever I hate for myself. Perform the prayers in the complete form at
the two Sanctuaries (of Makkah and Madinah), in Kufah, and at the tomb
of Husayn (‘a).*[^84]

Other Mosques and Holy Places
-----------------------------

### Jerusalem and the Furthest Mosque

The Furthest Mosque (*al-masjid al-aqsa*) is the place to which the Holy
Prophet (S) was carried at night (during his Night Ascension to the
heavens) and to which the Holy Qur'an has referred to, saying:

> سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَى بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
> الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
> لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ (1)

***Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from the Sacred
Mosque to the Furthest Mosque of which We have blessed the precincts so
that We may show to him some of Our signs. Surely, He is the Hearing,
the Seeing. (17:1)***

According to other traditions, the Furthest Mosque (of Jerusalem) was
the place from which the Holy Prophet (S) started his night ascension to
the heavens.[^85] At that place too, there is a famous rock known to be
the very place of the Holy Prophet’s ascension to the skies.

About the merit of this mosque, a famous tradition upon which all
Muslims unanimously agree reports the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُشَدُّ الرِّحَالُ إِلاَّ إِلَى مَسَاجِدَ ثَلاَثٍ: الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ وَمَسْجِدِ النَّبِيِّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَالْمَسْجِدِ الأَقْصَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Luggage must not be packed except for travel to three mosques: the
Sacred Mosque (of Makkah), the Prophet’s Mosque, and the Furthest
Mosque.[^86]

Traditions that are reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) confirm this
distinctive feature. In this respect, Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali has quoted
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَسَاجِدُ الأَرْبَعَةُ الْمَسْجِدُ الْحَرَامُ، وَمَسْجِدُ رَسُولِ
اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَمَسْجِدُ بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ،
وَمَسْجِدُ الْكُوفَةِ. الْفَرِيضَةُ فِيهَا تَعْدِلُ حِجَّةً،
وَالنَّافِلَةُ فِيهَا تَعْدِلُ عُمْرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The most distinctive mosques are four: (1) the Sacred Mosque (of
Makkah), (2) the Prophet’s Mosque, (3) the Mosque of Jerusalem, and (4)
the Kufah Mosque. An obligatory prayer performed at these mosques is
equal (in reward) to one Hajj Pilgrimage and a supererogatory prayer to
one ‘Umrah.*[^87]

Al-Sakuni has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) on the authority of his father
on the authority of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاَةٌ فِي بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ تَعْدِلُ أَلْفَ صَلاَةٍ، وَصَلاَةٌ فِي
الْمَسْجِدِ الأَعْظَمِ مِائَةُ صَلاَةٍ، وَصَلاَةٌ فِي مَسْجِدِ
الْقَبِيلَةِ خَمْسٌ وَعِشْرُونَ صَلاَةً، وَصَلاَةٌ فِي مَسْجِدِ
السُّوقِ إثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ صَلاَةً، وَصَلاَةُ الرَّجُلِ فِي بَيْتِهِ
وَحْدَهُ صَلاَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One prayer offered at the mosque of Jerusalem is equal to one thousand
prayers, one prayer at the Great Mosque is equal to one hundred, one
prayer at the tribe mosque is equal to twenty-five, and one prayer at
the mosque of the market is equal to twelve, while one prayer at one’s
house alone is considered one only.*[^88]

### The Khif Mosque

Among the other holy places that are deemed sacred by Muslims is the
Khif Mosque at Mina, which is the grand mosque there. A number of
traditions from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) report the merits of this mosque,
the merits of offering devotional acts therein, and the method of
offering such acts.

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid chain of authority that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ فِي مَسْجِدِ الْخِيفِ وَهُوَ مَسْجِدُ مِنَى، وَمَكَانُ مَسْجِدِ
رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ عَلَى عَهْدِهِ عِنْدَ
الْمَنَارَةِ الَّتِي فِي وَسَطِ الْمَسْجِدِ، وَفَوْقَهَا إِلَى
الْقِبْلَةِ نَحْواً مِنْ ثَلاَثِينَ ذِرَاعاً وَعَنْ يَمِينِهَا وَعَنْ
يَسَارِهَا وَخَلْفِهَا نَحْواً مِنْ ذَلِكَ. فَتَحَرَّ ذَلِكَ فَإِنِ
اسْتَطَعْتَ أَنْ يَكُونَ مُصَلاَّكَ فِيهِ فَافْعَلْ; فَإِنَّهُ قَدْ
صَلَّى فِيهِ أَلْفُ نَبِيٍّ، وَإِنَّمَا سُمِّيَ الْخِيفَ لأَِنَّهُ
مُرْتَفِعٌ عَنِ الْوَادِي، وَمَا ارْتَفَعَ عَنِ الْوَادِي سُمِّيَ
خِيفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Offer prayers at the Khif Mosque, which is the mosque of Mina and the
place of the Holy Prophet’s prostration, specifically near the column
that is in the center of this mosque and about thirty cubits towards the
kiblah direction and to its left, right, and back. Investigate this very
place and make it your prayer-place, if possible, because one thousand
prophets offered prayers here. This mosque has been called so because it
is mounting up the valley, and every mounting place is called
khif.*[^89]

Other traditions have mentioned the merits of offering prayers and
devotional acts at this mosque. Shaykh al-Saduq, through a valid chain
of authority, has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ صَلَّى فِي مَسْجِدِ الْخِيفِ بِمِنَى مِائَةَ رَكْعَةٍ قَبْلَ أَنْ
يَخْرُجَ مِنْهُ عَدَلَتْ عِبَادَةَ سَبْعِينَ عَاماً، وَمَنْ سَبَّحَ
اللهَ فِيهِ مِائَةَ تَسْبِيحَةٍ كُتِبَ لَهُ كَأَجْرِ عِتْقِ رَقَبَةٍ،
وَمَنْ هَلَّلَ اللهَ فِيهِ مِائَةَ تَهْلِيلَةٍ عَدَلَتْ أَجْرَ
إِحْيَاءِ نَسَمَةٍ، وَمَنْ حَمِدَ اللهَ فِيهِ مِائَةَ تَحْمِيدَةٍ
عَدَلَتْ أَجْرَ خَرَاجِ الْعِرَاقَيْنِ يَتَصَدَّقُ بِهِ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever offers one hundred units of prayers at the Khif Mosque before
he leaves it, his prayers will be equal in reward to doing acts of
worship for seventy years. Whoever glorifies Almighty Allah at this
mosque one hundred times, will have the reward of manumitting a slave.
Whoever professes Almighty Allah’s being the One and Only God at this
mosque one hundred times, his words will be equal to the reward of
giving life to a human being. Whoever praises Almighty Allah one hundred
times at this mosque, his doxology will be equal to the reward of giving
as alms for Almighty Allah’s sake the tributes of both Kufah and Basrah
in Iraq.*[^90]

Shaykh al-Kulayni has also quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ سِتَّ رَكَعَاتٍ فِي مَسْجِدِ مِنَى فِي أَصْلِ الصَّوْمَعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Offer six units of prayer at the center of the Mina Mosque.*[^91]

### Buratha Mosque

One of the famous mosques of Baghdad, the Buratha Mosque is situated on
the road between Baghdad and Kazimiyyah. In his book of *Mu’jam
al-Buldan*, al-Hamawi, one of the historians of the fifth century, has
referred to this mosque. Likewise, traditions reported from the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) have referred to this mosque. Shaykh al-Qummi, in his book
of *Mafatih al-Jinan*,[^92] has also mentioned this mosque and its
merits with some details.

Let us now cite a tradition that is reported by Shaykh al-Saduq, in
*man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih* and Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*,
on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari, the magnificent
companion of the Holy Prophet (S):

Upon his return from fighting the evil forces, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) led about
one hundred thousand men in a congregational prayer at Buratha. Upon
completion, a Christian man came out from his hermitage and asked about
the commander-in-chief of our army. He was thus led to Imam ‘Ali (‘a).

“Are you a prophet, sir?” asked the Christian.

“No, I am not,” answered Imam ‘Ali (‘a), “the prophet, who is my master,
has died.”

“So, you are a prophet’s successor, are you not?” asked the man.

“Yes, I am,” answered Imam ‘Ali (‘a) and asked the man to sit with him,
“Why have you asked these questions?” asked Imam ‘Ali (‘a).

The man explained, “This hermitage was established here because of this
place, which is Buratha. In the divinely revealed books, I have read
that no one except a prophet or a prophet’s successor would lead such a
group in a prayer at this place. I have just come to declare my
conversion to Islam.”

So, the man became a Muslim and accompanied us to Kufah. On their way,
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) asked him, “Do you know who offered prayers at this
place?”

“Jesus and his mother (‘a) did,” answered the man.

“May I tell you more,” suggested Imam ‘Ali (‘a).

“Yes, please,” answered the man.

“The Friend of Allah (i.e. Prophet Abraham (S)) also offered prayers at
this place,” informed Imam ‘Ali (‘a).[^93]

### Imam al-Ridha’s Holy Shrine

About the merits, rewards, and significance of visiting the tomb of Imam
‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (‘a) in the land of Khurasan, many traditions
have been reported in a supportive manner. Some of these have been
previously cited in the discussion of pilgrimages to the Holy Imams
(‘a).

In addition to the merits and rewards of making pilgrimages to this
place, many other traditions and texts have confirmed the sanctity of
the blessed tomb. As has been previously cited, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْبَعُ بِقَاعٍ ضَجَّتْ إِلَى اللهِ أَيَّامَ الطُّوفَانِ: الْبَيْتُ
الْمَعْمُورُ فَرَفَعَهُ اللهُ، وَالْغَرِيُّ وَكَرْبَلاءُ وَطُوسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the days of Noah’s flood, four regions cried to Almighty Allah: the
Much-Frequented House, which Almighty Allah thus raised, Ghari,
Karbala', and Tus.*[^94]

Shaykh al-Saduq, in his books of *man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*,
*al-Majalis*, and *‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha*, has reported through a valid
chain of authority that al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Fadhdhal quoted Imam
al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ بِخُرَاسَانَ لَبُقْعَةً يَأْتِي عَلَيْهَا زَمَانٌ تَصِيرُ
مُخْتَلَفَ الْمَلائِكَةِ فَلا يَزَالُ فَوْجٌ يَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ
وَفَوْجٌ يَصْعَدُ إِلَى أَنْ يُنْفَخَ فِي الصُّورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is an area in Khurasan where angels will come and go. All the
time a group of angels will be landing there from the sky and another
group will be departing from there to go to the heavens. This will
continue forever until the Trumpet is sounded.*

“Which area is this?” the Imam (‘a) was asked.

He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ بِأَرْضِ طُوسَ فَهِيَ وَاللَّهِ رَوْضَةٌ مِنْ رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ
مَنْ زَارَنِي فِي تِلْكَ الْبُقْعَةِ كَانَ كَمَنْ زَارَ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَكَتَبَ اللَّهُ تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالَى لَهُ ثَوَابَ أَلْفِ حَجَّةٍ مَبْرُورَةٍ وَأَلْفِ عُمْرَةٍ
مَقْبُولَةٍ وَكُنْتُ أَنَا وَآبَائِي شُفَعَاءَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is in the land of Tus and it is, by Allah, a garden of Paradise.
Whoever visits me in this area will be as if he has visited the
Messenger* *of Allah (S) and Almighty Allah will record for him the
rewards* *of one thousand Hajj Pilgrimages, one thousand ‘Umrahs, and my
fathers and I will be his intercessors on the Resurrection Day.*[^95]

Al-Saqr ibn Dalaf has reported that he heard ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali
al-Ridha (i.e. Imam al-Hadi (‘a)) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ إِلَى اللهِ حَاجَةٌ فَلْيَزُرْ قَبْرَ جَدِّيَ
الرِّضَا عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ بِطُوسَ وَهُوَ عَلَى غُسْلٍ، وَلْيُصَلِّ
عِنْدَ رَأْسِهِ رَكْعَتَيْنِ، وَلْيَسْأَلِ اللهَ تَعَالَى حَاجَتَهُ
فِي قُنُوتِهِ، فَإِنَّهُ يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ مَا لَمْ يَسْأَلْ مَأْثَماً
أَوْ قَطِيعَةَ رَحِمٍ. إِنَّ مَوْضِعَ قَبْرِهِ لَبُقْعَةٌ مِنْ بِقَاعِ
الْجَنَّةِ لاَ يَزُورُهَا مُؤْمِنٌ إِلاَّ أَعْتَقَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَى
مِنَ النَّارِ وَأَدْخَلَهُ دَارَ الْقَرَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever has a request to be granted by Almighty Allah should visit the
tomb of al-Ridha (‘a), my grandfather, in Tus after performing the
ritual bath. He should then offer a two-unit prayer at the side of the
Imam’s head and ask Almighty Allah to grant him his request in the
ritual supplication of that prayer (i.e. qunut). If he does all that,
his request will certainly be granted unless he has asked for a sin or a
matter that leads to cutting off of family ties. Verily, the place of
his tomb is an area of Paradise. Any believer that visits it will be
released by Almighty Allah from Hellfire and allowed into the Abode of
Settlement.*[^96]

### Qum: the Tomb of Lady Fatimah the Daughter of Imam al-Kazim (‘a)

In the sight of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the city of Qum has a special
significance and a vital role in the history and life of the virtuous
community. In its cultural aspect, this city seems to occupy the second
place after the city of Kufah because it has been joined with this city
in many traditions.[^97] As for the scholastic aspect of Shi’ism, the
religious school of Qum is seen as an extension of the religious school
of Kufah and the second educational site that comes after it. From the
city of Kufah, people from the Ash’ar Tribe migrated to Qum and scholars
of the virtuous community arrived successively in this city down the
ages. Some texts predict that this city would play a major role in the
life of the virtuous community.[^98]

This prediction has come true due to the harsh circumstances encountered
by the religious school of Najaf in this age and the great favor of
Almighty Allah endowed upon Iran where the government of Islam was
established under the leadership of the religious leader, Imam Khumayni,
and the active contribution of the religious school of Qum towards this
great achievement.

As a result, a vital development in the religious school of Qum as well
as its role and status took place.

The existence of the tomb of Lady Fatimah al-Ma’sumah the daughter of
Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) in the city of Qum has been significant in the
development and growth of the educational and religious state of this
city. In addition, traditions reported from Imam al-Ridha (‘a) about the
merits of visiting the tomb of this lady are considered another factor
in the development of religious studies in this city, being the center
of an important class of narrators during certain stages of the history
of Shi’ism.

In the previous discussion of the pilgrimages to the tombs of the Holy
Imams (‘a) and their descendants, we have referred to the recommendation
of visiting the tomb of this lady, considering this tomb to be one of
the most important and famous tombs of the Holy Imams’ (‘a)
descendants.[^99]

[^1]: - Books of Muslim jurisprudence and Hadith have dealt with all
these aspects in various chapters, the most important of which are the
sections on the place of prayer within Book of Prayer (kitab al-salat).

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 4:202, H. 2.

[^3]: - Mansur ‘Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami’ lil-Usul 1:224. This
tradition is reported by the five Sunni master traditionists; namely,
al-Bukhari, Muslim, Ibn Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, and al-Nasa'i. However, the
traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) show that such special
respect is not dedicated to these three mosques exclusively.

[^4]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:472, H. 2.

[^5]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:478, H. 1.

[^6]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 83:385, H. 63.

[^7]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 83:367, H. 25.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:486, H. 4.

[^9]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:481, H. 2.

[^10]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:1-3, H. 1, 2,
4, 5, & 6.

[^11]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:5, S. 2.

[^12]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:19, S. 3.

[^13]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:23-25, H. 1-5.

[^14]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:25, H. 8.

[^15]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:25, H. 12.

[^16]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:31-32, H. 5 &
6.

[^17]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:41.

[^18]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:50, H. 19.

[^19]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:58, H. 1 & 2.

[^20]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:59, S. 11.

[^21]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:83.

[^22]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:63, H. 6.

[^23]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:65, as quoted
from al-Barqi’s al-Mahasin.

[^24]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:64, as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi.

[^25]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:66, H. 15. This
tradition is decided as valid, because it has been reported from Ibn
Abi-’Umar on the authority of ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz.

[^26]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:536, H. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8;
‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:146-148, H. 4, 5, 10 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi and Shaykh al-Tusi’s Tahdhib al-Ahkam.

[^27]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:536, H. 1 & 2.

[^28]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’ah 10:69 as reported
by Maysarah.

[^29]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:543, H. 1, 2, & 3..

[^30]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:542, H. 1.

[^31]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:543, H. 4.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:547, H. 1.

[^33]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:543, H. 4.

[^34]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:542, H. 1.
Unfortunately, all these traces have been wiped out because the Wahhabi
sect (which dominates in Makkah and Madinah) does not respect the signs
and traces of Islamic history. Moreover, it attempts to totally
obliterate such traces. It seems that the “door facing the street that
goes to al-Baqi’ Cemetery” indicates the door that presently is to the
back of the shrine that currently stands on the Holy Prophet’s tomb,
which is the north eastern corner of the shrine.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:546, H. 2.

[^36]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:546, H. 3.

[^37]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:546, H. 1.

[^38]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:270, H. 1.

[^39]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:271, H. 1.

[^40]: - Abu-Lubabah, Bashir ibn ‘Abd al-Mundhir, of the Ansar
(supporters; Muslims of Yathrib who accepted and received the Holy
Prophet (S) and the emigrants of Makkah), was one of the Holy Prophet’s
companions (Sahabah). During the Battle of Badr, the Holy Prophet (S)
ordered him to stay in Madinah, yet he allotted a share of the spoils of
war for him. This column carrying his name has a story: When the Holy
Prophet (S) besieged the Jews of Banu-Qurayzah, they pleaded for
conciliation, but the Holy Prophet (S) refused, asking them to accept
the condition to agree to any decision made by Sa’d ibn Mu’adh in this
regard. They therefore asked him to grant them respite so that they
could take counsel with Abu-Lubabah because, to them, he was a good
adviser. Abu-Lubabah advised that they should not accept this condition
because it would lead them to be sentenced to death. Afterwards, he felt
sorry for giving this advice, seeing it as betrayal and disloyalty to
the Holy Prophet (S). He therefore repented and decided to tie himself
to a column in the Prophet’s Mosque, refraining from having any food.
Because this state lasted for seven days, the man fainted. Then,
Almighty Allah’s acceptance of his repentance was revealed to the Holy
Prophet. (S) When he was informed of the acceptance of his repentance,
he asked the Holy Prophet (S) to come to untie him personally. See
Al-Mamuqani, Tanqih al-Maqal 1:175.

[^41]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:274, H. 1.

[^42]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:548, H. 3 & 10:278, H.
5.

[^43]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:275, H. 1.

[^44]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 334-335.

[^45]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:289, H. 1.

[^46]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:292, S. 22.

[^47]: - Some of our brethren are doing some surveys in this regard,
hoping that they would be successful to publish them in the near future.

[^48]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:524, H. 10.

[^49]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:526, H. 2.

[^50]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:399, H. 43.

[^51]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:404, H. 60. This
guideline of the Imam (‘a) might be given to express the manners of the
people of that time exclusively. However, this tradition obviously
entails one of the distinctive features of the city of Kufah.

[^52]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:404, H. 61.

[^53]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:521, H. 3.

[^54]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:523, H. 8.

[^55]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:525, H. 14.

[^56]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:525, H. 16.

[^57]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:526, H. 18.

[^58]: - These idols, also mentioned in the Holy Qur'an (71:23), were
worshipped by the heathen people of Prophet Noah.

[^59]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:528, H. 1.

[^60]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 3:530. Section:
Recommendation of Offering Prayers at the Seventh and Fifth Columns of
al-Kufah Mosque.

[^61]: - Tasbih al-Zahra' is a famous litany comprising one hundred
words of praising Almighty Allah. The most famous and considerable form
of it is to say allahu-akbar(u) (Allah is the Greatest) thirty-four
times, alhamdu-lillah(i) (Praise be to Allah) thirty-three times, and
subhanallah(i) (Glory be to Allah) thirty-three times. Further details
about this litany can be found in books on devotional acts, especially
Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi’s famous one of Mafatih al-Jinan. [Translator]

[^62]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:532; Shaykh ‘Abbas
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 386-401 where details of the devotional
rites at al-Kufah Mosque are mentioned.

[^63]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:231, H. 22.

[^64]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:231, H. 21.

[^65]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:232, H. 25.

[^66]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:234, H. 26.

[^67]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:235, H. 1.

[^68]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:441, H. 20.

[^69]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:533, H. 3.

[^70]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:533, H. 4.

[^71]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:400, H. 4.

[^72]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:404, H. 5.

[^73]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:405, H. 6.

[^74]: - Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) is reported to have said: وَلاَ
تَأْخُذُوا مِنْ تُرْبَتِي شَيْئاً لِتَبَرَّكُوا بِهِ، فَإِنَّ كُلَّ
تُرْبَةٍ لَنَا مُحَرَّمَةٌ إِلاَّ تُرْبَةَ جَدِّيَ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ
عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ جَعَلَهَا
شِفَاءً لِشِيعَتِنَا وَأَوْلِيَائِنَا.Do not eat any amount of the soil
of my grave for seeking blessing, because the soil of our graves is
forbidden for eating except the soil of the grave of Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(‘a), my grandfather. Almighty Allah has made this soil carry remedy for
our Shi’ah and loyalists.See al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah
10:414.

[^75]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:408, H. 1.

[^76]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:409, H. 2.

[^77]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:420, H. 1.

[^78]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:422, H. 4.

[^79]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:406, H. 3.

[^80]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:406, H. 4.

[^81]: - One of the unanimously agreed upon laws of Islam is that a
traveler, under certain circumstances, is required to perform the
obligatory prayers in shortened (i.e. qasr) form; that is to lessen the
four-unit prayer into two units. Exempted from this general law are the
travelers to four defined places, one of which is the holy shrine of
Imam Husayn (‘a). [Translator]

[^82]: - See, for example, Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, Minhaj al-Salihin
1:361, Q. 71 and Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Minhaj al-Salihin 1:255,
Q. 952.

[^83]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 5:543, H. 1.

[^84]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 5:546, H. 13.

[^85]: - Al-Huwayzi, Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn 3:103, H. 10 as quoted from
‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s famous book of Tafsir (exegesis of the Holy Qur'an).

[^86]: - Sahih al-Bukhari 2:56; Sahih Muslim 4:126.

[^87]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:551, S. 64, H. 1.

[^88]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:551, S. 64, H. 2.

[^89]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:534, H. 1.

[^90]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:535, H. 1.

[^91]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:535, H. 2.

[^92]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 488-490.

[^93]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 3:549, H. 1.

[^94]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:231, H. 22.

[^95]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:445, H. 4.

[^96]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi’ah 10:446, H. 2.

[^97]: - Muhammad ibn Sahl ibn Alyasa’ has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
as saying: إِذَا فُقِدَ الأَمْنُ مِنَ الْعِبَادِ وَرَكِبَ النَّاسُ عَلَى
الْخُيُولِ وَاعْتَزَلُوا النِّسَاءَ وَالطِّيبَ فَالْهَرَبَ الْهَرَبَ
عَنْ جِوَارِهِمْ.When security is lacking and people ride on their
horses and isolate themselves from women and perfume, flee from their
vicinity.“May Allah accept me as ransom for you,” said the reporter,
“Where should we flee to?” The Imam (‘a) answered: إِلَى الْكُوفَةِ
وَنَوَاحِيهَا أَوْ إِلَى قُمَّ وَحَوَالَيْهَا فَإِنَّ الْبَلاَءَ
مَدْفُوعٌ عَنْهُمَا.Flee to Kufah and its districts or Qum and its
outskirts, for tribulation shall be repelled from these two
cities.‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 57:214, H. 29. Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) is also reported to have said: أَهْلُ خُرَاسَانَ أَعْلاَمُنَا،
وَأَهْلُ قُمَّ أَنْصَارُنَا، وَأَهْلُ الْكُوفَةِ أَوْتَادُنَا ، وَأَهْلُ
هَذَا السَّوَادِ مِنَّا وَنَحْنُ مِنْهُمْ.The people of Khurasan are our
signs, the people of Qum our supporters, the people of Kufah our
pillars, and the people of Iraq are from us and we are from
them.‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 57:214, H. 30. Imam al-Kazim
(‘a) is also reported to have said: قُمُّ عِشُّ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَمَأْوَى
شِيعَتِهِمْ، وَلَكِنْ سَيَهْلِكُ جَمَاعَةٌ مِنْ شَبَابِهِمْ بِمَعْصِيَةِ
آبَاءِهِمْ وَالإسْتِخْفَافِ وَالسُّخْرِيَةِ بِكُبَرَاءِهِمْ
وَمَشَايِخِهِمْ، وَمَعَ ذَلِكَ يَدْفَعُ اللهُ عَنْهُمْ شَرَّ الأَعَادِي
وَكُلَّ سُوءٍ.Qum is the refuge of Muhammad’s Household (S) and the
shelter of their partisans (i.e. Shi’ah). However, a group of their
youths will be annihilated for disobedience of their fathers and the
belittling and mocking of their grand personalities and chiefs.
Otherwise, Almighty Allah will ward off from them their enemies and
every misfortune.‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 57:214, H. 31.

[^98]: - About the history of the city of Qum, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),
having mentioned the city of Kufah, said: سَتَخْلُو كُوفَةُ مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَيَأْزَرُ عَنْهَا الْعِلْمُ كَمَا تَأْزَرُ الْحَيَّةُ
فِي جُحْرِهَا، ثُمَّ يَظْهَرُ الْعِلْمُ بِبَلْدَةٍ يُقَالُ لَهَا قُمّ،
وَتَصِيرُ مَعْدِناً لِلْعِلْمِ وَالْفَضْلِ حَتَّى لاَ يَبْقَى فِي
الأَرْضِ مُسْتَضْعَفٌ فِي الدِّينِ حَتَّى الْمُخَدَّرَاتِ فِي
الْحِجَالِ، وَذَلِكَ عِنْدَ قُرْبِ ظُهُورِ قَائِمِنَا، فَيَجْعَلُ اللهُ
قُمَّ وَأَهْلَهُ قَائِمَيْنِ مَقَامِ الْحُجَّةِ، وَلَوْلاَ ذَلِكَ
لَسَاخَتِ الأَرْضُ بِأَهْلِهَا وَلَمْ يَبْقَ فِي الأَرْضِ حُجَّةٌ،
فَيَفِيضُ الْعِلْمُ مِنْهُ إِلَى سَائِرِ الْبِلاَدِ فِي الْمَشْرِقِ
وَالْمَغْرِبِ، فَيِتِمُّ حُجَّةُ اللهِ عَلَى الْخَلْقِ حَتَّى لاَ
يَبْقَى أَحَدٌ عَلَى الأَرْضِ لَمْ يُبَلَّغْ إِلَيْهِ الدِّينُ
وَالْعِلْمُ، ثُمَّ يَظْهَرُ الْقَائِمُ وَيَصِيرُ سَبَباً لِنِقْمَةِ
اللهِ وَسَخَطِهِ عَلَى الْعِبَادِ، لأَِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَنْتَقِمُ مِنَ
الْعِبَادِ إِلاَّ بَعْدَ إِنْكَارِهِمْ حُجَّتَهُ.Kufah will be empty of
true believers, and knowledge will leave this city as a snake leaves its
hole. Then, knowledge will emerge in a town called Qum, which will then
become the center of knowledge and superiority until there will remain
there no single individual, even women in their boudoirs, uneducated in
religious knowledge. That will be at a time close to the advent of our
Rising Imam (i.e. al-Mahdi). Hence, Almighty Allah will make the city of
Qum and its inhabitants take the place of His Proof, the Imam. Without
this, the earth would certainly sink with its people and there would not
be anyone playing the role of Allah’s proof on earth. Knowledge will
then spout forth from this city to the peoples in the west and the east
of the earth and none will remain too remote to receive the knowledge of
the religion. Then, the Rising Imam will become the cause of Almighty
Allah’s chastisement and wrath on the [disobedient] creatures. This is
because Almighty Allah does not chastise any people except after they
deny His argument against them.‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar
57:214, H. 31.

[^99]: - Refer to Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 562. The
following traditions are quoted from this book: Shaykh al-Saduq, through
a seemingly authentic series of narrators, has reported Sa’d ibn Sa’d to
have asked Imam al-Ridha (‘a) about Fatimah, his sister and the daughter
of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a). Imam al-Ridha, peace be upon him,
answered: مَنْ زَارَهَا فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.Whoever visits her (tomb) will
be awarded Paradise.Through another valid series of narrators, Shaykh
al-Saduq reports Imam Muhammad al-Jawad ibn al-Ridha (‘a), as saying:
مَنْ زَارَ قَبْرَ عَمَّتِي بِقُمٍّ فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.Whoever visits the
tomb of my paternal aunt in Qum will be awarded Paradise.‘Allamah
al-Majlisi has reported from some books of formulas of Ziyarah that ‘Ali
ibn Ibrahim reported on the authority of his father that Imam al-Ridha
(‘a) said to Sa’d al-Ash’ari al-Qummi: “O Sa’d, we have a tomb in your
city.” “May Allah accept me as ransom for you!” answered Sa’d, “Do you
mean the tomb of Fatimah the daughter of Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a)?” The Imam
answered in the affirmative and added: مَنْ زَارَهَا عَارِفاً بِحَقِّهَا
فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.Whoever visits her with full recognition of her
standing will be awarded Paradise…


