Companions of Rasool Allah [saww] Sought Barakah From His Grave
===============================================================

Dawud ibn Salih says: "[The Caliph] Marwan [ibn al-Hakam] one day saw a
man placing his face on top of the grave of the Prophet. He said: "Do
you know what you are doing?" When he came near him, he realized it was
Abu Ayyub al-Ansari. The latter said: "Yes; I came to the Prophet, not
to a stone."

1. Ibn Hibban in his Sahih, Ahmad (5:422)

2. Tabarani in his Mujam al-kabir (4:189) and his Awsat according to
Haythami in al-Zawa'id (5:245)

3. al-Hakim in his Mustadrak (4:515); both the latter and al-Dhahabi
said it was sahih.

4. al-Subki in Shifa' al-siqam (p. 126)

5. Ibn Taymiyya in al-Muntaqa (2:261f.)

6. Haythami in al-Zawa'id (4:2)

Source: Encyclopedia of Islamic Doctrine Muadh ibn Jabal and Bilal also
came to the grave of the Prophet and sat weeping, and the latter rubbed
his face against it. Ibn Majah 2:1320

Source: Encyclopedia of Islamic Doctrine Narrated Hisham's father:

'Aisha said to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, "Bury me with my female
companions (i.e. the wives of the Prophet) and do not bury me with the
Prophet in the house, for I do not like to be regarded as sanctified
(just for being buried there).''

Narrated Hisham's father: 'Umar sent a message to 'Aisha, saying, "Will
you allow me to be buried with my two companions (the Prophet and Abu
Bakr) ?" She said, "Yes, by Allah." though it was her habit that if a
man from among the companions (of the Prophet ) sent her a message
asking her to allow him to be buried there, she would say, "No, by
Allah, I will never give permission to anyone to be buried with them."
Bukhari, Volume 9, Book 92, Number 428

Please pay attention to the words of Aisha, when she says:

"and do not bury me with the Prophet in the house, for I do not like to
be regarded as sanctified (just for being buried there)." These words
tell themselves that Sahaba Karam regarded the grave of Rasool Allah
[saww] as sanctified (and that is contrary to Salafi doctrine, who
regard grave of Rasool Allah [saww] as almost an idol and a source of
Shirk. Naudobillah).

Rasool Allah (saww) ordered Sahaba to seek Barakah from the well, where
she-camel of Salih drank water Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:

The people landed at the land of Thamud called Al-Hijr along with
Allah's Apostle and they took water from its well for drinking and
kneading the dough with it as well. (When Allah's Apostle heard about
it) he ordered them to pour out the water they had taken from its wells
and feed the camels with the dough, and ordered them to take water from
the well whence the she-camel (of Prophet Salih) used to drink. Bukhari,
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 562

Respecting valley of Tuwa and seeking Barakah from it is not
worshipping it

<p dir="rtl">
إِنِّي أَنَا رَبُّكَ فَاخ'لَع' نَع'لَي'كَ إِنَّكَ بِال'وَادِ
ال'مُقَدَّسِ طُوًى
</p>

[Pickthal 20:12] Lo! I, even I, am thy Lord, So take off thy shoes, for
lo! thou art in the holy valley of Tuwa.

**Umar and Hajar-e-Aswad**

Umar while visiting the Kaba, said before the Hajar al-aswad, "You
cannot do anything! But I kiss you in order to follow Rasulullah
('alaihi 's-salam)." 'Ali (as) said upon hearing this, "Rasulullah
(saww) said, 'On the Day of Judgment, the Hajar al-aswad will intercede
for people.' " [This hadith is reported by at-Thirmidhi, an-Nasai,
al-Baihaki, at-Tabarani and al-Bukhari in his History.] And 'Umar
thanked 'Ali (as).

Source: Religion reformers in Islam

See also: "Al-Farooq" by Shibli Naumani, page 323, published by Maktaba
Rehmania, Pakistan Note: Salafi and Deobandies propagate the distorted
version of above tradition. They tell only till Umar's words and all
together hide the saying of Mawla Ali (as) regarding intercession of
Hajar-e-Aswad on day of judgement. Detail discussion on this distorted
tradition is coming at the end of this article. Insha' Allah.

Salafi attitude towards such type of Ahadith

Salafi are not ready to take guidance from this part of Qur'an and
Sunnah since it is in direct contradiction to their doctrine of
Literalism. It is unfortunate that their Ulama try their best to hide /
neglect such type of Ahadith in order to keep the people ignorant of
them.

That is why most of the simple people, who follow the Salafi path, they
are fully unaware of existence of this part of Qur'an and Sunnah. These
poor people are following only that, which the Salafi Ulama tell them.


