Highlights of Karbala
=====================

![http://www.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/field/image/route.jpg?itok=mfCjj2PG](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0114_karbala_chain_of_events/images/image004.jpg)

The events of Karbala reflect the collision of the good versus the evil,
the virtuous versus the wicked, and the collision of Imam Husayn (the
head of virtue) versus**Yazid** (the head of impiety). Al-Husayn was a
revolutionary person, a righteous man, the religious authority, the Imam
of Muslim Ummah.

As the representative of his grandfather Prophet Muhammad (S),**Imam
Husayn's** main concern was to safeguard and protect Islam and guide
fellow Muslims. On the other hand, the staying power of the rulers
(Mu'awiya and his son**Yazid** ) depended solely on the might of the
sword. They used brute force to rule over the Muslim empire even by all
possible illicit means.

Imam Husayn as head of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) never recognized Mu'awiya nor
his followers. Before him Imam â€˜Ali (a.s.) had fought battles against
Mu'awiya because Mu'awiya continuously violated the Islamic principles.
Imam Al-Hasan (a.s.) had to swallow the bitter pill of making a peace
agreement with Mu'awiya, in order to safeguard the security of the Ummah
which was at stake.

When**Yazid** son of Mu'awiya declared himself as a ruler over the
Ummah, he demanded**Imam Al-Husayn's (a.s.)** allegiance of loyalty.
Imam Husayn on his part flatly rejected**Yazid** 's rule and behavior,
for there was no way**Yazid** could represent Islam, it would be
blasphemy. But**Yazid** , the tyrant ruler over the Ummah, was adamant
in his demand, and tension between the two parties increased day by day.

Imam Husayn was quick to realize that giving allegiance of loyalty
to**Yazid** would serve no purpose but to jeopardize the survival of
Islam. To safeguard and protect Islam, therefore, the Imam had no choice
but to confront and collide with**Yazid** 's rulership irrespective of
consequences. Since**Yazid** had ordered his commanders to seize the
Imam's allegiance of loyalty at any cost, even by brutal force, the
commanders had to assemble a relatively large army, surrounding**Imam
Husayn's** camp in a desert called Karbala.

Then they cut off the basic necessities to the camp, including access to
water. The camp consisted of Imam Husayn, his family, friends, and
companions, all of whom stood fast and firmly with him. These braves
would rather face death for the noble cause of Islam, than submit to the
outrageous tyranny and the un-Islamic ways of**Yazid** .

Thus, Karbala proved to be a clash involving Islamic truths versus
falsehood, right versus wrong, belief versus disbelief, and the
oppressed versus the oppressor, faith against brute force. Karbala was
about standing in the face of oppression, regardless no matter the cost.
Thus, in Karbala, Al-Husayn the 57 year old grandson of
Prophet**Muhammad** (S), sacrificed his totality and all he had, for one
goal.

This goal was to let the truth triumph over falsehood eventually, and he
did that brilliantly.

His goal was to foil the plan that Mu'awiya had expertly developed for
his son,**Yazid** , which was to establish a permanent Bani Umayya
rulership over the Muslim Ummah (even by sacrificing the Islamic
principles), but

doing it in the name of Islam. Brilliantly,**Imam Husayn** succeeded in
foiling this plan and he exposed the disreputable nature of Bani Umayya
though this was at the expense of his life.


