Yazid Becomes Ruler
===================

Upon Mu'awiya's death,**Yazid** , 30 years old, managed to impose
himself on the people and become the Khalifa. At first people refused to
accept him as a representative of the Prophet (S) and Islamic Ummah,
but**Yazid** approached people in mosques for their favors. Like his
father Mu'awiya,**Yazid** used all possible means like bribery,
coercion, pressure, threats, and force to receive the people's
acceptance of him as the legitimate ruler.

Many people were worried, threats to their lives and livelihood was too
menacing, so they grudgingly and reluctantly gave in. But,**Imam Husayn
(a.s.)** and his family (who practiced Islam in its true sense), did not
give in. As the true representative of Prophet Muhammad (S), Al-Husayn
flatly refused accepting**Yazid** either as a Khalifa or a leader of
Islam. Despite**Yazid** 's intimidating military power the Imam stood
firm in his resolve and chose to challenge Bani Umayya's authorities.

**Yazid** commissioned Waleed Ibn Ut'ba, his Governor over Medina, to
ask for**Imam Husayn's** allegiance of loyalty or else upon refusal, his
head. Waleed invited Al-Husayn to a meeting for the purpose.**Imam
Husayn** did not give his word at the meeting and decided to leave
Medina along with his family to proceed to Mecca. When Al-Husayn reached
Mecca he received 12,000 letters from Kufa urging him to go to Kufa to
be their leader, and be the Khalifa. Imam sent an emissary, his cousin
Muslim Ibn Aqeel, to Kufa to ascertain first-hand information about the
situation in Iraq.

In the meantime**Yazid** spread a network of informants and secret
agents in Mecca to assassinate the Imam during pilgrimage. Imam learned
about the spies, and carefully evaluated the situation in Mecca.**Imam
Husayn** knew that**Yazid** son of Mu'awiya had no regard for Islamic
values and teachings, that he would do anything to enforce his
tyrannical rule.

**Imam Husayn** also knew that giving allegiance of loyalty to an
imposter like**Yazid** would certainly place Islam at great jeopardy.
Therefore he decided to leave Mecca for Kufa to prepare for a
confrontation with**Yazid** and his forces.

Many friends and relatives urged**Imam Husayn** not to go to Kufa, but
he insisted on going.**Imam Husayn** , along with family, friends, and
companions began the journey toward Kufa (1,100 miles) in a long caravan
in the blistering heat of summer.


