On the Way to Karbala
=====================

During the early phase of the journey the caravan met Al-Farazdaq (a
famous poet) at a place called al-Sifah. Al-Farazdaq advised the Imam
not to go to Kufa because though people's hearts were with him (Imam),
their swords would be against him. But the Imam continued with the
journey, and he received the first letter from his emissary Muslim Ibn
Aqeel with good news.

The letter indicated that the people were more than ready to welcome the
Imam in Kufa and were looking forward to his leadership.**Imam Husayn**
decided to send another emissary to Kufa with a message. The caravan
kept proceeding toward Kufa. Many days passed but the Imam did not
receive any more responses from Muslim Ibn Aqeel.

In Kufa Muslim Bin Aqeel with the help of Mukhtar Al-Thaqafi and Hani
Ibn Urwah continued to hold secret meetings with the supporters of the
Imam. Within a short time the gatherings started to gain
momentum.**Yazid** through his spies and informants learned about
Muslim's successes in Kufa. He appointed the tyrant Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad
to replace al-Nu'man Ibn al-Basheer as Governor of Kufa.

Meanwhile, as Al-Husayn's caravan got closer to its destination (Kufa),
coming to a place called Zubalah,**Imam Husayn** unexpectedly received
shocking news. The shocking news was about Muslim Ibn Aqeel and the
person who provided him shelter, Hani's Ibn Urwah, both of whom were
arrested and beheaded by the Governor Ibn Ziyad. Mukhtar was also
arrested and imprisoned and tortured by Ibn Ziyad.

**Imam Husayn** gathered his companions and disclosed to them about the
bad news, and said, "Our Shi'a have deserted us, those of you who prefer
to leave us may do so freely and without guilt." Becoming scared, some
companions left the caravan.**Imam Husayn** continued with the journey
along with close companions and family members until he was face to face
with 1,000 horsemen led by Hurr al-Riyahi representing the enemy.

The enemy army blocked the camps of**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** from
advancing. Tension started to rise between the two. The Imam addressed
the enemy explaining to them his motives for going to Kufa, that it was
in response to the invitation of the people. He even showed them a
bagful of letters he received from Kufa. Hurr said that he and his men
were not the writers of those letters. Imam told them that if they did
not like him to advance with the journey, he was prepared to return to
Hijaz.

Hurr replied, "We are commissioned to follow you until we take you to
Governor Ibn Ziyad, and suggested to the Imam to go towards a station
which is neither Kufa nor Medina."**Imam Husayn** found the proposal
fair and turned the caravan away from Kufa. Hurr and his army marched
parallel to the Imam. The two sides reached a village called Nainawa
where Ibn Ziyad's messenger (**Yazid** 's governor over Kufa) delivered
a message to Hurr.

The message read, " ...force Husayn to a halt. But let him stop in an
open space, without vegetation or water." Hurr conveyed the contents of
the letter to**Imam Husayn** .

The Imam, his family and companions defiantly resumed their journey and
reached a place where another enemy force blocked their move and forced
them to stop. When**Imam Husayn** learned that the place was called
Karbala, he felt he reached the destination and ordered his camp to be
setup. That day was 2nd of Muharram, Hijri 61.


