Karbala
=======

Upon learning that his army had succeeded to lay a siege around the
Imam's camp, Governor Ibn Ziyad sent additional military units to
Karbala and appointed Umar Ibn Sa'ad in charge.**Imam Husayn (a.s.)**
opened a dialogue with Umar Ibn Sa'ad and convinced him to lift the
siege so that the Imam with his family and companions could leave Iraq.

Umar Ibn Sa'ad liked the Imam's proposal and sent a message to Governor
Ibn Ziyad notifying him about the results of the talks with**Imam Husayn
(a.s.)** . Ibn Ziyad also found the Imam's proposal acceptable. However
before agreeing to it officially, Shimr Bin Dhil-Jawshan, opposed it
strongly. As a result Ziyad wrote a letter to Umar Ibn Sa'ad commanding
him to either go to war with**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** or be relieved of his
duties as commander of the army and Shimr would not only replace him but
despatch Ibn Sa'ad's head to Kufa.

Umar Ibn bin Sa'ad got the letter. After pondering over the consequences
he decided to fight**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** . On the 7th day of Muharram
he moved his troops closer to the camp and began to surround the Husaini
camp. Ibn Sa'ad laid a blockade around the camp to cut it off from
access to the river Euphrates, to deprive it of water in a move to force
them to surrender.

Two days later, (on the 9th of Muharram), the enemy's military forces
closed in on the camp of**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** . Imam asked his brother,
Abbas, to talk to Ibn Sa'ad and request a delay of the aggression by one
night. Umar Ibn Sa'ad agreed to the demand. He ordered his troops to
delay the aggression till next morning.

Imam Husayn and his pious companions spent that night in prayers. During
the night the Imam told the companions, " ....the enemy is interested in
none but me, me alone. I'll be most delighted to permit each and every
one of you to go back, and I urge you to do so...." All companions
screamed in response, "By Allah, never, never! We will either live with
you or die together with you."


