The Battle
==========

**Imam Husayn's** supporters insisted on being the first to fight.
Therefore, they took the brunt of the enemy attack. The battle was
ferocious. Within a short time the Imam's supporters slay a large number
of the enemy fighters; they were on the offensive and the enemy on the
defensive. This caused apprehension and confusion in the enemy military,
the 72 of Husayn's against the 5,000 of the enemy (some say 30,000)
being on the defensive.

So worried and nervous, the enemy commander-in-chief ordered his army
not only to set fire to the Imam's tents (which were occupied mostly by
frightened females and children), but at the same time reinforced his
fighters with more troops.

The heroes began to fall, they were men of valor welcoming martyrdom,
and they fell one after another, for the enemy was overwhelming in
number. By noon time the Imam stopped the fight to perform the Salat
(prayer). By this time those left were mainly his family and a few
supporters. They performed the Salat together. Two supporters were
guarding the performers of Salat. The enemy was standing still,
watching!! When Salat was finished one of the guards fell dead; there
were 17 arrows in his back.

â€˜Ali Akbar, Husayn's son obtained permission to fight and dashed toward
the enemy. He engaged them in fierce fighting, falling on them like
thunder, slaying numerous fighters. He continued to move forward, deep
inside the enemy. The enemy was overpowering in number, it overwhelmed
him cutting him with swords and spears, and his body became nothing but
wounds gushing blood, until he died.

**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** rushed to the area and picked up the wounded limp
body and brought it to the appalled camp. His sister and others in the
camp were horrified and shocked at the scene.

Abbas and five other brothers of Imam Husayn went to fight. They also
engaged the enemy in a fierce fighting, almost doing the impossible.
Abbas went toward the river to bring some water for the thirsty
children. While he was returning on his horse with the water, he was
attacked by a large horde of the enemy, overwhelming and severely
wounding him. As much as he tried Abbas could not save the water, he
fell from his horse to breath his last.

Next to the battle field went the sons of Imam Al-Hasan and Zainab and
their cousins (about 17 of them). They were all in their teens but each
stood bravely, believing in the mission, facing a formidable enemy, and
showed no less enthusiasm in their quest to embrace the martyrdom.


