Al-Husayn by Himself
====================

**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** was alone, one man against thousands. He took
them on, fighting them bravely, and kept fighting, receiving many wounds
in the process. Thousands of enemy fighters were surrounding him but
none dared to move toward him.

The silence was broken when Shimr screamed for an attack, and then
screamed again, threatening, and in response they attacked collectively,
and one sword fell on**Imam Husayn's** left wrist and deeply cut his
left hand. The blood gushed like a fountain.

Another sword was soon to follow and it hit his upper back.**Imam Husayn
(a.s.)** felt numb as he fell to the ground, bleeding profusely. He was
near the point of shock, even though staggering he tried to stand by
leaning on his sword. Then he received the fatal blow.

It was at this point, that Shimr whose mother was a disbeliever, came
forward and severed**Imam Husayn's** noble head from the body, the noble
head kissed often by the Prophet (S)! Shimr and others had the audacity
to carry it on the tip of a spear to**Yazid** , 600 miles away!

Umar Ibn Sa'ad ordered the horsemen to trample upon the supine bodies of
Imam Husayn and all others killed, to disfigure them even further, as if
the wounds, the bloodied bodies, and the headless forms were not enough.

For three days the exposed bodies of the martyrs were left lying in the
desert of Karbala. Afterwards, the people of the tribe of Bani-Asad, who
were not far away from the battle field, helped bury them.

Umar Ibn Sa'ad and his forces (representing Bani Umayya) took the women
and children as prisoners in shackles, put them on camels, and proceeded
in a caravan from Karbala to Kufa. At the forefront of the procession
were the heads of**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** and his followers on the tip of
spears. The scene was both grotesque and pathetic. This was the leftover
of the beloved family of Prophet Muhammad (S), in such a deplorable
unimaginable condition, all caused by people who called themselves
Muslims!


