Glossary
========

*A'isha: Widow of the Prophet (S) and a leader during Jamal
Confrontation.*

*Abbas: Brother of Imam Husayn, flag-bearer during Karbala.*

*Abu Sufyan: Leader of Bani Umayya, Mu'awiya's father, was inveterate
enemy of Islam.*

*Abu Musa Ash'ari: Governor fired by Imam ‘Ali, was selected to
arbitrate after Siffin.*

*Ahlul Bayt: The household of the Prophet (s), consisting of ‘Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and the 9 Imams descending from al-Husayn
(peace be upon them all).*

*Al- Farazdaq: A famous poet.*

*Al- Nu'man Ibn al-Basheer: Governor over Kufa replaced by Ibn Ziyad
through**Yazid** 's order.*

*‘Ali Akbar: Son of Imam Al-Husayn, martyred in Karbala.*

*‘Ali Asghar: Baby of Imam Al-Husayn, martyred in Karbala.*

*Ammar Ibn Yasir: A famous highly revered Companion, on ‘Ali's side,
killed in Siffin.*

*Amr Ibnil Aas: A cunning deceptive person, in Mu'awiya's camp,
arbitrator after Siffin.*

*Ash'ath Ibn Qais: A spy General in ‘Ali's armed forces, also the father
of Joda (wife of Al-Hasan).*

*Bani Asad: The tribe that buried Al-Husayn and the other martyrs of
Karbala.*

*Bani Umayya: A clan known to be power hungry, greedy, and
materialistic, of Mu'awiya.*

*Basrah: An important town in south of Iraq.*

*Byzantines: The Christian superpower ruling over Syria and Egypt that
lost to Islam.*

*Hani Ibn Urwah: The man who helped Muslim Ibn Aqeel in Kufa and lost
his life for the cause.*

*Hurr Ibn**Yazid** alRiyahi: The Commander of the enemy force who
defected to the side of Imam Husayn.*

*Ibn Muljim: The killer of Imam ‘Ali while ‘Ali was performing Salat
Al-Subh.*

*Ibn Ziyad: The Governor over Kufa responsible for the atrocities of
Karbala.*

*Imam: The 12 Divinely Commissioned leaders of the Ummah after the
Prophet (S).*

*Imam AlHasan (a.s.): The second Divinely Commissioned Imam, and the
brother of Imam Husayn.*

*Imam ‘Ali (a.s.): The first Divinely Commissioned Imam, and the father
of Imam Hasan and Husayn.*

***Imam Husayn (a.s.)** : The third Divinely Commissioned Imam, hero of
Karbala, brother of Imam Hasan.*

*Iraq: Country in which Imam Husayn suffered at the hands of its
military.*

*Jamal: Battle imposed on ‘Ali by A'isha, Talha, and Zubair.*

*Joda: Wife of Imam Al-Hasan, who poisoned him when enticed by
Mu'awiya.*

*Karbala: The site of the ugliest atrocities committed against
Al-Husayn, his family and devotees, but Karbala saved Islam from
disintegration in an indirect way.*

*Khalifa: Head of state after the Prophet (S).*

*Kharijies: The outsiders who turned against ‘Ali, then killed him while
he was praying.*

*Medina: Famous town of the Prophet (S) in Arabia.*

*Mu'awiya: Of Bani Umayya clan, brother of**Yazid** , also father of the
infamous**Yazid** of Karbala.*

*Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr: Brother of A'isha who fought on ‘Ali's side
during Battle of Jamal.*

*Mukhtar AlThaqafi: Loyalist of Ahlul Bayt.*

*Muslim Ibn Aqeel: Cousin of Al-Husayn and his emissary to Kufa, killed
by Ibn Ziyad.*

*Omar: The second Khalifa who appointed Mu'awiya as the Governor over
Syria.*

*Quraish: The clan of the Prophet (S).*

*Shimr Bin DhilJawshan: The killer of Imam Husayn, his name will remain
in infamy.*

*Siffin: Battle imposed on ‘Ali by Mu'awiya.*

*Syria: Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine nowadays used to be called Syria.*

*Talha: Sahaabi, leader during Jamal Confrontation, killed during that
battle.*

*Tulaqaa': Denigrating term used by Muhammad (S) for the disbelievers
who had to become Muslims after Mecca was triumphed over.*

*Umar Ibn Sa'ad: Commander-in-chief of the military forces against Imam
Husayn in Karbala.*

*Umm Habiba: Sister of Mu'awiya, daughter of Abu Sufyan, wife of the
Prophet (S).*

*Uthman: The third Khalifa killed by the protesting Muslims.*

*Waleed Ibn Ut'ba: Governor over Medina when**Yazid** son of Mu'awiya
declared his rulership.*

***Yazid** son of Abu Sufyan: Brother of Mu'awiya, governor of Syria for
a few years until he died.*

***Yazid** son of Mu'awiya: Son of Mu'awiya, the infamous despicable
ruler, cause of Karbala tragedy.*

*Zainab: Sister of Al-Husayn, heroin of Karbala, losing her children for
the cause.*

*Zubair: Sahaabi, leader during Jamal Confrontation, refused to fight
during that battle.*


