Who Was Mu'awiya?
=================

![http://www.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/field/image/quraysh-tree.jpg](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0114_karbala_chain_of_events/images/image006.jpg)

Mu'awiya was son of Abu Sufyan, a leader of Bani Umayya clan which was
one of the clans of Quraish tribes. Mu'awiya grew up in a family known
to be cunning, worldly, materialistic, and power hungry. Mu'awiya became
Muslim only when Prophet Muhammad (S) triumphed over Mecca. Those who
became Muslim in this manner were called Tulaqaa', (a term scornfully
used for the disbelievers who became Muslims to save their lives).

Mu'awiya, his father Abu Sufyan, his mother Hind, and his
brother**Yazid** son of Abu Sufyan were all Tulaqaa'; Mu'awiya never
forgot this stigma for the rest of his life; he could never shake it
from his mind, thus a feeling of malicious vengeance always existed in
his heart. Mu'awiya's character and aspirations were entirely opposite
to that of his sister, Umm Habiba, who was one of the wives of the Holy
Prophet (S). Unlike Mu'awiya, Umm Habiba was a sincere believer and a
pious person.

Omar, the second Khalifa, appointed Mu'awiya's brother,**Yazid** son of
Abu Sufyan, as the Governor of Syria when the Muslims captured that
territory from the Byzantines. Within a few years,**Yazid** son of Abu
Sufyan died of a disease, and Omar appointed Mu'awiya in his brother's
place as the Governor. Upon coming to power, Mu'awiya took advantage of
the rich public treasury of Syria using it personally to buy favors and
influence people.

Thus he built a large base of support among some tribes, almost to the
fanatic level. He used this to his advantage in later years to form a
network of informants (spies) against Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and their
devotees.


