Jamal Confrontation
===================

When Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) became Khalifa, he decided to remove Mu'awiya
immediately, notwithstanding Mu'awiya's strong base of support. At that
time, Mu'awiya had been the governor of Syria, Palestine, and Jordan for
17 years. Mu'awiya became defiant, he refused to obey ‘Ali's orders.
Brazen and unabashed, he even declined to recognize ‘Ali or give
allegiance of loyalty to him.

Also in defiance, Mu'awiya established a parallel government in Greater
Syria, and started a campaign of treacherous accusations and malicious
rumors against Imam ‘Ali (a.s.). He falsely blamed Imam ‘Ali for the
killing of Uthman, the third Khalifa, and urged people to take up arms
against the Imam. He spread these notorious accusations constantly to
incite an uprising against ‘Ali (a.s.).

At the same time A'isha, the Prophet's widow, became highly vocal
against Imam ‘Ali (a.s.). She called for taking revenge for the blood of
Uthman. As a result, a party of 3,000 insurgents supported by Sahaaba
(Companions) such as Talha and Zubair, along with A'isha headed toward
Basrah. The insurgents upon reaching Basrah clashed with the local
authorities and finally occupied a portion of Basrah. Soon after the
occupation these insurgents spread a reign of terror among the people,
killing no less than 600 local Muslims, pilfering the treasury and
stealing the arms supplies of the armory.

As a Khalifa in charge, Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) could not ignore the situation,
he had to act and restore peace and order. He ordered his forces to
proceed to Basrah. As the Imam's forces reached near Basrah, Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.) tried to persuade the insurgents led by A'isha, Zubair and Talha
to change their minds and avoid confrontation, but he did not succeed. A
battle broke out though Zubair elected not to fight; Talha was wounded
then bled to death.

Thousands of people lost their lives. A'isha fell down from the camel
after it was disabled; but luckily she was not hurt. Imam ‘Ali asked
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, (A'isha's brother), to take A'isha to Basrah for
a few days, and from there to escort her to Medina with full honor and
dignity. Upon leaving Basrah Al-Hasan (a.s.) and Al-Husayn (a.s.)
accompanied the Prophet's widow for some distance before bidding her
farewell.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) stayed in Basrah for a few weeks to restore law and
order. He compensated for the dead, and decided to forgive and absolve
all who fought against him, exactly as the Prophet (S) had done when he
triumphed over Mecca 40 years earlier.


