Battle of Siffin
================

Upon returning to Kufa, Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) immediately prepared for the
anticipated clash with Mu'awiya. The defying Mu'awiya continued to
violate the Islamic principles by personally using the public treasury
for espionage and buying peoples' loyalty. The people of Syria fully
believed him and the in false picture he presented. Ultimately this
resulted in a confrontation called Battle of Siffin when the troops of
the two sides met at Siffin.

The battle saw ferocious fighting for nine days when Mu'awiya's forces
were near collapse. His troops were fleeing and in disarray, and their
retreat was in massive disorder, running helter skelter. Mu'awiya was
alarmed, tense and frightened, preparing to run away, when he learned of
a clever trick. The trick was indecent and unbecoming, it was to make
the Holy Quran as an instrument and exploit it, to use it as a tool to
his advantage.

Mu'awiya seized on this immediately and commanded his fighters to raise
500 Holy Qurans on tips of spears, in order to stun the troops of Imam
‘Ali. As jolting as it was, this maneuver did break the onslaught and
the momentum of ‘Ali's fighters, for they were very pious men. But Imam
‘Ali was quick to recognize this deceit, he knew how deceptive Mu'awiya
was, and now that being near collapse, Mu'awiya wanted to save his neck
at the expense of the Quran itself.

With that in mind, ‘Ali (a.s.) urged his generals not to halt, but to
keep fighting since victory was almost at hand. Alas, ‘Ali's generals
and fighters were in shock, for the sight of the Holy Quran high on
spear heads was startling to say the least. They could not take it. Not
willing to fight, they wanted to accept Mu'awiya's offer to halt the
fighting and negotiate instead. The termination of the battle in this
manner and the consequences thereof proved to be disastrous to say the
least, especially for Ahlul Bayt and Islam.

It is said that there was a conspiracy between Amr Ibnil Aas of
Mu'awiya's side, and Ash'ath Ibn Qais, a General in Imam ‘Ali's camp,
who was working as a spy against ‘Ali, secretly working as an agent for
Mu'awiya. In this battle 45,000 men lost their lives in Mu'awiya's camp,
and about 25,000 in ‘Ali's (a.s.) camp.

Many men of high caliber from both sides died, especially Ammar Ibn
Yasir, the great Companion of the Prophet (S), who was 90 years old and
fought on Imam ‘Ali's side against Mu'awiya.


