After Siffin
============

Imam ‘Ali's (a.s.) generals, who stopped the battle to negotiate with
Mu'awiya, did not pick the right person for the negotiation. They
unyieldingly refused to accept Imam ‘Ali's choice, instead they picked
Kufa's Governor, Abu-Musa Ash'ari, an incompetent Governor who had been
previously dismissed from office by Imam ‘Ali. Mu'awiya appointed Amr
Ibnil Aas, a shrewd and cunning man, to be his representative in the
negotiation. Negotiation between the two sides did not take place for
about one year.

When the two negotiators came face to face, it was clear that Ash'ari's
capability was no match for his opponent Ibnil Aas. In the negotiations,
Ash'ari proposed that, both Mu'awiya and Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) were to
abdicate and to let the people hold election for the Khilaafah. Amr
Ibnil Aas, a deceptive man at best, quickly agreed to Ash'ari's proposal
and asked Ash'ari to first announce the agreement.

Ash'ari stood up and announced, "O people, we have agreed not to
consider ‘Ali or Mu'awiya for Khilaafah. You may choose or elect
whomever you think is fit." The cunning Amr Ibnil Aas stood up next to
say, "O people! I won't consider ‘Ali for the Khilaafah. But Mu'awiya,
in my opinion, is the person for that office!"

Upon hearing this (and feeling deceived), the people screamed
disapprovingly, an uproar was the result. Imam ‘Ali's (a.s.) camp was in
shock, they were double-crossed, deceived and lied to, they felt deeply
cut. Amr's double crossing and deception was simply beyond their
imagination. They left the place bewildered and utterly disappointed.
Because of this a large group of Imam ‘Ali's supporters defected to form
a separate group called Kharijies, meaning the Outsiders.

The Khariji became fanatically opposed to Imam ‘Ali and Mu'awiya. Some
of their members met secretly in Mecca and drew a plan to assassinate
‘Ali (a.s.) in Kufa, Mu'awiya in Syria, and Amr Ibnil Aas in Egypt.
Three fanatics took the responsibility, they were to attack their
victims in the morning, the same day, as the would-be victims were going
to the mosque to lead the morning salat.

Ibn Muljim attacked and fatally wounded Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), whereas
Mu'awiya escaped with a light wound of his buttock. Amr Ibnil Aas was
ill that day and his replacement was killed by the Khariji. Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.), in wounded condition, conferred the Imamah and the reign of the
Islamic nation to his 37 years old son Al-Hasan.


