Peace Agreement Between Imam Al-Hasan And Mu'awiya
==================================================

Imam Hasan (a.s.) faced extremely difficult conditions from the start.
He observed that fear, anxiety and much distress were ever present in
Kufa, Basrah, Medina and other towns. The anxiety, uncertainty and
insecurity were caused by Mu'awiya's ill dealing of sincere Muslims.
Mu'awiya had spread secret agents all over to defame Ahlul Bayt.

Imam Hasan knew that his father Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) had stood like a lion
in all difficulties and fought battles against Mu'awiya, but these
confrontations had resulted in heavy casualties on both sides.

A mass scale family devastation was visible everywhere. Considering all
circumstances, Imam Hasan (a.s.) discussed the matter with his brother
Husayn (a.s.) and other relatives. He revealed to them that in order to
end the bloodshed and to provide a reasonable safety and security to the
Ummah, he would make a peace agreement with Mu'awiya and abdicate until
after Mu'awiya's death. After a few days of careful consideration, Imam
Hasan (a.s.) accepted an agreement as per the terms dictated by the Imam
and agreed to by Mu'awiya. Four noteworthy terms of this agreement were:

- People of Syria, Iraq, Hijaz, Yemen and other places shall enjoy
amnesty against persecution,

- Friends and companions of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and all their women and
children shall be protected from all dangers,

- Mu'awiya is to immediately stop the use of abusive language with
reference to Ahlul Bayt (cursing Imam ‘Ali) after Salat of Jumu'a), and

- Mu'awiya shall not appoint anyone as his successor.

Once the treaty was signed, Imam Hasan (a.s.) and brother Husayn (a.s.)
moved out of Kufa and settled in Medina. Over there both Imams lost no
time in holding nightly meetings for Islamic discussions. The nightly
meetings proved very successful and gained tremendous popularity. More
people started to attend, to hear the Imams give of their fountain of
knowledge on Islam and humanity.

The reputation of these meetings began to fly to faraway places. People
from as far away as Egypt, Iraq, Yemen, and other distant areas
travelled to Medina to learn about the Islamic values. As years passed,
the knowledge thus given started to bear fruits. The number of Islamic
scholars multiplied and increased considerably.

In the meantime Mu'awiya, unabashedly elected to disregard the terms of
his treaty with Imam Al-Hasan.

a) He sent secret agents to terrorize, kidnap, or even kill innocent
people specially those who were loyal to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

b) Instead of helping the needy with the public treasury, Mu'awiya's
governors and their surrogates used the public treasury for personal
use, freely and excessively as they wished.

c) Freedom suddenly died, and dictatorship took its place.

d) Mu'awiya gathered a very large number of collaborators who
unabashedly would do anything for money.


