Mu'awiya's Plot to Poison Imam Hasan (a.s.)
===========================================

It was Mu'awiya's ardent desire to impose his son**Yazid** (who had been
named after his uncle) upon the Muslims by making him the succeeding
Khalifa, despite the fact that**Yazid** was the playboy of the time,
with many evil habits including gambling, heavy drinking, and indulgence
in the pleasures of the flesh.

But the peace agreement would not permit Mu'awiya to appoint**Yazid** as
his successor, (According to the agreement Imam Hasan would immediately
become Khalifa upon Mu'awiya's death). Therefore, it was obvious to
Mu'awiya that, if Al-Hasan did not outlive him, Mu'awiya could do as he
pleased. Thus Mu'awiya planned to kill Imam Al-Hasan in order to pave
the way for his son**Yazid** to be his successor.

Mu'awiya sent one of his agents to contact Imam Al-Hasan's wife Joda who
was the daughter of Al-Ash'ath (once a secret agent for Mu'awiya against
Imam â€˜Ali in the Battle of Siffin). Joda was asked a small favor, i.e.,
to put a little poison in Al-Hasan's food, and in return Mu'awiya would
give her a large sum of money and also make her wife of his son**Yazid**
. She found the offer too attractive to ignore, and foolishly agreed to
accept it. A few days later, she mixed poison in honey and gave it to
the Imam.

As soon as the Imam took the poisoned honey he became seriously ill.
Sensing that his death was imminent, the Imam designated his brother
Al-Husayn (a.s.) to be the third Imam. Although Imam Al-Hasan knew he
was poisoned, he did not reveal that to anyone but to his brother
Al-Husayn.

One thing Al-Hasan had wished was to have his burial by the side of his
grandfather, Prophet**Muhammad (S)** .**Imam Husayn** made all the
arrangements to fulfill that wish but Mu'awiya's governor over Medina
did not let that happen and used military force to stop it. Imam
Al-Hasan was 47 year old when he died of poisoning.

Medina was never the same without Imam Hasan (a.s.). Everyone missed him
dearly. People at first did not believe Mu'awiya poisoned Imam Al-Hasan,
but soon found out the truth.

When**Husayn (a.s.)** was designated as the 3rd Imam he was 46 years
old.**Imam Husayn (a.s.)** carried on with his mission of teaching Islam
as before. A large number of people kept coming to see him and to learn
from him. This process continued for several years when people began to
hear an ugly rumor that Mu'awiya wanted his son,**Yazid** , to succeed
him.


