Two Women and a Man
===================

Rihab sat alone, musing to herself about the recent events that had
taken place within her home. "….everything is over. Hasanat has achieved
happiness, having decided upon a harmonious future for herself. All the
guests have left after celebrating the happy occasion with Hasanat,
whose finger is now embellished with an engagement ring. She has got the
man of her dreams and is now thinking of her future happy marriage.
Everyone left, praising the bride and groom. What bothers me most is
that I now have to go to my room and suffer tortuous boredom and
isolation. How cruel it is to have to live in this spiritual alienation.
My family is against me, on the pretext that I am wayward….

In fact they are! With their background and old-fashioned ideas that are
the mainstay of their lives, they are all deviated, even my sister
Hasanat, who now thinks she's chosen the right path and tries to make
out that she's a saint. She is really misguided and abnormal. How could
she agree to marry a man whom she has never seen, and who is far away?

He didn't even take the trouble to attend his own engagement party!
Instead he asked his father to represent him! They say that he is a
committed believer. Then he's the same as Hasanat; both of them are
crazy. How could he ignore beautiful European women and choose someone
like Hasanat? He could get the most beautiful girls –he is rich and
charming. Anyway, it must be some defect in him that made him turn to
Hasanat and neglect those beauties. Infact, Hasanat is beautiful and
educated, but I never thought she could get such a man. He is a complex
person though -she won't be happy with him."

Rihab tried to dismiss the subject from her mind. She took a book from
the shelf and tried to read. The book was entitled ‘Nothing Counts’ and
written by an Egyptian Author.  
*‘Nothing is important. Neither dignity nor conscience, not even what
comes after death.’* She enjoyed reading the story, written for people
like her and read till late.

The next morning, Rihab awoke late. She sat listening to the happy
voices of her mother and sister in the living room. She dragged herself
out of bed and joined them with a forced smile on her face. She saw her
sister was wearing a white gown. She was happy and cheerful, satisfied
with her future. Jealousy increased in Rihab's heart, but she tried to
look normal. She said to Hasanat, "How's the bride today?"

Hasanat said, "All praise be to God, quite well. I hope to see you a
bride soon too."

These words angered Rihab and she maliciously said, "Perhaps a man from
Africa will send to ask for my hand, just as a man from Europe did! Huh!
As if there aren't enough men here!”

Hasanat had no wish to prolong the conversation and said, "God knows
what is best, sister.”

Rihab continued scornfully, "I know how to build my future myself. I
won't marry someone I don't know."

Hasanat said defensively, "Why do you say I don't know him? I know
everything about my fiancé. It is enough to know that he is a committed
believer."

Rihab persisted, "Is it enough to be religious? You are still young. I
fear you may understand life too late."

"What do you mean?" said Hasanat.

Rihab replied, "You should be with your fiancé now, so that he won't
meet with other girls. You are here surrounded by the four walls, while
your man is free enjoying himself living it up with the girls!"

Hasanat said quietly, "I am sorry to tell you that you are wrong. I
would not have agreed to marry a man who was a playboy. Mustafa is a
righteous believer and does not care for loose women; that is why I am
happy to have him. Since he is a religious person, he is deterred from
such a life. His belief provides him with immunity whether he is here or
in some other place."

Rihab was about to respond when their mother stopped the argument
saying, "That is quite enough. You both have work to do. We are going to
have visitors this afternoon.”

The days passed and Hasanat was quite happy except for Rihab's silly
comments. For Rihab, the days passed slowly and were boring. She was
vexed to see her sister always happy and cheerful, listening to people's
congratulations.

A week later, Rihab returned from her office to find the postman at the
door, just about to knock. When he saw her, he gave her a letter
addressed to her sister Hasanat. It carried a European stamp. She knew
it was from Mustafa. She hid the letter in her bag and did not give it
to her sister. After dinner she hurried to her room to read it.
Wickedness made her open and read, the nicely written letter.

Letter 1
--------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat,

Assalamu Alaikum

Despite the long distance that separates us, I have chosen you. This is
my first letter to you. I have enjoyed many days thinking of you
throughout the past weeks. You are the hope I waited for, and I am
overwhelmed with longing to be with you. My dreams came true when I
found you, my treasure. These words can tell my feelings of love since I
am deprived of your presence. Now that you are part of me I can tell you
how much I love you. I have loved you though I have not seen you,
because I know you love what I love, and believe in what I believe in. I
shall always be faithful to you once this holy bond has joined us
together. Such a relation would not have existed but for your faith and
religious commitment and your acceptance to marry me.

As for me, I think of marriage as a spiritual and ideological
relationship with no false materialistic values. I have chosen you as a
wife to build an ideal married life, one decorated with the flowers of
faith with a torch of Qur'anic rays, supported with the Islamic
injunctions of love, compassion and sincerity. We are both devoted to
God first and then to each other. May God bless our spiritual unit and
protect our love and guide us to His path. I wish I could keep on
talking to you, but I fear you might prefer short letters.

My love to you  
 Yours forever,  
 Mustafa.  
 10th October, 1970  
 N.B. Enclosed is my photo for you. I expect to get yours as soon as
possible.

With great bitterness, Rihab read the letter, with each gentle word; she
felt a sting of fire. Her hatred increased to such a degree that she
decided not to give the letter and the photo to Hasanat. She spent the
day suffering jealousy and was in loss as how to rid herself of the
letter. She read it several times and suffered more and more pain. She
wished the letter was addressed to her, and not Hasanat. She spent a
sleepless night, and read it for the tenth time. She said to herself
"Beautiful handwriting, beautiful photo, nice words that reveal an
emotional nature. Hasanat would have rejoiced at reading it, she would
have felt happy, her happiness disturbs me…" Rihab decided to tear the
letter up. Then an idea flared up in her mind. She murmured to herself,
"No, I won't tear it up. I'll burn it and enjoy watching the fire devour
his words of love." So saying, she went to fetch a match. She saw a
bundle of small coloured candles in a golden ribbon with the words:
'Happy Birthday' written on them. She laughed nervously and took out one
candle. She said to herself, "How nice to burn Mustafa's letter with
Hasanat's candle. This is her gift to me for my 18th birthday. I have
kept it to burn Mustafa's letter with, I'll burn her happiness…"

Before burning it, another idea came to her mind. She thought there was
no use in burning it, as he would inevitably write her another letter
and certainly she could not hope to find the postman at the door again.
Thus, burning the letter would be of no use. She sat thinking for
sometime. She would write a letter to Mustafa using Hasanat's name. She
would try to destroy his love for her. Also she would give him another
address, her friend’s address. She decided to keep the letter incase she
needed to read it again. She sat at her desk and wrote:

Letter 2
--------

Dear Mustafa

I am grateful to you for your nice letter and loving words. I was also
satisfied with a short letter, as I do not like long ones.

You said that writing could replace seeing each other. I think that is
nonsense. An imaginative person might think in such a way, in order to
convince himself of something. But to me there is no use in letters.
What can a letter do as I know nothing about you? How you spend your
time and with whom?  
 You are in a country with every kind of enjoyment and entertainment.
What will be left of you when you come back to me?

I think there is no need to be religious. Today there is no such a sharp
conflict between the oppressed and the oppressors, or a class struggle.
There is not one exploited helpless group that makes us search for a
means of saving it, or search in the darkness for a ray of light. Hence
we create for ourselves a Supreme Power, which is stronger than darkness
and higher than oppression. By such a belief we satisfy ourselves with
hope in such a Power. We wait for it to solve our problems and remove
our sufferings. For this reason man came to believe in God and, as a
result have a religion. Don't you agree with me that we are no longer in
need of such a belief since man has found the way to justice?

Anyway, I am sorry to write such ideas, but you see I am a frank person,
and like to deal with others frankly.

My wishes and regards for you  
 Hasanat.  
 N.B. Please send your letter through the following address:

To: Miss Mida Naji ……….

Rihab posted the letter to Mustafa. She felt a pang of conscience. She
was sure she could destroy her sister's happiness, but still she
maliciously dismissed her accusing conscience. She waited for the result
of her plot.

Mustafa was anxious to get the letter. He was overwhelmed with love and
happiness. But as soon as he read it he was stunned and greatly
disappointed. He could not believe his eyes. He read it again to assure
himself of its contents. Was it really from Hasanat, the girl whom his
sister, Zainab had often praised for her righteousness and had herself
chosen her to be his wife? Could she be the writer of such a letter? Was
she the one with whom his hopes would be fulfilled? Yet she spoke
frankly enough to confess that she did not even believe in God! How hard
it was for him to accept! How could this have happened? How could his
sister have been cheated by her? She was her best friend. What could he
do? Mustafa tried to control his feelings after the shock of the letter
had passed. He first thought of writing a letter to his sister to blame
her for the choice of such a girl and to take steps to divorce her. Then
he dismissed the idea. He thought of a quick divorce as a means to
escape his responsibility towards her. He had to guide her, to enjoin
the good and forbid the evil. Perhaps he could guide her to the right
path. He could decide later for divorce. The more he thought of the
matter the more he found the idea acceptable. He then wrote to her the
following letter:

Letter 3
--------

In the Name of God

To: Hasanat

Assalamu Alaikum

I apologize for being late in replying to you. I have tried to overcome
the shock that your frank letter caused me, and it was not easy, but my
religious duty has caused me to discuss the matter. You say there is no
need for religion. Are you serious? Have you been joking? I don't know
how you could have such ideas. I think you are the victim of deviation
and misguidance.

I am writing to you as a brother writes to his sister. I am bound by
social and religious duties to you. You claim, in your letter, that
there is no need for religion and belief in God.

You should know that belief in God is not the result of injustice or
oppression. It came into existence long before injustice or class
disputes. What class conflict was there at the beginning of human life,
when foodstuff and cloth and land were common for all? Belief in God has
been known since the beginning of creation and man's first knowledge
about life. You may ask for proof of this. Can't you see that everything
has its own qualities and features, drawn on the pages of history?
History has given us sound evidence of that.

If you want examples you can have them. In Egypt, the Egyptians were the
oldest people who believed in the spirit and its renewed life after
death, in its punishment or reward. That was at a special level in
regard to their concepts. They symbolized the spirit, in various ways: a
flower, a bird and sometimes a human face. Such symbols are clear from
archeology and history. They worshipped the Founder of everything, as is
clear from their prayers. They considered whatever the heart and the
tongue comprehended as having been given by the Founder of life.

One of their Pharoahs, Akhnatoon, was famous for his meditation and
thinking. He tried to reform religious rituals, as is clear from his
prayers which history records thus: "How countless are your creatures of
which we know nothing! You are the One God and there is no other lord
but You, You created earth at Your will, and furnished it with men and
animals...” This happened in Egypt.

In India, the historians are not sure of the age when the worship of God
started. Some say it started fifteen centuries before the birth of Jesus
(AS). Some say six centuries before that. Max Muller, an authority on
European languages, says: "Whatever the age of the gathering of the
written anthems was, prior to that age, the Indians believed in One God
Who was neither male nor female, nor had any human natural limitations."
Muller interprets one of their anthems common five centuries B.C., in
the following way: "There was neither day nor night. There was none, but
the One.

China knew religion through the worship of the Sun and the Moon and the
Stars and the Winds. The greatest of their gods was the God of Heaven,
who controlled the universe and decided the life course of every human
being.

In Persia, Zurradasht mentions Honnuz the Worshipped as following:

"Oh Honnuz the Merciful, the Creator of the World, the most Sacred, who
is the Mightiest in Heaven and Earth?" Honnuz answered, "My name, which
is dear from the nature of my heaven, is the Mightiest." They also
believed in the existence of a passage where good spirits and devils,
come together on leaving their bodies (at death), to meet the God of
light and King of Justice. They believed that a balance was set up that
the spirits were questioned about their deeds and excuses. They believed
that one gate opened into Paradise and another to Hell.

In Babylon, where in the most ancient civilization was to be found,
archeological studies indicate the Babylonians' belief in the Creator.
They believed in the God of Water and the God of Heaven and the God of
War and the God of Soldiers.

In the Hellenistic civilizations of ancient Greece, the idea of one God
was mentioned by one of their wise men who blamed his people for their
worshipping of several gods 6 centuries B.C.

History proves man's belief in the One God, centuries before the birth
of Christ. This in itself indicates that the belief in One God is a very
early human idea.

I mention these things without claiming that the idea of religion was
clear at all stages, it has always been influenced by the cultural level
of the various successive generations and was thus affected by them.
Although not monotheism, it indicates a belief in God in a manner that
accords to the ideological understanding of those times. I do not wish
to disturb you by writing you a longer letter.

Perhaps, you could read a book written by the Egyptian writer AI Aqadd
entitled "God". It would give you more information about this matter and
help you accept what I have written.

God is our guide, wishing you every good.  
 Mustafa.

Rihab read the letter and spent the night thinking about it. She tried
to compare her knowledge with what he had written to her, to see which
was the more firmly based on sound evidence. She could come to no
conclusion, and so reverted to her natural stubbornness. She awoke early
the next morning to write her reply. She tried to avoid seeing her
sister Hasanat, incase she should feel sorry for her and change her mind
about spoiling her marriage. In fact Hasanat, in recent days had been
looking more concerned and unusually silent. She hardly laughed at all
and her face had grown pale. Rihab knew the reason for Mustafa's
supposed negligence, as Hasanat had never read his letter. Rihab was
happy to see her sister suffer silently, although sometimes she felt a
prick of conscience. This letter she wrote to Mustafa:

Letter 4
--------

Dear Mustafa,

I was sorry to see that my letter hurt you. I was awaiting a similar
letter to your first one, but instead, you rushed to defend your ideas,
and put aside words of your love. Perhaps you had found me to be
worthless of such feelings?

Anyway, your talk about the origin of man’s belief was quite interesting
and the historical evidence that you cited were clear. But I still
maintain that belief in God is a means for the weak who feel defeated in
the face of the strong. Such a weak person who feels he cannot protect
himself, searches for an imaginary Power to protect him from danger.

This is the basis for belief in God, and religion. I believe, we are not
weak and that we can protect ourselves by various means, why then should
we attach ourselves to the unknown in order to get the power that in
this day and age, we do not even lack.

I am waiting for your answer.  
 Hasanat.

Rihab waited anxiously for the answer. She wanted to hear his answer
after she had agreed with nearly his entire first letter. But she feared
her plot might be discovered if his sister returned from her journey.
Suppose he wrote to his sister and blamed her for the choice; surely she
would contact Hasanat, her best friend, and then everything would become
clear. When Rihab thought of this, she became very uneasy. She tried to
dismiss such ideas from her mind, and continue her 'game'. Soon she got
the following letter:

Letter 5
--------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat,

Assalamu Alaikum,

I was happy that you agreed with some of my ideas. I hope this will be
the start of our ideological agreement. Yet I am still surprised by your
ideas about belief in God.  
 Had that been the case, the prophets would have been the weakest of
individuals, whereas we see that all of those who called the people to
worship God were in some way or another strong.  
 For instance, Prophet Noah continued calling his people to believe in
God for hundreds of years with persistence and great energy.  
 With great effort he built the Ark, despite the mockery and ridicule of
the people; he never gave-up. When the great flood covered the whole
earth, he and his family went aboard the Ark with peace and security.  
 He neither feared the vast waves nor was he disturbed by the
disappearance of his unbelieving son. These are all clear indications of
his strong will and mighty character.

Then there is the Prophet Abraham (AS) who firmly stood up against his
enemies, the pagans.  
 He was not scared by their threat to burn him. His great belief in God
turned the raging fire into something harmless to him.  
 Doesn't this indicate a strong will and personality? Could anyone dare
to say that Abraham was a weak idle person?

What about Moses (AS)? He entered Pharoah's court with nothing but his
brother and their faith in God. He didn't fear Pharaoh’s threatened
horrible revenge.  
 Doesn't such a stance indicate firmness and strength?

Jesus (AS) as well persisted in calling people to the right path.

Our Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) struggled for the sake of God. He never
ceased calling people to worship God even when all the tribes of Quraish
were against him and bargained with him to give up the message. His
reply to them was, "By God, if you were to put the sun at my right and
the moon at my left, I wouldn’t give up this issue."

Throughout his life, the Prophet practiced heroic actions. I ask you to
read his biography in order to learn more about him.

Thus, you should come to know that the prophets were the strongest, the
most courageous and the firmest among their people.  
 You should read a book entitled ‘Faith.’ You will surely enjoy it and
benefit from it; however I am still more than happy to answer your
questions.

Mustafa.

Whilst waiting for Mustafa's reply to her letter, Rihab had sometimes
felt uneasy, and had found herself abhorring her wicked behavior.

Hasanat bore her pain silently, sometimes feeling depressed and
imagining the most awful things. She could not explain her fiancé’s
behavior. As a matter of politeness he should at least have written her
a short letter, and he should have sent her his photo, as she had not
seen him before their engagement.

Such feelings overwhelmed her at times, although in her saner moments
she did not believe the things that came into her mind and tried to find
different excuses for him. She thought he could be busy or even sick.  
 Perhaps he wrote to her, but his letter had been lost in the post. She
found such an excuse acceptable, and was happy thinking that he had
written to her and thought as much of her as she did of him.  
 She awaited his sister's return from holiday; perhaps she would know
the reason for his negligence.

Hasanat busied herself with reading books.

One day Rihab came to her room. Surprised, Hasanat welcomed her sister.
Rihab sat near her, not knowing what to do.

Hasanat said, "Have you got a day off? Why aren't you at the office
today? I hope you are not ill."

Rihab said, "I've a bit of a headache, so I phoned my friend asking her
to tell the office I won't be in today. I'm bored and need something to
read. Can you give me a book?"

Hasanat was surprised, as her sister was not usually interested in her
religious books.

She said to her, "Feel free to choose whatever book you like."

Rihab got up and stood in front of the shelves while Hasanat watched her
to see what books she would take. She was surprised when Rihab took one
about 'Faith' and a biography of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). Rihab
could not explain her choice of books, and so hurriedly left before
Hasanat had time to ask her any questions.  
 In fact Hasanat felt happy to see her misguided sister turning to the
right path of faith. She forgot her own sadness for a while as she
visualized Rihab as a committed Muslim, engaged to a good Muslim such as
her own fiance, Mustafa. Then she remembered Mustafa, she felt sad and
depressed. What could be of Mustafa? She resorted to her book and tried
to concentrate on reading.

Rihab read the two books she had borrowed from her sister and feeling in
need of his explanations, she wrote to Mustafa the following letter:

Letter 6
--------

Dear Mustafa

Perhaps I have been a bit late replying to your letter. Reading the
books you suggested has kept me busy for quite sometime.  
 I have to admit that your style of writing is very convincing.

I enjoyed reading a biography of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) for a few
days, as you advised me, and thus I learnt the details of his life. I
have also started reading the story of ‘Faith’ that answered many of my
questions.

But I still cannot understand why I should worship a God that I cannot
see, or perceive through any of the five senses. Isn't much worship
really mere tradition, based on illusions? I am sorry to disturb you
with such a question, but I feel I need your answer. Such questions
cause me uneasiness. I hope your letter can give me some comfort.

Hasanat.

Mustafa received Rihab's letter with the intention of deciding his
future relationship with her, according to its contents.  
 If he found her still negative, his relationship with her would have to
come to an end as there was no use in trying to guide her.  
 If he found her understanding and positive he would continue his duty
of guiding her, not so that she could be his future wife (he no longer
wanted her) but as a person going astray.

When he found in her letter that she was responding to his ideas and
reading the religious books, he wrote her this letter:

Letter 7
--------

In the Name of God

To: Hasanat

Assalmu Alaikum

Thank God that I am now writing to you in optimistic frame of mind. I
was happy with what I read in your letter. I am quite ready to answer
your questions. They are clear indications of your desire for knowledge.
But my answer in this letter will be short and in the form of questions
for you to answer:

I. What is the difference between a human being and an animal with
regard to comprehension since both have senses?

2. Have you ever considered something to be impossible?

3. Do you believe in the existent and the non-existent?

I would be grateful to you for answering the questions.

My best regards to you  
 Mustafa.

In great eagerness to read the answer to her question, Rihab got
Mustafa's letter only to find no answer but amazing inquiries. She found
it difficult to understand what had prompted him to ask them.

Hasanat was in her room so she went to her, hesitantly.

The more Rihab became aware of God, the more she felt uneasy with
regards to her sister. She could not find the answers to Mustafa's
questions without Hasanat's help and her sister had recently been
helpful to her, since she had seen her interest in religious books.

Rihab sat near her sister not knowing which book could help her find the
answers. She had to ask her sister, but was silent for awhile first.

Hasanat said, "I hope you've finished reading the two books?"

Rihab answered, "Yes"

Hasanat then said, "Did you find them interesting?"

"Yes." replied Rihab.

Hasanat guessed that her sister was in a quandary about books, as she
had nothing else but books to give to her.

She wasn't bothered by Rihab’s brief answers, and only said gently, “You
know you are free to choose any book you want from my library anytime.
Do you want one?"

Rihab, said hesitantly, "Yes. But I am not sure what books I want."

Hasanat said calmly, "History books, science, ethical or religious, what
books do you want?"

Rihab said, "I want religious books."

Hasanat was happy at her choice. She gave her three books; one about
‘Faith and Reason’ and the second one about ‘Reason and The Hereafter’,
and the third was about ‘Science and Faith.’

Rihab took the books and went to her room, her sister's nice words still
echoing in her head.

Hasanat's help in arranging her room, sewing her clothes and offering
her books made Rihab condemn herself saying, "What a wicked person I am!
Can't I stop this dangerous game? Why can't I leave the poor girl alone?
Now there is no way out but to see it through to the end. I am in need
of Mustafa's knowledge to explain difficult issues for me. If I confess
the truth, he and the others will scorn me. No! I cannot retreat."

A few days later she wrote:

Letter 8
--------

Dear Mustafa

I tried to understand your aim behind those questions, and looked for
books that dealt with these matters you asked about, to get the answers.
Actually, I do not want to be your little student waiting for you to
answer every small question. I read nearly three books besides the ones
you mentioned to me. I must say quite frankly that my aim behind reading
has been to comprehend your opinion before you mention it. Anyway the
books dealt with various topics and answered some of my own questions. I
found them interesting to read, but unfortunately I could not find the
answers to your questions. Hence I wait for you to answer them, along
with my answers.

1. Of course the difference between men and animals is not in regard to
the five senses but is because of Reason. Man can think reasonably
whereas animals cannot.

2. Existence and non-existence are matters clear to everyone who can
reasonably comprehend things.

3. Impossible things exist, i.e. to say that it is impossible.

• Hasanat.

Mustafa got Rihab's letter. He was about to tear it even before he'd
read it. Could such a doubting suspicious girl become his life-partner?
Could she be the golden girl of his dreams? What a bitter experience his
sister Zainab had caused him! How could he live with someone who
disbelieved in the most sacred values? Yet he did not tear the letter
but said to himself, “I should continue since I've got some promising
results." He opened the letter and tried to understand what kind of a
girl was writing the letter. He thanked God for success in his efforts
to guide her. He wrote the following letter:

Letter 9
--------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat

Assalamu Alaikum

I got your letter and was pleased to hear that you had enjoyed reading
with whatever results you gained from it. You see how valuable such
books are. They are real treasures within your reach but you never knew
about them. How did you get such books? As for the questions, you agree
that the five senses are not everything. They are only the means for the
mind to obtain the truth. Hence there are facts that need no arguments
though such facts are not perceived through the senses, such as the
existence and non-existence. For instance can you see the non-existent
with your eyes? Have you tasted it with your tongue, or touched or
smelled it? Has it a sound? Has someone else felt it? This is quite
impossible. Yet you and I and any wise person believe in such a thing.
How could that happen? If we say it is impossible to see the
non-existent, then how could we get such information? Was it through the
senses? Of course not. The senses cannot comprehend anything except what
exists. Yet we believe in the non-existent because of absolute reason
that makes all the difference between the animal and the human being.
There is another fact in this regard. Water is a liquid, a fact that
needs no argument. But it is not through the senses that we reach the
fact that water is composed of two atoms of Hydrogen and one of Oxygen.
Such facts have been proved by scientific process independently of
sensory activity. A certain scientist says, “...Some facts are reached
through the direct comprehension of the senses. But there are many facts
that are not reached through the senses; we get the knowledge of such
facts through inference. Such facts are discovered facts. What we should
understand here is that there is no difference between the facts in
these two categories. The difference is that we get the first facts
directly, the others indirectly." He also says, “…The senses cannot
comprehend the facts about the Universe, except to a limited degree, yet
there are other facts that we know nothing about. There is a way to get
such facts through cause and effect or through inference. Both are brain
methods. We start with a well-known fact to end at a particular theory;
something has been here all the time, but we have never been aware of
it." There is also the gravity law which can never be sensed, as Newton
says: 'It is something mysterious to see something with no life at all,
affect another, though there is no relation between the two." So you see
that through reasoning and the accumulation of facts we come to believe
in the Creator and eventually we attain to the religion of our own. You
may consider this letter to be long, but it is to your benefit. If you
need more information, I am ready to give it.

Mustafa.

Hasanat was hopeful of her sister's return to faith. She increased her
care and attention of her and kept showing her tender feelings. But she
noticed that Rihab could not respond easily. She often tried to speak
frankly to her.

She thought her sister's uneasiness was due to their past unfriendly
relationship yet the more she loved her, the more Rihab felt uneasy. She
regretted her misdeed and blamed herself more than she feared the
discovery of her plot. She feared she would no more get Mustafa's
letters guiding her to the right path. She needed those letters more and
more. She would confess the truth to him one day. She would also confess
to Hasanat, the great wrong she had done to her. She would ask for her
forgiveness and pardon. In fact she feared the loss of Mustafa's letters
as well as her weakness to face her sister with her confession. She
decided to go on writing to Mustafa, and wrote:

Letter 9
--------

Dear Mustafa

You will never know how grateful I am to you. I am also ashamed of
having done you so much wrong, while I benefit from your letters so
much. I am sure you are a noble person who pardons the one hurting him.
Your explanation is wonderful and convincing. Yet I have another
question. We understand that we comprehend some facts not only through
the five senses but through deductions and inference. Tell me now: How
can we prove the existence of the Creator? Thanks a lot for your help.

Hasanat

Rihab finished the letter and remembered that Mustafa, in his first
letter had asked for Hasanat's photo, although he had not since repeated
his request. Rihab thought she must do something for her innocent
sister. If she did not send the photo, then she would be doing her
sister another wrong, and Hasanat was a real beauty, just like an angel.

How could she inform Mustafa of her beauty? Had she thought of this from
the beginning, Rihab would have perhaps, sent her own photo, since she
had hated her sister. But thinking of that now would mean another crime
against Hasanat. Now, she must get her sister's photo and send it to him
at all costs. She would ask her sister for a photo of herself. She went
to her sister's room. Hasanat was happy to see her and welcomed her
heartily. She said, "Can you do me a favor, Hasanat?"

Hasanat happily answered, "With pleasure Rihab dear. I am ready for you
to ask anything. What do you want?" Rihab blushed shyly and she said, "I
want one of your most beautiful photos."

Hasanat was surprised at the demand. She did not want to disappoint her
sister, and said, "You can have my album and choose the one you like.”
She handed her an album from the shelf. Rihab took it in confusion. She
turned the pages looking for a clear beautiful picture. She took one,
thanked her sister and hastily left the room. She put the photo in the
envelope and left the house to post the letter.

The passing of the days and weeks, only served to increase Hasanat's
feelings of loss, with regards to her fiancé. However, she still looked
calm and in control of her feelings, appearing to be confident in her
future. Whenever she saw her sister reading religious books she felt
happy, and one day, saw her perform her daily prayers!

She rushed towards her and kissed her warmly, "How happy I am, and how
proud I am of you! Oh, how I love you dear Rihab, and how lovely you
look in your prayer robe! You look like a nymph. You are really very
beautiful!” She said. Rihab could not reply to her sister's feelings.
With every word her sister uttered she felt uneasy. As soon as her
sister left her, she threw herself on the prayer rug and burst into
tears. She murmured, "Oh God! How cruel am being towards this angelic
person."

A few days later, Rihab received the following letter:

Letter 10
---------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat

Assalamu Alaikum

I pray to God to guide you in this world and the next. It is good that
you have asked me to give you proofs of the existence of the Creator.

Science has discovered the second law for heat energy which is called
the power law. This law proves that the universe is not eternal and that
heat is transferred from hotter bodies to cooler ones until both have
the same temperature.  
 Energy resources within the Universe are continuously producing heat,
yet their temperature is never the same. This indicates that energy
resources are not eternal, and are therefore limited. Had it been
eternal, with the continuous heat transference of billions of years, the
temperature would have stabilized long ago.

Some biologists say, "Science has unintentionally proved that everything
has a beginning and that nothing can be self-generating. There is the
‘primary cause’ or the Lord Creator."

Another scientist says, "Scientists believe that the transference of
heat will continue until all energy sources are exhausted. It has not
reached its final level. Had it happened, we would not have survived
until now. There has to be a beginning and an end to this non-eternal
universe."

There are other scientific proofs to lead us to a belief in the Creator.
We can come to know Him through knowledge of the Universe. It would take
many pages if I were to refer to all of the evidence that proves His
existence.  
 Nevertheless, I will mention other scientific discoveries that indicate
that the Universe has a particular age.

Astronomy has proved that the universe is systematically growing larger
and that the planets and other celestial bodies are getting further away
from each other. These parts that are now moving away from each other
were only one mass in the beginning. Then heat and motion took part,
hence the Universe must have an age. It is in a state of continuous
movement until one day when it will come to its end. Whatever has an end
must also have a beginning. I hope you are not annoyed with my long
letter. I do advise you to read the book: ‘God and Science’ and the
book: ‘From disbelief to belief’

My best wishes for your success,  
 Mustafa.

Rihab read the letter then went to her sister's room to get the
suggested books. She started reading immediately trying to comprehend
their contents. She got one week's leave from the office in order to
devote all her time to her reading. On completing the books, she felt a
strong belief in God. Yet she still had a few questions that needed
answers.

She wrote:

Letter 11
---------

Dear Mustafa

I am never annoyed by what you write. You have removed the veil that
covered my eyes and caused my blindness, and misguidance.

I still need you to write to me about these things. I have read the
books that you recommended, and I now feel at ease. However, could you
please relate some more facts to me?

I have to admit that I am newly born, and, just as an infant needs milk,
I need information.  
 I hope you won't get tired of my questions.  
 Hasanat.

Mustafa was busy with his final exams when he got Rihab's letter, yet he
still replied to her.

Letter 12
---------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat

Assalamu Alaikum

I was very happy to receive your last letter that dearly showed that you
have successfully crossed the stage from disbelief, to Faith and
certainty. I congratulate you on your new birth, which, I hope, will be
a happy birthday for you every year.

You should not think that I am fed up with your letters and questions.  
 On the contrary I am happy that God the Great has chosen me to help you
on this crucial issue of faith and religion.

I am happy to help you discover the truth that had been hidden from you
by deviated ideologies. You have already listened to the voice of faith
that has taken you from darkness to light. I am happy and ready to write
to you, though, the books you have read can furnish you with all the
answers to your questions.

You still want more evidence about the Creator. Such evidence is related
to our bodies.  
 Have you ever thought of the complicated system of telecommunication?
Have you ever thought how the voice is carried from one place to
another, far away? Of course it is a wonderful system that calls for
praise for its designers.  
 Yet why doesn't man think of a yet more complicated device? It is our
own nervous system.

Our nerves carry, all the time, millions of pieces of information and
instructions from side to side without the least stop, day and night.
The nervous system carries out its duty of controlling the heart and
other organs. Every system has a central control, and the communication
systems center is man's brain.

There are millions of nerve cells with wires that extend throughout the
body. These are called the nerve tissues (neurons) and they receive and
respond to various stimuli and respond accordingly, thus giving
instructions to various parts of the body. Through this system we hear,
see, taste and think and do our work.

Have you ever thought of the brain? Have you ever thought about how it
remembers names, numbers, images, and events of the past and countless
other incidents? Can we say where such information is hidden, when my
brain is so small? Has nature (which cannot itself comprehend) arranged
this brain system and made it the central control in human bodies? Can
any wise person really believe such a claim?

Don't you know that there are countless machines and devices, which are
all invented in imitation of what God the Almighty has already created?

Can't you see that the camera functions in a similar manner to the eye
that also has an outer network and a screen where images are reflected?
The film that is sensation to light, in the camera box is similar to the
retina where various images are found. Yet, can anyone claim that a
camera makes itself.

Is there anyone who would dare to say that the delicately functioning
eye was established without designer, just by chance?

Have you heard that in one of the world-known international
universities, they have invented a tool with which to measure the
ultra-sound waves of the voices vibration in order to get more
information about floods and earthquakes before they occur?  
 Do you know that some kind of sea-fish have been studied and imitated
to this end? They imitated those fish (that are aware of such
occurrences by nature) in order to build their apparatus. These are only
a few examples.

You can find more if you read the books: ‘God in Heaven’ and ‘Medicine
and Faith’ and ‘The Behavior of Creatures’.  
 Mustafa.

Soon after Rihab got Mustafa's letter, she borrowed the books he'd
recommended, from her sister. Her faith increased and yet she had some
other questions that she intended to ask him; then she would confess the
truth to him before the end of the year when he would be back at home.
She wrote:

Letter 13
---------

Dear Mustafa

Assalamu Alaikum

You must be busy with your finals, hence I apologize for asking more
questions of you, but they are quite important to me. It is a matter of
life that has been renewed in me by you. Therefore I have the right to
ask you as a sustainer. We agree that God has created every thing. Then
who has created Him?

Hasanat.

Rihab posted the letter and returned home. She asked about her sister
and their mother said that Hasanat had spent the day in her room.  
 Rihab knew that Hasanat was worried by her finance's apparently strange
behavior. She felt sad for her and went to her room. She found the door
locked so she knocked gently on it.  
 Hasanat opened it and although she smiled, traces of tears could still
be seen in her eyes. Rihab knew why she had been crying and was about to
tell her the truth there and then but hadn't got the nerve to do it. She
still felt in need of Mustafa's letters. She entered the room and sat
near to Hasanat, “You look sad dear sister, yet you should be the
happiest person in the world."

Hasanat was silent, but happy to see her sister concerned for her. She
threw her hand on her shoulder as if throwing a burden of pain upon her.

Rihab tried hard to control her feelings, and said, "Dear sister, there
is nothing that deserves your concern. All that is good is waiting for
you."

Hasanat gave a deep sigh and then said, "How can you say that. Can't you
see how I have been engaged to a man for seven months yet not once have
I heard even one word from him. This makes me wonder if I was forced
upon him when he didn't want me. Within a few weeks, he will be back.
What will happen on his return? I don't complain, but I can't stop
thinking about my future with a man who doesn't want me."

Rihab could hardly bear to listen to Hasanat's words. She thought she
should do something for the sake of her innocent sister and said
cheerfully, "No, Hasanat, you are wrong to think like that. Your fiancé
is the most honorable and noble of men. He is just right for you."

Hasanat said, "I know that, but it seems he is not satisfied with his
choice."

"I am sure he is satisfied, and that things are nothing like you think."
Rihab said.

Surprised, Hasanat said, "How can you be so sure..?"

Rihab was at a loss as to how to answer.

"I know and am quite sure of what I say." She said firmly.

"How do you know?" Hasanat insisted.

Rihab was about to break down and confess. What could she say? How did
she know? What a dirty trick she had played! Yet she controlled her
feelings and said,

"You have to believe me when I say I know that I am quite sure of this.
Within a few days or a week, I will explain all to you. Now you must
feel confident of your future husband. You should look at life with hope
and high expectations, please dear sister!" She kissed her warmly and
continued,

"Promise me that you'll be your old happy self? Be sure of what I
say..."

Hasanat smiled gently and said, "I believe you dear sister. I can't
explain it but I feel much better already."

Both sisters left the room and joined their mother in the living room.
Rihab continued to spend most of her time with her sister except when
she left for her job. She amused her and talked about the future. She
helped her with her sewing and knitting, and continued to read religious
books, satisfied with what she read.

Mustafa's following letter read:

Letter 14
---------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat

I am sorry to be late in replying to your letter. I have been busy with
my finals.

Concerning your questions I will give you a brief answer and recommend
that you read a book called ‘The doctrine of Faith’ This will give you
details.

Supposing we see water boils, we ask: Why has it boiled? The answer is:
because it is placed on fire. Then we may ask: Why should fire cause
heat? Some one may reply: because it is hot. Can we explain why fire is
hot? It is not a reasonable question since there is no fire that is not
hot. Then don't we, the believers or the materialists, come to know that
this Universe was made for some purpose?

Everything has an end. Explanations also have an end. But the difference
is that the materialists claim that nature and matter or time has
created life. While the believers think and believe that God has created
it.

Here we see two theories for the creation of the world. The two sides
confess that there is a specific reason that cannot be explained. So can
the Power, which created this complicated world (which is also in
harmony with the needs of man) be an unintelligent power, which cannot
see, feel or comprehend, as the matter itself is? Of course it cannot.  
 The life system is in need of a wise designer. The wisdom behind the
creation is itself clear evidence of the existence of a Wise Creator.
Knowledge and wisdom can only be bestowed by a knowledgeable and wise
Creator.

Blessed is He the Best Creator.  
 Mustafa.

As soon as Rihab finished reading the letter, she went to Hasanat and
borrowed the recommended books. Reading strengthened her faith and she
made up her mind to confess the truth to Mustafa.

A new idea had struck her mind. Since she believed in God, she should
believe in His Book. How could she make sure that the Qur'an was
actually the word of God?  
 She decided to write and ask about this before she made her confession
as Hasanat felt and seemed much better since she'd listened to Rihab's
words of comfort. Rihab wrote:

In the Name of God

Letter 15
---------

Dear Mustafa

You have guided me well to the right path. You have filled my heart with
the light of faith, and I feel I am imposing myself on you. You will
soon know why!

I would like you to answer my last question. I hope you will pardon me
for all the trouble I caused you. My question is: How can I be sure that
the Qur'an is the word of God?

Hasanat.

Rihab got his reply very quickly. She had already started reading the
Qur'an with her sister. On that day, Hasanat told Rihab that she had got
a letter from her friend Zainab, Mustafa's sister who was coming back
soon.

Rihab looked happy and said, "Mustafa will also come soon, God willing."

Rihab went to her room and read Mustafa's letter:

Letter 16
---------

In the Name of God

Dear Hasanat

I would like to tell you that I am not annoyed by your letters. They
have helped me to accomplish my religious duty.

Now concerning your question; suppose you see a small girl living in a
society, which opens no door for her, whereby she might gain knowledge.
She neither reads nor writes and has seen no fashion magazines. Then you
see this same girl claiming that she herself has designed the latest
fashion. Would anyone believe her? Of course not. They consider her too
young and ignorant of any fashion principles. She can neither read nor
has she ever been to the big Fashion Houses. How could she design such
outfits? Thus, there must have been some one clever enough to have
designed it for her. Everyone will know that the little girl was not the
designer.

In regard to Gods mission to mankind, we know that a truthful man was
born and bred in the Arab Peninsula, in the desert, that lacked the
least scientific information and art or literature. He never left his
birthplace except once or twice when he was a boy and accompanied the
merchant’s caravans the same as the others did. He never attended
schools for studying either ancient or current civilizations. Yet he
suddenly produced a miraculous Book of logic and eloquence.

Despite the eloquence of the Arab language, they were stunned at its
high level. One of their men (who was against the Qur'anic verse) said
on hearing it, "By God, I have listened to words, which are neither of
man nor of spirits (Jinns). They are sweet with flavor, fruitful and
fresh. Superior to all, and which destroy whatever is below it."

The Qur'an is a miracle on various levels. It has mentioned the events
of previous religions, such as are clear in other religions, and their
books, even though the Prophet had never read those books and he was
illiterate.  
 This is made clear in the following Qur'anic verses: "And you were not
on the Western side when We revealed to Musa (Moses) the commandment,
and you were not among the witness;"

"But We raised up generations, then life became prolonged to them; and
you were not dwelling among the people of Madyan, reciting to them Our
communications, but We were the Senders."

"And you were not on the side of the mountain when We called, but a
mercy from your Lord that you may warn a people to whom no warner came
before you, that they may be mindful." Surah Al-Qasas: 44-46.

What is quite clear is that past incidents were not copied if anyone
might make such a claim. The Qur'an mentions the events in their true
form free from distortion or alteration.

The Qur'an relates those incidents positively, not for the sake of
merely mentioning them. The Qur'an prophesied events that were
improbable then but which later came true, as with its reference to the
defeated Roman army by the Persians. This caused the Muslims 'great
sadness' since the Roman's were people of the Book, whilst the Persians
were (at that time) pagans.

The Qur'anic verse says: "The Romans are vanquished, In a near land, and
after being vanquished, shall overcome within a few years." Surah Ar-
Rum: 2-3.

You see a few years, (according to Arab Terminology) cannot exceed ten
years. And what the Qur'an foretold came true nine years later. Doesn't
such information make you sure that the message of Islam is Divine? As
for the scientific miracles contained in the Qur'an, you should consider
the following blessed verse:

"And We send the winds fertilizing, then send down water from the cloud
" Surah Hijir: 22.

Scientific progress has only recently discovered that the winds play a
major role in fertilizing the plants. An English Orientalist, a
Professor of Arabic language in Oxford University refers to this fact
and says, “…the camel's people knew centuries ago that the winds fecund
the plants, prior to this scientific discovery in Europe."

Science has also proved that the earth is getting smaller day-by-day and
that it is shrinking ever since it was splitted from the sun and got
colder. Its surface is cracking, volcanoes, earthquakes and gravity and
air pressure causes it to get smaller. This is a recent scientific
discovery, but the Qur'an referred to it fourteen centuries ago. The
Qur’anic verse says:

"Do they not see that We are bringing destruction upon the land by
curtailing it of its sides? And Allah pronounces a doom, there is no
repeller of His decree, and He is swift to take account." Surah Ra’d: 41

"When the sun is covered," Surah Al Takwir: 1

Only recently has science made die discovery that the sun is burning,
like a candle, and is fading away. One day its heat will be exhausted,
because of the continuous explosions within it. Hence the sun will
vanish the same as the other stars and planets.

I don't want to bother you by making my letter longer, to make you sure
of this subject, I recommend that you read ‘The Qur’anic Phenomenon’ by
the Algerian writer, Malik Ibn Nabi.

Wishing you every good,  
 Mustafa.

Rihab read the letter several times. She placed her head on the table
and cried bitterly. With each tear she recalled the horrible image of
her crime, and her difficult situation. She viewed her new situation for
the first time. She felt that she was not the same person who had taken
the first step in this plot. She was a new person even though she still
had the same appearance. She was filled with remorse and sobbed and
sobbed.

Rehab was not aware of her sister Hasanat who had heard her and hurried
to her room. Hasanat was worried that something had caused her to want
to retreat from the path of Islam. She entered the room and took her
sister in her arms. She kissed her gently and asked why she was
crying.  
 Rihab could not answer. Her sister's affection increased her agony.

Hasanat said to her, "Please Rihab, be kind to me, I am your sister, I
cannot bear to see you crying..."

At last Rihab stopped and threw her head on her sister's shoulder.

Hasanat spoke kindly to her to calm her down. She saw the letter with
the address of Rihab's friend on the table. She thought that perhaps it
had something to do with Rihab's sadness. She said to her, "Did your
letter bring bad news? What nice handwriting! I don't think that its
writer could hurt others, your friend has good taste in friends."

Rihab could not keep silent any longer. She burst into tears saying, "I
am a criminal, I am unjust, I do not deserve your love."

Hasanat thought that Rihab was referring to those days when she was
unfriendly. She said, "Forget it dear sister. You are now on your way to
perfection. You need to take just one more step and then you will be
better than I. The one who repents is as pure as the one without sin."

Rihab asked, "Am I worthy of God's forgiveness?"

Hasanat said, "Yes. Prophetic narration states that, ‘However many sins
a person commits, then he/she repents, God will forgive him/her. God
loves those who repent.’ God not only forgives you, He also loves you
and He is happy with your repentance. Imam Al-Sadiq (AS) says: ‘God
rejoices at the repentance of His slaves as one rejoices at finding
something lost.’  
 The Qur'anic verse says:

‘Surely Allah loves those who turn much to (Him), and He loves those who
purify themselves.’ -*Surah Al-Baqarah: 222.*  
 Then how can you doubt God's acceptance of your repentance when you
obey His orders?"

Rihab became quiet, she considered her sister's great help to her, and
listened attentively, forgetting her own problematic situation. She
said, "What step do you mean?"

Hasanat said, "I mean the head cover, the decent hijab. You believe in
the Qur'an, don't you? Haven't you read those verses about Hijab in
Surah Al Nur? You know the Qur'an is the message from Heaven. It is for
us to regulate our lives by and to achieve happiness here and in the
hereafter."

Hasant's words were effective enough to awaken Rihab and make her feel
her painful situation. She was quite sure that the Qur'an is the message
from Heaven, but how could she achieve such faith?  
 Rihab was sure that Hasanat would not help her, if she had known the
truth (about the false letters).  
 Yet Hasanat continued talking about the decent clothes and the social
benefits of keeping a woman's body, properly covered.

Rihab wanted to know more about the hijab. She was thinking of wearing
it herself. After listening to her sister she said, "Isn't the hijab an
old Persian tradition?”

Hasanat said, "Not at all. The Qur'anic verses about hijab were revealed
years prior to the conquest of Persia. It was before any contact with
its people. Anyway the hijab recommended by Islam is quite different
from the traditional Persian one. The hijab is just a protection as a
shelter, not a curtain or barrier that prevents woman from performing
her role. The ancient Persian kept women behind the veil. You can be
sure if you read the Qur'anic verses in Surah Al-Nur: 30-31, which say:

“Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard
their private parts.  
 And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and
guard their private parts and do not display their ornaments except what
appears thereof, and let them wear their head-coverings over their
bosoms, and not display their ornaments except to their husbands or
their fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons….”

"So why are women believers ordered to cast down their looks if they are
separated from society and social performance of their role in life? A
man is ordered to cast down his looks, which means there is a woman near
him, and women are ordered to do that also, which means there is a man
near them.

Hence in order not to create sexual and social choas or stir up the
feelings of both sexes, the religion of Islam has ordered the decent
covering of women as a means for their protection. Preventing woman from
performing her role in society or keeping her behind a curtain could
cause a lot of psychological and mental disorders. With the decent
covering, it is quite possible for a woman to perform her role, side by
side with men.

The hijab prevents lots of social problems and disasters that are to be
found in societies where there are no limits placed upon the mixing of
men and women." Hasanat stopped talking for a while. She waited for her
sister to voice her own opinion. Rihab said, "Some say that the 'hijab'
is something which came from the monks. It is an image of austerity and
a denial of life’s pleasures.”

'Woman is a part of man's enjoyment; hence man has imposed the hijab on
her to comply with the difficult life he has experienced."

Hasanat rejected the idea, saying, "I am sorry to say that you have
listened to a lot of distorted information concerning the Islamic decent
dress. Islam has never denied the human being, life's pleasures, and has
never called people to monasticism or the non-enjoyment of life.

On the contrary, Islam wants man to enjoy life. Once the Prophet (PBUH)
saw a man in dirty clothes with untidy hair and a rough appearance, he
said to him, "Religion is to enjoy life."  
 What the Prophet meant is that life's bounties are created for the sake
of man.

Imam Ali (AS) says: "God is Beauty, He loves the beautiful." Imam
Al-Sadiq (AS) says, "God has bestowed on you His bounties, do not hide
them."

When he was asked, how, he answered, "Each of you must be clean and with
good perfume. His home must be bright and his walls white, his clothes
clean. This will increase his earnings."

Hasanat went on, "Three women complained to the Prophet (PBUH). One of
them said, ‘My husband does not eat meat.’

The second said, ‘My husband does not use perfume.’

The third said, ‘My husband does not touch me.’

The Prophet (PBUH) was sad. He went to the Mosque, got on the pulpit and
said, "Some of my companions do not eat meat, or use perfume or enjoy a
relationship with their women. Yet I eat meat, use perfume and enjoy my
women. Anyone who does not follow my course has nothing to do with me.’

The Prophet (PBUH) used to keep his hair tidy. He looked in a water pot
in place of a mirror before he met his companions. He used to say: God
loves His slave to look neat and beautiful in front of his companions.’
Thus you see that Islam does not order monasticism or the denial of
life's pleasures. Hijab bears no relation to such claims, as Islam is
against monastic ideas. I'll give you a book about chastity, its
positive and negative aspects. You can also learn more about the decent
covering and the harmfulness of nakedness.  
 Anyway I have a surprise for you. I have prepared an Islamic suit
(hijab) for you, when you are ready you can have it. I hope f won't have
to wait long,"

On hearing such words, Rihab grew calm again. Hasanat talked about other
things and then left her sister's room. Rihab noticed that her sister
gazed at the letter on her desk before she left.

Hasanat returned to her room.  
 She threw herself on a chair and murmured, "I'm sure I know the
handwriting on that letter! It is familiar to me! It looks like
Mustafa's handwriting. I remember his words in a book he gave to his
sister as a present. Yes, I still have the book I borrowed from Zainab."

She got up and went to the bookshelves to look for it. She soon found
it. She opened it and looked carefully at the handwriting. She fell on
to a nearby chair saying, "Oh my God! It is the same handwriting! Could
it be so similar? How could that have happened? What has Mustafa to do
with Rihab's friend? Oh no! Surely, I am wrong!

Many people's handwriting looks the same. Anyway, what does it mean? Has
the letter anything to do with Rihab's pain and sufferings? Yet, I
cannot imagine Mustafa's insincerity! Why should I?"

She took a book and sat reading, but couldn't take in a word. Her
thoughts were busy with the letter, the handwriting… She tried to sleep
but failed. She kept thinking and thinking. She spent nearly three hours
in her room, then Rihab came. She was happy to have her company, so that
she would not have black thoughts.

Rihab stood near her and said, "I have come to ask for…"

"What...?" said Hasanat. "I would like the Islamic suit that you have
prepared for me. I have decided to wear the decent covering from today."

Hasanat's face brightened. She got up, kissed her and went to her
cupboard. She got the Islamic Hijab and gave it happily to her.

Rihab took it with many thanks. She said, "I will always use it. I hope
you won't ever leave me dear sister."

Hasanat was bewildered at her sister's words. She said, "How could I do
that? Why do you say such a thing. This will never happen whatever the
reason be."

Rihab said, "Even if you discover something about my past?"

Hasanat answered firmly, "Whatever I learn about your past, won't change
me as long as you are clean and pure now."

But Rihab persisted, "Even if I did you some wrong?"

Hasanat said, "Even so. I am happy with your return to Islamic values.
This equals all the wrongs of the past. You are my beloved sister, how
can I hate you?"

"I do hope so" said Rihab "Yet I am not worthy of your love. Anyway
thanks a lot." She left the room with tears in her eyes.

Hasanat was amazed at her behavior and the letter and the handwriting.

Rihab sat thinking in her room. She made up her mind to end the shameful
game. She was ready to face the result whatever it might be. She took up
her pen and wrote a new page in her new life. She began to write to
Mustafa:

Letter 17
---------

In the Name of God

To Mr. Mustafa  
 I do not know where to begin. I am quite ashamed of what I am going to
write. In fact I am newly born with your help. You have given me
lessons, making me believe that shame is less harmful than hell. To feel
shame in this world is easier for me than to feel it in front of God,
the Almighty. That is why I am writing this letter.

I will confess the bare truth, that I (Rihab) have lied for a long time.
My confession, here is an indication about my repentance to God, for all
my sins. The truth is that Oh! I am sure you will be horrified. You will
scorn me and hate me.

The important thing is that I am doing my duty to please God, you and my
conscience. I have suffered a lot. I do confess that it is I, not
Hasanat who wrote to you all those letters. Hasanat could never write
such letters. She is a good believer and does not have such doubts about
her faith as I had. She is an angel, a beautiful saint. How could she
write what I had written? It is I who was lost in the world of deviation
and misguidance. Satan controlled me and tempted me until I was
tarnished by all of the devils, and all good disappeared from me.

I was jealous and remorseless, hence I wrote to you under her name, I
thought I could spoil the engagement and be sure of bringing sadness to
my sister. I went far into deviation and wrote what I wanted.

I even gave you a different address so that your letter might not get to
Hasanat. Through your letters, the cloud of deviation was removed from
my eyes. I drew nearer step by step to the righteous road. My conscience
awakened and hurt me. I tried to stop and withdraw from your life, but I
was in need of your advice and knowledge, so I continued the dangerous
game. I turned towards the source of light that you sent me.

I noticed Hasanat's great sufferings because she didn't hear a word from
you. I felt sad for her. You do not know how gentle she is! I tried to
destroy her future, yet she was happy whenever she saw me read a book
that could bring me to the right path.  
 She rejoiced at my return to faith. She never knew that my return was
at the expense of her happiness.

I do not praise Hasanat because she is my sister. Hasanat is my sister,
but I used to hate her. I never knew her value. Now I have come to know
the reality and she is worthy of all praise.  
 Recently I sent you her photo, but you never confessed her beauty
because you did not want to praise her. You thought she doubted her
religion.  
 Your photo is also still with me. I do not know how to give it to her.
I think that now you will curse me and you would be within your rights
to do so, for this is the painful truth.

You once asked me how I got my religious books, and I never answered
you. What could I say? In fact, I borrowed them from Hasanat. She
allowed me to use her library whenever I liked. Oh, how I hate myself
for my shameful conduct. Perhaps this confession will put me at ease for
a while and give me some rest. All that matters to me now is God's
forgiveness. I wonder will He ever forgive me!

You may get this letter while you are doing your final exams and getting
ready for your return. However, I hope you will write to Hasanat before
you come back. At least she should get one letter from you.

You can hate me as much as you like but I do apologize again and I
really wish you all happiness.

Rihab.

As soon as she finished the letter, Rihab put on her hijab. She hid the
letter in her handbag and before she left the house she went to her
sister's room. When Hasanat saw her in the decent clothes, she shouted
cheerfully, "How lovely you look! Oh look at yourself in the mirror."

Rihab said, "Thanks a lot, I have something important to do but I'll be
back soon. Wait for me please."

She left the house in a hurry and went to the post office. She posted
the letter and returned home. She took off her hijab, and went to her
sister's room. She decided to confess everything to her. She knew she
had caused her a lot of suffering. She was at a loss as to how to start
her confession. What could she say? What would her sister say? Surely
she would hate and punish her severely.

Rihab feared that she might not be able to confess, so she hurried to
her sister, whispering to herself, "I should fear nothing. I am doing
this to please God."

Hasanat was worried at her sister's strange behavior. She was anxious to
listen to her. Rihab immediately got Mustafa's photo from her bag and
gave it to Hasanat, who was surprised when she turned the photo and read
the nice words written by her fiancé.  
 She blushed and then said, "When did this come?"

Rihab said, "You can read the date"

Hasanat read the date loudly then said, "What? The date is some seven
months ago. Where has it been all this time?"

Rihab said, "I hid it. I am guilty, I am not worthy of your love!"

Hasanat said, "Oh, no, I do not agree with you. Just tell me the story
of this picture!"

Rihab answered, "Well, I have come to tell you that story, dear Hasanat,
and then you will have the right to treat me as cruelly as you wish."

She told her all the details, while Hasanat sat listening calmly. She
was surprised at her sister's courage in confessing everything.

Rihab finished and sat waiting for her sister's final judgement.

Hasanat took her in her arms and kissed her warmly saying, "Oh, dear,
how great your suffering must have been!"

Rihab could not believe her ears. She said, "Is it my suffering? It is
you to whom I caused a lot of pain."

Hasanat said, "Oh, dear, all my pains are nothing since they have been
indirect means of your return to the right path of Islam. I am now twice
as happy as I have a righteous sister and a righteous husband."

"Will you forgive me then?" asked Rihab tentatively.

"Of course!" said Hasanat "I'll forget everything and just feel happy
with your return to faith and with Mustafa's return from abroad. I shall
kiss you to prove that I will always be your loving sister." She kissed
her and then looked again at Mustafa's photo.

Rihab said, "Look, how handsome he is!" Hasanat smiled saying, "All that
counts is his faith and belief. I never thought of anything except his
good conduct."

The days passed by and Hasanat was again happy and cheerful. She
cherished her sister and cared for her. Three weeks later, the servant
brought the two sisters, two letters.

Neither put out her hand to get them, so she put them on the desk and
left. The letters were from Mustafa. One was addressed to Hasanat and
the other to Rihab.

Rihab was scared to open her letter. Hasanat encouraged her saying, "I
won't open mine unless you open yours. I think it is a friendly letter.”

They opened their letters and each read hers.

Rihab read:

Letter 18
---------

In the Name of God

To: The Noble Sister Rihab

Assalmnu Alaikum

My letter to you now is a different one. I honor and respect you very
much and I think you are a courageous person who managed to defeat the
devilish instincts by her own will. You have achieved a record in
purifying the self and cleaning the spirit in a way that pleases God.
You are blessed by such an experience. As soon as I read your last
(first) letter, I considered you to be a sister whose happiness is my
happiness and whose pain is my pain. Please do not trouble yourself with
past incidents and be sure that I do not hate you at all, but respect
you and hold you dear. I hope that Hasanat also has the same feelings
since she is, as you say, a good and kind person.

Finally, I wish you all the best.  
 Mustafa.

Hasanat's letter was full of words of love and emotion to make up for
the long months of suffering. She read her letter and looked now and
then at her sister. She feared that she might be hurt by Mustafa's
letter. But Rihab's expression showed satisfaction at what she read.

When they finished reading their letters, they kissed each other
cheerfully.

Hasanat said, “He is coming within a couple of weeks."

Rihab's comment was, "He will always be welcome."

A week later Mustafa's mother phoned the family and promised a visit.
The family thought the visit was to prepare for the wedding day, but in
fact it was made to propose for Rihab. Mustafa's brother Muhammad had
asked for her hand, and soon after, both sisters were married to the two
brothers on the same day.


