A Word to the Readers
=====================

Siyasat Nama is the most efficient part of Mawsu'a al-Imam Ali b. Abi
Talib – The Encyclopedia of Imam Ali (a.s.) – for ruling a country and
the noblest asset for organizing the well-founded Islamic Civilization
in the human society today.

In effect, Siyasat Nama of Imam Ali (a.s.) – Imam Ali's Book of
Government – is a volume consisting of Sovereignty policies of human
values. Thus, it is extremely helpful and instructive not only for the
Islamic world and statesmen, but also for all those who are suffering
from the dominance of power, gold, and fraudulence under various
rubrics, and those who yearn for the rule of values (on top of which
lies justice). This part of the Mawsu'a was translated prior to other
sections of this collection and presented hereby, in a separate volume,
to the interested readers.

Before reading this volume, the esteemed readers are asked to pay
attention to the following points:

1. Siyasat Nama is a complete translation [into English] of the fourth
volume of Mawsu'a of Imam Ali (a.s.), which includes the Arabic text,
too, for those interested in hadith and historical texts in the source
language.

2. The prolegomenon to this version of Siyasat Nama is more detailed
than the fourth volume of the Mawsu'a, consisting, besides new points,
an analysis explaining the reasons for Imam Ali (a.s.)'s being left
alone toward the end of his rule, as well as the reasons behind
disruption of 'Alawi Rule despite his efficient policies.[^1]

3. Prolegomenon of Siyasat Nama is a summing up of 'Alawi policies. To
learn more thoroughly about Imam Ali (a.s.)'s policies in various
fields, however, it is necessary to refer to the main text [of this
volume] in due order of the policies.

4. The references in the footnotes of the "Prolegomenon" are just part
of the sources used in Siyasat Nama for further information about other
sources; it is required to refer to the main chapters of the book.

5. Also, wherever reference is made to a "section", it is meant the
sections of Mawsu'a al-Imam Ali b. Abi Talib.

In the end, I would like to thank all my respected colleagues and others
who collaborated in compilation and authoring the Mawsu'a al-Imam Ali b.
Abi Talib; particularly, the two eminent scholars, Mr. Sayyid Muhammad
Kazim Tabataba'i and Sayyid Tabataba'i Nijad as well as the honorable
Professor Muhammad Ali Mahdawi Rad, who took on organizing its analysis.

Also, I am sincerely grateful to Mr. Ahmad Ridwani who took on the
English translation of Siyasat Nama as well as another brother for
editing this work. I pray to the Beneficent God to bestow on them all,
rewards befitting His Grace and the dignity of the Master of the Pious
[Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.)]. O Lord! Accept this from us! Verily You are
the All-hearing, the All-knowing.

Muhammad Muhammadi Rayshahri  
 January 22, 2001

[^1]: This analysis is added to the prolegomenon of the present book
from the Seventh Volume of "The Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu'minin", [The
Persian translation of the "Mawsu'a"].


