Chapter Eight: Security Policies
================================

8.1 Importance of Security
--------------------------

401. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The worst of cities is the one in which there is
no security and prosperity.”[^1]

402. Imam Ali (a.s.): “O Allah! You know what we did was neither to seek
power nor to acquire anything from the vanities of the world. Rather, we
wanted to restore the signs of Your religion and to usher prosperity
into Your cities so that the oppressed among Your creatures might be
safe and Your forsaken commands might be established.”[^2]

403. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Now
soldiers, by the leave of Allah, are the fortresses of the subjects, the
adornment of rulers, the might of religion and the means of security.
The subjects have no support but them…. Never reject a peace to which
your enemy calls you and in which is God’s pleasure, for in peace there
is ease for your soldiers, relaxation from your cares and security for
your land.”[^3]

404. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The fact is that there is no escape for men from
a ruler, good or bad, in whose rule the faithful persons perform (good)
acts, while the unfaithful enjoys (worldly) benefits. During the rule,
Allah would carry everything to end. Through the ruler tax is collected,
enemy is fought, roadways are protected and the right of the weak is
taken from the strong till the virtuous enjoys peace and allowed
protection from (the oppression of) the wicked.”[^4]

8.2 Collecting Information
--------------------------

405. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his administrators: “In the Name of Allah, the
All-Beneficent, the All-merciful. From the servant of Allah, Ali the
commander of the faithful, to whomever of the administrators who reads
my letter: Now then, some men have sworn allegiance to us who have
escaped [now]. We suspect that they have moved towards the cities of the
Basra region. Inquire your townspeople about them and assign secret
agents from all over your land over them. Then, write to me of whatever
you happen to find out in this respect. Wassalam![^5]

406. Waq‘atu Siffin: “Ali (a.s.) pretended that the next morning he
would be setting out to fight against Mu‘awiya. The news reached
Mu‘awiya and the Shamis got into a panic and were shattered by this
[rumor]. Mu‘awiya b. al-Aahhak b. Sufyan, the standard bearer of the
Bani Salim tribe, was with Mu‘awiya while antagonizing him and the
Shamis and favoring the people of Iraq and Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.). He
used to write the news to ‘Abd Allah b. Tufayl ‘Amiri, who would then
send it to Ali (a.s.).”[^6]

407. Waq‘atu Siffin: “Ali (a.s.) sent a group to obstruct the course of
the spring water to Mu‘awiya. The latter dispatched al-Aahhak along with
a gang toward them and they dispersed them [Ali (a.s.)’s group].”

“Ali (a.s.)’s secret agents came to him and reported what had happened.
Then Ali (a.s.) asked his companions, ‘What shall we do?’”

“A group said do this and the other said do that. When he noticed their
discrepancy, he ordered [to prepare] to launch an assault on Mu‘awiya
the next morning. In the morning, he led them to the battle (of Siffin),
and the Shamis were defeated.”[^7]

408. Ansab al-Ashraf: “Ali (a.s.)’s secret agent in Sham came to him and
handed him a report on Busr. This secret agent is said to have been Qays
b. Zurara b. ’Amr b. Hityan Hamadani. Qays was Ali (a.s.)’s secret agent
in Sham and used to report the news to him.”[^8]

709. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his letter to ‘Abd Allah b. Badil: “Beware
of encountering the enemy’s troops, until I come to you! Send the secret
agents toward them and make sure they carry arms with them to fight
with. The secret agents should be from among the brave troops; for the
coward would not bring you correct reports. You and whoever is with you,
by the leave of Allah, abide by my commands. Wassalam.”[^9]

410. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in the report on the battle of Siffin: “A man
from the Himyar tribe, by the name of Hasin b. Malik, was with Mu‘awiya
and [at the same time] had correspondence with Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.),
informing him about the secrets of Mu‘awiya.”[^10]

8.3 Rectifying the Enemies
--------------------------

411. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who rectifies his enemy, has [indeed]
augmented his company.”[^11]

412. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who corrects the opponents will achieve
his goal.”[^12]

413. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The pinnacle of prudence is rectifying the
opponents and putting up with the enemies.”[^13]

414. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Rectifying the enemies with nice words and decent
behavior is more convenient than confronting them and fighting against
them with pain and suffering.”[^14]

415. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Doing good to the wicked would rectify the
enemy.”[^15]

416. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The sages used to say in the past, ‘It is
befitting to frequent houses of others for ten purposes: first, to the
House of Allah for performing the rituals [of Hajj], discharging Allah’s
right, and fulfilling His obligatory commands;… and nine, to the houses
of the enemies so as by tolerance their turbulence would calm down and
by leniency and visitation their enmity would resolve their
enmity.”[^16]

417. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Refraining from persecuting [others] would
rectify the hearts of the enemies.”[^17]

418. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Shake hands with your enemies, even though they
dislike it, for it is one of the things to which Allah has enjoined his
servants, [where] He says***, (Repel [evil] with what is best. [If you
do so,] behold, he between whom and you was enmity, will be as though he
were a sympathetic friend. But none is granted it except those who are
patient and none is granted it except the greatly endowed.***
[^18]***)***[^19]

419. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “If your
enemy pretended friendship and honesty to you, accept it with warm
friendship, for if he goes on with this [attitude] and gets accustomed
to it, his friendship will turn sincere.”[^20]

8.4 Compromise Accompanied by Sagacity
--------------------------------------

420. Imam Ali (a.s.): “I found compromise more beneficial than combat so
long as it is not weakening to Islam.”[^21]

421. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Of all the benevolence, guiding to peace and
compromise is the best.”[^22]

422. Imam Ali (a.s.) - in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Never
reject a peace to which your enemy calls you and in which is God's
pleasure, for in peace there is ease for your soldiers, relaxation from
your cares and security for your land. But be cautious, very cautious,
with your enemy after (having made) peace with him, for the enemy may
have drawn near in order to take advantage of (your) negligence.
Therefore be prudent and have doubts about trusting your enemy in this
(matter).”[^23]

8.5 Keeping Extremely vigilant against the Enemy
------------------------------------------------

423. Imam Ali (a.s.): “[The warrior should be wakeful for] If he sleeps
the enemy does not sleep.” [^24]

424. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Be extremely vigilant against your enemy.”[^25]

425. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not feel safe from any enemy, even though they
express appreciation.”[^26]

426. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The worst of the enemies is the one who is more
insightful, and more surreptitious in conspiracies.”[^27]

427. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “Be more
wary of a surreptitious enemy than the enemy who openly fights against
you.”[^28]

428. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The weakest enemy in deception is the one who
manifests his enmity.”[^29]

429. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who manifests his enmity, is less
deceitful.”[^30]

430. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not be deceived by the enemy’s flattery, for
the enemy is like water which although it takes long to boil it with
fire, it does not fail to put it [the fire] out.”[^31]

8.6 Not Underestimating the Enemy
---------------------------------

431. Imam Ali (a.s.): Do not underestimate any of the enemies, even
though he is weak[^32]

432. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “Beware of
underestimating the enemy, for it bars you form watchfulness. Many a
small ones has defeated the great ones!”[^33]

433. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “Do not
underestimate the power of your enemy when you are fighting with him,
for if you win [the battle], you will not be praised, and if he defeats
you, you are not excused. The weak that keep a watchful eye on the
powerful enemy are closer to safety than the powerful who is conceited
of his own power over the weak.”[^34]

8.7 Avoid Consultation with the Enemy, except for Trial
-------------------------------------------------------

434. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Ignorant is the one who seeks consultation with
his enemy.”[^35]

435. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not consult with your enemy, and conceal your
news from him.”[^36]

436. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Consult with your enemies in order to find out
the extent of their enmity and their goals.”[^37]

437. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “As a
trial, consult with your enemy in order to realize the extent of his
enmity.”[^38]

438. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who seeks help from his enemy for [meeting]
his need, will move farther away from [meeting] his need.”[^39]

8.8 Knowing the Right Time in Encountering the Enemies
------------------------------------------------------

439. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Employ [the strategy of] waiting for
possibilities and timeliness in order to gain victory.”[^40]

440. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not assault the enemy before you are powerful
[enough].”[^41]

441. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not disclose your enmity to those over whom
you have no power.”[^42]

442. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not challenge your enemy when he is upcoming,
as his upcoming will help him over you; nor challenge him when he is
turning away, as his turning away will suffice you over him.”[^43]

443. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is most destructive to your enemy that you do
not inform him that you have taken him as enemy.”[^44]

444. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the Aphorisms attributed to him: “It is most
fatal to your enemy that you do not let him know that you have taken him
as enemy.”[^45]

8.9 Not Punishing on the Basis of Conjecture
--------------------------------------------

445. Al-Jamal: Ibn ‘Abbas entered the presence of Amir al-Mu’minin and
Ali (a.s.) began to speak and said, “O Ibn ‘Abbas! Do you have any
news?”

He siad, “I saw Talha and Zubair.”

He told him, “Those two asked my permission for ‘Umra (pilgrimage) and I
granted them permission after I had them pledge not to practice
deception, commit perfidy or get involved in corruption.”

“O Ibn ‘Abbas! By Allah, they have no intention other than sedition. I
have the vision that they have gone to Makka to seek assistance against
me; for the treacherous libertine Ya‘la b. Manih has taken the wealth of
Iraq and Fars to spend to this end. The two men will soon ruin my affair
and shed the blood of my followers and companions.”

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas said, “If you think so, why did you give them
permission and why did you not put them in jail and shackle them so that
the Muslims get rid of them?”

The Imam said, “O Ibn ‘Abbas! Are you getting me to start to tyrannize
and practice evil before doing good; and punish them on the basis of
conjecture and accusation? Far from it! By Allah, I will not withdraw
from the pledge I made to Allah as to judge on the basis of justice and
speaking the truth.”

“O Ibn ‘Abbas! I gave them permission and I know what they will commit;
however, I asked Allah for help against them, and I swear by Allah that
I will kill them and make them hopeless, and they will not fulfill their
wish, for Allah will punish them for their injustice and perfidy to me
and persecuting me.”[^46]

446. Tarikh al-Tabari - related by Jundab: When Ali (a.s.) was informed
about the frivolities of Bani Najiya and the murder of their chief, he
said, “May his mother die! How feeble-minded he was and how daring he
was toward Allah! Once somebody came to me and said, ‘There are men
among your companions who, I am afraid, may separate from you. What do
you think of them?’”

“I told him, ‘I do not administer punishment on the basis of accusation,
nor do I chastise on the basis of conjecture; I do not fight against
anyone but the one who has antagonized me and manifested his enmity to
me, and that I will not start to fight him unless after I have invited
him and presented my proofs to him. Then, if he repents and returns to
us, I will accept him as one of our brothers; but if he refused and
wished for nothing but battle against us, we will ask Allah for helping
us against him and will fight him. May Allah keep away from me what He
wishes!”

“Once again he came to me and said, ‘I am afraid that ‘Abd Allah b. Wahb
al-Rasbi and Zayd b. Husayn would ruin your affair. I heard them say
things about you that if you hear, you will not let them go unless you
kill or chastise them. So, never release them from the prison.’”

“I said, ‘I consult with you about them. What do you suggest?’ He said,
‘I suggest you to send for them and behead them.’”

“Then, I found out that he was neither pious nor wise. I said, ‘By
Allah, I do not suppose you are pious, nor helpful or wise. By Allah, if
I ever wanted to kill them, it would be more fitting for you to say to
me, ‘Be wary of Allah! Why do you consider their blood as lawful since
they have not killed anyone, nor have they rose up in war against you,
or given up obeying you?’”[^47]

447. Imam a-Sadiq: “Amir al-Mu’minin Ali b. Abi Talib – upon whom be
blessings from Allah – said in Kufa to the people, ‘O People of Kufa!
You suppose I do not know what can rectify you? Yes, I do. But I do not
like to do so by ruining myself.”[^48]

448. Al-Gharat – reporting on withdrawal of Khirrit b. Rashid, one of
the Kharijis, from Amir al-Mu’minin: ‘Abd Allah b. Qa‘in says: “… I came
to Amir al-Mu’minin and reported to him what I had heard about Khirrit,
what I had told his cousin and what response he had given me.”

“The Imam said, ‘Leave him alone. If he accepts the truth, we will know
him by this and accept him; and if he rejects it, we will send for him.”

I said, ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! Why do you not seize him right now to have
him give his assurances [to be secure of his evils]?’

He said, “If we treat all those whom we accuse like this, then we should
fill up prisons by them; and I do not believe it to be permissible to
attack people, imprison them, and punish them, unless they have openly
express their antagonism toward us.”[^49] See The Encyclopedia of Amir
al-Mu’minin, VI, 447 (The Revolt of Khirrit b. Rashid)

8.10 Warning against Torture
----------------------------

449. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who whips a person out of cruelty, Allah, the
Blessed and the Exalted, will whip him with fiery whips.”[^50]

450. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Among all the people the most detested before
Allah is the person who bares a Muslim’s back unrightfully and beat him
who has not beaten him, or kill him who has not intended to kill
him.”[^51]

451. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his letter to the chiefs [collectors] of land
tax: “Even if there had been no fear of punishment for revolt and
disobedience, which Allah has prohibited, the reward in keeping aloof
from it would be enough (incentive) to abstain from going after it.
Then, have pity [on others] so as to be pitied on; do not torture
servants of Allah, and do not demand from them beyond their
capacity.”[^52]

452. Imam Ali (a.s.): “O People! I called you to the Truth, you turned
your back on me, and I beat you with the lash, you tired me out. Know
that after me you will be ruled by rulers who would not be content with
this; rather, they would torture you with whips and iron. But I do not
torture you with whips and iron, for whoever tortures people in this
world, Allah will torture him in the Hereafter.”[^53]

453. Musnad Zayd – related by Zayd b. Ali (a.s.), from his father, from
his grandfather about Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.): “In truth, he [Ali
(a.s.)] told ‘Umar concerning a pregnant woman who had admitted to
committing adultery and ‘Umar had ordered her to be stoned: ‘Perhaps you
have shouted at her or frightened her?’

‘Umar replied, ‘That is so.’

Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Have you not heard from the Messenger of Allah saying,
“There should be no legal punishment to the one who has confessed after
being tortured. Certainly, the confession of the person whom you
shackle, incarcerate, or threaten is invalid”?

He (the narrator] said, “’Umar released the woman. Then he said, ‘Women
are unable to give birth to a son like Ali (a.s.) b. Abi Talib [any
more]. If Ali were not here ‘Umar would be ruined.’”[^54]

454. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his sermon at the beginning of his hukuma:
“Surely, Allah has made unlawful the things, which are not unknown and
made lawful the things, which are without defect. He has declared paying
regard to Muslims as the highest of all regards. He has placed the
rights of Muslims in the same grade (of importance) as devotion (to
Himself and His oneness). Therefore, a Muslim is one from whose tongue
and hand every (other) Muslim is safe save in the matter of truth. It is
not, therefore, lawful to molest a Muslim except when it is
obligatory.”[^55]

8.11 Warning against Invective
------------------------------

455. Imam Ali (a.s.) – related by ‘Abd Allah b. Sharik: “Hujr b. ‘Adi
and ‘Amr b. Hamq went out while openly disavowing and cursing the
Shamis. Ali (a.s.) sent a message to them to avoid what he had been
reported about.”

“The two came to Ali (a.s.) and said: ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! Are we not in
the right?

“He said, ‘Yes.’”

“They asked again, ‘Are they not in the wrong?’”

“He said, ‘Yes.’”

“They said, ‘Why, then, did you prevent us from cursing them?”

“He said, ‘I did not like you to be among the cursers and damners who
curse and then disavow; but if you recounted their misbehavior and said:
“Their conduct is such and their behavior is so”, it would be more in
the right and more plausible to give excuse for. And if instead of
cursing and disavowing them, you would say: “O Allah! Preserve our blood
and theirs, put things right between them and us and deliver them from
misleading so that the one who does not know the truth may know it and
the one who is eager for misguidance may be averted from it”, this would
be more lovely to me and better for you.’”

“They both said, ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! We accept your advice and we seek
to be refined by your good manners.’”

456. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not find fault with your enemy even if he
finds fault with you.”[^56]

8.12 Gentleness as long as no Intrigue is Going on
--------------------------------------------------

457. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Gentleness will soften the roughness of
opposition.”[^57]

458. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in the aphorisms attributed to him: “Get close to
your enemy as far as you may fulfil your need; and do not get too close
to him lest you should debase your comrades and yourself. Look at the
stick erected before the sun. If you slant it, the shadow will elongate;
and if you go to extremes in slanting, the shadow will diminish.”[^58]

459. Imam Ali (a.s.) – related from ‘Abd al-Malik b. Abi Harrat
al-Hanafi: “One day Ali (a.s.) went out to give a sermon. He was
lecturing while the Khawarij were chanting in a corner of the mosque la
hukm illa li’llah (judgment belongs to Allah alone)!”

“Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Allahu Akbar (Allah is the greatest)! It is a true
word that is intended for a false meaning. If they keep silent, I will
abandon them; if they go on talking, I will debate with them; and if
they rise against us, we will fight them.’”[^59]

460. Al-Sunan al-Kubra - related by Kathir b. Namir: “I was attending
the Friday prayer and Ali (a.s.) was on the minbar, when a man rose and
said, ‘La hukm illa li’llah (judgment belongs to Allah alone)!’”

“Another person rose and said, ‘La hukm illa li’llah! Then the Khawarij
stood up from around the mosque. Ali (a.s.) beckoned to them to sit
down, [and said:] ‘Yes, judgment belongs to Allah alone; a true word
that is intended for a false meaning! I look at you by the judgment of
Allah. Let it be known that to me there are three manners for you: So
long as you are with us, we will not repel you from the mosque where you
utter the name of Allah; so long as your hands are in ours, we will not
deprive you of the public assets; and we will not fight with you unless
you fight against us.’ Then he went on with his sermon.”[^60]

461. Al-Amwal – related by Kathir b. Namir: “A man brought another man
from Khawarij to Ali (a.s.) and said, ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! I saw this
man cursing you.’

He said, ‘Curse him back, the same way as he cursed me.’

He said, ‘He threatened you!’

Ali (a.s.) said, ‘I will not kill the one who does not fight against
me.’

Then he said, ‘They have three rights over us: not to prevent them from
the mosques where they utter the name of Allah; not to deprive them of
public assets so long as their hands are in ours; and not to fight with
them so long as they do not fight against us.’”[^61]

462. Al-Musannif – related by Kathir b. Namir: “A man brought another
man from Khawarij to Ali (a.s.) and said he [and his band] threatened
you and then ran away, and I caught this man.

The Imam said, ‘Should I kill the person who has not fought against me?’

The man said, ‘He cursed you!’

He said, ‘You curse him too, or let him go.’”[^62]

See The Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu’minin, VI, 390 (The Imam’s Patience
for the Persecutions from the Khawarij and Tolerance towards them).

8.13 Exiling or Incarcerating the Plotters
------------------------------------------

463. Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: “It is related that ‘Umran b. Husayn was one
of those who had withdrawn from Ali (a.s.) and Ali (a.s.) had exiled him
to Mada’in for he had said, ‘If Ali dies, I do not know how his death
will come! And if he is to be killed – that I hope he will – I look
forward to that!’”[^63]

464. Al-Gharat – related by Sa‘id Ash‘ari: “When setting out for
Nahrawan, Ali (a.s.) put a man from the Nakha‘ tribe by the name of Hani
b. Hudha in his place. He wrote to Ali (a.s.) that ‘the Ghani and Bahila
(tribes) have revolted and prayed that your enemy gain victory [over
you]’.

Ali (a.s.) wrote back, ‘Deport them from Kufa and do not neglect any of
them’.”[^64]

465. Tarikh al-Tabari - related by Mahall b. Khalifa: “A man from Bani
Sadus tribe named ‘Ayzar b. Akhnas who believed in Khawarij
[sympathizing with them] set off a trip toward them. In the outskirts of
Mada’in, he ran into ‘Adi b. Hatam who was accompanied by Aswad b. Qays
Muradi and Aswad b. Yazid Muradi.”

“When encountered ‘Adi, ‘Ayzar asked him, ‘Are you safely redeemed or
tyrannically sinful?’”

“‘Adi said, ‘Safely redeemed.’“

“The two Muradis said, ‘You did ask this only out of the evil you have
in you. We know for sure that you harbor views of Khawarij. O ‘Ayzar!
You will not go away from us until we take you to Amir al-Mu’minin and
report your state to him.’”

“A short while later Ali (a.s.) came and they reported to him, saying,
‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! He is in the same opinion as that of the Khawarij.
We know him.’”

“He said, ‘His shedding blood is not permissible to us; however, send
him to prison.’”

“‘Adi b. Hatam said, ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! Leave him with me and I ensure
that no harm would come to you from him.’”

“Ali (a.s.) left him with ‘Adi.”[^65]

[^1]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5684, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 294/5253.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 131, Tadhkira al-Khawas: 120.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 131, Ibid., 145. Also
see: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 1/ 357.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 40.

[^5]: Al-Gharat: 1/337, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/407/628.

[^6]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 468.

[^7]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 360, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/500/430, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha: 8/39.

[^8]: Ansab al-Ashraf: 3/212.

[^9]: Al-Mi‘yar wa al-Muwazina: 131.

[^10]: Al-Futuh: 3/78.

[^11]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8230, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 445/7838.

[^12]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8043.

[^13]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7232.

[^14]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1926.

[^15]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1517.

[^16]: Al-Khisal: 426/3, Bihar al-Anwar: 76/16/1.

[^17]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9784.

[^18]: Al-Qur’an, 41:34-35.

[^19]: Al-Khisal: 633/10, Bihar al-Anwar: 71/421/58.

[^20]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20321/680.

[^21]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10138, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 506/9288.

[^22]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9379, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 470/8579.

[^23]: Nahj al- Balagha: Letter 53, Khasa’s al-A’imma: 123, Da‘a’im
al-Islam: 1/367.

[^24]: Nahj al- Balagha: Letter 62, Al-Gharat: 1/321.

[^25]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10301.

[^26]: Ibid., 10197.

[^27]: Ibid., 5781.

[^28]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/311/575.

[^29]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 3258, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/343/947.

[^30]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7956.

[^31]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10298. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) says: “When Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s.) came down to the region of Nahrawan, he asked about
Jamil b. Bashiri, Anushirwan’s scribe. They said he was still alive and
having [his] daily sustenance. He ordered him to be summoned. When he
arrived, he [Ali (a.s.)] he found him sound in his senses (except for
his sight), clear-minded and highly talented. He asked him, ‘O Jamil!
How should man be?’ He said, ‘He should have few friends and many
enemies!’ The Imam said, ‘You uttered a novel thing, O Jamil, as people
are unanimous that it is better to have many friends.’ He said, ‘It is
not as they suppose; for when the friends are required to do something,
they do not act as they should, as it is said, “The ship sank because of
too many sailors”. Amir al-Mu’minin said, ‘I have tried this and it is
true; but what benefit is there in having many enemies?” He said, ‘When
there are too many enemies, man is always cautious and careful not to
utter a word by which to get stuck [in trouble], or make a blunder to be
reprimanded for. Therefor, he is always protected from erring. Amir
al-Mu’minin approved this. (al-Da‘wat: 297/65, Bihar al-Anwar: 34/345)

[^32]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10216.

[^33]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/282/231.

[^34]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/309/543.

[^35]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 6663.

[^36]: Ibid., 10198.

[^37]: Ibid., 2462.

[^38]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/317/634.

[^39]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8984.

[^40]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2347.

[^41]: Ibid., 10258.

[^42]: Kanz al-Fawa’id: 2/183, Bihar al-Anwar: 78/93/104.

[^43]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10306.

[^44]: Nathr al-Durar: 1/293.

[^45]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/283/244.

[^46]: Al-Jamal: 166.

[^47]: Tarikh al-Tabari: 5/131, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 3/148, Al-Gharat:
1/371.

[^48]: Al-Mufid, Al-Amali: 207/40, Bihar al-Anwar: 41/110/18.

[^49]: Al-Gharat: 1/333 & 335, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/407/628, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha:3/129.

[^50]: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 2/541/1927.

[^51]: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 2/444/1551, Tahdhib al-Ahkam: 10/148/588.

[^52]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 108, Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 51, Al-Mi’yar wa al-
Mawazina: 122.

[^53]: Al-Gharat, 2/458, Al-Irshad: 1/322, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 2/306.

[^54]: Masnad Zayd: 335, Kashf al-Yaqin: 73/55, Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqbi.

[^55]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 167, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/40/26.

[^56]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10418.

[^57]: Ibid., 560.

[^58]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/342/923.

[^59]: Tarikh al-Tabari: 5/72, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh:2/398, Ansab
al-Ashraf: 3/135.

[^60]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra: 8/319/16763, Tarikh al-Tabari: 5/73, Al-Kamil
fi al-Tarikh: 2/398.

[^61]: Al-Amwal: 245/567, Kanz al-‘Ummal: 11/300/31569.

[^62]: Al-Musannif fi al-Ahadith wa al-Athar: 8/614/147, Kanz al-‘Ummal:
11/319/31616.

[^63]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 4/77.

[^64]: Al-Gharat: 1/18, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/356/588.

[^65]: Tarikh al-Tabari: 5/89.


