Chapter Nine: Warfare Policies
==============================

9.1 Endeavors in Military Training
----------------------------------

### A. Training the Troops

466. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his commandments to Ziyad b. Nadr when he
assigned him as the commander of his army in the battle of Siffin: “You
should know that the vanguards are the harbingers, and the harbingers
are the front. If you leave your country and approach your enemy, you
should not feel weary from addressing the front to every side and to
some of the defiles, woods, and secret places as well as every area so
that your enemies will not raid or trap you.”

“Do not give the orders of directing the battalions and tribes from
morning to evening unless there are covering powers beyond them.”

“If a matter occurs or a trouble befalls you, your camp should be on the
heights, versants, or in rivers so that they will form fortresses for
you and will prevent your enemies from reaching you. Your fighting
should be in one or two faces. Order the harbingers to settle on the
summits of mountains, heights, and on the edges of rivers. They should
oversee for you so that the enemies will not attack you from an expected
or secured place.”

“If you want to reside, you should reside collectively, and when you
want to continue your march, you should continue collectively. When you
reside at night, you should encompass your camp with spears and armors.
The archers should protect the carriers of armors so that you will not
be taken surprisingly or inattentively.”

“Guard your army yourself. Beware, you should not sleep unbrokenly and
should not pass a night with deep sleep. You should keep up this
tradition until you meet your enemy.”

“You should be slow in fighting. You may hurry only when a good
opportunity arises for you. Do not fight before the enemy attacks you or
you receive my order. Peace and Allah’s Mercy be upon you.”[^1]

467. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his commandments to Ma‘qal b. Qays Riyahi
when he was dispatched to Syria at the head of a vanguard contingent
three thousand strong: “Fear Allah before Whom attendance is inevitable,
and with other than Whom there is no meeting. Do not fight except with
those who fight you. Travel in the two cool periods (i.e. morning and
evening). Let the men have midday sleep. March easily and do not travel
during the early night for Allah has made it for resting and has
ordained it for staying, nor for journeying.

Therefore give rest to your body in the night and let your
carrier-beasts also rest. When you are sure that morning has appeared
and when dawn has dawned commence your journey with Allah’s blessings.
If and when you face the enemy stand in the midst of your comrades. Do
not get too near the foe, like the one who wants to commence the
fighting, nor remain too distant like him who is afraid of action, till
you receive my orders. Hatred for them should not lead you to fight
before inviting them (to guidance) and exhausting your pleas before
them.”[^2]

468. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his letter to some of his chiefs of army:
“If they [the enemies] return to the umbrella of obedience, then this Is
all that we want. But if the condition of these people points out
towards disruption and disobedience, then, taking with you those who
obey you, rush upon those who disobey you. And while you have those with
you who follow you do not worry about those who hold back from you,
because the absence of a halfhearted man is better than his presence,
and his sitting down is better than his rising up.”[^3]

469. Imam Ali (a.s.): “If the enemy launches an assault upon you, then
array your troops on the gates of the ditches for there exists nothing
save swords; and stand firm on the ground after arraying the troops. Do
not look at the enemies in the face and their number should not scare
you, look to your own land [and front] instead. If they assault you,
bend over on your horses and hide yourselves behind your shields like an
impenetrable stronghold; and if they turn their back on you, launch an
attack on them with your swords. If they stand still, and you stand
still on the other side too. And if they run away, rush on them and
catch them.”[^4]

470. Imam Ali (a.s.): “If, God forbid, you happen to face a defeat, hold
a gathering and remember Allah and remember how the deserters of the
battlefield are promised [to be punished], and reproach the one whom you
see turning his back on the enemy. Gather the banners and unite them.
The roughriders must hasten to bring the fugitives back to the troops
and the army; and anyone hiding in the hideaways is to come back to you.
When the dispersed troops were gathered and your power was reclaimed and
defeat state left you, hand over the troops to the commanders, mobilize
the forces and fight. Seek assistance from Allah and be patient, for
there is great reward for perseverance at the time of defeat and for the
brave man’s surprise attack on the enemy.”[^5]

471. Tarikh Damishq – related by Ibn ‘Abbas: “Women fail to give birth
to the like of Amir al-Mu’minin Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.) any longer. By
Allah, I neither see nor heard of any chief to be compared to him. I saw
him at the battle of Siffin wearing a turban with the folders on both
sides let down. His two eyes looked [glazing] like two fiery lights. He
was standing before a small group and inciting them to fight until he
reached me while I was standing amid the people.”

“Then he said, ‘O Gathering of the Muslims! Feel the fear of Allah,
lower the voices, put on tranquility, wield your spears, and before
drawing your sword give it a good shake. Wave your swords to the left
and right, and strike them with their sharp edges. Coordinate your
swords with your steps and your arrows with your spears. Certainly, you
are in the sight of Allah and in the company of the Prophet’s cousin.”

“Launch your assaults consecutively and be ashamed of deserting, for it
is a great shame that will remain in the groups and generations, and it
is [turned into] fire on the Resurrection.”

“Keep yourselves lively and delighted, and step toward death readily and
lightheartedly. Aim at the bulk of the [enemy’s] troop and the tent
whose ropes are stretched around and aim at their hearts, for the Satan
has mounted the unruly camel and has extended his arms, holding one hand
forward to attack and a foot backward to run away. So stay firm and
persevere, so as the Light of Allah may shine on you, as ***(…and when
you have the upper hand and Allah is with you, and He will not stint
[the reward of] your works.)***[^6]”[^7]

472. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not let your banners bend down, nor leave it
alone. Do not give it to anyone except the brave and the defenders of
honor among you because they alone endure the befalling of troubles….
And know that the guardians are those who surround the banners and
encircle them on both sides, their rear and their front, and do not let
it be ruined. They do not separate from them lest they give them over to
the enemy, nor they go ahead of them lest they leave them alone.”[^8]

### B. Arrangement the Troops

473. Da‘a’im al-Islam – about Ali (a.s.): “When preparing for combat, he
would arrange the troops into the left, the right and the middle flanks,
with himself stationing in the middle. He would appoint liaisons for
them, would send forth harbingers and would order them to lower their
voices, to pray, to be one in the heart, to draw their swords, to
display their power. He would also order every group to be stationed in
their own positions and that everyone who would make a raid should
return to his position after the raid.”[^9]

474. Da‘a’im al-Islam – about Ali (a.s.): “Verily, when he prepared to
go on a battle, he would prepare the battalions and separate among the
tribes. He would appoint a person over every group, array the troops,
and divide them into groups. Then he would set off for the battle.”[^10]

475. Imam Ali (a.s.) – on how to wage a war: “Send the infantry and the
archers ahead to storm them [the enemy] with arrows, while the two
flanks raid on them with spears. Set the riders and the elite forces as
the support of the banner and the forerunners; and do not leave your
positions for a rider from the enemy who has been left alone.”[^11]

476. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his commandment to the troops when dispatching
them to confront the enemy: “ When you proceed towards the enemy or he
proceeds towards you, the position of your forces should be on the high
ground or on the mountain slopes or the bends of rivers so that it may
serve you as shelter and a place to return to and hindrance to the
enemy. Your encounter should be from one side or two sides. Place
watchers on the peaks of mountains and the raised sides of the high
ground so that the enemy my not approach you from any place, whether of
danger or safety. And know that the vanguard of an army serves as their
eyes, and the eyes of the vanguard are their informers.”

“Beware of dispersal. When you halt do so together, and when you move
you should move together. When night comes fix your spears in a circle
and do not sleep except for dosing or napping.”[^12]

### C. Enjoining to Get Hold of One’s Weapon in Battles

477. Da‘a’im al-Islam: “Verily, he [Ali (a.s.)] did not like a man to
drop his weapon while in combat. When pointing out the ‘Prayer of Fear’,
Allah said, ***(The faithless are eager that you should be oblivious of
your weapons and your baggage, so that they could assault you all at
once.)***[^13]”

“So, the best thing for those who are in combat is not to separate their
weapon from themselves by any means.”[^14] See The Encyclopedia of Amir
al-Mu’minin, VII, 100, (Martyrdom of Muhammad b. Abi Bakr), and 104,
(the sorrow of the Imam).

### D. Exploiting the Opportunities

478. Imam Ali (a.s.) – about batting: ”The one who notices a chance from
the enemy should raid on him and take advantage of the opportunity – of
course after strengthening his position – and when his goal is achieved
he should return to his position.”[^15]

479. Waq‘atu Siffin: [in the battle of Siffin], Ahnaf b. Qayth Sa‘di
addressed the people and said, “O people of Iraq! By Allah, You will not
confront this issue with your necks more lowered than [you are] today.
They lifted the veils of shame from before your eyes, and they do not
fight for the religion nor do they resist except out of shamefulness.
So, proceed!”

“They said, ‘If we proceed today, [it will be the same way as] we
proceeded yesterday, too. O Amir al-Mu’minin! What do you say?’”

“The Imam said, ‘At the time of proceeding, do proceed; and at the time
of withdrawal, withdraw. Proceed before they proceed toward you.”[^16]

### E. Tactical Withdrawal

480. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Retreat at the right time is the same as victory
in its time.”[^17]

481. Imam Ali (a.s.) – he would say to his companions at the time of
battle: “The retreat after which return is intended and the withdrawal
after which attack is in view should not make you unhappy.”[^18]

9.2 Forming Especial Forces
---------------------------

482. Al-Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.): “The elite army included six thousand of
Ali (a.s.)’s companions.”[^19]

483. Al-Ikhtisas - related by ‘Ali b. al-Hakam: “Amir al-Mu’minin’s
companions were those to whom he said, ‘Swear [your] allegiance! I do
swear allegiance to you by the Paradise, rather than by gold and silver.
Our Prophet said in the past: Swear allegiance as I do not swear
allegiance to you except by the Paradise’.”

“And they [Amir al-Mu’minin’s companions] included: Salman al-Farsi;
Al-Miqdad; Abudhar al-Ghaffari; ‘Ammar b. Yasir; Abu Sasan and Abu ‘Amr
al-Ansariyan; Sahl (Badri) and ‘Uthman, the sons to Hanif al-Ansari; and
Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari.”

“And from among his companions were: ‘Amr b. al-Hamq al-Khaza’i, the
Arab; Maytham al-Tammar – Maytham b. Yahya, the freed slave – Rushid
al-Hijri; Habib b. Mazhar al-Asadi; and Muhammad b. Abi Bakr.”

“His friends included: Al-‘lm al-Azdi; Suwayd b. Ghafla al-Ja‘fi;
al-Harith b. ‘Abd Allah al-A‘ur al-Hamdani; Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Jadli, Abu
Yahya Hakim b. Sa‘d al-Hanafi.”

“His elite forces included: Abu al-Radi ‘abd Allah b. Yahya al-Khadrami;
Salim b. Qays al-Hilali; and ‘Ubayda al-Salmani al-Muradi, the Arab.”

“The elect among his friends included: Tamim b. Hadhim al-Naji (who was
killed as a martyr with Ali (a.s.); Qanbar (a slave freed by Ali b. Abi
Talib – a.s.); Abu Fakhta (freed slave by Bani Hashim); and ‘Abd Allah
b. Abi Rafi‘ (who was Ali (a.s.)’s secretary).”[^20]

484. Rijal al-Kashshi - related by Abu Jarud: “I said to Asbagh b.
Nabata: What is the status of this man [Ali (a.s.)] among you?”

“He said, ‘I do not know what you say; but our swords were on our
shoulders, whomever he beckoned we would strike by sword. Ali (a.s.)
would say to us: Swear [your] allegiance! I do swear allegiance to you
by the Paradise, rather than by gold and silver, and your allegiance is
but for death. Certainly a group of the ancients from the Bani Isra’il
swore allegiance among themselves. None of them departed from the world
except that he was a prophet to his folk or his village or himself; and
you are like them, except that you are not prophets.’”[^21]

485. Rijal al-Kashshi: “It is related from Amir al-Mu’minin that he told
‘Abd Allah b. Yahya al-Hadrami in the battle of Jamal: Joyful tidings to
you O son of Yahya! For you and your father are indeed among the elite
forces. The Messenger of Allah informed me that you and your father are
named among the elite forces. Allah through the Prophet’s tongue called
you the elite forces, and said ‘Elite forces consist of six or five
thousand people.’”[^22]

9.3 Paying Special Attention to the Armed Forces
------------------------------------------------

486. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Then
inspect the affairs of the soldiers as parents inspect their own child.
Never let anything through which you have strengthened them distress
you, and disdain not a kindness you have undertaken for them, even if it
were small, for it will invite them to counsel you sincerely and trust
you. Do not leave aside the examination of their minor affairs while
depending upon (the examination of) the great, for there is a place
where they will profit from a trifling kindness, and an occasion in
which they cannot do without the great.”

“Among the chiefs of your army favor most him who assists the soldiers
with his aid and bestows upon them what is at his disposal to the extent
that suffices both them and the members of their families left behind.
Then their concern in battle with the enemy will be a single concern,
for your kind inclination toward them will incline their hearts to you.

Verily the foremost delight of the eye for rulers is the establishment
of justice in the land and the appearance of love for them among the
subjects. But surely the subjects' love will not appear without the
well-being of their breasts, and their sincerity (toward rulers) will
not become free from blemishes unless they watch over their rulers, find
their governments of little burden and cease to hope that their period
(of rule) will soon come to an end.”

“Therefore let their hopes be expanded, and persist in praising them
warmly and taking into account the (good) accomplishments of everyone
among them who has accomplished, for frequent mention of their good
deeds will encourage the bold and rouse the indolent, God willing.”

“Then recognize in every man that which he has accomplished, attribute
not one man's accomplishment to another and fall not short (of
attributing) to him the full extent of his accomplishment. Let not a
man's eminence invite you to consider as great an accomplishment that
was small, nor a man's lowliness to consider as small an accomplishment
that was great.”[^23]

9.4 Caring for the Troops Morale
--------------------------------

### A. Encouragement

487. Al-Kafi - related by Abu Sadiq: “I heard Ali (a.s.) encouraged
people [to war in] three places: Jamal, Siffin, and Nahrawan.”

“He would say, ‘O Servants of Allah! Be wary of Allah, cast down your
eyes, lower your voices, cut down your words; and prepare yourselves for
battle, conflict, confrontation, struggle, warfare, involvement, and
tough combat; and be steadfast, ***(…and remember Allah greatly so that
you may be felicitous. And obey Allah and His Apostle, and do not
dispute, or you will lose heart and your power will be gone. And be
patient; indeed Allah will be with the patient.)***[^24]”[^25]

Imam Ali (a.s.) – “Delivered in the Battle of Jamal when Amir
al-Mu'minin gave the banner to his son Muhammad b. al-Hanafiyya:
“Mountains may move from their position but you should not move from
yours. Grit your teeth. Lend to Allah your head (in fighting for Allah,
give yourself to Allah). Plant your feet firmly on the ground. Have your
eye on the remotest foe and close your eyes (to their numerical
majority). And keep sure that succor is but from Allah, the
Glorified.”[^26]

489. Imam Ali (a.s.) – to his followers at the time of battle: “The
retreat after which return is intended and the withdrawal after which
attack is in view should not make you unhappy. Do justice with the
swords (Allow your swords to do their duties). Keep ready a place for
the falling of bodies (of your foe); prepare yourselves for hurling
strong spears and striking swords with full force; and keep your voices
down as that keeps off cowardice. By Him Who broke open the seed (for
growing) and created living beings, they [the hypocrites] had not
accepted Islam but they had secured safety (by verbally professing it)
and had hidden their disbelief. Consequently, when they found helpers
for their disbelief they disclosed it.”[^27]

490. Imam Ali (a.s.) – exhorting his followers to fight: “Put the
armored men forward and keep the unarmored ones behind. Grit your teeth
because this will make the swords skip off the skull, and dodge on the
sides of the spears for it changes the direction of their blades. Close
the eyes because it strengthens the spirit and gives peace to the heart.
Kill the voices because this will keep off spiritlessness. Do not let
your banner bend down, nor leave it alone. Do not give it to anyone
except the brave and the defenders of honor among you because they alone
endure the befalling of troubles; they surround the banners and encircle
them on both sides, their rear and their front. They do not separate
from them lest they give them over (to the enemy). They do not go ahead
of them lest they leave them alone. Everyone should deal with his
adversary and also help his comrade by his own life, and should not
leave the adversary to his comrade lest both his own adversary and his
comrade join against him.”

“By Allah, even if you run away from the sword of today you would not
remain safe from the sword of the world to come. You are the foremost
among the Arabs and great figures. Certainly in running away there is
the wrath of Allah, unceasing disgrace and lasting shame. And certainly
a runner-away does not lengthen his life, nor does any thing come to
intervene between him and his day (of death). Who is there to go towards
Allah like the thirsty going to the water? Paradise lies under the edges
of spears. Today the reputations (about the valor of warriors) will be
tested. By Allah! I am more eager to meet them (in combat) than they are
for (returning to) their houses!”

“O my Allah! If they reject truth, disperse their group, divide their
words (opinions) and destroy them on account of their sins. They will
not budge from their stand till the continuous striking of spears causes
piercing (of wounds) through which wind may pass, and the hitting of
swords cuts through the skull, cleaves bones and breaks forearms and
legs, till they are attacked by contingent after contingent and
assaulted by detachments which are followed by reserves for support,
till their cities are continuously assailed by force after force, and
till the horses trample even the extreme ends of the lands, the tracks
of their beast and their meadows.”[^28]

491. Al-Kafi - related by Malik b. A‘yan: Amir al-Mu’minin – May the
blessings of Allah be upon him – exhorted people in Siffin and said,
“Allah guided you to a transaction that will deliver you from painful
torments and persuade you to the good and the faith in Allah. And He has
set aside as rewards for this the forgiveness of your sins and agreeable
abodes in the Garden of Eden. Allah, the Exalted said, ***(Indeed Allah
loves those who fight in His way in ranks, as if they were a compact
structure.)***[^29]”

“Then, put the armored men forward and keep the unarmored ones behind.
Grit your teeth because this will make the swords skip off the skull,
and dodge on the sides of the spears for it changes the direction of
their blades. Close the eyes because it strengthens the spirit and gives
peace to the heart. Kill the voices because this will keep off
spiritlessness and is better for enhancing dignity.”[^30]

492. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in the aphorisms attributed to him: “No one will
practice forbearance in war and veraciously face it except three groups:
Those who are insightful in religion; or those who are zealous over
sanctities; or those to whom degradation is torturous.”[^31]

### B. Watchword

493. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Verily, the Messenger of Allah commanded to
proclaiming watchwords before [launching] war and said, ‘Let there be
one of Divine names in your watchwords.’”[^32]

494. Waq‘atu Siffin – related by Asbaq b. Nabata: Ali (a.s.) never set
out to fight except that he would cry “Kaf, Ha, Ya, ‘Ayn, Sad.”[^33]

495. Al-Imam al-Sadiq: Our watchword is “O Muhammad, O Muhammad!”

And the watchword of the Muslims in the battle of Badr was “O Divine
Triumph come nigh, come nigh!”

And the watchword of the Muslims in the battle of Uhud was “O Divine
Triumph come nigh!”

And the watchword of the battle of Bani Nadir was “O Holy Ghost
comfort!”

And the watchword of the battle of Bani Qaynaqa‘ was “O Our Lord! Never
will they overpower You!”

And the watchword of the battle of Ta’if was, “O Ridwan (O Approver)!”

And the watchword of the battle of Hunayn was “O Sons of ‘Abd Allah! O
Sons of ‘Abd Allah!”

And the watchword of the battle of Ahzab was “Ha, Mim, they do not see!

And the watchword of the battle of Bani Qurayza was “O Salam! Keep them
safe!”

And the watchword of the battle of Marisi‘, i.e., the battle of Bani
Mustalaq was “Look, things return to Allah!”

And the watchword of the battle of Hudyabiya was “Look, may Allah’s
curse be on the unjust!”

And the watchword of the battle of Khaybar, i.e., the battle of
al-Qamus[^34] was “O Ali, forgive them out of dignity!”

And the watchword of the battle of Tabuk was “O Ahad (One)! O Samad
(All-Embracing)!”

And the watchword of the battle of Bani Maluh was “Cause them to die!
Cause them to die!”

And the watchword of the battle of Siffin was “O Divine triumph!”

And the watchword of Husayn (a.s.) was “O Muhammad!”

And our watchword was “O Muhammad!”[^35]

496. Sharh Nahj al-Balagha – related by Salam b. Suwayd from Imam Ali
(a.s.) concerning the phrase ‘Allahu Akbar (Allah is the greatest)!’:
“This is the sign of triumph.”

[Salam says:] “Allahu Akbar” was Ali (a.s.)’s watchword that he uttered
in battles and then launched his attacks. By Allah, he would lead
whoever followed him or contested him to the fountainheads of
death.”[^36]

497. Waq‘atu Siffin – related by Tamim: Whenever set out on a battle,
Ali (a.s.) would utter the name of God when mounting…. Then he would
say, “Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar! La ilaha ill-Allah wa Allahu Akbar
(There is no god except Allah and Allah is the greatest!) O Allah! O
Ahad! O Samad! O Lord of Muhammad! In the Name of Allah the
Compassionate the Merciful!

There is no power and no strength save in Allah, the All-Exalted, the
All-Supreme. ***(All praise*** ***belongs to Allah, Lord of all the
worlds, the Compassionate the Merciful, Master of the Day of
Retribution. You [alone] do we worship, and to You [alone] do we turn
for help.***[^37]***)*** O Allah! Keep away from us the power and
strength of the oppressors!” This was Ali (a.s.)‘s watchword in the
battle of Siffin.[^38]

498. Waq‘atu Siffin: The sign of the people of Iraq in [the battle of]
Siffin was a white piece of wool cloth worn over their heads and
shoulders and their watchword was “O Allah! O Ahad! O Samad! O Lord of
Muhammad! O Compassionate, O Merciful!”

And the sign of the people of Sham was piece of yellow cloth worn over
their heads and shoulders and their watchword was “We are the slaves of
Allah indeed, indeed; O Avengers for ‘Uthman’s blood!”[^39]

### C. Inculcation of Victory

499. Al-Jamal – related from ‘Amr b. Dinar: Amir al-Mu’minin siad to his
son Muhammad, “Hold the banner and move on!” And Ali (a.s.) was
following behind him. Then Ali (a.s.) called him, “O Abu al-Qasim!”

He replied, “Yes. O Father!”

He said, “My son! What you see should not frighten you. I carried the
banner whereas I was smaller than you were and the enemy did not
frighten me for I did not confront anyone except that I inculcated in
myself that I would kill him. So, with the help of Allah implant in your
mind that you will triumph over them; and do not let mistrust in
yourself bring you to your knees, as it is the worst degradations.”

[Muhammad said:] I said: “O Father! I hope I will be the way you like me
to be. God willing!”[^40]

### D. Warning against Escape from the Battleground

500. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Escape from battle is among the great sins.”[^41]

501. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Escape is one of degradations.”[^42]

502. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Launch successive attacks, and feel ashamed of
escape for it is disgrace among generations (to come) and (cause of
awarding you) fire on the Day of Judgment. Give your lives (to Allah)
willingly and walk towards death with ease.”[^43]

503. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The escapee (from the battle) should know that he
has infuriated Allah and is destroying himself. Verily, in escape there
is enmity to Allah, perpetual degradation, eternal disgrace, and
depravity of life. The escapee will not live long, nor will there come
an interval between him and the day he is destined to die, nor will he
please Allah. Man’s dying in honesty and truthfulness before committing
such practice [escape from battle] is better than involving in these
practices and accepting them.”[^44]

504. Al-Kafi - related by Malik b. A‘yan: Amir al Mu’inin exhorted to
[battle of] Siffin saying, “…May Allah have mercy on he who helps his
brother and does not leave the adversary to his comrade lest both his
own adversary and his comrade join against him. This way he will be
condemned and will come to baseness; and why should it not be so when
his brother fights with two people whereas he has given up and left his
adversary to his brother and while fleeing looks back at the enemy and
his brother. Every one who does so, Allah will regard him as His enemy.
Then, do not expose yourselves to enmity with Allah for you will
certainly be moving toward Him.

Allah, the Glorified and Exalted, said, ***(Flight will not avail you
should you flee from death of from being killed, and then you will be
let to enjoy only for a little while.)***[^45]

“By Allah, if you flee from the sword of the world, you will not be
secure against the swords of the world to come. Take recourse in
patience and truthfulness, for triumph would verily follow patience. And
wage jihad for the sake of Allah, jihad which is worthy of Him; and
there is no power and no strength save in Allah.”[^46]

### E. Hiding away whatever that Ruins the Troops’ Morale

505. Waq‘atu Siffin – related by Abu Rawq: Ziyad b. al-Nadr al-Harithi
said to ‘Abd Allah b. Badil b. Warqa’: Certainly our day and theirs is
so hard. No one will be patient with it except the one who is
brave-hearted, well-intended and steadfast. By Allah, I do not suppose
that today anyone would survive except the villainous.

‘Abd Allah b. Badil said, “By Allah, I do think so, too.”

Ali (a.s.) said, “Let this word be hidden in your hearts. Do not express
it, and nobody should hear it from you. Verily, Allah has destined some
group to be killed and some to die; every one will receive his death as
it is ordained. So, happy are those who fight in the way of Allah and
those who are killed in obeyance to Him.”[^47]

9.5 Deception
-------------

506. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Whenever I relate a hadith from the Prophet, I
swear by Allah, that it is more likeable to me to fall off [such a high
place as] heaven than to pass a lie upon him; it is [also] true when I
talk among you: Verily war is deception[^48].”[^49]

507. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.): Verily Ali (a.s.) would say, “I would like it
more If the birds snatch me away than I pass a lie upon the messenger of
Allah that he has not said. I heard from the Prophet saying on the day
of [the battle of] Khandaq: ‘War is deception.’ He would say, ‘Speak in
any way you wish’ [when in battle].”[^50]

508. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in the aphorisms attributed to him: “In the
battle trust your deceptions more than you trust your strength; [also]
be more delighted at your vigilance than at your valor, for the war is
the war of the fearless and to the advantage of the vigilant.”[^51]

509. Al-Kafi - related from ‘Adi b. Hatam: Indeed, when Amir al-Mu’minin
confronted Mu‘awiya in Siffin he would raise his voice so that his
companions hear him and say, “By Allah, I will kill Mu‘awiya and his
companions!” Then, he would lower his voice and day, “God willing!”

I was near him and said, ‘O Amir al-Mu’minin! You have truly sworn to do
it. And then you said “God willing”. What did you mean by this?’

He said, “War is deception, and I am not a liar to the faithful. I
wanted to incite my comrades against the enemy so as not to show
weakness and to encourage them [to fight] against the enemy. Then in
future the wisest of them will benefit from this word. God
willing!”[^52]

510. Tafsir al-Qummi - in the report about the battle of Khandaq: While
trotting, Amir al Mu’minin passed by…’Amr [b. ‘Abduwud] asked him who he
was.

He said, “I am Ali b. Abi Talib, cousin to the Messenger of Allah and
his son-in-law.”

‘Amr said, “By Allah, your father was an old friend of mine and I do not
like to kill you. When your cousin sent you to me, wasn’t he afraid that
I would snatch you up with my lance and leave you in the air, neither
killed nor alive?!”

Amir al Mu’minin told him, “My cousin knew that if you killed me I would
enter paradise; but if I killed you, you would abide in the fire [of the
hell] and I in the paradise.”

‘Amr said, “Both of them would be to your benefit, O Ali! And this is
not a fair dividing!”

He said, “Leave it aside for now! I heard you say while holding on to
the curtain of the Ka‘ba: ‘No one will presents three request to me in
battle except that I would answer to one of them.’ And [now] I have
three requests from you, and you answer to one of them.”

‘Amr said, “Say what they are O Ali!”

He said, “One is that you bear witness that there is no god but Allah
and Muhammad is His Messenger.”

‘Amr said, “Give it up and ask for the second one!”

He said, “That you go back and turn this army [of yours] away from
[confronting] the Messenger of Allah. If he [the Prophet] is truthful,
you will be honored too because of him; and if he is a liar, the Arab
robbers and rascals will suffice [to kill] him.”

‘Amr said, “Wouldn’t the Quraysh women, then, say to each other and the
poets [say] that I as afraid of battle and retreated? [In that case] I
wouldn’t have assisted those who had selected me as their chief.”

Amir al-Mu’minin said, “My third [request] is that you dismount [your
horse] so that I would fight with you, as you are mounted and I am on
foot.”

Then he dismounted his horse and hamstrung it and said, “This is a trait
that I did not suppose any of the Arabs would have me do it. Then he
started [the battle] and struck his sword at Ali (a.s.)’s head. Amir
al-Mu’minin held his head behind his shield, but the sword rent the
shield and hit his head.

Ali (a.s.) said to him, “O ‘Amr! Is it not too much for you that I am
fighting with you who are an Arab warrior, and you are being assisted?”

‘Amr turned his face back and Amir al-Mu’minin delivered a swift blow on
his both knees and cut them off. A huge cloud of dust rose around them.
The hypocrites said Ali b. Abi Talib was killed.

Then the dust settled for them to see. At this moment, they saw Amir
al-Mu’minin sitting on ‘Amr’s chest holding his beard and going to cut
his head off. Then he cut off his head and took it to the Prophet, while
his own head was bleeding due to the hit of ‘Amr’s sword and his sword
was dripping with blood. Holding ‘Amr’s head in his hand, he began
ranting:

“I am Ali, son of ‘Abd al-Muttalib,

Death is better for the knight that flight.”

Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah said, “Did you play a trick on him?”

He replied, “Yes. O Messenger of Allah! War is deception.”[^53]

9.6 Ethics of War
-----------------

### A. Avoidance of Initiating a Battle

511. Tarikh al-Tabari - related from Jundab al-Uzdi: Truly, whenever in
the company of Ali (a.s.) we confronted the enemy, he would command us:
“Do not fight them until they start; because you are, by the grace of
Allah, in the right, and letting them initiate the fighting will be
another point from your side against them. Then, whenever you fight with
them and defeat them, do not kill the runner away, do not murder the
wounded, do not slander, nor mutilate the dead.

When you reach the encampment of the enemy do not plunder nor enter a
house without permission. Do not seize anything from them unless what
you find in their military base. Do not inflict pain on women by
persecuting them even if they attack your honor with filthy words and
abuse your officers, as they [the women] are weak in power and lacking
in willpower.”[^54]

512. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar after the
battle of Siffin: “Beware of initiating war with this group unless they
begin it, until you encounter them and hear their words. Their evils
should not prompt you to fight before inviting them [to guidance] and
repeatedly avert them from seeking pretexts.”[^55]

513. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to his army before
confronting the enemy in Siffin: “

Do not fight them unless they initiate the fighting because, by the
grace of Allah, you are in the right and to leave them till they begin
fighting will be another point from your side against them. If, by the
will of Allah, the enemy is defeated then do not kill the runner away,
do not strike a helpless person, do not finish off the wounded.”[^56]

### B. Avoidance of Calling to Power

514. Imam Ali (a.s.) – to his son, Imam Hasan (a.s.): “Do not call out
for fighting, but if you are called to it do respond, because the caller
to fighting is a rebel and the rebel deserves destruction.”[^57]

### C. Diplomatic Immunity of Envoys

515. Imam Ali (a.s.): “If you triumph over a man of the enemy and he
claimed to be an envoy to you, in case it proved to be true and he
brought a witness to it, then do not do any harm to him until he
delivers his message and return to his comrades; but if you find no
witness to his claim, do not accept his assertion.” [^58]

### D. Raising an Argument before a Battle

516. Al-Sunan al-Kubra - related by Bara’ b. ‘Azib: ”Ali (a.s.)
dispatched me to [fight against] Hawarij in Nahrawan. Before the battle
I invited them [to guidance] thrice.”[^59]

517. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his letter to the people of San‘a and Janad
who were hostile and perfidious: “When my envoy comes to you, disperse
and go to your residences, so that I grant you amnesty, forgive your
ignorance, protect those of you who are away, and treat you by the
ordinances of the Qur’an. But if you do not do so, be prepared to face a
mighty army with a great number of cavalrymen who will head for those
who have rebelled and disobeyed, and you will be crushed as in a mill.”

***(Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil it
is to its detriment, and your Lord is not tyrannical to the
servants***[^60]).[^61]

### E. Supplication before a Battle

518. Waq‘atu Siffin Indeed, when Amir al-Mu’minin set out for a battle,
he would recite the following supplication:

“O Allah! Verily You showed a way of Your ways and set aside Your
pleasure in it, and called Your friends to it and made it Your best of
ways for reward, the noblest for returning [to You], and the most
favorable to You as a conduct. Then, in this way you bought from them
their souls and property for the paradise to fight in the way of Allah,
to kill and to be killed; [and this is] a rightful promise from You.”

“So, make me one of those from whom You have bought his soul, and he
fulfilled his commitment to Your dealing with him. He did not break a
pact, nor violated or altered it; rather he made it a response to Your
loving kindness and as approximation to You.”

“So, make it the end of my acting and ordain the end of my life in this
way. Bestow upon me in it a martyrdom, which causes Your pleasure and
removes my blunders. Place me among those who are living and provided
for by the enemies and the rebels [through being martyred by them] under
the banner of righteousness and guidance; as one who is moving along the
path of triumph over them, who does not turn his back [on the fighting],
and who does not create doubts.”

“O Allah! I seek refuge in You at this moment from cowardice in case of
terrors, from indolence in the time of the champions’ assault, and from
the sins that would ruin my actions. Then, [in that case] I would be
enfeebled out of doubt, or pass on without certitude, [thereby] my
attempts would be futile, and actions unaccepted.”[^62]

519. Waq‘atu Siffin – related by Tamim: Whenever set out for the battle,
he [Ali (a.s.)] would utter the name of God when mounting [his horse]
and say, “Thanks Allah for His bounties to us and His immense Grace!
***(Immaculate is He who has disposed this for us, and we [by ourselves]
were no match for it. Indeed we shall return to our Lord.)***[^63]”

Then, he would face the qibla, raise his hands towards heaven and say,
“O Allah! The steps were taken toward You, the bodies tired out, the
hearts inclined to You, the hands raised up and the eyes turned keen.
***(Our Lord! Judge justly between us and our people, and you are the
best of judges!)***[^64]***”***

Then he would say, “Allah is the greatest! Allah is the greatest! There
is no god apart from Allah! Allah is the greatest! O Allah! O Ahad! O
Samad! O Lord of Muhammad! ***(All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of all
the worlds, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful, Master of the Day of
Retribution, You [alone] do we worship, and to You [alone] do we return
for help.)***[^65] O Lord! Prevent from us the oppression of the
oppressors.”[^66]

### F. Starting the Battle in the Afternoon

520. Waq‘atu Siffin: Amir al-Mu’minin, upon whom be blessings from
Allah, would not start fighting except in the afternoon and would say,
“At this time the doors of heaven open up, mercy is accepted and victory
is won.”

And he would say, “This time [afternoon] is closer to the evening and it
is more fitting for the killing to be decreased, the warriors to
disengage [from] chasing the enemy], and the defeated to be saved.”[^67]

### G. Helping the Feeble

521. Imam Ali (a.s.) – to his companions on the battlefield in Siffin:
“Whoever among you feels spiritedness of heart during the action and
finds any of his comrades feeling disheartened should ward off (the
enemies) from him just as he would do from himself, because of the
superiority he enjoys over the other, For if Allah had willed He would
have made the former also like him.”[^68]

522. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Whenever in the war you find any of your brothers
wounded, or someone afflicted with an injury, or someone who has been
targeted [to be attacked] by the enemy, strengthen him by your souls
[spirit].”[^69]

### H. Good Conduct toward the Reminder of the Enemy Troop

523. Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi - related by Isma‘il b. ‘Ali: “The first person
who learned how to fight with the people of qibla was Ali b. Abi Talib
(a.s.). He would not kill the captives, would not chase after the
defeated, and would not finish off the wounded. “[^70]

524. Al-‘Aqd al-Farid – related by Abu al-Hasan – in the reports
concerning the events of the battle of Siffin: “Ali (a.s.)’s herald
would come out every day and call out: O People! Do not finish off the
wounded; do not chase after those who have turned their back to the
battlefield; do not rob the killed; and those who have laid down their
weapons are [to be] secure.”[^71]

525. Al-Kafi - related by ‘Abd Allah b. Sharik from his father: When the
people (Kharijis) were defeated in the battle of Jamal, Amir al-Mu’minin
said, “Do not chase after those who have turned their back to the
battlefield and do not finish off the wounded. The one who shuts his
house door is secure.”

When the battle of Siffin took place, he killed the warriors as well as
those who had turned their back on the battlefield, and finished off the
wounded. Aban b. Taghlab said to ‘Abd Allah b. Sharik, “These two
treatments of contradictory.”

He [Ali (a.s.)] said, “In the battle of Jamal, [their commanders] Talha
and Zubayr were killed but [in Siffin] Mu‘awiya himself is standing up
and commanding.”[^72]

526. Al-Sunan al-Kubra - related by Abu Fakhta: In the battle of Siffin,
a captive was brought to Ali (a.s.). He [the captive said], “Do not
torture me to death.”

Ali (a.s.) said, “I will not torture you to death. Verily, I fear Allah
the Lord of the worlds.” He let him go and then said, “Is there any good
in you to swear allegiance?”[^73]

527. Al-Musannif – related by Yazid b. Balal: I was in the company of
Ali (a.s.) in Siffin. When a captive was brought to him he would say, “I
will not torture you to death. Verily, I fear Allah the Lord of the
worlds.” He would take his weapon and swear him not to fight against him
[any longer]; and he would grant him four dirhams.”[^74]

528. Al-Musannif – related by Abu Ja‘far: In the battle of Siffin,
whenever a captive was brought to Ali (a.s.), he would take his mount
and weapon and made him promise not to return. Then he would free
him.”[^75]

529. Imam Ali (a.s.) – to the army before confronting the enemy at
Siffin, “Do not mutilate the dead; when you reach the encampment of the
enemy do not plunder nor enter a house [without permission]. Do not
seize anything from them unless what you find in their military base. Do
not inflict pain on women by persecuting them even though they may
attack your honor with filthy words and abuse your officers, because
they are weak in character, mind, and intelligence. We have been ordered
to desist from them although they may be unbelievers. [For] If a man
struck a woman with a stone or a stick he was rebuked along with his
posteriors after him.”[^76]

530. Tarikh al-Tabari - in the report on the battle of Jamal: Ahnaf b.
Qays and the children of Sa‘d rushed toward Ali (a.s.), while dissuading
Harqus b. Zahir (they did not approve of fighting with Ali b. Abi
Talib - a.s.).

Then he [Harqus] said, “O Ali! Our people in Basra presume that if you
triumph over them tomorrow, you will kill their men and take their women
captive!”

He said, “There should be no fear of the like of me for such matters.
Will it be perpetrated by anyone except him who turns back [from the
religion of Allah] and disbelieves? Have you not heard the word of Allah
saying, ***(And [you are] not a taskmaster over them, except him who
turns back and disbelieves.)”***[^77]

531. Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh: There were four hundred wounded among the
Kharijis. Ali (a.s.), then, ordered them to be taken inside Kufa and
treated.”[^78]

[^1]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 191, Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 11, Waq’atu Siffin:
123, Al-Akhbar al-Tawal: 166.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 12.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 4, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/67/46, Tadhkira
al-Khawas: 166.

[^4]: Da‘a’m al-Islam: 1/373.

[^5]: Da‘a’m al-Islam: 1/373.

[^6]: Al-Qur’an, 47:35.

[^7]: Tarikh Damishq: 42/460, Muruj al-Dhahab: 2/389, ‘Uyun al-Akhbar:
1/110.

[^8]: Al-Kafi: 5/39/4, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/563/468. Also, cf., Nahj
al-Balagha: Sermon 124.

[^9]: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 1/372.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: ibid., 1/372.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 11, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 192, Waq‘atu Siffin:
124, Al-Akhbar al-Tawal: 166.

[^13]: Al-Qur’an, 4:102.

[^14]: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 1/371.

[^15]: Ibid., 372.

[^16]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 406, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/511/437.

[^17]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2003.

[^18]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 16, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
530/964.

[^19]: Al-Ikhtisas: 2.

[^20]: Al-Ikhtisas: 2, Ibn Nadim, Al-Fihrist: 223.

[^21]: Rijal al-Kashshi: 1/19/8, Bihar al-Anwar: 42/150/16.

[^22]: Rijal al-Kashshi: 1/24/10, Bihar al-Anwar: 42/151/18.

[^23]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 137, Da‘a’im
al-Islam: 1/361.

[^24]: Al-Qur’an, 8:45-46.

[^25]: Al-Kafi: 5/38/2, Al-Irshad: 1/265, Waq’atu Siffin: 204, Al-Mi’yar
wa al- Mawazina: 158.

[^26]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 11, Manaqib Al al-Abi Talib: 3/155.

[^27]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 16, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
530/9644.

[^28]: Nahj al-Balagha: sermon 124. Also cf. Al-Irshad: 1/266, Waq’atu
Siffin: 235.

[^29]: Al-Qur’an, 61:4.

[^30]: Al-Kafi: 5/39/4.

[^31]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/288/292.

[^32]: Da’a’im al-Islam: 1/370.

[^33]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 231, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/461/398 & 100/36/32.

[^34]: The name of a fortress of the Khaybar castles.

[^35]: Al-Kafi: 5/47/1, Bihar al-Anwar: 19/163/1.

[^36]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 5/177, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/461/400 &
100/37/35.

[^37]: Al-Qur’an, 1: 2-5.

[^38]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 230, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 5/176.

[^39]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 332, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/27/380, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha: 8/15.

[^40]: Al-Jamal: 368.

[^41]: Da‘aim al-Islalam: 1/370, Al-Musannif fi al-Ahadith wa al-Athar:
7/733/6.

[^42]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1663.

[^43]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 66, Tarikh Damishq: 42/460

[^44]: Al-Kafi: 5/41/4, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/472/411. Also cf. Al-Mi‘yar
wa’l Muwazina: 105.

[^45]: Al-Qur’an, 33:16.

[^46]: Al-Kafi: 5/39/4, Waq‘atu Siffin: 235, Tarikh Tabari: 5/16. Also
cf. Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 124.

[^47]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 111, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/403/369 – 373, Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha: 3/18.

[^48]: In the Musnad of Ahmad b.Hanbal the above statement is related as
follows: “When I relate something from someone other than the Prophet
(S), I am indeed a man in battle.” (Musnad of Ibn Hanbal: 1/177/216)

[^49]: Sahih al-Bukhari: 6/162/298, & 3/1322/3415, Sahih of Muslim:
2/746/1066.

[^50]: Tahdhib al- Ahkam: 6/162/298, Qurb al-Isnad: 133/466

[^51]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/312/588.

[^52]: Al-Kafi: 7/460/1, Tahdhib al-Ahkam: 6/163/299, Tafsir al-Qummi:
2/60.

[^53]: Tafsir al-Qummi: 2/183, Bihar al-Anwar: 20/226.

[^54]: Tarikh al-Tabari: 10/5, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh: 2/370, Al-Futuh:
3/32.

[^55]: Waq’atu Siffin: 153, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/414/374.

[^56]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 14, Waq’atu Siffin: 203.

[^57]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 233, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
527/9587, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/454/668.

[^58]: Da‘a’im al-Islam: 1/367.

[^59]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra: 8/309/16739.

[^60]: Referring to Al-Qur’an, 41:46.

[^61]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 2/5.

[^62]: Al-Kafi: 5/46/1, Tahdhib al-Ahkam: 3/81/237, Tafsir al-Najashi:
2/113/143.

[^63]: Al-Qur’an, 43:13-14.

[^64]: Al-Qur’an, 7:89.

[^65]: Al-Qur’an, 1:2-5.

[^66]: Waq‘atu Siffin: 230 & 231, Bihar al-Anwar: 32/460/397 & 100/21/8.

[^67]: Al-Kafi: 5/28/5, ‘Ilal al-Sharaya’: 603/70.

[^68]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 123, Al-Irshad: 1/253, Al-Jamal: 334.

[^69]: Al-Khisal: 617/10, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 107, Bihar al-Anwar: 100/21/8.

[^70]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi: 2/383.

[^71]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid: 3/333, Imam Ali (a.s.) enjoyed the same
position toward the enemies in other battles too, cf., Waq’atu Siffin:
204, al-Kafi: 5/33/3, Al-Mustadrak ‘Ala al-Sahihin: 2/167/2660, and had
inspired it from the sira of the Prophet (S). Al-Kafi: 5/12/2, Tahdhib
al-Ahkam: 6/137/230, Ibid.: 155/274.

[^72]: Al-Kafi: 5/33/5, Rijal Kishshi: 2/482/392, Bihar al-Anwar:
33/446/657.

[^73]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra: 8/315/16754, Kanz al-‘Ummal: 11/348/31706.

[^74]: Al-Musannif fi al-Ahadith al-Athar: 8/725/25, Kanz al-‘Ummal:
11/345/31703.

[^75]: Al-Musannif fi al-Ahadith al-Athar: 8/724/23, Kanz al-‘Ummal:
11/345/31702.

[^76]: Al-Kafi: 5/39/4, Waq’atu Siffin: 204, Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 14,
Bihar al-Anwar: 32/563/468.

[^77]: Al-Qur’an, 89:22-23. Tarikh al-Tabari: 4/496, Al-Kamil fi
al-Tarikh: 2/334.

[^78]: Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh: 2/424, Ansab al-Ashraf: 3/248.


