Chapter Ten: State Policies
===========================

10.1 Causes for Durability of Governments
-----------------------------------------

### a) Establishing Justice

532. Imam Ali (a.s.) – when asked which of the two is better, justice or
generosity?: “Justice puts things in their places while generosity takes
them out from their directions. Justice is the general caretaker, while
generosity is a particular benefit. Consequently justice is superior and
more distinguished of the two.”[^1]

533. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He whose actions are taken by justice, Allah will
safeguard his kingdom.”[^2]

534. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do justice to [be able to] maintain your
sovereignty.”[^3]

535. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do justice to [be able to] rule.”[^4]

536. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Nothing has safeguarded states like justice.”[^5]

537. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Nothing safeguards states like doing justice in
them.”[^6]

538. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A just rule will endure.”[^7]

539. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do justice so that your authority may
persevere.”[^8]

540. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Durability of a sovereignty is [dependant upon]
justice.”[^9]

541. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Obedience is a shield for the ruled, and justice
is a shield for the governments.”[^10]

542. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Durability of governments is [dependant upon]
setting up just traditions.”[^11]

543. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Doing justice is following Divine traditions and
[grounds for] durability of the Governments.”[^12]

544. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who does justice, will be in no need of
companions.”[^13]

545. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is [the source of] stability for the
ruled.”[^14]

546. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is [the source of] stability for the
creatures.”[^15]

547. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The good of justice is its organizing the
creatures.”[^16]

548. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice organizes the rule.”[^17]

549. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Allah the Glorified made justice the stability of
the subjects, purity from tyranny and sins, and the cause of the
execution of [rules of] Islam.”[^18]

550. Imam Ali (a.s.): “If the ruled fulfil the rights of the ruler and
the ruler fulfils their rights, then right attains the position of honor
among them, the ways of religion become established, signs of justice
become fixed and the sunna gains currency. In this way, times will
improve, the continuance of government will be expected, and the aims of
the enemies will be frustrated.”[^19]

551. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is the strongest foundation.”[^20]

552. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The world is like a garden whose wayfarer is the
shari‘a (religious law); and the shari‘a is a king whose obedience is
obligatory; and obedience is a way by which the ruler is established;
and the ruler is a shepherd whom the troops help; and the troops are
assistants whom the riches manage; and the riches are [means of]
sustenance that the people gather; and the people are masses whom
justice subjugates; and justice is a foundation on which the world is
based.”[^21]

553. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is the best of policies.”[^22]

554. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is a sufficient policy.”[^23]

555. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice is the touchstone for politics.”[^24]

556. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The best of policies is [doing] justice.”[^25]

557. Imam Ali (a.s.): “No mastery is like justice in politics.”[^26]

558. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The beauty of politics is [doing] justice in
ruling and forgiveness in the time of [enjoying] power.”[^27]

559. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The ruled will not be rectified except by
justice.”[^28]

560. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Make religion you sanctuary and justice your
sword so as to be safeguarded from any evil and gain victory over any
enemy.”[^29]

561. Imam Ali (a.s.): “If the government is based on justice and
supported by wisdom, Allah will render His friends victorious and
disdain His enemies.”[^30]

562. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The hearts of the ruled are treasures of the
rulers. Whatever of justice or injustice that they stores in them, they
will find [the same].”[^31]

563. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Cities will not flourish except through
justice.”[^32]

564. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Justice of the king is better than the abundance
and fertility of the times.”[^33]

565. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Under justice, bounties double.”[^34]

566. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who does justice will gain power.”[^35]

567. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who brings justice to cities, Allah will
bestow His Mercy upon him.”[^36]

568. Imam Ali (a.s.) – among the aphorisms attributed to him: “Those who
treat the subordinate justly, will be treated justly by the
senior.”[^37]

569. Imam Ali (a.s.): “No reward is greater with Allah than the reward
for the just ruler and the beneficent person.”[^38]

570. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There are two things whose reward can not be
fathomed: forgiveness and justice.”[^39]

571. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Just politics consists of these three: lenience
in prudence; investigation in justice; and justly practicing
beneficent.”[^40]

572. Imam Ali (a.s.): “In establishing justice, seek assistance from
expressing goodwill toward people, little expectation, and plenty of
piety.”[^41]

See Chapter Six, 6/1 (Establishing Justice).

### b) Good Management

573. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Statecraft is [indeed] politics.”[^42]

574. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who follows a good politics would perpetuate
his chairmanship.”[^43]

575. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Good politics immortalizes chairmanship.”[^44]

576. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Good politics is [the source of] steadfastness of
the subjects.”[^45]

577. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is obligatory to follow the one who practices
good politics.”[^46]

578. Imam Ali (a.s.): “In the light of good politics good breeding will
ensue.”[^47]

### c) Good Behavior

579. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Good behavior is the beauty of power and a haven
for the rulership.”[^48]

580. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He whose good behavior increases, people agree on
his superiority.”[^49]

581. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who treats people nicely, will be treated
likewise.”[^50]

### d) Vigilance in Taking Care of Affairs

582. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Vigilance in taking care of the affairs is a sign
of [the endurance of] sovereignty.”[^51]

583. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is sagacious to be vigilant in securing the
rights of the subjects and to feign negligence of their offences against
you.”[^52]

584. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Little negligence is a sign of the [endurance of
the] states.”[^53]

10.2 Causes for the Decline of States
-------------------------------------

### a) Tyranny

585. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The worst of the rulers are those who oppress
their subjects.”[^54]

586. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who does injustice to his subjects assists his
adversaries.”[^55]

587. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Injustice ruins the subjects.”[^56]

588. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Injustice devastates the cities.”[^57]

589. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who treats his subjects unjustly, Allah would
destroy his sovereignty and expedite his overthrow.”[^58]

590. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “See that
justice is done towards God and justice is done towards the people by
yourself, your own family, and those whom you favor among your subjects.
For if you do not do so, you have worked wrong. And as for him who
wrongs the servants of Allah, Allah is his adversary, not to speak of
His servants. Allah renders null and void the argument of whosoever
contends with Him. Such a one will be Allah’s enemy until he desists or
repents. Nothing is more conducive to the removal of Allah’s blessing
and the hastening of His vengeance than to continue in wrongdoing, for
Allah listens to the call of the oppressed and He is ever on the watch
against the wrongdoers.”[^59]

591. Imam Ali (a.s.) – to Ziyad b. Abih: “Act on justice and keep aloof
from violence and injustice because violence will lead them to forsake
their abodes while injustice will prompt them to take up arms.”[^60]

592. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There is no king to whom Allah bestows power and
blessing and he employs them to oppress people, unless it is incumbent
on Allah to take them back from him. Do you not see the words of
Allah***, (Indeed Allah does not change a people’s lot, unless they
change what is in their souls.)***[^61]?”[^62]

593. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There is destruction for power in wrongdoing.”
[^63]

594. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who wrongs in his rule, his state will
decline.”[^64]

595. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Wrongdoing is the worst of pollicies.”[^65]

596. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who wrongs in his statecraft, people will wish
for his perishing.”[^66]

597. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The wrongdoing of a wrongdoer would lead him to
destruction.”[^67]

598. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who commits wrong, his wrongdoing would
destroy him.”[^68]

599. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Wrongdoing is one of the destroyers.”[^69]

600. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Wrongdoing causes the steps to stumble, brings
about a cessation of blessings, and destroys communities.”[^70]

601. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Outrage ruins power.”[^71]

602. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who does not do justice towards the wronged
against the wrongdoer, Allah will dispossess his power.”[^72]

### b) Unlawful Bloodshed

603. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Beware
of blood and spilling it unlawfully, for nothing is more deserving of
vengeance (from Allah), greater in its consequence or more likely to
(bring about) a cessation of blessing and the cutting off of (one's
appointed) term than shedding blood unjustly. Allah, the Glorified, on
the Day of Resurrection will begin judgment among His servants over the
blood they have spilt.”

“So never strengthen your rule by shedding unlawful blood, for that is
among the factors which weaken and enfeeble it, nay, which overthrow and
transfer it. You have no excuse before Allah and before me for
intentional killing, for in that there is bodily retaliation. If you are
stricken by error, and your whip, your sword or your hand should exceed
their bounds in punishment – for in striking with the fists and all that
exceeds it there is killing – never let the arrogance of your authority
prevent you from paying the relatives of the killed their rightfully
due.”[^73]

604. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The survivors of the sword (from getting killed)
are larger in number and have a larger progeny.”[^74]

### c) Mismanagement

605. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Mismanagement causes destruction.”[^75]

606. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who mismanages will hasten his
destruction.”[^76]

607. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There are for reasons [for the state] to fall
off: mismanagement; the evil of extravagance; failing to take lessons;
making too many apologies.”[^77]

608. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who fails in politics will be belittled in
chairmanship.”[^78]

609. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Political feebleness is a pitfall for the
leaders.”[^79]

610. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He whose management falls behind [the community]
his perishing will come forward.”[^80]

611. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who mismanages his management will destroy
him.”[^81]

612. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the aphorisms attributed to him: “When the
rule is expired for a group, their opinions enfeeble.”[^82]

### d) Arrogance

613. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the aphorisms attributed to him: “Arrogance
arouses envy, envy brings about enmity, enmity causes disunity, disunity
causes separation, separation causes feebleness, feebleness causes
degradation, which [in turn] ruins the governments and destroys
bounties.”[^83]

414. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Then
surely the ruler has favorites and intimates, among whom there is a
certain arrogance, transgression and lack of equity in transactions.
Remove the substance of these (qualities) by cutting off the means of
obtaining these situations. Bestow no fiefs upon any of your entourage
or relatives, nor let them covet from you the acquisition of a landed
estate which would bring loss to the people bordering upon it in (terms
of) a water supply or a common undertaking, the burden of which would be
imposed upon them. Its benefit would be for those (who acquired the
fiefs) and not for you, and its fault would be upon you in this world
and the next.”

“Impose the right (al-haqq) upon whomsoever it is incumbent, whether he
be related to you or not. Be patient in this and look to your (ultimate)
account; however this may affect your relatives and favorites. Desire
the ultimate end in that of it (imposing the right) which weighs heavily
against you, for its outcome will be praiseworthy.”[^84]

615. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “Beware
of arrogating for yourself that in which men are equal; and of
negligence in that which is of concern after it has become manifest to
the eyes (of men), for these things will be held against you for (the
benefit of) others; and (beware of negligence) of the fact that little
remains until the coverings of affairs are lifted from you and justice
is demanded from you for the wronged.”[^85]

616. Imam Ali (a.s.) – concerning ‘Uthman: “I am putting before you his
case. He ruled with arrogance, and did it badly. You protested against
it and committed excess therein. With Allah lies the real verdict upon
the arrogating and the protester.”[^86]

### e) Violation of the Principles

617. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There are for reasons for the state to fall off:
violating the principles; clutching at the branches; employing the
villainous; and putting aside the elite.”[^87]

618. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Coming to power of the villainous and the
newly-gained office is an indication of its [the state’s] dissolution
and falling off.”[^88]

619. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Decline of the states lies in employing the
villainous.”[^89]

10.3 Recommendations on Socio-Political Relations
-------------------------------------------------

### Treating others as Treating Oneself

620. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to his son, al-Hasan (a.s.):
“What wisely words are more exhaustive than [saying]: you should desire
for others what you desire for yourself and hate for others what you
hate for others.”[^90]

621. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is the duty of the ruler to choose for his
subjects what he chooses for himself.”[^91]

622. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his letter to Muhammad Abi Bakr: “Desire for
your subjects whatever you desire for yourself and your household, and
hate for them whatever you hate for yourself and your household.”[^92]

623. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to his son, al-Hasan (a.s.):
“Make yourself the measure (for dealings) between you and others. Thus,
you should desire for others what you desire for yourself and hate for
others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress, as you do not like to
be oppressed. Do good to others, as you would like good to be done to
you. Regard bad for yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Accept
that (treatment) from others, which you would like others to accept from
you.”[^93]

624. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his instructions to his son Muhammad b.
al-Hanafiya: “My son! Do good to all people as you like good to be done
to you, and desire for others what you desire for yourself. Regard bad
for yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Be amiable to all
people so that when you are away from they would be looking forward to
you and when you die they would weep for you and say, Indeed we belong
to Allah, and to Him do we indeed return. Do not be like those who when
die people would say, All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of all the
worlds.!”[^94]

625. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The most equitable treatment of people is that
you deal with people as you like to be dealt with.”[^95]

626. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from the aphorisms attributed to him: “Associate
with people as you wish; they would associate with you the same
way.”[^96]

### b) Self-Esteem

627. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Keep yourself away from every low thing even
though they may take you to your desired aims, because you will not get
any return for your own respect, which you spend.”[^97]

628. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Keeping away from the low things would debase the
enemy.”[^98]

629. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not act in a way that ruins your esteem.”[^99]

630. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Death, rather than lowering oneself with
disgrace.”[^100]

631. Imam Ali (a.s.): “O People! Certainly dying is more preferable to
being disgraced; and being whipped is preferable to being
humiliated.”[^101]

632. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Let it be death but not humiliation. Let it be
little but not through disgrace.”[^102]

633. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Let there be lacking but not facing
disgrace.”[^103]

### c) Avoidance of Enmity

634. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Avoid… malice in the heart, hatred in the chest,
turning away (from each other's help) and withholding the hand from one
another's assistance.[^104]

635. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not incur enmity towards each other as it is
corrosive [of faith].”[^105]

636. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Utmost ignorance Is enmity with people.”[^106]

637. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is among unseemly choices to seek dominance
over one’s peers and to incur enmity towards people.”[^107]

638. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who fights against people will be fought
against.”[^108]

639. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The world is incommodious for those who are
hostile to each other.”[^109]

640. Imam Ali (a.s.): “To incur enmity towards people is the feature of
the ignorant.”[^110]

641. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is incumbent upon you to unite and coordinate
with each other.”[^111]

642. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Even one enemy is much too many.”[^112]

643. Imam Ali (a.s.): “My children! Beware of hostility to people, since
they are not out of two groups: the wise who would play trick on you; or
the ignorant who would quickly retaliate. Statements are masculine and
responses are feminine. Whenever the masculine and the feminine
assemble, inevitably there will be some results.”

Then he recited the following poem:

“The honorable is he, who avoids responding,

And he who is tolerant to people will achieve his goal.

He who has respect for people, they will respect him too,

He who humiliates people, will receive no respect.”[^113]

### d) Fidelity in Agreements

644. Imam Ali (a.s.): “O People! Surely fidelity in agreements is the
twin of truth. I do not know a better shield (against the assaults of
sin) than it. One who realizes the reality of return (to the next world)
never betrays. We are in a period when most of the people regard
betrayal as wisdom. In these days the ignorant call it excellence of
cunning.”[^114]

645. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The best [feature in relation to] Islam is
fidelity in agreements of one’s pledge.”[^115]

646. Imam Ali (a.s.) – in his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar: “ If you
bind an agreement between yourself and your enemy or clothe him in a
protective covenant (dhimmah), guard your agreement in good faith and
tend to your covenant with fidelity. Make of yourself a shield before
what you have granted, for men do not unite more firmly in any of the
obligations (imposed upon them) by God than in attaching importance to
fidelity in agreements, despite the division among their sects and the
diversity of their opinions.

The idolaters had already adhered to that (honoring agreement) among
themselves before the Muslims, by reason of the evil consequences of
treachery that they had seen. So never betray your protective covenant,
never break your agreement and never deceive your enemy, for none is
audacious before God but a wretched fool. God has made His agreement and
His protective covenant a security, which He has spread among the
servants by His Mercy and a sanctuary in whose impregnability they may
rest and in whose proximity they may spread forth. Within it there is no
corruption, treachery or deceit.”

“Make not an agreement in which you allow deficiencies and rely not upon
ambiguity of language after confirmation and finalization (of the
agreement). Let not the straitness of an affair in which an agreement
before God is binding upon you invite you to seek its abrogation
unjustly. For your patience in the straitness of an affair, hoping for
its solution and the blessing of its outcome, is better than an act of
treachery. You would fear the act's consequence and (you would fear)
that a liability before God will encompass you, a liability from which
you will not be exempted in this world or the next.”[^116]

### e) Discharging Obligations

647. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Discharge your obligation to the person who has
trusted you, even though he would be murderer of the Prophet’s
children.”[^117]

648. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not betray the one who has regarded you as
trustworthy, even though he has betrayed you; and do not disclose his
secret, although he discloses it himself.”[^118]

649. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his letter to Ash‘ath b. Qayth: “Certainly,
your assignment is not a morsel for you but it is a trust round your
neck and you have been charged with protection (of people) on behalf of
your superiors.”[^119]

650. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from his letter to one of his tax collectors: “He
whose hidden position is not different from his open position and whose
action is not different from his words, has discharged his obligation
and his worship is pure. I also order him that he should not harass
them, should not be harsh on them and should not turn away from them
because of superiority of official position over them, because they are
brothers in faith and help in the recovery of levies.”

“Certainly you have a fixed share and a known right in this levy, and
there are other sharers who are poor, weak and starving. We shall
discharge your rights. So you should discharge their rights. If you do
not do so, you will have the largest number of enemies on the Day of
Judgement. How wretched is the man whose enemies in the view of Allah
are the needy, the destitute, the beggars, the turned away, the indebted
and (penniless) travelers.”

“He who treats the trust lightly and indulges in treachery and does not
keep himself and his faith untarnished by it has certainly secured
humiliation in this world, and his humiliation and disgrace in the next
world will be greater. Surely, the greatest treachery is the treachery
against the Muslim community and the ugliest deceit is the deceit
towards the Muslim leaders. Wassalam!”[^120]

### f) Exploiting Other People’s Knowledge

651. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Learn the knowledge of every learned man, and
teach your knowledge to anyone who does not know. Once you do this,
Allah will teach you what you do not know, and you will benefit from
what you know.”[^121]

652. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Knowledge is a lost article of the believer.
Therefore, get it even though from the polytheists. None of you should
avoid learning wise sayings – from whomever you may hear it.”[^122]

653. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Learn the wise saying wherever you find it.
Certainly, a wise saying is a lost article of the believer.”[^123]

654. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A wise saying is a lost article of the believer.
Seek it even though it is in possession of the evil-doers.”[^124]

655. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Acquire a wise saying even though from the
polytheists.”[^125]

656. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A wise saying is a lost article of the believer.
Seize it even though from the mouth of the polytheists.”[^126]

657. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A wise saying is a lost article of the believer.
Seek it even though from the polytheists; as you deserve it more and are
qualified for it.”[^127]

658. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A wise saying is a lost article of the believer.
Acquire it even though from he mouth of the hypocrites.”[^128]

659. Imam Ali (a.s.): “A wise saying is a lost article of the believer.
Therefore, acquire wise sayings even though from people of
hypocrisy.”[^129]

660. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Acquire wise sayings from wherever they may be,
because if a wise saying is in the bosom of a hypocrite it flutters in
his bosom till it comes out and settles with others of its own category
in the bosom of the believer.”[^130]

### g) Cultural Independence

661. Imam Ali (a.s.): “It is seldom that a man likens himself to a group
and does not become as one of them.”[^131]

662. Al-Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.): “Amir al-Mu’minin would say: This umma
will ever live with happiness as long as they would not wear the alien’s
clothing or eat the alien’s foods. If they do so, however, Allah will
inflict disgrace upon them.”[^132]

### h) Miscellaneous

663. Imam Ali (a.s.): “There will be no prosperity where a tyrant is
ruling.”[^133]

664. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Tyranny of a ruler is a misadventure to
prosperity.”[^134]

665. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Your turning away from him who inclines towards
you is a loss of your share of advantage while your inclining towards
him who turns away from you is humiliation for yourself.”[^135]

666. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who does not incur enmity towards you,
cares for you.”[^136]

667. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The one who inclines towards you in time of your
fortune will turn away from you in time of your misfortune.”[^137]

668. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Have love for your friend up to a limit, for it
is possible that he may turn into your enemy some day; and hate your
enemy up to a limit for it is possible that he may turn into your friend
some day.”[^138]

669. Al-Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.): “Amir al-Mu’minin would say: There should
gather in your heart need for people and independence from them. Your
need for them should appear in you lenient words and affability; and
your independence from them should appear in [maintaining] the integrity
of your reputation and retainment of your esteem.”[^139]

670. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do sacrifice all your friendship for your friend,
but do not fully trust him. Help him by all means, but do not divulge
all your secrets to him, so that you [both] pay wisdom its due and
observe bonds of friendship.”[^140]

671. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who does not tolerate those whom he has to
tolerate is not wise.”[^141]

672. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do not trade with those from whom you cannot
secure your rightful due.”[^142]

673. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Beware of scaring your friends to the extent that
it will force them to keep a distance and want to separate from
you.”[^143]

674. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He whose benefit lies in your loss will never be
free from enmity to you.”[^144]

675. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Be forgiving in power and do good in your good
turn of fortune so as to perfect your supremacy.”[^145]

676. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Put up with your friend’s blunders for the time
of the enemy’s assault.”[^146]

677. Imam Ali (a.s.): “People’s looking forward to your rewards is
better than their fear of your punishment.”[^147]

678. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Substitute [other people’s] interest in you with
[their] respect for you.”[^148]

679. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Let people hold on to their rites and customs and
[act in a way that] that the innocent feel secure from you, and the
evil-doers be scared of you; and attend to the borders and the outskirts
of cities.”[^149]

680. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The hardest of all policies is to transform
habits.”[^150]

681. Imam Ali (a.s.): “People will be in beneficence as long as they
differ. Then, when they become alike they will be ruined.”[^151]

682. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who treats people with tolerance, will enjoy
their company.”[^152]

683. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Obeying the superior, respecting the peers, and
being equitable to the subordinate is a sign of common sense.”[^153]

484. Imam Ali (a.s.): “The means to secure high authority is breadth of
chest (i.e. generosity).”[^154]

485. Imam Ali (a.s.): “People’s delving into something is laying the
ground for achieving it.”[^155]

686. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Beware of doing something that makes an honorable
person disgust you, or debases your status, or ushers evil towards you,
or makes you suffer a penalty on the Resurrection.”[^156]

687. Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who rises to a high position undeservedly will
collapse unreasonably (without committing any crime).”[^157]

688. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Measure people with their own scales.”[^158]

689. Imam Ali (a.s.): “Common sense is that you do not dispute with your
superior, do not debase your subordinate, do not offer [to do] what you
are not capable [of doing]; that your tongue should not disagree your
heart, and your words should not disprove your deeds, do not talk about
what you have no knowledge, do not give up affairs when applicable and
do not pursue them when inapplicable.”[^159]

690. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“Treat the honorable people magnanimously, the average people
interestedly and fearfully, and the lowly people contemptuously.”[^160]

691. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“When you have a friend whose brotherhood and friendship you do not
like, do not reveal it to the people, for such a friend is like a dull
sword in one’s house that frighten the foes and they do not know whether
it is sharp or dull.”[^161]

692. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“Whenever a friend of yours does something good to you do not pay him
back with full reward, but reserve some of it to be added to at the time
when his benevolence adds up.”[^162]

693. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“There are some people who cut down when you step up [your favor to
them], and degrade you when you take them as your special friend. Their
pleasure is not positioned so as you realize it, and their fury is not
situated so as you avoid it. If you ever encounter with them, offer them
your common friendship and deny them your deep friendship so as what you
grant them may serve as a defense against their harms and what you deny
them may keep their respect in check.”[^163]

694. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“The person who heads a group is rationally forbidden to be drunk, for
it is indecent for a guardian to need someone [else] to guard
him.”[^164]

695. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do
not accept chairmanship over the people of your hometown since they
would not be in agreement with you unless you overpass the status of an
accomplished chairman.“[^165]

696. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.): “Do
not serve the chairman of whose indolence you are aware and whom the
circumstances has raised [to a high position] and he knows that you are
aware of his past. That is because although he would be pleased with
your service, he knows how [disdainfully] you look at him, so he would
be annoyed with you.”[^166]

697. Imam Ali (a.s.); “Do not underestimate yourselves to be negligent
as it would lead you to the way of the despots and, hence, destroying
you. Once truth comes to you and you happen to realize it, do not be
indolent about it, as you will be at a great loss.”[^167]

698. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“The most detrimental to you is to infer to your chairman that that you
excel over him in chairmanship.”[^168]

699. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“The little that promotes towards abundance is better that the abundance
that promotes towards little.”[^169]

700. Imam Ali (a.s.) – from aphorisms attributed to Imam Ali (a.s.): “It
is of no harm to you to find your friend with your foe, for if he brings
you no profit he will not cause you any harm, either.”[^170]

[^1]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 437, Rawa al-Wa’izin: 511.

[^2]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8722.

[^3]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2253, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 82/1981.

[^4]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2223, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 78/1886.

[^5]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9574, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 476/8712.

[^6]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7444, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 408/6904.

[^7]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5110, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 249/4668.

[^8]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2285, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 83/1998.

[^9]: Al-Mawa’iz al-‘Adliya: 54.

[^10]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1873.

[^11]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4715, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 217/4263.

[^12]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 6496, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 355/6023.

[^13]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8669, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 441/7665,
Al-Sirat al-Mustaqim: 1//222.

[^14]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 30/466, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 30/466,
Ibid.: 42/994.

[^15]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2253, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:

[^16]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4819.

[^17]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4789, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 42/982.

[^18]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4789, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 223/4355.

[^19]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 216. Also cf., Al-Kafi: 8/353/550.

[^20]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 863.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar: 78/83/87.

[^22]: Ghurar al-Hikam:1656.

[^23]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7031, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 386/6537.

[^24]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9714, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 486/8960.

[^25]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4948, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 237/4505

[^26]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10895, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 544/10115.

[^27]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4792, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 223/4356.

[^28]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1342 & 4215, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
303/5396.

[^29]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2433, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 77/1853.

[^30]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4118, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 132/2971.

[^31]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 6825, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 370/6243.

[^32]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9543, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 481/8864.

[^33]: Matalib al-Su‘ul: 56.

[^34]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4211, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 188/3858.

[^35]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7711, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 428/7283.

[^36]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8638, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 460/8361.

[^37]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/308/535.

[^38]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7526, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 410/6976.

[^39]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5769, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 297/5298.

[^40]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5592, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 284/5141.

[^41]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2408, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 77/1860.

[^42]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 17, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 18/45.

[^43]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8438, Nazmu Durar al-Simtayn: 160.

[^44]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4820, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 229/4409.

[^45]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4818, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 227/4369.

[^46]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8025, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 431/7403.

[^47]: Al-Kafi: 1/28/34.

[^48]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4847.

[^49]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8407, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 455/8218.

[^50]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8716, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 440/7633.

[^51]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9360, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 469/8558.

[^52]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9407, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 470/8597.

[^53]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9410, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 473/8668.

[^54]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5717, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 295/5283.

[^55]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7815, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 429/7299.

[^56]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 807, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 42/955.

[^57]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1068, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 43/1047.

[^58]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8740.

[^59]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhafal-‘Uqul: 127. Also cf., Da‘a’m
al-Islam: 1/354.

[^60]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 476. Also cf., Rawa al-Wa‘izin: 511.

[^61]: Al-Qur’an, 13:11.

[^62]: Irshad al-Qulub: 68.

[^63]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 6512, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 355/6024.

[^64]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8365.

[^65]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4404, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 193/3970.

[^66]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8742, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 439/7606.

[^67]: Al-Mawa‘iz al-‘Adadiyya: 59.

[^68]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7836, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 452/8107.

[^69]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 16557.

[^70]: Ibid., 1734.

[^71]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 865, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 51/7261.

[^72]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7815, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 428/7261.

[^73]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 146.

[^74]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 84, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
196/4004.

[^75]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5571, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 281/5068.

[^76]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 7906.

[^77]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10958, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 552/10176.

[^78]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8536, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 450/8011.

[^79]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 3931, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 181/3703.

[^80]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8045 & 8346, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
432/7421.

[^81]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5571, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 438/7602.

[^82]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/303/465.

[^83]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 345/961.

[^84]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 144, ‘Uyun al-Hikam
wa al-Mawa’iz: 100/2296.

[^85]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul:147,

[^86]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 30.

[^87]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10956, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 550/10157.

[^88]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4523, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 202/4095.

[^89]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5486, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 275/4998.

[^90]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 81, Bihar al-Anwar: 77/208/1.

[^91]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9335, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 469/8562.

[^92]: Al-Amali of al-Mufid: 269/3, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 180, Al-Amali of
al-Tusi: 30/31, Al-Gharat: 1/249.

[^93]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 31, Kashf al-Mahajja: 226.

[^94]: Man laYahdarahu al-Faqih: 4/387/5834, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa
al-Mawa’iz: 79/1914.

[^95]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 3170, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 116/2580.

[^96]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/309/539.

[^97]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 31, Ghurar al-Hikam: 2428, ‘Uyun al-Hikam
wa al-Mawa’iz: 85/2056.

[^98]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9774, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 485/8954.

[^99]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10231, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 518/9395.

[^100]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 361, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 33/621.

[^101]: Al-Kafh: 8/21/4, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 207.

[^102]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 360 & 362, Nahj al- Balagha: Aphorism 396,
‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 3/620.

[^103]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9802, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 488/9044.

[^104]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 192, Ghurar al-Hikam: 4544, ‘Uyun
al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 200/4046.

[^105]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 86, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 152, Bihar al-Anwar:
77/292/1.

[^106]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5247, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 264/4814.

[^107]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9352 & 9429, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz:
469/8555.

[^108]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9013, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 427/7252.

[^109]: Al-Mawa‘iz al-Adadiya: 58.

[^110]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9785.

[^111]: Ibid., 6152.

[^112]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1149, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 45/1107.

[^113]: Al-Khisal: 72/111, Rawdat al-Wa‘izin: 412.

[^114]: Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 41, Khasa’s al-A’imma: 98, ‘Uyun
al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 152/3334.

[^115]: ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 471/8614.

[^116]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 53, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 145. Also cf.,
Da‘a’im al-Islam: 1/368.

[^117]: Al-Khisal: 614/10, Bihar al-Anwar: 75/115/8.

[^118]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 81, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 519/9426,
Bihar al-Anwar: 77/208/1.

[^119]: Nahj al-Balagha: Letter 5, Jawahir al-Matalib: 2/26.

[^120]: Nahj al Balagha: Letter 26, Bihar al-Anwar: 33/528/719.

[^121]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1133.

[^122]: Jami‘ Bayan al-‘Ilm: 1/10/.

[^123]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5043, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 243/6828.

[^124]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul: 201.

[^125]: Al-Mahasin: 1/360/771, Bihar al-Anwar: 2/97/41.

[^126]: Tanbih al-Khawatir: 1/81.

[^127]: Al-Amali, al-Tusi: 625/1290.

[^128]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 1829, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 22/145.

[^129]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 80, Khasa’s al-A’imma: 94.

[^130]: Khasa’s al-A’imma: 94, Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 79, Rabi‘
al-Abrar: 3/197.

[^131]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 207, Khasa’s al-A’imma: 115, Nuzha
al-Nazir: 53/31.

[^132]: Al-Mahasin: 2/178/1504 & 222/1669, Bihar al-Anwar: 66/323/6.

[^133]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10791, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 540/10022.

[^134]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 3954, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 181/3717.

[^135]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 451, Bihar al-Anwar: 164/74, Yanabi‘
al-Mawadda: 2/252/707.

[^136]: Al-Mawa‘iz al-‘Adadiyya: 61.

[^137]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8878.

[^138]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 268, Tuhaf al-‘Uqul: 201, Al-Tusi,
Al-Amali: 364/767.

[^139]: Al-Kafi: 2/149/7, Ma‘ani al-Akhbar: 267/1, Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 204.

[^140]: Kanz al-Fawa’id: 1/93.

[^141]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 218, Bihar al-Anwar: 78/57/121.

[^142]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10184, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 518/940.

[^143]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10184, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 98/2253.

[^144]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9150.

[^145]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2528, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 200/4048.

[^146]: Bihar al-Anwar: 74/166.

[^147]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 4510, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 203/4119.

[^148]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2291, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 20/311/573.

[^149]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2419, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 81/1961.

[^150]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 10184, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 118/2649.

[^151]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha: 2/53/204, Al-Saduq, Al-Amali: 531/718,
Ghurar al-Hikam: 289.

[^152]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8861, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 457/8286.

[^153]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9422, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 473/8646.

[^154]: Nahj al-Balagha: Aphorism 176, Khasa’is al-A’imma: 110, Ghurar
al-Hikam: 1256.

[^155]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 5067, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 242/4612.

[^156]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 2727, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 100/291.

[^157]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 8613.

[^158]: Al-Mawa‘iz al-‘Adadiyya: 57. Apparently meaning to measure
people according to their own capacities and circumstances.

[^159]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 9450, ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz: 473/8681.

[^160]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/311/574.

[^161]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 309/550.

[^162]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/331/798.

[^163]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/320/673.

[^164]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 338/871.

[^165]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 282/232.

[^166]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 337/865.

[^167]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul: 150. Also cf., Al-Kafi: 1/45/6, Al-Mufid,
Al-Amali: 206/38.

[^168]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/320/863.

[^169]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 20/344/953.

[^170]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha: 336/953.


