Politics in two Schools
=======================

Imam Ali (a.s.) took over the affairs of Muslims on Dhil Hajja 18, 35 AH
/ June 17, 656 CE, and was martyred in his prayer niche on Ramadan 21,
40 AH/ January 29, 661 CE. Hence, the reign of his holiness lasted only
four years, nine months, and three days. Issues in relation to this
period of his life are as follows:

1. How the Imam (a.s.) attained power; dimensions of 'Alawi reformation
and its fundamentals.

2. Various kinds of resistance against 'Alawi policies; wars and clashes
during his holiness' short period of rule.

4. Administrators of Ali (a.s.)'s government and his companions.

5. Plot for assassination of Imam Ali (a.s.), and his martyrdom.

Of the above mentioned topics, "'Alawi Policies in hukuma (rulership)"
is of utmost importance and specific status due to its instructive and
functional significance in the present era, and its guiding doctrine for
rulers, particularly for the Islamic Republic of Iran's statesmen.

We believe that if "Politics" in 'Alawi and Umayyad schools is
rightfully defined and the Imam's political principles in governing are,
however briefly, delineated, objections that are made, and perhaps even
now are manifested in some peoples' words and writings, on his political
insight will be responded and his policies will be rightly and
steadfastly defended.

Political insight, from the viewpoints of Imam Ali, is one of the most
crucial requirements of leadership. The Imam not only considers
"understanding politics" and having correct appreciation of it as the
secret of durability of a government, but also stresses that "governing
a state is the very politics".[^1]

He asserts that political incapability is a malady that threatens the
statesmen's authority with downfall. In the Imam's view, rulers who do
not possess acute and efficient political insight will not stay long in
office. Eventually, incorrect policies, according to 'Alawi doctrines,
are indicative of the decline of governments and downfall of states.[^2]

Thus, according to 'Alawi school, ruling a community on the basis of
Islamic principles would be practicable solely through the right
statesmanship of the rulers. In other words, statesmanship is one of the
general principles of management, equally important in various
doctrines. The type of attitude and how politics is interpreted,
appreciated, and perceived is what distinguishes Islam in this respect
from other doctrines, outshines 'Alawi policies above other policies,
and sets it against Umayyad policies.

Umayyad Policies
----------------

In Umayyad ideology, politics is defined as "recognizing the goal and
attaining it through every possible means". The world politicians of the
past and present seem to have had no perception beyond this. In reality,
politics in Umayyad ideology falls in the same category of meaning as
political trends of the governments that are not based on value
foundations and are not prompted by the criterion for realizing truth
and false that would guide them in their interactions and manners.
Describing a feature of politicians, Oswald Spengler said: "a politician
by nature has nothing to do with the truth or falsehood of things."

Moreover, Bertrand Russell has perceived political motives and
behavioral roots of man in politics as such and stated:

"Political motives in most people include profiteering, selfishness,
competition and love of power. For instance, in politics, all human
actions originate from the above traits. A political leader who can
convince people that he would be able to satisfy these needs, would also
be able to subjugate people in such a way that they get to believe that
two plus two equals five, or his authority has come down to him right
from God.

The political leader who neglects these basic motives is usually
deprived of the support of the masses. Psychology of public dynamics is
the most basic part of successful political leader's education. Most
political leaders achieve their posts by convincing people that they
have humanitarian ideals. It is easily understood that such belief will
be welcome as it is emotionally appealing. Fettering people, public
lectures and sermons, illegal punishments, and wars are procedures of
development of emotions. I think keeping people in emotions provides the
followers of illogical thinking with a better chance to deceive them and
make benefit from them."[^3]

What is brought up in this analysis about political leaders of
communities is consistent with the interpretation made of politics by
Umayyad statesmen. Mu'awiya is the founder of this approach to politics
in Islamic history. On this basic, and relying on the slogan "Politics
is barren" in order to snatch power and safeguard the acquired power, he
was ready to go to any extremes and use any hideous means to this end.

'Alawi Politics
---------------

Politics, in Ali (a.s.)'s view, is unfaltering administration of the
community based on Divine criteria, and a truth - oriented movement. He
is quoted as saying:

Administering a state is politics.[^4]

He never approved of doing anything for achieving power and retaining
it. On the contrary, he never considered resorting to illegitimate means
as permissible, even to the cost of losing power.

According to 'Alawi doctrine, politics is the recognizing and employing
legal instruments in administering a community, and providing people
with material and spiritual welfare. In other words, by 'Alawi
doctrines, exploiting illegitimate means and tools which are
ostentatiously efficient but erroneous in effect, is not regarded as
politics; rather, it is deception, fraudulence, and in Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s.)'s words, "imposture".[^5]

From the viewpoint of Imam Ali (a.s.), government is dominion over the
hearts and conquest of wisdoms and affections, rather than subjugation
of "bodies", dominance over individuals, and riding upon their
shoulders. Such interpretation of government leaves no room for
resorting to illegitimate political instruments. In his view, power has
no sanctity except for administering justice, hence no need to fall back
on false ways to preserve it. Dominion over hearts is in no way possible
except by using the right methods and treatment based on values.
Illegitimate and false policies may gallop along and go on dominating
for a short while, but they will never last long and bring nothing to
people but harm and loss:

Truth has a lasting sovereignty, and falsehood a short-lived
flaunting.[^6]

'Alawi Reformations
-------------------

With this attitude towards government and sovereignty, and with such
interpretation of politics, Imam Ali (a.s.) took over the reign, and
right after achieving political power started the state reformations
accordingly, with the motto, "Social and Economical Justice".

He had proclaimed the reason for accepting hukuma as "embarking on
reforms and restoring the suppressed rights. Ali (a.s.) believed that
whatever had happened before his time and after the demise of the
Apostle of God, had radically changed the community and altered the
values, creating a great gap and inconsistency between what was towed
behind by the name of "Islamic State", and what the Holy Prophet (S) had
originally founded. In his formal statement at the beginning of his
caliphate, Ali (a.s.) asserted that what had been done had been
inconsistent with the sira and sunna of the Apostle of God; the status
quo was unbearable; and there was a strong need for providing a new way
and a firmly set procedure which would be unlike "the tradition of the
two Shayks", but of "'Alawi tradition and 'Alawi reforms" consistent
with "the tradition of the Prophet" and Muhammadan reforms".

Surprisingly, Imam Ali (a.s.) has found out through his deep political
insight that such procedure and reformation would not be tolerated by
people who had for a long time been accustomed to reverse values:
“Neither hearts can stand it nor can intellects accept it”.[^7]

However, he is a Truth-oriented statesman who regards "Politics" as
honesty in speech and clarity in position, as well as adherence to
Truth, and no less than that. That is why in his very first statement,
he declares explicitly an unrelenting struggle against alterations,
deviations, abnormalities, and undue ups and downs, without the
slightest fear of the political repercussions and social tension that
would ensue. Of course, he started all this with resolution,
far-sightedness, and accurate and firm policy-making and planning.

'Alawi Policies in Confrontation with Deviations
------------------------------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.) was profoundly and closely aware of what had befallen
the people, and knew how they had acclimatized to the deviations, and
now he is determined to embark on reforms; he knew both the depth of the
calamity and the difficulty of removing it from every nook and cranny of
the society. Thus, Imam Ali (a.s.) acted neither hastily nor unplanned.
He divided the reforms he intended to make into two categories:

1. Fighting against administrative and economic corruption,

2. Fighting against cultural deviation.

The Policy of Administrative and Economical Reformation
-------------------------------------------------------

Ali (a.s.) began encountering administrative and economic deviations and
fighting against related corruption from the very beginning of his rule.
He expelled incompetent, corrupt, and ill-behaved administrators from
their posts and reclaimed the plundered public treasury.

On the first day of his rule, the Imam proclaimed his intended reform
policy in the following thought - provoking words:

You should know that if I respond to you, I would lead you as I know I
should and would not care about whatever one may say or abuse.[^8]

That means you should comply with me, rather than the reverse. Ali
(a.s.) is Truth-centered man, adept in the sunna, and absorbed in God.
What is thought-provoking here is that the Imam indicates that he knows
this complying would lead to hardships; above all, rebukes,
faultfinding, and chantage and lobbying would follow. His motto,
however, is: "I am Truth-centered and I safeguard the truth, and nothing
else.

Then, on the second day of his Caliphate, he asserted in his lofty
status of social guidance and in view of his great responsibility of
leadership as follows:

Know that any land that 'Uthman has granted and any wealth from God's
property that he has given as gift will be refunded to the public
treasury; as nothing would violate previous rights and if I find the
assets I will restore them to their rightful place even if they are
given as marriage-portion to women or distributed among cities; as
justice is expanding in nature, and for whomsoever justice is
constraining, oppression will be even more so.[^9]

In a fervent, awakening and thought-provoking sermon, the Imam widely
spoke on the same day about the responsibility of the authorities of a
community in realizing social justice, stressing that he would not give
a special privilege to anybody for utilizing public treasury; and those
who have appropriated, through public treasury, plots of land, water,
well-bred horses, and good looking maids should know that Ali will
confiscate all those assets and return them to the treasury.

These words came down like thunderbolts, heavily striking like a smith's
hammer on the heads of those who had plundered and pillaged, and now
were extremely worried; and thus Ali (a.s.)'s outcry advocating justice
reverberated more than ever among the well-known figures, who soon
turned into staunch opponents of Alawi rule.

These mottos were uttered, and the people got familiar with a resonance
unknown to them up to then.

On the third day of Ali (a.s.)'s rule, people sought to receive their
portion of public treasury. The Imam ordered his notary, 'Ubayd Allah b.
Rafi' as follows:

Start from Muhajirun (the emigrants). Call for them and give them three
dinars each. Then, call for the Ansar (the helpers), and treat them
similarly. Anyone else coming to you, black or red, or..., treat them
the same way you treated Muhajirun and Ansar....[^10]

The dignitaries from among the people found out that Ali (a.s.)'s plan
of economic justice was not a slogan; it was real practice, and very
serious indeed. Objections began to be raised in his presence. He
reported the events. Not only the Imam was not shocked by the onset of
oppositions, especially from pompous figures, and did not hesitate on
his way, but also decisively asserted the continuation of his reforms.
He said:

By God, if I remain [in power] and stay unimpaired, I will set them firm
on a bright path.[^11]

From this very moment, vengeance for 'Uthman's bloodshed began! Was it
not ironic that some of the gold-hoarders and affluent stipulated their
allegiance to the Imam on the following two conditions?

1. Ali (a.s.) should not meddle in the wealth that they have seized over
the rule of 'Uthman;

2. He should identify, arrest and kill the murderers of 'Uthman.

The Imam, however, knew that vengeance for 'Uthman's bloodshed was only
a pretext. What was of importance to them was prevention of taking back
the illegitimate riches and treasured up properties left over from the
era of 'Uthman. In this respect, the Imam had heard various proposals
and had strongly rejected all the proposals, which were compromising,
contradictory to restoring rights, and based on trampling upon public
treasury.

[^1]: See 10/1 (Causes for Durability of Governments).

[^2]: See 10/2 (Causes for the Decline of Governments).

[^3]: Robert Edward Egner, Bertrand Russell, Best: Silhouette in Satyr.

[^4]: Al-Saduq, al-Amali, 132.

[^5]: Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) says about Mu’awiya's political wits: "It is
imposture and devilishness; it looks like intellect, but is not
intellect." (Al-Kafi: I, 11.)

[^6]: Al-Kafi: II, 447.

[^7]: See 1/3: ahadith 7 & 6. [Nahj al-Balagha: Sermon 92. Translations
of Nahj al-Balagha throughout this book are mainly adopted from Sayyid
Ali Reza and William Chittick.]

[^8]: See 1/3, hadith 8.

[^9]: 2/3, hadith 72.

[^10]: See 2/1, hadith 62.

[^11]: Ibid.


