Policy of Cultural Reformation
==============================

In parts of the Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.), the reason for
and the quality of people's uprising against 'Uthman's rule is
delineated, the most important of which is standing up against
administrative corruptions and economic disturbances.[^1] People had
been fed up with the undue extravagance and nepotism, and would not
tolerate the incompetent sovereignty and inefficient statesmen who had
been assigned to their posts only because of their attachment to the
Caliph. From the early days of his rule, Ali (a.s.) thus started his
bureaucratic and economic reforms despite all the difficulties that
arose thereby.

However, the ground was not paved for accomplishment of cultural and
intellectual reforms and fight against value deformations and deviations
which had taken place in various dimensions in the Islamic state. Ali
(a.s.) had to delay and act hesitantly, preparing the ground to begin
the struggle. In other words, the endeavor required more stability and
stronger establishment of his government. That was why Ali (a.s.) would
say:

If my steps acquire firmness out of these slippery places, I would alter
several things.[^2]

The Imam could not easily and immediately fight against what had over a
period of 25 years rooted in people's minds, tongues, souls, and
characters and made them accustomed to it, building a different culture
for them.

Undoubtedly, this fight would have raised widespread discontent and
exacerbated the already knotty affairs, hindering the chance for other
reformations. So, forbearance had to be shown until the time for
plucking fruits would come up.

Anyway, Ali (a.s.) embarked on reforms on the basis of a precise
planning, a clear perspective, and explicit goals aiming at restoring
the community back to the prophet's sira and sunna. He took the first
step toward creation and expansion of social justice and execution of
administrative and economic reforms, carrying it on to the end of his
life in order to lay the foundation for a thoroughly "Islamic" community
based on the Qur'anic values and Divine doctrines. Evil-mindedness,
ill-naturedness, inhumanity, and tyrannies regretfully hindered that man
of justice and faith from achieving all those goals.

What we deal here with is an account of most fundamental 'Alawi Reform
in bureaucratic, cultural, economic, social, judicial, security,
military, and international areas on the basis of historical and hadith
texts, as well as an explanation of reforms principles. Undoubtedly, a
thorough account of the Imam's political foundations and an
interpretation of his reformation, demands more time.

One: The Foundations of Ruling over the Hearts
----------------------------------------------

Islam is the religion of hukuma, which is clearly evident in the
doctrines of this Divine Faith. A close study of the Islamic texts
dealing with foundations of Islamic hukuma, however, indicates that
Islam is a religion that rules over the people's hearts rather than over
their "bodies" and dominating them with political authority. Principles
of this type of ruling and statesmanship are tantamount to the political
foundations of the Islamic state; and political foundations of 'Alawi
[ruling] system are the very foundations of Islamic management.

Islam is the code of material and spiritual evolution of human beings.
Affection is the most basic element of this code. Affection is so
functional in realization of the Islamic state and the plans provided by
the Divine religion for development of human society that Al-Imam
al-Baqir considers the religion of Islam as nothing but affection, and
asserts:

Is religion anything but affection?[^3]

In Ali (a.s.)'s view, main pillars of Islam and its principles of
evolutionary planning are based on love for Allah. He says in this
respect:

This Islam is the religion which Allah has chosen for Himself, developed
it before His eyes, chose it as the best among His Creation, and
established its pillars on His love.[^4]

Religious guides and true political leaders of Islamic community are
manifestations of people's love for God, and people's love for them is
love for God. Accordingly, Islamic hukuma is basically stationed beyond
people's allegiance and decision [by voting]. Islamic hukuma is rooted
in people's love, which is indeed the secret of so much emphasis given
by the Qur'an and Islamic hadiths about love of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).

On the other hand, it is evident that love is not imperative. Man can
not be forced to love someone or something merely by circulars, contrary
to his inner drive.

Man loves beauty, and love for beauty lies deep in his soul. He, by
nature, loves all types of material and spiritual beauties. Thus, if he
views a person's insight, character, and manner as beautiful he would
fall in love with him; and if he finds him displeasing, he would turn
his face away from him. This is man's natural expediency, unless his
inner nature shifts otherwise.

Hence, we realize that the secret of emphasis on love of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.), and the philosophy of its necessity is persuasion to achieve a
real knowledge about them; for their character, conduct, and treatment
of people is so beautiful and attractive that true and unbiased
knowledge of them simply leads to fondness for and attachment to them.
How is it possible to see and know so much beauty in Ali (a.s.)'s
conduct and not to love him, unless one has lost his human conscience
and defiled his pure and noble nature? This is the secret of people's
such fervent love and devotion toward Ali (a.s.). Obviously, these
lovers consist of various types of people throughout the history and
unbounded by ideologies and beliefs, from all schools of thought; as,
beauty and love for beauty has no boundaries, like love for Ali (a.s.)
which is the greatest manifestation of beauty.

Ali (a.s.)'s conduct in his life span was replete with adherence to
Truth, Truth-centeredness, and spreading of Truth, especially in his
demonstration of the most beautiful aspect of human rule during his
brief period of hukuma. Would it be possible to behold Ali (a.s.)'s
comely grace and beauty and its manifestation in his hukuma and not to
fall in love with it?!

Now, before we elaborate on historical and hadith text relating to
'Alawi statesmanship, we intend to review the Imam's political
principles in government. This review would be very brief, within our
limited ability and time. In reality, restating these principles is, in
itself, revealing the secret of creation of Ali (a.s.)'s beauties and
attractions, and indicating the political principles of ruling over
hearts. We hope that the Islamic Republic of Iran officials do their
best in familiarizing with, introducing, and approaching these beauties
and try to identify the reality of their political and administrative
life as well as their transient responsibility with his; hence,
delineating a perspective of 'Alawi comely hukuma for the people of the
world.

Two: Administrative Policies
----------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.)'s managerial policies in administration may be stated in
the following principles:

### 1. Honesty in Politics

Honesty can be considered as the most fundamental principle in Ali
(a.s.)'s managerial policies. Throughout history, statesmen were mostly
dishonest to people; what they have told people was not what they had
thought about it or acted accordingly. Ali (a.s.) had set honesty and
truthfulness to people as a steadfast principle in his sovereignty and
remained faithful to it from the early days to the moment of his
martyrdom. Undoubtedly, honesty has been one of the most significant
everlasting attractions of Ali (a.s.)'s rule over the hearts and
throughout the history, and an explicit distinction bordering line
between 'Alawi and Umayyad politics.

In Umayyad culture, honesty is meaningless, with fabrication, telling
lies, and imposture being the motif of their politics. As mentioned
earlier and as it is evident to those having a slight familiarity with
history of politics, most statesmen of the past had no implication of
politics except for inversion of reality and spreading falsehood in
their interactions. Narrating a memory of the late Imam Khomeini (ra) in
this respect would be much self-evident and interesting. After his first
raging attack against the tyrannical monarchy, that noble figure was
arrested. One of the heads of state met with the Imam (ra) and talked to
him about politics. Imam (ra)'s account of what that person told is as
follows:

"[He said:] Politics is maliciousness, lying, rascality and... so, you'd
better leave it to us!"

Imam Khomeini (ra) goes on to say:

"He was right in that. If politics is such things, let it be
theirs."[^5]

Such is the professional statesmen's business; if lying, deception, and
double-facedness are eliminated from politics, nothing will be left of
it. 'Alawi politics is in sharp contrast with this. At first glance,
honesty is the prime requirement of statesmanship. If honesty is left
out of statesmen's array of actions and interactions with people, the
Truth-orientedness, adherence to law, human rights, social justice,
etc., would be rendered meaningless and vain. In other words, all these
in the absence of honesty would be mere slogans for deception of people
and instruments for further violation of their rights.

In 'Alawi politics, employing "inverting" method is permissible only in
battles, within all the restrictions, exceptions, and frameworks which
will be pointed out when talking about "Imam's warfare policies".

### 2. Truth-Orientedness

Truth-orientedness is a manifestation of political honesty in 'Alawi
Rule. Adherence to Truth and Truth-oriented ness is evident all through
Ali (a.s.)'s short period of rule. He thought of nothing but truth and
intended anything except restoring of rights. His outcry is for
restoring of rights, and his silence is for preparing the grounds for
safeguarding the Truth. His teaching in this respect is very
thought-provoking and awakening.

There were many who spoke of Truth and Truth-orientedness; but when
their personal, group and sectarian interests happened to conflict with
their slogans, their interpretations and justifications would come to
their aid to sacrifice the Truth. But, it is surprising how steadfast
Ali (a.s.) was in his Truth-orientedness. Truth, in his view, is the
"Principle". So it must be equally practiced for all – friends, near of
kin, insiders, outsiders, etc.

### 3. Adherence to law

Law is a strong cord that brings cohesion among different social strata.
It is not a matter of lawlessness, as a lawless society is a jungle
rather than a human society; rather, it is a matter of law status, and
the way rulers and people look at it. Respect for law, in Imam Ali
(a.s.)'s view, is irrefutable. This can be perceived throughout many
texts, including the Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu'minin, where his
interaction with people in financial matters, execution of legal
punishments, etc., is introduced.

Deliberation on this collection will show us that in Ali (a.s.)'s view
no one transcends the law, nor anybody or any authority can hinder the
execution of Divine law. Obviously, Ali (a.s.)'s position indicates that
he does not regard himself as a man of authority before law.[^6] That
was why he did not tolerate compromise and struggled with flattery and
hypocrisy in politics, strongly disagreeing with falsehood, affected
rightfulness, justifications, and [personal] interpretations that were
so prevalent in Umayyad's politics.

### 4. Administrative Discipline

Imam Ali (a.s.) frequently and emphatically enjoined orderliness in
affairs and discipline in conducts. This instruction was so important to
the Imam that even in his deathbed – where he would naturally have
stated his most significant and efficient instructions – he emphasized
orderliness in affairs.[^7]

He views orderliness in life and discipline in action as among the lofty
goals of Divine revelation:

Verily, in it (the Qur'an) lies the knowledge of the future and accounts
of the past, remedy to your maladies, and [establishing] orderliness
among you.

Again and again he would advise his administrators to attempt in
maintaining administrative discipline and not forgetting orderliness in
affairs, doing whatever they plan to in their due time and not wasting
their time in disorder and confusion.

### 5. Appointment of Competent and Capable Administrators

Administrators are the executive arms of rulers, and agents of
establishing justice and spreading of law in society. Their competence,
capability, steadfastness and behavioral soundness are doubtlessly most
effective in organizing the society in its various dimensions. Thus,
from Imam Ali (a.s.)'s viewpoint in appointing administrators only
competence and merits must be the criteria, rather than kinship and
relations. "Meritocracy" is the quintessence of appointment in 'Alawi
politics. Moral competence, familial originality, expertise, and
capability should be the criteria for being appointed, rather than
kinship, causal, factional, and sectarian relations, particularly if
politically weighed.

By Imam's doctrine, directors and officials are not privileged to grant
governmental posts on the basis of familial or political relations. They
are not privileged to consign people's affairs to those who are not of
noble birth; they are not privileged to assign those who are distanced
from moral virtues and good disposition; they are not privileged to
employ those who do not possess the proper expertise and due
cheerfulness in executive jobs. Job of an administrator is a "trust" and
should not be consigned to anyone but a trustworthy person.

### 6. Providing the Administrators with their financial Needs

The Imam believed that the administrators must enjoy sufficient
remuneration. From the viewpoint of Imam Ali (a.s.), to prevent form
corruption and to prepare the ground for reformation, it is necessary
that administrators be remunerated handsomely. In that case, on one
hand, they will avoid clutching at the public treasury; and on the
other, the officials will have the authority to punish the mutinous and
treacherous and to discipline the corrupt, and the violators would not
have a pretext for their violations.

### 7. Special Care for the Armed Forces

Armed forces are strong fortresses for guarding the sovereignty of a
community. The latter's military power is undoubtedly very influential
in maintaining security and preventing the enemy's intrusion, and above
all, in barring even the temptation by the rebels to launch an invasion.
Military forces, in Imam's view, must enjoy special care from the
officials. They must interact with troops as fathers do with their
children.

### 8. Necessity for setting up an Establishment to Monitor the Function of the Administrators

The world is a slippery abode, and the worldly attractions and glamour
cause blunder and fall. The officials are to take utmost care in
selecting administrators, to the extent that they appoint pure-hearted,
good-tempered, and steadfast people for administrative tasks. Once they
achieve this goal, they should not feel relieved of the possible
administrative corruption, violation of the law, and behavioral
abnormalities.

Therefore, setting up an organization for supervising the
administrators' behavior and watching over the administrative violations
and deviations would be mandatory. Imam Ali (a.s.) strongly forbade
prying into people's privacy in a ruling system[^8]; but he emphasized
on surveillance over employees of an Islamic state and monitoring the
administrators' behavior through certain intelligence establishments,
lest they should neglect their duties or violate people's rights by
means of their power and the authority at their disposal.

The part of Imam's letters in this respect and his letters to the
wrongdoing administrators such as Ash'ath b. Qays, Ziyad b. Abih, 'Abd
Allah b. 'Abbas, Qudama b. 'Ajlan, Masqala b. Hubayra, and Mundhir b.
Jarud, indicate that his holiness had employed very powerful
intelligence establishments in his government to Monitor the
administrators.

But what is extraordinary here is that the informants were both honest
and faithful so that they would watch over carefully, follow up
steadfastly, and investigate honestly on one hand, and would be
veracious and faithful in their reports, on the other.

The ones that Ali (a.s.) had selected for this extremely important task
were so highly endowed with justice, veracity, and authoritativeness
that their reports were the bases for administrative rewards and
punishments. Those doing good were rewarded by means of the reports, and
the treacherous were punished once proved guilty, and the corrupt ones
were expelled from work to serve as an example for others.

### 9. Never Accepting any Gifts

In order to put an end to bribery in the bureaucratic system and cleanse
the society of this evil and corruptive practice, he banned acceptance
of gifts. Anyhow, the imposters would try to penetrate by any possible
means into the administrative body of the government to utilize the
state facilities. Hence, the Imam ruled the acceptance of gifts as
deception (ghulul) and bribery as polytheism (shirk).

### 10. Decisiveness Coupled with Tolerance

Ali (a.s.)'s behavior highly represented decisiveness and tolerance.
From his point of view, the administrators must practice tolerance and
condescendence while being decisive. He regards extreme violence as
harmful to the management, as he considers too much leniency and being
easygoing in administering justice in people's affairs as detrimental.
In Imam's view, a successful manager would be the one who can devise a
midway between decisiveness and compassion, strictness and leniency.

Wherever there is need for decisiveness, he should practice it and do
not back down; and if leniency is demanded for being successful, he
should not avoid using it. Decisiveness Coupled with Tolerance, and
strictness joined with leniency is an 'Alawi strategy employed to
prevent the rebels from turning more rebellious and the hopeful from
becoming desperate. Taking a glance at the tangible examples of what was
said here – and presented in this book – would be very instructive.

Three: Cultural Policies
------------------------

Talking about various dimensions of cultural policies demands much wider
attention. Here we bring up the issue just as an introduction to the
historical and hadith texts, however briefly, as follows:

### 1. Development of Education

In 'Alawi system [of hukuma], cultural development precedes economic
development, since beside the fact that economic development is not
possible without cultural development, a slumbering society submerged in
ignorance neither enjoys the economic possibilities, facilities, and
blessings nor in endowed with the skills to utilize them or aware of the
necessity to use them. Cultural and Educational development is a need of
human soul and mind, and economic development is that of the body. It
goes without saying that needs of the soul and mind precede [are more
significant than] needs of the body.

Imam Ali (a.s.) considered knowledge as the origin and basis of all the
physical and spiritual goodness, and a criterion for evaluation of human
beings and believed that ignorance is the origin of all evils and
frustrations:

The value of every man is as high as his knowledge.[^9]

Knowledge is the basis of all goodness, and ignorance is the origin of
all evils. [^10]

He also emphasized that people's needs for knowledge and acquisition of
moral virtues are higher than their economic needs:

Verily, people need a good culture more that they need gold and
silver.[^11]

Verily, you need the acquisition of culture and courtesy (adab) more
than acquisition of gold and silver. [^12]

Looking at this issue from another perspective, we notice that it is
clearly stated in Divine doctrines that the philosophy of revelation and
the secret of prophethood and the reason for hukuma in the Prophets'
school is the education of human beings, removal of ignorance, and
motivating the wisdoms. Similarly, Ali (a.s.), whose mind, tongue, and
manners are above all else as exponents of Prophetic culture, has
represented this fact very beautifully in his sermons[^13]; and clearly
represented in his practical way of life the necessity of acculturating
people, giving priority to education over bread and water for man, and
stressing the development of culture along other dimensions of life. How
beautifully he defines paganism (jahiliyya) as a symbol of spreading
ignorance and stamping out knowledge. No doubt, a Divine, Prophetic, and
'Alawi community must be far beyond that.[^14]

### 2. Correction of Public Culture

Included among sublime and eminent 'Alawi policies is the battle against
false traditions, rude manners, unbecoming procedures, and emphasis on
decent manners and befitting behaviors, or as briefly stated, rectifying
the public culture. Ali (a.s.) would advise his administrators not to
eliminate from the society anything on the pretext that it is left over
from the past; to support the constructive and humane traditions; and to
fight against evil traditions, not tolerating their perpetuation and
expansion.

### 3. Criticism? Yes! But Never Flattery!

Criticism is a right by means of which other rights are restored and
despotism – that is the most dangerous pitfall of governments – is
banned.

In a society where criticism is free and people are able to disclose the
rulers' deficiencies and flaws, the statesmen can better notice their
own weak points, fight against corruption and injustice, and offer
valuable services.

On the other hand, in the absence of criticism, the grounds will be
paved for the emergence of flatterers and sycophants; the statesmen's
weak points in policies, plans and steps will remain unnoticed, and thus
corruption, decadence, and injustice in governmental organizations will
develop, leading to the fall of the governments.

When Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) took over the hukuma, undue praise and
exaggerated compliments about authorities were part of the public
culture. The rulers not only did not prevent them, but also further
promoted them. This way, culture of flattery and sycophancy had
developed and the cunning enemies of truth, had, by flattering the
commanders and authorities, achieved political and social positions
without being qualified for those jobs.

On the other hand, since the authorities were never criticized, they
began to consider themselves immaculate and flawless to the extent that
they took the constructive and compassionate criticisms as offensive and
deemed it obligatory to stand against them.

Of the most comely and exciting 'Alawi measures taken in rectification
of public culture was the battle against flattery and sycophancy and
stress on constructive criticism.

The Imam required his administers to appoint their associates,
consultants, and companions from among those who were more
straightforward in their impartiality and to treat them in a way that
they would never appeal to flattery, to evade criticism or praise
[others] to excess. He would himself also openly and staunchly challenge
any eulogy and responded sarcastically to the eulogists and asked people
neither to praise nor to flatter him for his Divine duties, and
criticize him benevolently instead if they find anything wrong with his
plans or if they find his manners criticizable, and not talk to him like
they talk to the tyrants.

Interestingly enough, Amir al-Mu'minin had brought up the issue of
letting others criticize him not in regular circumstances but on the
most critical occasions of his hukuma, i.e., amid the battle of Siffin.

It so happened that the Imam, in an exciting speech, made some remarks
regarding the mutual rights of leadership and the people. One of his
companions, who was very excited by these points, began as usual to
praise and applaud him in details while expressing his obedience.
Without being affected by his praising and applause or even being
concerned about the sensitive and critical current circumstances, the
Imam responded to so much adoration as follows:

In view of the Virtuous people, the worst position of rulers is that it
may be thought about them that they love glory, and their affairs may be
taken to be based on pride. I really hate that it may occur to your mind
that I love high praises or to hear eulogies. By Grace of Allah, I am
not like this. Even if I had loved to be mentioned like this, I would
have given it up in submissiveness before Allah rather than accept
greatness and sublimity to which He is more entitled...

And do not address me in the manner despots are addressed, do not evade
me as the people of passion are (to be) evaded, do not meet me with
flattery and do not think that I shall take it ill if a true thing is
said to me because the person who feels disgusted when truth is said to
him or a just matter is placed before him would find it more difficult
to act upon them.[^15]

And finally, he draws the following conclusion from his words:

Therefore, do not abstain from saying a truth of pointing out a matter
of justice because I do not regard myself above erring. I do not escape
erring in my actions but Allah helps me in matters which He is more
powerful than I.[^16]

By these words, Imam Ali (a.s.) clearly expressed that if it were not
through God's assistance and Divine infallibility, he would fall to
blundering too, and despite his enjoyment of Divine immunity, he wanted
the people not to be hindered by his political and spiritual status from
criticizing him and stressed that if they realized anything mischievous
in his government, they were to proceed to point it out to him.

In other words, by responding to the adoration of that person, the Imam
firmly condemns the evil custom of eulogizing and praising the
commanders and political authorities in the Muslim community on one
hand, and on the other, he wants to promote in people the spirit of
criticizing and delving into the actions of the Islamic state
authorities, even if they were on the highest level of administration,
i.e., the infallible Imam, and in effect to encourage the acceptance of
constructive criticism among the Muslim community's high ranking
authorities.

### 4. Imam Ali (a.s.)'s Reaction to Destructive Criticisms

The point which must be made at the end of this discourse is the Imam's
sagacious reaction to criticisms. Taking into consideration his sira in
encountering with criticisms and protests of three main political
opposition trends, i.e., Nakithun (covenant breakers), Qasitun
(deviators), and Mariqum (apostates) indicates that although he formally
and practically asked people to express their criticism, he did not
allow the seekers after power, the spiteful, and the plotters to tell
and write whatever they wish to achieve their political goals on the
pretext of criticism.[^17]

### 5. Adherence to Truth, rather than to Personalities

However high the people soar toward the truth, the possibility of their
deviation cannot be denied. Thus, it is worthwhile for the people to
notice this fact when following personalities and never deem human
beings as "absolute". Drawing attention to this issue and other
awakening doctrines of Imam Ali (a.s.) should be viewed as the most
fundamental guidelines of that holy Imam in rectifying public culture.
Obviously, most political and social deviations in socio-political
trends originate from absolutism about figures, and "personalism" in
taking stances.

Imam Ali (a.s.) used to warn people that personalities, however great,
noble, popular, or trustworthy, cannot be criteria for truth and
falsehood. He tried to get the society to a stage of awareness,
realization of stances and criteria and cultural consciousness so that
people would assess personalities and their stances with Truth, not vice
versa; to see the Truth as a criterion for getting to know personalities
rather than the other way round.

Four: Economical Policies
-------------------------

The people who stood up against 'Uthman's policies, proclaimed the
reasons for their uprising including economical disorder, the caliph's
open-handedness, undue largess, negligence of people's livelihood, and
dishonesty in public treasury.

In such climate, Imam Ali (a.s.) on one hand stressed on production, and
on the other gives priority to regulation of the market, and finally
pays close attention to distribution of the public treasury, ruling out
any kind of discrimination. Perhaps this had been the Imam's most
difficult position. Principles of 'Alawi policies in economy can be
enumerated as follows:

### 1. Promotion of Work Ethos

In 'Alawi doctrines, paying attention to striving and working enjoys a
high status. From Ali (a.s.)'s point of view, economic poverty is caused
by the traits of lassitude, inactivity, laziness, and inability. A
community replete with cheerfulness and activity and dominated by work
ethos will not be inflicted by poverty – which is the origin of many
material, spiritual, individual, and social maladies. Thus, the Imam
highly emphasized the necessity of work and striving, regarding work as
worship, and striving for improvement of living condition as taking
steps toward God.

### 2. Agricultural Development

Land is the source of "life". From the viewpoint of Imam Ali (a.s.)
people who possess land and water and are at the same time
poverty-stricken, will be far from Divine Mercy and deprived of God's
favor. Ali (a.s.) emphasized on reviving the land and recommended the
development of farming as a means of eliminating poverty from the
community, and called people to engendering prosperity in the lands and
exploiting them. Above all, he regarded attention to agriculture as a
touchstone for evaluating the governments and their efficiency in
rulership, viewing agricultural development as among the main duties of
administrators, and troop commanders as defenders of farmers' rights.

### 3. Development of Crafts

The community in which Ali (a.s.) had set up his hukuma did not have the
qualifications for "development of crafts", due to its climatic
conditions. However, his holiness – according to the traditions quoted
from him placed great importance on crafts, calling them and professions
in general as "treasures". Imam Ali (a.s.) enjoined his administrators
to seriously support the artisans and encouraged the latter to employ
utmost producing well-made goods, and never sacrifice a product's
"craftsmanship and quality" for the "speed" in production.

### 4. Development of Trade

In the early Islam as well as during Imam Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma, trade was
most influential. Thus, on one hand he would encourage trade prosperity
and on the other, would stress on supporting the merchants within
governmental structure; and finally, he would explain how to practice
trade, how the merchants were to deal in transactions, and in what
manner trading had to be performed.

### 5. Direct Supervision of the Market

The market presents economic endeavors of a community. Transactions take
place in the marketplace, and the marketeers are somehow associated with
people. Well-being of the market would lead to well-being in
transactions and people's sound exploitation of the process of economic
struggles for sustenance. Doubtlessly, the prime loss due to abnormality
in improper relations in market transactions would be sustained by the
people.

Due to the importance of the market ant its great impact on people's
economical situation and livelihood, Imam Ali (a.s.) directly supervised
the market and the quality of transactions there. His holiness would go
to the markets of Kufa every morning and, allegedly, like "a children's
teacher", instruct God-fearing as well as avoidance of selling short
weight, lying, treachery and tyranny to the marketeers.

The texts reporting this direct supervision are very interesting and
instructive to read. The Imam would shout among the Muslims enjoining
them not to practice frauds and hoarding, to be fair and honest in
offering goods as they really are, not to pretend genuineness, to treat
the customers in a well-disposed manner, not to devalue the seller when
they are buying goods, and not to overestimate their own goods when
selling them.

All these admonitions, warnings, and instructions of the Imam given to
the marketers are worth mentioning in practice of fairness, justice,
human disposition, dignity, and magnanimity.

### 6. Fair Levy of Taxes

Government, in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s view, is for the people and for the
establishment of their rights. That is why a part of the government's
financial needs must be met by people who benefit from the government
and engage in producing and trading under its protection. It is with
such intention that taxes are levied in all ruling systems, although by
different methods of collection and inclusiveness in different systems.
In 'Alawi politics, stressing on levying taxes and government's
responsibility in inclusiveness of receiving them from people, as well
as the kind of viewing taxes and the reason for and the quality of
levying them from people are worth paying attention. Trust in people,
emphasis on not creating problems for people, drawing people's attention
to the status and the importance of taxes are also noteworthy.

In an instruction to one of his administrators, Imam Ali (a.s.) states,
"Never use whippings in collecting taxes nor put people under pressure
for that". And the administrator says, "In that case I will have to
return the same way I have gone; that is, the people will not give
anything." The Imam replies, "Even if that happens [i.e., even if they
give nothing.]"[^18]

A glance at 'Alawi doctrines in this respect shows that the tax
organization and its agents are bound to win people's trust and to
observe Islamic morality and religious behavior, while being alert and
take care of safeguarding public treasure and carefully learn about the
problems of taxation.

### 7. Not Delaying in Distribution of Public Assets

Imam Ali (a.s.) did not approve of blocking public assets in the state's
treasury. Rather, he would try to deliver them to the needy. The Imam's
sira indicates that he would not tolerate even one night of delay in
this regard. He contended that what belonged to people had to be
delivered to them the soonest possible.

### 8. Necessity of People's Equal Enjoyment of Public Assets

Equal distribution of the public assets among all Muslims was one of the
policies in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma. This was contradictory to what had
been done to people in the previous years. Therefore, it cost very dear
to the well-to-do and those benefiting from the government, and the so
called "large grains" (i.e., the bigwigs).

In the Imam's outlook, the Muslim's skin color, tribes and ancestors,
their social and clan relations did not make any difference in their
portion in public assets. Arabs and non-Arabs, the Emigrants (muhajirun)
and the Helpers (ansar), the black and the white, and even the freed
slaves and their former masters, were equally treated in this respect
and all enjoyed equally from the public incomes.

### 9. Provision of Basic Needs of life for all People

The general trend of Ali (a.s.)'s economic policy is to struggle with
poverty and uprooting it from the face of Islamic community. His
holiness' guidelines in this respect are very thought-provoking. He
insists that hunger and indigence of a group is caused by unlimited
exploitation by another group and open-handedness of the well-to-do:

Whenever a destitute person remains hungry, it is because some rich
person has denied (him his share).[^19]

The Islamic state is bound to prevent the undue accumulation of riches
in the hands of the opulent, to eradicate the means of exploitative
benefiting of the rich, and to assist with constant attempts and
accurate planning the inferiors to meet their basic needs for living. He
did lead Kufa, even in that short period of his rule and despite so much
clashes, intrigues, and hindrances, to a condition that he proclaimed:

Now in Kufa, all people are enjoying ease and comfort, and the most
inferior of them has bread and shelter from the sunshine and enjoys
water from the Euphrates.[^20]

Imam (a.s.)'s recommendations to his administrators for paying attention
to the lower classes of society and the so-called "low-income stratum",
are amazing. He does not tolerate the indigence of a Christian who once
had been exploited by the opulent and at his old age had been
abandoned,[^21] and commands securing his needs through public treasury.
He also commands his governors to search all corners of society to
identify the poor and the needy and to disentangle them from the claws
of poverty.

### 10. Prohibition of Bestowing Gifts out of Public Assets

Governors are people's trustees and what they have at their disposal is
kept with them in trust. Government administrators are not allowed to
give away gifts from the government's assets on various occasions and
pretexts. Ali (a.s.) views such treatment of public treasury as
tyrannical:

The administrators' open-handedness in public assets is tyranny and
treachery.[^22]

### 11. Never Granting Privileges to One's Kith and Kin

We said that in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s view what is at the disposal of the
governors and administrators is trusted to them, being allowed to use
the assets at their disposals just in administering and rendering
services. They do not have the privilege to allocate certain provisions
to specific groups. The sons and close relatives of political and social
dignitaries in Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma as well as his own sons and relatives
did not enjoy any particular privileges. Above all, the Imam showed more
sensitivity towards his friends and kin, and was harder and stricter on
them in using the public assets in order to set an example for others.

### 12. Frugality in Public Assets

Given what was said, Imam's policy in consumption of public assets, how
the administrators should use them, and how the public treasury should
be spent is very interesting and instructive. In order to draw the
administrators' attention to utmost frugality in [spending] public
incomes and preventing them from extravagance, the Imam asked them
through circulars to practice frugality even in writing letters to him:

Sharpen your pens and reduce the space between lines; eliminate the
redundant for [writing to] me, and hold on to the meaning and beware of
verbosity in writing, for the Muslim public treasury does not tolerate
loss.[^23]

Evidently, when an administrator hears about so much carefulness in
writing letters, he would no longer give lavish banquets, or ride costly
horses, or try to achieve more and more welfare for himself through
public assets.

The Imam's personal frugality in spending the public treasury is very
amazing, too. He would not even use the lantern belonging to the public
treasury in order to respond to those people who came to him at night
time for personal purposes. Also in this line is the thought-provoking
and instructive story of Talha and Zubayr who went to Ali (a.s.) to
discuss their personal problems while he was seeing into public treasury
affairs and then he turned off the public light and had another lantern
brought in, unwilling to use the light from a lantern belonging to the
public treasury for personal purposes even for a few moments.[^24]

Five: Social Policies
---------------------

In social issues too, Imam Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma is based on firmly
founded and normative procedures and positions. The texts recounting the
dimensions of his social policies are thought-provoking and noteworthy.
According to such material, the Imam's principles of social policies can
be recounted as follows:

### 1. Social Justice

Justice is the most pivotal, the firmest, the most fundamental, and the
most comprehensive aspect of 'Alawi politics and rulership. The sacred
name of Imam Ali (a.s.) is so intermingled with justice that Ali is
associated with justice and justice is associated with Ali. Justice
always prevailed the life of Ali (a.s.) who gave up his life as a martyr
in the way of establishing justice and spreading equity.

Stressing on this issue is for ascertaining that only a government can
claim to have followed the example of Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma and the sira
of that noble Imam in a traditionalistic way, whose authorities gives
more importance to justice than anything else and spare no efforts in
spreading justice and development of equity, not merely in words and
speech – which is the top motto of many claimants today – but in action,
manners, and interaction with people from all walks of life. That
justice is as rare as elixir. Only a government can claim to be
spreading justice that do not sacrifice justice in favor of expedience
by means of interpretation and justification.

In 'Alawi system [of hukuma], as well as in the doctrines of that
"personified justice", there is no expedient higher than establishing
justice. Only the ruling system can claim to be a follower of Ali (a.s.)
that, through giving priority to justice over expedients and insisting
on implementing it, and despite lobbying and rabble-rousing, aims at
holding a permanent rule over the "hearts", rather than a transient rule
over "bodies" by preferring baseless expedients.

### 2. Safeguarding People's Rights

Psychological factors in people's support of governments are as numerous
as their intangible needs. One of the most important factors of popular
support is the safeguarding of people's rights by governments.

One of the pivotal factors which contribute to the securing of the
goodwill of the masses is the way a government views them, whether it
regards them as its slaves or as its masters and guardians, whether it
considers the people as possessing legitimate rights and itself only as
their trustee, agent, and representative. In the first case, whatever
service a government may render to people is not more than a kind of the
master's care of his beast.

In the second case, every service performed is equivalent to discharging
of duty by a right trustee. A state's acknowledgements of the authentic
rights of the people and avoidance of any kind of action that implies
negation of their right of sovereignty are the primary conditions of
securing their confidence and goodwill.[^25]

In a scholarly analysis, Ustad Shahid Mutahari (ra) regards the risky
and misleading idea that responsibility before God requires
irresponsibility towards masses, that "the right of God" substitutes
"the right of masses", and that the right of national sovereignty equals
Godlessness, as among the major materialist tendencies in recent
centuries:

At the dawn of the modern age there was a movement against religion in
Europe, which also affected more or less other regions outside the
Christendom.

This movement was inclined towards materialism. When we examine the
causes and roots of this movement, we discover that one of them was the
inadequacy of the teachings of the Church from the viewpoint of
political rights. The Church authorities, and some European
philosophers, developed an artificial relationship and association
between belief in God on one hand and stripping the people of their
political rights by despotic regimes on the other. Naturally, this led
to the assumption of some necessary relation between democracy on one
hand and atheism on the other. It came to be believed that either we
should choose the belief in God and accept the right of sovereignty
bestowed by Him upon certain individuals who have otherwise no
superiority over others, or deny the existence of God so as to establish
our right as masters of our own political destinies.

From the point of view of religious psychology, one of the causes of
decline of the influence of religion was the contradiction between
religion and a natural social need, contrived by religious authorities,
especially at a time when that need expressed itself strongly at the
level of public consciousness. Right at a time when despotism and
repression had reached their peak in European political life and the
people were thirstily cherishing the ideas of liberty and people's
sovereignty, the Church and its supporters made an assertion that the
people had only duties and responsibilities towards the state and had no
rights. This was sufficient to turn the lovers of liberty and democracy
against religion and God in general and the Church in particular.

This mode of thought, in the West as well as in the East, was deeply
rooted from ancient times….[^26]

Based on this hazardous mode of thought, people have no right over the
Imam and leader; and wilayat and religious leadership equals taking away
people's socio-political rights; and in short, the leaders are masters
and the people are the servants! Obviously, the government that is run
on this basis lacks popular support, and the leader who has this
conviction about people's rights would not enjoy people's consent and
support.

#### The Mutual Rights of People and the leadership

From Imam Ali (a.s.)'s viewpoint not only the right of community's
political leader has no contradiction with people's rights within this
doctrine, but his right is dependent upon his securing their rights, and
the people are bound to obey and protect the leader only if their rights
are secured in the system under his rule.

In this respect, Imam Ali (a.s.) has said the following:

So now, Allah has, by placing me over your affairs, created my right
over you, and you too have a right over me like mine over you. A right
is very vast in description but very narrow in equitability of action.
It does not accrue to any person unless it accrues against him also and
right does not accrue against a person unless it also accrues in his
favor.[^27]

His holiness has stated the mutual rights of people and the leader in
other words as follows:

It is incumbent upon the Imam to rule as per what God has ordained and
fulfill what He has trusted with him. Once he does so, it is incumbent
on people to accept his words and obey his commands, and respond to him
when summoned by him.[^28]

In this discourse, not only the leader's right is dependent on
discharging people's rights, but the right of Imamate, wilayat, and
leadership is also considered as a right to be trustworthy about.

Throughout the history, safeguarding people's rights has never passed
beyond a mere slogan; rather, it has always been a means of violating
people's rights and suppressing Truth-orientedness.

Throughout the history of Islam and after the Holy Prophet's era, Ali
(a.s.)'s time was an exception in establishing social justice, expansion
of equity, and discharge of people's rights, which was unfortunately
deprived of people as a result of the disturbances and rabble rousing;
and in effect, his rule was tyrannized. Ali (a.s.) said:

If in the past people complained of the rulers' injustice, today I
complain of the injustice of my own people.[^29]

It so happened that Ali (a.s.) hastened to meet the Beloved, with a
heart burdened with sorrows. With his departure, justice also departed
and once again there were the hukumas and the oppressed masses, and the
violations of human rights!

Now it is up to us to take an example of what came to pass in those days
in order to prepare the ground for establishment of social justice.

### 3. Development of Legitimate and Constructive Freedoms

Freedom is the first step on the way of realization of justice and
development of respect for other people's rights; this freedom, however,
is to be constructive rather than destructive, i.e., freedom from
internal and external bonds and as the Qur'an puts it, deliverance from
"heavy burdens":

***(He releases them from their heavy burdens and from yokes that are
upon them).***[^30]

Messengers of God were heralds of freedom and its advocates. Ali (a.s.)
considered the philosophy of prophetic mission (bi'that) as deliverance
of human beings from their bonds and taking them to the highest peaks of
glory and worship of God:

Allah, the Blessed and the Exalted, raised up Muhammad (S) to deliver
His servants from slavery to other slaves, to draw them close to Him…
and to direct them away from friendship (wilaya) to others toward
friendship to Him.[^31]

According to the doctrines of 'Alawi school all human beings are free
and should never be entrapped into slavery to others and promotion of
enslavement. It is evident that what forces them into slavery to
superpowers and entraps them into servitude to others in their internal
bondage to their own whims and carnal desires.

Those who are internally liberated and have cut off their bondage to
whims, and those who have accepted servitude to God and have deemed
their status too high to fall prey to obedience to others like
themselves, would never give up their independence to embrace slavery.
Only such people deserve to be emancipated. As Imam Ali (a.s.) said:

The one who fulfills the requirements of servitude [to God] deserves
emancipation.[^32]

Requirement of servitude includes submission to being a servant of God
and acceptance of Divine law, which has no process than real
independence, freedom and liberation and evasion from it is tantamount
to "enslavement", and "slavery", however appearing as freedom on the
surface.

### 4. Caring about People

To care about people, to value people and respect them in general is a
sublime manifestation of social policies of 'Alawi rule. In Imam Ali
(a.s.)'s outlook, treatment of people is to be with compassionate and
kindness; and rulers must respect people, their perspectives, and their
ideals. The ruling statesmen often try to satisfy the "nobles" and the
affectedly powerful, and in other words, the elite in the politics
arena, even though to the dissatisfaction of the common people.

Contrary to this policy, Imam Ali (a.s.) has stated:

Truly, the discontent of the common people invalidates the content of
favorites, and the discontent of favorites is pardoned at (the
achievement of) the content of masses.

Imam Ali (a.s.) recommended the administrators to be kind to people and
hold direct contacts with them, have personal meetings with them, and be
informed of their problems. The Imam would say: "People have mostly
suffered hardships, taken pains, and been oppressed. So, if they ever
find a chance to express their sufferings and pains, they may speak
coarsely." He would, therefore, advise his administrators to put up with
people's rough language, and occasional ill-temper, bitterness, and
unseemly reactions; never to get angry at them; to treat them with a
smiling face and nice words; and if they found out blunders committed
secretly and away from public's eyes by them, not to make any enquiries
about them.

Imam Ali (a.s.) tried to maintain people's relation to the state as
candid, transparent, and unambiguous. Hence, he would enjoin
administrators to try honestly to remove the grounds for people's
suspicion toward the state, and if some rabble-rousers would by chantage
accuse the administrators of violating people's rights, they should try
to elucidate the reasons for their actions, with honesty, face-to-face
encounters, and clear explanations, and never leave any doubts about the
state's affairs in people's minds. This, in reality, is an indication of
people's value and significance in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s view.

### 5. Protection of the Oppressed

Imam Ali (a.s.) viewed taking vengeance on the oppressors on behalf of
the oppressed as "Divine covenant". So, he stressed on helping the
oppressed and insisted on fighting against the oppressors. Helping the
oppressed and fighting the oppressors were among the last precepts
bequeathed to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.), and to all those
who would hear the Imam's testament throughout the history.

Imam Ali (a.s.) took advantage of any chance to promote the culture of
fighting against oppression and protecting the oppressed and sought help
from people to carry out social reforms, and to make social relations
and associations.

He would say:

O People! Support me despite your heart's desire. By Allah, I will take
revenge for the oppressed from the oppressor and will put string in the
nose of the oppressor.[^33]

Stories of practical support of the oppressed by that paradigm of
justice are very readable, and are very instructive for those who claim
to be followers of that noble figure.

### 6. Setting up a Complaints Box (Bayt al-Qisas)

The leader of the fighters against oppression, who attempted to support
the oppressed by any means and to take vengeance on their behalf,
certainly would spare no efforts in this way to see into the complaints
of the oppressed.

How should the oppressed have their complaints heard by the rulers?
Obviously, most often the subordinates are not able to get near the
ruling system, let alone to bring up a case or raise a complaint. Many a
time it has happened that when the complaint of an oppressed person been
expressed it has been responded reversely, i.e., the one who should have
been reprimanded, has been promoted and turned into a complainant
against the person who had complained about him.

In order to remove such difficulties and solve the problem of directly
expressing the complaints and pleading for justice as far as possible,
Imam Ali (a.s.) set up a station called "bayt al-qisas" (complaints box)
so that the people, the oppressed, and every one who had a problem and
was unable to bring it up, could write his complaint and place it there
to inform Ali (a.s.) about it. The Imam himself called out among the
people that anyone who had a case to bring up and did not want any body
else know about it in order to be immune from being identified, should
write down his inquiry and drop it in the complaints box. This seems to
be the first step in history toward connecting people to the ruling
body.

### 7. Attempts in Creating Empathy and Solidarity in the Society

The leader is the link between current trends in the community; and the
leadership, is the pivot of endeavors, movements, and cheerfulness.
Existence of various ideas, tendencies, and trends in a society is
natural and the concept of integrity in ideas and ideals in all strata
and levels of society is totally erroneous and unreal. Thus, various
trends, groups, and possessors of different ideas must seek for
integrating ways to rescue the society from disunity; and while
approving of multiplicity of ideas try to hold on to convergence in
sublime ideals. The leadership plays the most significant role in this
respect. Ali (a.s.) strongly emphasized the necessity of integration and
empathy in society.

That noble figure considered solidarity as guaranteeing the survival of
states, and differences as causing the fall of the states, thus strongly
emphasized the former. Parts of the "Sermon of Disparagement" (Khutba
al-Qasi'a) are regarded as among the instructive and awakening doctrines
of 'Alawi hukuma. He would himself do his best in this direction to
realize the roots of differences and how to achieve solidarity and
empathy, and would overlook his inalienable rights so as the community
would not burn in the fire of differences. He would say:

Remember that no person is more covetous than I for the unity of the
followers of Muhammad (S) and their solidarity.[^34]

The Imam stressed on the "unity of word", and regarded empathy and
détente as necessary to the extent that he obliged his judiciary to
avoid enforcing a ruling if it might disturb the solidarity of the
community and thus prevent inciting disunity. The Imam had frequently
warned that if the faithful disunited and gave up unity and solidarity,
the falsehood would definitely dominate over them.

Six: Judiciary Policies
-----------------------

Judgment is the main pillar of ruling systems. Sound and lawful judgment
play the greatest role in safeguarding a society's well-being and
firmness of the community. Doctrines of Ali (a.s.)'s hukuma indicate
that his holiness has been particularly attentive to the judiciary.
Accounts given as to how Ali (a.s.) made judgments as well as his
recommendations and emphasis in this respect are numerous and
thought-provoking. What is brought up here in this volume can also be
very enlightening for the judges and judiciary officials.

The principles of Imam Ali (a.s.)'s policies for judgment are enumerated
as follows.

### 1. Appointment of the Best Judges for Juridical Posts

A judge is, undoubtedly, the main component of judgment and plays the
most significant role in the judiciary establishment and in restoring
people's rights and battle against oppressions and abnormalities. In
judicial practice, the more steadfast, pure, and morally clean, and the
stronger and the more unbending in action a judge is, the more
efficient, organized, and well-founded his judgment will be.

Thus, Ali (a.s.) would enjoin Malik to select the best judges for
judgment; the ones who would neither put the people under pressure nor
to be obstinate in their judgment, nor easily fall into blunders; who
are intelligent and deeply insightful and would not fall prey to
misconceptions; who are patient, forbearing so as not to be affected by
conflicting turmoil and chantage.

### 2. Providing for financial Needs of the Judges

Life events and needs can neither be forgotten nor passed by
negligently. Even if some people are ascetic and abandon the world, it
should be noted that if they take the responsibility of running a
household, they will encounter some worldly demands in their lives.
Natural needs of one's family are neither forgettable nor are to be
neglected. It is in this respect that Imam Ali (a.s.) advises Malik
al-Ashtar to select the best judges for practicing judgment, and to
provide the best and the most suitable livelihood for them so that the
judge never in his judgment look to other people for worldly gains and
fulfillment of his needs by being seduced into corruption as a person
who himself must safeguard the society against corruption.

### 3. Job security for the Judges

The judge passes a judgment and obviously offends some by his decisive
judgment. There are very few people who would submit to a verdict
against them and not to have commotion inside. Also, it is evident that
the violators and lawbreakers are not always from among the lower class
of society, nor do the clashes and conflicts always take place from
among them; rather, it can be said that the upper class both commit most
of law breaking and most conflicts do happen among them, as it is them
who exert influence and are involved in political arena and current
trends. If the judge does not feel at ease while judging these people
and does not see the judiciary and legal as supporting and backing him,
he might falter while passing a judgment and back down in restoring
rights.

In 'Alawi [ruling] system, the qualified judges enjoy a lofty status. In
his distinguished instructions to Malik al-Ashtar after advising him to
select the best judges for judgment, Imam Ali (a.s.) enjoins him to
station the judges near himself in such high position that nobody, even
his own close associates would not harbor any slanders against them in
his presence. It is worth deliberating that then he draws attention to
the evildoing of the ill-natured to show that the sensualists very often
misuse their affinity to him [as a governor] against the judges to reap
worldly gains and escape punishment.

### 4. Observance of Judgment Rules

The judge occupies a highly distinguished position and his duty is
restoring rights and steadfast judgment. He does not stand on one side
of a lawsuit and his words are clear proof for the disputes. He has to
observe the rules of judgment with care. Imam Ali (a.s.)'s teaching in
this respect is highly admonishing.

His holiness would warn the judges against discriminating among the
clients, enjoining them not to be suspicious of either of the litigants,
not to offend them with tough language and authoritarian speech, not to
make decisions when angry, to lay aside avarice and not to speak out of
whimsy, to maintain their dignity in the court sessions and not to
underestimate the tribunal, to treat the clients kindly and equally, and
not to behave in a way that the inferiors become disappointed of justly
achieving their rights. His holiness discharged one of his companions
from his judgment post, when asked for the reason, the Imam replied as
follows:

I saw that your words were uttered louder than those of the
claimant.[^35]

### 5. Close Supervision over the Judges' Function

Judges are the upholders of the society's well-being and the judiciary
is in charge of its security. The society's well-being is, more than
anything else, dependent upon the judiciary's soundness. Thus, as the
Wali al-'Amr of the Muslims, Ali (a.s.) regarded himself as responsible
for the judiciary's function and did not content himself with
admonishing and preaching for the judges and merely warning them;
rather, he would personally supervise their function and sometimes even
would see into the way they issued their verdicts.

Due to the great role of judiciary in the society's well-being and
correction of social problems, he would take any possible chance –
despite his heavy responsibilities and numerous tasks – to call on the
"Dakkat al-Qada" (Platform of Judgment) in person and would practice
judgment himself so as to present a right pattern for judgment to the
people and the judges.

### 6. Integrated Judicial Procedures

Among the things that Amir al-Mu'minin (a.s.) would emphasize was the
consistency of judgments, or in other words, "integration of procedures"
in judgments. If people notice that the judges make different judgments
in similar cases, their prompt reaction would undoubtedly be mistrust in
the judiciary and unbelief in the legitimacy of the judgments.

The Imam insisted that difference in judgments would disrupt the
establishment of justice and create disunity in the society. He enjoins
the judges to discuss and consult with each other concerning the things
they disagree to achieve a consensus, or else take the issue to the
leader and submit to his verdict. This means that it is in fact the
responsibility of the leader to create integration of procedure in
judgment.

### 7. Equality of all People before the Law

Imam Ali (a.s.) stressed on the equality of all people in execution of
judgments. In 'Alawi system [of hukuma], all people are equal before the
law and, the judiciary enjoys such high status and firm station that it
can execute the law for all people who must submit to the verdicts of
the judges and the judiciary irrespective of their social status.

In his doctrines, the Imam stressed on this equality and, despite his
magnificence, majesty, and lofty status in knowledge and practice, he
would humbly stand before his state judiciary and answer to the
questions of his own appointed judges; hence indicating the importance
of the judiciary and safeguarding the station of judgment as well as
practically protecting people's rights so as to set an example both for
the public and for the future [generations].

### 8. The Status of an Islamic State's Expedience in Issuing Verdicts

We said before that Imam Ali (a.s.) never sacrificed Truth for
expedience, and did not take a position by relying on specific
interests; but he was a leader, people's leader and a protector of a
state at people's service. Hence, he placed the highest value and
significance on the most superior expedience that was the protection of
the state – which was for the people and at their service.

The Imam admits that in judgments the state's interests should be taken
into consideration. In the 'Alawi hukuma in which nothing can hinder the
execution of the genuine Islamic law in the judiciary, the state's
interests have a special status in execution of ordinances. In one case
due to certain social, cultural, and political circumstances, and
people's specific impression from Divine law, the Imam identifies
judgment based on genuinely set Islamic rules as disuniting and its
execution as detrimental to the foundation of the hukuma, hence not
permitting judgment to be made in order to prevent the society from
falling prey to disunity. That's why he ordered Shurayh:

Make judgments as you did before, so that people's affairs are set to
rights.

Seven: Security Policies
------------------------

An insecure and anarchistic society is more like a lawless and chaotic
jungle than a human community. In Imam Ali (a.s.)'s view, a society
devoid of peace and security is the worst of lands. The Imam regards the
restoration of peace and security to the society as among the most
important reasons for his acceptance of hukuma. Therefore, that noble
figure was highly concerned with security. His principles and procedures
for security policies, and his attempts in maintaining security are
listed as follows:

### 1. Establishing an Efficient Intelligence System

Although in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s sira no reference is made to an
establishment entitled "intelligence system", there are various and
dispersed texts concerning intelligence missions, and the measures taken
by his holiness in his ruling days on the basis of reports gathered
secretly that all in all suggest that the Imam's government enjoyed an
efficient and scrupulous establishment.

Secret investigation and collection of various reports in relation to
internal security, military information, and the function of the
administrators were the major responsibility of this establishment.
Regretfully, there is nothing in hand of the details regarding the
above-mentioned organizations; but through the outcomes of Imam's
decisions and the way he made them, its existence can be approved. This
establishment can be regarded as one or more intelligence systems.

### 2. Détente

Paying attention to the changes in thoughts and positions of the enemies
was among valuable Alawi doctrines. The antagonism of many enemies was
rooted in their unawareness of the stances and their being uniformed
about the methods and the reasons of those stances. The Imam insisted
that attempts had to be made on the correction of thoughts, hence the
change of positions of the opponents; and in his holiness' own words
istislah al-'a'da' and istislah al-'addad (finding good in the enemies
and finding good in the opponents) must be carried out as a procedure in
the policies of the government.

The Imam views as utmost deep-sightedness and far-sightedness the
attraction of the enemies and rectifying and strengthening their
positions, and stresses that it is much easier to transform the enemy's
ideas and stances by means of good speech and nice treatment than by
drawing the enemy to the battlefield, as the former approach will be
effective in istislah and compelling the evil-doing enemies to do good.
All this implies that the Imam had pursued the policy of détente towards
transforming the enemy into a friend and deliberate compromise with the
enemy, emphasizing on détente as an effective means of establishing
internal security.

### 3. Vigilance and timeliness

Besides stressing on détente policy and moving toward a peaceful life
and compromise with the enemy, Imam Ali (a.s.) also emphasized on
alertness and prudence in the face of the enemy. He insisted that the
believers must not underestimate the enemy and be especially alert
before those who do not openly express their enmity and do not fail to
be prepared to encounter any unprecedented event at the right time,
knowing that if they ever sink into oblivion the enemy will never remain
ignorant.

### 4. Avoidance of Terrorization and Spread of Horror

In his government, Imam Ali (a.s.) never resorted to terrorization and
spread of horror against the violators and opponents. His holiness would
not employ the policy of terror, horror, and the illicit harsh actions
against the violators of security, either. He never encountered people
on the bases of suspicion and probability and never punished the accused
or the suspects charged with actions against security.

### 5. Adherence to law in Dealing with Criminals

Imam Ali (a.s.)'s system of hkuma relied on law and in all aspects it
was law rather than a person's will that ruled. Thus, he strongly
emphasized on adherence to law and on law-centering in his doctrines.
That was why not only the torture of the accused and the suspects of
criminal actions was forbidden in his ruling system but also the
criminals were never tortured or even offended; and if anyone was proved
as guilty, they would be punished only according to the law.

If the executor of the law deliberately or unintentionally violated the
law in enforcing a verdict, he would be punished as retaliation (qisas).
So, when Ali (a.s.) found out that Qanbar had given three extra lashes
when whipping a criminal, he gave him three lashes in return as
qisas.[^36]

### 6. Tolerance towards Political Dissidents

The Imam never treated the political dissidents with harshness, either.
Tolerance in 'Alawi diplomacy was an inviolable principle. This
tolerance would go as far as prompting the opponent's plotting. Ali
(a.s.) contended that tolerance with the opponents would cut down their
vehemence and divert them from chantage and "stage managing".

That was why the Imam did not confront the Kharijites, tolerated their
invectives, and didn't even cut off their stipend from the public
treasury, until they committed murder and jeopardized the security of
the society. His confrontation with the plotters against internal
security was proportionate to the extent of their intrigue and their
role in the plotting. Sometimes he would exile them, and at other times
he would incarcerate them, and finally when other alternatives did not
work, he would resolve the problem by military intervention.

Eight: Military Policies
------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s.) was a gallant and dauntless warrior. His challenges in
battlefields and his superiority in combats are historically well-known.
Furthermore, he was a keen-sighted, sagacious, and prudent warlord.

It is very regretful that Imam Ali (a.s.)'s rule, short-lived as it was,
was thoroughly spent in internal battles against the intriguers. His
sira in these battles, however, was replete with dignity in warfare and
very instructive and enlightening. Imam Ali (a.s.)'s policies in warfare
can be enumerated as follows:

### 1. Attempts in Martial Training and Arrangement of Troops

We said that Imam Ali (a.s.) was the most gallant warrior in the
battlefield. Having spent a whole lifetime in the arenas of holy war
(jihad), he doubtlessly possessed the most efficient and the greatest
number of relevant experiences. Furthermore, he was matchless in his
dauntlessness and gallantry, and young in the heart as well as in his
knowledge of various tactics of warfare. The Imam trained his troops in
person and prior to any battle he would reiterate the major points of
his training while arranging the troops and arraying the combatants.
When the ambushes by Mu'awiya mounted up and the opponents accused him
of lacking knowledge in war tactics, the Imam said the following as
complaining of some of his companions:

By disobedience and lassitude, you ruined my reputation to the extent
that the Qurayshis say that the son of Abu Talib is brave but is lacking
in war knowledge. May God reward their fathers! Which one of them has
been in battlefields more than I have been, and experienced fighting and
the battlegrounds more than I did? I was still in my teens when I
stepped into the arena, and now I am over sixty; however, the one who is
not obeyed, would not have command of the situation.[^37]

In his military training of the troops, Ali (a.s.) was not negligent of
even the smallest details such as: the troops should not part from their
weapons; should make the most of the right chances to launch attacks on
the enemy; should not stare into the enemy's eyes; the multitude of the
enemy forces should not cast fear in your hearts; and instructed them
what to do and how to withdraw tactically once defeated in war, etc.

### 2. Formation of Special Forces

The forces, however on a single battleground and with a common
intention, may be varying in morale, the level of knowledge, and the
extent of ability and self-sacrifice. The confrontation scenes are also
varying, with each scene demanding appropriate and competent fighters
and warriors. Accordingly, one of the most outstanding features in Imam
Ali (a.s.)'s military policies is the formation of special troops which
the Imam called Shurtat al-Khamis (the Special Forces).[^38]

Imam Ali (a.s.)'s most efficient, self-sacrificed and most accomplished
warriors were recruited for the Special Forces. This unit was
astonishingly competent, and the Imam employed them for special purposes
and in specific arenas. In a sermon, Imam Ali (a.s.) addressed them as
follows:

You are the helpers of the Truth, my brothers in faith, shields against
tribulations and hardships of the time, and confidants apart from other
people. With your help, I will beat the ones who turn their back, and I
am hopeful of the obedience of the proponents. So, help me with
benevolence devoid of fraud and free from suspicion, as I swear to God
that I am fitter (worthier) for people than themselves.

The Special Forces, in modern terms, were the wise and proficient
"fundamentalists" and "hizbullahis" (members of Allah's party) by the
side of the Imam who both timely criticized and expressed their
viewpoints about his policies, and remained loyal to him in the most
distressing situations of his rule.

They seemed to be called "Shutat al-Khamis" because of their special
insignia or due to their being in the Imam's presence through a special
treaty.[^39]

Asbagh b. Nabata was asked: "O Asbagh! How were you named Shurtat
al-Khamis? He replied: "We guaranteed our self-sacrifice for him, and he
guaranteed victory for us."[^40]

### 3. Enhancement of the Troops' Morale

Spiritual forces and mental power undoubtedly play a decisive and
astonishing role in movements and creation of valorous scenes.
Therefore, the Imam greatly stressed the importance of the mental power,
spiritual capability, and chivalrous spirit of his combat forces, trying
through any possible way to strengthen the armed forces' morale in
confrontation with the enemy, and to enhance their steadfastness before
the enemy through uplifting their sense of chivalry. The Imam's speeches
in this respect are highly thought-provoking and readable.

The Imam's fiery speeches, exciting words, inspiring sermons, and
stimulating slogans, as well as his attractive descriptions of the end
of life, explanation of the combatants' final station after life, all
were intended to provide and spread such states of mind.

Once having organized the combat forces, the Imam would envisage with
such eloquence and elegance the transience and undesirability of the
worldly life in contrast to the excellence and everlastingness of the
Hereafter, that sometimes the impact would be left on the troops for so
long a time. That was why for many of them their lives were intermixed
with enthusiasm, self-sacrifice, valor, bravery; and their actions were
intermixed with their steadfastness, invincibility, and daring
confrontation with the enemy.

Creation of a spirit of "martyrdom seeking" in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s
companions was undoubtedly the outcome of his holiness' lofty sermons
and doctrines.

Inculcation was among Imam Ali (a.s.)'s worthwhile tactics in battle
that he would employ to strengthen the spiritual forces of his Mujahids
(holy warriors). Concerning his own experience, the Imam said to his
son, Muhammad b. Hanafiya:

I did not confront anyone [in war], except that I inculcated his killing
in may mind; so, do inculcate victory over them with the succor from
Allah.[^41]

On the other hand, the Imam demonstrates that inculcation of weakness,
apprehension, and the enemies' power is among the causes of
disarrangement of the battle array and being defeated by the enemy. Once
the Imam was asked:

How did you win victory over the fighters?

He replied:

I did not meet [confront] anyone except that he helped me win victory
over himself.[^42]

Ali (a.s.)'s explicit delineation of the ominous worldly and
other-worldly outcome of shunning the fight with the enemy and fleeing
from the battlefield was another tactic by Imam Ali (a.s.) for
strengthening the spiritual power of the mujahids.

Besides what was said, the Imam also insisted that the warlords never
disclose whatever of the current situation lest it would leave a bad
impact on the morale of the combatants. In the thick of the battle of
Siffin and amid the direst states of war, the Imam outlined the
perspective and outcome of the engagement for one of his warlords and
explained how the upcoming confrontation would be strenuous and would
inflict heavy losses on the forces, but at the same time stressing to
keep this fact as a secret and not to let it reach the troops.

### 4. Employing Deceitful Tactics in Battles

For achieving victory, the Imam would try all the rational tactics.
Never having appealed to "deceit and fraud" in his statesmanship
diplomacy and never having used it in his managerial approaches, as
mentioned before, he utilized it in his battles and emphasized in this
respect:

In a battle, do rely on your deceits more than on your power.

And this is one difference between the 'Alawi and Umayyad diplomacy.

The Imam's teachings and the relevant objective examples indicate that
"deception" in warfare policies is a rational option to achieve victory
and as far as possible to avoid resorting to irrational actions. 'Ubayy
b. Hatam is quoted as saying that amid the clashes of the battle of
Siffin, Imam Ali (a.s.) said with such a loud voice for his companions
to hear:

I swear by God that I will kill Mu'awiya and his companions.

Then he said with a low voice:

If God wills!

The narrator said, "I asked: O Amir al-Mu'minin! You swore and then made
an exception, why is that?" The Imam replied:

War is deception.

The Imam employed the same tactic when confronting 'Amr b. 'Abdawud and
managed to kill him with the chance he got by means of this tactic.

Thus, the Imam's utilization of deception is in line with the human
values and dignities and is, on the other hand, an efficient and
accurate tactic in warfare.

### 5. Ethics of War

In 'Alawi culture, war is intended to defend the entity of the school
and for the purpose of fending off tyranny, eliminating oppression, and
removing the difficulties away from the way of rulership. "Wielding a
sword for the sake of the Truth", he would not neglect the moral
principles and human basics even amid the direst moments of war. Taking
a glance at such warfare temperament and battleground moral codes in
'Alawi sira, would be instructive and enlightening. Some topics in this
respect are as follows:

#### A. Never Initiating a War

The Imam never initiated a war; and would never draw his sword and also
would enjoin his companions not to ever initiate a war unless the enemy
stubbornly blocked the way for peaceful and face-to-face negotiation. As
a matter of fact this policy of the Imam is a confirmation of pacifism
of the 'Alawi approach to Islam, of human values, and of opposition to
belligerency.

The Imam always practiced this policy emphatically. Jundub Azdi said:

Whenever in the company of Ali (a.s.) we encountered the enemy, he would
order us: "Do not fight them until they start; because you are, thanks
God, possessed of hujja (proof), and letting them initiate the battle is
another proof of yours.[^43]

Thus, he would show that in his culture the principle is peace and
quiet, rather than belligerence and warmongering.

That was why the Imam ordered his combat forces not to initiate the war
and if it was launched by the enemy and then they won the war by the
help of God, they must not kill the fugitive nor assault the wounded,
and must not denude or dismember the corpses either, and so forth. This
shows, in Ali's war profile, that warfare in his highness' policies is
an exception and the rule is stressing on human values and their
development.

#### B. Not Calling to War

Ali (a.s.) insisted on his troops' gallantry, steadfastness, dominance
in the battlefield, enthusiasm, and being hard on the enemy, and
prepared them by all means for the bottle; he would enjoin them,
however, never to challenge the enemy to fight, since it was a way of
creating terror and panic. Actually, this too was part of the policy of
opposition to belligerency. The Imam only instructed that if the enemy
took up the challenge and asked for a rival in fight, you proceed to
fight in order to stop the enemy's obstinacy.

#### C. Diplomatic Immunity of the Enemy's Envoys

Islam is a global religion and its doctrines are universal and
time-embracing, hence inclusive of international and world policies. In
Islam, political envoys of foreign countries enjoy diplomatic immunity
in military and political confrontations (even though in the thick of
the war). Ali (a.s.) had instructed this noble doctrine to the troops
and wanted them to take this policy seriously, and even if some people
claimed to be carrying a message from the enemy, do not confront them
without first verifying the matter through sufficient inquiries.

#### D. Raising an Argument before Starting the War

We said that war in Imam Ali (a.s.)'s view is a means of removing the
barriers to the development of truth and guidance of human beings. Thus
he never failed to enlighten enemy and to take any possible chance to
guide them. He would even attempt to guide the enemy amidst the
battleground and in the thick of the war, frequently raising arguments
to avert the war. Anyway, in 'Alawi sira, a war would not be waged
unless when necessary.

#### E. Supplication at the Time of war

In 'Alawi sira, spiritual dimensions and development of spirituality in
human beings and human society is precedent to anything else. The Imam
did not forget to create and develop such a spirit even in the thick of
the war. When troops were lined up and prepared to assault, he would
start to speak; trying to put out the fire of war with his illuminating
words; but of no avail, and obstinacy of the enemy would render the war
inevitable.

At the time of war the Imam would engage in supplication and worship of
God; would restore the remembrance of God in the hearts; with his
mystical whispers he would make the atmosphere of his army fragrant; and
would seek God's assistance. Thus, his jihad and fighting was a prelude
to his love of God and a stepping stone to his approaching to God, as
well as a step in the direction of actualizing Divine ideals and human
values. The content of the Imam's supplications and the theme of his
invocations clearly prove what was said and are very thought-provoking.

#### F. Starting the War in the Afternoon

The Imam would try by any arrangement and provision that the war might
inflict the least damage and as far as possible the least human loss, if
fighting would become inevitable. Thus, the Imam would try to get the
war started in the afternoon so that by falling of the night the
fighting would wind up and consequently there would be less bloodshed,
the fighters would withdraw earlier, and the fugitives from the
battleground could run away.

#### G. Fair Treatment of the Enemy's Troops Left behind

When the battle would subside, Imam Ali (a.s.) would command that the
defeated troops, the wounded, the captives, and the leftover of the
enemy's army, particularly the women, be given the best of treatment. As
we said before, the Imam would order not to chase the fugitives, not to
kill the wounded, not to invade people's houses, not to take any of the
spoils, never to molest the women even if they insulted the troops and
their commanders.

Nine: International Policies
----------------------------

Whatever said so far was a glance at 'Alawi policies in various aspects
of governing a state.

Now, we intend to recount some aspects of Imam Ali (a.s.)'s universal
policies. We have selected guidelines from among the Imam's universal
policies that would be fruitful and efficient for governing a state in
every place and in any culture.

The guidelines listed below and the relevant material in the main part
of the book include political, social, cultural, and governmental
guidelines which human natural disposition (fitra) and common sense
confirm their firmness and efficiency; and historical experience is a
true witness to their soundness and merit. Anyone with any conviction
can, by referring to the conscience and the history, simply perceive
these facts and confirm their efficacy in governing a state. In chapter
ten of the present book, these guidelines and principles are divided
into three categories as follows:

### 1. Policies Perpetuating Governments

Imam Ali (a.s.) has regarded certain policies necessary for the survival
of governments. We can find out, by taking a glance at 'Alawi doctrines
and sira, that the Imam considers as necessary the spread of equity,
social justice, development of righteousness and discretion in
administering people's affairs, treating them fairly and respectfully,
alertness to political trends and safeguarding them, independence,
might, and whatever related to people's individual and social rights. He
deems them necessary for steadfastness and perpetuity of government. The
Imam's interpretation of justice is very interesting and
thought-provoking.

Ali (a.s.) has identified justice with a citadel, a shield, a firmly set
foundation, and a binding string, and considered the execution of
justice as the best and the most efficient policy in ruling and defined
it as "the adornment of politics", affirming that it is with justice
that the ruler captures the hearts and attracts Divine Mercy. He is also
quoted as saying that once the rules are based on the foundations of
justice and rested on the pillars of wisdom, Allah would help its
proponents and smash its opponents. In addition to promotion of justice,
the Imam has regarded discreet administration as necessary for
establishment and perpetuity of governments, benevolence as the beauty
of power, and alertness and wakefulness as indications of astuteness and
decent governance.

### 2. Policies Causing Decline of Governments

Imam Ali (a.s.) has considered some policies as destructive and
undermining. Such policies, even though effective for a short while and
keeping up the government for a while longer, would eventually lead to
fall and destruction. What has been deemed by Imam Ali (a.s.)'s
doctrines as undermining and ruinous are: violation of people's rights;
unjust bloodshed; mismanagement in handling current affairs; selfishness
and appropriation; giving priority to governors, heads of government,
and their cronies over others; heedlessness toward fundamental measures
and tasks and dealing with trivial, fruitless, and unimportant affairs;
assigning inefficient people to critical posts; and failing to employ
competent individuals.

The Imam asserts that oppression and injustice, under any rubric and in
any form, will cause decline [of the state]; and if injustice is allowed
in a society, it will consequently lead to drawing swords and the
state's authority and dignity will be marred. That is why he views
oppression as the worst of policies and asserts that injustice and
tyranny makes the steps unstable, the blessings transformed, and the
communities and states ruined.

In his instructions to Malik al-Ashtar, Ali (a.s.) writes: Never
practice bloodshed when dealing with the heterodox, as shedding unlawful
blood causes blessing. Never will sovereignty set firm by bloodshed,
rather, it will enfeeble and lower its authority.

He asserts that if a government is inflicted with mismanagement and does
not enjoy wise and scrupulous policies, it will start to decline and
will consequently topple. The state provides the best facilities for the
ruler and his dominance, and instead of self-sacrifice (ithar), proceeds
with selfishness and attraction of possibilities for the ruler and his
cronies (isti'thar), will definitely be bound to decline. The Imam said:
The rulers who deal with trivial, baseless, and transient issues instead
of proceeding with fundamental tasks, basic policies, and principal
planning, will slide down to decline. Those who put aside the high tasks
and excellences, and deal with mean and petty work, will lead the
government to decline. Pondering on such teaching of the Imam would be
so necessary and helpful for the governors, officials, and heads of
states.

### 3. Efficient International Policies

In addition to what was said, the Imam adopted certain policies and
introduced ways of interaction for the governors to take into
consideration when interacting with other states, nations, and
countries. The following facts and policies can be extracted from among
the Imam's highly valuable words and by pondering on his lifestyle
(sira):

Respecting the rights of human beings regardless of their ideas and way
of thinking, and maintaining human rights for them; practicing
respect-orientedness in dealing with others, and avoiding any
disrespectful and belittling relation or association with governments
and nations and never submitting to derogation; stressing on détente in
encounters with governments, and moving toward development of genuine
peace and peaceful life combined with esteem; prevention of arousing
enmity; making attempts in correction of the enemy's ideas and conducts
(istislah al-'aduww); remaining loyal to various treaties, and being
trustworthy in fulfillment of people's rights; benefiting from other
people's knowledge and expertise and exploiting human knowledge trends
in the field of culture, yet stressing on the policy of cultural
independence; warning against being absorbed in polytheistic and corrupt
cultures; and finally, searching into cultures and pick out the best in
them, etc.

Furthermore, there have been certain facts expressed in various sayings
of Ali (a.s.) that are very illuminating in respect to international
relationships. Such tenets have been presented in the "miscellaneous"
section at the end of the present volume.

Summing up Imam Ali (a.s.)'s Policies
-------------------------------------

What we said so far consists of a brief glance at the content of the
chapters compiled for explaining Imam Ali (a.s.)'s various policies.
Deliberation on what was brought up would reveal that politics in Imam
Ali (a.s.)'s view is an instrument for ruling on the basis of human
rights and people's real needs, rather than for the dominance of the
bullies and violators of people's rights.

From what we said, we can now respond, with a general outlook and
accurate summing up, to the questions and criticisms made concerning
Imam Ali (a.s.)'s policies, analyze the hows and whys of what is stated
about his statesmanship, and discuss their consistency and
inconsistency.

[^1]: See The Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu'minin, III, 157 (Causes for
Uprising against 'Uthman).

[^2]: See 2/4, hadith 73.

[^3]: Da'a'im al-Islam: 1/71. Friendship in the Qur'an and hadith: 259.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 198.

[^5]: Wilayat al-Faqih, pp. 192 - 3.

[^6]: See 3/3, hadith 89.

[^7]: See 3/5, hadith 102.

[^8]: See Nahj al-Balagha, letter 53.

[^9]: See Science and wisdom in the Qur'an and hadith, 1/30.

[^10]: Ibid. For more information of the texts denoting the precedence
of cultural development over economic development, see chapter two of
part one of the book.

[^11]: Ghurar al-Hikam: 3590.

[^12]: Ibid: 3835.

[^13]: See Nahj al-Balagha, Sermons 182.

[^14]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 2.

[^15]: See 4/5, hadith 164.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: See, Leadership in Islam, M. Muhammadi Rayshahri, pp. 391-418.

[^18]: See 5/8, hadith 208.

[^19]: See 5/11, hadith 247.

[^20]: See 5/11, hadith 249.

[^21]: See 5/14, hadith 262.

[^22]: See 5/14, hadith 262.

[^23]: See 5/16, hadith 282.

[^24]: 5/16, hadith 283.

[^25]: Shahid Murtadha Mutahhari, Sayri dar Nahjul Balagha, (Glimpses of
Nahj al-Balagha), p. 118.

[^26]: Ibid. p. 119.

[^27]: See, 6/2, hadith 305.

[^28]: Kanz al-'Ummal: 5/764/14313.

[^29]: See, The Encyclopedia of Amir al-Mu'minin, IX, 474 – 75, ahadith
4748 & 4749.

[^30]: Al-Qur'an, 7:157.

[^31]: See 6/3 hadith 308.

[^32]: See 6/3, hadith 310.

[^33]: See 5/11, hadith 349.

[^34]: See 6/14, hadith 360.

[^35]: See 8/4, hadith 421.

[^36]: See 7/10, hadith 394.

[^37]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 27. Also, see The Encyclopedia of Amir
al-Mu'minin, VII, 21.

[^38]: See 9/2, (Forming Special Forces).

[^39]: Al-Nihaya, II, 460.

[^40]: Majama' al-Bahirayn, II, 942.

[^41]: See 9/4, hadith 499.

[^42]: Nahj al-Balagha, Aphorism 318.

[^43]: See 9/6, hadith 511.


