Preface
=======

He had just been born. The aroma of his existence fragranced
everywhere. He had a face, as soft as dew on spring flowers. Celestial
beings and angels gave each other glad tidings of his birth. There was
absolute hubbub.

He is the peacock of the residents in paradise; incomparable in beauty
and magnificence. Every prophet had prophesied his coming; he is the
destroyer of every blasphemy, corruption and ruin. He shall bring with
himself peace, tranquility, friendship and love. He is the pure son from
the last prophet's (s.a.w.a.) progeny.

In his due, the prophet said, "He is the ninth generation of Imam
Hussein (a.s.) and is my namesake. His name is Mahdi (a.s.) and I give
you glad tidings of his coming".

The infallibles wept and lamented as they were in earnest to see him.
Concerning Imam Mahdi's (a.s.) rank and status, Imam Sadiq (a.s.), the
leader of the Shi'ite religious sect, said:

"If I happen to live at the time of Mahdi's appearance, I will serve
him till the end of my life."

Also, every time the holy name of Imam Mahdi was mentioned by the title
"Qaem", Imam Reza (A.S) would rise on his feet and while facing the
Qibla would place his hand on his head and pray for the divine savior’s
appearance. He would weep for his absence and craved for seeing him.


On the other hand, the enemies of God and truth lay in ambush. They
were very well aware that this "divine promised one" is the son of Imam
Hasan Askari (A.S). They kept Imam (a.s.) under strict surveillance.

Very often, they invaded Imam's house so that if a male child was born
they could kill him instantly thereby impeding God's aim. But,
considering that God's power is above all powers and whatsoever He
wishes would come to be.

So Imam Mahdi (a.s.) was born at dawn in mid-Sha’ban, 255 years A.H.
The incident of Imam's birth was unknown to anyone save a few
distinguished Shi'ites. Day by day, Imam Mahdi grew.

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) decided to show his dear offspring to his
trusted Shiites so they would get acquainted with him and follow him
after his own departure.

In this short compilation, incidents of the meetings between the
Shiites and Imam Mahdi (a.s.) have been recorded.

These visitations took place during the very lifetime or at the end of
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) honorable life. In such instances, Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) introduced Imam Mahdi (a.s.) in different ways to the
Shi'ites.


