The Full Moon
=============

It was dawn, I arose from my sleep. After reciting my prayers and
supplications I went into the courtyard. The sun had not yet risen over
the rooftops. Once again the thoughts that I had over the past few days
returned to me. I said to myself:

“Oh God! I am living in the era of the eleventh true descendant of
prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.)

The prophet had once said that, "my descendants are twelve in number."
So who would succeed Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)? Who is the last divine
deputy? Now that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) has no offspring, who else
could succeed him?

At that moment, a white dove interrupted my train of thoughts.

“It’s better to ask Imam (a.s.) himself." I said.

I rose, made ablution, put on clean garments and got ready to leave. I
arrived at the Imam's door, knocked and after receiving permission,
entered.

After greetings, Imam (a.s.) made me sit besides himself and before I
spoke he said: “Oh Ahmad-ibn-Eshaq! The sublime God, from the very fist
day he created Adam, till the day of resurrection will never leave this
earth void of a proof or guide; a proof for whose sake God would put an
end to the sufferings of the earth's inhabitants. And would send down
rain and make the earth's treasure to gush out.

“Oh the son of God's messenger!" I said. “Who is the leader and
successor after you?"

Imam Hasan Askari (A.S) rose and entered another room. Minutes later he
returned with a three year old child, whose face was as beautiful and
bright as the full moon. He then said:

“Oh Ahmad-ibn-Eshaq! If you weren't dear and honorable in the eyes of
God and myself, I would not have shown you my child. My son has the same
name and title of the prophet and he will fill the world with justice
and truth at the time when it would be filled with of injustice and
tyranny.

Oh Ahmad-ibn- Eshaq! This infant, among my people, is just like Khizr
(Elias) and Zulqarnain. I swear by God that he will disappear from the
eyes of the people; and because of his occultation, people would deviate
and turn apostates save those whose belief has been strengthened by God
and those who shall pray for my sons appearance.

" When the Imam said this, tears streamed from my eyes. My gaze rested
in that child's dazzling face and I couldn't take my eyes off him. “My
master!” I said. “Is there any sign in this infant whereby I can gain
certainty by heart that he is the same true "Qaem”?

Suddenly, with a pleasant voice, which shook my heart, the child spoke
and said: “I am the last divine deputy and the avenger of God's enemies
on earth. Oh Ahmad-ibn-Eshaq! After witnessing the truth with your own
eyes, don't ever ask for any more proof again."

His sayings gave me comfort and I became very pleased. I bid farewell
to Imam and returned home. But I couldn't, for an instant, stop thinking
about that child. I said to myself that Elias and 'Zulqarnain' were both
prophets with special qualities. How could Imam Hasan Askari (A.S)
compare his son with them?

I, again, went into deep thought. I couldn't tolerate it, so the next
day, once again, I visited the Imam's house. I said:

“Oh the son of Gods messenger! I am truly grateful for the grace and
kindness you extended me yesterday. You saved me from great distress and
confusion, but you never explained to me the signs of Elias and
"Zulqarnain" that are in him."

"His long occultation, he replied.

“Will his occultation last very long?" I asked.

“Yes", he replied. “I swear to God, it will be so long that most of his
believers will deviate, save those who have a friendly and steadfast
contact with us and have strong belief. Oh Ahmad-ibn-Eshaq!

The occultation of my son Mahdi is among God's masterpiece and secret.
So accept my words and do not disclose to those whom you don't trust and
be thankful to this bounty so that on the day of judgment you reside
besides us in paradise."

My heart, then, flew like a bird. I was ecstatic. I took the Imam's
hands in my own and kissed them. I thanked God for having met His last
proof on earth.


