The Man From Persia
===================

I had come a long way. Sweat trickled from my head and brow. Dust had
settled on my clothes and traveling bales, but there was so much
enthusiasm in my heart, that I couldn't feel the tiring journey.

I was near the city of Samerra and even though my legs were weary I
quickened my steps. I entered the city, and then said to myself. Where
should I go? Who can I ask?

I am a stranger in this town and I know no one. But I know of a house
that never turns away the needy, its door is open to every one and the
generosity of its inhabitants is a parable on every ones lips. I had
traveled in hope of meeting the owners of this house, so it is better I
first go there.

I entered the marketplace. I knew a little Arabic. There was an elderly
man sitting in front of his stall reading the Quran. I went foreword and
greeted him, then, I asked:

“Where does Imam Hasan Askari' reside?"

From my accent, he realized that I wasn't an Arab and that I must have
journeyed far to see the Imam. He rose and embraced me, proclaiming his
joy at my arrival in this town. He signaled with his hand for me to
wait, and then he picked up his Quran, closed his stall and accompanied
me.

We passed through the marketplace and entered an alley. After we had
walked a short way we stopped in front of a house and he told me that
this was the Imam's residence. He then bid farewell to me and
returned.

I took a fresh breath, shook out my clothes, ran a hand through my head
and over my face and made tidy my hair. The door was open. A curtain
laid hanging over the door. Before entering, I knocked and sought
permission. I was granted permission.

When my eyes fell on Imam's blessed and dazzling face, I fell upon his
feet and started crying. He gently patted me with his fatherly hand and
made me sit besides him. He cleaned the dust off my face and said:

How are you?"

Then he inquired about the health of my family and relatives. He looked
into my eyes and said:

“Why made you come here? My master!" I replied. “Our far distance from
you and our enthusiasm to see you had made us restless. I couldn't
endure it any more, so I bid farewell to my family and set out with the
intention of serving you.

Imam then smiled a smile worth the whole of the universe; he held my
hands and with his soft charming voice said.

“Stay in this house."

Hearing this I was ecstatic and my tears washed the desolation of
several years distance from Imam and I thanked him. From that day
onwards, I resided in Imam's house and would buy the household's daily
needs from the market. One day as I returned home I heard the noise of
something moving in the house. Suddenly, in a very loud voice, the Imam
cried:

“Stay where you are and don't move!" Of course I couldn't dare move.
Thereafter, the Imam told me to enter. I entered the room and there, I
saw a bondmaid carrying something in her arms but with a covering. Imam
then said to the bondmaid “Take the mantle off from what you carry in
your arms."

She obeyed and cast aside the covering.

I then saw an enchanting infant; white skinned, with fetching eyes.
Until that day I had never seen such a beautiful child.
The Imam then said to me.

“This is your, 'Sahibu - Zaman (master of the age)." He then ordered
the bondmaid to take him away and hide him. She left the room but my
eyes followed the child.

Thereafter, I realized that he was the only offspring of Imam Hasan
Askari (A.S) but he was shown only to the Shiites and elite friends. As
the Imam had also trusted me and had shown me his son, Sahibu - Zaman
(master of the age) I was extremely happy and prostrated in thanks.
After this incident till the day the Imam passed away, I never saw him
again.

Several years elapsed. One day I narrated this encounter to my friend.
He asked, “At that time when you saw the child, how old was he?" I
replied. "Two years".


**Forty Witnesses**

Friends had gathered together, and their commotion filled the mosque
courtyard. The Moazzen's call to prayer could be heard.

Abdullah said.

“Dear friends, reciting prayers at the earliest time possible has great
virtue. After prayers we will gather again here.

Every one rose, some of them went to the pool in the center of the
courtyard to make ablution and some of them hurried in to the mosque to
be in the first line of congregational prayer.

They recited the noon and afternoon prayer and afterwards they, once
again, congregated in the courtyard and sat besides each other. The
mosque attendant served them with tea and when the conversation died
down Jafar Fazari said.

“I heard Muhammad-ibn-Ayoub and Muhammad-ibn-Osman saying: "We were in
the house of Imam Hasan Askari) A.S), there were forty of us and Imam
presented his offspring to us."

One of those present in the courtyard said.

"Amazing, there were forty of them. I am certain they were of the
trusty and worthy Shiites because Imam showed his son to them." Jafar
Fazari continued.

“Do you know what the Imam said to them?"

They all replied in one accord. “No, tell us!"

He replied. “Imam Hasan Askari (A.S) said “After me, he is your Imam
and my successor, follow him and know that after today, you won't see
him again." These forty people then left the Imam's house and a few days
later Imam Hasan Askari (A.S) was martyred.

At that moment Jaafar Fazari fell silent and nobody else too uttered a
word. At that moment Abdullah broke the silence and said.

“We thank God that only the trusted and righteous ones have seen that
honorable child and that the news of this meeting has also reached us.
Oh God!

Grant us, as well, the privilege to see him!"

All of those present in the mosque cried out in one voice, "Amen!"


