Master of the Shiites
=====================

The weather was warm. I left my home, as I wanted to visit my store. In
the middle of the alley I met an acquaintance and we continued on
together. On the way he asked me.

“Do you know who the Sahib-ul-Amr is? (The master of affairs) I
stopped, stared in to his face and replied.

"No I don't. Do you?"

He replied, “They say his son is the Sahib-ul-Amr (the master of
affairs)." “As of today," I said,” We haven't seen him, so how are we to
recognize him! He nodded but I failed to know whether it was in denial
or agreement to my words.

We turned into a street and from there we entered an alley. Our route
passed close to Imam Hasan Askari's (a.s.) house. When we drew nearer,
Imam's sparkling face caught our attention. We went closer, greeted him
and received a charming response.

The Imam asked how we were and we replied that we are stuck on a
problem. “Ask me." The Imam said.

“Master!” we replied. “Who is the Sahib-ul-Amr (The master of affairs)?
We mean the same person who would reform the world and would put an end
to tyranny and oppression?"

Imam took one look at my friend and me and cast another look around and
then pulled aside the curtain that was hanging in front of the door and
said. “Take a look."

I looked inside the house and saw a child of five whose height was of
eight to ten hand spans. His forehead was bright and shining; his face
pink and white and his eyes sparkling.

His hands and forearms were strong and powerful and his right cheek had
a mole on it. The child came out of the house and Imam (a.s.) took him
into his arms and said.

“This is your master." He then placed the child on the ground,
addressed him and said.

“Son, return to the house tills the imminent time."

The child left his father and we, in wonder and amazement, looked at
him. Instantly the aroma of daffodils and jasmine filled the atmosphere
of the alley.


**The Attendant called Naseem**

Joy and happiness engulfed the whole house. The household members,
particularly Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) and his lady, Narges, were
extremely happy over the birth of their infant.

We all wanted to shout and celebrate so that the news of his birth
would reach the four corners of the earth. But this secret had to remain
concealed.

The enemies had waited for such a day because, according to them, by
killing him, their tyrannical aims would be accomplished.

Imam had commanded that the news of his son's birth should not be
proclaimed under any circumstances. I had gone, as usual, to buy the
household needs from the marketplace. When I returned, I entered Imam
Hasan Askari's (a.s.) room.

I saw him holding his infant in arms; and he gazed at him and kissed
his enchanting face.

I stood transfixed for a moment; it was as though the sun and the moon
had gathered in one place. What a beautiful sight. I sneezed suddenly.
The infant in a heavenly angelic voice said.

" Yar-hamoka'l-Allah (God bless you)."

I was amazed at the infant talking and I hesitated a moment, but then I
remembered that the pure Imams talked in infancy just as Jesus (A.S)
spoke from the cradle.

Then once again he addressed me and said:

“Oh Naseem! Let me give you glad tidings about sneezing."

“May my life be sacrificed for you?" I replied. “Tell me."

“Sneezing keeps a person immune from death for three days." He
answered.

My gaze lay fixed on his flower like face; after this short talk, his
lips closed like a bud and he turned his eyes towards his father's
kindly face.

My whole being was overcome with joy and I thanked God for being
fortunate enough for allowing me to be present in this bountiful
house.


