The Signs
=========

It was cold. People were returning to their homes. Wind swirled through
the streets, throwing the last dry leaves to the ground where they were
crushed under the feet of the passers by. Abul Adyan, the Imams pupil,
hurried to the Imam's house.

He used to transfer Imam Hasan Askari's (a.s.) letters to different
towns and convey the replies back to the Imam.

As the Imam was poisoned, he was ill and confined to the bed. He moved
his weak body with extreme difficulty.

Abul Adyan sat besides Imam (a.s.) and stared at his master's pale
face. His tears dripped on to his Imam's face and grief-stricken, he
said. “My master. How are you?"

The Imam requested his pupil to assist him to sit up. Abul Asyan took
the Imam under his arms and propped him up. The Imam started to write
letters and said to Abul Adyan.

“Take these letters to the cities written on them. Your journey will
take fifteen days. On your return to Samerra on the last day, you will
hear wailing from my home and you will see them washing and wrapping me
in a shroud.

“My master! Abul Adyan said. “Who is your successor after you?"

Imam (a.s.) replied, “The person who demands the replies of these
letters from you is my successor."

“Oh son of God's messenger!” Abul Adyan said. “Tell me more so that I
don't err on this matter."

Imam (a.s.) replied, “The one who recites prayers over my body is my
successor."

Abul Adyan requested once again. “Sir! Give me more details so that I
gain certainty."

Once again Imam (a.s.) replied, “Whoever gives news of the contents in
the bag is the "Qaim" and my successor."

On hearing the prediction of the Imam's martyrdom, Abul Adyan was
crestfallen, threw himself on to the Imam's bed, and rested his head on
the Imam's chest. Imam Hasan Askari (A.S) placed his hand on Abul
Adyan's head, patted him and said.

“Arise and carry out the mission you have to perform." Abul Adyan
brushed away his tears and though he didn't want to leave the Imam he
obeyed his command. He rose and for the last time kissed the Imam's
hands and cheek.

Abul Adyan carried the letters to the relevant towns and collected the
replies. He entered Samerra on the fifteenth day. Just as the Imam had
predicted, the shrill cry of wailing was heard from the Imam's house.

The brother of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.), Jafar- ibn-Ali (Jafar Kazzab),
stood by the front door and the Shiites gathered around him offering
their condolences.

“If this is the new Imam." Abul Adyan said to himself. “Then the
succession of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) has been lost as he is a known
drinker and gambler, he plays musical instruments and is involved with
amusements and debauchery." Nevertheless, he went forward to test him
and just like others, offered his condolence. But as long as he waited,
Jafar didn't request any thing from him.

At this moment, Imam Hasan Askari's servant approached Jafar and said.
“Sir! They have shrouded your brother. Come and pray over his body."

Jafar along with the Shiites and several representatives of the caliph
entered the house. All got ready for prayers; Imam's pure body was
enveloped in a shroud and placed in front of the prayer rows.

Just when Jafar intended to say " Takbir' (Allaho-Akbar), a child, with
short and black hair and with gap between his teeth, appeared from
behind the curtain. He pulled Jafar's robe and said. “Out of the way,
uncle! I am more worthy than you to pray over my father's body!"

Jafar looked at the child in complete surprise, his face turned pale as
he stepped aside.

The young boy stood in front of the group and said “Takbir” and every
one followed him. Thereafter, the pure body of the Imam was buried
beside the tomb of Imam Ali Naqi (A.S), his father.

The child then saw Abul Adyan and said. “Bring me the answers to the
letters." Abul Adyan quickly handed over the letters to him and said to
himself. " Two signs have been revealed, one, praying over the Imam's
body and the other, demanding the replies to the letters, but the third
one, the one about the bag, still remains.

Abul Adyan approached Jafar and found him weeping and wailing. At the
same moment, one of Jafar's friends said.

“Sir! Who was that child who claims to be the Imam's son?" Jafar
replied, “I swear to God! I have never seen him before and don't know
him."

Meanwhile, a group that had come from Qum was inquiring about Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.) and they were informed that the Imam had passed
away. “Then who is his successor?" they asked.

“Him." The people replied while pointing to Jafar.

They came foreword, greeted him and offered their condolence.

“We have brought letters and wealth with us." They continued. “Tell us
who the letters are from and how much is the wealth so we can give them
up to you."

A far, as he was shaking his robe in agitation said. “Do you expect me
to know the unseen!"?

At that moment, an attendant approached and said.

“My master says you have brought letters from this person and that
person and you have with you a purse containing a thousand dinars. Among
these thousand dinars is a ten dinar coin which has faded away."

The men from Qum were pleased as they could transfer their trust to the
true successor of the Imam. Then they released the purse, along with the
letters, to the Imam's attendant for handing them to the Imam.

When Abul Adyan witnessed this scene he realized that Imam Hasan
Askari's (a.s.) successor was that same five year old child, who prayed
over his father's body, demanded from him, the letters and gave news
about the contents in the bag.


