The Last Word
=============

I had known Abu Sahl Nowbakhti for a long time. One day I went to visit
him. When he saw me he greeted me and inquired, “Abu Suleman! How are
you?"

I said, “I intended to see you alone." He then guided me over to a
corner of his courtyard where there was a bench on which we sat. A
gentle breeze blew through the tree as if, it was waiting as well, for
Abu Sahl to speak. Abu Sahl turned to me and said.

“O Abu Suleman, the son of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) has been born. His
title is Abul- Qasim, just like his ancestor, the messenger of God
(s.a.w.a.).

Abu Sahl continued: 'the prophet had said, "the offspring of Imam Hasan
Askari is my namesake, his title the same as mine. His name is Mahdi,
Hujjat and Montazer and he is the Sahibul Zaman (The master of the
Age)." I was looking into Abu Sahl face; he read the prophet's tradition
with grandeur.

“Have you seen the son of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)?" I asked.

“The Imam was sick in bed." Abu Sahl said. “I was in his presence when
the Imam said to his attendant, "Aqid" to bring him some boiled drink.
“Aqid" gave the potion to the Imam's wife and she handed it over to Imam
(a.s.).

The Imam took the cup and wanted to drink but his hands were shaking so
much that the cup hit his teeth and fell to the floor. He then turned to
"Aqid" and said, "Go in to the other room, my son is worshiping God
there, tell him to come and see me." Abu Sahl continued.

“When the child entered the room he greeted us. His skin was pearl
white, his hair was short and he had a gap in his front teeth.

When the Imam saw him he wept and said. Son, give me some water as now
I am leaving to go to God. The child picked up the water jug and put it
to his father lips so that he could drink.

Imam Hasan Askari then said, "Make me ready for prayer". The small
child, with a face as bright as the moon, spread a towel over the Imam's
legs so that he could make ablution.

“Oh Son!" The Imam said. “I give you these glad tidings that you are
the “Sahibul Zaman” (master of the age), the Mahdi and the Hujjat of God
on this earth. You are my son and my successor. You are born of the
prophet's generation and me and you are the last of the pure Imams.

The prophet prophesied your coming and chose your name and title; this
information was given to me by my father and him, from his amenable
ancestors. May God send blessings to their chaste and pure households,
as our God is Praiseworthy, Almighty?"

Meanwhile, tears rolled down Abu Sahl cheeks and we wept together for a
long time.

Abu Sahl then said, “These were the last words of the Imam after which
he departed from this transient world."

A breeze caressed our tear-laden cheeks, as if it were also
grief-stricken at the passing of the eleventh Imam. But, it passed us by
quickly, perhaps wanting to announce to every one, the beginning of Imam
Mahdi's (a.s.) leadership.

Source: The 13th Volume of Bahar- ul- Anvar (The promised Mahdi)
translated by: Ali Davani, printed by: Darul- Ketab- ul- Islamiah, 1991
A.D.

Chapter 23: Those who have seen the Imam.


