7) Hadith Al-Tawliyah
=====================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله أنت وليي في كل مؤمن بعدي فإن هذا موضوع باتفاق أهل المعرفة بالحديث
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement, “You are my *wali* over every believer after me”.
**Verily, this is a fabrication (*****mawdu’*****), by the consensus of
the** ***hadith*** **scholars**.[^1]

This is a very big claim. It means that every single *hadith* scholar,
from the start of Prophet Muhammad’s mission, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa
alihi*, till the days of Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah – without any exception –
explicitly declared this *Hadith al-Tawliyah* to be *mawdu’*. At a
specific level, our dear Shaykh claims that Malik b. Anas (d. 179 H),
Ibn al-Mubarak (d. 181 H), al-Shafi’i (d. 204 H), al-Tayalisi (d. 204
H), ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-San’ani (d. 211 H), al-Humaydi (d. 219 H), Ibn
Ja’d (d. 230 H), Ibn Sa’d (d. 230 H), Ibn Abi Shaybah (d. 235 H), Ibn
Rahwayh (d. 238 H), Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 H), al-Darimi (d. 255 H),
al-Bukhari (d. 256 H), Muslim (d. 261 H), Ibn Majah (d. 273 H), Abu
Dawud (d. 275 H), Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276 H), al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H), Ibn
Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H), al-Nasai (d. 303 H), Ibn Khuzaymah (d. 311 H),
al-‘Aqili (d. 322 H), Ibn Abi Hatim (d. 327 H), Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H),
al-Tabarani (d. 360 H), al-Darqutni (d. 385 H), Ibn Shahin (d. 385 H),
al-Hakim (d. 403 H), al-Bayhaqi (d. 458 H), al-Baghdadi (d. 463 H), Ibn
‘Abd al-Barr (d. 463 H), al-Khawarazmi (d. 568 H), Ibn Asakir (571 H),
al-Nawawi (d. 676 H), among others – each of them has an *express*
statement about the *hadith* in which he grades it as *mawdu’*. However,
the reverse is actually the truth! No scholar before Ibn Taymiyyah (d.
728 H) ever classed the *hadith* to be *mawdu’* or even *dha’if*. By
contrast, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) actually calls its chain *sahih*[^2]!
What drove Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah into such reckless fallacy must have
been something very huge!

Imam Ahmad has documented *Hadith al-Tawliyah* in his *Musnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا أبو بلج
ثنا عمرو بن ميمون ....قال بن عباس .... وخرج بالناس في غزوة تبوك قال
فقال له علي أخرج معك قال فقال له نبي الله لا فبكى علي فقال له أما ترضى
أن تكون منى بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا أنك لست بنبي انه لا ينبغي أن أذهب
الا وأنت خليفتي قال وقال له رسول الله أنت وليي في كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah
– Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun .... Ibn ‘Abbas said:

.... He (the Messenger of Allah) went out for the battle of Tabuk. So,
‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out with you.” Therefore, the Prophet of
Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Do not weep, ‘Ali. Are you not pleased
that you are to me of the status of Harun to Musa, with the exception
that you are not a prophet? Verily, it is not right that I depart except
with you as my *khalifah*. **You are my** ***wali*** **over every
believer after me**.”[^3]

‘Allamah Ahmad Muhammad Shakir (d. 1377 H) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^4]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1412 H) also states:

> وأخرجه أحمد 1/330: ثنا يحيى بن حماد به مطولا وفيه: قال: وخرج صلى الله
> عليه وسلم بالناس في غزوة تبوك قال: فقال علي أخرج معك قال: فقال له نبي
> الله: "لا". فبكى علي قال له: " أما ترضى أن تكون منى بمنزلة هارون من
> موسى إِلا أنك لست بنبي انه لا ينبغي أن أذهب الا وأنت خليفتي". قال:
> وقال له رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: "أنت وليي في كل مؤمن بعدي".
> الحديث وأخرجه الحاكم بطوله 3/132-134 من طريق أحمد ثم قال: صحيح الإسناد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووافقه الذهبي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad (1/330) recorded it from Yahya b. Hamad in detail, and part of it
is:

He (the Messenger of Allah) went out with the people for the battle of
Tabuk. So, ‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out with you.” Therefore, the
Prophet of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Do not weep, ‘Ali. Are you
not pleased that you are to me of the status of Harun to Musa, with the
exception that you are not a prophet? Verily, it is not right that I
depart except with you as my *khalifah*. **You are my** ***wali***
**over every believer after me**.” ... the *hadith*.

Al-Hakim recorded it in full (3/132-134) through the route of Ahmad, and
said, “**Its chain is** ***sahih*****” and al-Dhahabi concurred with
him**.[^5]

The ‘Allamah himself adds concerning its chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^6]

Commenting on this same chain of *Hadith al-Tawliyah*, Dr. Al-Jawabirah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^7]

Imam al-Busiri too grades the chain as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih* chain.[^8]

So, one wonders: why is Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah so panicky about this
*hadith*? There must be a reason he is so desperate about it, to the
extent of attributing patent fallacies to all the Sunni *muhadithun* –
perhaps dozens or hundreds of them – before his time in order to bring
it down. What is the scary secret?

It is apparent that *wali* in *Hadith al-Tawliyah* cannot possibly mean
“friend”, “helper” or “supporter” in any logical sense. ‘Ali, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, was the friend, helper and supporter of the believers during
the lifetime of the Prophet and after his death, *in his presence* and
in his absence. Besides, changing *wali* in the *hadith* to “friend”, or
“helper” or supporter” would only produce incoherent and insensible
statements:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت وليي في كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are my friend over every believer after me.”

“You are my lover over every believer after me.”

“You are my supporter over every believer after me.”

“You are my friend over every believer after me.”

The Messenger of Allah was absolutely above making such kinds of
statements. Moreover, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah himself cautions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أراد الموالاة لم يحتج ان يقول بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

If he had intended friendship, he did not need to say “after me”.[^9]

But, can we interpret “my *wali*” in the *hadith* to mean “my ruler”?
This depends on the exact intended meaning. For instance, Allah says
about His Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل يا أيها الناس إني رسول الله إليكم جميعا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: “O mankind! Verily, I am the **Messenger of Allah** to you
all.”[^10]

He was the Messenger *appointed by* Allah. The Qur’an also states about
him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أم تريدون أن تسألوا رسولكم كما سئل موسى من قبل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Or, do you want to ask ***your*** **Messenger** as Musa was asked
before?[^11]

Does this mean that the people appointed the Messenger? Of course, they
never did! Rather, he was appointed *by* *Allah* – hence, the Messenger
of Allah – and *sent to* the people – and thereby their Messenger. This
is a similar verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أم لم يعرفوا رسولهم فهم له منكرون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Or is it that they did not recognize ***their*** **Messenger** so they
deny him?[^12]

In the light of the above, the following conclusions can be drawn about
the word “messenger”:

1. “The Messenger of Allah” means the messenger appointed by Allah.

2. “Your Messenger” means the Messenger sent to you.

3. “Their Messenger” means the Messenger sent to them.

In the same manner:

1. The *wali* of the Prophet over his *Ummah* is the *wali* appointed by
him over them.

2. The *wali* of the *Ummah* is the *wali* appointed over them or by
them.

As such, the *hadith* “You are my *wali* over every believer after me”
may mean “You are the *wali* I have appointed over every believer after
me”. This is perfectly in line with *Hadith al-Wilayah* too.

Another probable meaning of “my *wali*” in the *hadith* is “my heir”.
One of the rarer meanings of *wali* is “heir”. Prophet Zakariyah,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, prayed to Allah, while he was still barren, with
these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فهب لي من لدنك وليا يرثني ويرث من آل يعقوب واجعله رب رضيا يا زكريا إنا
نبشرك بغلام اسمه يحيى
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So give me from Yourself **a** ***wali*****, who shall inherit me** and
inherit the family of Ya’qub. And make him, my Lord, one with whom You
are well-pleased”. (Allah said): “O Zakariyah! Verily, We give you the
glad tidings of a son, his name will be **Yahya**.”[^13]

Zakariyah was a prophet. His *wali*, who was his son Yahya, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, inherited his prophethood and knowledge, and thereby became
the next master of his father’s *Ummah* after his death. Professor Ibn
Yasin also states in his *tafsir*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخرج عبد الرزاق بسنده الصحيح عن قتادة عن الحسن في قوله (يرثني ويرث من
آل يعقوب)، قال: نبوته وعلمه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq records **with his** ***sahih*** **chain** from Qatadah,
that al-Hasan said concerning the verse {who shall inherit me and
inherit the family of Ya’qub}: [who shall inherit] **his prophethood and
knowledge**.[^14]

*Hadith al-Tawliyah* therefore makes ‘Ali the *wali* – the heir - of the
Messenger of Allah. Meanwhile, this inheritance was declared to be “over
*every* believer” after the Prophet. Apparently, it concerned only
matters and affairs between the Messenger and his *Ummah*. These,
without doubt, included his powers, rights responsibilities,
obligations, and duties *over* them. All of these were inherited by Amir
al-Muminin after him.

A *shahid* that has been documented by Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) gives
this same impression as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا الحسين بن علي وأحمد بن عثمان قالا: ثنا محمد بن خالد بن عثمة، حدثنا
موسى بن يعقوب، حدثني المهاجر بن مسمار، عن عائشة بنت سعد، عن أبيها قال:
سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم يقول يوم الجحفة وأخذ بيد علي، فخطب
فحمد الله وأثنى عليه ثم قال: أيها الناس إني وليكم. قالوا: صدقت يا رسول
الله، وأخذ بيد علي رضي الله عنه فرفعها فقال: هذا وليي، والمؤدي عني.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Husayn b. ‘Ali and Ahmad b. ‘Uthman – Muhammad b. Khalid b. ‘Athmah –
Musa b. Ya’qub – al-Muhajir b. Mismar – ‘Aishah bint Sa’d – her father:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying on the Day of
al-Juhfah while holding the hand of ‘Ali, and he delivered a sermon, and
thanked Allah and praised Him, and then said: “**O mankind! I am your**
***wali***”. They replied, “You have said the truth, O Messenger of
Allah.” Then he held the hand of ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him,
and raised it up, and said, “**This is my** ***wali*****, and the one to
discharge** ***on my behalf***.”[^15]

‘Allamah al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح، فإن له شواهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**It is** ***sahih*** because it has *shawahid*.[^16]

‘Ali was the *wali* appointed by the Messenger of Allah over his
*Ummah*, and the one to discharge on his behalf among them after him. It
is further noteworthy that the responsibility of discharge granted to
Amir al-Muminin was unqualified. Therefore, *anything* that was the
responsibility of the Prophet among his *Ummah*, no one else has the
right to do it *for him* except ‘Ali. As such, after the death of the
Messenger of Allah, all his obligations, responsibilities and
liabilities – with regards to the *Ummah* - naturally passed onto ‘Ali
by inheritance.

‘Allamah al-Albani has equally copied a further *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي يقضي ديني
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali will repay my debts.[^17]

And he gives this verdict about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^18]

In other words, ‘Ali – being the heir – inherited the liabilities of the
Messenger of Allah, including his debts to members of his *Ummah*. So,
the liabilities became his personal responsibilities after the death of
his Prophet.

But, some unthinkable things happened in Islamic history. Although the
Prophet had declared ‘Ali to be his *wali* over his whole *Ummah* after
him, the one to discharge on his behalf and the one to repay his debts,
some other people precluded Amir al-Muminin and arrogated these ranks to
themselves! With support from their kinsmen and associates, they even
proceeded to militarily install themselves in ‘Ali places. For instance,
Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) records that ‘Umar b. al-Khattab said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
توفى الله نبيه صلى الله عليه و سلم فقال أبو بكر أنا ولي رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم .... توفى الله أبا بكر فقلت أنا ولي رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم وأبي بكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah caused His Prophet, peace be upon him, to die. **So, Abu Bakr
said, “I am the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger of Allah**, peace be
upon him”.... Allah (also) caused Abu Bakr to die. **So, I (too) said,
“I am the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr**.”[^19]

Elsewhere, al-Bukhari also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا إبراهيم بن موسى أخبرنا هشام عن ابن جريج قال أخبرني عمرو بن دينار
عن محمد بن علي عن جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهم قال: لما مات النبي
صلى الله عليه و سلم جاء أبا بكر مال من قبل العلاء بن الحضرمي فقال أبو
بكر من كان له على النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم دين أو كانت له قبله عدة
فليأتنا . قال جابر وعدني رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم أن يعطيني هكذا
وهكذا وهكذا فبسط يديه ثلاث مرات قال جابر فعد في يدي خمسمائة ثم خمسمائة
ثم خمسمائة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Narrated J**a**bir b. ‘Abd All**a**h:**

**When the Prophet, peace be upon him, died, Abu Bakr received some
property from al-‘Al**a **b. al-Hadhram**i**. So, Abu Bakr said,
“Whoever has a debt claim against the Prophet, peace be upon him, or was
promised something by him, should come to us.” I said, “The Messenger of
All**a**h, peace be upon him, promised me that he would give me this
much, and this much, and this much”. And I spread my hands three times.
So, he (Ab**u **Bakr) counted for me and handed me five-hundred, then
five hundred and then five-hundred.**[^20]

What?! Abu Bakr was the *wali* of the Prophet over every believer after
him? Abu Bakr was the one to repay the Messenger’s debts? What in the
world was happening exactly! Wonders really never end! Besides, why was
Abu Bakr repaying the Prophet’s *personal* debts and promises with
*state* funds? Would the Messenger have misappropriated the Muslim
treasury in such a manner?

Imam ‘Ali was apparently terribly disappointed by this turn of events.
Therefore, despite his extraordinary patience, his shock made him to
voice out angrily. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) quotes ‘Umar as having said
the following words to both ‘Ali and ‘Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلما توفي رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم قال أبو بكر أنا ولي رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم .... فرأيتماه كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا والله يعلم
إنه لصادق بار راشد تابع للحق ثم توفي أبو بكر وأنا ولي رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم وولي أبا بكر فرأيتماني كاذبا آثما غادرا خائنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, died, **Abu Bakr said:
“I am the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him.”.... So both of you (‘Ali and ‘Abbas) thought him (i.e. Abu Bakr)
to be a liar, sinful, treacherous and dishonest**. And Allah knows that
he was really truthful, pious, rightly-guided and a follower of the
truth. **Abu Bakr died and I became the** ***wali*** **of the Messenger
of Allah**, peace be upon him, and the *wali* of Abu Bakr. **So both of
you thought me to be a liar, sinful, treacherous and dishonest**.[^21]

Due to Abu Bakr’s surprising claim that he was the *wali* of the
Messenger of Allah - among others - ‘Ali declared him “a liar, sinful,
treacherous and dishonest”. When ‘Umar made the same claim later, ‘Ali
repeated those same words for him too. This is what Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah
fears; the truth of ‘Ali’s accusations against them both. If his words
about them were correct, then Sunni Islam crashes headlong! It cannot
stand without the alleged saintly status of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.
Moreover, the fallacy of some “ahadith” circulated to highlight their
“merits” becomes exposed as well. The cost is simply too much. So, our
dear Shaykh seeks to save his Sunni sect by desperately and recklessly
denying *Hadith al-Tawliyah*. The truth, however, never dies.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 5, pp. 35-36

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir], vol.
1, p. 330, \# 3062

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 331, \# 3062

[^5]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 566, \# 1189

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^7]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^8]: Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara (Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st
edition, 1420 H), vol. 7, p. 184, \# 6630

[^9]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 391

[^10]: Qur’an 7:158

[^11]: Qur’an 2:108

[^12]: Qur’an 23:69

[^13]: Qur’an 19:5-7

[^14]: Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H), vol. 3, p. 332

[^15]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1410 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1189

[^16]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 566, \# 1189

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 754, \# 4092

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
5, p. 2048, \# 5043

[^20]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 953, \# 2537

[^21]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1376, \#1757


