8) Hadith Al-Wirathah, Establishing Its Authenticity
====================================================

Allah informs us about two of His prophets in His Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وورث سليمان داوود
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Sulayman inherited Dawud.[^1]

In other words, it was Sulayman, *‘alaihi al-salam*, who inherited
Dawud, *‘alaihi al-salam*. Explaining this verse, Imam al-Tabari (d. 310
H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول تعالى ذكره :وورث سليمان أباه داود العلم الذي كان آتاه الله في
حياته، والملك الذي كان خصه به على سائر قومه
  </p>
</blockquote>

He, the Most High, says: Sulayman inherited **the knowledge** which
Allah gave his father during his lifetime and **the kingdom** which He
specially bestowed upon him above all of his people.[^2]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الله تعالى: }وورث سليمان داود وقال يا أيها الناس علمنا منطق الطير
وأوتينا من كل شئ إن هذا لهو الفضل المبين) {النمل: ١٦ (أي ورثه في
النبوة والملك، وليس المراد ورثه في المال، لأنه قد كان له بنون غيره،
فما كان ليخص بالمال دونهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High said: {And Sulayman inherited Dawud, and he
(Sulayman) said, “O people, we have been taught the language of birds,
and on us have been bestowed all things. This, verily, is an evident
grace} [27:16], **that is, inheritance of prophethood and kingdom**.
What was intended was not inheritance of material possessions. This is
because he (Dawud) had several children apart from him (Sulayman) and he
(Sulayman) could not have been exclusively given the material
possessions at their expense.[^3]

Imam Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 597 H) has these words too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله تعالى: }وورث سليمان داود {أي :ورث نبوته وعلمه وملكه، وكان لداود
تسعة عشر ذكرا، فخص سليمان بذلك، ولو كانت وراثة مال لكان جميع أولاده
فيها سواء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High says {And Sulayman inherited Dawud}, that is: **he
inherited his prophethood, knowledge and kingdom**. Dawud had nineteen
sons. But, Sulayman was exclusively given that. If it had been
inheritance of material possessions, all his children would have been
equally entitled.[^4]

There are a number of points from this verse:

1. Prophethood is an inheritable office.

2. Divine knowledge is inheritable.

3. Kingdom – which is also called *khilafah*[^5] - is inheritable.

Moreover, where someone, out of many possible heirs, is singled out as
the only heir in any circumstance, then such inheritance could not have
been about material possessions. Rather, it must have been with regards
to knowledge, offices and ranks. Prophet Sulayman was *the* inheritor of
his father, Prophet Dawud. As such, he became the prophet, the supreme
scholar and the ruler after him. But, what about our dearest Prophet
Muhammad, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*? Was he inherited by anyone? Did
he name any inheritor?

Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) records a really interesting *hadith* in this
regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا الفضل بن سهل قال حدثني عفان بن مسلم قال حدثنا أبو عوانة عن
عثمان بن المغيرة عن أبي صادق عن ربيعة بن ناجد أن رجلا قال لعلي يا أمير
المؤمنين لم ورثت بن عمك دون عمك قال: جمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
أو قال دعا رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم بني عبد المطلب فصنع لهم مدا
من طعام قال فأكلوا حتى شبعوا وبقي الطعام كما هو كأنه لم يمس ثم دعا
بغمر فشربوا حتى رووا وبقي الشراب كأنه لم يمس أو لم يشرب فقال يا بني
عبد المطلب إني بعثت إليكم بخاصة وإلى الناس بعامة وقد رأيتم من هذه
الآية ما قد رأيتم فأيكم يبايعني على أن يكون أخي وصاحبي ووارثي فلم يقم
إليه أحد فقمت إليه وكنت أصغر القوم فقال اجلس ثم قال ثلاث مرات كل ذلك
أقوم إليه فيقول اجلس حتى كان في الثالثة ضرب بيده على يدي ثم قال أنت
أخي وصاحبي ووارثي ووزيري فبذلك ورثت بن عمي دون عمي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Fadhl b. Sahl – ‘Affan b. Muslim – Abu ‘Awanah – ‘Uthman b.
al-Mughirah – Abu Sadiq – Rabi’ah b. Najid:

A man said to ‘Ali, “**O Amir al-Muminin! Why is it you that have
INHERITED your cousin (i.e. the Prophet) and not your uncle**?”

He replied, “The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
gathered/summoned the Banu ‘Abd al-Mutalib. He cooked some food for
them, and they ate until they were satisfied while food was still
remaining, as though they never touched it. Then he called for water,
and they drank until their thirst was quenched, and the containers of
the water remained as though they were never touched or drunk.

After that, he said, “O Banu ‘Abd al-Mutalib! I have been sent to you
specially, and to mankind generally. You have seen in this verse what
you have seen. Therefore, which one of you will give me a *bay’ah* (oath
of allegiance) to become my brother, my companion **and my inheritor**?”
None stood up. So, I (‘Ali) stood up, and I was the youngest of the
people. So, he (the Prophet) said, “Sit down”. On the third time, he hit
his hand on my hand (for the *bay’ah*) and then said: “**You are my
brother, and my companion, and MY INHERITOR, and my** ***wazir***.” So,
through this, **I have inherited my cousin**, at the expense of my
uncle.[^6]

The above *hadith* has a *sahih* chain. All its narrators – without
*any* exception – are *thiqah* (trustworthy), and it is well-connected.
Strangely, this is what ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد ضعيف، رجاله كلهم ثقات؛ غير ربيعة ين ناجد، قال الذهبي
في ((الميزان)) : ((لا يكاد يعرف، وعنه أبو صادق بخبر منكر فيه: علي أخي
ووارثي)) يشير إلى هذا الحديث. وصرح في ((الكاشف)) بأنه لم يرو عنه غير
أبي صادق هذا. وقال في ((الضعفاء والمتروكين)) : ((فيه جهالة)) .
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This chain is *dha’if*, **all its narrators are** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy), except Rabi’ah b. Najid**. Al-Dhahabi said in
*al-Mizan*:

“**He is scarcely known**, and Abu Sadiq narrated from him a *munkar*
(repugnant) report, which contains: ‘Ali is my brother and inheritor.”

He was referring to this *hadith*. **He explicitly declared in**
***al-Kashif*** **that none else narrated from him other than this Abu
Sadiq**. And he (al-Dhahabi) said in *al-Dhu’afa wa al-Matrukin*: “There
is *jihalah* in him (he is not known)”.[^7]

So, the only narrator that the ‘Allamah has problem with is Rabi’ah b.
Najid, and his only evidence against him is Imam al-Dhahabi’s (d. 748 H)
overall verdict that he is “scarcely known”. The ‘Allamah places
everything on the fact that only Abu Sadiq has narrated from him. It is
also noteworthy that al-Dhahabi has called the above *hadith*
“repugnant” without giving any proof or explanation.

But, does the fact that a narrator is “scarcely known” - where only a
single person has transmitted from him – really affect his *ahadith*?
Perhaps, the best way to answer that is to examine how the *‘ulama* of
the Ahl al-Sunnah have treated other similar cases.

A very clear example is Hasin b. Muhammad al-Ansari. Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H)
says about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حصين بن محمد الأنصاري السالمي المدني يحتج به في الصحيحين لا يكاد يعرف
قلت ذكره ابن حبان في الثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hasin b. Muhammad al-Ansari al-Salimi al-Madani: **He is relied upon as
a** ***hujjah*** **in both** ***Sahihs*** (i.e. *Sahih al-Bukhari* and
*Sahih Muslim*). **He is scarcely known**. I say: Ibn Hibban has
included him in *al-Thiqat*.[^8]

He also adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حصين بن محمد الأنصاري السالمي المدني صدوق الحديث من الثانية لم يرو عنه
غير الزهري.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hasin b. Muhammad al-Ansari al-Salimi al-Madani: *Saduq al-hadith* (very
truthful in *ahadith*), from the second (*tabaqat*). **None narrated
from him except al-Zuhri**.[^9]

He is exactly like Rabi’ah b. Najid! Yet, he is relied upon as a
*hujjah* in both *Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih Muslim*, and is accepted
as *saduq* (very truthful)!

Another case is that of Zayd b. Rabah. He too is like Rabi’ah; only one
person as transmitted from him. Imam al-Dhahabi confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن رباح مديني. سمع أبا عبد الله الأغر. ما وجدت أحدا روى عنه سوى
مالك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Rabah, a resident of Madinah: He heard from Abu ‘Abd Allah
al-Aghrah. **I could not find anyone who has transmitted from him except
Malik**.[^10]

Nonetheless, he is graded *thiqah* (trustworthy) by al-Hafiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن رباح المدني ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Rabah al-Madani: *Thiqah* (trustworthy).[^11]

In very simple words, whether or not only a single individual has
transmitted from a narrator does not affect his standing as long as
there is proof that he is trustworthy or very truthful. If there is no
evidence for or against his reliability, then such a fact becomes
relevant and makes him *majhul* (unknown). In the case of Rabi’ah, it is
well-known that only his brother, Abu Sadiq, transmitted from him.
Moreover, there is no evidence at all against his reliability. But, is
there evidence to prove his trustworthiness or truthfulness?

Rabi’ah’s surname is spelt in two ways in the books of *ahadith* and
*rijal*: Najid (ناجد) and Najidh (ناجذ). Meanwhile, the *‘ulama* have
used the two words to refer to the same individual. As such, Imam
al-‘Ijli (d. 261 H) says about Rabi’ah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربيعة بن ناجذ كوفي تابعي ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabi’ah b. Najidh: He was a Kufan, a Tabi’i, ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**[^12]

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) has also included him in his book of *thiqah*
(trustworthy) narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربيعة بن ناجذ الأسدي الأزدي الكوفي يروى عن علي روى عنه أبو صادق
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabi’ah b. Najidh al-Asadi al-Azdi al-Kufi: He narrated from ‘Ali, and
Abu Sadiq narrated from him.[^13]

Al-Hafiz confirms both of these in his *al-Tahdhib*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربيعة بن ناجد الأزدي ويقال أيضا الأسدي الكوفي. روى عن علي وابن مسعود
وعبادة بن الصامت رضي الله عنهم. وعنه أبو صادق الأزدي يقال إنه أخوه
ذكره ابن حبان في الثقات ….وقال العجلي كوفي تابعي ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabi’ah b. **Najid** al-Azdi, also called al-Asadi al-Kufi. He narrated
from ‘Ali, Ibn Mas’ud and ‘Ubadah b. al-Samit, may Allah be pleased with
them. Abu Sadiq al-Azdi narrated from him, and he is said to have been
his brother. **Ibn Hibban mentioned him in** ***al-Thiqat*** **... and
al-‘Ijli said: A Kufan, Tabi’i,** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^14]

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) also considers the chain of Rabi’ah to be
*sahih*, thereby accepting him as *thiqah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني أبو قتيبة سالم بن الفضل الآدمي بمكة ثنا محمد بن عثمان بن أبي
شيبة ثنا عمي أبو بكر ثنا علي بن ثابت الدهان ثنا الحكم بن عبد الملك عن
الحارث بن حصيرة عن أبي صادق عن ربيعة بن ناجد عن علي رضي الله عنه....
صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Qutaybah Salim b. al-Fadhl al-Adami –Muhammad b. ‘Uthman b. Abi
Shaybah – Abu Bakr – ‘Ali b. Thabit al-Dihan – al-Hakam b. ‘Abd al-Malik
– al-Harith b. Hasirah – Abu Sadiq – **Rabi’ah b. Najid** – ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him.... **The chain is** ***sahih***.[^15]

In his *al-Taqrib*, al-Hafiz personally grades him *thiqah*
(trustworthy) too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربيعة بن ناجد الأزدي الكوفي يقال هو أخو أبي صادق الراوي عنه ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabi’ah b. Najid al-Azdi al-Kufi: It is said that he was the brother of
the narrator, Abu Sadiq. **He was** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^16]

Intriguingly, ‘Allamah al-Albani himself concurs to a good extent:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن عبد الله بن سالم المفلوج حدثنا عبيدة بن الأسود عن القاسم بن الوليد
عن أبي صادق عن ربيعة بن ناجذ عن عبادة بن الصامت مرفوعا....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد جيد، رجاله ثقات غير ربيعة هذا فقد وثقه الحافظ فقط تبعا
لابن حبان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Salim al-Mafluj – ‘Ubaydah b. al-Aswad – al-Qasim b.
al-Walid – Abu Sadiq – **Rabi’ah b. Najidh** – ‘Ubadah b. al-Samit, in a
*marfu’* manner....

I say: **This chain is good**. Its narrators are trustworthy, except
this Rabi’ah, for only al-Hafiz (Ibn Hajar) has declared him *thiqah*,
copying Ibn Hibban.[^17]

The ‘Allamah has reservations about the fact that –according to him –
only al-Hafiz al-‘Asqalani, imitating Ibn Hibban, has declared Rabi’ah
to be *thiqah* (trustworthy). Nonetheless, that does not stop him from
authenticating the chain. Needless to say, however, the ‘Allamah’s
position contains an error: al-‘Ijli, Ibn Hibban and al-Hakim actually
declared him *thiqah* before al-Hafiz. If the latter copied anyone, it
was at least both al-‘Ijli and Ibn Hibban.

The bottom-line is that this *hadith* has a *sahih* chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت أخي وصاحبي ووارثي ووزيري
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are my brother, and my companion, and MY INHERITOR, and my *wazir*.

The objections of Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah and ‘Allamah al-Albani to it are
without basis.

We know from this authentic *hadith* that Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib, *‘alaihi al-salam*, was the chosen inheritor of the Prophet’s
knowledge, power and divine *khilafah* after him. In fact, if
prophethood had not ended with Muhammad, ‘Ali would have inherited it
too.

[^1]: Qur’an 27:16

[^2]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Attar], vol. 19, p. 172

[^3]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 2, p. 22

[^4]: Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Jawzi al-Qurshi al-Baghdadi, Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir (Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad b. ‘Abd
al-Rahman ‘Abd Allah], vol. 6, p. 60

[^5]: See Qur’an 38:26

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 125, \# 8451

[^7]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 12, p. 646,
\# 5793

[^8]: Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
Lisan al-Mizan (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H), vol. 7, p. 199, \# 2686

[^9]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 223, \# 1391

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol. 2, p. 103, \# 3004

[^11]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 328, \# 2142

[^12]: Abu al-Hasan Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Salih al-‘Ijli al-Kufi,
Ma’rifat al-Thiqat (Madinah: Maktabah al-Dar; 1st edition, 1405 H), vol.
1, p. 359, \# 471

[^13]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, Kitab
al-Thiqat (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1398 H), vol. 4, p. 229

[^14]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 3, p. 228, \# 498

[^15]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
132, \# 4622

[^16]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 298, \# 1923

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 4, p. 582, \# 1942


