11) Hadith Al-Ada, the Report of Zayd B. Yathi’
===============================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) classifies *Hadith al-Ada* as “a lie”.
Of course, it is actually *hasan*, as explicitly declared by both Imam
al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) and ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H). Moreover,
concerning reports of how the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*,
implemented *Hadith al-Ada* in the case of Abu Bakr, the Shaykh further
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال الخطابي في كتاب شعار الدين وقوله لا يؤدي عني إلا رجل من أهل بيتي
هو شيء جاء به أهل الكوفة عن زيد بن يثيع وهو متهم في الرواية منسوب إلى
الرفض
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Khattabi said in *Kitab Shi’ar al-Din*: “And his statement ‘None can
discharge on my behalf except except a man from my Ahl al-Bayt’, **it is
something brought by the people of Kufa from Zayd b. Yathi’, and he is
accused in narrations**. He is attributed to *al-rafdh* (hardline
anti-Abu Bakr Shi’ism).”[^1]

Ibn Taymiyyah has approvingly quoted, and has relied upon and adopted,
al-Khattabi’s opinion. Therefore, he is bound by its consequences.

Our Shaykh suggests that the reports of the Messenger’s implementation
of *Hadith al-Ada* – in which the above-quoted phrase is mentioned – are
narrated only by Kufans from a single man: Zayd b. Yathi’. This Zayd is
accused in narrations – according to Ibn Taymiyyah – and has been
attributed to *al-rafdh*. If what Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah says were true,
then the *hadith* would be *mawdu’* (fabricated). However, is it so?

In the last chapter, we have presented different reliable chains of the
reports (of the implementation), and none of them includes Zayd b.
Yathi’. That alone exposes our dear Shaykh’s submission as a blatant
distortion of reality. Zayd b. Yathi’ is not the only source of the
reports!

But then, has Zayd b. Yathi’ really being accused in narrations? We will
mention first the scholars of *rijal* who had commented about Zayd
*before* Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H). Imam Muhammad b. Sa’d (d. 230
H) submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع :روى عن علي وحذيفة بن اليمان وكان قليل الحديث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’: He narrated from ‘Ali and Hudhayfah b. al-Yaman, and he
narrated few *ahadith*.[^2]

Imam al-‘Ijli (d. 261 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع كوفي ثقة تابعي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’: A Kufan, ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, a Tabi’i.[^3]

Ibn Abi Hatim (d. 327 H) makes a mistake in the surname:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن نفيع الهمداني الكوفي روى عن علي وأبي ذر وحذيفة روى عنه أبو
إسحاق الهمداني سمعت أبي يقول ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Nafi’ al-Hamadani al-Kufi: He narrated from ‘Ali, Abu Dharr and
Hudhayfah, and Abu Ishaq al-Hamadani narrated from him. I heard this
from my father.[^4]

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) has also included him in his book of *thiqah*
(trustworthy) narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع الهمداني كوفي يروى عن علي روى عنه أبو إسحاق السبيعي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’ al-Hamadani: A Kufan, he narrated from ‘Ali, and Abu
Ishaq al-Sabi’i narrated from him.[^5]

In addition to al-‘Ijli and Ibn Hibban, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) too
considers Zayd b. Yathi’ to be *thiqah* (trustworthy). He mentions this
chain in his book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو العباس محمد بن يعقوب ثنا الحسن بن علي بن عفان وأخبرني محمد
بن عبد الله الجوهري ثنا محمد بن إسحاق بن خزيمة ثنا الحسن بن علي بن
عفان العامري ثنا فضيل بن مرزوق الرواسي ثنا أبو إسحاق عن زيد بن يثيع عن
علي رضي الله عنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ya’qub – al-Hasan b. ‘Ali b. ‘Affan – Muhammad
b. ‘Abd Allah al-Jawhari – Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah – al-Hasan b.
‘Ali b. ‘Affan al-‘Amiri – Fudhayl b. Marzuq al-Ruwasi – Abu Ishaq –
**Zayd b. Yathi’** – ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him.[^6]

Commenting on the *sanad*, al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^7]

It is noteworthy that NONE of the classical Sunni *muhadithun* ever
accused Zayd b. Yathi’ of anything – whether lying, fabrication or
*al-rafdh*. Rather, three of them called him *thiqah* (trustworthy).
This reveals yet another disturbing foul play by our dear Shaykh, Ibn
Taymiyyah.

What about the *rijal* scholars after Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H)? Al-Hakim
further records this chain in his *al-Mustadrak*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو عبد الله الصفار ثنا محمد بن إبراهيم الأصفهاني ثنا الحسين بن
حفص عن سفيان عن أبي إسحاق عن زيد بن يثيع عن حذيفة رضي الله عنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Saffar – Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Isfahani – al-Husayn
b. Hafs – Sufyan – Abu Ishaq – **Zayd b. Yathi’** – Hudhayfah, may Allah
be pleased with him.[^8]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^9]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*Sahih*) upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim.[^10]

We do not know on what ground both al-Hakim and al-Dhahabi have placed
Zayd on the standard of the two Shaykhs, since neither of them has
relied upon him in his *Sahih*. However, their main message – that he is
*thiqah* (trustworthy) is unmistakable from their respective verdicts.
Elsewhere, the same al-Dhahabi also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع عن أبي بكر وأبي ذر وعنه أبو إسحاق فقط وثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’: **He narrated from Abu Bakr** and Abu Dharr, and only
Abu Ishaq narrated from him. **He has been graded** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**.[^11]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع … الهمداني الكوفي ثقة مخضرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’.... al-Hamadani al-Kufi: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.
He witnessed both the *Jahiliyyah* and the Islamic era.[^12]

In simple summary, these are the conclusions so far from our
investigations in this chapter:

1. Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah’s suggestion that reports of the Prophet’s
implementation of *Hadith al-Ada* has been narrated by only Zayd b.
Yathi’ is nothing but a complete fallacy.

2. His claims that Zayd b. Yathi’ was accused in narrations and that he
was attributed to *al-rafdh* are both patent untruths, with *absolutely*
no basis. Rather, Zayd b. Yathi’ in reality narrated *ahadith* from Abu
Bakr, and is *thiqah* (trustworthy) according to several top-ranking
Sunni *muhadithun*!

The most interesting part, however, is that Zayd b. Yathi’ actually also
narrated about the Messenger’s implementation of *Hadith al-Ada* from
two grand Sahabis - Abu Bakr and ‘Ali – with reliable chains! It is
noteworthy that even without any report from Zayd b. Yathi’, the
incident is reliably transmitted nonetheless, through other routes.
Therefore, its authenticity is not dependent in any way upon Zayd b.
Yathi’ or his reports. But, the *ahadith* of Zayd b. Yathi’ provide
*additional* grounds of authenticity for that crucial episode in Islamic
history.

Zayd b. Yathi’s *hadith* from Abu Bakr is documented by Imam Ahmad b.
Hanbal (d. 241 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله قال حدثني أبي قال ثنا وكيع قال قال إسرائيل قال أبو
إسحاق عن زيد بن يثيع عن أبي بكر: أن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم بعثه
ببراءة لأهل مكة .... فسار بها ثلاثا ثم قال لعلي رضي الله تعالى عنه
ألحقه فرد علي أبا بكر وبلغها أنت قال ففعل قال فلما قدم على النبي صلى
الله عليه و سلم أبو بكر بكى قال يا رسول الله حدث في شيء قال ما حدث فيك
إلا خير ولكن أمرت أن لا يبلغه إلا أنا أو رجل مني
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Waki’ – Israil – Abu Ishaq –
Zayd b. Yathi’ – Abu Bakr:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, sent me with *Barat* to the people of
Makkah.... I journeyed with it for three days. Then, he (the Prophet)
said to ‘Ali, may Allah the Almighty be pleased with him, “Meet him, and
ask Abu Bakr to return to me, and convey it yourself”. So, he did so.
When I got to the Prophet, peace be upon him, I wept and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, has something happened about me”? He replied,
“Nothing happened about you except a good thing. However, **I HAVE BEEN
COMMANDED that none can convey it (i.e.** ***Barat*****) except myself
or a man from me**.”[^13]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده ضعيف رجاله ثقات رجال الشيخين غير زيد بن يثيع
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *dha’if*. Its narrators are *thiqah* (trustworthy),
narrators of the two Shaykhs, except Zayd b. Yathi’.[^14]

Of course, Zayd b. Yathi’ is *thiqah* (trustworthy) too, as we have
proved. Al-Arnaut’s submission is surprising – considering his calibre -
since it has absolutely no basis! It is obvious that he only seeks – in
line with his custom – to salvage the face of his beloved spiritual
father, Ibn Taymiyyah, by boosting the latter’s ranks in his
distortions. That, however, does both of them no good.

The above *sahih* report of Zayd b. Yathi’ confirms that the order to
replace Abu Bakr came directly from Allah. Moreover, it was a command
that *must* be obeyed by the Messenger and his entire *Ummah*, and not
merely a piece of advice or a recommendation.

The same report is also recorded by Imam Abu Ya’la al-Mawsili (d. 307 H)
his *Musnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا إسحاق بن إسماعيل حدثنا وكيع حدثنا إسرائيل عن أبي إسحاق عن زيد بن
يثيع عن أبي بكر الصديق أن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم بعثه ببراءة إلى
أهل مكة ....فسار بها ثلاثا ثم قال لعلي الحقه فرد علي أبا بكر وبلغها
قال ففعل قال : فلما قدم على النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم أبو بكر بكى وقال
: يا رسول الله أحدث في شيء ؟ قال ثم قال : ما حدث فيك إلا خير إلا أني
أمرت بذلك : أن لا يبلغ إلا أنا أو رجل مني
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ishaq b. Isma’il – Waki’ – Israil – Abu Ishaq – **Zayd b. Yathi’** – Abu
Bakr al-Siddiq:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, sent me with *Barat* to the people of
Makkah.... I journeyed with it for three days. Then, he (the Prophet)
said to ‘Ali, “Meet him, and ask Abu Bakr to return to me, and convey
it”. So, he did. When I got to the Prophet, peace be upon him, I wept
and said, “O Messenger of Allah, has something happened about me”? He
replied, “Nothing happened about you except a good thing. However, **I
HAVE BEEN COMMANDED with it, that none can convey it (i.e.**
***Barat*****) except myself or a man from me**.”[^15]

Shaykh Dr. Husayn Asad Salim, the annotator, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رجاله ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its narrators are *thiqah* (trustworthy).[^16]

Zayd b. Yathi’s report from Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi al-salam*, is
documented by Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H). He records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا العباس بن محمد قال حدثنا أبو نوح واسمه عبد الرحمن بن غزوان قراد
عن يونس بن أبي إسحاق عن أبي إسحاق عن زيد بن يثيع عن علي: أن رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم بعث ببراءة إلى أهل مكة مع أبي بكر ثم اتبعه بعلي
فقال له خذ الكتاب فامض به إلى أهل مكة قال فلحقته فأخذت الكتاب منه
فانصرف أبو بكر وهو كئيب فقال يا رسول الله أنزل في شيء قال لا إني أمرت
أن أبلغه أنا أو رجل من أهل بيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-‘Abbas b. Muhammad – Abu Nuh, his name is ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Ghazwan
Qurad – Yunus b. Abi Ishaq – Abu Ishaq – Zayd b. Yathi’ – ‘Ali:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, sent *Barat* to the people of
Makkah with Abu Bakr. Then he sent me after him, and said to me, “Take
the document and go with it to the people of Makkah.” I met him and took
the document from him. So, Abu Bakr headed back, weeping. Then he said,
“O Messenger of Allah, has something (bad) been revealed (from heaven)
about me?” He replied, “No. **(But) I have been COMMANDED to either
convey it myself or a man from my Ahl al-Bayt should convey it**.”[^17]

Al-Hafiz says about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عباس بن محمد بن حاتم الدوري أبو الفضل البغدادي خوارزمي الأصل ثقة حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abbas b. Muhammad b. Hatim al-Dawri Abu al-Fadhl al-Baghdadi,
originally from Khawarazm: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***hafiz (the
hadith scientist)***.[^18]

The second narrator is like that too, according to al-Hafiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرحمن بن غزوان …. أبو نوح المعروف بقراد …. ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Rahman b. Ghazwan .... Abu Nuh, better known as Qurad ....:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^19]

What of the third narrator? Al-Hafiz states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يونس بن أبي إسحاق السبيعي أبو إسرائيل الكوفي صدوق يهم قليلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yunus b. Abi Ishaq al-Sabi’i, Abu Israil al-Kufi: ***Saduq*** **(very
truthful), hallucinates a little**.[^20]

The status of Abu Ishaq and Zayd b. Yathi’ is already known. Both are
*thiqah* (trustworthy). Abu Ishaq in particular is a narrator of both
*Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih Muslim*, as further confirmed by Shaykh
al-Arnaut. As such, the above *hadith* is *hasan* due to Yunus b. Abu
Ishaq.

With the undeniable authenticity of Zayd b. Yathi’s reports, Shaykh Ibn
Taymiyyah loses completely, and is shamed on all fronts concerning
*Hadith al-Ada*.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 5, p. 63

[^2]: Muhammad b. Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir), vol.
6, p. 222

[^3]: Abu al-Hasan Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Salih al-‘Ijli al-Kufi,
Ma’rifat al-Thiqat (Madinah: Maktabah al-Dar; 1st edition, 1405 H), vol.
1, p. 380, \# 535

[^4]: Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim Muhamamd b. Idris b.
al-Munzir al-Tamimi al-Hanzali al-Razi, al-Jarh wa al-Ta’dil (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1371 H), vol. 3, p. 573, \#
2598

[^5]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, Kitab
al-Thiqat (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1398 H), vol. 4, p. 251

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p. 73,
\# 4434

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 521, \# 8462

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Shams al-Din Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Dhahabi
al-Dimashqi, al-Kashif fi Ma’rifat Man Lahu Riwayat fi al-Kutub
al-Sittah (Jeddah: Dar al-Qiblah li al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah; 1st
edition, 1413 H), vol. 1, p. 419, \# 1759

[^12]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 332, \# 2166

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 3, \# 4

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 1, p. 100, \# 104

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 128, \# 8461

[^18]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 475, \# 3200

[^19]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 586, \# 3991

[^20]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 348, \# 7928


