16) Hadith Al-Siyadah, Examining The Background Arguments
=========================================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ففي هذا الخبر إخبار عمر بين المهاجرين والأنصار أن أبا بكر سيد المسلمين
وخيرهم وأحبهم إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ذلك علة مبايعته فقال
بل نبايعك أنت فأنت سيدنا وخيرنا وأحبنا إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم ليبين بذلك أن المأمور به تولية الأفضل وأنت أفضلنا فنبايعك
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this report is the declaration of ‘Umar among the Muhajirun and the
Ansar that **Abu Bakr was the** ***sayyid*** **of the Muslims** and the
best of them, and the most beloved of them to the Messenger of Allah.
This is the reason for following him. **So, he (‘Umar) said, “Rather, we
will follow you because you are our** ***sayyid***, and the best of us,
and the most beloved of us to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him”. He wanted to make clear through it that: **What is ordained is to
give authority to the best**, and you are the best of us. So, we will
follow you.[^1]

‘Umar apparently referred to Abu Bakr as “our *sayyid*”[^2]. Our Shaykh
interprets that “our” as referring to all Muslims of that time, who were
only the Sahabah. In other words, ‘Umar was speaking on behalf of his
colleagues as a whole. Therefore, on the basis of ‘Umar’s testimony, Abu
Bakr was the *sayyid* of the Sahabah. So, what does this mean?

First and foremost, it is important to note that the word *sayyid* has
different meanings and can be used in various contexts. Dr. Baalbaki, a
contemporary lexicographer, defines *sayyid* in this manner:

master, lord, chief, head, leader; Mr.; gentleman; a descendant of
Prophet Mohammad; sovereign; independent.[^3]

As such, in a cultural context, the word *sayyid* means “descendant of
the Prophet”. In a political context, it refers to the ruler. In a
tribal context, the title belongs to their chief. In the family setting,
the husband – being its head - is the *sayyid*. The examples go on and
on. What matters to our research, however, is solely the *spiritual*
context. Therefore, all references to “sayyid” or “siyadah” henceforth
in this and other chapters on *Hadith al-Siyadah* relate to spirituality
only. Abu Bakr was not the political leader of Muslims, nor was he their
tribal or other chief, when ‘Umar addressed him as “our *sayyid*”. This
reveals that he too was referring to Abu Bakr’s alleged spiritual
*siyadah* over the *Ummah*.

In order to determine what the term *sayyid* indicates in the spiritual
context, we must examine the following *hadith*, documented by Imam
Muslim (d. 261 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني الحكم بن موسى أبو صالح حدثنا هقل (يعني ابن زياد) عن الأوزاعي
حدثني أبو عمار حدثني عبدالله بن فروخ حدثني أبو هريرة قال قال رسول الله
أنا سيد ولد آدم يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hakam b. Musa Abu Salih – Hiql b. Ziyad – al-Awza’i – Abu ‘Ammar –
‘Abd Allah b. Farukh – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah said: “I am the *sayyid* of the descendants of
Adam on the Day of Resurrection.”[^4]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن سعيد قال ثنا أبو حيان قال ثنا أبو
زرعة بن عمرو بن جرير عن أبي هريرة قال ... رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم ... أنا سيد الناس يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Sa’id –
Abu Hayyan – Abu Zur’ah b. ‘Amr b. Jarir – Abu Hurayrah:

... The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “... I am the
*sayyid* of mankind on the Day of Resurrection.”[^5]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^6]

Obviously, the *siyadah* of the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*,
in these *hadiths* falls within the spiritual context, especially since
they are connected with the Hereafter. This is how the scholars of the
Ahl al-Sunnah understand the reports too. Imam al-Nawawi (d. 676 H), for
instance, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تفضيل نبينا صلى الله عليه وسلم على جميع الخلائق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله صلى الله عليه وسلم أنا سيد ولد آدم يوم القيامة ... وهذا الحديث
دليل لتفضيله صلى الله عليه وسلم على الخلق كلهم لأن مذهب أهل السنة أن
الآدميين أفضل من الملائكة وهو صلى الله عليه وسلم أفضل الآدميين وغيرهم
وأما الحديث الآخر لا تفضلوا بين الأنبياء فجوابه من خمسة أوجه الأول:
أنه صلى الله عليه وسلم قاله قبل أن يعلم أنه سيد ولد آدم فلما علم أخبر
به
  </p>
</blockquote>

Superiority of our Prophet, peace be upon him, over the entire creation

His statement, peace be upon him, “I am the *sayyid* of the descendants
of Adam on the Day of Resurrection”.... **This** ***hadith*** **is proof
of his superiority, peace be upon him, over all the creation**. This is
because the doctrine of the Ahl al-Sunnah is that human beings are
superior to angels, and he, peace be upon him, is the most superior of
the human beings and others. As for the other *hadith* “do not give
superiorty to any among the prophets”, the answer is from five aspects.
The first is: he, peace be upon him, said it before he knew that he was
the *sayyid* of the descendants of Adam. When he knew, he informed of
it.[^7]

Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) has a similar view:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله أنا سيد ولد آدم يوم القيامة ولا فخر أي ولا أقوله تفاخرا بل اعتداد
بفضله
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement, “I am the *sayyid* of the descendants of Adam on the Day
of Resurrection, and I am not boastful”, meaning: I am not saying it for
pride. **Rather, it was in consideration of his superiority**.[^8]

Therefore, in the spiritual context, *siyadah* means superiority in the
Sight of Allah. Whoever is the *sayyid* of the Muslims is their best.
Moreover, anyone who is a *sayyid* in the Hereafter is equally a
*sayyid* in this world in the same capacity.

Our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah often quote a relevant Sunni-only
report to prove the superiority of both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar over the
*Ummah*. ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) states:

> قال عبد الله بن أحمد في " زوائد المسند " (1 / 80) : حدثني وهب بن بقية
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الواسطي حدثنا عمر (في الأصل: عمرو) بن يونس اليمامي عن عبد الله بن عمر
اليمامي عن الحسن بن زيد بن حسن حدثني أبي عن أبيه عن علي رضي الله عنه
قال: " كنت عند النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم، فأقبل أبو بكر وعمر رضي الله
عنهما، فقال: " يا علي هذان سيدا كهول أهل الجنة وشبابها بعد النبيين
والمرسلين ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad said in *Zawaid al-Musnad* (1/80):

Wahb b. Baqiyyah al-Wasiti – ‘Umar (in the original: ‘Amr) b. Yunus
al-Yamami – ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al-Yamami – al-Hasan b. Zayd b. Hasan –
my father – his father ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him:

I was with the Prophet, peace be upon him, when Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with them both, approached. So, he said, “O ‘Ali!
**These two are the two** ***sayyids*** **of THE ELDERLY ONES of the
people of Paradise (*****Ahl al-Jannah*****) and of its youth**, after
the prophets and messengers.”[^9]

Our ‘Allamah comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا سند حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This chain is *hasan*.[^10]

The problem of the above *hadith* is primarily in its *matn* (content).
It disturbingly assumes that there will be elderly people in Paradise,
alongside its youth! This embarrassing mistake raises several red flags
concerning its true origin. The correct opinion of the Messenger of
Allah, which is universally confirmed, is that there will be only youth
in *Jannah*. Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal records, for instance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا سليمان بن داود ثنا عمران عن قتادة عن شهر
بن حوشب عن عبد الرحمن بن غنم عن معاذ بن جبل انه سأل النبي صلى الله
عليه و سلم أو سمع النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول يدخل أهل الجنة الجنة
جردا مردا مكحلين بنى ثلاثين أو ثلاث وثلاثين
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) Sulayman b. Dawud –
‘Imran – Qatadah – Shahr b. Hawshab – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Ghanam – Mu’adh
b. Jabal:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, said, “The people of Paradise will enter
Paradise hairless, beardless with their eyes anointed with kohl, **aged
thirty or thirty-three years**.”[^11]

Shaykh al-Arnaut declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan li ghayrihi*[^12]

In his *Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir*, the ‘Allamah copies a similar
*hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يدخل أهل الجنة الجنة جردا مردا كأنهم مكحلون أبناء ثلاث وثلاثين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The people of Paradise will enter Paradise hairless, beardless, with
their eyes anointed with kohl, **aged thirty-three years**.[^13]

And the ‘Allamah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^14]

Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) also documents a *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن بشار و أبو هشام الرفاعي قالا حدثنا معاذ بن هشام عن أبيه
عن عامر الأحول عن شهر بن حوشب عن أبي هريرة قال قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم أهل الجنة جرد مرد كحل لا يفنى شبابهم ولا تبلى ثيابهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Bashar and Abu Hisham al-Rufa’i – Mu’adh b. Hisham – his
father – ‘Amir al-Ahwal – Shahr b. Hawshab – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “The people of Paradise
will be hairless and beardless, with their eyes anointed with kohl.
**Their YOUTH will never end**, and their clothes will never become
worn.”[^15]

Al-Tirmidhi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حسن غريب
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *hasan gharib*.[^16]

‘Allamah al-Albani supports him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^17]

Since there will be no elderly folks in Paradise, how then will Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar be their *sayyids* in there? Al-Mubarakfuri – apparently
troubled by these facts - attempts to explain away the fatal problem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لم يكن في الجنة كهل ... وقيل سيدا من مات كهلا من المسلمين فدخل الجنة
لأنه ليس فيها كهل
  </p>
</blockquote>

**There will be NO elderly person in Paradise** ... And it is said they
(i.e. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar) both will be *sayyids* of **those who died as
elderly people** among the Muslims and thereby entered Paradise, because
there will be no elderly person in it.[^18]

So, “elderly ones of the people of Paradise” only refers to those who
died elderly in this world and were later admitted to *Jannah* in the
Hereafter. Their official title, according to the Ahl al-Sunnah, is
“elderly ones of the people of Paradise”. What about those who died
young in this world and then made it to Paradise? In line with the Sunni
logic, they are “the youth of the people of Paradise”. Things however
get out of hand when questions are asked about the fortunate people of
*Jannah* who died as infants, babies or children in this world? The
*hadith* mentions only two categories for the people of Paradise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
" يا علي هذان سيدا كهول أهل الجنة وشبابها بعد النبيين والمرسلين ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O ‘Ali! These two are the two *sayyids* of the elderly ones of the
people of Paradise (*Ahl al-Jannah*) and of its youth, after the
prophets and messengers.”

The youth, of course, are people above the ages of adolecence. It would
be ridiculous to put babies of two months or foetuses, for instance, in
the category of youth! So, there are only two possibilities here:

1. People who died in pregnancy, infancy or childhood will all
automatically go to Hellfire. No category is listed for them, thereby
suggesting that they have no place in Paradise. Otherwise, the *hadith*
should have mentioned “the, foetuses, infants and children of the people
of Paradise” as well.

2. People who died in infancy or childhood will all be superior to Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar, in Paradise! After all, the duo are described as being
*sayyids* of only the elderly as well as the youth of the people of
Paradise. The infants and children are conspicuously excluded.

Apparently, neither of the above is acceptable to our brothers from the
Ahl al-Sunnah. As such, the absurdity of al-Mubarakfuri’s linguistic
gymnastics, even by Sunni standards, is unmistakable. Clearly, the Sunni
*hadith* is not about the age of death here in the world *at all*. It
rather informs the Ahl al-Sunnah that the people of Paradise will be in
two categories only: the elderly as well as the youth. Of course, such a
scandalous error could never have emerged from the noble Messenger of
Allah.

Things get even a lot messier when one considers the case of Bilal b.
Rabah, the well-known *muezzin* of the Prophet. Imam Ibn Sa’d (d. 230 H)
records about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أخبرنا محمد بن عمر قال أخبرنا موسى بن محمد بن إبراهيم بن الحارث
التيمي عن أبيه قال توفي بلال بدمشق سنة عشرين ودفن عند الباب الصغير في
مقبرة دمشق وهو بن بضع وستين سنة قال أخبرنا محمد بن عمر سمعت شعيب بن
طلحة من ولد أبي بكر الصديق يقول كان بلال ترب أبي بكر قال محمد بن عمر
فإن كان هذا هكذا وقد توفي أبو بكر سنة ثلاث عشرة وهو بن ثلاث وستين سنة
فبين هذا وبين ما روي لنا في بلال سبع سنين وشعيب بن طلحة أعلم بميلاد
بلال حين يقول هو ترب أبي بكر فالله أعلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. ‘Umar – Musa b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. al-Harith al-Tamimi –
his father: “Bilal died in Damascus in the year 20 AH, and was buried at
the *al-Bab al-Saghir* in the cemetery of Damascus, **and he was more
than sixty years old**.”

Muhammad b. ‘Umar – Shu’ayb b. Talhah, from the descendants of Abu Bakr
al-Siddiq, used to say: “**Bilal was an age mate of Abu Bakr**.”
Muhammad b. ‘Umar said, “If this was the case, and Abu Bakr had died in
13 AH at the age of sixty three, then the difference between this and
what is narrated to us concerning Bilal (i.e. his date of death) is
seven years. Shu’ayb b. Talhah was the most knowledgeable of the date of
birth of Bilal when he used to say that he (Bilal) was an age mate of
Abu Bakr. And Allah knows best.”[^19]

He was over 60 years old when he passed away. That puts him far into the
elderly category. Yet, he was the *sayyid* of ‘Umar in the same way that
Abu Bakr was, as the son of al-Khattab himself testified! Imam al-Hakim
(d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو عبد الله الصفار أحمد بن عبد الله ثنا أحمد بن مهران الأصبهاني
ثنا خالد بن مخلد وحدثنا أبو العباس محمد بن يعقوب ثنا بحر بن نصر ثنا
عبد الله بن وهب قالا : ثنا عبد العزيز بن أبي سلمة الماجشون عن محمد بن
المنكدر عن جابر قال قال عمر : رضي الله عنه أبو بكر سيدنا وأعتق سيدنا
يعني بلالا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Saffar Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah – Ahmad b. Mahran
al-Isbahani – Khalid b. Mukhlid AND Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ya’qub –
Bahr b. Nasr – ‘Abd Allah b. Wahb – ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Abi Salamah
al-Majishun – Muhammad b. al-Munkadar – Jabir:

‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, “Abu Bakr is our *sayyid*,
**and he emancipated OUR** ***SAYYID*****, THAT IS BILAL**.”[^20]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح ولم يخرجاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is *sahih*, and they both (i.e. al-Bukhari and Muslim) have not
recorded it.[^21]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^22]

Contrary to the mistake of al-Hakim, Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) has
actually recorded it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو نعيم حدثنا عبد العزيز بن أبي سلمة عن محمد بن المنكدر أخبرنا
جابر بن عبد الله رضي الله عنهما قال : كان عمر يقول أبو بكر سيدنا وأعتق
سيدنا . يعني بلالا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Na’im – ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Abi Salamah – Muhammad b. al-Munkadar –
Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah, may Allah be pleased with them both:

‘Umar used to say, “Abu Bakr is our *sayyid*, **and he emancipated our**
***sayyid*****, that is Bilal**”.[^23]

*Siyadah* – in the spiritual sense - in this world only reflects that of
the Hereafter. For instance, our Prophet will be the *sayyid* of all
humanity in the Hereafter. This, as we have shown, is why he is our
*sayyid* here as well. As such, since Bilal was the *sayyid* of ‘Umar,
he will *surely* also be the latter’s *sayyid* in the Hereafter.
*Siyadah* in the Hereafter reflects in this world, and *siyadah* in this
world is evidence of that of the Hereafter.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 8, p. 565

[^2]: See also Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1341, \# 3467

[^3]: Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic-English Dictionary
(Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th edition, 1995 CE), p. 653

[^4]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1782, \# 2278 (3)

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 2, p. 435, \#
9621

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Muhyi al-Din Abu Zakariyyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, Sahih
Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H), vol.
15, pp. 37-38

[^8]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 10, p. 59

[^9]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 2, p. 468, \# 824

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 5, p. 243, \#
22159

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 1341, \# 3158 (8072)

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’
al-Sahih Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 4, p. 679, \# 2539

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Ibid

[^18]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 10, p. 103

[^19]: Muhammad b. Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir),
vol. 3, p. 238

[^20]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
320, \# 5239

[^21]: Ibid

[^22]: Ibid

[^23]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1371, \# 3544


