20) Hadith Sadd Al-Abwab, What Doors Exactly Were Closed?
=========================================================

Why exactly did the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*,
order that all doors be closed except the door of Amir al-Muminin,
*‘alaihi al-salam*? This is a question that has engaged the *‘ulama* of
the Ahl al-Sunnah for centuries, with each side among them offering its
difference perspective on the incident. Perhaps, the most widespread
opinion among the Sunni scholars is that ‘Ali was only “spared” out of
mercy. His house had only one door, which was that which opened into the
mosque. If it were closed, then he and his family would be sealed
*inside* their house or permanently blocked from entering it. Al-Hafiz
(d. 852 H) is quite explicit on this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمعنى ان باب علي كان إلى جهة المسجد ولم يكن لبيته باب غيره فلذلك لم
يؤمر بسده
  </p>
</blockquote>

The meaning is that the door of ‘Ali opens into the mosque and his house
had no other door. This was why he was not commanded to close it.[^1]

One of the most crucial evidences often quoted for this position is this
*hadith* documented by Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن جعفر بن حمدان القطيعي ببغداد من أصل كتابه ثنا
عبد الله بن أحمد بن حنبل حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا
أبو بلج ثنا عمرو بن ميمون قال إني لجالس عند ابن عباس إذ أتاه تسعة رهط
فقالوا : يا ابن عباس : إما أن تقوم معنا وإما أن تخلو بنا من بين هؤلاء
قال : فقال ابن عباس بل أنا أقوم معكم قال وهو يومئذ صحيح قبل أن يعمى
قال : فابتدؤوا فتحدثوا فلا ندري ما قالوا قال فجاء ينفض ثوبه ويقول أف
وتف وقعوا في رجل له بضع عشرة فضائل ليست لأحد غيره ....قال ابن عباس وسد
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم أبواب المسجد غير باب علي فكان يدخل المسجد
جنبا وهو طريقه ليس له طريق غيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ja’far b. Hamdan al-Qati’i – ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b.
Hanbal – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) Yahya b. Hamad – Abu Awanah – Abu
Balj - ‘Amr b. Maymun:

I was sitting in the company of Ibn ‘Abbas when nine men came to him and
said, “O Ibn ‘Abbas! Either you debate with us, or tell these folks that
you prefer a private debate.” So, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I would rather
participate with you.” In those days, he had not lost his eye-sight yet.
So they started talking, but I was not sure exactly what they were
talking about.

Then he came, squeezing his robe, and saying: “Nonsense! **They are
attacking a man who has ten EXCLUSIVE MERITS**.... Ibn ‘Abbas said: “The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, closed the doors of the mosque
except the door of ‘Ali. So he (‘Ali) used to enter the mosque after
having a seminal discharge before performing the purification bath. **It
(i.e. the mosque) was his pathway, and he had no other pathway except
it**.”[^2]

Al-Hakim states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^3]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^4]

If we accepted al-Hafiz’s understanding of the *hadith*, then there
would be no value in it for ‘Ali. After all, if another Sahabi had
fallen into a similar “predicament”, he would have been treated
similarly “out of mercy”. Therefore, it would be an “ordinary” incident
with no special significance to it. However, that theory lacks strength
in many respects. First, Ibn ‘Abbas, *radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, considered
the *hadith* to be a “merit” of ‘Ali, in fact his “*exclusive* merit”!
This reveals very clearly that our Hafiz understood the reports very
wrongly.

Even though ‘Ali had only one door, that was NOT the reason he was
allowed to open it. He certainly could have been ordered to relocate the
door to the opposite side of his house; and he would have achieved that
within hours.

So, there was clearly a choice in the matter. But, the Prophet deemed it
unnecessary. In fact, it is obvious from Ibn ‘Abbas’ words that even if
there had been many doors to the house of ‘Ali, he still would have been
exempted from the closure order. After all, the Messenger purposely left
open his door to highlight his “exclusive merit” over the rest of the
Sahabah.

Interestingly, Ibn ‘Umar also understood the incident as indicating a
unique rank. Al-Hafiz states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واخرج النسائي من طريق العلاء بن عرار بمهملات قال فقلت لابن عمر أخبرني
عن علي وعثمان فذكر الحديث وفيه وأما علي فلا تسأل عنه أحدا وانظر إلى
منزلته من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قد سد أبوابنا في المسجد وأقر
بابه ورجاله رجال الصحيح الا العلاء وقد وثقه يحيى بن معين وغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذه الأحاديث يقوي بعضها بعضا وكل طريق منها صالح للاحتجاج فضلا عن
مجموعها
  </p>
</blockquote>

And al-Nasai recorded through the route of al-‘Ala b. ‘Arar: “I said to
Ibn ‘Umar: ‘Tell me about ‘Ali and ‘Uthman’.” Then he (al-Nasai)
mentioned the *hadith* (as above), and added (that Ibn ‘Umar said), “As
for ‘Ali, do not ask anyone about him. **Just look at his status from
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. He had closed our doors in
the mosques and left his door open**.” Its narrators are narrators of
the *Sahih* except al-‘Ala, and Yahya b. Ma’in and others have declared
him *thiqah* (trustworthy).

These *ahadith* strengthen one another, **and each of the chains is
qualified to be used as a** ***hujjah***, much less their
combination.[^5]

What exactly was this status? Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) records a *hadith*
that gives the answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الله بن نمير قال ثنا موسى الجهني قال
حدثتني فاطمة بنت علي قالت حدثتني أسماء بنت عميس قالت سمعت رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول: يا علي أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا انه
ليس بعدي نبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Abd Allah b. Numayr – Musa
al-Juhani – Fatimah bint ‘Ali – Asma bint ‘Umays:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “**O ‘Ali!
You are to me of the status of Harun to Musa** except that there is no
prophet after me.”[^6]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^7]

So, Imam ‘Ali was exempted from the closure order to highlight his
status as the Harun of our *Ummah* – the spiritual, political and
military lieutenant of our Prophet. Quite strangely though, Ibn ‘Umar
and some other Sahabah did not think that this status of ‘Ali placed him
above Abu Bakr and ‘Umar! How they managed to arrive at such a weird
conclusion is a mystery of mysteries.

In a related *riwayah*, Ibn ‘Umar even revealed a fact that changes the
game even more drastically. Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أحمد بن سليمان قال حدثنا عبيد الله قال حدثنا إسرائيل عن أبي
إسحاق عن العلاء بن عرار قال سألت بن عمر وهو في مسجد رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم عن علي وعثمان فقال أما علي فلا تسألني عنه وانظر إلى منزله
من رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ليس في المسجد بيت غير بيته وأما عثمان
فإنه أذنب ذنبا عظيما يوم التقى الجمعان فعفى الله عنه وغفر له وأذنب
فيكم ذنبا دون فقتلتموه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Sulayman – ‘Abd Allah – Israil – Abu Ishaq – al-‘Ala b. ‘Arar:

I asked Ibn ‘Umar while he was in the mosque of the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, concerning ‘Ali and ‘Uthman. So, he replied, “As for
‘Ali, then do not ask me concerning him. Just look at his apartment from
(the apartment of) the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. **There is
NO house in the mosque apart from his house**. As for ‘Uthman, he
committed a terrible sin on the day when the two armies met (i.e. at
Uhud when he fled). But Allah pardoned and forgave him. Then, he
committed another sin among you, and you killed him.”[^8]

Both Dr. Bandari and Sayyid Hasan jointly state:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح رجاله ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

**It is** ***sahih***. Its narrators are trustworthy.[^9]

Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن رافع حدثنا حسين عن زائدة عن أبي حصين عن سعد بن عبيدة قال
:جاء رجل إلى ابن عمر فسأله عن عثمان فذكر عن محاسن عمله قال لعل ذاك
يسؤوك ؟ قال نعم قال فأرغم الله بأنفك ثم سأله عن علي فذكر محاسن عمله
قال هو ذاك بيته أوسط بيوت النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم ثم قال لعل ذاك
يسؤوك ؟ قال أجل قال فأرغم الله بأنفك انطلق فاجهد علي جهدك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Rafi’ – Husayn – Zaidah – Abu Husayn - Sad b. ‘Ubaydah:

A man came to Ibn ‘Umar and asked about ‘Uthman. So, he (i.e. Ibn ‘Umar)
mentioned his good deeds and said to the questioner. “Perhaps these
facts annoy you?” He (the questioner) answered, “Yes.” Ibn ‘Umar said,
“May Allah stick your nose in the dust!” Then he (the man) asked him
(i.e. Ibn ‘Umar) about ‘Ali. So, he (i.e. Ibn ‘Umar) mentioned his good
deeds and said, “He (‘Ali) is this. **His house is in the midst of the
houses of the Prophet, peace be upon him**. Perhaps these facts have
hurt you?” He (i.e. the questioner) said, “Of course.” He (i.e. Ibn
‘Umar) said, “May Allah stick your nose in the dust! Go away and do
whatever you can against me.”[^10]

This incident clearly took place after the death of ‘Uthman. A number of
fundamental facts are discernible from the reports:

1. The purpose of the closure order was to “detach” all houses from the
mosque of the Prophet, except his own houses and that of Amir
al-Muminin.

2. Once it was impossible to move directly from the *mihrab* (prayer
chambers) into the house, it was deemed “detached”.

3. Therefore, once the order was given to close all doors except that of
‘Ali only, the houses of the other Sahabah – including that of Abu Bakr
– permanently ceased to have any entry or exit point into the mosque.
Through this, they were literally detached from the *mihrab* of the
*masjid*.

4. This was the case till after the death of ‘Uthman.

5. As such, Abu Bakr had NO house “attached” to the mosque at the time
when the Messenger was allegedly ordering that all “wickets” be closed!
How did Abu Bakr possess a wicket when he no longer had any house in the
mosque?!

6. Ibn ‘Umar thought that the order to spare only the house of ‘Ali in
the mosque is indicative of the latter’s special rank in the Sight of
Allah and His Messenger.

7. The Prophet allowed the house of ‘Ali to be in the midst of his own
houses facing *into* the mosque. He never granted the same honour to any
other creature!

This is our query to our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah: how did Abu
Bakr manage to have a wicket, or a door, during the Prophet’s fatal
illness when he no longer had *any* house facing into the *masjid*? He
used to have. But, once the order for closure was issued earlier, he and
all other Muslims – with the sole exception of the Messenger of Allah
and Imam ‘Ali – “detached” their houses from the mosque by permanently
sealing their doors opening into it. This remained the case till, at
least, after the death of ‘Uthman. So, how could Abu Bakr have had any
wicket or door in that circumstance? Where did his apparently
*imaginary* “wicket” and “door” come from?

Ironically, our Sunni brothers haved hinged some of their *real* beliefs
on this fiction of Abu Bakr’s “wicket” and “door”! Interestingly,
however, their statements concerning those two also reveal a lot about
the full meaning of *Hadith Sadd al-Abwab*. For instance, al-Hafiz Ibn
Kathir (d. 774 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي قوله عليه السلام سدوا عني كل خوخة - يعني الأبواب الصغار - إلى
المسجد غير خوخة أبي بكر إشارة إلى الخلافة أي ليخرج منها إلى الصلاة
بالمسلمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in his statement, peace be upon him, “Close all wickets opening into
the mosque except the wicket of Abu Bakr”, is **an indication towards
the** ***khilafah***, that is, so that he could pass through it (into
the mosque) to lead the Muslims in *Salat*.[^11]

Therefore, by opening the *imaginary* wicket of Abu Bakr, the Prophet
was announcing him as his *khalifah*. The Imam of Muslims, who would be
leading them in *Salat* in the mosque of the Messenger, must have his
residence forming part of it, like the Prophet too. This establishes
beyond doubt that when the Messenger of Allah left open the *real* door
of Amir al-Muminin and closed all others, he was indicating to all the
Sahabah that the latter was be his *real* legitimate *khalifah*.

Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي حديث أبي سعيد عند البخاري في المناقب لا يبقين في المسجد باب إلا سد
إلا باب أبي بكر وفي الهجرة لا تبقين في المسجد خوخة إلا خوخة أبي بكر
وكذا عند الترمذي كما تقدم قال الخطابي وابن بطال وغيرهما في هذا الحديث
اختصاص ظاهر لأبي بكر رضي الله عنه وفيه إشارة قوية إلى استحقاقه للخلافة
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the *hadith* of Abu Sa’id, recorded by al-Bukhari in the Chapter of
*al-Manaqib*, it is read, “Close all doors in the mosque except the door
of Abu Bakr.” In the Chapter of *al-Hijrah*, it is read, “No wicket
shall remain in the mosque except the wicket of Abu Bakr”. This is how
it is recorded by al-Tirmidhi too, as previously stated. Al-Khattabi and
Ibn Battal and others said that in this *hadith* is **a clear, exclusive
merit** for Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, **and in it is a
strong indication of his entitlement to the** ***khilafah***.[^12]

So, by leaving open the *real* door of Amir al-Muminin, the Messenger of
Allah was confirming for him a clear, *exclusive* merit and affirming
his right to the *khilafah* before anyone else. Imam al-‘Ayni (d. 855)
adds his few cents too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله خوخة بفتح المعجمتين بينهما واو ساكنة هو الباب الصغير وكان بعض
الصحابة فتحوا أبوابا في ديارهم إلى المسجد فأمر الشارع بسدها كلها إلا
خوخة أبي بكر ليتميز بذلك فضله وفيه إيماء إلى الخلافة
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement “wicket” refers to the small door. Some of the Sahabah
used to open the doors of their houses into the mosque. So, the
Law-Giver (i.e. Allah) ordered that the closure of all of them except
the wicket of Abu Bakr, **to establish his superiority through that, and
in it is a gesture towards the** ***khilafah***.[^13]

In other words, ‘Ali was the best of the Sahabah, on account of *Hadith
Sadd al-Abwab*, and was the first legitimate *khalifah* among them!
Al-Hafiz makes an even more groundbreaking submission which reaches far
to the very heart of Sunni Islam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد ادعى بعضهم ان الباب كناية عن الخلافة والامر بالسد كناية عن طلبها
كأنه قال لا يطلبن أحد الخلافة الا أبا بكر فإنه لا حرج عليه في طلبها
والى هذا جنح ابن حبان فقال بعد أن اخرج هذا الحديث في هذا الحديث دليل
على أنه الخليفة بعد النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم لأنه حسم بقوله سدوا عني
كل خوخة في المسجد أطماع الناس كلهم عن أن يكونوا خلفاء بعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Some of them (i.e. the Sunni scholars) have claimed that the “door”
(in the** ***ahadith*****) is equivalent to the** ***khilafah***. So,
the order of closure is equivalent to an order against seeking it (i.e.
the *khilafah*). It was as though he said, “None should seek the
*khilafah* except Abu Bakr, because there is no blame on him in seeking
it.” Ibn Hibban subscribed to this view, and so said after recording
this *hadith*: “**In this** ***hadith*** **is a proof that he (Abu Bakr)
was the** ***khalifah*** **after the Prophet**, peace be upon him,
because **he (the Messenger) terminated** – through his statement ‘Close
all wickets in the mosque’ – **the desire of all (other) human beings to
become** ***khalifahs*** **after him**.”[^14]

We agree wholly that the “door” symbolized the *khilafah*. As such, when
Allah closed the doors of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and others, He
literally banned them forever from ever becoming legitimate *khalifahs*
of His Prophet. By leaving open only the door of ‘Ali, Allah and His
Messenger explicitly restricted the true *khilafah* to him and his
descendants – to his household.

The severe dilemma of the Sunni position is that even *IF* it is agreed,
for the sake of argument, that Abu Bakr’s “wicket” and “door” had been
real, then the *hadith* would only have proved his *khilafah* and
delegitimized those of ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, Amir al-Muminin, Mu’awiyah and
others! The *khilafah* would have been the right and preserve of Abu
Bakr and his descendants, to the exclusion of all others!

[^1]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 7, p. 13

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 7, p. 13

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 6, p. 438, \#
27507

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 138, \# 8491

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1358, \# 3501

[^11]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 5, p. 251

[^12]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 10, p. 112

[^13]: Badr al-Din al-‘Ayni, ‘Umdah al-Qari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.
17, p. 39, \# 386

[^14]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 7, p. 12


