21) Hadith Al-Manzilah, the Golden Hadith
=========================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرافضي الثالث قوله أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا انه لا نبي
بعدي....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والجواب أن هذا الحديث ثبت في الصحيحين بلا ريب وغيرهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Rafidhi said: The third (point) is his statement (to ‘Ali), “**You
are to me of the status of Harun to Musa**, except that there is no
prophet after me.”....

The reply is: **This** ***hadith*** **is authentic** in the two *Sahihs*
**without any doubt**, and in other books too.[^1]

This is one of the *very* few, miraculous instances when our Shaykh
submits to the truth about the authenticity of a pro-‘Ali *hadith*! As
he has conceded, the *hadith* is certainly *sahih*. Imam Muslim (d. 261
H) too recorded it in his *Sahih* in confirmation of this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا يحيى بن يحيى التميمي وأبو جعفر محمد بن الصباح وعبيدالله
القواريري وسريج بن يونس كلهم عن يوسف بن الماجشون (واللفظ لابن الصباح)
حدثنا يوسف أبو سلمة الماجشون حدثنا محمد بن المنكدر عن سعيد بن المسيب
عن عامر بن سعد ابن أبي وقاص عن أبيه قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم لعلي أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنه لا نبي بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yahya b. Yahya al-Tamimi, Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Sabah, ‘Ubayd Allah
al-Qawariri and Surayj b. Yunus – Yunus b. al-Majishun – Yusuf Abu
Salamah al-Majishun – Muhammad b. al-Munkadar – Sa’id b. al-Musayyab –
‘Amir b. Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas – his father (Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas):

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “**You are to
me of the status of Harun to Musa**, except that there is no prophet
after me.”[^2]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) as well documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبى ثنا يحيى بن سعيد عن موسى الجهني قال دخلت على
فاطمة بنت على فقال لها رفيقي أبو سهل كم لك قالت ستة وثمانون سنة قال ما
سمعت من أبيك شيئا قالت حدثتني أسماء بنت عميس ان رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم قال لعلي أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا أنه ليس بعدي نبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Sa’id –
Musa al-Juhani – Fatimah bint ‘Ali – Asma bint ‘Umays:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “**You are to
me of the status of Harun to Musa**, except that there is no prophet
after me.”[^3]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^4]

We need not extend our research on the authenticity of the *hadith*,
since there is no denial of it. So, we will simply cap the above with
these words of Imam al-Kattani (d. 1345 H) about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد تتبع ابن عساكر طرقه في جزء فبلغ عدد الصحابة فيه نيفا عشرين وفي شرح
الرسالة للشيخ جسوس رحمه الله ما نصه وحديث أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى
متواتر جاء عن نيف وعشرين صحابيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Asakir investigated its chains in a volume, and the number of the
Sahabah who narrated it (in his research) reached more than twenty. In
*Sharh al-Risalah* of Shaykh Jasus, may Allah be merciful to him, he
states: “**And the** ***hadith*** **‘You are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa’ is** ***mutawatir***. It has been narrated by more than
twenty Sahabah.”[^5]

So, does Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah accept that Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, was to Prophet Muhammad, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, of
the *status* of Prophet Harun, *‘alaihi al-salam*, to Prophet Musa,
*‘alaihi al-salam*? Of course, he does! However, he has limited the
circumstance and the scope to just a one-off event:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم قال له ذلك في غزوة تبوك وكان صلى الله
عليه و سلم كلما سافر في غزوة أو عمرة أو حج يستخلف على المدينة بعض
الصحابة....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبالجملة فمن المعلوم انه كان لا يخرج من المدينة حتى يستخلف وقد ذكر
المسلمون من كان يستخلفه فقد سافر من المدينة في عمرتين عمرة الحديبية
وعمرة القضاء وفي حجة الوداع وفي مغازيه اكثر من عشرين غزاة وفيها كلها
استخلف وكان يكون بالمدينة رجال كثيرون يستخلف عليهم من يستخلفه فلما كان
في غزوة تبوك لم يأذن لاحد في التخلف عنها وهي آخر مغازيه صلى الله عليه
و سلم ولم يجتمع معه أحد كما اجتمع معه فيها فلم يتخلف عنه إلا النساء و
الصبيان أو من هو معذور لعجزه عن الخروج أو من هو منافق و تخلف الثلاثة
الذين تيب عليهم و لم يكن في المدينة رجال من المؤمنين يستخلف عليهم كما
كان يستخلف عليهم في كل مرة بل كان هذا الاستخلاف اضعف من الاستخلافات
المعتادة منه لأنه لم يبق في المدينة رجال من المؤمنين أقوياء يستخلف
عليهم أحدا كما كان يبقى في جميع مغازيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Prophet, peace be upon him, said it (i.e. the** ***hadith*****) to
him (i.e. ‘Ali) during the Battle of Tabuk**. Meanwhile, whenever he
(the Prophet) made a journey for battle, or for *‘Umrah* or *Hajj*, he
used to make one of the Sahabah his *khalifah* over Madinah....

In summary, **it is well-known that he (the Prophet) never left Madinah
without appointing a** ***khalifah*** **over it**. Muslims have
mentioned those whom he appointed as *khalifahs*. He made journeys out
of Madinah during two *‘Umrahs* – *‘Umrah al-Hudaybiyyah* and *‘Umrah
al-Qadha* – and during the Farewell *Hajj*, as well as in more than
twenty battles.

On all of them (i.e. these occasions), he appointed *khalifahs* and
there used to be several men in Madinah (on all these occasions) over
whom the *khalifah* was given authority. However, during the battle of
Tabuk, he (the Prophet) did not permit anyone to stay behind from it
(i.e. the battle). It was his last battle, peace be upon him, and he
never conscripted (for any battle) as he conscripted for it (i.e.
Tabuk). **Therefore, none was left (in Madinah) except women, children,
those who were exempted due to inability, hypocrites, and three men who
(later) repented**.

There were no believing men in Madinah over whom to appoint a *khalifah*
(during Tabuk), unlike the case on all other occasions. **Rather, this
appointment (of ‘Ali) as** ***khalifah*** **was inferior to the other,
several** ***khilafah*** **appointments**, because there were no strong
believing men in Madinah (during Tabuk) over whom he (the Prophet) could
have placed (‘Ali as) a *khalifah*, unlike the case in all his (the
Prophet’s) other battles.[^6]

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah obviously interprets the *hadith* as referring
solely to Amir al-Muminin’s *khilafah* over Madinah during the battle of
Tabuk. So, he was like Harun to Musa only for the duration of the
battle. Once the battle ended, and the Messenger took over control of
Madinah once again, ‘Ali ceased to be his Harun.

In the simplest terms, in the view of our Shaykh, the status of Imam
‘Ali as the Harun of Prophet Muhammad was temporary and shortlived and
never extended beyond the Battle of Tabuk. Moreover, it was limited
*exclusively* to ‘Ali’s governorate of Madinah while the battle lasted.
It is very apparent that our Shaykh considers *Hadith al-Manzilah* to be
specifically linked with the words of Musa in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال موسى لأخيه هارون اخلفني في قومي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Musa said to his brother, Harun: “**Be my** ***khalifah*** **over my
people**.”[^7]

Explaining the connection, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قيل أن بعض المنافقين طعن فيه و قال أنما خلفه لانه يبغضه فبين له
النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم اني إنما استخلفتك لأمانتك عندي و أن
الاستخلاف ليس بنقص و لا غض فإن موسى استخلف هارون على قومه فكيف يكون
نقصا و موسى ليفعله بهارون فطيب بذلك قلب علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is said that some hypocrites condemned him (i.e. ‘Ali), and said that
he (the Prophet) only made him (i.e. ‘Ali) a *khalifah* because he (the
Prophet) hated him (i.e. ‘Ali). So, the Prophet, peace be upon him,
explained to him, saying: “I have only made you a *khalifah* due to my
trust in you, and that *khilafah* is neither a belittling step nor a
demotion, **for Musa appointed Harun as his** ***khalifah*** **over his
people**. How then could that have been a belittling step, while Musa
did it with Harun?” Through that the mind of ‘Ali became clear.[^8]

This logic of Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah suggests that all the governors of
Madinah during the Prophet’s numerous absences were like Harun too.
Therefore, it was not a merit *at all* for ‘Ali, much less an exclusive
one! In fact, the *khilafah* of Amir al-Muminin was the most “inferior”
of all, as submitted by our Shaykh! After all, his governorate was only
over women, children, mutineers and hypocrites. By contrast, all the
other governors had ruled over believers among the men and the women. It
is at this point that things get really messy.

*Khilafah* can be temporary, permanent, restricted or total, depending
on the circumstances. There is no doubt that the *khilafah* of Amir
al-Muminin *during Tabuk* was both *temporary* and *restricted*. He was
the governor of Madinah only, and not of the entire Islamic state. What
Imam ‘Ali controlled during that time was merely a small percentage of
the *Ummah* of Muhammad. By contrast, the *khilafah* of Prophet Harun
was *total*. He was the *khalifah* of Prophet Musa over the *entirety*
of “his people”. Therefore, there was simply no connection or comparison
between the two *khilafahs*. Meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah
specifically mentioned that ‘Ali was *exactly* like Harun!

In fact, the Prophet further specifically explained the *khilafah*
component of the Harun-‘Ali comparison in a way that knocks out Shaykh
Ibn Taymiyyah! Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا وأنت خليفتي
في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym **Abu Balj** – ‘Amr b. Maymun – **Ibn ‘Abbas**: The Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “You are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. **And you
are my** ***khalifah*** **over EVERY BELIEVER after me**.”[^9]

Dr. Al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^10]

‘Allamah al-Albani agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^11]

Of course, the *khilafah* of Harun too was over the *entirety* of Musa’s
*Ummah*, and the same thing was intended for ‘Ali in this *hadith*! The
Messenger of Allah was announcing him as the *khalifah* over all
believers – in exactly the *same* way that Harun was – in any case of
*total* absence of Muhammad from his *Ummah* – as Musa did.

Meanwhile, although Prophet Musa was able to keep away from his entire
*Ummah* during his lifetime, the Messenger of Allah was unable to do
that except through death. This apparently explains why he mentioned
“after me” with the *khilafah*. It is also solely in this context that
the phrase “except that there will be no prophet after me” makes any
sense. If the Prophet had intended *Hadith al-Manzilah* to be limited to
the duration of Tabuk only, on what logical basis would he have added
those two expressions?

What is more? The Messenger of Allah never restricted the comparison
between Harun and ‘Ali to mere *khilafah*, to begin with! ‘Allamah
al-Albani, for instance, states:

> أخرجه أحمد فى " المسند " (1/170) : حدثنا أبو سعيد مولى بنى هاشم حدثنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سليمان بن بلال حدثنا الجعيد بن عبد الرحمن عن عائشة بنت سعد عن أبيها: "
أن عليا رضى الله عنه خرج مع النبى صلى الله عليه وسلم حتى جاء ثنية
الوداع , وعلى رضى الله عنه يبكى , يقول: تخلفنى مع الخوالف؟ فقال: أما
ترضى أن تكون منى بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا النبوة؟ ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد صحيح على شرط البخارى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad recorded it in *al-Musnad* (1/170): Abu Sa’id, freed slave of Banu
Hashim – Sulayman b. Bilal – al-Ja’id b. ‘Abd al-Rahman – ‘Aishah bint
Sa’d – her father:

Verily, ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, WENT OUT WITH THE PROPHET,
peace be upon him, UNTIL HE (THE PROPHET) REACHED THANIYYAH AL-WADA’,
and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, was weeping, saying: “You are
leaving me behind with the women and children?” So, he (the Prophet)
replied, “**Are you not pleased that you are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa EXCEPT PROPHETHOOD?**”

I say: This chain is *sahih* upon the standard of al-Bukhari.[^12]

Shaykh al-Arnaut agrees with him about the same *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط البخاري
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of al-Bukhari.[^13]

In other words, all the components of Harun’s status to Musa were
present in ‘Ali too. The *only* exception was that Harun was a
co-prophet with Musa while ‘Ali was not a prophet at all. Needless to
say, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah’s restriction of the comparison to *khilafah*
contradicts this authentic Sunnah! Amir al-Muminin was to the Prophet
*everything* that Harun was to Musa with the sole exception of
co-prophethood.

What further kills our Shaykh’s attempted diversion is the fact that the
Messenger of Allah repeated that *hadith* to Imam ‘Ali *outside* the
context or period of Tabuk! In the last *hadith* above, we read that
‘Ali *went out* of Madinah with the Prophet during Tabuk, till the
Muslim army reached Thaniyyah al-Wada’. It was there that the Messenger
mentioned the *hadith* to him. There were no women around. The women and
children were all in Madinah, while only men were in the army at
Thaniyyah al-Wada’. In the light of this, let us examine this *hadith*
documented by Imam Ahmad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الله بن نمير قال ثنا موسى الجهني قال
حدثتني فاطمة بنت علي قالت حدثتني أسماء بنت عميس قالت سمعت رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول يا علي أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا انه
ليس بعدي نبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Abd Allah b.
Numayr – Musa al-Juhani – Fatimah bint ‘Ali – Asma bint ‘Umays:

**I HEARD the Messenger of Allah**, peace be upon him, saying, “O ‘Ali!
You are to me of the status of Harun to Musa, except that there is no
prophet after me.”[^14]

Al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^15]

Apparently, Asma (a wife of Abu Bakr) did not “hear” this *hadith* at
Thaniyyah al-Wada’. She certainly must have heard it *inside* Madinah,
either before or after Tabuk. This fact alone completely defeats all of
Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah’s efforts at reinterpreting *Hadith al-Manzilah*
out of its intended purpose. Meanwhile, things get really much worse for
him with Ibn ‘Abbas’ claim, *radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, that the “merit” in
the *hadith* belonged *exclusively* to ‘Ali! Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H)
records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن جعفر بن حمدان القطيعي ببغداد من أصل كتابه ثنا
عبد الله بن أحمد بن حنبل حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا
أبو بلج ثنا عمرو بن ميمون ....قال ابن عباس :.... وقعوا في رجل له بضع
عشرة فضائل ليست لأحد غيره.... وخرج رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في
غزوة تبوك وخرج بالناس معه قال فقال له علي : أخرج معك قال : فقال النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم لا فبكى علي فقال له : أما ترضى أن تكون مني بمنزلة
هارون من موسى إلا أنه ليس بعدي نبي إنه لا ينبغي أن أذهب إلا وأنت
خليفتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ja’far b. Hamadan al-Qati’i – ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b.
Hanbal – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah –
Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun .... Ibn ‘Abbas said:

**.... They are attacking a man who has ten EXCLUSIVE merits**.... The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, went out for the battle of Tabuk,
and the people went out with him. So, ‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out
with you.” Therefore, the Prophet, peace be upon him, said, “Do not
weep, ‘Ali. **Are you not pleased that you are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that there is no prophet after me**?
Verily, it is not right that I depart except with you as my
*khalifah*.”[^16]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^17]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) backs him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^18]

Was ‘Ali then the only governor ever appointed over Madinah during the
Prophet’s lifetime?! Obviously, the *hadith* is very, very far from what
Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah claims!

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, pp. 325-326

[^2]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1870, \# 2404 (30)

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 6, p. 369, \#
27126

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Idrisi al-Kattani, Nazam
al-Mutanathir min al-Hadith al-Mutawatir (Egypt: Dar al-Kutub
al-Salafiyyah; 2nd edition), p. 195, \# 233

[^6]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, pp. 326-328

[^7]: Qur’an 7:142

[^8]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, pp. 328-329

[^9]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^12]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Irwa al-Ghalil fi Takhrij
Ahadith Manar al-Sabil (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1405
H), vol. 5, p. 11, \# 1188

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 170, \#
1463

[^14]: Ibid, vol. 6, p. 438, \# 27507

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^17]: Ibid

[^18]: Ibid


