22) Hadith Al-Manzilah, ‘Ali: The Wazir of Muhammad
===================================================

Although Allah has informed us of several ranks which Prophet Harun,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, held in relation to Prophet Musa, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, we will be focusing exclusively on one of them only in this
research: the *wizarah*. Musa had supplicated to Allah in this manner,
as narrated by the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رب اشرح لي صدري ويسر لي أمري واحلل عقدة من لساني يفقهوا قولي واجعل
لي وزيرا من أهلي هارون أخي
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (Musa) said, “O my Lord! Open for me my chest, and make my assignment
easy for me. And make loose the knot from my tongue, that they
understand my speech. **And appoint for me a** ***wazir*** **from my
family, Harun my brother**.[^1]

Expectedly, his *du’a* was granted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب وجعلنا معه أخاه هارون وزيرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And indeed We gave Musa the Book, **and We appointed his brother Harun
as a** ***wazir***.[^2]

Therefore, Harun was undoubtedly the *wazir* of Musa, *by divine
appointment*. This obviously confirms a principle: the appointment of
the *wazir* of each prophet was only in the Hand of Allah. If it had
been otherwise, Musa would have simply handpicked his brother for the
post without making any *du’a*. This fact, in turn, reveals that being
the *wazir* of a prophet was an extremely high rank in the Sight of
Allah, so high that He personally chose to make the appointments.

So, who was a *wazir*? What were his functions? The Book of Allah has
given us an example: Haman, the *wazir* of Fir’aun. The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن فرعون وهامان وجنودهما كانوا خاطئين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, Fir’aun and **Haman** and their soldiers were people who made
mistakes.[^3]

Imam al-Tabari (d. 310 H) starts the identifications:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال فرعون … لوزيره وزير السوء هامان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fir’aun said … to **his** ***wazir***, the evil *wazir*, **Haman**.[^4]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) follows his footsteps here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{وهامان} وهو: وزيره في مملكته
  </p>
</blockquote>

{and Haman}, he was his *wazir* in his kingdom.[^5]

Shaykh al-Zuhayli also explains the names:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرعون ملك مصر وهامان وزير فرعون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fir’aun was the king of Egypt **and Haman was the** ***wazir*** **of
Fir’aun**.[^6]

Shaykh al-Maraghi also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهامان وزير فرعون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Haman was the *wazir* of Fir’aun.[^7]

Shaykh ‘Ali Shiri, the annotator of *Tarikh Dimashq*, has the same
submission:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هامان وزير فرعون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Haman was the *wazir* of Fir’aun.[^8]

Imam al-Tha’alabi (d. 875 H) says as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهامان: هو وزير فرعون وأكبر رجاله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Haman: **he was the** ***wazir*** **of Fir’aun** and the most senior of
his men.[^9]

And Imam al-Alusi (d. 1270 H) solidly stands with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
}إلى فرعون وهامان {وزير فرعون
  </p>
</blockquote>

{To Fir’aun and Haman} the *wazir* of Fir’aun.[^10]

The Salafi Imam, Shaykh Ibn Baz (d. 1420 H), corroborates everyone else:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال بعض أهل العلم في شرح هذا الحديث : إنما يحشر مضيع الصلاة مع فرعون
وهامان وقارون وأبي بن خلف؛ لأنه إن ضيعها من أجل الرئاسة والملك
والإمارة شابه فرعون الذي طغى وبغى بأسباب وظيفته فيحشر معه إلى النار
يوم القيامة، وإن ضيعها بأسباب الوظيفة والوزارة شابه هامان وزير فرعون
الذي طغى وبغى بسبب الرئاسة فيحشر معه إلى النار يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Some of the people of knowledge said in the commentary of this *hadith*:
The one who abandons *Salat* will be gathered with Fir’aun, Haman, Qarun
and Ubayy b. Khalaf (on the Day of *al-Qiyamah*), because if he abandons
it due to leadership, kingdom and governance, he will be similar to
Fir’aun who oppressed and rebelled on account of his office. So, he (the
abandoner of *Salat*) will be gathered with him into the Fire on the Day
of *al-Qiyamah*. But, if he abandons it (i.e. *Salat*) due to position
and *al-wizarah*, he will be similar to **Haman, the** ***wazir*** **of
Fir’aun, who oppressed and rebelled because of leadership**. Therefore,
he (the abandoner of *Salat*) will be gathered with him into the Fire on
the Day of *al-Qiyamah*.[^11]

Then, another top Salafi scholar, Shaykh al-‘Uthaymin (d. 1421 H), seals
the list:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ففرعون غره الملك والسلطان فاستكبر هو وجنوده في الأرض بغير الحق وهامان
غرته الوزارة لأنه وزير فرعون
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for Fir’aun, he was deceived by kingdom and power. So, he became
arrogant - he and his soldiers - without right. **As for Haman, he was
deceived by** ***al-wizarah*****, because he was the** ***wazir*** **of
Fir’aun**.[^12]

In all, we know that Fir’aun was the king of Egypt, and that its armed
forces owed their allegiance to him. We also know that Haman was the
*wazir* of this Fir’aun. Interestingly, both Fir’aun and Haman were
contemporaries of Musa, and his *wazir*, Harun. The four of them had
initially lived together in the same city: Musa and his *wazir*, and
Fir’aun and his *wazir*. The rank and power of the *wazir* are indicated
in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن فرعون وهامان وجنودهما كانوا خاطئين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, Fir’aun and Haman and ***their*** **soldiers** were people who
made mistakes.[^13]

First, Allah mentions Haman immediately after Fir’aun – a fact that is
indicative of the status of the *wazir*. The *wazir* is next in rank
only to the sovereign ruler. Second, the armed forces of Egypt are
identified as the soldiers of *both* the king and his *wazir*! In other
words, Fir’aun was the commander-in-chief of the armed forces of Egypt,
and his *wazir* – Haman - was their deputy commander-in-chief. Needless
to say, Musa was the sovereign leaders of the Israelites and his
*wazir*, Harun, was the next in rank to him. No Muslim has ever disputed
this, and none ever will till the Hour. The true followers of Musa also
accepted this fact:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالوا آمنا برب العالمين رب موسى وهارون
  </p>
</blockquote>

They said: “We believe in the Lord of the worlds, **the Lord of Musa and
Harun**.”[^14]

Those were their two leaders and masters. Interestingly, they also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فألقي السحرة سجدا قالوا آمنا برب هارون وموسى
  </p>
</blockquote>

So the magicians prostrated. They said: “**We believe in the Lord of
Harun and Musa**.”[^15]

The Qur’an too leaves no one in doubt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولقد مننا على موسى وهارون ونجيناهما وقومهما من الكرب العظيم ونصرناهم
فكانوا هم الغالبين وآتيناهما الكتاب المستبين وهديناهما الصراط المستقيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And, indeed, **We favoured Musa and Harun. And We saved them both and**
***their*** **people from the Terrible Distress**. And We gave them both
the Clear Book; and guided them both to the Right Path.[^16]

The followers of Musa were apparently also those of his *wazir*.

All these take us back to *Hadith al-Manzilah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم لعلي أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى
إلا أنه لا نبي بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “**You are to
me of the status of Harun to Musa**, except that there is no prophet
after me.”

Without doubt, this *hadith* establishes – among others – that Imam
‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, was the *wazir* of Prophet Muhammad,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*. There was no other *wazir* for Musa
except Harun. Therefore, there was no other *wazir* for Muhammad except
‘Ali. This fact too is confirmed in *Hadith al-Wirathah*, which – as we
have proved in this book – has a *sahih* chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت أخي وصاحبي ووارثي ووزيري
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are my brother, and my companion, and my inheritor, **AND MY**
***WAZIR***.[^17]

In simpler words, Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah was the *amir* of the *Ummah* –
their commander-in-chief, and ‘Ali b. Abi Talib – his inheritor – was
the *deputy* commander-in-chief. ‘Ali, during the Messenger of Allah’s
lifetime, was the deputy *amir* of the believers. The direct implication
of this is – the moment the Prophet passed away, Imam ‘Ali
*automatically* became promoted to the rank of the supreme *amir* of the
*Ummah*. After all, our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah claim that the
Messenger died *without* designating any heir, inheritor or successor.
In cases like that, it is the deputy commander-in-chief (i.e. the
*wazir*) who *automatically* succeeds the dead commander-in-chief (i.e.
the *amir*)!

Apart from being the deputy leader of the nation, and the deputy
commander-in-chief of the armed forces, the *wazir* also functions as
the chief adviser *and* helper of the ruler. Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H)
records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا الحسين بن عبد الله القطان قال حدثنا موسى بن مروان الرقي قال
حدثنا الوليد عن زهير بن محمد عن عبد الرحمن بن القاسم عن أبيه عن عائشة
قالت قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم إذا أراد الله بالأمير خيرا جعل
له وزير صدق إن نسي ذكره وإن ذكر أعانه وإذا أراد الله به غير ذلك جعل له
وزير سوء إن نسي لم يذكره وإن ذكر لم يعنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qattan – Musa b. Marwan al-Raqiyy – al-Walid
– Zuhayr b. Muhammad – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Qasim – his father –
‘Aishah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**If Allah intends
good for the** ***amir*****, He appoints for him a sincere**
***wazir*****. If he (the** ***amir*****) forgets, he (the**
***wazir*****) will remind him; and if he (the** ***amir*****)
remembers, he (the** ***wazir*****) will help him**. However, if Allah
intends other than that for him (i.e. the *amir*), He appoints for him
an evil *wazir*. If he (the *amir*) forgets, he (the *wazir*) will not
remind him; and if he (the *amir*) remembers, he (the *wazir*) will not
help him.”[^18]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^19]

Shaykh al-‘Arnaut agrees with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih hadith*[^20]

The *hadith* obviously establishes that the success or failure of a
ruler depends very heavily upon his *wazir*. If his *wazir* his
righteous, the leader is very likely to succeed. However, if the *wazir*
is evil, the *amir* has very low chances of success. For instance,
Fir’aun was an evil ruler. Yet, if his *wazir* – Haman – had been a good
human being, Fir’aun’s atrocities would have been far less serious or
widespread. Prophet Harun was also the *wazir* of his brother, Prophet
Musa. This is interesting indeed. Musa was already an infallible leader.
Yet, he prayed to his Lord for a *wazir*, and another infallible prophet
was bestowed that rank.

Muhammad, on the other hand, is Allah’s most beloved and best creature.
Moreover, the task given to him by his Lord was countless times heavier,
more difficult, more complex and more important that those awarded to
all the other prophets and messengers combined. Since the *wazir* of a
prophet can be appointed only by Allah, it is indeed an unimaginably
huge honour that He chose ‘Ali for Muhammad.

Amir al-Muminin was the most qualified of all of Allah’s creatures to be
the *wazir* – the spiritual, political and military deputy, and the
chief adviser and helper - of the master of all creation. That truly is
an *extremely* lofty merit. Without a doubt, the superiority of ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib over everyone in this *Ummah* – apart from our Prophet – is
established absolutely and perfectly through his status as the *wazir*
of the best Messenger of Allah.

On that note, we would like to conclude our book with these words of
Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ففي هذا الخبر إخبار عمر بين المهاجرين والأنصار أن أبا بكر سيد المسلمين
وخيرهم وأحبهم إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ذلك علة مبايعته فقال
بل نبايعك أنت فأنت سيدنا وخيرنا وأحبنا إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم ليبين بذلك أن المأمور به تولية الأفضل وأنت أفضلنا فنبايعك
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this report is the declaration of ‘Umar among the Muhajirun and the
Ansar that Abu Bakr was the *sayyid* of the Muslims and the best of
them, and the most beloved of them to the Messenger of Allah. This is
the reason for following him.

So, he (‘Umar) said, “Rather, we will follow you because you are our
*sayyid*, and the best of us, and the most beloved of us to the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him”. He wanted to make clear through
it that: **WHAT IS ORDAINED IS TO GIVE AUTHORITY TO THE BEST**, and you
are the best of us. So, we will follow you.[^21]

[^1]: Qur’an 20:24-36

[^2]: Qur’an 25:35

[^3]: Qur’an 28:8

[^4]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Attar], vol. 24, p. 82

[^5]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 7, p. 139

[^6]: Wahbah b. Mustafa al-Zuhayli, al-Tafsir al-Munir fi al-‘Aqidah wa
al-Shari’ah wa al-Manhaj (Beirut, Damascus: Dar al-Fikr al-Mu’asir; 1418
H), vol. 24, p. 103

[^7]: Ahmad Mustafa al-Maraghi, Tafsir al-Maraghi (Egypt), vol. 20, p.
31 and vol. 24, p. 70

[^8]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st
edition, 1418 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 61, p. 59, footnote \# 7

[^9]: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad b. Makhluq, Abu Zayd al-Tha’alabi
al-Maliki, al-Jawahir al-Husan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’ud, Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Prof. Dr. ‘Abd
al-Fattah Abu Sunnah], vol. 4, p. 264

[^10]: Abu al-Fadhl Mahmud al-Alusi, Ruh al-Ma’ani fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
al-‘Azim wa Sab’ al-Mathani (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi), vol.
24, p. 61

[^11]: ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah b. Baz, Majmu’ Fatawa, vol. 10, p.
249. See also vol. 10, p. 278

[^12]: Muhammad b. Salih al-‘Uthaymin, Fatawa Nur ‘ala al-Darb
(Muasassat Shaykh Muhammad bin Salih b. ‘Uthaymin al-Khayriyyah; 1427
H), vol. 31, p. 111

[^13]: Qur’an 28:8

[^14]: Qur’an 7:121-122

[^15]: Qur’an 20:70

[^16]: Qur’an 37:114-118

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 125, \# 8451

[^18]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 10, p. 345,
\# 4494

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: Ibid

[^21]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 8, p. 565


