Bibliography
============

1. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah b. Baz, *Majmu’ Fatawa*

2. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Marzuq al-Turayfi, *al-Tahjil fi Takhrij ma lam
Yukhraj min al-Ahadith wa al-Athar fi Irwa al-Ghalil* (Riyadh: Maktabah
al-Rushd li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H)

3. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al-Baydhawi, *Tafsir* (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr)

4. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr
b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, *Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith
wa al-Athar* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

5. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad b. Makhluq, Abu Zayd al-Tha’alabi
al-Maliki, *al-Jawahir al-Husan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an* (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’ud, Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Prof. Dr. ‘Abd
al-Fattah Abu Sunnah]

6. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Mu’alami al-‘Atmi
al-Yamani, *al-Tankil bi ma fi Ta-anib al-Kawthari min al-Abatil*
(al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1406 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani, Zuhayr al-Shawish and ‘Abd al-Razzaq Hamzah]

7. ‘Ala al-Din ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Khazan al-Baghdadi, *Lubab
al-Tawil fi Ma’ani al-Tanzil* (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1399 H)

8. ‘Ali b. Husam al-Din al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, *Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa Af’al* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1989 H)

9. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir]

10. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
*al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

11. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

12. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha]

13. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Idrisi al-Kattani, *Nazam
al-Mutanathir min al-Hadith al-Mutawatir* (Egypt: Dar al-Kutub
al-Salafiyyah; 2nd edition)

14. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, *Sunan al-Kubra*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan]

15. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani,
*Al-Thamar al-Mustatab fi Fiqh al-Sunnah wa al-Kitab* (Gharas li
al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H)

16. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah* (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H)

17. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Ta’liqat al-Hisan ‘ala Sahih Ibn Hibban*
(Jeddah: Dar Ba Wazir li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1424 H)

18. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu*
(Al-Maktab al-Islami)

19. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih Abi Dawud* (Kuwait: Muasassat
al-Gharas li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1423 H)

20. Abu ‘Ali al-Fadhl b. al-Hasan al-Tabarsi, *Majma’ al-Bayan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an* (Beirut: Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at; 1st edition,
1415 H)

21. Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani] Abu ‘Umar Yusuf b. ‘Abd Allah b.
Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Barr b. ‘Asim al-Nimri al-Qurtubi, *al-Isti’ab fi
Ma’rifat al-Ashab* (Beirut: Dar al-Jil; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator:
‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

22. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
*Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah* (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406
H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

23. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, *Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

24. Abu al-Fadhl ‘Abd Allah b. al-Siddiq al-Maghribi, *al-Qawl al-Muqni’
fi Radd ‘ala al-Albani al-Mubtadi’*

25. Abu al-Fadhl Jamal al-Din Muhammad b. Mukram b. Manzur al-Afriqi
al-Misri, *Lisan al-‘Arab* (Qum: Nashr Adab al-Hawzah; 1405 H)

26. Abu al-Fadhl Mahmud al-Alusi, *Ruh al-Ma’ani fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
al-‘Azim wa Sab’ al-Mathani* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)

27. Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Jawzi al-Qurshi al-Baghdadi, *Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir*
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad b.
‘Abd al-Rahman ‘Abd Allah]

28. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
*Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim* (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

29. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah* (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

30. Abu al-Hasan Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Salih al-‘Ijli al-Kufi,
*Ma’rifat al-Thiqat* (Madinah: Maktabah al-Dar; 1st edition, 1405 H)

31. Abu al-Husayn Ahmad b. Faris b. Zakariyyah, *Mu’jam Maqayis
al-Lughah* (Qum: Maktab al-A’lam al-Islami; 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Abd
Salam Muhammad Harun]

32. Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, *Sahih
Muslim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

33. Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, *Tarikh Madinah Dimashq* (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

34. Abu al-Qasim al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Mufadhdhal al-Raghib
al-Isfahani, *Tafsir al-Raghib al-Isfahani wa Muqadimmatuh* (Kulliyat
al-Adab, Jami’ah Tanta; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad
‘Abd al-‘Aziz Basyuni]

35. Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400
H) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

36. Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah]

37. Abu Barakat ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Mahmud al-Nasafi, *Tafsir
al-Nasafi* (Beirut: Dar al-Nafais; 2005 CE) [annotator: Marwan Muhammad
al-Shi’ar]

38. Abu Dawud Sulayman b. Dawud b. al-Jarud al-Farisi al-Basri
al-Tayalisi, *Musnad* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah)

39. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, *Kitab
al-Thiqat* (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1398 H)

40. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b. Ma’bad
al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, *Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

41. Abu Ishaq Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Tha’labi al-Naysaburi,
*al-Kashf wa al-Bayan* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st
edition, 1422 H) [annotator: Abu Muhammad b. ‘Ashur]

42. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, *Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an* (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Attar]

43. Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Darimi, *Sunan*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Husayn
Salim Asad]

44. Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim Muhamamd b. Idris b.
al-Munzir al-Tamimi al-Hanzali al-Razi, *al-Jarh wa al-Ta’dil* (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1371 H)

45. Abu Muhammad al-Husayn b. Mas’ud al-Baghwi, *Mu’alim al-Tanzil* (Dar
Tayyibah; 4th edition, 1417 H)

46. Abu Sa’ud Muhammad b. Muhammad al-‘Imadi, *Irshad al-‘Aql al-Salim
ila Mizaya al-Qur’an al-Karim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)

47. Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, *Musnad*
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

48. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh]

49. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Taqrib al-Tahdhib* (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

50. Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, *Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara* (Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st
edition, 1420 H)

51. Ahmad Mustafa al-Maraghi, *Tafsir al-Maraghi* (Egypt)

52. Badr al-Din al-‘Ayni, *‘Umdah al-Qari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari*

53. Dr. Rohi Baalbaki, *al-Mawrid: A Modern Arabic-English Dictionary*
(Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin; 7th edition, 1995 CE)

54. Fakhr al-Din al-Turayhi, *Majma’ al-Bahrayn* (2nd edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: Sayyid Ahmad al-Husayni]

55. Hans Wehr, *A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic*, ed. J. Milton
Cowan (Ithaca, New York: Spoken Languages Services; 3rd edition, 1976
CE)

56. Ibn al-Athir, Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad al-Jazari,
*al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar* (Qum: Muasassat
Isma’iliyyan) [annotator: Mahmud Muhammad al-Tanahi and Tahir Ahmad
al-Zawi]

57. Isma’il b. Hammad al-Jawhari, *al-Sihah: Taj al-Lughah wa Sihah
al-‘Arabiyyah* (Beirut: Dar al’-Ilm li al-Malayin; 4th edition, 1407 H)
[annotator: Ahmad ‘Abd al-Ghafur ‘Atar]

58. Jalal al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahalli and Jalal al-Din ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Abu Bakr al-Suyuti, *Tafsir al-Jalalayn* (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition)

59. Muhammad al-Jawahiri, *al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith* (Qum:
Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H)

60. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Razi, *Mukhtar al-Sihah*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotator:
Ahmad Shams al-Din]

61. Muhammad b. Sa’d, *al-Tabaqat al-Kubra* (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir)

62. Muhammad b. Salih al-‘Uthaymin, *Fatawa Nur ‘ala al-Darb* (Muasassat
Shaykh Muhammad bin Salih b. ‘Uthaymin al-Khayriyyah; 1427 H)

63. Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Salihi al-Shami, *Subul al-Huda al-Rashad fi
Sirah Khayr al-‘Ibad* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1414 H) [annotators: ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and ‘Ali Muhammad Ma’ud]

64. Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, *Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami’ah li Durar
Akhbar al-Aimah al-Athar* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 3rd
edition, 1403 H)

65. Muhammad Ghazali al-Saqa, *Fiqh al-Sirah* (Damascus: Dar al-Qalam;
1st edition, 1427 H) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

66. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Asl Sifat al-Salat al-Nabi*
(Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1427
H)

67. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Irwa al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahadith
Manar al-Sabil* (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1405 H)

68. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Mukhtasar al-‘Uluw al-‘Aliyy
al-‘Azim* (al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1412 H)

69. Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith
al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi al-Ummah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H)

70. Muhammad Rashid b. ‘Ali Ridha, *Tafsir Qur’an al-Hakim* (Egypt:
al-Hay-ah al-Masriyyah al-‘Amma li al-Kitab; 1990 CE)

71. Muhammad Tahir b. ‘Ashur, *al-Tahrir wa al-Tanwir* (Tunis: Dar
al-Sahnun li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1997 CE)

72. Muhyi al-Din Abu Zakariyyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, *Sahih Muslim
bi Sharh al-Nawawi* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1407 H)

73. Mullah Muhsin al-Faydh al-Kashani, *Tafsir al-Safi* (Tehran:
Maktabah al-Sadr; 2nd edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Shaykh Husayn A’lami]

74. Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, *Majma’ al-Zawaid* (Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr; 1412 H)

75. Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, *Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur* (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

76. Shams al-Din Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Dhahabi
al-Dimashqi, *al-Kashif fi Ma’rifat Man Lahu Riwayat fi al-Kutub
al-Sittah* (Jeddah: Dar al-Qiblah li al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah; 1st
edition, 1413 H)

77. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1413 H) [annotators of the
eighth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and Nazir Hamadan]

78. Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
*Lisan al-Mizan* (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H)

79. Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

80. Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)

81. Wahbah b. Mustafa al-Zuhayli, *al-Tafsir al-Munir fi al-‘Aqidah wa
al-Shari’ah wa al-Manhaj* (Beirut, Damascus: Dar al-Fikr al-Mu’asir;
1418 H)


