1) Hadith Al-Khilafah
=====================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والجواب أن هذا ليس مسندا بل هو مرسل لو ثبت عن عمرو بن ميمون وفيه ألفاظ
هي كذب على رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم كقوله أما ترضى أن تكون مني
بمنزلة هارون من موسى غير أنك لست بنبي لا ينبغي أن أذهب إلا وأنت خليفتي
فإن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم ذهب غير مرة وخليفته على المدينة غير علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

The reply is that this (*hadith*) is not fully-connected in its chain
(*musnad*). Rather, it is *mursal* (narrated by a Tabi’i directly from
the Prophet), (even) if it is authentically transmitted from ‘Amr b.
Maymun. It (also) contains **statements that are lies upon the Messenger
of Allah** such as his statement: “Are you not pleased that you are to
me of the status of Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are not a
prophet? **It is not right that I depart except with you as my**
***khalifah***.” Verily, the Prophet, peace be upon him, departed many
times and his *khalifah* over Madinah was other than ‘Ali (on each
occasion). [^1]

First, our dear Shaykh grades the *hadith* of ‘Amr b. Maymun to be
*mursal*. This means that there is no Sahabi in the chain. The last
narrator transmitting directly from the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*, is only a Tabi’i. Second, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah claims
that it contains clear lies upon the Messenger of Allah, especially the
statement that ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, was his *khalifah*. He also
interprets “depart” in the *hadith* to mean “depart from Madinah”,
rather than “depart from this world”. It would be appropriate to examine
its full chain, context and texts in order to determine the validity of
the Shaykh’s claims.

*Hadith al-Khilafah* has come in three *sighahs* (versions). The first
*sighah* is documented by Imam Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H). He records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا وأنت خليفتي
في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym **Abu Balj** – ‘Amr b. Maymun – **Ibn ‘Abbas**: The Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “You are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. **And you
are my** ***khalifah*** **over every believer after me**.”[^2]

Dr. al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن. رجاله رجال الشيخين غير ابي‌ بلج واسمه يحيي بن سليم بن بلج،
قال الحافظ: صدوق ربما اخطأ. وله شواهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***hasan***. Its narrators are narrators of the two
Shaykhs, except Abu Balj, and his name is Yahya b. Sulaym b. Balj.
Al-Hafiz said: “*Saduq* (very truthful), *maybe* he made mistakes.”
**There are witnesses for it (i.e. the** ***hadith*****)**.”[^3]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H), in his annotated version of Ibn Abi
Asim’s *Kitab al-Sunnah* surprisingly added some new words in brackets:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا] إنه لا ينبغي
أن أذهب إلا [وأنت خليفتي في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym **Abu Balj** – ‘Amr b. Maymun – **Ibn ‘Abbas**: The Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali: “You are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. [**Verily,
it is not right that I depart except] with you as my** ***khalifah***
**over every believer** ***after me***.”[^4]

Nonetheless, ‘Allamah al-Albani also comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن. ورجاله ثقات رجال الشيخين غير أبي بلج واسمه يحيى بن سليم بن
بلج قال الحافظ: " صدوق ربما أخطأ ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***hasan***. Its narrators are trustworthy, and are
narrators of the two Shaykhs (i.e. al-Bukhari and Muslim) except Abu
Balj. His name is Yahya b. Sulaym b. Balj. Al-Hafiz said: “*Saduq* (very
truthful), *maybe* he made mistakes.”[^5]

This *hadith*, in the Sunni book, is narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas,
*radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, a Sahabi. Therefore, it is not *mursal*, as
claimed by Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah. Rather, its chain is *musnad*
(well-connected) and *hasan* (good). Moreover, since the *hadith* has
been authentically transmitted, the Shaykh’s grading of it as “a lie”
also has absolutely no basis at all.

The second *sighah* is recorded by Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 H), in
his *Musnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا أبو بلج
ثنا عمرو بن ميمون ....قال بن عباس .... وخرج بالناس في غزوة تبوك قال
فقال له علي أخرج معك قال فقال له نبي الله لا فبكى علي فقال له أما ترضى
أن تكون منى بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا أنك لست بنبي انه لا ينبغي أن أذهب
الا وأنت خليفتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah
– **Abu Balj** – ‘Amr b. Maymun .... Ibn ‘Abbas said:

.... He (the Messenger of Allah) went out for the battle of Tabuk. So,
‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out with you.” Therefore, the Prophet of
Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Do not weep, ‘Ali. Are you not pleased
that you are to me of the status of Harun to Musa, with the exception
that you are not a prophet? **Verily, it is not right that I depart
except with you as my** ***khalifah***.”[^6]

Al-Arnaut strangely says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده ضعيف بهذه السياقة . أبو بلج أعدل ما قيل فيه أنه يقبل حديثه فيما
لاينفرد به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *dha’if* with this context. **Abu Balj**, the fairest that
has been said about him is that his *hadith* is accepted only when he is
corroborated.[^7]

However, he contradicts himself elsewhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عفان ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا أبو بلج عن محمد بن
حاطب.... إسناده حسن من أجل أبي بلج
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Affan – Abu ‘Awanah – **Abu
Balj** – Muhammad b. Hatib .... **Its chain is** ***hasan*** **due to
Abu Balj**.[^8]

Al-Arnaut also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا حسن حدثنا زهير حدثنا أبو بلج ان عمرو بن
ميمون حدثه قال قال أبو هريرة ....هذا إسناد حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Hasan – Zuhayr – **Abu Balj**
– ‘Amr b. Maymun – Abu Hurayrah .... **This chain is** ***hasan***.[^9]

Apparently, *Hadith al-Khilafah* is *hasan* by the standards of Shaykh
al-Arnaut too! Commenting about the same *hadith* in *Musnad Ahmad*,
‘Allamah Ahmad Shakir (d. 1377 H) declares:

> إسناده صحيح، أبو بلج، بفتح الباء وسكون اللام و آخره جيم: اسمه يحيى بن
> سليم ويقال يحيى بن أبي الأسود الفزاري، وهو ثقة، وثقه ابن معين وابن سعد
> والنسائي والدارقطني وغيرهم. وفي التهذيب أن البخاري قال: فيه نظر! وما
> أدري أين قال هذا؟، فإنه ترجمه في الكبير 4/2/279 ـ 280 ولم يذكر فيه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جرحاً، ولم يترجمه في الصغير، ولا ذكره هو والنسائي في الضعفاء، وقد روى
عنه شعبة، وهو لا يروي إلا عن ثقه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***sahih***. Abu Balj: his name is Yahya b. Sulaym. He
is also called Yahya b. Abi al-Aswad al-Fazari, **and he is**
***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**. **Ibn Ma’in, Ibn Sa’d, al-Nasai,
al-Daraqutni and others declared him** ***thiqah***. It is said in
*al-Tahdhib* that al-Bukhari said: “There is a problem in him”! I do not
know: **where has he said that**? This is because in his (al-Bukhari’s)
biography of him in *al-Kabir* 4/2/279-280, he does not mention any
criticism against him, and he (al-Bukhari) does not write his biography
in *al-Saghir*, and neither he nor al-Nasai has mentioned him in (his
respective) *al-Dhu’afa*. Moreover, Shu’bah has narrated from him, and
he does not narrate except from *thiqah* narrators.[^10]

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) records the *hadith* too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن جعفر بن حمدان القطيعي ببغداد من أصل كتابه ثنا
عبد الله بن أحمد بن حنبل حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا
أبو بلج ثنا عمرو بن ميمون ....قال ابن عباس :.... وقعوا في رجل له بضع
عشرة فضائل ليست لأحد غيره.... وخرج رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في
غزوة تبوك وخرج بالناس معه قال فقال له علي : أخرج معك قال : فقال النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم لا فبكى علي فقال له : أما ترضى أن تكون مني بمنزلة
هارون من موسى إلا أنه ليس بعدي نبي إنه لا ينبغي أن أذهب إلا وأنت
خليفتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ja’far b. Hamadan al-Qati’i – ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b.
Hanbal – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah –
**Abu Balj** – ‘Amr b. Maymun .... Ibn ‘Abbas said:

**.... They are attacking a man who has ten EXCLUSIVE merits**.... The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, went out for the battle of Tabuk,
and the people went out with him. So, ‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out
with you.” Therefore, the Prophet, peace be upon him, said, “Do not
weep, ‘Ali. Are you not pleased that you are to me of the status of
Harun to Musa, with the exception that there is no prophet after me?
**Verily, it is not right that I depart except with you as my**
***khalifah***.”[^11]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^12]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) backs him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^13]

Meanwhile, Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) has documented the third *sighah*,
through the same *hasan* chain of transmission as the first:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخرج بالناس في غزوة تبوك فقال علي أخرج معك فقال لا فبكى فقال أما ترضى
أن تكون مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست بنبي ثم قال أنت خليفتي
يعني في كل مؤمن من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

.... He (the Messenger of Allah) went out with the people for the battle
of Tabuk. So, ‘Ali said to him, “Let me go out with you.” Therefore, he
(the Prophet) said, “Do not weep, ‘Ali. Are you not pleased that you are
to me of the status of Harun to Musa, with the exception that you are
not a prophet? **You are my** ***khalifah*****, that is, over every
believer** ***after me*****.**”[^14]

This third *sighah* reveals that the second *sighah* actually misses
some words. When the Messenger of Allah declared Amir al-Muminin as his
*khalifah*, he explicitly explained what he meant, so that the
*khilafah* is not confused with ‘Ali’s governorate over Madinah. In the
end, all three *sighahs* actually say the same thing: ‘Ali was the
*khalifah* of the Messenger of Allah over *every* believer *after him*.

These various reports record varying degrees of details of the text of
*Hadith al-Khilafah*. However, by combining the *sighahs*, a clear
picture emerges:

1. The Messenger of Allah made Amir al-Muminin his *khalifah* over
Madinah during the battle of Tabuk.

2. The Prophet himself led the army to Tabuk.

3. ‘Ali was very distressed with the appointment and preferred to
participate in the battle as a soldier. This displeasure made him weep.

4. His request to the Prophet to let him participate as a soldier in the
battle was turned down.

5. To make him happy and pleased, the Prophet stated that he was exactly
the Harun of this *Ummah*, except that while Harun was a prophet, he was
not.

6. The Messenger of Allah also informed him that he would become his
*khalifah* over his *entire* *Ummah* after him.[^15]

7. The Prophet further added that it was not right for himself to depart
except with ‘Ali being his *khalifah* over the *entire* *Ummah* after
him.

8. Lastly, ‘Ali’s *khilafah* in the *hadith* is part of his ten
**exclusive** merits, according to Ibn ‘Abbas.

Interestingly, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah seeks to capitalize on the fact that
the *hadith* was delivered during ‘Ali’s *khilafah* over Madinah. He
therefore restricts the *khilafah* in the *hadith* to mere governorate
over a town or city within the *Ummah*. On that basis, he kicks it out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم ذهب غير مرة وخليفته على المدينة غير علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, the Prophet, peace be upon him, departed many times and his
*khalifah* over Madinah was other than ‘Ali (on each occasion). [^16]

His submission however fails for two reasons. First, the Messenger
wanted to tell ‘Ali something to make him happy, considering the
latter’s deep distress over his appointment as governor of Madinah. How
then would he have still mentioned that *same* governorate to cheer him
up? Does that make any sense? Besides, the Prophet specifically
indicated that the *khilafah* he was speaking about would be over the
entire *Ummah* after him. This certainly is different from the
governorate of Madinah, which was over a tiny portion of the *Ummah*
while the Messenger of Allah was still alive! How on earth did our dear
Shaykh miss this simple, clear difference?

As if the weird actions of Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah on *Hadith al-Khilafah*
are not enough, ‘Allamah al-Albani sinks even deeper:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما ما يذكره الشيعة في هذا الحديث وغيره أن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم
قال في علي رضي الله عنه: " إنه خليفتي من بعدي ". فلا يصح بوجه من
الوجوه، بل هو من أباطيلهم الكثيرة التي دل الواقع التاريخي على كذبها
لأنه لو فرض أن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قاله، لوقع كما قال لأنه (وحي
يوحى) والله سبحانه لا يخلف وعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for what the Shi’ah mention about this *hadith* and others that the
Prophet, peace be upon him, said about ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
him, that “**he is my** ***khalifah*** **after me**”, it is NOT
authentic for many reasons. **Rather, it is one of their (i.e. Shi’is’)
several fabrications**, which are exposed as lies by history. If truly
the Prophet, peace be upon him, had said it, it would have occurred as
predicted, because it is *wahy* revealed, and Allah never betrays His
Promise.[^17]

Has the ‘Allamah really forgotten that he has personally authenticated
the chain of that *hadith*? Or, did he choose to become economical with
truthfulness and sincerity after realizing that *Hadith al-Khilafah*
simply cannot be twisted to kill its true meaning? It is rather
unfortunate that ‘Allamah al-Albani plays this lowly “Ibn Taymiyyah”
card despite his high calibre.

The only excuse he has actually tabled for attacking the *hadith*
(despite his claim of the existence of many) is that it contradicts
historical reality. Rather than ‘Ali, Abu Bakr became the *khalifah*.
*Therefore*, ‘Ali could not have been the designated successor?! This
reasoning further exposes another aspect of ‘Allamah al-Albani: his
shocking ignorance of the meaning of the word *khalifah*! Does he even
read the Qur’an at all?

Musa and Harun, *‘alaihima al-salam*, were both messengers chosen by
Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأتياه فقولا إنا رسولا ربك
  </p>
</blockquote>

So go you both to him and say: “Verily, we both are **messengers** of
your Lord”[^18]

By the Order of Allah, every messenger was a ruler of his people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما أرسلنا من رسول إلا ليطاع بإذن الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

We sent no **messenger**, but to be obeyed by Allah’s Leave.[^19]

So, what happens when the people refuse to obey a messenger? Does he
lose his status? By the reasoning system of ‘Allamah al-Albani, if Allah
had truly appointed someone a messenger, then the people would certainly
have obeyed him. If they did not obey him, then it must have been that
he was not a genuine messenger!

Harun, apart from being a messenger, was also Musa’s *khalifah* over the
latter’s entire *Ummah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال موسى لأخيه هارون اخلفني في قومي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Musa said to his brother, Harun: “Be my *khalifah* over my people.”[^20]

But, what happened once Musa went away temporarily from his *Ummah*,
with his brother as his *khalifah* over them? A rebel leader rose
against Harun, and stole power. The people of Musa thereby disobeyed
Harun and followed the rebel leader, named al-Samiri. Allah informed
Musa of the situation while he was still absent from them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال فإنا قد فتنا قومك من بعدك وأضلهم السامري
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (Allah) said: “Verily! We have tried your people in your absence, and
al-Samiri has led them astray.”[^21]

The Qur’an continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولما رجع موسى إلى قومه غضبان أسفا قال بئسما خلفتموني من بعدي أعجلتم
أمر ربكم وألقى الألواح وأخذ برأس أخيه يجره إليه قال ابن أم إن القوم
استضعفوني وكادوا يقتلونني
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Musa returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said, “What an
evil thing is that which you have done during my absence! Did you hasten
and go ahead as regards the matter of your Lord?” He threw down the
Tablets and seized his brother by his head and dragged him towards him.
Harun said, “O son of my mother! Indeed the people judged me weak, and
were about to murder me.”[^22]

In line with the logic of ‘Allamah al-Albani, since Allah announced
Harun as a messenger, and Musa too called him his *khalifah*, then the
Israelites *must* have obeyed him. Otherwise, the Promise of Allah would
have failed! Moreover, because they disobeyed Harun and obeyed al-Samiri
– in the thinking line of ‘Allamah al-Albani – the former was therefore
no longer a messenger or a *khalifah*! Rather, al-Samiri became the true
messenger and *khalifah* by staging a successful rebellion! How can a
Muslim scholar reason like that?

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 5, p. 34

[^2]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 330, \#
3062

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 259, \# 18305

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 355, \# 8645

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir], vol.
1, p. 331, \# 3062

[^11]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 112, \# 8409

[^15]: ‘Ali obviously was very passionate about serving Islam. This was
why he preferred to be a soldier, rather than a governor. As a soldier,
he believed that his contributions would be far greater. The Prophet
then informed him that he was holding, and would also be holding, ranks
and positions that would afford him unprecedented opportunities to serve
Islam. This was to make him happy, and it did.

[^16]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 5, p. 34

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 4, p. 344, \# 1750

[^18]: Qur’an 20:47

[^19]: Qur’an 4:64

[^20]: Qur’an 7:142

[^21]: Qur’an 20:85

[^22]: Qur’an 7:150


