3) Hadith Al-Wilayah, Al-Arnaut’s Rescue Attempts
=================================================

Shaykh al-Arnaut is a hard-line follower of his “Shaykh al-Islam” Ibn
Taymiyyah. Seeing the latter’s helplessness on *Hadith al-Wilayah*, he
decides to come to his rescue. Although he falls short of calling the
*hadith* “a lie” like Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H), Shaykh al-Arnaut
nonetheless makes frantic but fragile efforts to cast a shadow of doubt
over its head.

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H), in his *Sahih*, records the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن عليا مني وأنا منه وهو ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, ‘Ali is from me and I am from ‘Ali, and he is the *wali* of
every believer after me.[^1]

The *riwayah* is through this chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو يعلى حدثنا الحسن بن عمر بن شقيق حدثنا جعفر بن سليمان عن
يزيد الرشك عن مطرف بن عبد الله بن الشخير عن عمران بن حصين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ya’la – al-Hasan b. ‘Umar b. Shaqiq – **Ja’far b. Sulayman** –
**Yazid al-Rishk** – **Mutarrif b. ‘Abd Allah b. Shikhir** – ‘Imran b.
Hasin.[^2]

Shaykh al-Arnaut says about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده قوي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is strong.[^3]

This indicates the reliability of all the narrators. ‘Allamah al-Albani
(d. 1420 H) confirms this when he says about the very same report, with
the same chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^4]

The *hadith* is also recorded in *Musnad Ahmad* with this chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الرزاق وعفان المعنى وهذا حديث عبد
الرزاق قالا ثنا جعفر بن سليمان قال حدثني يزيد الرشك عن مطرف بن عبد
الله عن عمران بن حصين قال ... رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم .... دعوا
عليا دعوا عليا ان عليا مني وأنا منه وهو ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad)** – **my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal)** – **‘Abd
al-Razzaq** and **‘Affan al-Ma’ni**, and this is the *hadith* of ‘Abd
al-Razzaq – **Ja’far b. Sulayman** – **Yazid al-Rishk** – **Mutarrif b.
‘Abd Allah** – ‘Imran b. Hasin:

.... The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “.... Leave ‘Ali
alone! Leave ‘Ali alone! Verily, ‘Ali is from me and I am from ‘Ali and
he is the *wali* of every believer after me.”[^5]

Al-Arnaut already testifies to the reliability of Ja’far, Yazid and
Mutarrif above. So, we are left with only ‘Abd Allah, son of Imam Ahmad
b. Hanbal; and both of them are highly authoritative *hadith* scientists
and compilers in the eyes of the Ahl al-Sunnah. Like his father, Ahmad
b. Hanbal, ‘Abd Allah needs no introduction and his trustworthiness is
absolutely beyond question. ‘Abd al-Razzaq too is like that. His
*Musannaf* is a prominent *hadith* source among Sunni *‘ulama*, and he
is a major narrator in *Sahih al-Bukhari*. So, ordinarily, Shaykh
al-Arnaut should have absolutely no problem with the *sanad*. However,
he does:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده ضعيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *dha’if* (weak).[^6]

He gives no excuse at all, apparently because there is none! Or, is it
that he has problem with ‘Abd Allah, his father Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241
H) or ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H)? Elsewhere in the same *Musnad*, this is
how al-Arnaut comments about another chain of theirs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبى ثنا عبد الرزاق قال ثنا سفيان عن الأعمش عن أبى
وائل عن أم سلمة....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘Abd Allah** – **my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal)** – **‘Abd al-Razzaq** –
Sufyan – al-A’mash – Abu Wail – Umm Salamah....

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of the two Shaykhs (i.e.
al-Bukhari and Muslim).[^7]

So, even Shaykh al-Arnaut is well-aware that the chain of *Hadith
al-Wilayah* in *Musnad Ahmad* is reliable. Yet, he does what he does!

Or, wait a minute! Is there not a break in the chain between ‘Abd
al-Razzaq and Ja’far? It is one thing for all the narrators of a chain
to be trustworthy and truthful. It is another for it to be
well-connected, such that each narrator transmits from the one he really
met. If there is a break in the chain, then it is indeed weak. Shaykh
al-Arnaut has authenticated the transmission from ‘Abd Allah – Ahmad b.
Hanbal – ‘Abd al-Razzaq. He has equally authenticated the transmission
from Ja’far – Yazid – Mutarrif. As such, there is only the question of
the link between ‘Abd al-Razzaq and Ja’far.

In the *riwayah* of *Hadith al-Wilayah* in *Musnad Ahmad* above, two
people have narrated from Ja’far: ‘Abd al-Razzaq and ‘Affan al-Ma’ni. If
only one of them is reliable and is fully connected to Ja’far, then the
entire *sanad* is impeccable. But, look at this chain and al-Arnaut’s
comment on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عفان ثنا جعفر بن سليمان ثنا ثابت عن أنس
بن مالك ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم رجاله ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – **‘Affan** – **Ja’far b.
Sulayman** – Thabit – Anas b. Malik ....

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim, **its
narrators are trustworthy**.[^8]

Similarly, Shaykh al-Arnaut says about another chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الرزاق ثنا جعفر بن سليمان قال حدثني
ثابت البناني عن أنس بن مالك .....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم , رجاله ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – **‘Abd al-Razzaq** – **Ja’far
b. Sulayman** – Thabit al-Banani – Anas b. Malik ....

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim, **its
narrators are trustworthy**.[^9]

Obviously, two trustworthy narrators have narrated *Hadith al-Wilayah*
from Ja’far b. Sulayman. Moreover, all its narrators are trustworthy,
and the *sanad* is fully-connected. Therefore, it is a doubly *sahih*
chain without any doubt, even by the standards of Shaykh al-Arnaut! Yet,
he knowingly grades the *sanad* as *dha’if* without any justification!
However, Allah has made him admit the truth about the noble *hadith* in
his *tahqiq* of *Sahih Ibn Hibban*. So, his own words will continue to
refute him till the Hour!

The second version of *Hadith al-Wilayah*, narrated by Buraydah, is
equally documented in *Musnad Ahmad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا بن نمير حدثني أجلح الكندي عن عبد الله بن
بريدة عن أبيه بريدة قال .... فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم لا تقع
في علي فإنه منى وأنا منه وهو وليكم بعدي وانه منى وأنا منه وهو وليكم
بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Ibn Numayr – **Ajlah
al-Kindi** – ‘Abd Allah b. Buraydah – his father Buraydah, who said:
.... The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “Do not attack
‘Ali, for he is from me and I am from him, and he is your *wali* after
me; and he is from me and I am from him, and he is your *wali* after
me.[^10]

Shaykh al-Arnaut comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده ضعيف بهذه السياقة من أجل أجلح الكندي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *dha’if* (weak) with this context due to **Ajlah
al-Kindi**.[^11]

Really?! But, this is what this same al-Arnaut says about the same Ajlah
in the same book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأجلح - وهو ابن عبد الله الكندي - فقد روى له البخاري في " الأدب "
وأصحاب السنن وهو صدوق
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Al-Ajlah** – and he is Ibn ‘Abd Allah **al-Kindi** – al-Bukhari has
narrated from him in *al-Adab*, and the authors of the *Sunan* too (i.e.
al-Tirmidhi, Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah and al-Nasai). **And he is**
***saduq*** **(very truthful)**.[^12]

How then can anyone grade his *hadith* as *dha’if*? Interestingly,
elsewhere, al-Arnaut’s verdict changes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا مصعب بن سلام سمعته من أبي مرتين ثنا
الأجلح عن الذيال بن حرملة عن جابر بن عبد الله....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح لغيره وهذا إسناد حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Mus’ab b. Salam – my father –
**al-Ajlah** – al-Zayal b. Harmalah – Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah....

*Sahih li ghayrihi*, **and this chain is** ***hasan***.[^13]

Therefore, the version of *Hadith al-Wilayah* narrated by Ajlah is
actually *hasan* by the standards of Shaykh al-Arnaut.

[^1]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 15, pp.
373-374, \# 6929

[^2]: Ibid, vol. 15, p. 373, \# 6929

[^3]: Ibid, vo. 15, p. 374, \# 6929

[^4]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ta’liqat al-Hisan ‘ala Sahih Ibn Hibban
(Jeddah: Dar Ba Wazir li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1424 H),
vol. 10, p. 67, \# 6890

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 437, \#
19942

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 6, p. 322, \# 26782

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 267, \# 13847

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 164, \# 12698

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 356, \# 23062

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 305, \# 14313

[^13]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 310, \# 14372


