5) Hadith Al-Wilayah, The Implication of “After Me”
===================================================

The phrase “after me” in Arabic is either *ba’di* (بعدي) or *min ba’di*
(من بعدي). Both mean the same thing and are considered as one and the
same. *Hadith al-Wilayah* has been transmitted with both terms. Imam
al-Salihi al-Shami (d. 942 H) for instance says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروى ابن أبي شيبة وهو صحيح عن عمران - رضي الله تعالى عنه - قال: قال
رسول الله - صلى الله عليه وسلم -: " علي مني وأنا منه، وعلي ولي كل مؤمن
من بعدي."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abi Shaybah narrated, **and it is** ***sahih***, from ‘Imran, may
Allah be pleased with him, saying: The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, said: “Ali is from me and I am from him, and ‘Ali is the *wali* of
every believer after me (*min ba’di*).”[^1]

Meanwhile, al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخرج الترمذي بإسناد قوي عن عمران بن حصين في قصة قال فيها قال رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم ما تريدون من علي إن عليا مني وأنا من علي وهو ولي كل
مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Tirmidhi records in a narrative **with a strong (*****qawi*****)
chain** from ‘Imran b. Hasin: “The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, said: ‘What do you want from ‘Ali? Verily, ‘Ali is from me and I am
from ‘Ali, and he is the *wali* of every believer after me
(*ba’di*).’”[^2]

The Shi’i lexicographer, al-Turayhi (d. 1085 H), explains what *ba’da*
(“after”) means in medieval Arabic:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعد: خلاف قبل. قال تعالى) :ولله الامر من قبل ومن بعد (أي قبل الفتح
وبعده، وقد يكون بمعنى مع مثل قوله تعالى ): عتل بعد ذلك زنيم (أي مع ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ba’da*****: This is the opposite of “before”**. Allah says: (To Allah
belongs the Command before and after) [30:4], meaning before the
Conquest of Makkah and after it. Also, it also has the meaning of
“with”, like in His Words, (Cruel, after that base-born) [68:13],
meaning “with that”.[^3]

Classical Sunni lexicographers, Ibn Manzur (d. 711 H) and Muhammad b.
‘Abd al-Qadir (d. 721 H), also state:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبعد ضد قبل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ba’da* is the opposite of “before”.[^4]

The definitions are general. As such, *ba’di* refers to any “after”,
especially “after in time”, “after in status” or “after in sequence”. A
rarer meaning of *ba’di* is “in my absence” or “during my absence”, as
in these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال فإنا قد فتنا قومك من بعدك وأضلهم السامري
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (Allah) said: “Verily! We have tried your people **in your absence**,
and al-Samiri has led them astray.”[^5]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولما رجع موسى إلى قومه غضبان أسفا قال بئسما خلفتموني من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Musa returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said, “What an
evil thing is that which you have done **during my absence**!

So, what does “after me” mean in *Hadith al-Wilayah*? Was ‘Ali, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, thereby the *wali* of the *Ummah* in the event of Muhammad’s
death, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa aalihi*? Or, was he their *wali* next in
rank to the Messenger with the latter alive? Or was he the *wali* only
in the temporary absence of the Prophet? In the event of any of these
cases, what exactly would *wali* and “after me” mean?

In order to determine these, one must first analyze the text and grammar
of the *hadith* itself. There is a clear difference between these two
statements:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is **THE** *wali* (wali) of every believer after me.

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي لكل مؤمن من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is a *wali* (waliyyun) of every believer after me.

The actual word in *Hadith al-Wilayah* is *al-wali* (الولي) – THE
*wali*. However, since it is immediately followed by *kulli* (كل), its
first two letters are hidden for a smoother pronunciation. Yet, the word
remains pronounced as *wali* – indicating that it is a definite noun.
Its indefinite form is *waliyyun*. This indefinite form can only be
followed by *likulli* (لكل) in order to retain its indefinite status.

The singular definite personal noun, followed by *kulli* (كل), is
sometimes adopted to name a rank, status or quality that is *absolutely*
*exclusive* to someone. The Qur’an too has used it in this sense, with
regards to Allah. For instance, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل أغير الله أبغي ربا وهو رب كل شيء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: “Shall I seek a lord (*rabban*) other than Allah, while He is
**THE** Lord (*Rabb*) of every thing?”[^6]

The last part of this verse adopts the exact same grammatical format as
*Hadith al-Wilayah*. It apparently seeks to declare that *absolutely* no
other lord *of everything* exists besides Allah – *not at a higher,
equal or even lower level* - and has used that format to strongly and
completely convey its message. For all intents and purposes, only Allah
exists as the *sole* Lord of everything. There is no superior,
concurrent or inferior lord – for any purpose – besides Him.

Another similar verse is this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل من رب السماوات والأرض قل الله …. قل الله خالق كل شيء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: “Who is **THE** Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say:
“Allah”.... Say: “Allah is **THE** Creator of every thing.”[^7]

He is the *only* Lord of everything, and the *only* Creator of
everything. It is obvious that the Qur’an absolutely restricts the
*rububiyyah* (lordship) and *khalq* (creation) of everything exclusively
to Him through the adoption of this grammatical style. Meanwhile, the
fact that the *wilayah* in the *hadith* is absolutely exclusive to ‘Ali
after the Messenger is clearly confirmed by Ibn ‘Abbas, *radhiyallahu
‘anhu*, a *very* prominent Sahabi. Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن جعفر بن حمدان القطيعي ببغداد من أصل كتابه ثنا
عبد الله بن أحمد بن حنبل حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن حماد ثنا أبو عوانة ثنا
أبو بلج ثنا عمرو بن ميمون قال إني لجالس عند ابن عباس إذ أتاه تسعة رهط
فقالوا : يا ابن عباس : إما أن تقوم معنا وإما أن تخلو بنا من بين هؤلاء
قال : فقال ابن عباس بل أنا أقوم معكم قال وهو يومئذ صحيح قبل أن يعمى
قال : فابتدؤوا فتحدثوا فلا ندري ما قالوا قال فجاء ينفض ثوبه ويقول أف
وتف وقعوا في رجل له بضع عشرة فضائل ليست لأحد غيره وقعوا في رجل ....
قال له رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم أنت ولي كل مؤمن بعدي ومؤمنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ja’far b. Hamdan al-Qati’i – ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b.
Hanbal – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) Yahya b. Hamad – Abu Awanah – Abu
Balj - ‘Amr b. Maymun:

I was sitting in the company of Ibn ‘Abbas when nine men came to him and
said, “O Ibn ‘Abbas! Either you debate with us, or tell these folks that
you prefer a private debate.” So, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I would rather
participate with you.” In those days, he had not lost his eye-sight yet.
So they started talking, but I was not sure exactly what they were
talking about. Then he came, squeezing his robe, and saying: “Nonsense!
**They are attacking a man who has ten EXCLUSIVE merits**.... They are
attacking a man ... to whom the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
said: “**You are THE** ***wali*** **of every male and female believer
after me**.”[^8]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^9]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) corroborates him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^10]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) confirms them both:

> . وأما قوله: "وهو ولي كل مؤمن بعدي " فقد جاء من حديث ابن عباس، فقال
> الطيالسي (2752) : حدثنا أبو عوانة عن أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون عنه " أن
> رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال لعلي: " أنت ولي كل مؤمن بعدي ".
> وأخرجه أحمد (1 / 330 - 331) ومن طريقه الحاكم (3 / 132 - 133) وقال: "
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح الإسناد "، ووافقه الذهبي، وهو كما قالا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for his statement “and he (*huwa*) is the *wali* of every believer
after me”, it has been narrated in the *hadith* of Ibn ‘Abbas, for
al-Tayalisi (2752) said: Abu ‘Awanah – Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun, from
him (i.e. Ibn ‘Abbas), “that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
said to ‘Ali: ‘You are **THE** *wali* of every believer after me.’”
Ahmad (1/330-331) recorded it, and from his route al-Hakim (3/132-133),
**and he (al-Hakim) said, “a** ***sahih*** **chain” and al-Dhahabi
concurred with him, and it is indeed as both have stated**.[^11]

The full *hadith* elaborates on all ten exclusive merits. However, we
have highlighted the most relevant of them to our current discourse,
which is *Hadith al-Wilayah*.

As such, grammatically and based upon the explicit testimony of Ibn
‘Abbas, the *wilayah* of Amir al-Muminin in the *hadith* is a “merit”
that is *absolutely* *exclusive* to him *alone*. To him alone, to the
exclusion of all other creatures, belonged the *wilayah* of the *Ummah*
immediately after the Prophet.

A rather relevant fact is that the Messenger of Allah too was the only
*wali* of the believers throughout his lifetime. This is explicitly
stated in another *hadith* copied by al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا ولي كل مؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am **THE** *wali* of every believer.[^12]

Ibn Kathir has this comment about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال شيخنا أبو عبد الله الذهبي حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Our Shaykh, Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Dhahabi, said: (It is) a *sahih*
*hadith*.[^13]

Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 H) also records that the Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا ولي المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am **THE** *wali* of the believers.[^14]

Al-Arnaut says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim.[^15]

He was the only one. There was absolutely no other among humans – none
above him, none with him, and none below him. After him, the exact same
status passed onto ‘Ali from him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is **THE** *wali* of every believer after me.

So, what was that totally exclusive type of *walayah* or *wilayah* that
the Messenger of Allah held during his lifetime? Was it friendship with
the Muslims? Was it help of the Muslims? Was it support of the Muslims?
Or, was it rule over the Muslims?

As for *walayah* (friendship, help and support), this was NOT exclusive
to the Prophet during his lifetime, nor was it ever exclusive to him
and/or ‘Ali or any other Muslim! Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمؤمنون والمؤمنات بعضهم أولياء بعض
  </p>
</blockquote>

The believers, men and women, are *awliya* (plural of *wali*) of one
another.[^16]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir explains the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{بعضهم أولياء بعض} أي : يتناصرون ويتعاضدون ، كما جاء في الصحيح:
"المؤمن للمؤمن كالبنان يشد بعضه بعضا" وشبك بين أصابعه وفي الصحيح أيضا
: "مثل المؤمنين في توادهم وتراحمهم ، كمثل الجسد الواحد ، إذا اشتكى منه
عضو تداعى له سائر الجسد بالحمى والسهر"
  </p>
</blockquote>

{are *awliya* of one another}, meaning **they help one another and they
support one another**, as it is recorded in the *Sahih*: “Each believer
to another believer are like the fingertip, **each strengthening the
other**” and he interlocked his fingers. Also, in the *Sahih*, it is
recorded: “The example of the believers in **their love of one another,
and their mercy to one another**, is like a single body. If a body part
complains, the remaining parts of the body come to its rescue with
strength and care.”[^17]

With this reality, we are left with only one explanation: the Messenger
of Allah was the sole ruler of the *Ummah* – which fits perfectly with
history! In *Hadith al-Wilayah*, he apparently indicates the transition
of this same exclusive *wilayah* after him, and its direction.

Our understanding is further helped by the context of the *hadith*
itself. ‘Ali made an **administrative** decision, in his capacity as the
overall commander of the army units. Some of the soldiers under him
objected, and thereby reported him to the Messenger. The issue for
determination was NOT whether or not he was their friend, helper or
supporter. Rather, ‘Ali’s authority was being questioned by his
subordinates.

It was in this light that the Messenger of Allah angrily rejected their
objections, ordered them to desist from *any* future recurrence, and
informed them that ‘Ali was their *wali* after him. In other words, “he
is your next ruler after me: you should learn to be fully loyal to him
and his decisions now; if you kept up this attitude to him, you would be
rebels to him later”! With the above facts in mind, there is no doubt
that “after me” in the *hadith* could only have meant “after my death”.

Interestingly, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) reaches this same
conclusion as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كذلك قوله هو ولي كل مؤمن بعدي كذب على رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
بل هو في حياته و بعد مماته ولي كل مؤمن و كل مؤمن وليه في المحيا و
الممات فالولاية التي هي ضد العداوة لا تختص بزمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

And similarly his statement “he is the *wali* of every believer after
me”, it is a lie upon the Messenger of Allah. Rather he (the Prophet),
during his life **and after his death**, was the *wali* of every
believer, and every believer is his *wali* in life **and death**. The
*walayah* that means the opposite of enmity (i.e. friendship) is not
restricted by time.[^18]

Our dear Shaykh obviously understands from the *hadith* that “after me”
indicates the end of the Prophet’s *wilayah*, followed immediately by
the commencement of that of ‘Ali. He also knows that this termination of
the Prophet’s *wilayah*, according to “after me” in the *hadith*, could
only have occurred with his death. But, since Ibn Taymiyyah has
self-deluded himself into believing that *wali* can never mean “ruler”,
he becomes totally confused, or at least pretends to be so. Despite the
clear illogicality and grammatical invalidity of such a stance, Shaykh
Ibn Taymiyyah maintains that “the *wali*” in the *hadith* only means “a
friend”! Yet, on the strength of the illogicality and fallacy of
interpreting *wali* in the *hadith* to mean “friend”, our dear Shaykh
throws it away!

Surprisingly, ‘Allamah al-Albani thinks that his Shaykh actually has a
point:

> فمن العجيب حقا أن يتجرأ شيخ الإسلام ابن تيمية على إنكار هذا الحديث
> وتكذيبه في " منهاج السنة " (4 / 104) كما فعل بالحديث المتقدم هناك، مع
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تقريره رحمه الله أحسن تقرير أن الموالاة هنا ضد المعاداة وهو حكم ثابت
لكل مؤمن، وعلي رضي الله عنه من كبارهم، يتولاهم ويتولونه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Of the truly unbelievable is Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah’s denial of
this *hadith*, and his calling it a lie in *Minhaj al-Sunnah* (4/104),
as he did with the previous *hadith* here, despite his *excellent*
confirmation, may Allah be merciful to him, that **the friendship here
is the opposite of enmity. And this is a ruling that is firmly
established for every believer**, and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
him, is one of their elders. **He loves them and they love him**.[^19]

In simple words, there is nothing special or exclusive to anyone in the
*hadith*. It only reminds that ‘Ali is *a* friend of every believer, in
the exact same way that each believer is *a* friend of every other
believer! So, one is tempted to ask: why then has the *hadith* stated
“the *wali*”, rather than “a *wali*”, and especially within an exclusion
grammar? Secondly, why has ‘Allamah al-Albani pretended not to see that
“after me” exists in the *hadith*?! It is not reflected at all in his
“explanation”? After all, the Messenger of Allah did not say it for fun!
In a rather intriguing stunt, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah himself reveals why
‘Allamah al-Albani and others like him do not like to see the “after
me”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقول القائل علي ولي كل مؤمن بعدي كلام يمتنع نسبته إلى النبي صلى الله
عليه و سلم فإنه إن أراد الموالاة لم يحتج ان يقول بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Therefore, the statement of the speaker “’Ali is the *wali* of every
believer after me”, it is a statement that cannot be attributed to the
Prophet, peace be upon him. This is because **if he had intended
friendship, he did not need to say “after me”**.[^20]

We too add that he would have said “a *wali*”, and NOT “the *wali*”, if
he had meant to say “friend”, “helper” or “supporter”. The full *hadith*
– if ‘Allamah al-Albani were right – would have been: “’Ali is a *wali*
of every believer”! He apparently prefers to ignore crucial parts of the
*hadith* in order to keep his fallacious explanation of it floating.

But, Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) thinks he has a final solution to this
stubborn Sunni dilemma:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما تريدون من علي ثلاثا إن عليا مني وأنا منه وهو ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكر البيان بأن علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه كان ناصر كل من ناصره رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What do you want from ‘Ali! What do you want from ‘Ali? What do you
want from ‘Ali. Verily, ‘Ali is from me and I am from ‘Ali, and he is
THE *wali* of every believer after me.”

He mentioned the explanation that ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, may Allah be
pleased with him, *was* **THE** **helper** of everyone whose helper
*was* the Messenger of Allah, pace be upon him.[^21]

Yet, this, disappointingly, solves nothing. Was Amir al-Muminin not *an*
helper of the believers during the Prophet’s lifetime? Besides, was the
Messenger of Allah *the* only helper of the Muslims during his prophetic
mission, such that ‘Ali became *the* only helper after him?

Seeing the utter helplessness of the situation, a prominent Sunni
scholar, al-Salihi al-Shami (d. 942 H), chooses to submit to the
apparent truth, while addressing *Hadith al-Wilayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)وهو وليكم بعدي: (أي يلي أمركم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(He is your *wali* after me): meaning, **he will rule over your
affairs**.[^22]

Of even greater interest is that Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H), a major
classical Sunni *muhadith*, places this *hadith* under the chapter
heading: **the** ***Khilafah*** **of ‘Ali**:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا عباس بن الوليد النرسي وأبو كامل قالا ثنا جعفر بن سليمان، عن يزيد
الرشك، عن مطرف، عن عمران بن حصين قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم: علي مني، وأنا منه، وهو ولي كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abbas b. al-Walid al-Narsi and Abu Kamil – Ja’far b. Sulayman – Yazid
al-Rishk – Mutarrif – ‘Imran b. Hasin: The Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, said: “’Ali is from me and I am from him, and he is **THE**
*wali* of every believer after me.”[^23]

Dr. Al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح. رجاله رجال مسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***sahih**.* Its narrators are narrators of (*Sahih*)
Muslim.[^24]

[^1]: Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Salihi al-Shami, Subul al-Huda al-Rashad fi
Sirah Khayr al-‘Ibad (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1414 H) [annotators: ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and ‘Ali Muhammad
Ma’ud], vol. 11, p. 296

[^2]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh], vol. 4, p. 468

[^3]: Fakhr al-Din al-Turayhi, Majma’ al-Bahrayn (2nd edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: Sayyid Ahmad al-Husayni], vol. 1, p. 217

[^4]: Abu al-Fadhl Jamal al-Din Muhammad b. Mukram b. Manzur al-Afriqi
al-Misri, Lisan al-‘Arab (Qum: Nashr Adab al-Hawzah; 1405 H), vol. 3, p.
92; Muhammad b. Abi Bakr ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Razi, Mukhtar al-Sihah
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotator:
Ahmad Shams al-Din], p. 37

[^5]: Qur’an 20:85

[^6]: Qur’an 6:164

[^7]: Qur’an 13:16

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 263, \# 2223

[^12]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 5, p. 228-229

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 3, p. 371, \#
15026

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Qur’an 9:71

[^17]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 4, p. 174

[^18]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 391

[^19]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 264, \# 2223

[^20]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 391

[^21]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 15, pp.
373-374, \# 6929

[^22]: Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Salihi al-Shami, Subul al-Huda al-Rashad fi
Sirah Khayr al-‘Ibad (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1414 H) [annotators: ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud and ‘Ali Muhammad
Ma’ud], vol. 6, p. 237

[^23]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, p. 799, \# 1221

[^24]: Ibid


