6) Hadith Al-Wilayah, Doctored By Shi’is?
=========================================

Facing severe hopelessness about *Hadith al-Wilayah*, a high-standing
Sunni *‘alim* decides to play the last remaining card: “Shi’is doctored
it”! Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه أحمد في مسنده) وهو ولي كل مؤمن من بعدي (كذا في بعض النسخ بزيادة
من ووقع في بعضها بعدي بحذف من وكذا وقع في رواية أحمد في مسنده وقد
استدل به الشيعة على أن عليا رضي الله عنه كان خليفة بعد رسول الله من
غير فصل واستدلالهم به عن هذا باطل فإن مداره عن صحة زيادة لفظ بعدي
وكونها صحيحة محفوظة قابلة للاحتجاج والأمر ليس كذلك …. زيادة لفظ بعدي
في هذا الحديث ليست بمحفوظة بل هي مردودة فاستدلال الشيعة بها على أن
عليا رضي الله عنه كان خليفة بعد رسول الله من غير فصل باطل جدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad recorded it in his *Musnad*: “And he is THE *wali* of every
believer after me (*min ba’di*)”. This is how it is recorded in some
manuscripts, with the addition of “min”. In other manuscripts, there is
“ba’di” without “min”, and this is how it is in the report of Ahmad in
his *Musnad*. The Shi’ah have proved with it (i.e. the phrase “after
me”) that ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, was the immediate
*khalifah* of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him.

**Their reliance of upon as proof is fallacious because it depends
entirely upon the authenticity of the additional phrase “after me”. If
it were authentic, then it would be acceptable as proof**.

But, the matter is not like that.... **The additional phrase “after me”
in this** ***hadith*** **is not authentic**. Rather, it is rejected.
Therefore, the reliance upon it as proof, by the Shi’ah, that ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, was the immediate *khalifah* of the Messenger
of Allah is terribly fallacious.[^1]

In simple words, the original *hadith* was this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي كل مؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is **THE** *wali* of every believer.

However, some unreliable people maliciously added “after me” to it to
make it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي كل مؤمن بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is **THE** *wali* of every believer after me.

In his haste, al-Mubarakfuri obviously fails to notice that the
“dangerous elements” in the *hadith* are two, not one: the word “the”
before *wali* and the phrase “after me”. The only way he can have his
way is if the original *hadith* had been this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي ولي لكل مؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali is a *wali* of every believer.

In that case, Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi al-salam*, would have been only
one of the friends and helpers of the believers. But, the definite
article (i.e. the word “the”) before *wali* in the actual *hadith*
restricts *wilayah* to him, to the exclusion of all others – based on
the testimony of Ibn ‘Abbas, *radhiyallahu ‘anhu*. As such, the
alternative version being proposed by al-Mubarakfuri is blasphemous in
its purport as it suggests that the *wali* was only ‘Ali, and not the
Messenger, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, even though the latter was
still alive! Whatever meaning is given to *wali* in such a situation,
the meaning still constitutes disbelief in Islam. No doubt,
al-Mubarakfuri has no viable way out of the quagmire.

So, who possibly forged “after me” in the *hadith*? Al-Mubarakfuri now
reads his charge sheet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد تفرد بها جعفر بن سليمان وهو شيعي بل هو غال في التشيع…. وظاهر أن
قوله بعدي في هذا الحديث مما يقوى به معتقدا الشيعة وقد تقرر في مقره أن
المبتدع إذا روى شيئا يقوى به بدعته فهو مردود …. فإن قلت لم يتفرد
بزيادة قوله بعدي جعفر بن سليمان بل تابعه عليها أجلح الكندي …. قلت أجلح
الكندي هذا أيضا شيعي …. والظاهر أن زيادة بعدي في هذا الحديث من وهم
هذين الشيعيين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ja’far b. Sulayman was the only one to narrate it (i.e. the phrase
“after me” in the *hadith*) **and he was a Shi’i**. Rather, he was an
extremist in Shi’ism.... **An apparent fact is that his statement “after
me” in this** ***hadith*** **is PART OF what is used to strengthen the
beliefs of the Shi’ah**. It has been repeatedly stated at its place that
whenever a heretic narrates anything through which he strengthens his
heresy, then such is rejected.... If you say that Ja’far b. Sulayman is
not the only one who narrated the phrase “after me” (in the *hadith*),
and that, rather, Ajlah al-Kindi also narrated it.... I say: **Ajlah
al-Kindi too was a Shi’i**.... The apparent fact is that the additional
phrase “after me” in this *hadith* is from the hallucinations of these
two Shi’is.[^2]

Al-Mubarakfuri admits that “after me” is only “part of” the pro-Shi’i
elements in the *hadith*. He fails to elaborate however, and prefers not
to touch on the other part at all! It is our submission that this second
undisclosed “dangerous” part of *Hadith al-Wilayah* is none other than
its definite article.

In any case, al-Mubarakfuri is correct about the Shi’ism of both Ja’far
b. Sulayman and Ajlah al-Kindi. Both were companions of the sixth Shi’i
Imam, Ja’far al-Sadiq, *‘alaihi al-salam*. The Shi’i *hadith* scientist,
al-Jawahiri, says about Ja’far:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر بن سليمان الضبعي: البصري - من أصحاب الصادق) ع (ثقة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ja’far b. Sulayman al-Dhab’i: al-Basri, **one of the companions of
al-Sadiq**, peace be upon him. He was *thiqah* (trustworthy).[^3]

He equally states about Ajlah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأجلح بن عبد الله: بن معاوية أبو حجية الكندي أسمه يحيى من أصحاب
الصادق)ع (روى في كامل الزيارات والكافي وقال المفيد في كتاب الكافية في
سند فيه الأجلح انه صحيح الاسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Ajlah b. ‘Abd Allah: b. Mu’awiyah Abu Hujiyyah al-Kindi. His name was
Yahya. **He was one of the companions of al-Sadiq**, peace be upon him.
He narrated in *Kamil al-Ziyarat* and *al-Kafi*, and al-Mufid says in
*Kitab al-Kafiyyah* concerning a chain which includes al-Ajlah, that it
is a *sahih* chain.[^4]

Both Ja’far and Ajlah are considered trustworthy by the Ahl al-Sunnah wa
al-Jama’ah and the Shi’ah Imamiyyah. So, on what basis does
al-Mubarakfuri seek to establish his accusation against them? Does he
have any *positive* proof that they doctored the *hadith*? This is all
he has given as his basis:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد تقرر في مقره أن المبتدع إذا روى شيئا يقوى به بدعته فهو مردود
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been repeatedly stated at its place that whenever a heretic
narrates anything through which he strengthens his heresy, then such is
rejected.

So, both Ja’far and Ajlah are suspects only because the *hadith*
supports Shi’ism and they are Shi’is! Therefore, they *must have*
doctored it to make it the pro-Shi’i evidence that it is, even though
they were trustworthy people! Al-Mubarakfuri has no concrete evidence
against his two victims. All he has is mere conjecture. Meanwhile, a
contemporary Salafi *hadith* scientist, al-Turayfi, further reveals that
al-Mubarakfuri has actually misrepresented the true Sunni position:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأصل في رواية المبتدع إذا كان ضابطاً ثقة القبول، سواء روى فيما يوافق
بدعته أم لا، ما لم يكن قد كفر ببدعته، فحينئذ يرد لكفره، وعلى هذا
الأئمة الحفاظ، فهم يخرجون للمبتدع إذا كان ثقة ثبتاً، ويصححون خبره، فقد
أخرج الإمام أحمد في "مسنده" ومسلم في "صحيحه" والنسائي في "الكبرى"
و"المجتبى" والترمذي وابن ماجه وابن حبان في "صحيحه" وابن منده في كتاب
"الإيمان" والبيهقي في "الاعتقاد" وغيرهم من حديث عدي بن ثابت عن زر قال:
قال علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه: والذي فلق الحبة وبرأ النسمة إنه لعهد
النبي الأمي إليّ أن لا يحبني إلا مؤمن ولا يبغضني إلا منافق. وعدي بن
ثابت ثقة وصفه بالتشيع الأئمة كابن معين والإمام أحمد وأبي حاتم ويعقوب
بن سفيان، بل قال المسعودي: (ما رأيت أقول بقول الشيعة من عدي بن ثابت)
انتهى. ومع هذا أخرج له الأئمة. بل قال بتوثيقه من وصفه بالتشيع وأخرج له
فيما يوافق بدعته كالإمام أحمد بن حنبل والنسائي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The default position concerning the report of a heretic, if he was
accurate and trustworthy, is to accept it, **regardless of whether he
narrated concerning what agrees with his** ***bid’ah*** **(heresy) or
not**, as long as he had not apostatized through his heresy. In such a
case, it will be rejected due to his *kufr* (disbelief). This was the
practice of the Imams who were *hadith* scientists, for they used to
narrate from the heretic if he was trustworthy and accurate, and used to
declare his report to be *sahih*. For verily, Imam Ahmad has recorded in
his *Musnad*, and Muslim in his *Sahih*, and al-Nasai in *al-Kubra* and
*al-Mujtaba*, and al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, and Ibn Hibban in his
*Sahih*, and Ibn Mandah in *Kitab al-Iman*, and al-Bayhaqi in
*al-I’tiqad* and others the *hadith* of ‘Adi b. Thabit from Zirr, who
said: ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “I swear
by the One Who split up the seed and created something living, the
*Ummi* Prophet verily informed me that none loves me except a believer
and that none hates me except a hypocrite.”

Meanwhile, ‘Adi b. Thabit was trustworthy, and the Imams like Ibn Ma’in,
Imam Ahmad, Abu Hatim and Ya’qub b. Sufyan identified him as a Shi’i.
Rather, al-Mas’udi said, “I do not see anyone who professes Shi’ism more
than ‘Adi b. Thabit.” Despite this, the Imams narrated from him.
**Rather, those who identified him as a Shi’i, like Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal
and al-Nasai, also declared him trustworthy, and narrated from him in
what agrees with his** ***bid’ah***.[^5]

Another Salafi *hadith* scientist, al-Mua’lami (d. 1386 H) corroborates
him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد وثق أئمة الحديث جماعة من المبتدعة واحتجوا بأحاديثهم وأخرجوها في
الصحاح، ومن تتبع رواياتهم وجد فيها كثيراً مما يوافق ظاهرة بدعهم، وأهل
العلم يتأولون تلك الأحاديث غير طاعنين فيها ببدعة راويها ولا في راويها
بروايته لها
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Imams in the *hadith* sciences have declared as trustworthy a lot of
the heretics, and have taken their (i.e. the heretics’) *ahadith* as
*hujjah*, and have recorded them (i.e. those reports) in their *Sahih*
books. **And whoever researches their (the heretics’) narrations finds
that a lot of them apparently agree with their heresies**. The scholars
give alternative interpretations for those *ahadith* without attacking
them (i.e. the *ahadith*) on account of the heresy of their narrators,
nor do they attack the narrators for narrating them.[^6]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H), in particular, feels uncomfortable about
al-Mubarakfuri’s “solution” to the crisis, and therefore refutes him
about the same *Hadith al-Wilayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن قال قائل: راوي هذا الشاهد شيعي، وكذلك في سند المشهود له شيعي آخر،
وهو جعفر بن سليمان، أفلا يعتبر ذلك طعنا في الحديث وعلة فيه؟ !
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأقول: كلا لأن العبرة في رواية الحديث إنما هو الصدق والحفظ، وأما
المذهب فهو بينه وبين ربه، فهو حسيبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

If someone says: “The narrator of this corroborative *hadith* (i.e. that
of Ajlah) was a Shi’i, and also in the chain of the main *hadith*, there
is another Shi’i, and he is Ja’far b. Sulayman. Does this not justify
attack on the *hadith* and constitute a fault in it?”

So, I answer: “**Not at all, because the requirements in the
transmission of** ***hadith*** **are ONLY truthfulness and sound
memory**. As for the *madhhab* (of the narrator), that is between him
and his Lord, and He is sufficient for him.[^7]

But, the ‘Allamah is not done yet. He drops the final bombshell:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على أن الحديث قد جاء مفرقا من طرق أخرى ليس فيها شيعي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Plus, the hadith (i.e. *Hadith al-Wilayah*) has been narrated, in parts,
**through many others chains, which do not contain a single Shi’i in
them**.[^8]

The above submissions basically flatten al-Mubarakfuri’s foul attempts
on the *hadith* and his unfair allegation against Ja’far and Ajlah!

[^1]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 10, pp. 146-147

[^2]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 10, pp. 146-147

[^3]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith (Qum:
Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 107, \# 2171

[^4]: Ibid, p. 19, \# 378

[^5]: ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Marzuq al-Turayfi, al-Tahjil fi Takhrij ma lam
Yukhraj min al-Ahadith wa al-Athar fi Irwa al-Ghalil (Riyadh: Maktabah
al-Rushd li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1422 H), p. 546

[^6]: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yahya b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Mu’alami al-‘Atmi
al-Yamani, al-Tankil bi ma fi Ta-anib al-Kawthari min al-Abatil
(al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1406 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani, Zuhayr al-Shawish and ‘Abd al-Razzaq Hamzah], vol. 1,
p. 237

[^7]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 262, \# 2223

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 263, \# 2223


