Section 1: Qur’an, the Book Manifest
====================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 1-3
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طسم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ أَلاَ يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Ta. Sin. Mim.”***  
***2. “These are verses of the Book (that makes the truth) clear.”***  
***3. “Perhaps you will kill yourself with grief, for that they do not
become Believers.”***

Many words have been cited about abbreviated letters and maybe the best
one is that Allah brings up these letters in the beginning of some Suras
(29 cases) of the Holy Qur’an for stating this matter that the holy
Qur’an is His perpetual miracle which is generated from these very
letters and if anyone can write a similar book by these Arabic letters,
he may bring it forth.

The verse says:

***“Ta. Sin. Mim.”***

A comprehensive religious school must have a strong, written,
systematic, and decisive logic so that everyone can easily reach it.

The holy Qur’an has got a very high rank and whenever there is a
deadlock and stop for you, the Qur’an functions as a guide.

This noble verse states the magnificence of the Holy Qur’an in this way:

***“These are verses of the Book (that makes the truth) clear.”***

Of course, the Arabic word /tilka/ refers to something far away and its
meaning is ‘that’ or ‘those’. As we said before, in the Arabic and
Persian languages sometimes it happens that we use demonstrative
pronouns of fat distance to state the magnificence of something, that
is, that subject is so important and crucial that it seems to be out of
our reach and in the heavens.

It is worth paying attention that this holy verse is exactly mentioned
in Suras Yusuf and Al-Qasas, too, and in all cases it has come after
abbreviated letters. These occurrences show that these letters have a
kind of direct relationship with the magnificence of the holy Qur’an.

Using the Arabic adjective /mubin/, which is in fact derived form the
word /bayan/, for the Qur’an , refers to the obviousness of its
magnificence and being a miracle that if the more attention man pays to
its content, the more he will get familiar with its being a miracle.

Moreover, the holy Qur’an distinguishes the truth from the falsehood and
it clarifies the way of happiness, victory and salvation from
misleading.

Then, in the next noble verse, the Prophet (S) is sympathized with when
it says:

***“Perhaps you will kill yourself with grief, for that they do not
become Believers.”***

The Arabic word /baxi‘/ is derived from the word /bax‘/ that means:
‘kill oneself by sorrow and sadness’. This meaning shows how much the
holy Prophet (S) of Islam was compassionate towards people and
persevered in doing his mission.

He was worried and upset that some thirsting people were sitting beside
the spring of the Qur’an and Islam and yet cried because of thirstiness.

He was saddened why the sane man goes in an astray path and falls in a
pitfall while there are so many lamps and lights.

Yes, all divine prophets, especially the Prophet of Islam (S), were in
the same way compassionate, and this sentence has been repeated about
him (S) many times.

Some commentators say that the cause of the revelation of this verse was
that: the Prophet (S) frequently called the people of Mecca to
monotheism, but they did not achieve faith in Allah. The Prophet (S)
became so worried that his face showed signs of his sadness and then the
above verse wassent down to sympathize with him.[^1]

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 4-6
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَأْتِيهِم مِّن ذِكْرٍ مِّنَ الرَّحْمَنِ مُحْدَثٍ إِلاَّ كَانُوا
عَنْهُ مُعْرِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ كَذَّبُوا فَسَيَأْتِيهِمْ أَنبَاء مَا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the
heaven to which they would bend their necks in humility.”***  
***5. “And never comes there to them a new reminder from the Beneficent
(Allah), but they turn away from it.”***  
***6. “So they have indeed rejected (it), therefore the news of that
which they used to mock shall soon come to them.”***

Allah’s way of treatment and law is to provide people choice, options
and opportunities of respite. Faith must be voluntary and optional not
compulsory.

In these verses three attributes of pagans are mentioned: aversion,
denial, and derision. Yes, man gradually and step by step falls in
pitfall; first he ignores and dislikes the Truth, then he denies it, and
finally he scoffs at it. The worst attribute and mood of man is to
ridicule the truth.

Therefore, this verse says:

***“...the news of that which they used to mock shall soon come to
them.”***

And it does not say that they will be punished because of their denial
and aversion.

Anyway, in order to prove that Allah is omnipotent, and even He can
forces all people to believe in Him, through the first verse He says:

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
to which they would bend their necks in humility.”***

The verse refers to this matter that Allah can present them a surprising
miracle or impose a severe punishment on them so that they involuntarily
bow down before Him and yield it, but this compulsory faith is
worthless. What is important is that they yield to the Truth willingly,
thoughtfully, intentionally and consciously.

It is clear that the purpose of ‘they would bend their necks in
humility’ is that the owner of necks would bow down before it. But
because the neck, which is /raqabah/ and /‘unuq/ in Arabic, is the most
important limb of man's body is mentioned ironically as man himself.

Then, in the next holy verse the position of pagans and polytheists
against the holy Qur’an is mentioned, where it says:

***“And never comes there to them a new reminder from the Beneficent
(Allah), but they turn away from it.”***

Using the Qur’anic word ***/ǒikr/ (reminder)*** refers to the fact that
all verses and Suras of the holy Qur’an are striking man’s conscience
and give him awareness, but this group turns away from vigilance and
awareness.[^2]

Using the Qur’anic word ***‘Ar-Rahman’ (the Beneficent)*** refers to the
matter that the verses are sent down out of His general mercy and He
calls all people, without exception, to happiness and perfection.

It is also likely that it is for motivating people to thank

Allah, for these words are said by Allah Whose blessings embrace people.
How they turn away from Him, their Benefactor, and if He does not hurry
to punish them, it is because of His mercy, too.

The Arabic word ‘Muhaddith’ (new and fresh) is used to refer to the
matter that the verses of the holy Qur’an are sent down one after the
other one and each of them has a new concept.

However, what benefit it has that they are against these fresh truths,
as if they have had perpetual relationship with those superstitions of
the ancestors and they do not want to say farewell to ignorance
superstitions, and misleading at any price.

Essentially bias, stubborn, unwise persons are always against any new
thing, though it may guide, inform, and save them.

In verse 68 of Surah Al-Muminun we read:

***“Have they not pondered the statement (of the Qur’an), or has
anything come to them that did not came to their fathers of old?”***

(They struggle with it for it is new!)

Then in the next verse it adds implying that they do not get satisfied
with aversion, and they begin to deny and then they start to do
something worse than that which is scoffing at the revelations. It says:

***“So they have indeed rejected (it), therefore the news of that which
they used to mock shall soon come to them.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/’anba’/*** is the plural form of the word /naba’/
that means ‘important news’. Its purpose here is those severe
punishments which will be imposed on them both in this world and the
other world.

Although some commentators, such as Shaykh Tusi in the book Tibyan,
believe that these punishments are limited to those in the Hereafter,
and most of commentators believe that the concept of the verse is
general and in fact this is true, for the verse is absolute and,
moreover, paganism and denial of the truth has got an extensive terrible
effect on the entire life of man. How can it be ignored?

Studying this verse and the former verse shows that when man is on
deviated paths, he gets increasingly far away from the Truth. First it
is the phase of aversion and turning away from the Truth and being
heedless to it.

Then gradually man begins to deny and reject it and even he gets further
than this stage and he starts to mock the Truth. Then divine punishment
will come.[^3]

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 7-9
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الأَرْضِ كَمْ أَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ
زَوْجٍ كَرِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “Do they not look at the earth - how many of every noble kind We
have caused to grow in it?”***  
***8. “Verily in that there is a sign, but most of them do not
believe.”***  
***9. “And verily, your Lord certainly is He the Mighty, the
Merciful.”***

Studying the creatures of the universe and its beauties is the best way
of theology and knowing Allah. Consequently, the holy Qur’an reprimands
those who do not closely look at the universe.

Thus, the previous holy verses talked about the pagans’ aversion to
divine religious verses, that is fhe Qur’an, and the concerned verses
talk about their aversion to genetic verses and Allah’s portents in the
universe. Not only did they pay no attention to the words of the Prophet
(S), but also they deprived themselves of watching signs of the Truth
around them.

It first says:

***“Do they not look at the earth - how many of every noble kind We have
caused to grow in it?”***

Here, it is worthy to pay attention to the Arabic word /zauj/ concerning
to the plants, though most of commentators say that this word means
‘kind’ and ‘type’ and the word /’azwaj/ means ‘types’ and ‘kinds’, it is
no matter that we consider here the famous meaning of the word /zauj/,
which comes to mind before any other meanings, and that is mate. So it
may refer to the conjugality of plants!

In the ancient times men had somehow found out that some plants have
female and male kinds, and pollination has been used to fecundate
plants.

This matter about palm tree was perfectly known to man. For the first
time Karl Linne (1707-1778), the Swedish botanist, could discover that
the issue of sex in the world of plants is rather a general rule and
plants are fertilized like most animals, that is by joining male semen
with female seed and then they produce fruit.

However, many centuries before these scientists the holy Qur’an has
frequently mentioned the subject of conjugality in plants.[^4] And this
is one of the scientific miracles of the holy Qur’an.

The Arabic word /karim/ (noble) means every thing that is valuable. It
is sometimes applied to man, sometimes to plants, and sometimes it is
used even to qualify a letter, such as the words of the Queen of Sheba
concerning the letter of Solomon she said:

***“...there has been thrown unto me a noble letter.”***[^5]

The purpose of a plant that is ‘Karim’ is the plants which are
beneficial and good and, of course, each plant has got some benefits and
by the development of science this fact gets more and more clear.

The second verse of the above verses, in order to specify and emphasize
more, the Qur’an says:

***“Verily in that there is a sign, but most of them do not believe.”***

Yes, paying attention to this fact that this apparently worthless soil,
which has a certain and given structure, is the source of generation of
various beautiful flowers, fruitful plants, colorful fruits with totally
different properties, states the ultimate power of Allah, but these
blind-hearted persons are so neglectful and unaware that they do not see
the divine signs and are still uninformed, for paganism and stubbornness
have penetrated into their hearts. Thus, in the end of the verse, it is
said:

***“...but most of them do not believe.”***

This faithlessness has become such as a perpetual attribute of theirs,
and it is not surprising that they do not achieve anything from the
divine verses, for receptivity of person is of the main conditions of
the effect, as we read about the holy Qur’an in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2,
verse 2:

***“...a guidance to the pious ones.”***

In the last verse of the verses under discussion, through a phrase which
is the sign of both threat and encouragement, and it is a dread and a
hope both, it says:

***“And verily, your Lord certainly is He the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/‘aziz/***, means a powerful person who is not
defeated. He has power both to present great verses and to beat those
who deny verses, nevertheless, He is merciful and His encompassing mercy
includes every creature and, a serious return to Him in a short moment
is enough that He directs all His grace toward man and to forgive all
his past sins.

It is likely that the attribute /’aziz/ which has preceded the attribute
/rahim/ is for this matter that if the word ‘Rahim’ came before the word
“Aziz’, it would create a feeling that He is weak, but the word “Aziz’
has come first to show that, in spite of being powerful, He is very
merciful.

[^1]: Abul Futuh-i-Razi, Vol. 8, the explanation of the verse

[^2]: In some famous books, such as Irshad Mufid, Rauzah Kafi, Kamal
Al-Din Saduq, and tafsir-i-Qummi, we read that Imam Sadiq (as) said
about the commentary of verse 4: “The purpose is the rebels of Umayyads
who would yield when they see heavenly signs at the time of the rising
of Imam Mahdi (as).” (Al-Mizan and Nur uth-Thaqalayn) It is clear that
the purpose of these narrations is to state an extension of the
extensive: concept of the verse, that finally when Imam Mahdi (as), the
leader of universal government, comes, all tyrannical regimes which
follow the approach of Umayyads, surrender and bow down before the power
of Imam Mahdi (as) and his divine support.

[^3]: The same matter is also mentioned in verses 4 and 5 of Surah
Al-’An‘am

[^4]: in current verses, and also in Surah Ar-Ra‘d, verse 4, Surah
Luqman, verse 10, Surah Qaf, verse 7

[^5]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 29


