Section 2: Moses and Aaron Sent Towards Pharaoh
===============================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 10-12
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ نَادَى رَبُّكَ مُوسَى أَنِ ائْتِ الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَوْمَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَلاَ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي أَخَافُ أَن يُكَذِّبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “And when your Lord called out to Moses (saying): ‘Go to the
unjust people,”***  
***11. “The people of pharaoh; will they not fear (Allah)?’”***  
***12. “Said (Moses): ‘O my Lord! Surely I fear that they will reject
me?’”***

Sending prophets to people is of Allah’s status. Struggling with false
god is at the top of prophets’ programs.

***(Go to the unjust people)***

As we said before, this Surah states the life story of 7 great prophets
as an instructive lesson for all Muslims, especially early ones.

It begins with Moses (as) and explains some parts of his life and
struggles with Pharaohs until the time when this tyrannical nation sank.

Up to now many Suras of the holy Qur’an[^1] have talked about Children
of Israel, Moses (as) and the people of Pharaoh and in some of the next
Suras there will be some discussions about them, too.

Of course, some of these discussions are apparently repeated, but
studying them carefully shows that each of them emphasizes on a
particular part of this event and it is for a special aim.

For example, the concerned verses were sent down when Muslims were so
minor that they did not have any power and important position while
their enemies were very powerful and mighty so that by no means they
were equal.

Here, it is necessary for Allah to mention some similar life stories of
the former nations in order to make them know this great power of foe
and their apparent weakness would never bring about their defeat, and so
their morale would be boosted and they could increase their resistance
and insistence.

It is interesting that after each life story of these 7 prophets, these
two verses are repeated:

***“...but most of them do not believe.”***

***“And verily, your Lord is He the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

It is exactly the same sentences that we read about the Prophet (S) in
the beginning of this very Surah. This harmony is an active evidence of
this fact that mentioning this part of the stories of prophets has been
because of some special psychological and social conditions of Muslims
in that particular part of time and age, and their similarity in other
occasions.

At first it says:

***“And when your Lord called out to Moses (saying): ‘Go to the unjust
people,”***

In the next verse the Qur’an adds:

***“The people of pharaoh; will they not fear (Allah)?”***

This point is worth-studying that here the only attribute of Pharaohs
that is emphasized is /zulm/ (oppression).

We know that this word has got a comprehensive and extensive meaning,
and polytheism is one of its manifest extensions:

***(“...verily polytheism is a grievous iniquity.”***[^2]***)***

Exploitation and slavery of the Children of Israel, with those harsh
punishments and tortures, is its other extension. Moreover, before
anybody else, they first oppressed themselves with their wrong actions;
and so we can summarize the purpose of Divine prophets’ call in
struggling with oppression and tyranny in all aspects.

At this time Moses (as) tells Allah his great problems and difficulties
and asks Him to strengthen and boost him more for carrying out this
great mission.

Here is what the Qur’an says:

***“Said (Moses): ‘O my Lord! Surely I fear that they will reject
me?’”***

Thus, Moses implied that they would defeat him with their oppositions
and denials before he could complete his mission and this mission could
not get anywhere.

Moses (as) was totally right, for Pharaoh and his people had so much
dominance over the conditions of the country, Egypt, that no one could
struggle with and oppose them, and, thus, any little opposition would be
harshly and tyrannically suppressed.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 13-15
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَضِيقُ صَدْرِي وَلاَ يَنطَلِقُ لِسَانِي فَأَرْسِلْ إِلَى هَارُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُمْ عَلَيَّ ذَنبٌ فَأَخَافُ أَن يَقْتُلُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ كَلاَ فَاذْهَبَا بِآيَاتِنَا إِنَّا مَعَكُم مُّسْتَمِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “And my breast straitens, and my tongue is not eloquent,
therefore sent for Aaron (to help me).”***  
***14. “And they have a crime against me, therefore I fear that they may
slay me.”***  
***15. “Said (Allah): ‘By no means, so go you both with Our signs,
surely We are with you, hearing’.”***

The purpose of Moses’ wrong action, mentioned in verse 14, is an event
that is referred to in Surah Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 14. Before his
prophethood, Moses (as) entered a city and saw that one of his adherents
was fighting with one of the people of Pharaoh. Moses’ adherent asked
Moses’ help, and Moses (as), supporting him, struck the Coptic enemy
with his fist and he died.

This event sent a shock wave across the region and it forced Moses (as)
to escape. Although this action of Moses was not done to kill that
person, for it was done to support an oppressed person, it caused Moses
(as) to be counted as a murderer in the view of the people of Pharaoh.

When Moses (as) was appointed as a prophet, he said to Allah that he
feared the death of that Coptic man prevented him from his mission.

It is understood from the word ‘Kalla’ (nay) that the act of Moses (as)
was not a deliberate murder, otherwise, Allah may not say to a willful
murderer:

***“...‘By no means so go you both with Our signs, surely We are with
you, hearing.”***

And therefore, Moses (as) implies that his breast straitens, and has:
not enough capacity for the accomplishment of this mission.

Moses also added that his tongue was not eloquent enough and, therefore,
he (as) asked Him to give his brother the messengership, too, so that
they could struggle with together.

Moses (as) wanted to carry out this great commandment with the help of
Aaron, his brother, in spite of those stubborn oppressors.

The verse says:

***“And my breast straitens, and my tongue is not eloquent, therefore
sent for Aaron (to help me).”***

In the next verse Moses (as) implies that, further, they have a charge
of crime against him, as they think, because he had killed one of those
cruel Coptic people when the man was quarrelling with an oppressed
person from the children of Israel.

The verse says:

***“And they have a crime against me, therefore I fear that they may
slay me.”***

Moses (as) feared that the people of Pharaoh might kill him as
retaliation for slaying one of them and this could put an end to that
great mission.

As a matter of fact, Moses (as) encountered 4 problems on the way of
carrying this great mission and he asked Allah to solve them, (the
problem of denial, the problem of straitening of breast, the problem of
retaliation, the problem of lack of eloquence).

Meanwhile, it gets clear that Moses (as) did not fear about his own
life, but he feared that he might get killed before fulfilling his
mission, and so he asked Allah to help him more, for succeeding in this
struggle.

The kind of means that Moses (as) asked Allah in this connection is a
clear evidence upon this fact. He asked expansion of breast (great and
extensive soul), eloquence, and commissionership of his brother, Aaron,
to participate in this great job.

This matter has been explained in details, in Surah Ta-Ha, where it
says:

***“(Moses) said: ‘My Lord expand me my breast!”***

***“And make easy for me my task,”***

***“And loose a knot from my tongue,”***

***“(That) they may understand my saying;”***

***“And appoint for me an assistant from my family,”***

***“Aaron, my brother;”***

***“Strengthen my back by him,”***

***“And associate him (with me) in my affair.”***

***“So that we glorify You much,”***

***“And remember You abundantly.”***[^3]

Through the next verse, Allah fulfilled this sincere demand of Moses,
where the Qur’an says:

***“Said (Allah): ‘By no means, so go you both with Our signs, surely We
are with you, hearing’.”***

This statement means that they can not kill you, your breast will not be
straitened and you will be eloquent.

Allah also fulfilled Moses’ praying about his brother and he was
commissioned, too, to go to invite Pharaoh and his people to the truth.

Allah never left them alone and He helped them in tight conditions, and
they paved the path of the Truth firmly and with assurance.

Thus, by three sentences Allah provided Moses (as) enough assurances of
support and fulfilled his demand; by the word ‘Kalla’ (nay) Allah
assured him that they could not kill him. Also he would have no problem
in speaking and in his job.

And with the sentence ***/faǒhaba bi ’ayatina/ (So go you both with Our
signs)***, Allah sent his brother, Aaron, to help Moses (as). And
finally, with the sentence /’inna ma‘akum mustami‘un/ (Surely We are
with you, hearing), He promised them to support them anywhere on the
earth.

It is considerable that, in the last sentence, the pronoun has been used
in the plural form and it is said,

***‘We are with you’.***

It is possible that this sentence refers to the matter that Allah is
present in all meetings and gatherings that Moses (as) and his brother
have with the people of Pharaoh and He hears all their words, and, thus,
helps these two brothers to overcome those oppressors.

Some think that since the Arabic word /ma‘a/ (with) indicates support
and helps, and this help is not for the people of Pharaoh, they are
wrong, but this word indicates the perpetual presence of Allah in all
scenes and places. Even he is with wrongdoers and lifeless creatures and
there is no place in which He is not present.

The application of a derivative of the word /’istima‘/ that means: ‘to
listen carefully’ puts emphasis on this fact, too.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 16-19
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأْتِيَا فِرْعَوْنَ فَقُولاَ إِنَّا رَسُولُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ أَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَلَمْ نُرَبِّكَ فِينَا وَلِيدًا وَلَبِثْتَ فِينَا مِنْ عُمُرِكَ
سِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَعَلْتَ فَعْلَتَكَ الَّتِي فَعَلْتَ وَأَنتَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “So go to Pharaoh and say: ‘Verily we (two) are the Messengers of
the Lord of the worlds!”***  
***17. “Send you with us the Children of Israel’.”***  
***18. “Said (Pharaoh): ‘Did we not cherish you as a child among us, and
you tarried among us for (many) years of your life?”***  
***19. “And you did that your deed which you did, and you are one of the
ungrateful.”***

It is Allah’s will to rear Moses (as) in the house of Pharaoh. Allah’s
friends do not get bound by ties of people’s hospitality, and society
and environment have no effect on them.

It is not right to leave someone who is good with us alone and to
accept, or ignore, his faults. (Moses (as) was helped and brought up by
Pharaoh but Moses (as) did not leave him alone.)

In the previous verses, the first phase of Moses’ mission was stated,
namely receiving revelation and asking means of achieving this great
aim, ended.

Now, the second phase that is meeting Pharaoh and having a critical
conversation with him is mentioned.

As an introduction, Allah, pointing to availability of everything for
Moses and Aaron, commands them and says:

***“So go to Pharaoh and say: ‘Verily we (two) are the Messengers of the
Lord of the worlds!”***

The Qur’anic phrase ***/fa’tiya/ (come together)*** shows that they must
speak with Pharaoh himself at any price, and using the word /rasul/
(messenger) which is in the singular form, although they were two,
refers to unity and oneness of their call, as if they were two souls in
one body with one program and one aim.

After declaring their mission, they asked freedom of the Children of
Israel, when they said:

***“Send you with us the Children of Israel’.”***

It is obvious that the purpose of this statement is to set them free in
order to go with Moses and Aaron (as), and its purpose is not at all
that they have asked Pharaoh to send them by himself.

Here, Pharaoh began to speak and, with calculated and, at the same time,
wicked words, tried to deny their mission.

First, he addressed Moses (as), as the Qur’an announces:

***“Said (Pharaoh): ‘Did we not cherish you as a child among us, and you
tarried among us for (many) years of your life?”***

Pharaoh wanted to say to Moses (as) that he rescued him from huge waves
of Nile, called nut nurses for him, exempted him from the law of death
sentence of the Children of Israel and reared him well in a secure,
comfortable and luxurious environment, so that Moses (as) spent many
years of his Life with them.

In the next verse Pharaoh found another fault with Moses, (as):
(referring to killing one of the advocators of Pharaoh).

It says:

***“And you did that your deed which you did, and you are one of the
ungrateful.”***

Pharaoh implied that Moses (as) has been fed with the hand of him and
now how Moses (as) wanted to bite that hand.

As a matter of fact, he wanted to condemn Moses (as) with this
argumentation, as he supposed.

The purpose of Moses’ wrong action mentioned in verse 14 is an event
that is referred to in Surah Al-Qasas, verse 14 and it does not need
that we repeat it.

Some commentators have said that the best form in the meaning of the
verse is the content of the tradition of Imam Rida, the eighth Imam
(as), who said Moses (as) had acted amphibological congruity.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 20
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَعَلْتُهَا إِذًا وَأَنَا مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “Said (Moses): ‘I did it then, when I was (as you think) in
error’.”***

Sometimes confession is a value. After hearing the diabolic words of
Pharaoh, Moses (as) answered the three faults that were mentioned, but
he counted the second fault more important, when he answered it prior to
the first one, (or basically the first fault was not worth answering,
for rearing one is not a reason for not guiding the probably misled
person who rears.)

However, here is his answer:

***“Said (Moses): ‘I did it then, when I was (as you think) in
Error’.”***

In the commentary of Atyab-ul-Bayan, we read different commentaries
about the Qur’anic phrase ***/min-ad-dallin/***; some say that Moses
(as) implied that he did not intend to kill and he did not know that it
would lead to death.

Some say that Moses (as) implied that he had forgotten. Some say that
murder was done by error. Some say that he had not been appointed to
messengership when he did it. But all these are wrong, for we know that
one of the conditions of prophets, messengers and saints is
infallibility. They are far from sins, errors, mistakes, ignorance, and
forgetfulness.

Moreover, before this event, Allah says:

***“And when he reached his maturity and was full grown, We gave him
wisdom and knowledge...”***[^4]

So attributing ignorance, forgetfulness, mistake and error to Moses (as)
is wrong.

Moreover, Moses (as) knew that he would become prophet, for it was
revealed to his mother:

***“...verily We shall bring him back unto you and shall make him (one)
of the Messengers.”***[^5]

The purpose of the Qur’anic word ***/dallin/*** seems that, because the
Coptic man wanted to kill another person and that person asked Moses
(as) to help him, and also removing oppression of oppressor is necessary
according to intellect and reason.

Then Moses (as) added he thought that helping the oppressed person makes
Pharaoh happy and he would like what Moses (as) wanted to do. But after
making Pharaoh angry, he escaped for Pharaoh wanted to kill Moses (as).
And it got clear to Moses that what he (as) had done was wrong according
to the opinion of Pharaoh.

Another commentary says that this word, /dall/, mentioned in the verse
under discussion, refers to a practical deviation which is unintentional
and it does not mar infallibility, or it means astonishment, like verse
7 of Surah Ad-Duha, No. 93 which says:

***“And He found you wandering and guided (you).”***[^6]

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 21
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me
wisdom and made me of the messenger.”***

In this noble verse Moses (as) tells the reason of his escape after that
event.

He (as) says:

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the messenger.”***

The commentators are of different opinions about the purpose of the
Qur’anic word ***/hukm/*** in this verse. Is it the position of
prophethood or knowledge and cognizance? But by paying attention to the
rest of the verse which sets the position of prophethood in front of the
position of wisdom, it gets clear that it is something other than
prophethood and mission.

Another evidence for this subject is verse 79 of Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No.
3:

***“It is not for a human being that Allah should give him the Book, the
judgment and the Prophethood, then he should say to people: ‘Be my
servants rather than Allah’s...”***

Basically the Arabic word ‘Hukm’ originally means to prevent for
reforming, therefore snaffle is called ‘Hakamah’ in Arabic language.
Then this word has been applied to saying something that is wisdom, and
in this relation, knowledge and intellect have been called /hukm/, too.

There may be said that it is understood from verse 14 of Surah Al-Qasas,
No. 28 that Moses (as) had achieved the position of wisdom and knowledge
before this event; when it says:

***“And when he reached his maturity and became full grown, We granted
him wisdom and knowledge...”***

After this verse the affair of killing that man is mentioned through
some verses next to it.

The answer to this question is that knowledge and wisdom has got various
levels and Moses (as) had reached one level formerly and he reached a
higher level of it at the time of appointing as prophet.

Imam Ali (as) was once asked that why, after the Prophet (S), did he not
gain his due with the help of sword and why he did not fight with his
former caliphates as he fought with Talhe, Zubayr, and Mu‘awiyah.

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Sometimes it is necessary to be silent. Did not ’Ibrahim (as) say to
people:*

***“And I shall withdraw from you and what you call on besides
Allah...”?***[^7]

*Did not Aaron say:*

***“...verily the people judged me weak and had well-nigh slain
me...”?***[^8]

*Did not Yusuf (as) say:*

***“...‘My Lord! The Prison is dearer to me than that to which they
invite me...?”***[^9]

*Did not Moses (as) tell them:*

***“So I fled from you when I feared you...”?***[^10]

*Did not Lut (as) say for the demand of the wrong-doers:*

***“...‘Would that I had the power against you or I might take refuge in
a strong support’?”***[^11]

*Therefore other friends of Allah sometimes have to be silent or to be
in reclusion.”*

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 22
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتِلْكَ نِعْمَةٌ تَمُنُّهَا عَلَيَّ أَنْ عَبَّدتَّ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And is it a favour with which you reproach me that you have
enslaved the Children of Israel?”***

The reproaches and arrogance should be answered with harshness and
severity.

To answer back the reproach of Pharaoh about rearing Moses (as) in his
childhood, Moses (as) protested and decisively said:

***“And is it a favour with which you reproach me that you have enslaved
the Children of Israel?”***

It is correct that the hand of events brought Moses (as) to the Palace
of Pharaoh and he (as) was unwillingly brought up in his lap, and this
shows the might of Allah, but one must see what the main factor of this
affair was. Why was not Moses (as) brought up in his real home with his
father and mother caring him?

Is not it true that Pharaoh held the Children of Israel captive and
killed boys and let girls to live for being slave-girl?

This great oppression that Pharaoh committed caused Moses’ mother to put
her son in a wooden box and placed it in Nile River in order to protect
her child. It was Allah’s will that this small ship came near Pharaoh's
palace.

Yes, it was Pharaoh’s great oppression that made Moses (as) indebted to
this reproach and deprived him of his clean parental home and placed him
in Pharaoh defiled palace.

With this commentary, the relation of Moses (as) with Pharaoh’s question
gets clear.

Another possible commentary is that the purpose of Moses (as) was that
his rearing by Pharaoh could be as a blessing compared with those
tyranny and cruelties Pharaoh imposed on the Children of Israel, and it
is understood that this blessing is a drop in the ocean. What blessing
is it that Pharaoh points to, while he has done many oppressions and
crimes beside it?

The third commentary that can be mentioned for the answer of Moses (as)
to Pharaoh is that: if Moses (as) was brought up in Pharaoh’s palace and
enjoyed various blessings, it must not be forgotten that the real
builders of that palace were the slaves taken from the nation of Moses
(as) and the producers of those blessings were the prisoners of the
Children of Israel.

How did Pharaoh reproach Moses (as) for enjoying his (Moses’) own nation
products?

These three above mentioned commentaries are not inconsistent with each
other, but the first one seems clearer from some aspects.

By the way, the Qur’anic phrase ***/min-al-mursalin/*** (used in the
previous verse, refers to the fact that Moses (as) was not the only
messenger of Allah, and before him there had come many prophets and
Moses (as) was one of the divine prophets, and Pharaoh did forget all of
these things.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 23-26
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَا رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إن كُنتُم
مُّوقِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لِمَنْ حَوْلَهُ أَلاَ تَسْتَمِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “Pharaoh said: ‘And what is the Lord of the woilds?’”***  
***24. “He said: ‘(He is) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what
is between them, if you have faith’.”***  
***25. “Pharaoh said to those around him: ‘Do you not hear (what he
says)?’”***  
***26. “(Moses) said: ‘Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of
old’.”***

The Qur’an implies that Prophets’ thesis against their opponents was
around Allah’s lordship, that is Allah’s management and legislation and
the necessity of the obedience of His orders, otherwise, prophets’
opponents accepted Allah as the creator of the world.

Nowadays some people say that religion is separated from politics. This
statement is like the words of those who say the creation of the world
by Allah is something other than management of the world; (Allah creates
it and we govern it).

According to the holy Qur’an and intellect, the right of lordship,
obligating and being obeyed belongs only to the One who is Creator, not
others. One who has created knows what law to be enacted.

Moses (as) implied that Pharaoh’s question was not for understanding,
but he was beating about the bush. If Pharaoh really sought the Truth,
he would understand His unity and lordship by pondering over the current
order and system of the creation.

Anyway, when Moses (as) answered Pharaoh’s words very decisively and
strongly and Pharaoh got hopeless from this aspect, he changed the
course of conversation.

He questioned Moses (as) who had said: his Lord, the Lord of the worlds,
appointed him (as) one of the messengers; as the Holy Qur’an declares:

***“Pharaoh said: ‘And what is the Lord of the worlds?’”***

It seems very unlikely that Pharaoh has raised this question for
understanding the matter, but it seems that he said it rather out of
feigning ignorance and for the sake of scoffing.

In the second verse, like all aware and attentive discussers, Moses (as)
had no way but to treat the matter earnestly and to answer it seriously.

In view of the fact that the Essence of Allah is out of reach of man's
thoughts and perceptions, Moses (as) used His signs and effects that are
everywhere in the universe and spoke about the extrovertive signs, as
follows:

***“He said: ‘(He is) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is
between them, if you have faith’.”***

The heavens with their greatness, the earth with its vastness and its
various creatures, before which Pharaoh’s kingdom is nothing, is the
creation of the Lord of Moses (as). Such a Creator, Divisor and
administrator, namely Allah (s.w.t), deserves worshipping, not a weak
and tiny creature like Pharaoh.

Paying attention to this matter is also necessary that idol-worshippers
believed that each creature of the world had got a certain lord, and
counted universe as a mixture of scattered systems, but Moses' words
refer to the fact that this united single system that governs the
universe is an evidence that it has ‘a single Lord’ unique Allah.

The Qur’anic sentence ***/’in kuntum muqinin/ (if you have; faith)***
probably refers to this matter that Moses (as) implicitly wanted to make
Pharaoh and his companions understand that

the aim of their question was not for understanding the Trauth, but if
they were really seeking the Truth and were the owner of wisdom and
intellect, that argument that he uttered would be enough.

Moses (as) implied they should open their eyes for some time and see His
signs in the vast heavens and the expanded earth in order to know what
they must know and correct their world-view.

But Pharaoh did not rouse from ignorance sleep with this strong speech
of the heavenly great teacher and continued ridiculing and scoffing. He
used the ancient method of the conceited tyrants and addressed his
companions when he spoke, as the Qur’an says:

***“Pharaoh said to those around him: ‘Do you not hear (what he
says)?’”***

It is obvious who were the companions of Pharaoh. They were like Pharaoh
himself; they were some oppressors and wealthy people who supported
tyranny.

Ibn ‘Abbas says that his companions, who were attending there, were 500
persons who were some special and important persons of his nation.[^12]

Pharaoh’s aim was to render this logical and pleasant speech of Moses
(as) ineffective on the dark heart of group, and to show that this
speech was meaningless and its content was not understandable.

Then Moses (as) continued his logical and calculated words, while he
feared no one:

***“(Moses) said: ‘your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of Old’.”***

As a matter of fact, Moses (as) who began with the extrovertive signs in
the first stage, then in the second stage, he proceeded to introvertive
signs and embarked on mysteries of creation in man himself and the signs
of divine rearing and Allah's lordship in soul and body of man in order
to make these ignorant conceited persons think about themselves and to
know themselves a little and then to know their Lord.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 27-30
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّ رَسُولَكُمُ الَّذِي أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ لَمَجْنُونٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِن كُنتُمْ
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَئِنِ اتَّخَذْتَ إِلَهًا غَيْرِي لاَجْعَلَنَّكَ مِنَ
الْمَسْجُونِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكَ بِشَيْءٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “(Pharaoh) said: ‘Verily your messenger who has been sent unto
you is a veritable madman’.”***  
***28. “(Moses) said: ‘The Lord of the east and the west and what is
between the two, if you have understanding’.”***  
***29. “(Pharaoh) said: ‘If you take any god other than me, I will
certainly make you one of the imprisoned’.”***  
***30. “(Moses) said: ‘Even if I bring unto you something manifest?’”***

Calumniations do not cause Allah’s friends to depart from their divine
aims. One of the strongest weapons of prophets’ opponents is unfair
imputation of insanity. Yes, those who can not offer reasonable argue,
resort to false accusation and foul language.

Therefore, Pharaoh continued stubbornness. He exceeded the stage of
scoffing and ridiculing him and imputed insanity to Moses (as).

The verse says:

***“(Pharaoh) said: ‘Verily your messenger who has been sent unto you is
a veritable madman’.”***

It is the same imputation that all oppressors of the world used to
charge divine reformers.

It is interesting that this conceited deceiver is not willing even to
say ‘our messenger’ or ‘unto us’, but he says ‘your messenger’ and ‘unto
you’, for the phrase ‘your messenger’ has got a ridiculing aspect.

It is a kind of ridiculing that is along with self-assertion, implying
that he is so important that a godly prophet can not come, to call him.
His aim of imputing insanity to Moses (as) was to negate the effect of
the strong logic of Moses on his present companions.

However, this unfair accusation had no effect on the heavenly soul of
Moses (as) and he continued the main path of monotheism by Allah’s signs
in the expanse of creation, microcosm and macrocosm.

The verse says:

***“(Moses) said: ‘The Lord of the east and the west and what is between
the two, if you have understanding’.”***

If Pharaoh had an unreal government in a small region called Egypt,
Allah’s real government rules the East and the West and all that there
are between them.

His signs are seen everywhere and in all creatures. Basically the very
rising and downing of the sun in the east and the west and the system
that works in it is the sign of His magnificence. But the problem is
that such people do not ponder them and even they are not used to
thinking.

(You must pay attention that the Qur’anic sentence ***/’in kuntum
ta‘qilun/ (if you have understanding)*** refers to this matter that if
Pharaoh had used to thinking in the past and present, he would
understand this fact).

In fact, Moses (as) answers this insanity accusation very nicely, saying
that he is not insane and a person who does not see all these signs of
Allah is mad and insane.

A Persian poem says:

*In spite of these strange signs and things that are found on*

*the wall of creation,*

*If one does not think about You, is a picture on the wall.*

It is true that for the first time Moses (as) referred to management of
heavens and the earth, but since the heaven is so high and the earth it
so mysterious, therefore, at last he pointed out a matter that no one
could deny it and man sees it every day. It is the system of rising and
downing of the sun and the precise program it has and no one can claim
that he is its designer.

The Qur’anic phrase ***/wa ma baynahuma/ (and what is between the
two)*** refers to the unity and relation of the East and the West, as
this meaning is also applied to the heavens and the earth. And the
relation and unity of their generations have somehow been stated by the
Qur’anic phrase which is recited:

***“...‘Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old’.”*** [^13]

However, then this strong and top logic made Pharaoh very angry and he
restored to the same weapon that all irrational oppressors use when they
are defeated and hopeless.

The Qur’an says:

***“(Pharaoh) said: ‘If you take any god other than me, I will certainly
make you one of the imprisoned’.”***

Pharaoh wanted to say he could not understand what Moses (as) said and
the only thing he persisted on was that there was one great god to be
worshipped and it was Pharaoh, and whoever would say something other
than that he should be condemned to death or being sent to his helish
prison.

Some commentators believe that since the Qur’anic word
***‘Al-Masjunin’*** in this verse has ‘’Alif’ and ‘Lam’, it refers to a
special prison into which if anyone was sent, one would remain in it
until his corpse was brought out.[^14]

As a matter of fact, Pharaoh wanted to suppress Moses (as) with these
threatening and tough words and to make him silent, for the continuation
of these discussions could make people awaken, and nothing is more
dangerous for oppressors than alertness and cognizance of people.

In the previous verses we saw how Moses (as) maintained his logical
superiority over Pharaoh, and showed the audience how much his religion
depended on logic and intellect, and how Pharaoh’s claim was baseless
and senseless. Sometimes Pharaoh ridicules, sometimes he imputes
insanity to Moses (as), and finally he resorts to power, force, and
threatening to death and prison.

Now Moses (as) had to choose a new approach which made Pharaoh hopeless
again. Resorting to Allah’s might originated from a conspicuous miracle,
he (as) addressed Pharaoh implying that if he (as) showed a manifest
thing as a sign of his messengership, would he imprison him?

The verse says:

***“(Moses) said: ‘Even if I bring unto you something***
***manifest?’”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 31
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَأْتِ بِهِ إِن كُنتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “(Pharaoh) said: ‘Bring it then, if you are of the truthful
ones’.”***

At this time Pharaoh reached a very difficult deadlock, for Moses (as)
implicitly referred to an extraordinary program and attracted the
attention of the audience towards himself. If Pharaoh ignored his words,
all persons would object him and would say that he must let Moses
present his important job.

If Moses (as) could do it, it would get clear that he (as) could not be
dealt with, otherwise, his bragging and idle talk would get obvious.
Anyway, the words of Moses (as) could not be easily ignored.

Pharaoh unwillingly had to utter as follows:

***“(Pharaoh) said: ‘Bring it then, if you are of the truthful
Ones’.”***

When logic does not work, miracle is a must, for prophets’ miracle is
real and true and people understand it easily.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 32-33
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَلْقَى عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ ثُعْبَانٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَعَ يَدَهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ بَيْضَاء لِلنَّاظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “So he cast down his rod, and behold, it was a clear
serpent.”***  
***33. “And he drew out his hand, then behold, it was radiant white to
the beholders!”***

Prophets’ miracles are clear and manifesting, not fantasy and
imagination.Becoming staff a manifest serpent is repeated ten times in
the holy Qur’an, and whitening of Moses hand is repeated five times. Of
course, for making the true words effective, one must rightly use both
hopeful and unhopeful or threatening methods.

Moses (as) threw the staff that he had in his hand and it changed into a
great serpent by the command of Allah.

The verse says:

***“So he cast down his rod, and behold, it was a clear serpent.”***

And then he put his hand in his cloth on his chest and took it out, it
suddenly became white and brightening.

The verse says:

***“And he drew out his hand, then behold, it was radiant white to the
beholders!”***

In fact, these two great miracles were signs of hope and fear. The first
one was for warning and the second one was for good tidings. One is
stating the divine punishment and the other one is light and the sign of
mercy, for miracle must be in harmony with prophet’s call.

The Arabic word /u‘ban/ means a great serpent like a dragon. In the book
Mufradat, Raqib says that this word is probably derived from the word
/a‘b/ that means the current of water, for the movement of this animal
is like the streams that move in the shape of serpent form.

The Qur’anic word ***/mubin/*** may refer to this fact that staff really
changed into a great snake and no jugglery and cunning, like what
sorcerers do, has happened.

It is necessary to mention that here the word /u‘ban/ is used, in Surah
An-Naml, No. 27, verse 10, and in Surah Al- Qasas, No. 28, verse 31 the
word ‘Jan’ (small snakes that move fast and swiftly), and in Surah
Ta-Ha, No. 20, verse 20, the word ‘Hayyah’ (that means ‘snake’ and is
derived from the word ‘Hayat’) is used.

The application of these various words may raise question, but they are
for stating one of the following matters:

They may refer to various statuses of that snake; first the staff
changed into a thin and small snake and then it grew gradually and
changed into a great dragon.

Or these three various words may refer to the different characteristics
of that snake; the word /u‘ban/ refers to its greatness, the word ‘Jan’
refers to its swiftness and fastness, and the word ‘Hayyah’ refers to
the life and liveliness of that snake.

[^1]: Surah Al- Baqarah, Surah Al-Ma’idah, Surah Al-’A‘raf, Surah Yunus,
Surah Al-’'Isra’, Surah Ta-Ha

[^2]: Surah Luqman, No. 31, verse 13

[^3]: Surah Ta-Ha, No. 20, verses 25-34

[^4]: Surah Al-Qasas, No.28. verse 14

[^5]: Ibid, verse 7

[^6]: The commentary of Nur, Vol. 8, P. 301

[^7]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 48

[^8]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 150

[^9]: Surah Yusuf, No. 12, verse 33

[^10]: The current verse

[^11]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 80

[^12]: The commentary of Abul-Futuh Razi, the explanation of the verse

[^13]: The current Surah, verse 26

[^14]: The Commentaries of Al-Mizan, Fakhr-i-Razi, Ruh ul-Ma‘ani


