Section 4: Moses Rescues the Children of Israel
===============================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 52-53
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى مُوسَى أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي إِنَّكُم
مُّتَّبَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَرْسَلَ فِرْعَوْنُ فِي الْمَدَائِنِ حَاشِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “And We revealed unto Moses (saying): ‘Go you forth with My
servants by night, for verily you will be pursued’.”***  
***53. “Then Pharaoh sent heralds into the cites.”***

Since the Children of Israel had provided Pharaoh some benefits, he
barred them from migration and Moses (as) was ordered to move them from
Egypt at night.

In the previous holy verses we saw that Moses (as) was the victorious
party in that day. Although Pharaoh and his supporters did not believe
in him, this happening had some important consequences each of which
were an important victory:

1. The Children of Israel achieved faith in their leader and they
supported him by soul and body, for after years of misery, wretchedness
and wandering they saw a divine prophet who both guaranteed their
guidance and led their revolution, victory and freedom.

2. Moses (as) had gained a foothold among Egyptians and Coptic ones.
Some had been under his influence, or, at least, they feared opposing
him, and the sound of his call ringed out throughout Egypt.

3. More importantly from the view of both public opinion and fearing
life exposing to danger, Pharaoh did not dare oppose a man who had such
a staff and a very expressive language.

All of these affairs provided a proper ground for Moses (as) to remain
among those people and to do propagation, call them after providing them
proofs.

In this way many years passed, and Moses (as) presented them some other
miracles, which were mentioned in the commentaries of verses 13-135 of
Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7 along with logic and discussion. Even Allah
imposed drought and famine on Egyptians for some years in order to make
awake those who deserved to be awaken.

When Moses (as) provided them proof and reason and believers and
disbelievers were distinguished, the Children of Israel were commanded
to migrate. The concerned verses depict the scene first.

The Qur’an says:

***“And We revealed unto Moses (saying): ‘Go you forth with My servants
by night, for verily you will be pursued’.”***

This was the divine plan for them to move at night then the people of
Pharaoh could become aware of this plan, and So to pursue the Children
of Israel.

In spite of the fact that the Qur’anic phrase ***/auhayna/ (we revealed)
has come before the word /’ibadi/ (My servants)***, which is in plural
form, this word, /‘ibadi/ is for showing the ultimate kindness of Allah
towards His faithful servants.

Moses (as) obeyed this commandment and mobilized the Children of Israel
by night in secret and issued the command of migration. He especially
chose night, as Allah had ordered, to make his plan more exact and
calculated.

It is clear that the movement of such a huge group of people could not
be kept hidden for a long time. Pharaoh’s spies did inform him very
soon.

The holy Qur’an says:

***“Then Pharaoh sent heralds into the cities.”***

Of course, in the conditions of that time delivering the message to all
cities of Egypt needed considerable time, but it is natural that this
message reached to near cities very fast, and the ready forces moved
immediately and they formed a small army. Other forces also joined them
gradually.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 54-56
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَؤُلاَء لَشِرْذِمَةٌ قَلِيلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُمْ لَنَا لَغَائِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا لَجَمِيعٌ حَاذِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “Verily these (Israelites) are only a small group,”***  
***55. “And verily they have enraged us.”***  
***56. “And verily we are a host on our guard.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/šir immah/*** means a limited group which is
separated from the main.[^1] Pharaoh propagated that his opponents were
a small group. But in some commentaries we read that it is narrated from
Ibn ‘Abbas that those who were with Moses (as) were about 600000 and
Pharaoh called these many people as ‘a little troop’.

He said:

***“Verily these (Israelites) are only a small group,”***

To make people psychologically ready for this general mobilization,
Pharaoh ordered his own men to declare this announcement that his
opponents were a small group. (He meant they are quantitatively less
than Pharaoh's men and less powerful than them.)

So they said to themselves that, with their strong power, there was no
problem and nothing to fear of and they could certainly be victorious.

In the next verse, they implicitly said that how much they could be
patient, and in what extent they might conciliate with those rebellious
slaves.

It says:

***“And verily they have enraged us.”***

Pharaoh’s men could not tolerate them (slaves) anymore, yet they said:
Who would irrigate farms of Egypt the following days? Who would mend the
houses of Pharaoh’s men? Who would carry heavy things in this vast
country? Who would be servant of the men of Pharaoh?

In the next verse it says:

***“And verily we are a host on our guard.”***

They mean that they were ready to fight Moses’ (as) people anytime and
anywhere, for they feared the conspiracy of this group.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 57-60
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَخْرَجْنَاهُم مِّن جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنُوزٍ وَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَتْبَعُوهُم مُّشْرِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “So We expelled them from the gardens and the springs,”***  
***58. “And treasures and a goodly dwelling,”***  
***59. “Thus (did We drown them) and We made the Children of Israel the
inheritors to them.”***  
***60. “Then they (Pharaoh’s host) pursued them at sunrise.”***

One of Allah’s ways of treatment is to replace oppressors with the
oppressed. Departure of Pharaoh and his men after the Children of Israel
was a divine prudence to sink them. Consequently wealth, palaces and
gardens of Pharaoh and his people turn into the possession of the
Children of Israel.

In these noble verses, the destiny of Pharaohs is mentioned and the holy
Qur’an concisely states the declination of Pharaoh and ruling of the
Children of Israel.

It says:

***“So We expelled them from the gardens and the springs,”***

***“And treasures and a goodly dwelling,”***

Yes, thus were those things taken from them and Allah caused the
Children of Israel to inherit them.

The verse says:

***“Thus (did We drown them) and We made the Children of Israel the
inheritors to them.”***

Commentators have various opinions about the Qur’anic phrase ***/maqamin
karim/ (a goodly dwelling)***. Some say that it means luxurious palaces
and expensive houses. Some say that it means gatherings and meetings of
the rulers which were encircled with some obedient officers.

Of course these two commentaries are consistent. It is likely that both
of them are include in the concept of the verse; both their palaces and
their power and positions were taken from them.

According to the above verse,

***“Thus (did We drown them) and We made the Children of Israel the
inheritors to them”,***

some commentators believe that the Children of Israel came back to Egypt
and ruled the country for some time.[^2]

Of course the verses are apparently in line with this commentary, while
some believe that after sinking of Pharaoh and his men they went to the
holy lands, but, after a length of time, they returned to Egypt and
established a government.[^3]

The concerning Chapters of the current Torah are in line with this
commentary.

Some say that probably the Children of Israel were divided into two
groups. A group remained in Egypt and ruled, and a group went with Moses
(as) to the holy lands.

However, as the last verse implies, Pharaoh sent his men to the cities
of Egypt and gathered enough army and forces.

Some commentators say that he sent 600000 men as an advanced guard and
he himself followed them with 1000000 soldiers. They moved fast at night
and pursued them and they reached Moses (as) and his people when sun was
rising, as the holy Qur’an says:

***“Then they (Pharaoh’s host) pursued them at sunrise.”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 61-62
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا تَرَاءى الْجَمْعَانِ قَالَ أَصْحَابُ مُوسَى إِنَّا
لَمُدْرَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ كَلاَ إِنَّ مَعِيَ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “So when the two parties saw each other, the companions of Moses
said: ‘Indeed we are overtaken’!”***  
***62. “(Moses) said: ‘By no means! Verily my Lord is with me, soon will
He gtiide me (to safety)’.”***

Heavenly leaders are calm and serene at the time of crises and cause
others to be calm. Confronting foe (even when one is trapped between sea
and foe), one must not get disappointed and must trust Allah and believe
in divine promises.

However, to illustrate their situation, the Qur’an says:

***“So when the two parties saw each other, the companions of Moses
said: ‘Indeed we are overtaken’!”***

There was a wavy sea in front of them and there was a strong and
tyrannical arm behind them. A very equipped troop who were angry with
the Children of Israel and they had showed that they were blood thirsty
with killing their issues during many years, and Pharaoh himself was
also a stubborn and bloodthirsty tyrant.

Therefore, they would possibly surround them and would torture or arrest
and kill them. And situations wholly showed that this was so.

At that time the Children of Israel suffered some painful moments, the
bitter moments whose bitterness cannot be described. Perhaps some of
them lost heart and their faith was shaken.

But, as the verse implies, Moses (as) was still calm and faithful and
knew that Allah’s promises about deliverance of the Children of Israel
and the destruction of tyrannical people are not to be unfulfilled.

Therefore, believing and trusting in Allah, Moses (as) addressed the
frightened Children of Israel and implicitly said that it was not so,
and the foe could never overcome them because his Lord was with him and
He would guide him.

The verse says:

***“(Moses) said: ‘By no means! Verily my Lord is with me, soon will He
guide me (to safety)’.”***

This may refer to the same promise that Allah gave to Moses (as) and
Aaron at the time of specifying their mission:

***“He said: ‘Fear not. Verily I am with you both, hearing and
seeing.”***[^4]

Thus, whether all of the Children of Israel returned to, Egypt and
established a government, or some of them, obeying Moses’ command,
remained there and carried out this plan, otherwise, sending Pharaoh and
his men out and making the Children of Israel inherit them, which is
mentioned in the verses, has not a clear concept.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 63-64
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى مُوسَى أَنِ اضْرِب بِّعَصَاكَ الْبَحْرَ فَانفَلَقَ
فَكَانَ كُلُّ فِرْقٍ كَالطَّوْدِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَزْلَفْنَا ثَمَّ الْآخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “Then We revealed to Moses: ‘Strike the sea with your staff’,
then it clove asunder and each part became like a huge mountain.”***  
***64. “Then We made the other party approach thither.”***

It is always with Allah’s will and divine revelations that all prophets
do their jobs.

Allah does some jobs through His friends in order to make people pay
attention to them and obey them. (Yes, the nature and its manifestations
are fully, by Allah’s will, at the mercy of His special servants and are
over powered by them.)

It was why that the Qur’an says:

***“Then We revealed to Moses: ‘Strike the sea with your Staff’...”***

The same staff that is the means of miracles and warning on one day, it
is the sign of mercy and deliverance on the other day. Moses (as) did
this and hit his staff against the sea and a very strange scene happened
in a manner that the Children of Israel got very happy.

Suddenly the sea divided, its water separated into pieces, and each
piece, like a huge mountain, was over another piece; and among them a
road appeared.

The verse continues saying:

***“...then it clove asunder and each part became like a huge
mountain.”***

The Arabic word/’infalaqa/ is derived from the word /falq/ which means
to get broken up. The word /firq/ is derived from the word /farq/ which
means to separate, hi other words, (as Raqib says in Mufradat), the
difference between /falq/ and /firq/ is that the first one refers to
breaking and the second one refers to separating.

Thus, the Arabic words /firqih/ and /firq/ are applied to a piece or
group that is separated from the rest.

The Arabic word /taud/ means a huge mountain and using an adjective in
this verse which means ‘huge’ for it, is for the sake of emphasis.

Anyway, Allah, Who rules everything and if waters get wavy it is because
of His command, if storms take place, it is by His order, and Who has
created the universe, and water, wind, and soil are under His authority,
commanded waves of the sea to pile. And then roads appeared between them
and every group of the Children of Israel chose one of them to pass.

Pharaoh and his men got astonished by seeing this scene and such a clear
miracle, but they did not stop being conceited and still pursued Moses
(as) and the Children of Israel and sought their final destiny, as the
holy Qur’an says:

***“Then We made the other party approach thither.”***

Therefore, unaware of the fact that they were going to die and the
divine command of punishment would be soon issued, Pharaoh and his
ignorant men entered the marine roads and ran arrogantly after their
former slaves who had disobeyed them.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 65-66
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنجَيْنَا مُوسَى وَمَن مَّعَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “And We saved Moses and those with him all together.”***  
***66. “Then We drownedthe others.”***

Deliverance and salvation can be gained only by following the Divine
Prophets.

In the worst conditions, Allah saves His friends from dead locks.

The sea being cloven asunder and the Pharaohs being drowned are the
signs of the power and the wrath of Allah which must be the cause of
admonition. Also, Allah’s way of treatment has been to assist ‘the
truth’ and to destroy ‘the wrong’ throughout the history!

So, in this holy verse, the noble Qur’an says:

***“And We saved Moses and those with him all together.”***

Just when the last member of the Children of Israel came out of the sea
and the last member of the host of Pharaoh entered the sea, Allah
ordered the water of the sea to return to the first state. The huge
raging waves fell down and came together and took Pharaoh and his host,
like some straw, with them here and there and destroyed them.

The Qur’an has stated this event in a short sentence when it says:

***“Then We drowned the others.”***

Thus, in a very short moment, everything finished. Those captivated
slaves easily became free; those proud tyrants were punished and
annihilated; the history changed and the glorious palaces, which had
been founded over the ruined housed of the oppressed, vanished; the
period of those arrogant people ended and then the oppressed people
inherited their land and their government.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 67-68
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “Verily in this is a sign, yet most of them do not believe.”***  
***68. “And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.”***

By explaining the history of some of the former nations, Allah soothes
the holy Prophet of Islam (S) and teaches him patience.

Yes, it is true that the Qur’an says:

***“Verily in this is a sign, yet most of them do not believe.”***

It seems that their eyes are close, their ears are deaf, and their
hearts are asleep.

Where the people of Pharaoh, with those wonderful scenes and events, did
not believe, the Prophet (S) should not surprise of this infidel people
and he would not be worried of their disbelief because the history has
contained many of them in it.

The application of the Arabic word /’akar/, mentioned in this noble
verse, refers to this sense that some of the people of Pharaoh embraced
the religion of Moses and joined his companions.

Not only ’Asiyah, Pharaohas wife, and Moses’ faithful friend who is
mentioned in the Qur’an as ‘the believer of the people of Pharaoh’, but
also some others, such as the wizards, repented and joined Moses (as).

In the next verse, through a short and expressive sentence, the Qur’an
refers to the unlimited power and mercy of Allah, where it says:

***“And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

It is because of His ‘Might’ that whenever He wills He issues the
command of the destruction of a rebellious nation, and for destroying a
tyrannical group He does not need to send down the army of the angels
from heaven, He may order the water, which is the cause of their life,
to put them to death, and that very Nile River, which was the source of
wealth and power for the people of Pharaoh, becomes the place of their
dead bodies.

And, it is from His Mercy that He does not haste in issuing this
command, but He respites them for years, sends miracles for them, and
completes the argument, and it is also from His Mercy that He makes
these oppressed slaves free from the grips of those cruel rulers.

This point is noteworthy that it is repeatedly mentioned in the Qur’an
that by the command of Allah Moses (as) made the Children of Israel pass
the sea, /bahr/[^5], and in a few occurrences the word /yam/ has been
used for it.[^6]

Now, what is the objective of the words /bahr/ and /yam/ used here? Do
they refer to the vast and great river of Nile from which the whole
freshness and liveliness of Egypt originate? Or they refer to the Red
Sea.

There are some evidences which show the purpose is the great river of
Nile, because the word /bahr/ in Arabic, as Raqib in Mufradat says,
originally means ‘vast and abundant water’, and the word /yam/ means the
same. Therefore applying these two words for Nile does not matter.

[^1]: The commentaries of Majma‘-ul-Bayan and Fhakhr-i-Razi

[^2]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan and Qurtabi, the explanations following the verses

[^3]: Ruh-ul-Ma‘ani, by ’Alusi, the explanations following the verses

[^4]: Surah Ta-Ha, No. 20, verse 46

[^5]: Suras Yunus, verse 9; Ta Ha, verse 77, Shu‘ara, verse 69, Dukhan,
verse 24

[^6]: Suras Ta Ha, verse 78, Qasas, verse 40, and Thariyat, verse


