Section 8: Salih Preaches Righteousness to the People of Thamud
===============================================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 141-145
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ صَالِحٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلاَّ عَلَى
رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***141. “The Thamud (people) belied the messengers.”***  
***142. “When their brother Salih said to them: ‘Will you not fear
(Allah)?”***  
***143. “Verily I am unto you a trustworthy messenger.”***  
***144. “Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***  
***145. “And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is
only from the Lord of the worlds.”***

The life stories of a few prophets have been told in this Surah, each of
which begins with the word ‘Belied’. This is because in these stories
the most important point is the subject of prophets being rejected by
the ancient people and their destruction.

Yes, in writing and speaking, the important points must come first.
Therefore, in these stories there have been stated nothing about the
number of their people, the name of their places, the date of the events
and other details, because what is a gazing-stock is to show the
manifestations of right and wrong and to state the victory of divine
truth and the defeat of wrong.

However, the fifth part of the story of the prophets, which has been
mentioned in this Surah, is the story of the people of Thamud and their
prophet Salih (as) which is told precisely and briefly.

They lived in a land called/wadiyul qura/, locateid between Medina and
Syria, and they had a comfortable life, but as the result of
disobedience and contumacy, they were so destroyed that there is no sign
from them today.

This story beings from the people of ‘Ad and the people of Noah, and it
shows how the events of history repeat.

The verse says:

***“The Thamud (people) belied the messengers.”***

The Divine prophets preached the same call, and when the people of
Thamud belied their prophet, Salih, indeed they belied all the Divine
messengers.

After mentioning this short explanation, the Qur’an talks in details,
where it says:

***“When their brother Salih said to them: ‘Will you not fear
(Allah)?”***

Salih (as) who, as a brother, was a kind leader and a guide for his
people, had no superiority over them and no material benefits did he
demand from them. Therefore, the Qur’an introduces him as their brother
to them.

Like all prophets of Allah, Salih (as) begins his invitation with piety
and feeling responsibility. Then he (as) implicitly refers to his good
background among them as a reference for the veracity of his claim.

He says:

***“Verily I am unto you a trustworthy messenger.”***

Therefore, Salih recommended them that they should be pious, be in awe
of Allah, and obey him, because he wanted for them nothing but the
pleasure of Allah, their goodness, and prosperity.

He said to them:

***“Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***

As a reason for the truthfulness of his statement, and that his struggle
was for Allah, he added:

***“And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is only
from the Lord of the worlds.”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 146-150
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتُتْرَكُونَ فِي مَا هَاهُنَا آمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزُرُوعٍ وَنَخْلٍ طَلْعُهَا هَضِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا فَارِهِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***146. “Will you be left secure, in (the enjoyment of) all that you
have here?”***  
***147. “In the gardens and springs,”***  
***148. “And cornfields and date palms with slender spathes?”***  
***149. “And you hew houses (skillfully) out of the mountains
exultingly.”***  
***150. “Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***

When the bounties of security, finance, and welfare are not enriched
with the obedience from the immaculate Imam, they work as a preparation
for mischief and corruption.

Man is not free in front of Divine bounties, but he has responsibility
before them. That is why in this verse the Qur’an refers to the
sensitive points of their life. And, in a court procedure, through their
inner sense, their prophet condemns them.

He asks them whether they imagine that they remain safe and sound fully
in that security and affluence of bounties forever. Do they think that
this material and negligent life is eternal and that they will not
counter death, revenge, and retribution?

Then he explains his previous brief sentence in details when he asks
them whether they think that they will live eternally in these gardens,
springs, and fanning lands that produce ripe, sweet, and pleasant
fruits.

The verse says:

***“Will you be left secure, in (the enjoyment of) all that you have
here?”***

***“In the gardens and springs,”***

***“And cornfields and date palms with slender spathes?”***

Then it refers to their strong and comfortable houses, and says:

***“And you hew houses (skillfully) out of the mountains exultingly.”***

The Arabic word /farih/ is derived from /farah/ originally in the sense
of ‘joy accompanied with unawareness and sensuality’. Sometimes it has
also been used in the sense of skillfulness in doing an action. Although
both meanings are in line with the above verse, regarding to the
reproach and blame of Salih (as), the first meaning seems more
appropriate.

Comparing these verses with the qualities mentioned in the former verses
about the people of ‘Ad, it is understood that the People of ‘Ad mostly
used to apply egotism, love of position, and ostentation, while the
People of Thamud were mostly the captives of their belies, comfortable
life, and affluence.

But they were alike each other in one evil thing, they both ignore the
call of Divine prophets for coming out of the prison of egotism and
reaching the rank of theism and, consequently, they were punished as the
retribution of their deeds.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 151-152
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُفْسِدُونَ فِي الأَرْضِ وَلاَ يُصْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***151. “And do not obey the bidding of the extravagant,”***  
***152. “Those who make mischief in the earth, and amend not.”***

Immoderation is a kind of corruption, and a spendthrift is a mischief
monger and a corrupter.

You must not expect any improvement from the painless persons who live
in welfare, since improvement comes into being only under the light of
the Divine prophets’ school. So, these couple of verses imply that the
extravagant should not be obeyed, and those who are corrupters must not
be expected improvement from.

The verses say as follows:

***“And do not obey the bidding of the extravagant,”***

***“Those who make mischief in the earth, and amend not.”***

Of course, we know that extravagance is the same as exceeding the limits
of law, the law of creation and the law of religion. This is also clear
for all that in a correct system any exceeding the limit causes
corruption and destruction; and in other words, the origin of corruption
is extravagance and the consequence of extravagance is mischief.

Of course, it should be noted that extravagance has a vast meaning.
Sometimes it is used in simple issues like eating and drinking.[^1]

Sometimes it is in spendthrift and too much remittal.[^2]

Sometimes it is in judgment and judiciary arbitration which leads to
falsehood.[^3]

Sometimes it is in one’s beliefs, which leads to doubt and skepticism,
(as it is in Surah Al-Qafir, No. 40, verse 34, where /musrif/
(extravagant) and /murtab/ (doubter) have come with together).

Sometimes it has been used in the sense of self-superiority, arrogance,
and exploitation, (as in Surah Ad-Dukhan, No. 44, verse 31 the Qur’an
says about Pharaoh:

***“...surely he was haughty, (and) one of the extravagant.”)***

And, finally, sometimes it has been applied to any sin and fault, (as in
Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 53 the Qur’an says:

***“Say: ‘O My servants! Who have acted extravagantly against their own
selves, do not despair of the mercy of Allah, surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether, surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”)***

Regarding to what was said, thus the relation between extravagance and
corruption was made manifest well.

According to the statement of ‘Allamah Tabataba’i in Al-Mizan, the world
of existence is wholly order, righteousness, and benefit and, even with
the contrast which may sometimes be seen in its parts, it contains so
much agreement. This system is moving towards some righteous aims, and
it arranges a particular path for each of its parts.

Now, if one of these parts deviates from its orbit and paves the path of
corruption, there will arise a conflict between this part and other
parts of this world. If this extravagant part can be returned to its
main orbit, the better, otherwise they will destroy it so that the
system can continue its own way.

Man, who is one of the parts of this world of existence, is not an
exception from this general law.

If he goes forth according to his nature and be harmonious with the
system of creation, he will attain the prosperous aim that has been
determined for him, but if he exceeds his limits and steps in the path
of corruption and mischief in the earth, at first Allah warns him by
punishing him with grievous and painful events, as Surah Ar-Rum, No. 30,
verse 41 says:

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought, that He may make them taste a part of
that which they have done, so that they may return.”***

But if this could not be effective and corruption has influenced into
the depth of his self, Allah will wipe out the face of the earth from
the dirt of the existence of such a person by the punishment of
’Istisal.[^4]

(It is the Divine punishment which comes for the incorrigible people to
annihilate them to which no prayer is beneficial at this time)

Thus, it makes fairly clear that why Allah has mentioned ‘extravagance’
and ‘corruption in the land’ and the lack of improvement in the above
mentioned verses in the same row.

### Some Traditions Upon Extravagance and Corruption

1- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, Ali (as), said:

*“Extravagance is blameworthy in all things, except in the righteous
deeds.”*[^5]

2- There is a tradition recorded in Al-Kafi and the Commentary of
‘Ayyashi which is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) who said to a man:

*“Be in awe of Allah and be not extravagant nor (take the life) strait
(for yourself) and move between them; verily squandering is of the
extravagances as Allah has said:*

***‘...and do not squander wastefully’***[^6]***.”***[^7]

3- Imam Sadiq (as) once said:

*“Verily, extravagance is accompanied with scanty of bounty.”*[^8]

4- The Prophet (S) once passed by Sa‘d while he was making ablution,
then he (S) told him:

*“What is this extravagance (using too much water), O’ Sa‘d?”*

He said:

*“Is there extravagance even in ablution?”*

The Prophet (S) answered:

*“Yes, even if you are by a spring.”*

5- Imam Sadiq (as) has said:

*“The outside corruption originates from the inside corruption. Whoever
improves his inside, Allah will improve his outside, and whoever proves
treacherous with Allah in secret, Allah will make his secret manifest in
outside.”*[^9]

6- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, Ali (as) says:

*“Being unjust to the servants of Allah causes the Hereafter to be
corrupted.”*[^10]

7- The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“How will be your situation when your wives are corrupted and your
youths are mischievous and you do not enjoin what is good and do not
forbid what is wrong?...”*[^11]

8- Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Avoid any speech and action that causes the corruption of (your)
Hereafter and religion.”*[^12]

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 153-154
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَنتَ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا فَأْتِ بِآيَةٍ إِن كُنتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***153. “They said: ‘You are only of the bewitched ones’,”***  
***154. “You are no more than a mortal, like us, so bring you a sign if
you are one of the truthful.”***

Prophets were denigrated in two things; sorcerer and being bewitched.

The former verses contained the benevolent and reasonable logic of Salih
in the face of that deviated group of people. Now these holy verses
deliver the logic of those people.

The verses declares:

***“They said: ‘You are only of the bewitched ones’,”***

Moreover, they used to say that their prophet was a human being like
them and no intellect lets them follow and obey such a mortal; so they
demanded him a proper sign.

Here is what they said:

***“You are no more than a mortal, like us, so bring you a sign if you
are one of the truthful.”***

The Arabic word /musahhar/ is derived from the word /sihr/ and it means
‘the one who is bewitched’. They believed that the sorcerers sometimes
cause the persons’ talent and intellect to become powerless or feeble by
means of sorcery.

They not only used this denigration for Prophet Salih (as) but also a
group of other prophets were accused of it. As Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25,
verse 8 indicates, the oppressors said to the believers that they
followed a man who, as the result of being bewitched, has lost his
intellect.

Yes, they considered intelligence in the manner that a man behaves
according to his surrounding and does the same as others do in his
environment, so that he adjust himself with all the vices over there.

If a godly and revolutionary man rose against the corrupted beliefs and
a wrong system, according to this logic, they would call him mad, insane
and bewitched.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 155-157
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَذِهِ نَاقَةٌ لَّهَا شِرْبٌ وَلَكُمْ شِرْبُ يَوْمٍ مَّعْلُومٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَمَسُّوهَا بِسُوءٍ فَيَأْخُذَكُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَقَرُوهَا فَأَصْبَحُوا نَادِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***155. “He said: ‘Here is a she-camel; she shall have her portion of
water (one day), and you have your portion of water on an appointed
day’,”***  
***156. “And do not touch her with evil, least the punishment of a
grievous day should overtake you.”***  
***157. “Then they hamstrung her, and became regretful.”***

A miracle must be so manifest that all people, in every level they are,
can understand its miraculous state. (Here is a she-camel)

Allah is omnipotent and easily can bring miracles into existence,
whether it is the moon that did rend asunder, [^13] or the water of the
sea that clave asunder,[^14] and the mountain that clave asunder and a
she-camel came out of it; all of these are indifferent for Him, the
Mighty.

Salih’s She-camel was hamstrung by a single person, yet the Qur’an says:

***“They hamstrung her”,***

namely a group hamstrung her, because those people were content with the
deed of that person.

Imam Ali (as) says:

*“Certainly the she-camel of Thamud was hamstrung by only one, but Allah
held all of them in punishment because all of them joined him by their
acquiescing in their consenting to it...”*[^15]

However, this disobedient group, not for understanding the right but for
seeking pretext, asked Salih for a miracle. Since the argument should be
completed to them, then Salih, by the command of Allah, spoke to them as
follows:

***“He said: ‘Here is a she-camel; she shall have her portion of water
(one day), and you have your portion of water on an appointed day’,”***

The Arabic word /naqah/ means a she-camel. The Qur’an has talked about
the characteristics of this camel, which has had a miraculous situation,
in brief and it has not mentioned its entire specialties, but we know
that it had not been an ordinary camel.

As some commentators have said this she-camel, in a miraculous manner,
came out from inside of a mountain. One of its qualities was that it
specialized the water of the spring of the town every other day to
itself and drunk it, as it is said in the above verse and the 28th verse
of Surah Al-Qamar, No. 54.

However, Salih (as) was commissioned to announce to them that they
should leave that wonderful and extraordinary she-camel, which was as
the sign of the unlimited Power of Allah, to itself, and he ordered that
they should not hurt it the least.

Here is the command:

***“And do not touch her with evil, least the punishment of a grievous
day should over take you.”***

Of course, the disobedient people, who did not want that those deceived
people became aware, and considered the people’s awareness as a barrier
for their interests, planned to kill the she-camel. Finally they
attacked the camel and, by one strike or more, they killed it and then,
when they saw the Divine punishment was nigh, they became regretful of
what they had done.

The verse says:

***“Then they hamstrung her, and became regretful.”***[^16]

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 158-159
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَخَذَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***158. “So the punishment overtook them; verily in this there is sign,
but most of them do not believe.”***  
***159. “And verily your Lord, He is certainly the Mighty, the
Merciful.”***

Sacrilege and blasphemy is so important that for killing an animal
sometimes a group of people may be destroyed by Divine punishment.

***(Then they hamstrung her... So the punishment overtook them)***

The wrath and punishment of Allah is because of our own deed, else He is
Merciful.

So, in this holy verse, the Qur’an implies that since their rebellion
exceeded the limits and they actually showed that they would not accept
the truth, the will of Allah, or the Divine providence, was to purify
the face of the earth from the dirt of their existence and He
annihilated them.

The verse says:

***“So the punishment overtook them...”***

As Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 78, and Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 67
briefly indicate, a severe earthquake did shake their land, and, when
they woke up and were sitting on their knees, the event did not give
them any respite, a fatal lightning, which was accompanied with
earthquake, ruined the walls over them, and at the same time, they died
in an astonishing horror.

At the end of the explanation of the event, the holy Qur’an repeats the
same thing that was stated at the end of the explanation of the events
of the people of Hud, the people of Noah, and the people of Abraham.

It says:

***“...verily in this there is sign, but most of them do not
believe.”***

This verse implies that with the effort and endeavour of this great
prophet, Salih, and the sufferings that he tolerated while he had a
clear logic, those black hearted ungodly people obstinately showed their
opposition with that awakening miracle and, consequently, they
encountered an evil destiny which is an instructive lesson for others.

Yes, none can defeat the Power of Allah, as this great might is not a
hinder for His mercy to be showered over His friends and even over His
enemies.

The verse says:

***“And verily your Lord, He is certainly the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

Thus, not only His mercy and favours are the signs of admonition, but
also His wrath and punishment works as a sign:

***“...verily in this there is a sign...”***

[^1]: as it is referred to in Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 33

[^2]: as it is mentioned in Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 67

[^3]: as in Surah Al-Qafir, No. 40, verse 28 an extravagant person and a
liar both are set in a row

[^4]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 15, P. 333

[^5]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 1, P. 83

[^6]: Surah ’Asra’, No. 17, verse 26

[^7]: At-Tafsir-us-Safi, P. 283, old edition

[^8]: Raudatul-Muttaqin, Vol. 3, P. 194

[^9]: Tafsir-us-Safi, P. 373, old edition

[^10]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 2, P. 475

[^11]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 74, P. 153

[^12]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 1, P. 142

[^13]: Surah Al-Qamar, No. 54, verse 1

[^14]: Surah Ash-Shu‘ara, No. 26, verse 63

[^15]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 201

[^16]: The Qur’anic phrase /‘aqaruha/ is derived from the word /‘uqr/
which originally means: ‘root and the base of something’. It is
sometimes used in the sense of ‘to kill’ and sometimes in the sense of
‘to hamstrung’ an animal’, too.


