Section 9: Lut Admonishes His People
====================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 160-164
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ لُوطٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلاَّ عَلَى
رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***160. “The Lut (people) belied the messengers.”***  
***161. “When their brother Lut said to them: ‘Will you not fear
(Allah)?’”***  
***162. “Verily I am unto you a trustworthy, messenger.”***  
***163. “Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***  
***164. “And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is
only from the Lord of the worlds.”***

The rejection of one Divine prophet is always the same as rejecting all
prophets.

(Although every nation had its own prophet whom they belied, since all
Divine prophets have a single aim and program, belying one of them means
belying all of them.)

However, the sixth prophet, a part of whose life story and his deviated
people is mentioned in this Surah, is Hadrat Lut (as). Although he was
living at the same time with Abraham (as), the statement of his life
story has not been mentioned next to that of Abraham’s, for the Qur’an
is not a history book that explains the events one after another.

It considers the whole aspects of training, education, and improving man
which requires some other proportionalities, and here, the life story of
Lut and his people is more consistent with the life stories of the
prophets who were mentioned recently.

At first, it says:

***“The Lut (people) belied the messengers.”***

As it was mentioned formerly, too, the application of the Qur’anic word
***/mursalin/ (messengers)***, in the plural form, is either for the
unity of the call of the prophets, that rejecting one of them is counted
as the rejecting all of them; or, in fact, they believed in none of the
former prophets, either.

Then the Qur’aan points to the call of Lut, which is in line with the
quality of the call of other ancient prophets.

It says:

***“When their brother Lut said to them: ‘Will you not fear
(Allah)?’”***

The tone of his speech and his deep and extraordinary sympathy shows
that he speaks like a brother.

Then he added:

***“Verily I am unto you a trustworthy messenger.”***

Have you seen any treachery from me? It is the same from now on, and I
will certainly observe the deposit of Divine revelation and conveying
the message of Allah to you.

If it is so, be pious, and be in awe of Allah, and obey me because I
lead you to happiness and prosperity.

The noble verse says:

***“Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***

You may not think that this call is a means for obtaining the worldly
wealth and that I pursue a material aim. No, it is not so, and I do not
want you to give me the slightest wage.

My wage is only to the Lord of the worlds.

The verse says:

***“And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is only
from the Lord of the worlds.”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 165-167
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَأْتُونَ الذُّكْرَانَ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَذَرُونَ مَا خَلَقَ لَكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُم بَلْ أَنتُمْ
قَوْمٌ عَادُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَئِن لَّمْ تَنتَهِ يَا لُوطُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُخْرَجِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***165. “Of all the creatures in the world, do you come to the
males?”***  
***166. “And leave what your Lord has created for you of your wives?
Nay, you are a people transgressing (the limits)”***  
***167. “They said: ‘If you desist not, O Lut! you shall surely be of
those who are expelled’.”***

For the act of forbidding the wrong, the current sins and unlawful
things of every kind and in any time must be recognized and people must
earnestly be urged to desist from committing them.

One of the unlawful things is sodomy.

The punishment of the person who commits it is slaughter.This deed is so
hideous and indecent that even if a person has sexual intercourse with
an animal, the flesh of that animal is religiously forbidden to be
consumed.

Sodomy is a very mean, ugly and indecent action and it is unlawful. So,
these verses criticize those people’s indecent deed and some of their
immoral deviations, and since their most important deviation was sexual
deviation and sodomy, Lut (as) emphasizes on this very issue and says:

***“Of all the creatures in the world, do you come to the males?”***

It means that although Allah has created so many members of the opposite
sex for you and by a safe and right marriage you can have a pure and
peaceful life, you have left this pure and natural bounty of Allah and
you have polluted yourselves with this mean and indecent action.

Then Lut added:

***“And leave what your Lord has created for you of your wives? Nay, you
are a people transgressing (the limits)”***

Lut wanted to tell them it was not a natural need, whether spiritual and
bodily, that caused them to commit that deviated action, but it was
disobedience and transgression that polluted them by such an indecency
and shame.

Lut implicitly told them that their deed was like that man puts the good
fruits, nutritious foods and safe natural things aside and goes to a
poisonous, polluted, and fatal food. This is not a natural need, it is
an insolence and inordinacy.

Then, the next noble verse implies that the people of Lut, who were
engaged with lust, pride and haughtiness, instead of obeying this divine
leader and following his advice eagerly and delivering themselves from
that polluted pool, they stood against him.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘If you desist not, O Lut! You shall surely be of those
who are expelled’.”***

Those people told Lut that his words caused their thoughts to be
confused and their peace to be disordered. They were not ready even to
listen to him, and if he continued his job, his least punishment would
be being expelled from his land.

In some other places of the Holy Qur’an we read that they fulfilled this
threat and they ordered that Lut’s family to be expelled out of the
city, because they were clean and did not commit sin:

***“...they said: 'Expel them from your town: verily they are a people
(who seek) to purify (themselves)’.”***[^1]

The misguided and deviated people sometimes reach a point that having
piety and chastity is a fault among them and impurity and immorality is
an honour for them. This is the evil end of a society that goes
hurriedly towards corruption.

It is understood from the Qur’anic sentence:

***“...you shall surely be of those who are expelled”***

that this mischievous group of people had formerly expelled some pure
persons whom they saw as troublesome for their ugly deeds. They
threatened Lut, too, and said if he continued his way, his fate would
also be like them.

It is explicitly explained in some commentary books that they urged to
send the chaste persons out of the city with a very bad manner.[^2]

In some suras of the Qur’an, such as: Al-’A‘ra, Had, Al-Hijr,
Al-’Anbiya, An-Naml, and Al-‘Ankabut, the explanation about the people
of Lut and their hideous sin has been hinted to, but the content meaning
of every one of them is different from that of the other. In fact, every
one of them points to a different inauspicious dimension of this
shameful deed.

### Some Traditions

1- The holy Prophet of Islam in a tradition says:

*“The odour of Paradise will not reach the one who is catamite.”*[^3]

2- Ali (as) in a tradition introduces the act of sodomy nigh to
infidelity.[^4]

3- Upon the philosophy of the prohibition of sodomy, Ali ibn-Mus-ar-Rida
(as) in a tradition says:

*“The reason of the prohibition of men for men and women for women is
that this is spite of the natural sate that Allah has set for man and
woman (and opposition with this natural innate nature* *causes the
deviation of man’s soul and body) and it is for this reason that if men
and women pursue sodomy, man’s generation will be ceased and the device
of social life will become imperfect, and the world will be
wasted.”*[^5]

From the view point of Islam, this action is so ugly and shameful that
its punishment in Islamic jurisprudence doubtlessly is death. Even for
those who act some levels lower than sodomy there have been considered
some intensive punishments.

For example, the Prophet (S) in a tradition says:

*“Whoever kisses a boy lustfully, on the Day of Hereafter Allah will
rein him with a rein from fire on his mouth.”*[^6]

The punishment of the person who commits such an action is to be
scourged 30 to 99 whips.

However, there is no doubt that sexual deviation is one of the most
dangerous deviations that may appear in human societies, because its
inauspicious effects can encompass all moral issues and drug man towards
emotional deviation.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 168-172
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنِّي لِعَمَلِكُم مِّنَ الْقَالِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ نَجِّنِي وَأَهْلِي مِمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاَّ عَجُوزًا فِي الْغَابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ دَمَّرْنَا الْآخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***168. “He said: ‘I do detest your doings’.”***  
***169. “My Lord! deliver me and my family from (the vice of) what they
do.”***  
***170. “So, We did deliver him and his family all.”***  
***171. “Except an old woman who remained behind.”***  
***172. “Then We destroyed the others.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/qalin/*** is usually used for an intensive
opposition and expression of anxiety which comes from the depth of soul.

The Divine prophets do not fear of enemies’ threats and they convey
their call.

When Lut was threatened to be expelled and being sent out of the city,
he expressed his hatred because of their action.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘I do detest your doings’.”***

Abhorring a bad thing should always be shown verbally and practically.
Yes, bare anxiety is not enough. We must think of being delivered from
the center of mischief.

However, by this verse, the Qur’an implies that, without heeding their
threats, Lut continued his words that he abhorred their doings, namely
he would go on his protests and they would do whatever they could,
because he was not afraid of their threats in his struggle in the path
of Allah against their indecencies.

The application of the Qur’an word /qalin/ in the holy verse shows that
another group of the believers also supported Lut by their intense
protest, although at last those disobedient people dismissed them from
the scene.

It is interesting that Lut says he is the enemy of their doings; that is
he had not any enmity with those people, but their deed was shameful;
and if they left those actions he would be a sincere friend of them.

Finally, those admonitions and advice got no effect on them and finally
corruption had enveloped their entire society thoroughly.

He had sufficiently completed the argument and Lut's mission had been
fulfilled. Now he must rescue both him; and those who have believed in
his call from this polluted region before the time when the fatal
punishment of Allah comes to destroy those indecent people.

Lut as a supplication and invocation asked Allah to deliver him and his
family from the vice of what they were doing.

He said:

***“My Lord! deliver me and my family from (the vice of) what they
do.”***

By the way, as a result of what was said, this fact became clear that
Lut’s prayer for his family was not done because of emotional aspects
and relationship, but it was for their Faith.

Allah fulfilled this supplication, as He says:

***“So, We did deliver him and his family all.”***

***“Except an old woman who remained behind.”***

This old woman was but the wife of Lut who, from the point of belief and
religion, was in line with those misguided people and she did not
believe in Lut, so, at last, she faced with the same fate.

Yes, Allah delivered Lut and those few believers who were with him. By
the command of Allah, they went out from that polluted land at night and
left those mischievous people, who were drowned in corruption and
indecency, to themselves.

Early in the morning the command of Allah came. A terrible earthquake
covered their land.

It utterly destroyed their good cities, beautiful firm castles and their
welfare life which was polluted with unchastity, as the holy Qur’an, in
a short sentence points to it, and says:

***“Then We destroyed the others.”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 173-175
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِم مَّطَرًا فَسَاء مَطَرُ الْمُنذَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***173. “We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone), and evil is the
rain of them that were warned.”***  
***174. “Verily in this is a sign, but most of them do not
believe.”***  
***175. “And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.”***

The retribution of those who change the path of marriage into the path
of sodomy is that the rain of Divine mercy changes into the rain of
chastisement, and annihilates them.

Yes, the whole nature is at the service of the Divine Power. The same
might which causes to send down the rain from the sky, can send down a
shower of brimstone.

So, Allah says:

***“We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone)...”***

This rain was a rain of pebbles which wiped out even the ruins of their
buildings.

The verse continues saying:

***“...and evil is the rain of them that were warned.”***

What a horrible rain it was! The rain which overtook those threatened
people.

The ordinary rains are refreshing and enlivening, but this rain was
terrible, and destructive.

Verse No.82 from Surah Hud indicates that at first the cities of the
people of Lut were destroyed, then a shower of pebbles, layer on layer,
came down on them. As we mentioned in the commentary of that verse, the
rain of stones was, perhaps, for this aim that their effects would be
wiped out, too, and only a heap of stone and dust could be seen from
those populated cities.

Were these stone taken from deserts, as the result of a great storm and
they were poured over them? Or were they some wandering aerolites which,
by the command of Allah, fell on them?

Or, as some say, was there a silent volcano near around there which, by
the command of Allah, roared and sent a rain of stones over them? It is
not known, but it is certain that this fatal shower left no sign of life
in that land.

Again, at the end of this event we encounter the same couple of
sentences that were mentioned at the end of the similar events in this
Surah concerning other five great prophets of Allah. The Holy Qur’an
implies that there is a sign and an instructive lesson in the story of
this unjust and indecent people that had a fatal and unsuspicious end.

It says:

***“Verily in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe.”***

What a sign is more clear than that this event makes you acquainted with
some important and helpful issues without that you need any personal
experimentation.

Yes, the history of the ancient is an instructive lesson and a sign for
the coming generations; it is not even an experience, because in
experience one must bear some losses so that he obtains some results,
but here we obtain the results from the losses of others.

***“And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

What a mercy can be better than this that Allah does not immediately
punish such polluted people and He gives them enough respite to be
guided and to review their situation.

And also what mercy is superior to this fact that His punishment does
not involve both right doers and wrong doers; it is so that if there is
a faithful family among thousand misguided families, He rescues these
believers.

What a glory and might is higher than this that in a short moment He
destroys the dwellings of those polluted persons so severely that there
remains no effect from them. The land, which must be as a comfortable
cradle for them, is commissioned for their death; and the enlivening
rain is changed into the rain of fatal stones.

[^1]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 82

[^2]: The commentaries of Ruh-ul-Ma‘ali and Fakhr-i-Razi, following the
verse under discussion

[^3]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 79, P. 67, New edition

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Ibid, P. 64

[^6]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 79, , P. 7


