Section 10: Shu‘ayb’s Mission to the Dwellers of the Forest
===========================================================

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verse 176-180
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الأَيْكَةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ شُعَيْبٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلاَّ عَلَى
رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***176. “The dwellers of the Forest belied the messengers.”***  
***177. “When Shu‘ayb said to them: ‘Will you not fear (Allah)?”***  
***178. “Verily I am unto you a trustworthy messenger.”***  
***179. “Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***  
***180. “And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is
only from the Lord of the worlds.”***

This is the seventh and the last story of the stories of the prophets
mentioned in this Surah. This story is about prophet Shu‘ayb and his
disobedient people. This great prophet lived in a land called Madyan[^1]
and ’Aykah[^2].

Verse 70 from Surah Al-Hijr indicates that ’Aykah had been located in
the way of those people who used to go from Mecca and Medina toward
Syria.

First the verse says:

***“The dwellers of the Forest belied the messengers.”***

They belied not only Shu‘ayb (as), the prophet who was divinely
appointed for them but also all other prophets, because they said the
same thing from the viewpoint of unity and call, or in principle, they
had believed in no religion from among the Divine religions.

The Arabic word /’aykah/ originally means a place with condensed trees
which usually called forest. The land which was near Madyan, because of
having enough water and many trees, was named ‘’Aykah’. The frame of
references shows that these people had a welfare life with abundant
wealth, and perhaps it was for the same reason that they were in full
pride and negligence.

Then, the Qur’an explains this concise meaning about those people, and
says:

***“When Shu‘ayb said to them: ‘Will you not fear Allah!?’”***

In fact, the call of Shu‘ayb (as) began from the same point of ideology
that other prophets (as) had begun. His call was an invitation to piety
and being in the awe of Allah which the source of all programs of
rectification, and ethical and social changes.

It is important to note that in this story the phrase ‘their brother’,
which was used in the stories of Salih, Hud, Noah and Lut, has not been
applied here.

This may be for the fact that Shu‘ayb was originally from Madyan and he
was relative only with the people of that place, not with the people of
’Aykah.

That is why when in Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 84 the Qur’an refers to
only Madyan, this phrase is used, where it says:

***“And to (the people of) Madyan (We sent) their brother
Shu‘ayb...”,***

but since the concerning verse speaks about the People of ’Aykah and
they had no relation with Shu‘ayb, then this phrase has not been
mentioned.

Then he (as) added:

***“Verily I am unto you a trustworthy messenger.”***

***“Then be in awe of Allah and obey me.”***

***“And I do not ask you any recompense for it, my recompense is only
from the Lord of the worlds.”***

These sentences are the same form of well-calculated sentences which
other prophets announced at the beginning of their call.

They are invitation to piety, emphasizing on their background of
trustworthiness among people, and saying that their godly call has only
spiritual motive and they demand no material wage for it from any one.
This was for the sake that the pretext seekers and cynical ones might
not misuse it.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 181-183
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَلاَ تَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُخْسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءهُمْ وَلاَ تَعْثَوْا فِي الأَرْضِ
مُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***181. “Fill up the measure, and be not of the cheaters,”***  
***182. “And weigh (things) with a right balance,”***  
***183. “And do not defraud people in their (due) goods, and do not act
corruptly in the earth, making mischief.”***

The act of defrauding is unlawful, and observing the right of people is
obligatory,

***“Fill up the measure...”.***

The Arabic word /kayl/ (measure) usually is used for liquid substances;
the word /qistas/ (balance) is used for weights; and the word /’ašya’/
(goods), in this sense, is used for the things which are counted or
bought and sold by the pieces.

In these holy verses, there are two divine enjoinments and two
prohibitions which are complementary of each other: (Fill up - and be
not), (weight - do not defraud)

It is mentioned in some Islamic narrations that the persons who do not
tell the blemish or defect of their goods to the customer the angels
will curse them, and those who deceive others with guile and plotting
are the worst people.[^3]

However, like other prophets a part of whose history was mentioned in
this Surah before, Shu‘ayb, after his general and godly invitation to
piety and the obedience to the command of Allah, emphasized on the
ethical and social deviations of that environment and criticized them in
the second part of his teachings.

Since the most important deviation of those tranquil people was their
economic disorders, manifest injustice, inequity and exploitation,
Shu‘ayb emphasized on these subjects more.

At first, he says:

***“Fill up the measure, and be not of the cheaters,”***

***“And weigh (things) with a right balance,”***

***“And do not defraud people in their (due) goods, and do not act
corruptly in the earth, making mischief.”***

Fraud is one of the great sins and unlawful things of economy which
brings all corruptions of unlawful food.

Fraud is not seen only in transaction, but there may also be some unjust
persons who fraud people in teaching, medical profession, control,
engineering and other affairs of life and do not give others their due
right as they must do.

In these recent verses, in a few short calculated sentences Shu‘ayb
commands these misguided people to follow five commandments.

Some commentators have thought that these commandments are mostly some
emphasis on each other, while a sufficient care makes it clear that
these five divine commandments, in fact, point to five basic different
matters, or in others words, they are four commandments and a general
conclusion.

In order that this difference can be clear, this fact must be noted that
the people of Shu‘ayb (the inhabitants of ’Aykah and Madyan) were living
in a sensitive commercial region which was located on the way of those
caravans that traveled from Mecca and Medina to Syria and from Syria to
Mecca and Medina as well as other regions.

We know that these caravans are in need of many things in this way and
sometimes those people who are in the cities along those roads apply the
utmost misuse and buy their goods for the lowest price and sell them for
the dearest price. (It should be noted that, at that time, many bargains
were done in the form of barters.)

Sometimes, they find many undue faults on the material they are going to
buy, while they cammand very much for the thing they are going to sell;
and at the time of weighing and measuring their own goods they measure
it very exactly and sometimes they fraud, but they weigh and measure
others’ goods carelessly and sometimes they take more than the due
amount, and since the opposite party is dependent and needy he is
helpless to acquiesce to all these matters.

However, the Qur’anic phrase ***/la tabxasu/*** is derived from the word
/baxs/ which originally means ‘to give the people’s right unjustly and
less than their due’, and sometimes it means deceit, dishonesty and
trickery which lead to wasting others’ rights.

Therefore, the abovementioned expressive holy phrase contains such a
vast meaning that it envelops any kind of people's defraudation,
dishonesty, deceit, cheat and trickery in transaction, as well as any
heedlessness unto others’ right.

In regard to the fact that the Arabic word /muxsir/ means the person who
exposes someone or something to loss and harm, the Qur’anic sentence:
***/latakunu minal muxsirin/ (be not of the cheaters)***, also has a
vast meaning which, besides defraudation, encompasses any factor that in
bargain causes the loss of the opposite party.

Thus, all abuses, injustices and vices in transaction, and any
dishonesty, trickery and struggle that end to loss, whether in quality
or quantity, are inside the above commandments.

And since the economic disorders are often the causes of destruction in
social system, at the end of these great commandments, as a conclusion,
it says:

***“And do not defraud people in their (due) goods, and do not act
corruptly in the earth, making mischief.”***

These commandments not only were helpful for the rich and Unjust society
of the time of Shu‘ayb, but also they are useful in any age because they
cause the economic justice.

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 184-186
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ وَالْجِبِلَّةَ الأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَنتَ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا وَإِن نَّظُنُّكَ لَمِنَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***184. “And fear Him Who created you and the former generations.”***  
***185. “They said: ‘Verily you are only of those bewitched’.”***  
***186. “And you are naught but a mortal like us; and we think that you
are of the liars.”***

Piety and Faith hinder corruptions in economy. He Who created you will
sustain you, too, and you need not to be worried about your sustenance.

The corrupt customs and traditions of ancestors must not be relied on,
because we all are Allah’s creatures and we must obey Him.

So, in his last command here, Shu‘ayb invites them again to piety, and
says:

***“And fear Him Who created you and the former generations.”***

You are not the only nation who have come to live on the earth; before
you there were your fathers and other groups of people who came into
being and passed away. Do not forget both the events of theirs in the
past and yours in future.

The Arabic word /jibillah/ is derived from /jabal/ which means
‘mountain’. It is applied for a large crowd of people which, from the
point of hugeness, is like a mountain. Some commentators have said that
the number of them was about ten thousand.

Also, the man’s nature is called /jibillah/, because it is unchangeable
and it is like mountain which cannot be moved from one place to another.

The abovementioned change may also refer to this fact that what he said
about the abundance of transgression and giving the people’s rights to
them and observing justice has been inside the innate of man from the
beginning and he has come to revive their pure nature.

But, unfortunately the words of this sympathetic prophet did not affect
positively in them and they answered his logical statements with the
same bitter and ugly label that the sinners and tyrants had ever used,
as the Qur’an says:

***“They said: ‘Verily you are only of those bewitched’.”***

They told him that he did not say any logical word in his statements at
all, and that he thought he could restrain them from their freedom in
their deeds upon their properties.

Moreover, you are also a mortal like us, then how do you expect us to
follow you? And what superiority do you have over us?

As the verse explains, they said:

***“And you are naught but a mortal like us...”***

The only consideration we have about you is that you are a lying person.

The verse continues saying:

***“...and we think that you are of the liars.”***

Surah Ash-Shu‘ara - Verses 187-191
----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْقِطْ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفًا مِّنَ السَّمَاء إِن كُنتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّي أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمِ الظُّلَّةِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ
عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***187. “Therefore cause a piece of the sky to fall on us, if you are
one of the truthful.”***  
***188. “He (Shu‘ayb) said: ‘My Lord knows best what you do’.”***  
***189. “But they belied him, then there seized them the chastisement of
the Day of Shadow. Verily it was a chastisement of a grievous day.”***  
***190. “Verily there is a sign in this, but most of them do not
believe.”***  
***191. “And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.”***

The Arabic word /kisaf/, which has been repeated for four times in the
Qur’an, is the plural form of the word /kisafah/ in the sense of ‘a
piece’ and here it means: ‘a piece of cloud’.

The purpose of /‘aǒaba yaum iz zullah/ (the chastisement of the Day of
Shadow) is either the chastisement of the day when people sheltered
under the shadow of the trees because of the severity of heat, or on a
day a piece of cloud caused a shadow over them.

There are mentioned a few different sentences in the holy Qur’an
concerning the chastisement of the people of Shu‘ayb mentioned. Once it
says it was an earthquake.[^4] In another place it says they were
punished by a (heavenly) blast.[^5]

Here, in this verse it speaks about a piece of cloud. All the three
subjects can combine with together.A piece of dark cloud may produce a
thunder and a blast which causes them to tremble, or by creating an
earthquake simultaneously, they might be destroyed.

Or perhaps the earthquake relates to the people of Madyan and the dark
cloud relates to the people of ’Aykah, since Shu‘ayb had been the
prophet appointed for both of them.

In Surah Al-’A‘raf, his messengership over the people of Madyan, who
were destroyed by earthquake, is mentioned, while in this Surah his
messengership over the people of ’Aykah is referred to.

However, after saying some contradictory statements that they sometimes
called him a liar by which they meant he intended to be superior over
them, and sometimes called him mad, their last word was as follows:

***“Therefore cause a piece of the sky to fall on us, if you are one of
the truthful.”***

They wanted to say that he would send the chastisement by which he
threatened them so that he could understand that they might not afraid
of those threats.

The only answer that Shu‘ayb (as) gave them for those inconvenient
statements and their indecent words and that they asked for Divine
punishment, was as follows:

***“He (Shu‘ayb) said: ‘My Lord knows best what you do’.”***

Shu‘ayb implicitly says that Allah knows best of what you deserve,
whenever He finds that you deserve for a chastisement, he may send it
down over you.

At last, the time of wiping the earth from these polluted ones came, and
as the Qur’an says:

***“But they belied him, then there seized them the chastisement of the
Day of Shadow. Verily it was a chastisement of a grievous day.”***

For seven days a blazing heat overtook their land and there existed no
wind at all. Suddenly a piece of cloud appeared in the sky, and there
blew a breeze. They hastily came out from their own houses and, since
they were uncomfortable because of heat, they went under the shadow of
the cloud.

At this time a fatal thunderbolt was created by the cloud. It was a
thunderbolt accompanied with a very loud sound that followed by falling
fire over them, and simultaneously an earthquake shook the earth when
all of them were annihilated.

At the end of this story, the Qur’an reiterates the same things that
were said at the end of the former six stories of the great prophets.
The verse implies that there is a sign and an instructive lesson in the
story of the people of ’Aykah and the kind call of their prophet,
Shu‘ayb, and their stubbornnesses, obstinacies and rejections led to
their destruction.

It says:

***“Verily there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe.”***

Yet, Allah, the Kind, the Merciful, gave respite to them sufficiently in
order that they might change their way and improve themselves, but when
they deserved punishment, He seized them with His Might.

The verse says:

***“And verily your Lord, certainly He is the Mighty, the Merciful.”***

[^1]: a city located in the south of Syria

[^2]: a town near Madyan

[^3]: Qurar-ul-Hikam

[^4]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 89

[^5]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 94


