Surah al-Furqan, Section 3, The Qur’an Was Revealed Gradually
=============================================================

Surah al-Furqan, Chapter 25- Verse 21
-------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءنَا لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا
الْمَلاَئِكَةُ أَوْ نَرَى رَبَّنَا لَقَدِ اسْتَكْبَرُوا فِي
أَنفُسِهِمْ وَعَتَوْ عُتُوًّا كَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And those who do not hope to meet Us (for Judgment) say: ‘Why
are not the angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our Lord?’
Certainly they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in great
revolt.”***

The Arabic word /‘utuww/ means the worst kind of oppression.[^1] The day
of Resurrection is called the day of /liqa’/ (meeting), because in that
day all ignorance, negligence and obstacles will be removed fully and
people can see Allah’s magnificence.

***(“...and they will know that Allah, He is the (very) Manifest
Truth.”)***[^2]

In order to relinquish duties and responsibilities that believing in
Allah and Resurrection would put on polytheists’ shoulder, they stated
some pretexts, one of which was why the Prophet (S) eats like us and
walks in markets, which we read its answer in the former verses.

The concerned verse completes two other parts of their pretexts and
answers them.

It first says:

***“And those who do not hope to meet Us (for Judgment) say: ‘Why are
not the angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our Lord?’...”***

Their statement means that suppose it is accepted that the Prophet (S)
can have a common life like other people, but it is not accepted that
the bringer of revelation comes only to him and that it cannot be seen
by other people. What is the problem if the angel appears and certifies
his prophethood or retells some of his revelation while people are
present?

What is the matter if man sees Allah by his own eye? If this happens, no
doubt remains for him. These are the arouse questions which prevent them
accepting the call of the Prophet (S).

It is important that the holy Qur’an introduces these pretext-seeking
persons as:

***“...those who do not expect the meeting with Us...”.***[^3]

This shows that these baseless words originate from unbelief in
resurrection and also the lack of undertaking responsibility to Allah.

In verse 7 of Surah Al-Hijr, No. 15 we read words like this, where they
said:

***“If you are of the truthful ones, why do you not bring to us the
angels?”***

In the beginning of this Surah also we read:

***“...Why is not an angel been sent down to him, to be a warner with
him?”***[^4]

But a person who seeks truth only demands reason for proving a matter
and he does not care about the sort of reason whatever kind it may be.
When by performing miracles, including the holy Qur’an itself, the
Prophet (S) has proved that his call and invitation is right, what do
these pretexts mean?

The best reason that these words were not uttered for the sake of
researching on the prophethood of the holy Prophet (S) is that they
asked to see Allah and by this demand they reduced Him to a visible
object. This groundless demand was asked by the Children of Israel and
its decisive answer has been given them in the Qur’an which is explained
in Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 143.

Thus, the Holy Qur'an answers these demands in this way:

***“...Certainly they are too proud highly of themselves and have
revolted in great revolt.”***

The Arabic word /‘utuww/ means to restrain to obey an order stubbornly
and with enmity. The Qur’anic phrase /fi ’anfusihim/ may mean that they
were proud of themselves and were also self-conceited, or it may mean
that they concealed their conceit and pride in their own heart and
proposed such demands and pretexts.

In our age there are also some persons who repeat the logic of former
polytheists and say that they do not believe in Allah unless they see
Allah in their laboratory and experiment the soul with Himself in
surgery operation. The source of both is one thing: arrogance and
delusion.

Basically, all the persons who know sense and experience as the only
means of recognition implicitly repeat this very matter. All
materialists and the money-minded ones do have the same opinion, while
our sense can perceive only a small part of this world.

Anyway, all materialists count everything unspiritual and earthy and
they try to see Allah with their own physical eyes and this is their
great mistake.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 22
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ لاَ بُشْرَى يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَيَقُولُونَ حِجْرًا مَّحْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “On the day when they shall see the angels, there shall be no glad
tidings that day for the guilty, and they (the angels) shall say: ‘It
(Paradise) is a forbidden (thing), totally prohibited’.”***

In the previous verse the arrogant that had no hope of resurrection and
expected to see angels were mentioned, and the concerned verse wants to
say that the angels will come to

them but instead of conveying the light of revelation, they declare the
severest threats to them. That day, as Imam Baqir (as) says, is the day
of their death and Allah orders the Angel of death to take their life
and when their soul is going to leave their body, some angels hit their
back and face. Then Imam Baqir (as) recited this verse.[^5]

The verse says:

***“On the day when they shall see the angels...”***

Therefore, in this noble verse the Qur’an implies as a threat that they
want to see the angels and finally they will see them, but as the verse
says:

***“...there shall be no glad tidings that day for the guilty...”***

Yes, on that day they do not get happy, but since they see the signs of
punishment along with them, they fear so much that they will utter the
same sentence that they used to say at the time of danger in this world:

***“Grant grace to us and exempt us!”***[^6]

Certainly neither this sentence nor other sentences will have any effect
on their doomed fate, for the fire they have started by themselves will
burn them, and the evil deeds which they have done will be materialized
then before them, The consequences of their misdeeds eventually come
home to roost.

The verse continues saying:

***“...and they (the angels) shall say: ‘It (Paradise) is a forbidden
(thing), totally prohibited’.”***

The Arabic word /hijr/ originally means an area that is furnished with
stones and it becomes forbidden to enter. If we see that
‘Hijr-i-Isma‘il’ is called /hijr/ it is because it prevents man from
some evil actions, thus we read in verse 5 of Surah Al-Fajr, No. 89:

***“Is there (not) in this an oath for those who have sense?”***

Also the companions of Hijr whose name is mentioned in Qur’an[^7], has
been used for the name of the people of Salih (as) who used to make
fortified stone houses for themselves in mountains and were protected by
these houses.

But the Qur’anic phrase ***/hijran mahjūra/ (A forbidding ban***) is an
expression that was used by Arabs when they met a person whom they
feared. They used to say it for protecting themselves.

Specially it was Arab’s tradition that in the sacred months that war was
forbidden when they confronted someone and this tradition might get
unobserved they repeated this phrase in order to be protected. By
hearing this phrase that person protected them and made them calm. Thus
the meaning of this holy phrase is that:

*“I seek protection, which is stable and unchanging.”*

Meanwhile, it is understood from the above words that the persons who
said these words are criminal. The proportion of existing verbs in the
verse, the course of history, and the background of this phrase among
Arabs demand this, though some say that it is possible that the speaker
of these words will be the angels and their aim is to prevent
polytheists from Allah’s mercy.

Some have also said that these words are said by criminals to each
other, but apparently the first meaning is correct, for many
commentators have accepted it or have mentioned it as the first
commentary.[^8]

But what day do wrongdoers meet angels?

Some of the commentators say that it is at the time of death that man
sees the angel of death, as Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 97 says:

***“Verily (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their own selves...”***

Some other commentators say that its purpose is the day of Resurrection
when wrongdoers encounter the Divine angels of punishment and observe
them.

The second commentary seems more appropriate with regard to the next
verses that talk about resurrection and especially with the word
/yauma’iǒin/ that refers to it.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 23
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدِمْنَا إِلَى مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاء
مَّنثُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And We will proceed to what they have done of deeds, so We shall
render them as scattered floating dust.”***

The Arabic word /haba’/ means ‘fine dust’ and the word ‘Manthūr’ means
‘scattered’.

In this noble verse the condition of wrongdoers’ actions in Hereafter is
imagined.

It says:

***“And We will proceed to what they have done of deeds, so We shall
render them as scattered floating dust.”***

The Arabic word /‘amal/, as Raqib in Mufradat says, in this verse means:
every work or job done by intention. But the word /fi‘l/ ‘verb’ is
general and is applied to both jobs and works that are done whether
intentionally or unintentionally.

The Qur’anic word /qadimna/ is derived from the word /qudūm/, which
means to enter or to turn unto something.

Here, this word is for putting emphasis on the matter, that is to say
they have certainly done all their actions intentionally and on purpose,
though their deeds are apparently right and good. Thus, for their
polytheism and paganism Allah shall turn unto the work they did and make
it scattered motes.

In narrations the extension of those whose deeds will be naught is the
persons who perform ritual prayer and fast but do not refrain from
unlawful food, or do hate and have enmity against Imam Ali-ibn-Abitalib
(as) and his Shiites.

By the way, the Arabic word /haba’/ means some very tiny particles of
dust that can not be seen in a natural way, unless sun light comes
inside a dark room from an opening, so that these particles are clear
and visible and, in this way, we can see them.

This sentence shows that their deeds will be so worthless and
ineffective that it seems there were not any deeds at all, though they
have tried and attempted many years.

This verse is like verse 18 of Surah ’Ibrahim No. 14, which says:

***“...their deeds are as ashes on which the wind blows severely on a
stormy day...”***

Its logical reason is also clear, for what gives meaning and sense to
man’s deed is proper intention, motivation, and the final aim of that
action. Faithful persons go after doing things with Divine motives and
seek for pure sacred aims, and some sound and correct programs, while
unfaithful persons are mostly proud, affecter, deceiver, and
self-conceited, therefore, their deeds will be of no value.

As an example, there are mosques that have been built hundreds years
before and the past of centuries of time had the least effect on them.
On the contrary, we see some houses that after one month or year there
appear some defects in them.

The former was built strongly and with the best construction materials
and foreseeing all future events, because it had divine motivation, but
as for the latter one, attention was paid only to the colour and
appearance of it, for its aim was acquiring wealth and money by means of
deception and counterfeit.

Basically, according to Islam logic, righteous deeds have got some pests
which must be definitely protected. Sometimes it is wrong from the
beginning, like the deed which is done hypocritically. Sometimes man
will get proud, self-conceited and self-admired while he is performing a
deed and his deed will be worthless because of it.

And sometimes after doing a deed, its worth and value will get abolished
because its doer does some actions that are contradictory and opposing
to it, like a generous action or prodigality that is followed by
reproach, or the righteous deeds that are followed by paganism and
apostasy.

Even, according to some Islamic narrations, sometimes committing sins
before doing a good deed will affect it, as about the person who drinks
alcoholic drink we read that his righteous deeds done during 40 days
will not be accepted by Allah[^9].

Anyway, Islam has got a very strict, calculated and precise program
about attributes of righteous deeds.

Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“On the day of Resurrection Allah brings a group of people while there
is a light in front of them, like brightening and white garments, (this
is the light of their deeds). Then Allah orders those deeds to be
scattered particles of dust. (Then all of them will disappear).*

*These are those who used to perform ritual prayer and fast, but when
they were given something unlawful, they would take it; and when it was
said something of the virtues of Imam Ali (as) to them they denied
it.”*[^10]

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 24
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَيْرٌ مُّسْتَقَرًّا وَأَحْسَنُ
مَقِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “The companions of the Garden (Paradise) that day shall be in a
better abode and a better resting-place.”***

There must be a kind of good tidings and encouragement along with
warning and advice. Therefore, the holy Qur’an usually sets good and bad
beside each other, so that by comparing, their situations will be clear.
This verse speaks about the situation of those who live in the Paradise.

The verse says:

***“The companions of the Garden (Paradise) that day shall be in a
better abode and a better resting-place.”***

This verse does not imply that Hell-dwellers are in a good situation,
and dwellers of Paradise are in a better situation. For example, we read
in Surah Fussilat, No. 41, verse 40:

***“...Is he who is hurled into the Fire better, or he who comes secure
on the Day of Resurrection...”***

The Arabic word /mustaqarr/ means ‘residence’ and the Qur’anic word
/muqil/ means ‘the pace of rest in the midday’.

(It is derived from the word /qaylūlah/ that means ‘midday sleep’.)

Ibn Abbas said that the Prophet (S) said:

“When Allah created the Paradise, He put things in it that no one has
seen and no mind has imagined. Then He ordered the Paradise to speak.

The Paradise began speaking and said:

***‘Successful indeed are the believers’.”***[^11]

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 25-26
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ تَشَقَّقُ السَّمَاء بِالْغَمَامِ وَنُزِّلَ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ
تَنزِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ لِلرَّحْمَنِ وَكَانَ يَوْمًا عَلَى
الْكَافِرِينَ عَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And on the day when the heaven shall burst asunder with the
clouds and the angels shall be sent down descending (in ranks).”***  
***26. “The dominion that day in truth shall belong to the Beneficent
Lord, and a hard day shall it be for the unbelievers.”***

Again, the discussion of Resurrection and the destiny of wrongdoers on
that day continues where it says:

***“And on the day when the heaven shall burst asunder with the clouds
and the angels shall be sent down descending (in ranks).”***

The Arabic word /qamam/ is derived from the word /qam/ that means to
cover something. Because cloud covers sun, it is called ‘Qamam’. Also
the sorrow that covers heart is called ‘Qam’.

This noble verse is in fact an answer to the polytheists’ demand and one
of their pretexts, for they expected that Allah and the angles who are
among clouds, according to the old fables and legends, come to them to
invite them to the Truth.

In the Jews’ myths we also read that Allah sometimes appears among
clouds.[^12]

The holy Qur’an answers them, implying that a day (in which wrongdoers
are punished and their meaningless words are finished) the angels (not
Allah) will be sent down to them.

Now, what is the purpose of separation of the sky and heaven? Some say
that it means intuition, rising of curtail of ignorance, and showing of
the invisible world. That is on that day, man is bestowed a perceiving
and viewing capacity that is different from today’s. He sees angels who
are descending from the above world.

Another commentary is that the sky and heaven means celestial bodies
that explode one after the other one. The cloud that is created by these
explosions and bursting of mountains, covers the sky. Thus the celestial
bodies will burst asunder and in the same time their resulting clouds
are with them.

Many verses of the holy Qur’an, especially those of the short Suras that
are at the end of the Qur’an, express this truth that on the threshold
of resurrection some great changes and a strange revolution and
transformation happen throughout the universe; mountains will burst and
scatter in air like dust, sun and stars will lose their light, even the
existing distance between moon and sun will abolish, and a strange shake
and earthquake will happen throughout the earth.

Yes, on such a day the bursting of heaven (celestial bodies) and
covering sky with a dense cloud is a natural matter.

This very commentary can be said in another way:

The intensity of changes and explosion of stars and planets cause that
the sky can be covered with a dense cloud, but there are sometimes some
openings inside this cloud. Thus, the sky that in the ordinary state is
seen with the natural eye will be separated with these clouds of great
explosion.

Then one of the clearest characteristics of that day is referred to
through the next verse, where it says:

***“The dominion that day in truth shall belong to the Beneficent
Lord...”***

Even those who have some kind of transient, mortal limited, virtual
sovereignty in this world will leave their apparent government, and
sovereignty will belong to His pure essence from every aspect and
dimension, and because of this, as the Qur’an says:

***“...and a hard day shall it be for the unbelievers.”***

Yes, on that day that virtual powers will completely diminish and
sovereignty will be particular to Allah, the disbelievers’ shelters will
be destructed, and the tyrannical powers will disappear, though they
were also naught in this world before His Will, but here they were
apparently powerful and important.

But in resurrection, where the fact will manifest and unfaithful
persons’ imaginations and dreams will blow out, to what they can resort
when they face divine punishments. That is why that day will be very
difficult for them, while believers will have an easy and comfortable
day.

’Abū Sa‘id Khidri says that when the Prophet (p.b.u.h) was reciting the
verse saying:

***“...in a Day whereof the span is fifty thousand years”,***[^13]

which shows that the day of Resurrection is equal to 50 thousand years,
he said:

*“What a strange long day it is!”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“I swear by The One in Whose hand my life is, that that Day will become
light for the believer as short as the time is spent for performing one
ritual prayer in this world.”*[^14]

Carefully studying other verses of the holy Qur’an shows why that day is
hard for pagans. On one side, we read in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse
166:

***“(On the day) when those who were followed disown those who followed
(them), and they would see the torment, and their ties (between them)
are cut asunder.”***

On the other side, we read in Surah AL-Lahab, No. 111, verse 2:

***“His wealth avails him not, neither what he had earned.”***

And also we read in Surah Ad-Dukhan, No. 44, verse 41:

***“The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught, nor
shall they be helped.”***

Even intercession that is the only way of salvation is for those sinners
that have some relationship with Allah and His friend:

***“...Who is it that can intercede with Him save by His
leave?...”***[^15]

Also they will not be allowed to apologize on that day, let alone to the
acceptance of their unreasonable excuses:

***“Nor will it be open to them to put forth excuses.”***[^16]

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 27-29
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يَعَضُّ الظَّالِمُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي
اتَّخَذْتُ مَعَ الرَّسُولِ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا وَيْلَتَى لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أَتَّخِذْ فُلاَنًا خَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَضَلَّنِي عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءنِي وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِلْإِنسَانِ خَذُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “And on the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands, saying:
‘Oh! Would that I had taken a way alone with the Messenger’!”***  
***28. “Oh woe is me! Would that I had not taken such a one for a
friend!”***  
***29. “He indeed led me astray from the Message after it had come to
me, and the Satan fails to aid man.”***

### Occasion of Revelation

Commentators have narrated an occasion of revelation for these verses
that we mention a summary of it:

At the time of the Prophet (S), there were two friends named ‘Uqbah and
’Ubayy among polytheists. Whenever ‘Uqbah returned from a journey, he
prepared some food and invited wealthy people of his tribe to a party.

Meanwhile, he liked to go to the Prophet (S) and to be with him for a
while, though he had not accepted Islam. One day he prepared some food
as usual and invited his friends as well as the Prophet (S).

When food was ready to be served, the Prophet (S) told ‘Uqbah:

*“I will not eat your food unless you testify to unity of Allah and my
mission.”*

‘Uqbah testified that there is no god besides Allah and testified that
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah.

’Ubayy heard this news.

He said to his friend:

*“You have deviated from your religion O’ ‘Uqbah!”*

His friend said:

*“No, by God I did not. But a man came to me who did not eat my food
unless I testified to Allah’s unity and his mission. I was ashamed that
he was about to leave my home without eating any food, so I testified.”*

’Ubayy said:

*“I will not be happy with you, unless you stand before him and insult
him.” ‘Uqbah did this action and apostatized.*

Finally he was killed with other pagans in the Battle of Badr. His
friend ’Ubayy was also killed in the Battle of ‘Uhud.[^17]

The above holy verses were sent down and explained the destiny of the
man who had a deviated friend and he caused him to go astray.

We have repeatedly said that though the occasions of revelation are
particular and especial, they never limit the concept of holy verses and
its generality includes all similar persons.

### A Bad Friend Deviated Me!

The day of Resurrection has strange scenes, some of which are mentioned
in the previous holy verses and in the concerned verses, here, another
part is brought up, and that issue is the extraordinary regret of
oppressors about their past.

It first says:

***“And on the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands, saying:
‘Oh! Would that I had taken a way alone with the Messenger’!”***

The Arabic word /ya‘add/ is derived from the word /‘add/ that means grip
with teeth. This is usually used about the persons who are upset because
of regret and sorrow, as in a Persian proverb it is said that that
person grips finger of regret with teeth.

But in the Arabic language, instead of finger, hand is used, and perhaps
it is more expressive, for man in such situations does not bite his
finger, but he bites the back of his hand. In the Arabic language it is
seen many times such as this verse that both hands are referred. In this
way the intensity of regret and sorrow is expressed better.

This is perhaps for this matter that when such persons review their past
and see that they themselves are responsible and guilty, they decide to
revenge themselves so that they can somehow get calm and soothed.

Verily that Day must be called ‘the Day of anguish’, as in the holy
Qur’an the day of Resurrection is called by this name[^18], for
wrongdoers see a perpetual life with the worst conditions before them,
while they could change it to a happy and honorable life with some days
of patience, struggling with appetitive soul, holy war and donation.

Even for doers of good deeds it is the day of regret. They will regret
why they did not do more good deeds!

Then, in the next verse this oppressor, who is completely regretful,
says:

***“Oh woe is me! Would that I had not taken such a one for a
friend!”***

It is clear that the purpose of ‘such a one’ is the same person, whether
an aberrant kinsman, or Satan or a deviated friend such as ’Ubayy, who
deviated ‘Uqbah, mentioned in the occasion of revelation.

In fact this verse and the previous verse set two positions of negation
and verification against each other.

In a verse it says:

***“Oh woe is me! Would that I had not taken such a one for a
friend!”***

(For all my misery is for leaving the Prophet (S) and choosing this
deviated person as a friend.)

Again in this verse it is continued:

***“He indeed led me astray from the Message after it had come to
me...”***

If he were very far away from perpetual happiness and faith, he would
not regret so much, but he had been near it, there was only one step for
being ever after happy. But that stubborn, biased, dark-hearted friend
returned him thirsty from the spring of life water and took him to the
whirlpool of misery.

The Qur’anic word /ǒikr/ has got an extensive meaning in this verse and
it includes all divine verses that are in the heavenly books. Moreover,
it includes any thing that makes man awaken, alert, and informed.

In the end of the verse the Qur’an says:

***“...and the Satan fails to aid man.”***

For Satan misleads man and leads him to dangerous places. Then leaving
him wandered, Satan goes after his own job.

We must note that the Arabic word /xaǒūl/ is an amplification form which
means:

'The one who abundantly fails someone when most needed’, and the reality
of /xiǒlan/ (desertion) is that someone hopes for another person’s help,
but he deserts him just in the very sensitive moments.

Whether this last sentence of the verse saying:

***“...and the Satan fails to aid man”***

is said by Allah as a warning for all oppressors and the deviated
persons, or it is the rest of the statement said by those who regret in
the day of Resurrection, commentators have mentioned two commentaries,
both of which are in line with the meaning of the verse, but being
Allah’s words is more consistent.

### The Role of Friend in Man’s Destiny

Undoubtedly the factors that form man’s personality are different
including his will and decision, and most importantly his friend and
companion, for man is desirably or undesirably impressionable. Most of
his thoughts and moral attributes are formed through his friends. This
fact has scientifically and experimentally been proved.

From the view of Islam this impressionability is logical so much that we
read in Islamic narrations that Solomon (as) has said:

*“Do not judge someone, unless you see who are his friends, for man is
known by his companions, friends, and fellows.”*[^19]

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“When you are doubtful about someone and you do not know his religion,
find out who are his friends. If they are believers, he is a believer,
too, and if they are not believers of the religion of Allah, he may be
an unbeliever, too.”*[^20]

Verily the role that a friend plays in happiness and misery of a person
is sometimes more important than any other factors. Sometime a friend
leads him to destruction and death and sometimes a friend leads him to
the climax of success and prosperity.

The concerned verses and their occasion of revelation show well that how
possibly man can approach happiness, but a devil temptation by a friend
takes him back to darkness and prepares him a deadly fate so that he
bites both of his hands on the day of Resurrection and cries:

*“Oh Woe is me!”*

In the book Al-‘Ishrah (Roles of Association), there are many narrations
about this matter. This shows how precise and exact Islam is in
selecting a friend.

We finish this discussion with narrating two traditions.

Those who want to read more, please refer to Bihar-ul-’ Anwar, Vol. 74.

Imam Muhammad Taqi, Al-Jawad (as) said:

*“Avoid a bad companion, for he is like an unsheathed sword whose
appearance is beautiful and whose effect is very ugly.”*[^21]

The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“There are four things that bring death to man’s heart: repetition of
sin... and association with the dead.”*

A person asked him:

*“Who are the dead?”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“The wealthy people who are indulging in luxury.”*[^22]

### Some Traditions About Friendship in Islam

1. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“A man’s friend is the sign of his intellect and his speech is the sign
of his virtue.”*[^23]

2. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Anyone who dies while he is a friend of the family of the Prophet (S)
has died as a martyr.”*[^24]

3. The Prophet (S) said:

*“The happiest man is one who associates with respected and dignified
people.”*[^25]

4. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The most favoured brothers of mine are those who present me my defects
(and to warn me of them).*[^26]

5. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The best friend of yours is the one who makes you fond of the
Hereafter and indifferent to the world and helps you in obeying
Allah.”*[^27]

6. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Avoid associating with bad companion, for you are known by him.”*[^28]

7. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Associating with bad people causes mistrust unto good people.”*[^29]

8. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Whenever Imam Ali (as) climbed the pulpit, he said:*

*“It is deserved that a Muslim avoids friendship of three persons: the
impudent dissolute person, imbecile, and liar.”*[^30]

9. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Be kind towards your friend, though he disobeys you and have
relationship with him, though he treats you harshly.”*[^31]

10. The Prophet (S) was once asked about the best companion.

He said:

*“The best one is the person whose meeting reminds Allah to you, and his
words increases your knowledge, and his behaviour makes you remember the
Hereafter.”*[^32]

Islam has got many pieces of advice about friendship and selecting a
friend. Islam encourages having friendship with some persons and
prohibits friendship of some other persons, and this needs a special
separate discussion.

Some subtitles of the subject of ‘friend and friendship’ are as follows:
the ways of knowing a friend, boundaries of friendship, continuity of
friendship, termination of friendship, proper motivations of friendship,
and rules of association with friends and rights of friend, that for
each of them there are a lot of verses and narrations.

We have only mentioned some part of it.

Also Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Good friend is the best relative.”*[^33]

There is a tradition that says test your friend with money, anger,
wealth and journey. If he is successful in them, he is a good one. In
poems there are also a great deal of references about friend and
friendship and it is recommended to associate with good friends. Also
association with bad friends is reproached.

Bad companion is likened to a beautiful snake that has a very deadly
poison.

As a Persian poet says:

*Escape bad companion as you can,*

*Bad companion is worse than a poisonous snake.*

*Poisonous snake threats only your life,*

*But bad companion threats your, life as well as your faith.*

*Or, bad friend is likened to a dark cloud that covers the magnificent
sun:*

*Associate less with bad persons,*

*For bad persons’ words make you impure, though you are pure.*

*Sun that is so great and huge,*

*Goes out of sight with a piece of cloud*.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 30
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ
مَهْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “And the Messenger will say (that Day): ‘O my Lord! Verily my
people treated this Qur’an with neglect.”***

Oh Allah! People have deserted the holy Qur’an.

Since the previous verses mentioned the different kinds of
pretext-seeking of some stubborn polytheists and unbelievers, this holy
verse mentions complain and annoyance of the Prophet (S) about the
incorrect behaviour of this group with the Qur’an, where it says:

***“And the Messenger will say: ‘O my Lord! Verily my people treated
this Qur’an with neglect.”***

This complain of the Prophet (S) is still heard. He complains to Allah
even about a large group of Muslims who have neglected the holy Qur’an
which is the secret of life, means of salvation, the factor of victory,
development and movement, and full of life programs. They have neglected
this book and have begged others for their civil and criminal laws!

Now if you study the situation of the people of Islamic countries,
especially those who are culturally under the control of Western and
Eastern countries, you see that the holy Qur’an is changed into a
ceremonial book among them.

Only its words are nicely broadcasted by a few speakers and are seen on
glazed tiles of mosques as architecture. It is used for making new house
blissful, or for protecting a traveler and healing patients, or at most
it is recited for its reward.

Even when some persons argue by using the holy Qur’an, their aim is to
prove their prejudgments by the help of its verses and their
interpretation is according to their personal opinion.

In some Islamic countries, there are great schools that are named
‘Schools of Memorization of the Holy Qur’an’. In these schools girls and
boys are memorizing the Qur’an, while their thoughts are sometimes
influenced by Western and Eastern countries and their laws are borrowed
from some none-Islamic countries and the Qur’an is applied only for
covering their wrong actions.

Yes, today the Prophet (S) also cries:

*“O my Lord! Verily my people treated this Qur’an with neglect.”*

It is neglected from the aspects of content, thought, and reforming
programs.

### Some Points

1. This noble verse refers to the complaint of the Prophet (S) and,
because he is ‘mercy for both worlds’, he does not cast curse.

2. Imam Rida (as) said:

*“The reason that we read the holy Qur’an in ritual prayers is for
paying attention to the Qur’an.”*

3. An Islamic narration recommends to read 50 verses of the Qur’an
everyday and your aim must not be reaching the end of Surah. Read slowly
and strike your heart with reading the Qur’an. Whenever you are
surrounded by temptations, as night engulfed you, resort to the
Qur’an.[^34]

4. It seems proper to mention a few confessions of some great persons
about the holy Qur’an how it is neglected:

A) Mulla Sadra (may his spirit be sanctified!) says in the introduction
of Surah Al-Waqi‘ah:

*I read books of many philosophers so that I thought I knew all things
and I became an important man, but when I began to perceive a little of
the true nature of situations, I found out that I knew no real and true
knowledge.*

*At the end of my lifetime, I embarked on pondering the Holy Qur’an and
the narrations of the Prophet (S) and his family. I became certain that
what I had done up to then was baseless, for during my life I was
standing in shadow instead of being under light.*

*I became wholeheartedly sorrowful, and, then divine favour was bestowed
on me and I became familiar with the secrets of the holy Qur’an and I
began to comment on and ponder the Qur’an.*

*I knocked the door of revelation until curtains were taken away and
doors were opened and I saw that angels say to me:*

***“...Peace be unto you! You are good, therefore enter it to dwell
therein (forever*** [^35]***.”***[^36]

B) Fiyz-i-Kashani (may his spirit be sanctified!) says:

*I wrote books and treatises and I researched, but none of them was
remedy for my pain and no water I found to quench my thirst. I got
worried about myself, and I resorted to Allah and repented so that Allah
led me by means of pondering the Qur’an and Islamic traditions.*[^37]

C) Imam Khomeini (may his spirit be sanctified!) says that he regrets
that he has not spend all of his life for the holy Qur’an and he advised
the students of universities and the students of seminaries to set the
Qur’an and its various dimensions as ultimate aim in all courses, lest
in the end of life they do not regret for youth days.[^38]

D) The relationship of man and the heavenly book must be perpetual and
in all aspects, for the word ‘Hijr’ is used when there is relationship
between man and that thing.[^39] So, we must try our best to pay
attention to the holy Qur’an and set it our scientific and practical
base in all dimensions of life so that the dear Prophet (S) gets
satisfied.

E) Abandoning reading the Qur’an, preferring other books to the holy
Qur’an, not setting it as pivot, not pondering it, not teaching it to
others, and not applying it in practice are extensions of negligence of
the Qur’an. Even one who learns the Qur’an, but does not pay attention
to it, does not look at it, and does not feel responsible for it, has
neglected the Qur’an.[^40]

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 31
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَا لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ عَدُوًّا مِّنَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَكَفَى بِرَبِّكَ هَادِيًا وَنَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31 “And thus We appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the
sinners, and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and a Helper.”***

The call that expresses and seeks truth has always been faced with
opponents. In struggles of truth with falsehood, man needs two things;
guidance and power. Of course, guidance and help are of dignities of
Allah’s Lordship.

So in this noble verse, for sympathizing with the Prophet (S), who faced
atrocious position of enemies, the Qur’an says:

***“And thus We appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the
sinners...”***

(It is not only you who have faced severe animosity of this group, all
prophets were in such positions that a group of wrongdoers stood against
them.)

But the holy Prophet (S) is not alone and without supporter; as the
verse continues saying:

***“...and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and a Helper.”***

Neither can their temptations mislead the holy Prophet (S), for Allah
guides him, nor their conspiracies can defeat him, for Allah is his
supporter and helper, He Whose knowledge is the supreme and His power is
above all others’.

In brief we must say:

If thousands of enemy intend to kill me,

I fear not enemy, for You are my Friend.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 32
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلاَ نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الْقُرْآنُ
جُمْلَةً وَاحِدَةً كَذَلِكَ لِنُثَبِّتَ بِهِ فُؤَادَكَ وَرَتَّلْنَاهُ
تَرْتِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “And those who disbelieve say: ‘Why has not the Qur’an been sent
down upon him all at once? Thus (is it revealed), that We may strengthen
your heart by it and We have rehearsed it to you in slow, well-arranged
stages, gradually’.”***

Pretext-seekers found new pretexts every moment. They sometimes said:
Why is not revelation made to us? Sometimes they said: Why do not we see
angel of revelation? Why does not the Prophet have money, palace, and
gold? And sometimes they said:

***“Why is not the Qur’an revealed to him all at once?”***

The Qur’an has got two kinds of revelation: A) Instant revelation on the
heart of the Prophet (S) that occurred in the night of Power, when all
of the Qur’an was sent down to the Prophet’s heart. B) Gradual
revelation that the Qur’an was sent down on special occasions during 23
years.

Any way, the word ‘Kaǒalika’ (thus) is the answer of them, that is, the
advantage and wisdom of gradual revelation of the Qur’an is to make the
heart of the Prophet (S) stronger and to make memorization and keeping
of the Qur’an easier.

Moreover, there are abrogating and abrogated verses in the Qur’an and
every answer must be exactly for a question and these are not consistent
with instant revelation of the Qur’an. In addition, the Prophet (S) was
illiterate and he did not know writing and reading, so to make him
understand the revelation, the Qur’an was sent down gradually, while
Moses and Christ knew writing and reading.

### Explanations

1. Gradual revelation of the Qur’an is the factor of continual and
permanent relation of the Prophet (S) with the source of revelation and
it makes him stable in his way. It shows that prophethood is not a
temporal matter.

2. A religion that is comprehensive and enlivened has a strong relation
with events and occasions. And events and occasions occur gradually, not
instantly.

3. To obey all orders and to avoid prohibitions instantly was difficult
for common people and it caused them distress and constriction.

4. Since each Surah and verse of the Qur’an was by itself, a miracle,
its gradual revelation was as a continual miracle and each miracle
soothed the heart of the Prophet (S) against enemies’ oppression.

5. There is much difference between revelation of each verse according
to special position and instant revelation of all verses regardless of
situations.

6. Some verses are the answers of people’s questions.

Therefore, a question must first be raised and then its answer be given.
Some verses and judgments were descended for a certain period; so a
verse must be sent down to annul them.

### Slowly and Distinctly Reading of the Qur’an (Tartil)

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Tartil is to recite the Qur’an distinctly (not like reading poem and
prose). When you reach its wits, you stop and purify your Heart and
spirit. Your aim of recitation must not be reaching the end of
Surah.”*[^41]

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The purpose of Tartil is to stop when it needs full stop and
articulation of letters.”*[^42]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Tartil is to recite the Qur’an beautifully and slowly. It is to stop
and to resort to Allah, when reciting the verses that are about the Fire
and punishment. It is to pray and to ask Allah the Heaven, when verses
about the Paradise are read.”*[^43]

In the end, it is understood from all narrations and the words of
commentators that Tartil is to recite the holy Qur’an slowly and in
proper order.

Reading must be done verse by verse and they must not be mixed, so that
the verses can enter the conscience of society and used by next
generations. Therefore the future ages can use the light of its guidance
and make dark places of their life lighted by it.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 33
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَأْتُونَكَ بِمَثَلٍ إِلاَ جِئْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَ أَحْسَنَ
تَفْسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “And they shall not bring to you any similitude, but We bring to
you the truth and the best explanation (of it).”***

Addressing the Prophet (S), the Qur’an implies that whether the words of
the opponents are false so Allah presents true words to the Prophet (S),
or their words are true then Allah brings some better and more
comprehensive words of the truth for the Prophet (S).

To put more emphasis on this answer, the Qur’an implies that they bring
no similitude to him, or they mention no words to weaken his call, but
Allah brings the Truth as against it, and better than their similitude
as argument.

The verse says:

***“And they shall not bring to you any similitude, but We bring to you
the truth and the best explanation (of it).”***

### Explanations

1. The Qur’an is a comprehensive book which answers all faults that are
found with it by the opponents.

2. Prophets were struggling with opponents and prophets treated them by
means of reasonable argumentation.

3. Others’ words and complains are to be answered with some better
words.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 34
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُحْشَرُونَ عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ أُوْلَئِكَ
شَرٌّ مَّكَانًا وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “Those who shall be mustered upon their faces unto Hell, they are
in a worse place and as to path, most astray.”***

The most misled person is the one who finds faults with prophets and
makes difficulty for them. Therefore, in this noble verse, it is implied
that after their finding faults, stubborn and biased foes had made
inference that Muhammad and his followers, with this book and these
programs, were the worst people of Allah (we seek Allah's protection!).

Since saying this matter was not consistent with the eloquent and
decorous words of the Qur’an, Allah answers this without mentioning the
matter.

It says:

***“Those who shall be mustered upon their faces unto Hell, they are in
a worse place and as to path, most astray.”***

Yes, the result of men’s programs and deeds will be shown in the
Hereafter; when some persons are as tall as cedar and their faces shine
like moon. They go toward the Paradise with long steps and fast.

On the contrary, there are persons who are lying on the ground and
angels of punishment are dragging them to the Hell. This different
destiny shows who had been misled and evil and who had been guided and
happy!

Moreover, commentators are of different opinions about the purpose of
the Qur’anic phrase which says:

***‘...shall be mustered upon their faces...’:***

Some commentators have rendered as the verse means literally. They have
said that the angels of punishment drag them to the Hell while their
faces will be on the ground. On one hand, it shows how abject and
wretched they are, for in the world they were very self-conceited and
proud and they considered themselves better than other people.

On the other hand, it is an embodiment of their aberration in this
world, for such a person that is dragged in this way can never see ahead
and is unaware of what is happing around him.

But some other commentators have taken it with its ironical meaning;
sometimes they say that this sentence ironically implies their inner
longing for this world, that is, for the sake that their heart still
longs for this world, they are dragged toward Hell.

1. The Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“On the day of Resurrection, Fire speaks with three persons: ruler,
singer, and the rich. It says to the ruler that Allah had bestowed you
palace and sovereignty and you did not judge rightly and then the Fire
swallows him as a bird swallows the sesame.*

*It says to the singer that you adorned yourself for people and
struggled against Allah by committing sin and disobeying Him, and then
it swallows him. It says to the rich that Allah had bestowed you a lot
of blessings and wealth, and you did not lend poor and needy people who
wanted a little money and then it swallows him, too.”*[^44]

2. Imam Sadiq (as) has narrated from his ancestors that Imam Ali (as)
said:

*“In the Hell there is a mill that crushes five things into flour. Do
not you ask what is its flour?”*

Then he was asked what its flour was.

He said:

*“It is the corrupted and evil scientists, evil and vice singers,
tyrannical rulers, treacherous ministers, and lying Gnostics. Verily in
the Hell there is a city that is called ‘Hasinah’. Do not you ask me
what is in that city?”*

Someone asked:

*“What is there in it O’ Amir-al-Mu’minin?”*

He said:

*“There are hands of those who broke an oath of allegiance.”*[^45]

3. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Fear the Fire whose heat is severe and it is very deep. Its adornment
is iron and its beverage is pus.”*[^46]

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān

[^2]: Surah An-Nūr, No. 24, verse 25

[^3]: Surah Yūnus, No. 10, verse 7

[^4]: The current Surah, verse 7

[^5]: Bihār, Vol. 8, P. 317

[^6]: Surah Qāfir, No. 40, verse 49

[^7]: Surah Al-Hijr, No. 15, verse 80

[^8]: Al-Mīzān, Fhakr-i-Rāzī, Fī Zalāl, and Abulfutūh

[^9]: Safīnat-ul-Bihār, Vol. 1, P. 227

[^10]: The commentary of Ali ibn ’Ibrāhīm, narrated from
Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 2, P. 9

[^11]: Kanz-ul-’Umāl, Vol. 14, P. 645

[^12]: Fī Zilāl, Vol. 6, P. 154

[^13]: Surah Al-Ma‘ārij, No. 70, verse 4

[^14]: The commentary of Qurtabī, Vol. 1, P. 4739

[^15]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 255

[^16]: Surah Al-Mursalāt, No. 77, verse 36

[^17]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān, the explanation upon the verse

[^18]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 39

[^19]: Safīnat-ul-Bihār, Vol. 2, P. 27

[^20]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 197

[^21]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 198

[^22]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 195

[^23]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 3, P. 261

[^24]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 107, P. 111

[^25]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 187

[^26]: ’Usūl-i-Kāfī, Vol. 4, P. 452

[^27]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 3, P. 436

[^28]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummāl, Vol. 9, Had. 34844

[^29]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 191

[^30]: ’Usūl-i-Kāfī, Vol. 4, P. 453

[^31]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 166

[^32]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, Vol. 74, P. 186

[^33]: Qurar-ul-Hikam

[^34]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^35]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 73

[^36]: Introduction to the commentary on Surah Al-Wāqi‘ah

[^37]: Risālāt-ul-’Insāf

[^38]: Sahīfah Nūr, Vol. 20, P. 20

[^39]: Mufradāt by Rāqib

[^40]: Al-Munīr, the Commentary explained upon the verse

[^41]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān and Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn P. 15

[^42]: Kanz-ud-Daqāyiq and Manhāj-us-Sādiqīn

[^43]: Majma‘-ul-Bahrayn, explanation about the word /rattala/

[^44]: Bihār, Vol. 8, P. 285

[^45]: Ibid P. 311

[^46]: Ibid P. 206, taken from Nahj-ul-Balāqah


