Section 6: Repentance, Belief and Good Deeds
============================================

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 61
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَارَكَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ فِي السَّمَاء بُرُوجًا وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا
سِرَاجًا وَقَمَرًا مُّنِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “Blessed is He Who has set in heaven constellations, and has set
therein a lamp (the sun) and the moonilluminating.”***

The Qur’anic word /tabaraka/ is used only in past tense and it is
repeated thee times in this Surah[^1].

As it was said before, it is derived from whether the word ‘Baraka’
(stable and constant), or from the word ‘Barakat’ (abundant goodness).

This noble verse is in fact the answer of those who said what ‘the
Beneficent’ is. Though they present this question mockingly, the Holy
Qur’an answers them seriously.

It says:

***“Blessed is He Who has set in the heaven constellations...”***

The Arabic word /burūj/ is the plural form of the word ‘Burj’ which
originally means ‘appearance’, therefore, that part of the wall that is
around a city or camp of an army and is taller and more remarkable is
called ‘Burj’. Also when a woman shows her adornment, it will be said:
“Tabarrajat il-Mar’ah’. This word is applied to tall palaces, too.

Anyway, heavenly mansions refer to special constellations before which
each season and each time of year the sun and the moon pass, for
example, it is said that the sun is in Aries-, which means the sun is in
front of the constellation of Aries,: Or the moon is in Scorpios, that
is the moon is in front of the constellation of Scorpios. (A
constellation is a collection of stars which seems to us a special
form.)[^2]

Thus, the verse refers to the heavenly places of the sun and the moon
and it says:

***“...and has set therein a lamp (the sun) and the moon
illuminating.”***

As a matter of fact, this verse states how precise and fixed the Orbits
of the sun and the moon are in heaven. (Of course, these changes are in
fact resulted from the movement of the earth around the sun).

It is a precise system that rules them for millions of year so that
astronomers can forecast hundreds of year later. This system that rules
over these great celestial bodies testifies to the existence of a Lord
Who is the manager and administrator of the great universe.

Do not they (disbelievers) know Him with such clear signs and with such
exact places of the sun and the moon and then they say what the
Beneficent is?

Why is the sun called ‘Siraj’? And why is the adjective ‘Munir’ used for
the moon? It is probably because the word ‘Siraj’ means light and the
lamp from which light comes out and this is consistent with the nature
of the sun that according to scientific researches the light of the sun
belongs to itself.

On the contrary, the light of the moon does not belong to itself and it
comes from the sun, therefore, the adjective ‘Munir’ (giving light) is
used for the moon, though its light is borrowed from somewhere else.[^3]

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 62
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ خِلْفَةً لِّمَنْ أَرَادَ
أَن يَذَّكَّرَ أَوْ أَرَادَ شُكُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “And He it is Who has made the night and the day to succeed each
other for him who desires to reflect or desires to be thankful.”***

This noble verse still continues to introduce the Lord of the universe
and states another part of the system of the existence.

It says:

***“And He it is Who has made the night and the day to succeed each
other for him who desires to reflect or desires to be thankful.”***

It is the regular system that rules the day and the night which
alternatively substitute each other. This system is in work for millions
of year. It is the system that if does not exist the life of man will be
destroyed by intensity of heat and light or darkness, and this is an
attractive reason for those who want to know Allah.

We know that the system of day and night is generated from the movement
of the earth around itself. Its gradual and regular changes, that is
continually the duration of one of them increases and the other one
decreases, is because of its axle slope in regard to its orbit, which,
during a year, causes the four seasons.

If the earth rotated faster or slower than its usual speed, in one case
the nights would get so longer that all things would be frozen, and in
other case the days would be so long that the sun would burn everything.
Moreover, the centrifugal force could be so intense that the earthly
creatures would be thrown out into the space.

In brief, on one hand, the study of this system awakes the theology
nature in man. (Perhaps the application of the phrase ‘desires to
reflect’ refers to this fact), and on the other hand, it awakes the
thanking spirit in man and the phrase ‘desires to be thankful’ may refer
to this matter.

It is worth-mentioning that in a narration whether belongs to the
Prophet (S) or Infallible Imams (as) we read:

*“Coming day and night in succession is for the matter that if man does
dereliction of his duties in one of them, he recompenses it in another
one.”*

This meaning may be the second commentary for the verse and, since the
verses of the Qur’an has got levels of meaning, it is not inconsistent
with the first commentary either.

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition says:

*“Any worship and obedience that you missed to do in the night make up
for it in the day, for Allah, the Mighty and the Blessed, says:*

***‘Man must compensate the undone duties of night in day and compensate
those of day in night.’”***[^4]

The same thing is narrated by Fakhr-i-Razi from the Prophet (S).

Conclusion:

To learn lessons from 'the system ruling the universe’ depends on our
will. How a lot are persons who spend their life for a phenomenon, but
since they do not will to learn lesson, they do not profit by the
example!

These persons are like one who sells mirror, the one who always looks at
mirror, but does not straighten his garments, while a passenger may
straight his collar by just one careful glance at mirror.

Therefore, a mere glance is not enough, but the will for reformation
also is necessary. With this matter mentioned, it gets clear why some
scientists do not know Allah, while they have spent their life for
researching the nature, for they do not do anything for knowing Allah,
as a carpenter makes many ladders, but he does not will to climb one of
them.

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 63-64
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الأَرْضِ هَوْنًا
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّدًا وَقِيَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “And the servants of the Beneficent (Allah) are those who walk on
the earth humbly; and when the ignorant address them, they answer;
‘Peace’.***  
***64. “And those who spend the night prostrating themselves before
their Lord and standing.”***

The behaviour of each person shows his personality and character. The
supreme reward and medal for man is the medal of servitude of Allah:

***(‘The servants of the Beneficent (Allah)’).***

For being related to infinity makes man exalted.

Form this holy verse on, an interesting and comprehensive discussion
about the attributes of Allah’s special slaves is brought up under the
title of

***‘The servants of the Beneficent (Allah)’.***

It, in fact, completes the former verses in which there has been
mentioned that the obstinate polytheists said out of conceit and
ridicule when the name of Allah, the Beneficent, has been mentioned:

***“...what is the Beneficent?”***

We saw that the holy Qur’an introduced Allah, the Beneficent, to them in
two verses. Now it is time for introducing the Beneficent Allah to the
special servants. When His servants are so dignified and lofty, the
magnificence of Allah, the Beneficent, will be understood better.

In these two verses and the next verses, more than 10 attributes of
theirs are mentioned, some of which are related to the creedal aspects,
some are moral, some are social, some are personal, and some are
collective. On the whole they are of the supreme humane values.

It first says:

***“And the servants of the Beneficent (Allah) are those who walk on the
earth humbly...”***

In fact the first attribute introduced for ‘The servants of the
Beneficent (Allah)’ is denial and negation of conceit, pride and
self-admiration, which is seen in all deeds of man, even in his way of
walking, for moral habits will appear in man’s deeds, speech, and
gestures, so that by studying the way of walking of a person we can find
out many things about his morality.

Yes, they are humble and the key of faith is humbleness, while the key
of unfaithfulness is conceit and pride. We have seen many times in
everyday life and we have also read frequently in the holy Qur’an that
the conceited arrogant have not been willing even to listen to the words
of the divine leaders, and they have ridiculed the truths.

They do not see further than the end of their own nose. Is it possible
to acquire faith with such mood of conceitedness?

Yes, these faithful persons are the servants of Allah, the Beneficent.
The first sign of servitude is that humbleness, which penetrates all
particles of their entity and even it can be detected in their way of
walking.

Since the spirit of faith is humbleness, we see that one of the main
commandments given to the Prophet (S) by Allah is:

***“And do not walk around exultantly on the earth; certainly you will
never rend the earth, nor attai the mountains in height.”***[^5]

Verily if man knows himself and the universe minimally, he knows how
small he is comparing with this great universe! Even if his neck gets as
long as mountains, the highest mountains are less than the peel swells
of sour orange in regard to the hugeness of the earth which is itself
just a tiny particle in these great galaxies.

After all, is not pride and conceit the reason of absolute ignorance and
lack of knowledge?

It is narrated that one day the Prophet (S) was passing through a lane
where he saw some of people had gathered in a place. He asked them its
reason. They said that a mad person was doing some mocking actions and
people were therefore attracted by him.

The Prophet (S) called them and told them:

*“Do you want to introduce you the real mad man?”*

All people were silent and were listening to him carefully.

He said:

*“A person who walks conceitedly, and he continually looks around
himself. He moves his sides along with his shoulder, (he sees no one but
himself and thinks about no one save himself). A person whom people
expect no goodness and a person from whose mischief people are not safe.
This is the real mad man. The person whom you saw is a patient.”*[^6]

The second attribute of theirs is patience and forbearance, as the holy
Qur’an says in this verse:

***“...and when the ignorant address them, they answer: ‘Peace’;”***

This ‘peace’ is the sign of heedlessness which is along with nobility
and greatness, and it is not because of weakness.

It is the ‘peace’ that is the reason of lack of retaliation against the
ignorant. It is to say farewell to their senseless words. This ‘peace’
is not a greeting which is the sign of kindness and friendship. It is
the ‘peace’ that is the sign of patient and greatness.

Yes, one of the great spiritual phenomena of theirs is patience and
forbearance, without which no man can pave the fluctuating path of
Allah’s servitude and bondage, especially in the societies in which
there are a lot of corrupted, ignorant and wicked persons.

In the second verse, the third attribute of theirs, that is the sincere
worshipping of Allah, is mentioned.

It says:

***“And those who spend the night prostrating themselves before their
Lord, and standing,”***

In the darkness of night, when the eyes of the ignorant are sleeping and
there is no place for hypocrisy and feigning, a believer deprives
himself of pleasant sleep and does what is more pleasant, that is the
remembrance of Allah and prostrating and standing before Him, the
Magnificent.

He spends some part of night supplicating Him and illuminates his heart
and soul with His name and remembrance.

Though the Qur’anic phrase /yabitūna/ (‘who spend the night’) indicates
that they spend the night prostrating and standing before Him, it is
clear that its purpose is considerable part of the night or if its
purpose is all the night, sometimes it is so.

Meanwhile, coming the word ‘prostrating’ before the word ‘standing’ is
because of its importance, though in prayer (salat) prostrating is
practically after standing.

### Some Traditions On Humbleness and Night Prayer

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Why do not I see the sweetness of worshipping in you?”*

One said:

*“What is the sweetness of worshipping?”*

He said:

*“Humility.”*[^7]

2. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Be humble and modest, for it is one of the greatest worships.”*[^8]

3. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Verily Allah revealed to me to be humble so that no one boasts anyone
and no one oppresses anyone.”*[^9]

4. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Humbleness and modesty increases the rank and dignity of one who is
humble, then be humble so that Allah exalts you.”*[^10]

5. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“No dignity and greatness is like humbleness, and no nobility is like
knowledge and knowing.”*[^11]

6. Imam Ali (as) once said:

*“The fruit of knowledge is humility.”*[^12]

7. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Performing two rak‘ats of prayer in the midnight is better than the
world and what is in it. Verily, if it were not difficult for my nation,
I would make this prayer compulsory for them.”*[^13]

8. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The dignity of a believer depends on his night prayer, and his
greatness and glory depends on avoiding bothering people.”*[^14]

9. The Prophet (S) said:

*“When man gets out of his pleasant bed and while his eyes are drowsy he
tries to make his Lord pleased and happy by his night prayer, Allah
takes pride in him and says:*

*“Do not you see My servant who gets out of his pleasant bed for a
prayer that I did not make it a must on him? Be witness that I forgive
him.”*[^15]

10. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“One who does not perform night prayer is not of our Shiites.”*[^16]
[^17]

11. Imam Rida (as) said:

*“Do perform night prayer. There is no servant who gets up at the end of
night and performs 8 rak‘ats night prayer, 2 rak‘ats even prayer, one
rak‘at odd prayer and asks pardon of Allah 70 times in personal prayer
(qunūt), unless Allah protects him from the chastisement of grave and
the chastisement of Fire, and prolongs his life and gives him his
provisions generously.”*

Then Imam continues:

*“Verily the homes in which night prayer is performed its light
illuminates before the inhabitants of the heaven as stars glow for the
people of the earth.”*[^18]

12. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Night prayer makes man’s face beautiful and fine, makes him morally
good and agreeable and makes him smell pleasantly. It increases
sustenance, causes the debt to be paid, takes sorrow away and makes
man’s vision strong.”*[^19]

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 65-66
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اصْرِفْ عَنَّا عَذَابَ جَهَنَّمَ إِنَّ
عَذَابَهَا كَانَ غَرَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهَا سَاءتْ مُسْتَقَرًّا وَمُقَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “And those who say: ‘O’ our Lord! Avert from us the torment of
Hell, verily the torment of it is a lasting affliction;”***  
***66. “Verily it is an evil abode and (an evil) station.”***

There are two ways for getting released from the Fire; worshipping and
doing good deeds.

When Imam Ali (as) dedicated some properties to Allah, he wrote in act
for the establishment:

*“I dedicated this for saving myself from the Fire as well as getting
the Fire away from me.”*[^20]

In this noble verse, the fourth attribute of ***‘the servants of the
Beneficent’***, which is the fear of divine chastisement, is mentioned.

It says:

***“And those who say: ‘O’ our Lord! Avert from us the torment of Hell,
verily the torment of it is a lasting affliction;”***

The Arabic word /qaram/ originally means: intense disaster and sorrow
which always afflicts man. If creditor in Arabic is called /qarim/, it
is because he is always following man for getting his money. The love
and motivation that makes man do a job is also called /qaram/. This word
has been applied to the Hell since the chastisement of the Hell is very
grievous, lasting, and permanent.

Therefore, in the next verse it is said:

***“Verily it is an evil abode and (an evil) station.”***

Although these servants of the Beneficent remember and worship Allah in
the midnight and do their duties in the day, their heart is still full
of the fear that their duties to be done rightly. It is that fear that
is the powerful factor of doing duties more and better.

It functions as an inward powerful police that controls man and man does
his duties in the best way, while no one observes and controls him and
he still thinks that he is guilty before Allah.

The difference between the Arabic word /mustaqarr/ (abode) and the word
/muqam/ (station) is that the Hell is a perpetual home for pagans and it
is a temporal place for believers. So, to both groups who enter the Hell
reference is made.

It is obvious that the Hell is a bad place and residence.

How can one be calm in the blazing Fire? Is there comfortableness and
easiness in the killing flames?

It is also possible that both these words, ***‘Mustaqarr’ (abode)*** and
***‘Muqam’ (station)***, mean the same and they are for more emphasis on
the perpetuity of the Hell chastisement.

It is the opposite of the Paradise about which we read in this Surah,
verse 76:

***“Abiding therein, how excellent the abode, and the resting-place.”***

Anyway, the special servants of Allah fear the Fire of the Hell more
than that they desire the Paradise.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 67
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا وَكَانَ
بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ قَوَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “And those who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor
niggardly, and are stationed between the two (extremes).”***

The Arabic word /qawam/ means moderation and the word /qiwam/ means
something as a help for standing.

Imam Rida (as) announced that moderate prodigality and expenditure is
the famous criterion that is mentioned in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse
236:

***“...the rich according to his means, and the straitened according to
his means, a provision in a fair manner.”***[^21]

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition said:

*“To spend for the sake of the falsehood is extravagance (though it is a
little), and to be stingy in the path of the Truth is thrifty and frugal
(/’iqtar/).”*[^22]

There is another verse that says:

***“And do not make your hand to be shackled to your neck nor stretch it
to the utmost (limit) of its stretching, so that you should sit down
blamed, empty-handed.”***[^23]

In this holy verse, the fifth attribute of the servants of the
Beneficent, which is moderation and avoiding any excess and defect in
jobs and affairs, especially the issue of alms-giving, is mentioned.

It says:

***“And those who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor
niggardly, and are stationed between the two (extremes).”***

It is interesting that this verse speaks in a way that it takes the
issue of spending something which is certain and exists, so that it does
not need mentioning, for it is one of the given duties of any man.

Thus it talks about the way and manner of the spending. It indicates
that they have a just spending and are neither prodigal nor grudging.
They neither spend so much that their wife and offspring gets hungry,
nor they are so economical that other persons do not get help from them,
and there is ever a firm station between the two.

Commentators have various opinions about the Qur’anic words /’israf/
(extravagance) and /’iqtar/ (to be economical).

All these opinions say one matter that /’israf/ is to spend too much,
undue, and for the sake of none-Allah, and /’iqtar/ is to be less than
what is necessary and right.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 68
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ لاَ يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ وَلاَ يَقْتُلُونَ
النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ وَلاَ يَزْنُونَ
وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ يَلْقَ أَثَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “And those who do not call with Allah any other god, and do not
slay the soul which Allah has forbidden except for just cause, nor
commit fornication, and whosoever does this shall find a requital of the
sin.”***

In this verse, polytheism, murder, and adultery, which are of the
greatest sins in narrations, are mentioned.[^24]

Homicide is of the greater sins, but the holy phrase:

***‘’Illa Bilhaqq’ (‘except for just cause’)***

says that sometimes murder is necessary and right, including:

1. Retaliation of homicide

2. Incest

3. Adultery of a pagan with a Muslim woman

4. The adultery of the one who has spouse

5. One who claims prophethood

6. Vilifying and insulting the Prophet (S) and the immaculate Imams (as)

7. The adulterer who forces woman to do fornication

8. Muslim sorcerer

9. Corrupter and combatant who uses weapon for frightening people

10. Apostate

11. One who stands against and fights with just Imam of time

12. Polytheist

Anyway, the sixth attribute of the true servants of the Beneficent
(Allah), that is mentioned in the verse under discussion, is sincere
monotheism which is free from any polytheism and multi-worshipping.

It says:

***“And those who do not call with Allah any other god...”***

The light of monotheism has illuminated all of their heart and their
personal social life, and the darkness and gloom of polytheism is no
longer in the thought and soul of theirs.

Their seventh attribute is that they do not murder any innocent.

It says:

***“...and do not slay the soul which Allah has forbidden except for
just cause...”***

It is understood from this noble verse that all humans are basically
honorable and respected. It is forbidden to murder them, unless a
phenomenon occurs that overshadows this natural respect and provides
permission of murder.

The 8th attribute of theirs is that their realm of chastity never gets
polluted.

The verse says about them:

***“...nor commit fornication...”***

They choose faith when they face dilemma of faith and paganism, they
choose security when they face dilemma of security and insecurity, they
select purity when they face dilemma of purity and defilement, and they
struggle to make an environment which is free from polytheism,
insecurity, immodesty, and impurity.

In the end of the verse, to show more emphasis, it adds:

***“...and whosoever does this shall find a requital of the sin.”***

The Arabic words /’im/ and /’aam/ originally means deeds that prevent
man from achieving reward, then they have been applied to any sin, but
here it means the punishment of wrong action. Some say that the word
‘*’Ithm*’ means sin and the word ‘’Atham’ means the chastisement of
sin.[^25]

If we see that some of commentators say that it means ‘desert’ or
‘mountain’ or ‘a deep well in the Hell’, these are, in fact, to state
the kind of its extensions. In Surah ’Isra’, No. 17, verse 33, we talked
about the philosophy of prohibition of adultery in detail.

It is interesting that the above holy verse first talks about
polytheism, then about homicide, and finally about adultery. It is
understood from some narrations that the importance of these three sins
is as they are mentioned sequentially in the verse.

Ibn Mas‘ūd asked the Prophet (S):

*“Which sin is greater than other sins?”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“To consider a match for Allah while it is He Who has created you.”*

Then he asked the Prophet (S):

*“Which sin comes next?”*

He said:

*“To kill your child for fearing that he may eat food with you.”*

Again he asked him (S):

*“Which sin comes next?”*

He said:

*“To betray the spouse of your neighbour, and Allah sent down its
confirmation in this verse by saying:*

***“And those who do not call with Allah any other god, and do not slay
the soul which Allah has forbidden except for just cause, nor commit
fornication, and whosoever does this shall find a requital of the
sin.”***[^26]

Though this narration speaks about a special kind of fornication and
murder, with regard to generality of the concept of the verse, this
ordinance is about all kinds of them, and this narration is a clear
extension of it.

Anyway, the command of the holy Qur’an about avoiding polytheism,
adultery, and homicide is not only a sermon, it is a rule that if it is
disobeyed, severe chastisement will be its compensation. Divine
chastisements do not have any exception; anyone who commits wrong action
will be punished.

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 69-70
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُضَاعَفْ لَهُ الْعَذَابُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَيَخْلُدْ فِيهِ
مُهَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاَّ مَن تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلاً صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “On the Day of Judgment, the chastisement will be doubled to him,
and he shall abide therein in abasement.”***  
***70. “Unless he repents, believes, and works righteous deeds, then
these are they who, Allah changes their evil deeds to good ones, And
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

Multiplication of wrongdoers’ punishment which is cited in the phrase
‘will be doubled’ is not against divine justice, for double punishment
happens when sin or wrong action has got multiplied evil and gloomy
effects.

For example, an adulterer not only commits sin, but also he forces other
one to commit sin, and an illegitimate issue may get born, who has
negative tendencies. In homicide, a murderer kills someone, but some
persons will get bereaved, orphaned and he makes society insecure.

Each of the above items has individually a separate punishment, as one
who forms and creates a bad tradition or custom in society will be
punished each time that someone practices this custom during the course
of history and its fonder has a share of its sin.

Since all commentators believe that fornication by itself brings no
perpetuity of chastisement in the Hell, therefore, only those
polytheists who commit adultery will remain in the Hell forever. Yes,
false and true belief and paganism and polytheism have effect on
punishments.

Since these three sins (polytheism, homicide, and adultery) are
extremely important, again this verse puts emphasis on them and says;

***“On the Day of Judgment, the chastisement will be doubled to him, and
he shall abide therein in abasement.”***

### Questions

Here, there arise a few questions: Why is the punishment of theirs
doubled? Why are not they punished as much as they have committed sin?
Is this consistent with the principles of justice?

Another matter is that the verse speaks about perpetuity of chastisement
and abiding in the Hell, while we know that abiding in the Hell is only
for pagans. Only the first sin of three sins mentioned in the verse is
paganism, and murder and adultery cannot bring perpetual chastisement.

About the first question, commentators have discussed a lot and what
seems more correct is that the purpose of doubling of chastisement is
that for each of these three sins there are separate punishments that on
the whole the punishment gets doubled.

Moreover, sometimes a sin will be the source of other sins, such as
paganism that causes the obligations to be left and commitment of
illegal things to be done, and this makes the Divine punishment double.

Therefore, some of commentators say that this verse is the reason of
this famous principle which says:

*“As pagans are responsible for fundamentals of religion, they are
responsible for positive laws, too.”*[^27]

About the second question, we can say that some of sins are so great and
bad that cause a person to die while having no faith, as we said about
homicide in verse 93 of Surah An-Nisa’.

It may also be true about fornication especially when it is adultery.

Another possibility is that the Qur’anic word /xulūd/ (abide for ever)
is about persons who commit all of these three sins (polytheism,
homicide, fornication) together. The next verse testifies to this
meaning.

It says:

***“Unless he repents, believes, and works righteous deeds, ..”***

Thus there will be no problem. Some of commentators say that ‘khulūd’
here means to abide for a long time not perpetually, but the first and
the second commentaries seem more correct.

It is interesting mat in addition to the issue of common and general
punishment, there is another punishment which is to get offended and
insulted and this is psychological. It also can be a commentary on the
issue of punishment to be double, for they have both physical and
spiritual punishments.

But, in view of the fact that the holy Qur’an does not close the path of
return to the wrongdoers and invites and encourages them to repent their
sins, it says in the next verse:

***“Unless he repents, believes, and works righteous deeds, then these
are they who, Allah changes their evil deeds to good ones, And Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.”***

As we said, three sins of the greatest sins were mentioned in the
previous verse and opportunity is provided for returning and repenting
of these persons, for every regretful wrongdoer can return to Allah on
the condition that his repentance is real and its sign is doing
righteous deeds which is brought up in the verse, otherwise, to merely
repent verbally or having passing regret in the heart is not the reason
of repentance.

The important issue about the above verse is how Allah changes their
sins to good deeds.

### Changing Evil Deeds to Good Deeds

Here are a few commentaries all of which can be acceptable:

1. When man repents and acquires faith in Allah, deep transformation
happens throughout his whole entity. And because of this inward
revolution, later all his evil deeds will change to good deeds.

If formerly he committed homicide in future defending the oppressed and
fighting with oppressors would take its place. If he was adulterer, he
would later become pure and modest. This divine aid and success is
achieved under the light of faith and repentance.

2. Allah removes all his evil deeds out of His grace, favour, and
bestowal, and replaces them by good deeds.

’Abūthar narrated that the Prophet (S) said that on the day of
Resurrection some persons are called to come and Allah commands to
remind him his small sins and to hide his greater sins. It is said to
him that he has done such and such small sin that day. He will confess
to it and his heart is frightened and shakes because of greater sins.

Here, if Allah wants to do him a favour, He commands to give him a good
deed, in stead of each evil deed and he will say that he has some
important sins which he does not see. Abūzar says that at this time the
Prophet (S) smiled in a way that his teeth appeared.

Then he recited this verse:

***“...Allah changes their evil deeds to good ones...”***[^28]

3. The third commentary is that the purpose of evil deeds is not the
nature of deeds man does, but it is the gloomy effects that they have on
the soul and spirit of man. When man repents and believes, these gloomy
effects will be removed from his soul and they will be changed to good
effects. This is the meaning of changing evil deeds to good deeds.

Of course, these three commentaries are not inconsistent and it is
likely that all of them are included in the concept of the verse. Imam
Rida (as) said that the Prophet (S) was told that that person was a
miserable man, for he had done many sins.

The Prophet (S) said:

*“It is not at all as you say, but he has been freed and his destiny has
become good, his sins are vanished and changed to good deeds. For when
he was passing a way, he saw a believer whose pudendum was visible but
he was not aware of it, (it seems that he was sleeping). This person
covered that believer’s body and, for not making him ashamed, he did not
tell him about this matter.*

*When the believer found out, he prayed for him in this way:*

*‘May Allah bestow you a lot of reward and make your resurrection
peaceful and get easy with your reckoning!’*

*Allah fulfilled his prayer about that person and made his destiny
good.”*

When this good tiding of the Prophet (S) came to that wrongdoer, he
repented of all his sins and became a worshipper of Allah. After one
week a group of Islam enemies attacked Medina and the holy Prophet (S)
issued the command of defense. That person went with other Muslims to
holy war and when fighting he got martyred and his destiny became good
and happy.[^29]

Yes, real repentance changes man’s deeds and reforms his improper
behaviour. As in the world of creation Allah creates flowers from soil
and manure, He changes man’s evil deeds to good deeds.

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 71
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن تَابَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَإِنَّهُ يَتُوبُ إِلَى اللَّهِ مَتَابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And whoever repents and does good, he verily repents toward
Allah with true repentance.”***

Real repentance happens when it is along with good deeds. This noble
verse explains the manner of correct repentance.

It says:

***“And whoever repents and does good, he verily repents toward Allah
with true repentance.” (And gets his reward from Him).”***

It means that not only repentance and abandonment of sin must be because
of evilness of sin, but also its motivation must be to make intention
sincere and to return to Allah. Therefore, for example, although
stopping drinking wine or stopping lie for the harms that they have is
good, the value of this stopping is when it has divine motivation.

Anyway, anyone who really and earnestly repents of his sins returns to
Allah and to His countless rewards.

### Some Traditions On Repentance

1. On a Friday the Prophet (S) delivered a sermon and said:

*“O People! Before, you die, return to Allah and repent of your evil
behaviour. And before you get involved in affairs of life, do righteous
and good deeds and amend the affairs that are between you and Allah so
that you get successful and happy. And pay alms a lot so that you are
provided provisions.”*[^30]

2. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Anyone who does not repent of the sin he has done is not believer and
will not be interceded.”*[^31]

3. Imam Rida (as) said that the Prophet (S) said:

*“The parable of a faithful person before Allah, is like the parable of
a favorite angel, and the believer is really more preferred than this
angel in the view of Allah. And before Allah nothing is more preferred
and liked than a man or a woman who repents.”*[^32]

4. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Although believer returns to Allah while he asks Allah forgiveness and
repentance, Allah bestows repentance and forgives his sins, for Allah is
Forgiving and Merciful. He accepts repentance and He forgives sins (and
evil deeds), so be aware that you do not make believers hopeless of
Allah’s Mercy (and forgiveness).”*[^33]

5. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Allah gets happy when His faithful servant repents and returns to Him,
as one of you gets happy when he finds something he has lost.”*[^34]

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 72
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ لاَ يَشْهَدُونَ الزُّورَ وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِاللَّغْوِ
مَرُّوا كِرَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “And those who witness no falsehood, and when they pass by what
is vain, they pass by nobly.”***

Not only committing sin is unlawful, but also attending a sinful
gathering and viewing a sin is forbidden. To avoid attending a sinful
gathering and being disrespectful to sinners is a kind of prohibition of
sin.

Following the previous holy verses in which some of the attributes of
the servant of the Beneficent are mentioned, this verse explains the 9th
outstanding attribute of theirs and says:

***“And those who witness no falsehood...”***

Great commentators have cited two various commentaries on this verse:
some say that the witness of (‘Zūr’) means ‘false testifying’, for the
word ‘Zūr’ means deviation and inclination, and since lie, falsehood and
oppression are some deviated affairs, they are called ‘Zūr’.

This phrase (Shahadat-uz-Zūr) is mentioned in the book ‘Shahadat’ of our
jurisprudence. It is prohibited in various narrations, though in those
narrations this verse has not been taken as an evidence.

Another commentary is that the purpose of ‘Shuhūd’ is ‘attending’ and
‘participation’, which means that the special servants of Allah do not
attend false gatherings and parties.

In some narrations of Imams (as) this word has been interpreted as
parties of profane singing, in which frivolous and deviating singers as
well as playing musical instruments take place.

Undoubtedly the purpose of these narrations is not to limit the
extensive concept of the Qur’anic word ‘Zūr’ to profane singing, but one
of the clear extensions of it is profane singing.

It also includes all gatherings and parties in which wine is drunk, lie
is told, backbiting happens, and such like.

Another possibility that does not seem unlikely is that both
commentaries are truly applied to the meaning of the verse.

Thus, special servants of Allah, or the special servants of the
Beneficent, neither bear false witness nor attend sinful and vain
parties, for attending such parties is both confirming sin and
preparation to defilement of soul and heart.

Then, the 10th attribute of theirs, which is having positive aim in
life, is mentioned.

It continues saying:

***“...and when they pass by what is vain, they pass by nobly.”***

In fact, they neither attend false and vain parties, nor do they get
defiled with vanity and falseness.

With regard to the matter that the Qur’anic word /laqw/ includes any job
that has no rational aim, it is clear that they have always a rational,
useful, and good aim in their life and they dislike those who are after
vain and futile matters.

If they face such vain affairs in their life, they avoid them in a way
that their negligence shows that they are inwardly discontented with
such deeds. They are so magnanimous that such defiled environments never
affect them.

No doubt being heedless to such deeds happens when there is no better
way to prohibit evil deeds and to struggle with corruption, otherwise
they certainly stand against them and do their duties to the end.

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition says that the purpose of the Qur’anic
word ‘Zūr’ in phrase:

***‘La Yashhadūn az-Zūr’***

is profane singing.[^35]

In tafsir-i-Majma‘-ul-Bayan, we read that ‘passing by nobly’ is when
such believers are helpless to mention the name of an evil thing, they
say it ironically, as we read in a narration by Imam Baqir (as) that
when they want to say pudendum, they say it implicitly.

Of course, this is one of the extensions of dignified behaviour. Imam
Sadiq (as) said that Allah enjoined ear to avoid any unlawful things and
then he (as) recited this verse.[^36]

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 73-74
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِّرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَمْ يَخِرُّوا
عَلَيْهَا صُمًّا وَعُمْيَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا
وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “And those who, when admonished with the Signs of their Lord, do
not fall down thereat deaf and blind.”***  
***74. “And those who say: ‘O’ our Lord! Grant us from our wives and our
offspring the joy of our eyes, and make us for the pious ones (their)
Imams.”***

Acts of worship and having insight are attributes of the servants of the
Beneficent. They knowingly follow religion. Therefore, this noble verse
mentions the 11th attributes of theirs which is to have an ear that can
hear and an eye that can see at the time effacing with Allah's
revelations.

It says:

***“And those who, when admonished with the Signs of their Lord, do not
fall down thereat deaf and blind.”***

Certainly it does not refer to the deed of pagans, for they do not even
pay attention to Allah’s verses, but it refers to hypocrites or those
apparently Muslims who blindly and deafly follow Allah's verses, while
they neither understand its reality and find its depth, nor they know
Allah's purpose, nor they think about it, nor do they practically use it
through inspiration in their life.

Of course, one can not pave the path of Allah blindly and deafly; before
anything an ear that hears and an eye that sees are needed for this way.
It needs an eye that can see inwardly and deeply and an ear that is
sensitive and punctilious.

If we think correctly we see that the damage of this group, who blindly
and deafly, as they imagine, pursue the divine verses, causes to
religion of truth is not less than the damage that the enemies who
knowingly cause to the foundation of the religion of truth, and
sometimes it is more.

Basically, conscious perception of religion is the main source of
resistance and forbearance, for those who have blind eye and deaf ear
can be easily deceived and they can be deviated from the main path by
distorting religion and they can be led to paganism and disbelief.

They are tools and puppies in the hands of foes and good victims for
devils. Only insightful believers who see and listen carefully may
remain stable and do not become puppies of this and that person.

When Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about the commentary of this verse, he
said:

*“The purpose is the insightful ones that are not skeptic!”*[^37]

In the next verse, the 12th attribute of these real believers, which is
paying special attention to training and education of their issue and
family and for which they feel seriously responsible is mentioned.

The verse says:

***“And those who say: ‘O’ our Lord! Grant us from our wives and our
offspring the joy of our eyes...”***

It is clear that its purpose is not to sit in a corner and pray for
them, but prayer is the reason of their inward love and fond for this
affair and the main key is struggle and attempt.

Certainly such people leave no stone unturned in training their issues
and wives, and they making them acquainted with the main principles and
positive laws of Islam and paths of truth and justice, and when having
no way and no choice, they ask Allah, the Merciful, and pray.

Basically each correct praying is so, man must try his best and when
there is something out of his power, he must pray.

The Arabic phrase /qurrata ‘ayn/ means the apple of one’s eye, which
means a person who is the cause of happiness and pride.

This is originally derived from the word /qurr/ which means coolness and
coldness, and since it is said (and maney commentators specify this)
that the tears of eagerness and happiness are always cool, and the
sorrowful tears are always hot and burning, the phrase /qurrata ‘ayn/
means something that causes the eye of man to get cool, that is: teats
of happiness and eagerness are shed from his eyes and this implies
happiness and joy.

The issue of training children and guiding wife and responsibility of
parents for their children is of the most important issues on which the
holy Qur’an puts emphasis. We will explain it in the commentary of verse
6 of Surah At-Tahrim, if Allah wills.

The 13th attributes of these outstanding sincere servants of Allah,
which is from one aspect one of the most important ones, is that they
never get satisfied by going the path of truth lonely, but they are so
high-minded that they want to be the Imam and leader of the believers
and to invite others to this upright path.

They do not do only all right for themselves like recluses but they try
to save one who is sinking.

Therefore, it is said in the end of the verse that they are those who
say:

***“...and make us for the pious ones (their) Imams.”***

It must be noted that they do not pray for taking the place of great
persons exorbitantly, but they acquire the means and qualifications of
greatness and leadership in a way that all deserved attributes of a real
leader are included in them and this is a very difficult job with severe
conditions.

Certainly it is not forgotten that these verses do not state all the
qualities of the believers but they define the specialties of a choice
group of them who are at the top and are entitled as ‘the servants of
the Beneficent’.

Yes, they are special servants of Allah and as the general mercy of
Allah includes all people, the mercy of servants of Allah is, from some
aspects, general, too. Their knowledge, speech, thought, power, and
writing all function for guiding people to the path of the Truth.

They are paragons and examples of the humane society.

They are counted as examples for pious persons. They are like guiding
lights and lamps in deserts and seas, which call those who are lost to
them and save them from falling down and sinking.

In many narrations we read that this verse is about Imam Ali (as) and
family of the Prophet (S) and Imams (as). Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The purpose of this verse is us.”*[^38]

Without doubt, Imams (as) are of the most obvious extensions of this
verse, but this does not limit the concept of the verse that other
believers can be imams and leaders of others in various degrees.

Some of commentators say that not only asking spiritual and divine
leadership is not forbidden, but also it is preferred and good.[^39]

Meanwhile, we must pay attention that though the Qur’anic word ‘Imam’ is
singular, sometimes it is used in plural sense. In this verse it is so.

Surah al-Furqan - Verses 75-76
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ يُجْزَوْنَ الْغُرْفَةَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا وَيُلَقَّوْنَ فِيهَا
تَحِيَّةً وَسَلاَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا حَسُنَتْ مُسْتَقَرًّا وَمُقَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “Those (servants of the Beneficent) shall be rewarded with the
high stations (in Paradise) because they were patient, and they shall be
met therein with welcome and salutations.”***  
***76. “Abiding therein; how excellent the abode, and the
resting-place.”***

After completing these attributes, these special servants of Allah, with
their attributes, are referred to and in a short conclusion their divine
reward is brought up as follows:

***“Those (servants of the Beneficent) shall be rewarded with the high
stations (in Paradise) because they were patient…”***

The Arabic word /qurfah/ means something that is picked up and consumed,
such as water that man gets from spring for drinking. Then this word was
applied to upper parts and stories of a building and houses. Here it
implies the best places of the Paradise.

Since the servants of the Beneficent, with such attributes, are in the
first row of other believers, their heavenly rank and position must be
also the highest.

It must be noted that this high rank is given to them for they have been
patient and tolerant for the sake of Allah. It maybe thought that this
is another attribute of theirs, but it is not a new one, it guarantees
the fulfilment of the previous attributes. Is it possible to worship
Allah, to be humble and modest, to struggle with low desires and to stop
vain witness without patience and perseverance?

This statement reminds one of the famous tradition stated by Imam Ali
(as) who said:

*“The relationship of patience and tolerance with faith is like the
relationship of head with body.”*[^40]

The survival of body depends on the existence of the head, for what
controls all limbs is located in man’s head.

Thus, the Qur’anic word ***/sabr/ (patience)*** has got an extensive
concept which includes tolerance and resistance against difficulties
being on the path of worshipping Allah, struggling with low desires and
withstanding factors of sin. If in some narrations we read that its
purpose is only poverty and financial weakness, these are the extensions
of it.

Then it says:

***“...and they shall be met therein with welcome and salutations.”***

The dwellers of the Paradise welcome each other, and angels say hello to
them and, more importantly, Allah says hello and welcomes them, as we
read in verse 58 of Surah Ya- Sin:

***“Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord!”***

In verses 23 and 24 of Surah Ar-Ra’d we read:

***“...and unto whom the angels will enter from every gate,”***

***“Peace (be) upon you...”***

Commentators have various opinions about the meaning of the Qur’anic
words /tahiyyat/ and /salam/. The word /tahiyyat/ originally means to
pray for life and the existence of other person. And the word ‘Salam’ is
derived from the word ‘Salamat (health) and it means to ask health for
someone.

Thus the first word is for asking life and the second word is for making
this life healthy and without danger, though they both can sometimes
mean one thing.

Of course, in common language, the meaning of the world /tahiyyat/ is
more extensive and it, envelops any word, which causes happiness and
respect and kindness, said to someone at the time of entrance.

To emphasize more on this subject in a different style, the noble verse
says:

***“Abiding therein; how excellent the abode, and the resting-place.”***

Surah al-Furqan - Verse 77
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْلاَ دُعَاؤُكُمْ فَقَدْ كَذَّبْتُمْ
فَسَوْفَ يَكُونُ لِزَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “Say (to the disbelievers: ) ‘My Lord would not esteem you at all
were it not for your prayer (unto Him), but you: indeed have belied (the
Truth), and soon you shall be (in) the grip (of the inevitable).”***

The Arabic word /‘iba’/ means weight and heaviness.The Qur’anic sentence
/ma ya‘ba’ū bikum rabbi/ means that Allah does not value and weigh you,
unless under auspices of your worshipping and prayer.

This verse is the last verse of Surah Furqan. It is in fact the
conclusion of all discussions of the Surah as well as the attributes of
the servants of the Beneficent which were mentioned in the previous
verses.

The Prophet (S) is addressed here, where the Qur’an says:

***“Say (to the disbelievers: ) ‘My Lord would not esteem you at all
were it not for your prayer (unto Him)...”***

Though there are many probabilities about the meaning of the word /du‘a/
(prayer) mentioned here, all of them have approximately one root and
source.

Some say that it means to pray. Some say that it means faith. Some say
that it means worshipping and monotheism.

Some say that it means thanking. Some say it means to call Allah at the
time of difficulties and disasters. However the root of them is faith
and paying attention to Allah.

Therefore, the verse implies that what makes one valuable and respected
before Allah is having faith in Allah and His servitude.

Then it says:

***“...but you: indeed have belied (the Truth), and soon you shall be
(in) the grip (of the inevitable).”***

It may be considered that there is no coherency and relationship between
the beginning and the end of the verse.

But, by some careful study it gets clear that the main purpose is that
formerly polytheists and pagans denied the revelations of Allah and His
prophets, and if these people do not return to Allah and do not worship
Him, no value and respect they will have before Him and the punishments
of their denials will be certain.

One of the evidences that confirm this commentary is a tradition by Imam
Baqir (as) who was asked whether too much recitation of the Qur’an is
preferred or too much praying. He answered that too much praying is best
and then Imam (as) recited this verse.[^41]

We know that praying is much considered important in the verses of the
holy Qur’an and Islamic narrations, and one of its examples was the
above verse, but praying has got conditions:

A) To know One Whom man calls,

B) To purify heart and soul and to make spirit ready for asking Him, for
when man wants to meet someone, man must be ready for someone’s meeting,

C) To make One, Whom man wants to ask something, happy and contented,
for without it, fulfilment of demand is unlikely.

D) To use all one’s power and potentiality, to try one’s best, then to
ask Allah something beyond it, and to focus one’s heart on Creator for
fulfilment of praying.

It is specified in Islamic narrations that if man does not do a job that
he can do by himself and he resorts to praying, his praying will not be
fulfilled. Thus, praying is a means for both knowing Allah and His
glorious and beautiful attributes and repenting of sins and purifying
soul, and a factor for doing good deeds and a cause for struggling as
much as possible.

Therefore, there are important words about praying, which can not be
understood save through what was said.

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Praying is the weapon of the believer, the pillar of religion and the
light of the earth and the skies.”*[^42]

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Praying is the key of victory and success, and the best praying is one
that comes from a clean chest and a pious heart.”*[^43]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Praying is more penetrating than spearhead.”*[^44]

Moreover, basically events take place in man’s life, which disappoint
him from the viewpoint of apparent means and factors, but praying can be
a window to hope and success, and it is an effective means for
struggling with disappointment and distress.

Therefore, praying at time of disasters makes man powerful, hopeful and
calm. It has such a psychological effect that can not be denied

### Some Traditions On Praying

1. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“No group has prayed to Allah for a matter, unless they have scattered
by fulfilment of their praying.”*[^45]

2. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Praying is fulfilled in some times: in odd prayer (in midnight), after
dawn, and at the time of noon and sunset prayers, after and at the time
of wedding and marriage ceremony, at the time of looking at the door of
Ka‘bah and parent’s face, at the time of raining and recitation of the
Qur’an.”*[^46]

3. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Do pray, for praying is the heel of every malady.”*[^47]

4. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Allah does not fulfil the praying that comes from a tough and hard
heart.”*[^48]

5. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Allah knows your need and your demand, and He also knows what you want
from Him, but He likes that you retell your needs to Him.”*[^49]

6. Imam Sadiq (as) said that Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The job that Allah, Glorious and Majestical, likes best on the earth
is praying and the best worship is modesty and chastity.”*

And Imam Sadiq (as) added:

*“Imam Ali (as) was a man who prayed a lot.”*[^50]

7. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“There is a position and rank before Allah which can not be achieved
save by asking and requesting Allah, and if a servant closes his mouth
and does not ask what he needs, nothing will be given to him, then ask
Allah, so that you are given what you like.”*[^51]

8. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Anyone who wants something from Allah must begin his praying with
reciting ‘’Allahumma Sall-i ‘Ala Muhammad wa ’Al-i Muhammad, then one
must ask one’s need. Finally one must also end one’s praying with
reciting ‘’Allahumma Sall-i ‘Ala Muhammad wa ’Al-i Muhammad’, for Allah,
all Mighty, is more generous than accepting two ends of a praying and
leaving what is in the middle. Reciting ‘’Allahumma Sall-i ‘Ala Muhammad
wa ’Al-i Muhammad’ will not remain unanswered.”*[^52]

9. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“There are four persons whose praying will not be rejected and the
doors of the heaven are open to them and their praying reaches ‘Arsh,
The Throne:*

*A): Parents’ praying for their issue*

*B) Praying of the oppressed against the one who has oppressed him*

*C) Praying of one who is performing greater and lesser pilgrimage until
one returns home*

*D) Praying of one who is fasting until when he breaks fast.”*[^53]

10. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Praying turns away divine decree, though it has come down from heaven
and is stabilized.”*[^54]

*O Allah! May set us one of Your special servants and bestow us the
grace of achieving the attributes of ‘the servants of the Beneficent’. O
Allah! Open the doors of praying to us and make it factor of value
before You.*

### Some Traditions On Patience

1. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Verily those who are patient enter the Paradise without
Reckoning.”*[^55]

2. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Patience is a treasure out of the treasures of Paradise.”*[^56]

3. The Prophet (S) was once asked about faith and he answered:

*“Faith is patience and generosity.”*[^57]

4. Hisham Ibn Hakam narrates from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“When the day of Resurrection comes, a group of people will go unto the
door of Paradise and knock at it. They will be told who they are. They
say that they are those who are patience. They will be asked with what
they had patience.*

*They say that they had patience with worshipping Allah and abstaining
from sins specified by Allah. Allah lets them enter the Paradise, and
this is the meaning of Allah’s words:*

***‘...Verily the steadfast patient will be paid their wages without
stint’***[^58]***.”***[^59]

5. The Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“One who has patience with disobeying Allah and committing sin is like
one who goes to holy war for the sake of Allah.”*[^60]

6. Imam Sadiq (as) was asked who the most honored before Allah is, and
he said:

*“One who thanks Allah when (favour and blessing) is bestowed on him and
is patience when he is imposed with disaster.”*[^61]

7. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The highest reward is the reward of patience and perseverance.”*[^62]

8. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“If you are patient with disasters and difficulties, you will achieve
the rank and position of the righteous ones. If you have impatience with
them, this impatience leads you to the Hell and Fire.”*[^63]

9. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Success and victory will be achieved by patience, and there will be
ease at the end of suffering and difficulty.*

***‘Verily with difficulty is ease’***[^64]***.”***[^65]

10. Washsha’ narrated Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“We are patient and our Shiites are more patient than us.”*

Washsha’ said:

*“May I be sacrificed for you! How is your Shiites’ patience more than
yours?”*

Imam said:

*“For we have patience with what we know but our Shiites have patience
with what they do not know.”*[^66]

11. Hassan Ibn Mahbūb said that Hassan Ibn Ali (as) said that Imam Kazim
(as) said that Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“On the day of Resurrection, a caller cries:*

*‘Where are the patient?’*

*Then some people stand up. And he cries again:*

*‘Where are the bearers of patience?’*

*Then some people stand up. Then he said may I be sacrificed for you,
who those who are patient are.*

*He said:*

*“Those who are patient with doing what is obligated. And bearers of
patience are those who have patience with abandonment of sins.”*[^67]

12. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Any believer who is imposed with a disaster and he is patient, he will
be given the reward which is equal to the reward of one thousand
martyrs.”*[^68]

13. ’Anas said that the Prophet (S) said that Allah, All-Mighty, said:

*“When I impose a disaster on My servant’s body, on his issue or on his
property, and he welcomes it with beautiful patience, I will be ashamed
to set him a scale for evaluating his deeds or to open a book for
retelling his deeds on the Hereafter Day.”*[^69]

14. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Paradise is covered inside difficulties and patience. One who is
patient with unlawful low desires and difficulties will enter Paradise.
And the Hell is covered inside low desires and lusts. One who is after
low desires and lusts will enter the Hell.”*[^70]

15. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Patience has got two kinds: patience with difficulty and disaster
which is beautiful and good, and patience with unlawful matters which is
better than that.”*[^71]

16. Imam Ali (as) said that the Prophet (S) said:

*“If four attributes are bestowed on a man, he will be given goodness of
this world and the other world; a patient body, a tongue that utters
Allah's name, a heart that thanks Allah, a good and righteous
spouse.”*[^72]

17. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Patience has got three kinds: Patience with affliction, patience with
worship, patience with sins and wrong action.”*[^73]

18. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“It is likely that one hour patience causes perpetual happiness and one
hour pleasure causes long time sorrow.”*[^74]

[^1]: in verses 1, 10, and 61

[^2]: Constellation (astronomy), any of 88 visible groupings of bright
stars, named after religious or mythological characters, animals, or
objects. The oldest known drawings of constellations are Sumerian, and
constellations may have been developed as early as 4000 BC. The division
of the zodiac into 12 equal signs was known around 450 BC by the
Babylonians. The northern constellations known today are little
different from those known to the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans.
At the end of the 16th century AD, the first European explorers of the
South Seas mapped the southern sky. Many constellations were proposed
until astronomers finally settled on a list of 88. The boundaries of
constellations, however, remained a matter of discussion until 1930,
when definitive boundaries were fixed by the International Astronomical
Union. The possessive forms of the names of constellations, preceded by
a Greek letter, are used to name about 1300 bright stars. The famous
star Algol in the constellation Perseus, for example, is called Beta
Persei.

[^3]: Of course, we talked about this in detail in Surah Yūnus, No. 10,
verses 5 and 6.

[^4]: Man Lāyahzuruhl-Faghīh, as it is narrated in Nūr uth-Thaqalayn,
Vol. 3

[^5]: Surah ’Isrā’, No. 17, verse 37

[^6]: Safīnat-ul-Bihār, Vol. 1, P. 191

[^7]: Bihār.Vol. 72, P. 119

[^8]: Bihār, Vol. 72, P. 119

[^9]: Kanz ul-‘Ummāl, Vol. 2, P. 572

[^10]: Bihār ul-‘Anwār, Vol. 72, P. 119

[^11]: Qisār ul-Hikam, P. 113

[^12]: Qurar ul-Hikam, Vol. 1, P. 14

[^13]: Kanz ul-‘Ummāl, Vol. 7, P. 21405

[^14]: Bihār ul-‘Anwār, Vol. 87, P. 141

[^15]: Bihār ul-‘Anwār, Vol. 87, P. 156

[^16]: Bihār ul-‘Anwār, Vol. 87, P. 162

[^17]: Sheikh Mufīd says: its purpose is that he is not of sincere
Shiites, or it may mean that if he does not believe in night prayer, he
is not of Shiites.

[^18]: Bihār ul-‘Anwār, Vol. 87, P. 161

[^19]: Wasā’il ush-Shī‘ah, Vol. 5, P. 272

[^20]: Tafsīr-us-Sāfī, Vol. 3, P. 104

[^21]: Kāfī, Vol. 4, P. 56

[^22]: Sāfī

[^23]: Surah ’Isrā, No. 17, verse 29

[^24]: Kanz-ud-Daqā’iq, the Commentary

[^25]: Fakhr-i-Rāzī

[^26]: Sahīh Bukhārī and Muslem as it is written in Majma‘ ul-Bayān

[^27]: Tafsīr-i-Nimūnah, Vol. 15, P. 158, and Vol. 4, P. 68

[^28]: Nūr uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 33

[^29]: Bihār, Vol. 5, P. 155

[^30]: Bihār, Vol. 74, P. 176

[^31]: Wasā’il, Vol. 6, P. 266

[^32]: Muhajjat-ul-Baydā’, Vol. 7, P. 24

[^33]: Safīnat-ul-Bihār, Chapter Repentance

[^34]: Muhajjat-ul-Baydā’, Vol. 7, P. 8

[^35]: Kāfī, Vol. 6, P. 433

[^36]: Nūr uth-Thaqalayn

[^37]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 2, P.

[^38]: Nūr uth-Thaqalayn, following the verse

[^39]: Qurtabī and Fakhr-i-Rāzī, commentaries can be referred to

[^40]: Bihār, Vol. 68, P. 92; and ’Usūl-i-Kāfī, Vol. 2, P. 87

[^41]: Bihār, Vol. 3, P. 948

[^42]: ’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 2, Chapter ‘Prayer’

[^43]: ’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 2, Chapter ‘Prayer’

[^44]: ’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 2, Chapter ‘Prayer’

[^45]: Mir’āt-ul-‘Uqūl, Vol. 12, P. 46

[^46]: Raudat-ul-mottaqīn, Vol. 13, P. 38, Amally By Sadūq, P. 265,
’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 4, P. 243, and Bihār, Vol. 103, P. 221

[^47]: Mostadrak ul-Wasā’il, Vol. 1, P. 363

[^48]: Al-Murāqibāt. P. 116

[^49]: Mir’āt-ul-‘Uqūl, Vol. 12, P. 32

[^50]: Raudat-ul-Muttaqīn, Vol. 12, P. 32

[^51]: Mir’āt-ul-‘Uqūl, Vol. 12, P. 4, Tradition No. 3

[^52]: ’Udat-ud-Dā‘ī, P. 154

[^53]: Mir’āt-ul-‘Uqūl, Vol. 12, P. 173

[^54]: Wasā’il-ush-Shī‘ah, Vol. 4, P. 1093

[^55]: Safīnat-ul-Bihār. Vol. 2. P. 5

[^56]: Muhajat ul-Baydā, Vol. 7, P. 107

[^57]: Muhajat ul-Baydā? Vol. 7, P. 107, Explanation of Nahj ul-Balāqah,
By Ibn Ab il-Hadīd. Vol. 20. P. 322, and ’Ihyā’-ul-’Ulūm, Vol. 3, P.
1775

[^58]: Az-Zumar, No. 39 verse 10

[^59]: ’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 3, P. 123

[^60]: Jami‘ ul-’Ahadīth-ush-Shī‘ah, Vol. 14, P. 253

[^61]: Mishkāt ul-’Anwār, P. 60

[^62]: Qurar ul-Hikam, Vol. 3, P. 348

[^63]: Qurar ul-Hikam, Vol. 3, P. 4

[^64]: Surah ’Inshirah, No. 95, verse 5

[^65]: Mustadrak ul-Wasā’il, Vol. 2, P. 299

[^66]: ’Usūl Kāfī, Vol. 3, P. 148

[^67]: Bihār, Vol. 7, P. 181

[^68]: Mishkāt ul-’Anwār, P. 66

[^69]: Kanz ul-’Ummāl, Vol. 3, P. 282

[^70]: 4 Muhajat ul-Baydā, Vol. 7, P. 18 and ’Usūl-i-Kāfī, Vol. 3, P.
145

[^71]: Qurar ul-Hikam, Vol. 1, P. 88

[^72]: Jami‘ ul-’Ahadīth-ush-Shī‘ah, Vol. 14, P. 251

[^73]: Bihār, Vol. 75, P. 43

[^74]: Bihār. Vol. 68, P. 91


