Introduction
============

Khadija, the first wife of Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah,
(may Allah bless him and his Ahlel-Bayt), and the first Believer, evokes
a most extraordinary personality. She played a stellar role in the
history of nascent Islam. She was, with Abu Talib, one of the two
greatest benefactors of Islam and the Muslims. At a time when Islam was
under unremitting predation pressure; and was, for three years, in a
state of unrelenting siege, she bailed it out, by her incredible
sacrifices. Her constancy, her tenacity, her vision, and her indomitable
faith in Allah, and in the mission of Muhammed Mustafa - His Last and
the Greatest Messenger - were the sine qua non as the underpinnings of
Islam during the first ten years of its existence.

For some mysterious reason, Khadija's role - so central in shaping the
destiny of Islam - has not received the recognition to which it is
entitled, from most of the Muslim biographers and historians. Such
recognition as they have given it, is, at best, perfunctory and
tentative. To the best of my knowledge and belief, a standard biography
of Khadija has not been published yet. This is a most lamentable lack in
the inspirational literature of Islam, especially at a time when, in the
West, there is growing interest in Islam as a creed, and in the story of
the respective roles of its various protagonists in its early days.

The material which is extant on the life of Khadija in various sources,
is scanty and fragmentary. Even this scanty and fragmentary material is
not free from stereotypical interpretations or misinterpretations of
history. The biographer or the historian must create a sensitized
climate of authentic understanding of Islam, and he must make an
evenhanded assessment of the roles of those personages who shaped its
history. Khadija is one of the most dynamic and vital personages in the
entire history of Islam. It is impossible to tell the story of Islam
without telling the story of the contribution she made to its survival,
its consolidation, and its eventual triumph. Islam owes Khadija an
unpayable debt!

Therefore, I believe that the publication of a biography of Khadija -
reflecting scientific spirit and scientific principles - which at one
time I envisioned as a necessity, now confronts the Muslim biographers
and historians as an overwhelming imperative.

Another reason why all Muslims should have access to the life-story of
Khadija, is, that like her husband, Muhammed Mustafa, may Allah bless
him and his Ahlel-Bayt, she too is a symbol of the unity of his umma.
She is a symbol that fosters unity of the Muslim umma.

An attempt has been made in this book to put together whatever material
on the life of Khadija was available in numerous scattered sources. But
it is an attempt which, it must be conceded, is hopelessly inadequate.
It purports to be a mere outline - to be referred to only until such
time as more authoritative works on the subject become available.
Nevertheless, it is essential for all Muslims, but especially for the
Muslim women, to be familiar with the story of the life of Khadija and
her work for Islam. She blended her personality with the personality of
Islam so thoroughly that she became its heart and core.

Khadija literally lived and died for Islam. If Muslim women are in
search of happiness in this world, and salvation in the Hereafter, they
must live in imitation of the sainted life of Khadija. She is the
"guardian" of the secret of winning the pleasure of Allah; and she is
the "custodian" of the key that will unlock for them, the gates of
success in the two worlds. She would be glad to share the "secret" with
them, if they want to know what it is; and she would be glad to put the
"key" in their hands, if they would seek it from her. May Allah bless
Khadija and her family.


**Chapter I : Makka in the Sixth Century**

Makka in the sixth century AD. was an important emporium in Arabia. It
was at the crossroads of international commerce and trade. Cargoes
coming from India such as spices, fruits, grain, ceramics and textiles,
were unloaded at the ports of Yemen, and were carried from there, with
the produce of Southern Arabia itself, such as coffee, medicinal herbs,
aromatics, and perfumes, by camel caravans to Makka, and thence, to
Syria and through Syria to the Mediterranean world.

Makka itself was the destination of many of the caravans of the
"Incense Road" of Arabia and of the "Spice Road" of India. Other
caravans passed through Makka and Yathrib on their way to various
destinations in the north where they made a link-up with the caravans of
the Silk Road of China.

The caravans coming from the north, also halted in Makka. They changed
their camels and horses, replenished their supplies and then marched on
to the ports in the south of the peninsula, on the Arabian Sea.

Makka was also a center for the exchange of goods and commodities, both
for the sedentary and nomadic Arabian tribes; and it was a point of
distribution of agricultural produce and manufactured goods to the
hinterland of Hijaz. The tribesmen came from as far away as central
Arabia and even eastern Arabia, to buy those goods which were not
available in their territories. Most of this inter-tribal trade was
carried on in Makka by the barter system.

The Quraysh of Makka was the most important tribe of Western Arabia.
All its members were merchants. By providing trans-shipment of silk from
China, produce from East Africa and treasures from India - the Quraysh
dominated trade between the civilizations of the East and those of the
Mediterranean.

Clearly much of this trade was in luxury goods but ordinary goods were
traded too, such as purple cloth, clothing, plain, embroidered or
interwoven with gold, saffron, muslin, cloaks, blankets, sashes,
fragrant ointments, wine and wheat.

In this manner, the production, sale, exchange and distribution of
goods had made the Quraysh quite rich. But there was one more thing to
make them rich. Makka housed the Kaaba with its famous Black Stone. The
Arabs came to Makka to perform pilgrimage at the Kaaba. For them, Makka
held the same sanctity that Jerusalem did for the Jews and the
Christians.

Kaaba was the pantheon of the idols of the various Arabian clans and
tribes. The pilgrims brought rich and exotic offerings with them for the
idols they worshipped. When the pilgrims left Makka to return to their
homes, the priests of the pantheon appropriated all the offerings for
themselves. The pilgrim traffic was a very lucrative source of revenue
for the citizens of Makka.

If the Quraysh of Makka did not engage in trade for themselves, they
would still become rich merely by providing the vast range of services,
which they did, on a year-round basis, to the caravans - both northbound
and southbound - and to the pilgrims. But many of them were enterprising
merchants as noted before, and brought much wealth to Makka from the
neighboring countries.

Though the merchants of Makka sent only one caravan to Syria and one to
Yemen in the whole year, there were numerous other little caravans which
plied between various points within the Arabian peninsula throughout the
year. Most of them either originated in Makka or they passed through
Makka. Therefore, the caravan traffic in Makka was quite brisk.

The caravans varied in size. They ranged from "local" caravans of as
few as ten camels to "international" caravans of as many as thousands of
camels. The organization of caravans was a major industry in Arabia.


**Chapter 2 : Early Life of Khadija tul Kubra (R)**

Khadija was born in Makka. She was the daughter of Khuwayled bin Asad
bin Abdul Uzza bin Qusayy. Qusayy was the common progenitor of her line
as well as the line of Muhammed Mustafa of the clan of Bani Hashim, and
the future Prophet of Islam (may Allah bless him and his Ahlel Bayt).
She thus belonged to a collateral branch of the Bani Hashim. Next to
Bani Hashim itself, her family was the noblest and the most honorable in
all Arabia. Her family was distinguished not only by its opulence but
also by Jl the content of its character.

Khuwayled, the father of Khadija, was, like most other memhers of the
tribe of the Quraysh of Makka, also a merchant. Like most of them, he
too had made a fortune in foreign trade. The merchants of Makka put
together two caravans every year - one in summer and one in winter. They
sent the "summer caravan" to Syria and the "winter caravan" to Yemen.

These caravans carried the produce of the desert, and the goods
manufactured in Makka and the surrounding areas, and sold them in the
markets of Syria and Yemen. They also sold pedigreed horses in Syria.
These horses were valued very highly in Syria and in the neighboring
countries. After selling their merchandize and their horses, the traders
bought grain, olive oil, fruits, coffee, textiles, luxury goods and
other manufactured items for sale in Makka. They thus made profit at
both ends of the journey.

(This trade of Makka has been referred to in Quran Majid in Sura
Quraysh, the 106th chapter). Foreign trade was the entire basis of the
economic life of Makka. Makka had neither arable lands nor water for
irrigation. The Makkans, therefore, could not grow their own food. To
feed themselves, they depended upon their trade with Syria and Yemen.
With the profits they made in their trade, they bought grain and other
necessities of life.

Each caravan had a leader. This leader had to be a man of some
exceptional qualities. Upon his judgment and decisions depended the
physical safety and the success of the caravan in its business of
selling and buying. He was responsible for protecting the caravan from
the brigands and the predators of the desert. This he did by recruiting
warriors from various tribes, and by forming a squad or squads out of
them, depending upon the size of the caravan. This squad accompanied the
caravan to its destination. All caravans bound for distant destinations
travelled under military escort.

The caravan-leader also had to be gifted with a "sixth sense" to guide
him in the trackless desert during the day, and he had to have the
ability to determine directions at night. He, therefore, had to have the
knowledge of the relative position of the stars. He also had to assure
beforehand the availability of water during the long journey north to
Syria or south to Yemen. He also had to take precautionary measures
against such unforeseen hazards as sand-storms and flash floods. He also
had to have the ability to administer "first aid" to a traveller if he
became sick or was injured. In other words, he had to be a man capable
of handling any emergency. The merchants of Makka, therefore, selected a
leader for their caravans after thoroughly investigating his
antecedents. A screening panel of experienced travellers appraised all
candidates for the post.

The panel was not satisfied by anything less than the proven ability of
a candidate to "navigate" skillfully in the uncharted "sea" of sand, and
his success in bringing the convoys of the "ships of the desert," (= the
camels), and their cargoes, home safely. To be acceptable to the panel,
a candidate had to show that he had thorough familiarity with the
logistics of the caravans; and his "credentials" had to be impeccable.

Khadija's mother had died in or around A D. 575; and Khuwayled, her
father, died in or around AD. 585. Upon his death, his children
inherited his fortune, and divided it among themselves. Wealth has its
own perils. It can tempt one to live a life of idleness and luxury.
Khadija subconsciously understood the ambivalent character of wealth,
and made up her mind not to let it make her an idler. She was endowed
with such extraordinary intelligence and force of character that she
overcame the challenge of prosperity, and decided to build an empire
upon her patrimony. She had many siblings but among all of them, she
alone had "inherited" their father's ability to become rich. But she
demonstrated very soon that even if she had not inherited a fortune from
her father, she would have made one for herself.

After the death of Khuwayled, Khadija took charge of the family
business, and rapidly expanded it. With the profits she made, she helped
the poor, the widows, the orphans, the sick and the disabled. If there
were any poor girls, Khadija married them off, and gave them dowry. One
of her uncles acted as her adviser in business matters, and other
members of the family also assisted her in the management of business if
and when she sought their assistance. But she didn't depend upon anyone
else to make her decisions. She trusted her own judgment even though she
welcomed advice and considered it. The senior members of her family knew
that one thing she didn't like was paternalism.

Most of the traders who had cargo to sell in Syria or Yemen, travelled
with the caravans to oversight all transactions in person. But there
were occasions when a trader was unable to leave Makka. In such an
event, he engaged a man to go in his stead, with the caravan. The man
chosen for this purpose, had to be one with good reputation for his
probity and for his sound business sense. Such a man was called an agent
or a manager.

Khadija herself was a homebody and her brothers and cousins also did
not show any interest in travelling with the caravans. She, therefore,
recruited an agent whenever a caravan was outfitted to go abroad, and
made him responsible for carrying her merchandize to the foreign markets
and for selling it in those markets. By judicious selection of her
agents, and by selling and buying at the right time and at the right
place, she was able to make fantastic profits, and in due course, became
the richest merchant in Makka. Ibn Sa'ad says in his Tabqaat that
whenever caravans of the Makkan merchants set out on their journey, the
cargo of Khadija alone was equal to the cargo of all other merchants of
Quraysh put together. She had, it was obvious to everyone, the
proverbial "golden touch." If she touched dust, it turned into gold. The
citizens of Makka, therefore, bestowed upon her the title of the
Princess of the QuMysh. They also called her the Princess of Makka.

Arabia at this time was a pagan society, and the Arabs worshipped a
multitude of idols and fetishes who, they believed, had the power to
bring good fortune to them. But their idolatry was crude and primitive,
and their habits, customs and characteristics were repulsive.
Drunkenness was one of their many vices, and they were incorrigible
gamblers. They were wallowing in a pit of error and ignorance. Quran
Majid has borne testimony to their condition in the following verse:

IT IS HE WHO HAS SENT AMONGST THE UNLETTERED AN APOSTLE FROM AMONG
THEMSELVES, TO REHEARSE TO THEM HIS SIGNS, TO SANCTIFY THEM, AND TO
INSTRUCT THEM IN SCRIPTURE AND WISDOM, - ALTHOUGH THEY HAD BEEN, BEFORE,
IN MANIFEST ERROR; (Chapter 62; verse 2)

But the country was not altogether devoid of individuals who found
idolatry repugnant. These individuals, who were very few in number, were
called "Hanifs," i.e., men and women "who had turned away from idol
worship." Makka also had a sprinkling of these "hanifs," and some of
them were in the clan of Khadija herself. One of them was her first
cousin, Waraqa bin Naufal.

Waraqa was the eldest of all his siblings, and his hair had all turned
grey. He castigated the Arabs for worshipping idols and for deviating
from the true faith of their forebears - the prophets Ibrahim (Abraham)
and Ismael. Ibrahim and Ismael had taught the lesson of Tauheed - the
doctrine of the Unity of the Creator. But the Arabs had forgotten that
lesson, and had become polytheists. Waraqa despised them for their
polytheism and their moral turpitude. He himself followed the religion
of Prophet Ibrahim, the true and faithful slave of Allah. He never
associated any partner(s) with Allah. He did not drink and he did not
gamble. And he was generous to the poor and the needy.

One of the most hideous customs of the Arabs of the times was that they
buried their female infants alive. Whenever Waraqa heard that someone
intended to bury his daughter alive, he went to see him, dissuaded him
from killing his daughter, and if the reason for the contemplated murder
was poverty, he ransomed her, and brought her up as his own child. In
most cases, the father later regretted his error, and came to claim his
daughter. Waraqa exacted from him a pledge to love his daughter, and to
treat her well, and only then let him take her back.

Waraqa lived in the twilight of the pagan world. That world was soon
going to be flooded with the Light of Islam - the Religion of Allah, par
excellence - the Pristine Faith, first promulgated, many centuries
earlier, by Ibrahim (Abraham), the Friend and Messenger of Allah. Allah
had already chosen His slave, Muhammed Mustafa ibn Abdullah, of the clan
of Bani Hashim, to be His new and His last Messenger to the world. The
latter was living in Makka at the same time as Waraqa but had not
proclaimed his mission yet.

Waraqa was one of the very few people in Makka who were educated. He is
reported to have translated the Bible from Hebrew into Arabic. He had
also read other books written by the Jewish and Christian theologians.
He was a desperate seeker of truth in the darkness of a world growing
darker, and longed to find it before his own death, but did not know
how.

Khadija was strongly influenced by the ideas of Waraqa, and she shared
his contempt for the idols and the idolaters. She did not associate any
partner(s) with the Creator. Like Waraqa and some other members of the
family, she too was a follower of the prophets Ibrahim and Ismael.


**Khadija was a Muwahhid (monotheist)!**

What Khadija did not know at this time was that within a few years, her
destiny was going to be intertwined with the destiny of Muhammed
Mustafa, the apostle of Monotheism (Tauheed); and with the destiny of
Islam, the creed of Monotheism. Arabia, before Islam, had no political
organization in any form, and had no basic structure of any kind. There
were no courts or police or a system of justice. Therefore, there was no
apparatus to control crime, or to inhibit criminals. If an Arab
committed a crime, he didn't feel any remorse. Instead, he boasted that
he was capable of being utterly reckless, brutal and ruthless.

The whole peninsula was a masculine-dominated society. A woman had no
status whatsoever. Many Arabs believed that women were bringers of bad
luck. In general, they treated women more like chattel than like
individuals. A man could marry any number of women he liked. And when he
died, his eldest son "inherited" all of them except his own mother. In
other words, he married all his step-mothers. Such a thing as a code of
ethics simply did not exist to inhibit him in any way. Islam placed this
foul practice under proscription.

The pre-Islamic Arabs were semi-savages. An Arab spent his life in
lawless warfare. Killing and plundering were his favorite professions.
He tortured his prisoners of war to death, and torturing animals was one
of his favorite pastimes. He had a perverse sense of honor which led him
to kill his own infant daughters. If his wife gave birth to a daughter,
he was unable to conceal his anguish and displeasure. WHEN NEWS IS
BROUGHT TO ONE OF THEM, OF (THE BIRTH OF) A FEMALE (CHILD), HIS FACE
DARKENS, AND HE IS FILLED WITH INWARD GRIEF! WITH SHAME DOES HE HIDE
HIMSELF FROM HIS PEOPLE, BECAUSE OF THE BAD NEWS HE HAS HAD! SHALL HE
RETAIN IT ON (SURFACE AND) CONTEMPT, OR BURY IT IN THE DUST?

AH! WHAT AN EVIL (CHOICE) THEY DECIDE ON. (Quran Majid. Chapter 16;
verses 58, 59)

In most cases an Arab killed his daughter out of his fear that she
would be made a prisoner in the inter-tribal wars, and therefore, a
slave of the enemy, and her status as a slave would bring disgrace to
his family and tribe. He could also kill her out of his fear of poverty.
He believed that his daughter would become an economic liability to him.
Islam made the killing of children a capital offence. KILL NOT YOUR
CHILDREN FOR FEAR OF WANT: WE SHALL PROVIDE SUSTENANCE FOR THEM AS WELL
AS FOR YOU. VERILY THE KILLING OF THEM IS A GREAT SIN. (Quran Majid. Ch.
17; verse 31)

There were also those Arabs who did not kill their daughters but they
deprived them of all their rights. They figured that since their
daughters, when married, would go to other men's homes, they ought not
to spend anything on them. It was such an environment in which Khadija
was born, grew up and lived - an "anti-woman" environment.

From her home in Makka, Khadija controlled an ever-growing business
which spread into the neighboring countries. What she had succeeded in
achieving, would be remarkable in any country, in any age, and for
anyone - man or woman. But her achievement becomes doubly remarkable
when one takes into account the "anti-woman" orientation of the Arab
society. This is proof of her ability to master her destiny by her
intelligence, strength of will and force of character. Her compatriots
acknowledged her achievements when they called her the princess of the
Quraysh and the princess of Makka, as noted before.

But even more remarkably, Khadija also earned a third title. She was
called "Tahira" which means "the pure one." Who bestowed the title of
Tahira upon her? Incredibly, it was bestowed upon her by the same Arabs
who were notorious for their arrogance, conceit, vanity and male
chauvinism. But Khadija's conduct was so consistently exemplary that it
won recognition even from them, and they called her "the pure one."

It was the first time in the history of Arabia that a woman was called
the Princess of Makka and was also called Tahira. The Arabs called
Khadija the princess of Makka because of her affluence, and they called
her Tahira because of the immaculacy of her reputation. They were also
aware that she was a highly cultivated lady. She was thus a personage of
distinction even in the times before Islam - the Times of Ignorance.

It was inevitable that Khadija would attract the attention of the Arab
nobles and princes. Many among them sent proposals of marriage to her.
But she did not consider any of them. Many of these nobles and princes
were persistent in seeking her hand in marriage. Not discouraged by her
refusal, they sought out men and women of influence and prestige to
intercede for them with her. But she still spurned them all. She perhaps
didn't attach much importance to the guardians of the male-dominated and
"anti-woman" society.

Khadija's refusal to accept the offers of marriage sent by the high and
the mighty of Arabia, gave rise to much speculation as to what kind of
man she would like to marry. It was a question that Khadija herself
could not answer. But her destiny knew the answer; she would marry a man
who was not only the best in all Arabia but was also the very best in
all creation. It was her destiny which prompted her to turn down offers
of marriage sent by commonplace mortals.


