Chapter 4 : the Marriage of Muhammed Mustafa (s) and Khadija
============================================================

The commercial expedition of Muhammed to Syria turned out to be the
prelude of his marriage with Khadija. The translator and commentator of
Quran Majid, Yusuf Ali, poses the following rhetorical question in this
context: "Can we wonder at Jacob's re-union with Joseph, or that of
Moses with Aaron, or of Muhammad Mustafa with the Lady Khadija?" No. We
cannot. It was the decree of Allah that two of his slaves - Muhammed and
Khadija - should be united in marriage, and they were.

It is reported that one of the close friends of Khadija was a high-born
lady of Makka called Nafisa (or Nufaysa) the daughter of Munyah. She was
aware that Khadija had turned down many proposals of marriage. At first
she wondered if there was any man in Arabia who would come up to the
standards set by her. She had discussed the matter many times with
Khadija. Finally, she had one more discussion with her which convinced
her that she (Khadija) was not impressed by any man's wealth or rank or
power. What really impressed Khadija, her friend gathered, was
character - a sterling character. Khadija admired only a man of ethical
and moral principles.

Nafisa (or Nufaysa) also happened to know that there was such a man in
Makka and his name was Muhammed. It is reported that one day Muhammed
was returning home from the Kaaba when Nafisa stopped him, and the
following exchange took place between them: Nafisa: O Muhammed, you are
a young man and you are single. Men who are much younger than you, are
already married; some even have children. Why don't you marry?

Muhammed: I cannot afford to marry; I am not rich enough to marry.

Nafisa: What would be your response if you could marry a woman of
beauty, wealth, status and honor, notwithstanding your present poverty?
Muhammed: Who could be such a woman? Nafisa: Such a woman is Khadija the
daughter of Khuwayled.

Muhammed: Khadija? How is it possible that Khadija would marry me? You
know that many rich and powerful princes and chiefs of tribes proposed
to her, and she rebuffed them all.

Nafisa: If you are agreeable to marry her, you just say so, and leave
the rest to me. I shall arrange everything. Muhammed wished to inform
his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib, about Nafisa's demarche, and to
consult him in the matter before giving her an answer.

Abu Talib knew Khadija as well as he knew his own nephew. He welcomed
Nafisa's suggestion. There was no doubt in his mind that Muhammed and
Khadija would make the ideal couple. He, therefore, gave his blessings
to the proposal of their marriage. Thereupon, Muhammed told Nafisa that
her suggestion was acceptable to him and that she had the authority to
negotiate, on his behalf, his marriage with Khadija.

Once Abu Talib had approved the match, he sent his sister, Safiya, to
see Khadija, and to talk with her about the proposed marriage. In the
meantime, Nafisa had already done the "groundwork," and Khadija was
expecting a visitor from the house of her future in-laws. She cordially
received Safiya, entertained her, and told her that she (Khadija) had
selected her (Safiya's) nephew to be her (Khadija's) life-partner
without any preconditions and reservations. Safiya was very happy with
the success of her embassy. Before she left the house, Khadija gave her
an elegant robe which she accepted with many expressions of joy and
gratitude.

Abu Talib then decided to comply with the traditional formalities of
marriage. He bought gifts for Khadija, and took his brothers, Abbas and
Hamza, with him to her house to formally present to her the proposal of
the marriage of his nephew with her. Khadija accepted the gifts that Abu
Talib had brought, and of course she accepted the proposal of marriage.
The two parties immediately fixed a date for the auspicious wedding.

Abu Talib himself took charge of the preparations for the marriage of
his beloved nephew. For the blessed occasion, he brought out all the
heirlooms of the family and the sacred relics of his forefathers. These
included the cloak and the staff of Abdul Muttalib, the late chief of
Bani Hashim. The bridegroom put on the cloak and held the staff in his
hand. Abu Talib put the black turban of his clan on his (the
bridegroom's) head, and a ring of green agate on his finger. The ring,
at one time, had belonged to Hashim bin Abd Manaf bin Qusayy.

The wedding party was made up of all the chiefs of Quraysh and the
lords of Makka. The bridegroom rode a proud and prancing horse, and the
young warriors of Bani Hashim brandished gleaming swords high above
their heads as they escorted him from the house of Abu Talib to the
house of Khadija. The women of the clan had gone ahead of the
bridegroom, and were already being entertained in the house of the
bride.

Khadija's house was illuminated by myriads of lamps. Inside the house,
chandeliers hung on golden chains from the ceiling, and each chandelier
held seven lamps. The guests arrived in the amber dusk. The chief
steward of Khadija's estates had formed a committee for the reception of
the bridegroom and the distinguished guests. The members of this
committee conducted them inside the house through a high-arched entrance
to a rectangular hall whose walls were panelled with tiles and whose
ceiling was gilded. They made themselves comfortable on rugs and
cushions.

For this special occasion, Khadija had ordered a special outfit to be
made for all her domestics - male and female. Men were handsomely
arrayed in spangled turbans, scarlet tunics, and black sashes around
their waists. Attached to their turbans were silk tassels of ivory hue.
The girls were wearing decor-blending costumes which dripped with gold
and spangles. They were wearing coronets on the head and ropes of pearls
and rivers of crystals. Their hair, cascading from the head to the
shoulders and from the shoulders down to the waist, was braided with
pearls.

The decor of the chamber of the bride was exquisite and was in fact,
unsurpassable in taste and skill. The hangings of silk and brocade in
many delicate tints, draped the walls; and a white velvet carpet covered
the floor. The smoke of incense rose from a goblet of silver sparkling
with diamonds, blue sapphires and balas rubies.

Khadija, the bride, sat on a high dais placed under a richly
embroidered canopy. She looked radiant and resplendent like the rising
sun itself. On her head she was wearing a crown of gold and pearls of
amazing orient and beauty. Her dress, in subtle shades of crimson and
green, was shot with gold, and was set with pearls and emeralds. There
were two maids in personal attendance on her; each was wearing a diadem
of gold, an amethyst silken dress, and jewel-studded slippers.

When all the guests had taken their seats, Abu Talib, the guardian of
the bridegroom, rose to read the sermon of marriage as follows: All
glory and all praise to Allah, the Creator of Heavens and earth, and all
thanks to Him for all His blessings, bounties and mercy. He sent us into
this world in the posterity of Ibrahim and Ismael. He put us in charge
of the Mosque and made us guardians of His House, the Kaaba, which is a
sanctuary for all His creatures.

After this exordium, Abu Talib continued:

My nephew, Muhammed ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul Muttalib, is the best
individual in all mankind in his intelligence, in wisdom, in purity of
lineage, in purity of his personal life, and in distinction of family.
He has all the markings of a man destined to be great. He is marrying
Khadija the daughter of Khuwayled against a meher of four hundred pieces
of gold. I declare Muhammed and Khadija husband and wife. May Allah
bless them both, and may He be their Protector.

In his sermon, Abu Talib declared that the Bani Hashim were the heirs
of Ibrahim and Ismael, and were the carriers of their heritage. They
were, therefore, uncontaminated by idolatry. When Abu Talib concluded
his sermon, Waraqa bin Naufal rose to read the marriage sermon on behalf
of the bride. He said:

All praise and glory to Allah. We testify and we affirm that the Bani
Hashim are just as you have claimed. No one can deny their excellence.
Because of their excellence, we cherish the marriage of Khadija and
Muhammed. Their marriage unites our two houses, and their union is a
source of great happiness to us. O Lords of Quraysh, I want you to be
witnesses that I give Khadija in marriage to Muhammed ibn Abdullah
against a meher of four hundred pieces of gold. May Allah make their
marriage a happy one.

(M. Shibli, the Indian historian, says in his Seera that the meher of
Hadret Khadija was five hundred pieces of gold).

Amr bin Asad, the aged uncle of Khadija, also spoke on the occasion,
and he affirmed, in his own words, what Waraqa b. Naufal, had said. And
it was he who, as guardian of the bride, gave her away to Muhammed ibn
Abdullah. Abu Talib paid the meher for his nephew.

**Edward Gibbon**

At home and abroad, in peace and war, Abu Talib, the most respected of
Mohammed's uncles, was the guide and guardian of his youth; in his 25th
year he entered into the service of Khadija, rich and noble widow (sic)
of Mecca, who soon rewarded his fidelity with the gift of her hand and
fortune. The marriage contract, in the simple style of antiquity,
recites the mutual love of Mohammed and Khadija; describes him as the
most accomplished of the tribe of Koreish; and stipulates a dowry of
twelve ounces of gold and twenty camels, which was supplied by the
liberality of his uncle. (The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)

**Washington Irving**

Khadija was filled with a lively faith in the superhuman merits of her
youthful steward, Mohammed. At her nuptials, Haleema, who had nursed
Mohammed in his infancy, was summoned and was presented with a flock of
forty sheep.

(The Life of Mohammed)

All the guests congratulated Muhammed Mustafa on his wedding and
expressed their best wishes for his happiness. They also congratulated
his uncle, Abu Talib, on the auspicious occasion. Both thanked their
guests cordially.

When these ceremonies were over, the major-domo ordered the slaves to
spread out the banquet. The banquet was a gustatorial extravaganza such
as no one had ever seen in Makka. The guests feasted upon delicacies
each of which was a masterpiece of the culinary art. They slaked their
thirst with delectable drinks laced with lotus nectar.

After the feast, each guest was invested with a robe of honor, in
conformity with the ancient custom of the Arabian aristocracy.
Presently, the major-domo announced that the bride was ready to depart.
A richly-caparisoned she-camel, carrying a white pavilion on her back,
was waiting at the gate of the house. All the guests gathered in the
foyer to see the bride being escorted to the gate. Her maids assisted
her in climbing into the bridal pavilion.

...EMBARK YE ON THE ARK, IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, WHETHER IT MOVE OR BE AT
REST! FOR MY LORD IS, BE SURE, OFT-FORGIVING, MOST MERCIFUL." (Quran
Majid. Chapter 11; verse 41)

One of the maidservants sat in the pavilion with the bride. Resting
upon her head was a floral tiara, and her hair was threaded with blue
ribbons and strands of lustrous pearls. She was wearing bracelets of
agate, coral and rock crystal, and she held a jewelled fan in her
hand.

A team of Nubian slaves carrying flambeaus, marched in front and on the
right and the left sides of the she-camel. The bridegroom also mounted
his horse, and he, his uncles, the young men of Bani Hashim and their
guests, returned to the house of Abu Talib in the same panoply as they
had gone earlier that day to the house of the bride.

When this torch-lit procession arrived at the house of Abu Talib, his
wife and sisters assisted the bride in dismounting from the she-camel. A
chamberlain held a parasol of white silk over her head, and conducted
her into the inner apartments of the house. And say:

"O MY LORD! ENABLE ME TO DISEMBARK WITH THY BLESSING: FOR THOU ART THE
BEST TO ENABLE (US) TO DISEMBARK" (Quran Majid. Chapter 23, verse 29)

Everything went off with perfect precision. Coordination was superb
from beginning to end. The marriage of Muhammed and Khadija had brought
happiness to everyone but the happiness of Abu Talib knew no bounds. He
had been very anxious that his nephew should have a good wife. This
anxiety turned into pure and undiluted joy when his nephew and Khadija
were married. There could not have been a better match. Abu Talib
thanked Allah for the new happiness he had found, and his happiness was
shared by his brothers, Abbas an~ Hamza, and all other members of the
clan of Hashim.

Three days after the marriage, Abu Talib made arrangements for a
banquet to mark the occasion called since then "the feast of walima." He
dazzled the whole city by his liberality. At the feast, every resident
of Makka was his guest. Muhammed, the bridegroom, was himself welcoming
the guests into the house. He himself, his uncles, his cousins and all
the young men of Bani Hashim, were the proud hosts. The banquet lasted
for three days. Years later, Islam made the feast of walima a "memorial"
to the banquet of Abu Talib at the marriage of Muhammed and Khadija,
instituting it as a tradition of all Muslim marriages. Abu Talib was the
first man to arrange it. Before the marriage of Muhammed and Khadija,
the feast of walima was not known to anyone in Arabia.

Abu Talib must have wished that his beloved brother, Abdullah and his
wife, Amina, may Allah bless them, were also present to witness and to
bless the marriage of their son, and to share his (Abu Talib's)
happiness. But even if Abdullah and Amina had been present, the marriage
of their son could not have been celebrated with more pomp and pageantry
than it was with Abu Talib as his (Muhammed's) guardian.

Next it was Khadija's turn to show generosity and hospitality.
Generosity and hospitality were her old "addictions." And what occasion
could be more appropriate or propitious for her than her own marriage to
satisfy this propensity? She, therefore, ordered her major-domo to make
arrangements for the most elaborate banquet in the history of Makka.

It was a banquet that was truly memorable. Even the beggars of Makka
and the wandering tribesmen and women were not excluded from the list of
guests. They feasted on delicacies which they had never seen before.
Those Arabs of the desert who had never tasted anything but brackish or
rank water all their lives, drank rose water as the guests of Khadija.
For many days the guests - rich and poor, high and low, lord and lackey,
young and old - were fed in her house. To the poor guests, Khadija gave
pieces of gold and silver and clothes, and she filled the houses of many
widows and orphans with the necessities of life which they didn't have
before.

Khadija had spent many years of her life waiting for the ideal man to
come. Her long wait was at last rewarded when Muhammed came along, and
they were united in holy wedlock.

The marriage of Muhammed and Khadija was the first and the last of its
kind in the world. It was the only marriage in the whole world which
abounded in heavenly blessings as well as material blessings. It was a
marriage which was immeasurably and incalculably rich in the blessings
of both the heaven and the earth.

It is entirely probable that in Arabia, no woman ever brought so much
dowry with her into the house of her husband as Khadija did. It included
slaves, slave girls, real estate, pasture lands, herds of camels and
horses, flocks of goats and sheep, and her personal outfit of rich and
rare fabrics, accessories, priceless heirlooms, ornaments, precious
metals, precious stones and masses of gold and silver coins.

This dowry, unprecedented as it was for its quality and its quantity,
was not a gift to Khadija - the bride - from her uncles or from her
brothers. It was the product of her own efforts. She had produced it by
her own diligence, industry, prudence, and foresight.

But these were not the only riches that Khadija brought with her. She
also brought the riches of heart and mind, and these were immeasurable
and inexhaustible. In the years to come she immeasurably enriched the
life of her husband with these gifts.

Once Khadija was married, she appears to have lost interest in her
mercantile ventures and in her commercial empire. Marriage changed the
character of her dedication and commitment. She had found Muhammed
Mustafa, the greatest of all treasures in the world. Once she found him,
gold, silver and diamonds lost their value for her. Muhammed Mustafa,
the future Messenger of Allah and the future Prophet of Islam, became
the one object of all her affection, attention and devotion. Of course,
she never lost her genius for organization, but now instead of applying
it to her business, she applied it to the service of her husband. She
reorganized her whole life around the personality of Muhammed Mustafa.

(Khadija could not wind up her wide-ranging commercial operations
abruptly. She had to phase them out. By degrees, therefore, she phased
out the export-and-import business which her father had founded.)

In the years following his marriage, Muhammed travelled again with
Khadija's caravans to Syria. M. Shibli, the Indian historian, says that
he also went to Yemen. Wherever he went, he made profits. Khadija also
recruited other managers who sold her merchandize or bought merchandise
for her, and they too made profits for her. But the emphasis had
shifted; instead of expanding her business as she had done in the years
before her marriage, Khadija began, gradually, to curtail her
commitments until all her merchandize was sold, and she had recovered
all her investments.

When the Princess of Makka entered the house of her husband, Muhammed
Mustafa, the most successful and the happiest phase of life began for
her. This phase lasted 25 years - until her death. She immediately
adapted her life to the new environment. From the very first day, she
took charge of her new duty which was to make the life of her husband
happy and pleasant. In carrying out this duty, she was eminently
successful, as the history of later times has eloquently borne
witness.

Marriage opened a new chapter for both Muhammed and Khadija in their
life. The keynote of this "chapter" was happiness - the purest kind of
happiness. Blessed with happiness as their marriage was, it was also
blessed with children. Their first-born was a boy called Qasim. It was
after the birth of the infant Qasim that his father, Muhammed Mustafa,
was called Abul-Qasim - the father of Qasim - as per the custom of the
Arabs. The second child was also a boy. His name was Abdullah. He bore
the nicknames of Tahir and Tayyeb. Both Qasim and Abdullah died in their
infancy.

The third and the last and the only surviving child of Muhammed Mustafa
and Khadija was their daughter, Fatima Zahra. Though the gifts which
Allah had bestowed upon them, were many, there was none that they
treasured more than their daughter. She was the "light of the eyes" of
her father, and she was the "comfort of his heart." She was also the
future "Lady of Heaven." The father and mother showered their love upon
her, and she brought hope and happiness and the blessings and the mercy
of Allah with her into their home.


**Chapter 5 : The Eve of the Proclamation of Islam**


Not with standing the fact that Arabia was a pit of iniquity and the
bastion of idolatry and polytheism, Muhammed himself was free from all
vice and sin, and he never bowed before any idol. Even before he
formally declared that he came to establish the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth, his own conduct and character were a reflection of Quran Majid -
the Book of Allah and the Manifesto of Islam. Even his enemies have not
been able to point out any divergence between his conduct and the
precepts of Quran - at any time - after or before the Proclamation of
his mission as the Messenger of Allah. After the Proclamation of his
mission as Allah's messenger, he placed pagan practices and customs
under proscription. But there is no evidence that before doing so, he
himself ever committed a pagan act, or indeed any act repugnant to
Quran.

It appears that Quran Majid was etched on the heart of Muhammed from
beginning to end, and it also appears that he "preached" Islam even
before the Proclamation but only through his deeds and not with his
words. His deeds were just as eloquent as his speeches, and they
proclaimed to the world what manner of man he was. After all, it were
the pagans who called him Sadiq (=Truthful) and Amin (=Trustworthy), and
they were the same people who, in later years, persecuted him, hunted
him, banished him, and set a price on his head.

Muhammed's demeanor preached a silent sermon!

Depraved and wanton as the pagan Arabs were, even they admired
truthfulness, and they admired it even in an enemy. They admired
Muhammed for his truthfulness yet their admiration did not inhibit them
from conspiring to kill him when he denounced their idolatry and
polytheism. They loved nothing more than to kill him ever since he
invited them to Islam but they never questioned his integrity and
trustworthiness. On this point there cannot be a testimony more
unimpeachable than theirs.

The citizens of Makka admired not only Muhammed's integrity but also
his judgment. At one time, the Quraysh were rebuilding the Kaaba, and in
one of the walls they had to fit the Black Stone. Someone had to bring
the Black Stone to the site of construction, lift it from the ground,
and put it in its place in the wall. Who was going to do it?

Each clan claimed the honor for itself but other clans were not willing
to defer to anyone in this matter. The disagreement led to violent
speeches, and it was not long before the swords were drawn. The sword
was going to decide who would place the Black Stone in the wall.

At that moment an old Arab intervened, and suggested that instead of
fighting against, and killing each other, the chiefs of the clans ought
to wait and see who would be the first man to enter the precincts of the
Kaaba on the following morning, and then submit the case for
adjudication to him. It was a wise suggestion, and the chiefs wisely
accepted it. Next morning when the gate of Kaaba was opened, they
noticed that it was the man thev called Sadiq and Amin who was entering
through it. They were all glad that it was he, and they all agreed to
refer their dispute to him, and to abide by his decision.

Muhammed ordered a sheet of cloth to be brought and to be spread on the
ground. He then placed the Stone on it, and asked each chief to lift one
of its corners, and to carry it to the foot of the wall of Kaaba. When
it was done, he himself lifted the Stone and placed it in position.

Muhammed's decision satisfied everyone. By his wisdom, he had saved
faces and he had obviated bloodshed. The incident also proved that in
moments of crisis, the Arabs deferred to his opinion. They knew that he
had all the virtues held high in their scale of values.

Muhammed was an inspired leader of men.

**Sir William Muir**

The circumstances which gave occasion for the decision of Mohammed
(when Kaaba was being rebuilt and he put the Black Stone in place)
strikingly illustrate the absence of any paramount authority in Mecca.

(The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

Muhammed at this time was 35 years old. His temples were faintly
silvered. He was a man much devoted to his family, and had a great
fondness for children. His sons, Qasim and Abdullah, had died in their
infancy. After their death, he and Khadija adopted Ali as their son. Ali
was the youngest son of Muhammed's uncle and guardian, Abu Talib. He was
five years old when he came into their house, and filled a void in their
life. They brought him up and educated him. He grew up surrounded with
their love.

In the years to come, Ali showed himself a most splendid product of the
upbringing and education that Muhammed and Khadija gave him. He was
destined to be the most versatile young man in the entire entourage of
Muhammed, the Messenger of God.

**Sir William Muir**

Shortly after the rebuilding of the Kaaba, Mohammed comforted himself
for the loss of his infant son Casim by adopting Ali, the child of his
friend and former guardian, Abu Talib. Ali, at this time not above five
or six years of age, remained ever after with Mohammed, and they
exhibited towards each other the mutual attachment of parent and
child.

(The Life of Mohammed, London. 1877)

As noted before, Muhammed was endowed with a contemplative cast of
mind. As the years passed, he became more and more absorbed in
contemplation. He had discovered a cave called Hira, three miles in the
hills to the north-east of Makka. To be free from extraneous
distractions, and from any possible interference in his reflections, he
left the city, went to the hills, and spent the long summer days in
Hira. Sometimes Muhammed Mustafa went to Hira alone, but quite often he
took Khadija and the little boy, Ali, with him. The three of them spent
the day together on top of the hill, and returned home in the evening.

From the cliffs of Hira, Muhammed could survey the immensity of heaven
and the earth, and in silent wonder he contemplated the line where they
met. How could one comprehend the greatness of the Creator Who created
such vastness and Who regulates it all? What was so wonderful as the
stars glittering in a tranquil sky or as intriguing as the Destiny of
Man? And could anyone fathom the mystery of the two great abstractions
which cradled the universe - Space (=Makan) and Time (=Zaman)? Muhammed
sought answers to questions that embody perennial mysteries of human
existence. For him, all creation was veiled in mystery. He spent hours
reflecting on the awesome Intelligence and the constancy of Creation.

But as mysterious as the universe was, it was obvious to Muhammed that
it was governed by immutable laws. He could almost "see" an organization
and a system at work; without such organization and system there would
only be chaos in both the celestial and the terrestrial spheres of
creation.

(A few years later when Muhammed told the Arabs that God had sent him
among them as His messenger, they challenged him to show them a
"miracle." n A miMcle?" asked Muhammed. To see a miracle, all that they
had to do was to open their eyes and to look around. Wasn't the whole
universe full of miracles? What miracles were more wonderful than the
rising and setting of the sun, the full moon sailing across the sky, the
stars in their revolutions, the incandescent heaven, the change of the
seasons, the upheaving bosom of the ocean, and the love of a mother for
her child?)

If the immensity and majesty of Creation filled Muhammed's mind with
wonder, they also filled his heart with humility. It might have occurred
to him that if intellect could not apprehend the Creator and His mighty
works, perhaps love could. He, therefore, let intellect defer to love -
the love of his Creator.

Muhammed also reflected on the state of the Arabs - their idolatry,
their lust for blood and practice of infanticide, and the emptiness,
meaninglessness, aimlessness and dreariness of their lives. But for
Muhammed, the long years of "spiritual apprenticeship" and his solitary
explorations in the domain of the soul, were coming to an end. He might
have sensed that the time to turn his back upon a life of contemplation
and meditation had come, and that he had soon to plunge into a life of
action and conflict.


