Chapter 6 : the Proclamation of Islam
=====================================

At length the groundwork that Muhammed had to do to take charge of his
duties and responsibilities as the Last and the Greatest Messenger of
God to this world, was over. The night of paganism, error and ignorance
had been long, dark, dreary and dismal. Mankind was in a state of
despair. It was at a loss to know if it would ever see the light of
dawn.

It was God's infinite Mercy which harkened to the unspoken longing of
mankind. In response to its silent appeal, the Sun of Islam rose from
the valley of Makka to overpower the darkness of polytheism in the
world, and to proclaim the triumph of the doctrine of Tauheed
(monotheism). Muhammed was 40 years old when he was commanded by Allah,
through His angel, Gabriel, to declare His Oneness (Tauheed) to the
idolaters and polytheists of the whole world, and to deliver the message
of new hope and peace to an embattled humanity.

In compliance with this command of Heaven, Muhammed launched the
momentous programme called Islam which was to change the destiny of
mankind forever. The basic design of Islam, as he received it from
Gabriel, was perfected in Heaven, and now he had to present it to the
family of man.

Before he received his prophetic mission, Muhammed spent days and
nights in prayer and meditation both at home and in the cave of Hira, as
noted before. He was in Hira one evening when the Archangel Gabriel
appeared before him, and brought to him the tidings that Allah had
chosen him to be His last messenger to this world, and had imposed upon
him the duty of extricating mankind from the welter of sin, error and
ignorance, and to bring it into the light of Guidance, Truth and
Knowledge. Gabriel then bade Muhammed to "read" the following verses:
(In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful)

READ IN THE NAME OF THY LORD AND CHERISHER WHO CREATED: CREATED MAN OUT
OF A CLOT OF CONGEALED BLOOD. READ! AND THY LORD IS MOST BOUNTIFUL, HE
WHO TAUGHT THE USE OF PEN: TAUGHT MAN THAT WHICH HE KNEW NOT. These five
verses were the earliest revelation, and they came to Muhammed Mustafa
on the "Night of Power" or the "Blessed Night" in Ramadan (the ninth
month of the Islamic calendar) of the 40th year of the Elephant.

1. RAMADHAN IS THE (MONTH) IN WHICH WAS SENT DOWN THE QURAN, AS A GUIDE
TO MANKIND, ALSO CLEAR (SIGNS) FOR GUIDANCE AND JUDGMENT (BETWEEN RIGHT
AND WRONG). (Quran Majid. Chapter 2; verse 185)

2. WE HAVE INDEED REVEALED THIS (MESSAGE) IN THE NIGHT OF POWER. (Quran
Majid. Chapter 97; verse 1)

3. BY THE BOOK THAT MAKES THINGS CLEAR; WE SENT IT DOWN DURING A
BLESSED NIGHT...

(Quran Majid. Chapter 44; verses 2 and 3) The Night of Power or the
Blessed Night occurs, according to tradition, during the last ten nights
of Ramadan, and could be the 21st or 23rd or 25th or 27th of the month.
According to the Gregorian calendar, the first revelation came to the
Prophet on the 12th of February, 610, as per the calculations of Mahmud
Pasha al-Falaki of Egypt.

These five verses are at the beginning of the 96th chapter of Quran
Majid. The name of the chapter is Iqraa (Read) or ~, (the Clot of
Congealed Blood).

In their respective accounts of the reception by Muhammed Mustafa of
the First Revelation, the Sunni and the Shia Muslims are not in
agreement. According to the Sunni tradition, the appearance of Gabriel
suprised Muhammed; and when the former ordered him to ~ he said: "I
cannot read." This happened thrice, and each time when Muhammed declared
his inability to read, the angel pressed him hard to his bosom.
Eventually, he was able to repeat the five verses whereupon the angel
released him, and disappeared.

When Archangel Gabriel disappeared, Muhammed, who was now "ordained"
the Messenger of Allah, descended from the cliffs of Hira, and repaired
to his home in a state of great trepidation. Apparently, Gabriel's
sudden intrusion had been a traumatic experience for him. He was
shivering with cold, and when he entered his house, he asked his wife,
Khadija, to cover him with a blanket which she did. When he had
sufficiently recovered from the shock, he recounted to her the story of
his strange encounter with Archangel Gabriel in the cave of Hira.

The traditional Sunni account of this event is given in an article
written by Shaykh Ahmad Zaki Hammad, Ph.D., captioned "Be Hopeful,"
published in the magazine, Islamic Horizons of the Islamic Society of
North America, Plainfield, Indiana, May-June 1987, as follows: "The
Prophet (pbuh) in the early stages in Makkah, feared that the revelation
experience was an evil touch preying upon him, playing with him
mentally, upsetting his tranquility and peace of mind. He was afraid
that one of the jinn had touched him. He expressed this to Khadija. His
fear increased to the point that --- and please don't be surprised by an
authentic report in Bukhari --- the Prophet (pbuh) preferred to take his
own life rather than to be touched by evil, to be tampered with,
corrupted, or polluted."

But according to the accounts of the Shia Muslims, Muhammed Mustafa,
far from being suprised, much less frightened, by the sudden appearance
of Archangel Gabriel, welcomed him as if he had been expecting him.
Gabriel brought the tidings that Allah had chosen him to be His Last
Messenger to Mankind, and congratulated him on being selected to become
the recipient of the greatest of all honors for a mortal in this
world.

Muhammed had no hesitation in accepting the mission of prophethood nor
he had any difficulty in repeating the verses of the First Revelation.
He read them or repeated them effortlessly, spontaneously. Gabriel, in
fact, was no stranger to him, and he also knew that as the slave of
Allah, his own raison d'etre was to carry out the mission imposed upon
him by Allah. He was "mission-oriented" even before Gabriel's visit.
Gabriel only gave him the signal to begin.

The Shia Muslims also say that one thing that Gabriel didn't have to
do, was to apply physical pressure on Muhammed to read. If he did, it
would truly be a bizarre mode of imparting to Muhammed, the ability to
read - by squeezing him or choking him. They further maintain that
Muhammed Mustafa did not contemplate suicide at any time in his life,
even in its most desolate moments; and that it never occurred to him
that he could ever be touched by "evil" or that he could be "tampered
with, corrupted or polluted." In this context, the Shia Muslims quote
the following two verses of Quran Majid which appear to have a logical
connection with this episode:

1. (Allah said to Iblis:)

"AS FOR MY SERVANTS, NO AUTHORITY SHALT THOU HAVE OVER THEM." ENOUGH IS
THY LORD FOR A DISPOSER OF AFFAIRS. (Chapter 17; verse 65)

Allah Himself protects His sincere and true slaves from the clutches of
Iblis (the Devil); he can have no authority over them, and they can
never be tampered with or corrupted or polluted. 2. BUT GOD WILL DELIVER
THE RIGHTEOUS TO THEIR PLACE OF SALVATION; NO EVIL SHALL TOUCH THEM. NOR
SHALL THEY GRIEVE. (Chapter 39; verse 61)

No evil could touch Muhammed, the chosen one of God Himself. Under
God's protection, he was safe from every evil. He lived under the
jurisdiction of God at all times.

Nevertheless, Muhammed felt alarm at the magnitude of the task ahead of
him. He realized that in the execution of his duty, he would be
confronted by the massive, formidable, and determined opposition of the
pagans of the whole world. The state of his anxiety was almost palpable.
He was therefore in a somber frame of mind as he left the cave to return
home. And he did in fact ask Khadija to drape him in a blanket as he sat
down to recapitulate the events in Hira to her.

When Khadija heard the story that Muhammed Mustafa told her, she
comforted him and reassured him by saying: "O son of my uncle, be of
good cheer. Allah has chosen you to be His messenger. You are always
kind to your neighbors, helpful to your kinsfolk, generous to the
orphans, the widows and the poor, and friendly to the strangers. Allah
will never forsake you."

**R V. C Bodley**

"God is my protection, Oh Abul Kasim!" said Khadija, "Rejoice and be of
good cheer. He in Whose hands stands the life of Khadija, is my Witness
that thou wilt be the Messenger of His people!" Then she added, "Hast
thou not been loving to thy kinsfolk, kind to thy neighbors, charitable
to the poor, hospitable to the stranger, faithful to thy word, and ever
a defender of the truth?" (The Messenger, the Life of Mohammed, 1946)

It is possible that Muhammed was momentarily overwhelmed by the thought
of his accountability to Allah in carrying the enormous burden of his
new responsibilities, but when he heard Khadija's soothing words, he
immediately felt the tensions within him decompressing. She reassured
him and convinced him that with God's Hand on his shoulder, he would
rise equal to his duties and would overcome all obstacles. Muhammed
rallied. He knew from that moment that Khadija was the "instrument"
through which God would reinforce his courage if it ever flagged, and
would boslter his morale if it ever sagged.

The following verse of Quran Majid also appears to support the Shia
point of view:

AND REMEMBER WE TOOK FROM THE PROPHETS THEIR COVENANT: AS (WE DID) FROM
THEE: FROM NOAH, ABRAHAM, MOSES, AND JESUS THE SON OF MARY: WE TOOK FROM
THEM A SOLEMN COVENANT: THAT (ALLAH) MAY QUESTION THE (CUSTODIANS) OF
TRUTH CONCERNING THE TRUTH THEY (WERE CHARGED WITH): (Chapter 33; verses
7,8)

**Translator's Note**

There is an implied covenant on all created things to follow God's Law,
which is the law of their being. But there is a special implied covenant
with all Prophets, strict and solemn, that they shall carry out their
mission, proclaim God's Truth without fear or favor, and be ever ready
in His service in all circumstances. That gives them their position and
dignity and their tremendous responsibility in respect of the people
whom they come to instruct and lead to the Right Way. (A. Yusuf The Shia
Muslims point out that Allah had taken a Covenant from Muhammed to
deliver His Last Message to Mankind. Therefore, they do not agree with
those historians who allege that Muhammed reacted to Gabriel's visit
with surprise, shock and fear. Such reactions, they say, simply do not
jibe with his temperament, and are not consistent with the character of
his solemn Covenant.

After a brief interval, Gabriel appeared once again before Muhammed
when the latter was in the cave of Hira, and presented to him the second
Revelation which reads as follows: O THOU WRAPPED UP (IN A MANTLE)!
ARISE AND DELIVER THY WARNING! AND THY LORD DO THOU MAGNIFY! (Chapter
74; verses 1, 2, 3)

The commandment from Heaven to "arise and warn" was the signal to
Muhammed (the wrapped up in a blanket) to begin his work. Gabriel
expounded to him his new duties the foremost of which was to destroy the
worship of false gods, and to plant the banner of Tauheed - the doctrine
of the Unity of the Creator - in the world; and he had to invite mankind
to the True Faith Islam. Islam means to surrender to Allah and to
acknowledge Muhammed as His slave and His messenger.

A.L.R. A BOOK WHICH WE HAVE REVEALED UNTO YOU, IN ORDER THAT YOU MIGHT
LEAD MANKIND OUT OF THE DEPTHS OF DARKNESS INTO LIGHT - BY THE LEAVE OF
THEIR LORD - TO THE WAY OF (HIM) THE EXALTED IN POWER, WORTHY OF ALL
PRAISE. (Quran Majid. Chapter 14, verse 1)

Muhammed had to lead mankind out of the depths of darkness into light.
How was Muhammed to lead mankind out of the depths of Darkness into
Light? This question is answered by Quran Majid in the following verse:
A SIMILAR (FAVOR HAVE YOU ALREADY RECEIVED) IN THAT WE HAVE SENT AMONG
YOU AN APOSTLE OF YOUR OWN, REHEARSING TO YOU OUR SIGNS, AND SANCTIFYING
YOU, AND INSTRUCTING YOU IN SCRIPTURE AND WISDOM, AND IN NEW KNOWLEDGE.
(Chapter 2; verse 151)

Quran is precise and specific in defining the concept of his duty for
Muhammed Mustafa. He had to lead mankind out of "the depths of darkness"
into the light, by:

1. rehearsing the Signs of Allah; 2. sanctifying mankind; 3.
instructing mankind in scripture and wisdom; and 4. imparting new
knowledge to it. Gabriel and Muhammed then went out of the cave. Gabriel
taught him how to take ablutions (ritual purification before saying
prayers). Muhammed took ablutions, and then, with Gabriel in the lead,
both of them offered prayers. When the prayer was over, Gabriel bade
farewell to Muhammed, and disappeared in the sky. That evening Muhammed
returned home conscious and conscientious of his new duty to "arise and
warn." He had to preach Islam, the Religion of Allah, to the whole
world, and he had to begin from his own home - by preaching it to his
wife.

Muhammed told Khadija about the second visit of Gabriel, and the duty
imposed upon him by Allah to invite her to Islam. For Khadija, the
antecedents and the moral integrity of her husband were an
incontrovertible attestation that he was a divine messenger, and she
readily accepted Islam. In fact, between her and Islam, an "ideological
affinity" had pre-existed. Therefore, when Muhammed Mustafa presented
Islam to her, she at once "recognized" it, and rosily embraced it. She
believed that the Creator was One and that Muhammed was His messenger,
and she declared:

I BEAR WITNESS THAT THERE IS NO GOD BUT ALLAH; AND I BEAR WITNESS THAT
MUHAMMED IS HIS SLAVE AND HIS MESSENGER.

Muhammed, the new messenger of Allah, had won his first convert -
Khadija - his wife. She was the first one, the very first to affirm her
faith in Tauheed (Oneness of the Creator), and she was the very first to
acknowledge Muhammed as God's messenger to all mankind. She was the
first Muslima. Muhammed had "introduced" Islam to Khadija. He explained
to her its meaning, and he initiated her into it. He told her that
obedience to and love for Allah were central to the whole system called
Islam.

Then Muhammed showed Khadija how to take ablutions and how to say
prayers. She took ablutions and both of them offered their prayers, with
Muhammed as the leader. After the prayer, both of them thanked Allah for
bestowing upon them the blessing of Islam. They also thanked Him for the
blessing of prayers (Salat) through which He gave them audience.

Prayer was, Khadija soon found out, the "Gate" to Allah's Tribunal of
Grace and Mercy. The humble slaves of Allah have to pass through this
"Gate" to get access to His Tribunal and to receive Grace and Mercy from
Him. She also found out that prayer (Salat) was perpetual renewal and
sanctification.

Khadija is the first Muslima - the very first to submit to Allah - next
to her husband. Now no matter who compiles the list of the earliest
converts to Islam, her name will always be on top. No venal historian
can change this fact. The honor of being the first Muslima belongs to
Khadija, and it will be hers to all Eternity.

After her induction into Islam, Khadija adopted the following credo:

SAY: "VERILY, MY LORD HATH GUIDED ME TO A WAY THAT IS STRAIGHT, - A
RELIGION OF RIGHT, THE PATH (TROD) BY ABRAHAM THE TRUE IN FAITH, AND HE
(CERTAINLY) JOINED NOT GODS WITH ALLAH."

SAY: "TRULY, MY PRAYER AND MY SERVICE OF SACRIFICE, MY LIFE AND MY
DEATH, ARE (ALL) FOR ALLAH, THE CHERISHER OF THE WORLDS: NO PARTNER HATH
HE: THIS I AM COMMANDED, AND I AM THE FIRST OF THOSE WHO BOW TO HIS
WILL. (Quran Majid. Chapter 6, verses 161, 162, 163)

**Washington Ilving**

After the first encounter with Gabriel, Mohammed came trembling and
agitated to Khadija. She saw everything with the eye of faith. "Joyful
tidings dost thou bring," exclaimed she, by Him, in Whose hand is the
soul of Khadija, I will henceforth regard thee as the Prophet of our
nation. Rejoice," added she, "Allah will not suffer thee to fall to
shame. Hast thou not been loving to thy kinsfolk, kind to thy
neighbours, charitable to the poor, hospitable to the stranger, faithful
to thy word, and ever a defender of the truth?" (Life of Mohammed)

**Yusuf Ali**

At twenty-five he (Muhammed) was united in the holy bonds Of wedlock
with Khadija the Great, the noble lady Who befriended him when he had no
worldly resources, Trusted him when his worth was little known,
Encouraged and understood him in his spiritual struggles, Believed in
him when with trembling steps He took up the Call and withstood obloquy,
Persecution, insults, threats, and tortures, And was a lifelong helpmate
till she was gathered To the saints in his fifty-first year, A perfect
woman, the mother of those that believe.

When Muhammed was ordained messenger of Allah, his young cousin, Ali
ibn Abi Talib, was ten years old. As young as he was, he showed
remarkable grasp of the events taking place around him, and was richly
endowed with the capacity for participating in his guardian's religious
experience. He therefore eagerly declared what he believed - that God
was One, and Muhammed was His messenger. And he could not wait long
enough to offer prayers with Muhammed and Khadija. He wished to go into
the presence of Allah in the company of His Own messenger.

(Introduction to the Translation and Commentary of the Holy Quran)

Muhammed Mustafa taught Ali how to take ablutions and how to pray.
Since then, Muhammed was never seen at prayer except when Ali was with
him. The boy also memorized the verses of Quran Majid as and when they
were revealed to Muhammed. In this manner, he literally grew up with
Quran. In fact, Ali and Quran "grew up" together as "twins" in the house
of Muhammed Mustafa and Khadija-tul-Kubra.

Ali lived in an ambience vibrant with the ethos of Islam. Through such
osmotic action, Islam became a part of the blood-stream of Ali ibn Abi
Talib, Muhammed's young protege. Islam became the very texture of his
being.

Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, had found the hrst Muslima in
Khadija, and he found the first Muslim in Ali ibn Abi Talib.

**Muhammad Ishaq**

Ali was the first male to believe in the Apostle of God, to pray with
him and to believe in his divine message, when he was a boy of ten. God
favored him in that he was brought up in the care of the Apostle before
Islam began. (The Life of the Messenger of Allah)

Muhammad Husayn Haykal

Ali was then the first youth to enter Islam. He was followed by Zayd
ibn Harithah, Muhammad's client. Islam remained confined to the four
walls of one house. Besides Muhammad himself, the converts of the new
faith were his wife, his cousin, and his client. (The Life of Muhammed,
Cairo, 1935)

Mannaduke Pickthall

The first of all his (Muhammad's) converts was his wife, Khadija; the
second his first cousin Ali, whom he had adopted; the third his servant
Zeyd, a former slave. (Introduction to the Translation of Holy Quran,
1975)

Abdullah Yusuf Ali

To his (Muhammed's) cousin Ali, the well-beloved, Born when he was
thirty, he appeared As the very pattern of a perfect man, As gentle as
he was wise and true and strong, The one in whose defence and aid He
spent his utmost strength and skill, Holding life cheap in support of a
cause so high, And placing without reserve his chivalry, His prowess,
his wit and learning, and his sword At the service of this mighty
Messenger of God. Khadija believed, exalted in faith Above all women;
Ali, the well-beloved, Then a child of ten, but lion-hearted, Plighted
his faith, and became from that moment The Right Hand of Islam.

(Introduction to the Translation and Commentary of the Holy Qur'an)

The third "witness" who accepted Islam, was Zayd bin Haritha, the freed
man of Muhammed, and a member of his household. Tor Andre

Zaid was one of the first to accept Islam, in fact the third after
Khadija and Ali. (Mohammed, the Man and his Faith, 1960)

Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first male to accept Islam, and his
precedence in accepting Islam, is beyond any question. Dr. Sir Muhammad
Iqbal, the poet-philosopher of Indo-Pakistan, calls him, not the first,
but "the foremost Muslim." Ali's was the foremost Muslim in point of
time. No man preceded him in accepting Islam. But he was also the
foremost Muslim in service to Islam and to its Messenger-Prophet as the
years to come were to reveal.

Muhammad ibn Ishaq, the biographer of Muhammed Mustafa, reports the
following in his Seera: From Yahya b. al-Ash'ath b. Qays al-Kindi from
his father, from his grandfather Afiif: Al-Abbas b. Abdul Muttalib was a
friend of mine who used to go often to the Yaman to buy aromatics and
sell them during the fairs. While I was with him in Mina, there came a
man in the prime of life and performed the full rites of ablution and
then stood up and prayed. Then a woman came out and did her ablution and
stood up and prayed.

Then a boy came out just approaching manhood, took his ablutions, stood
up and prayed by his side. I asked Abbas what were they doing, and he
said that it was his nephew, Muhammad b. Abdullah b. Abdul Muttalib, who
claims that Allah has sent him as an Apostle; the other is my brother's
son, Ali ibn Abi Talib, who has followed him in his religion; the third
is his wife, Khadija daughter of Khuwayled who also follows him in his
religion... Afiif said after he had become a Muslim and Islam was firmly
established in his heart, "Would that I had been a fourth." The fourth
"witness" who accepted Islam, was Abu Bakr, a merchant of Makka.

In the beginning, Muhammed preached Islam secretly. He invited only
those people to Islam he could trust, and who were like his personal
friends. The handful of neophytes he won, kept a "low profile" in
Makka.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Fearful of arousing the enmity and antagonism of Quraysh for their
departure from idol worship, the new Muslims used to hide the fact of
their conversion. (The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)

Among the earliest converts to Islam were Yasar; his wife, Sumayya; and
their son, Ammar. They are remarkable for the fact that they were the
first family all members of which accepted Islam simultaneouslv, thus
making up the first Muslim familv. outside the family of the Prophet of
Islam himsel.

Another early convert to Islam was Abu Dharr el-Ghiffari of the tribe
of Ghiffar, noted in later years, for his uncompromising love of Justice
and Truth.

Through the efforts of Abu Bakr, the fourth Muslim, a few other Makkans
also accepted Islam. Among them were Uthman bin Affan, a future khalifa
of the Muslims; Talha; Zubayr; Abdur Rahman ibn Auf; Saad ibn Abi
Waqqas; and Obaidullah Aamir ibn al-Jarrah. Abu Abdulah Arqam bin Abil
Arqam was a young man of twenty. He belonged to the Makhzoom clan of
Quraysh, and was a successful businessman. He lived in a spacious house
in the valley of Safa. He too heard the Call of Islam and responded to
it, and he put his house - Dar-al-Arqam - at the service of the Prophet
of Islam.

The Muslims at this time were so few in number that they did not dare
to say their prayers in Kaaba or in public. The Prophet gratefully
accepted Arqam's offer, and Muslims gathered in his house to offer their
congregational prayers. Dar-al-Arqam thus became Dar-al-Islam - the
missionary center of Islam, and the first meeting place of the Muslims.
Three years passed in this manner but in the fourth year of the Call,
Muhammed was commanded by Allah to invite his own folks to Islam
openly.

**AND ADMONISH THY NEAREST KINSMEN**

(Quran Majid. Chapter 26, verse 214) Muhammed's kinsmen included all
members of Bani Hashim and Bani al-Muttalib. He ordered his young
cousin, Ali, to invite their chief men to a banquet. Forty of them
came.

The guests gathered in a hall in the house of Abu Talib, and when they
had partaken of the repast, Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, rose to
address them. Among the guests, there was one Abu Lahab, an uncle of
Muhammed on his father's side. He had probably heard what his nephew was
doing secretly, and guessed the reason why he had invited the Bani
Hashim to a feast. Muhammed had just begun to speak when Abu Lahab
rudely interrupted him, and himself addressed the assembly, saying:

Brothers, cousins and uncles: Do not listen to this "renegade," and do
not leave your ancestral religion, if he invites you to a new one. If
you do, then remember that you will rouse the anger of all Arabs against
you. You do not have the strength to fight against all of them. After
all, you are a mere handful. Therefore, it will be in your interest to
be steadfast in your traditional religion. Abu Lahab, by his brief
speech, succeeded in throwing the assembly into confusion. Everyone
stood up milling around and jostling against each other. They then began
to leave, and soon the hall was empty.

Muhammed's first attempt to convert his own clan to Islam had failed.
But unfazed by this initial setback, he ordered his cousin, Ali, to
invite the same guests a second time.

A few days later the guests came, and when they had eaten supper,
Muhammed addressed them as follows: "I offer thanks to Allah for His
mercies. I praise Allah and I seek His guidance. I believe in Him, and I
put my trust in Him. He is Beneficent and Benevolent; and He is Gracious
and Merciful." After this doxology, the Prophet went on to say: "I bear
witness that there is no god except Allah; He has no partners, and I am
His messenger. Allah has commanded me to invite you to His religion
Islam - by saying: AND WARN THY NEAREST KINSMEN.

I, therefore, warn you that you should abandon false worship, and call
upon you to testify that there is no god but Allah, and that I am His
messenger. O ye sons of Abdul Muttalib, no one ever came to you with
anything better than what I have brought to you. By accepting it, your
welfare will be assured in this world and in the Hereafter. Who among
you will support me in carrying out this momentous duty? Who will share
the burden of work with me? Who will respond to my call? Who will become
my vicegerent, my deputy and my wazir?"

There were forty guests in the hall. Muhammed paused to assess the
impact of his words upon them. But no one among them responded. No one
in the audience seemed to stir. At last, when the silence became too
oppressive, young Ali stood up and said that he would support the
Messenger of Allah; would share the burden of his work; and would become
his vicegerent, his deputy and his wazir. But Muhammed beckoned Ali to
sit down, and said: "Wait! Perhaps someone older than you might respond
to my call."

Muhammed renewed his invitation but still there was no answer, and he
was greeted only by an uneasy silence. Once again Ali offered his
services but the Apostle still wishing that some senior member of the
clan would accept his invitation, asked him to wait. He then appealed to
the clan a third time to consider his invitation, and the same thing
happened again. No one in the assembly showed any interest in what he
told them. He surveyed the crowd and transfixed everyone in it with his
gaze but no one moved. At length he beheld the solitary figure of Ali
rising above the silent figures of the adults, to volunteer his services
to him a third time.

This time Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, accepted Ali's
offer. He drew him close, pressed him to his heart, and said to the
assembly: "This is my wazir; my successor; and my vicegerent. Listen to
him and obey his commands."

**Edward Gibbon**

Three years were silently employed in the conversion of fourteen
proselytes, the first fruits of his (Mohammed's) mission; but in the
fourth year he assumed the prophetic office, and resolving to impart to
his family the light of divine truth, he prepared a banquet for the
entertainment of forty guests of the race of Hashim. "Friends and
kinsmen," Mohammed said to the assembly. "I offer you, and I alone can
offer, the most precious gifts, the treasures of this world and of the
world to come. God has commanded me to call you to His service. Who
among you will support my burden? Who among you will be my companion and
my vizir? No answer was returned, till the silence of astonishment and
doubt, and contempt was at length broken by the impatient courage of
Ali, a youth in the fourteenth year of his age. "O Prophet, I am the
man, whoever rises against thee, I will dash out his teeth, tear out his
eyes, break his legs, rip up his belly. O Prophet, I will be thy vizir
over them." Mohammed accepted his offer with transport, and Abu Talib
was ironically exhorted to respect the superior dignity of his son.

(The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)

**Washington Ilving**

"O children of Abd al-Muttalib," cried he (Mohammed) with enthusiasm,
"to you, of all men, has Allah vouchsafed these most precious gifts. In
His name I offer you the blessings of this world, and endless joys
hereafter. Who among you will share the burden of my offer? Who will be
my brother, my lieutenant, my vizir?"

All remained silent; some wondering; others smiling with incredulity
and derision. At length Ali, starting up with youthful zeal, offered
himself to the services of the Prophet though modestly acknowledging his
youth and physical weakness. Mohammed threw up his arms around the
generous youth, and pressed him to his bosom. "Behold my brother, my
vizir, my vicegerent," exclaimed he, "let all listen to his words, and
obey him." (The Life of Mohammed)

**Sir Richard Burton**

After a long course of meditation, fired with anger by the absurd
fanaticism of the Jews, the superstitions of the Syrian and Arab
Christians, and the horrid idolatries of his unbelieving countrymen, an
enthusiast too - and what great soul has not been an enthusiast? - he
(Mohammed) determined to reform those abuses which rendered revelation
contemptible to the learned and prejudicial to the vulgar. He introduced
himself as one inspired to a body of his relations and fellow-clansmen.
The step was a failure, except that it won for him a proselyte worth a
thousand sabres in the person of Ali, son of Abu Talib. (The Jew the
Gypsy and El Islam, San Francisco, 1898)

Ali had offered his services to Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, and
the latter had accepted them. To the elders of the tribe, Ali's conduct
might have appeared rash and brazen but he soon proved that he had the
grit to accomplish far more than others had the courage even to dream.
The Messenger of Allah, on his part, accepted the offer not only with
expressions of gratitude and joy but also declared that Ali was, from
that moment, his vicegerent and his wazir. Muhammed's declaration was
forthright and unequivocal. It is foolish to quibble, as some people do,
that Ali's vicegerency of Muhammed, was confined to the tribe of Bani
Hashim because it was an assembly of Bani Hashim. But Muhammed himself
did not restrict Ali's vicegerency to Bani Hashim. Ali was his
vicegerent for all Muslims and for all time.

The banquet at which Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, declared Ali to
be his successor, is famous in history as "the Banquet of
Dhul-'Asheera." This name comes from Quran Majid itself (Chapter 26;
verse 214). Strangely, Sir William Muir has called this historic event
"apocryphal." But what is apocryphal or so improbable about it? Could
anything be more logical for the Messenger of Allah than to begin his
work of propagating Islam at his own home, and with the members of his
own family and clan, especially, after he was expressly commanded by
Allah to warn his "nearest kinsmen?"

The feast of Dhul-'Asheera at which Muhammed, the Apostle of Allah,
designated Ali ibn Abi Talib, as his successor, is a historical event,
and its authenticity has been affirmed, among others, by the following
Arab historians: 1. Tabari, Historv. Volume II, p. 217 2. Kamil ibn
Atheer, Historv, Vol. II, p. 22 3. Abul Fida, Historv, Vol. I, p. 116
Writing about Ali at this time, Sir William Muir says:

"His (Mohammed's) cousin, Ali, now 13 or 14 years of age, already gave
tokens of the wisdom and judgment which distinguished him in after life.
Though possessed of indomitable courage, he lacked the stirring energy
which would have rendered him an effective propagator of Islam. He grew
up from a child in the faith of Mohammed, and his earliest associations
strengthened the convictions of maturer years." (Life of Mohammed,
London, 1877)

We have many reservations about Sir William Muir's statement that Ali
"lacked the stirring energy that would have made him an effective
propagator of Islam." Ali did not lack energy or anything else. In all
the crises of Islam, Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, selected
him to carry out the most dangerous missions, and he invariably
accomplished them.

As a missionary also, Ali was peerless. There was no one among all the
companions of the Prophet who was a more effective propagator of Islam
than he. He promulgated the first 40 verses of the Sura Bera'a
(=Immunity), the 9th chapter of Quran Majid, to the pagans in Makka, as
the first missionary of Islam, and as one representing the Messenger of
Allah himsel£ And it was Ali who brought all the tribes of Yemen into
the fold of Islam.

Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, had brought up Ali as his own child,
and if the latter had lacked anything, he would have known it. He
declared Ali to be his wazir, his successor and his vicegerent at a time
when no one could have foreseen the future of Islam. This only points up
the unbounded confidence that the Prophet of Islam had in this stripling
of 14 years!

Ali symbolized the hopes and aspirations of Islam. In the great
revolution which Muhammed, the Apostle of God, had launched at the feast
of Dhul-'Asheera, he had mobilized the dynamism and the idealism; and
the fervor and the vigor of youth; Ali personified them all. Two things
had happened at the Feast. One was that the Prophet had brought Islam
out in the open; it was no longer an "under-ground" movement; it had
"surfaced." At the Feast of his kinsfolk, Muhammed had "crossed the
Rubicon" and now there could be no turning back. Time had come for him
to carry the message of Islam beyond his own clan - first to the Quraysh
of Makka, then to all the Arabs, and finally, to the rest of the world.
The other was that he had found Ali who was the embodiment of courage,
devotion and resolution, and was worth far more than a "thousand
sabres."

It is reported that some days after the second banquet of
Dhul-'Asheera, Muhammed Mustafa climbed up the hill of Safa near the
Kaaba, and called out: "O sons of Fehr; O sons of Loi;

O sons of Adi; and all the rest of Quraysh! Come hither, and listen to
me. I have something very important to tell you." Many of those Makkans
who heard his voice, came to listen to him. Addressing them, he said:
"Will you believe me if I told you that the army of an enemy was hidden
behind yonder hills, and was watching you to attack you as soon as it
found you sleeping or off-guard?" They said they would believe him
because they had never heard him telling a lie.

"If that's so," said Muhammed, "then listen to this with attention. The
Lord of heavens and earth has commanded me to warn you of the dreadful
time that is coming. But if you pay heed, you can save yourselves from
perdition..." He had gone only as far as this when Abu Lahab, who was
present among the listeners, interrupted him a second time by saying:
"Death to you. Did you waste our time to tell us only this? We do not
want to listcn to you. Do not call us again."

Thenceforth, Abu Lahab made it a practice to shadow the Prophet
wherever the latter went. If he started to read Quran or to say
something else, he (Abu Lahab) interrupted him or started heckling him.
Abu Lahab's hatred of Muhammed and hostility to Islam were shared by his
wife, Umm Jameel. Both of them were cursed by Allah, for their
perversity, in Chapter 111 of His Book.


