Chapter 8 : the Two Migrations of the Muslims To Abyssinia (615 - 616)
======================================================================

Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, shared all the sorrows and
afflictions of his followers who were being tortured for believing in
Tauheed but he had no means to protect them. When it appeared that there
was going to be no deescalation in the violence against and persecution
of the Muslims by the pagans, he suggested to them to leave Makka, and
to seek sanctuary in Abyssinia which was then ruled by a Christian king,
well-known for being a just and a God-fearing man.

Following this suggestion, a group of Muslims, comprising eleven men
and four women, left Makka and went to Abyssinia. The group included
Uthman bin Affan, a future khalifa of the Muslims, and Zubayr bin
al-Awwam, a cousin of the Prophet. The Prophet appointed one of his
principal companions, Uthman bin Mazoon, as the leader of this group.

Muhammad ibn Ishaq

When the Apostle saw the afflictions of his companions and that though
he escaped them because of his standing with Allah and his uncle, Abu
Talib, he could not protect them, he said to them: "If you were to go to
Abyssinia (it would be better for you), for the king (there) will not
tolerate injustice and it is a friendly country, until such time as
Allah shall relieve you from distress." Thereupon his companions went to
Abyssinia, being afraid of apostasy and fleeing to God with their
religion. This was the first hijra in Islam.

(The Life of the Messenger of God)

The first migration took place in the fifth year of the Call
(Proclamation), i.e., in AD. 615. The king of Abyssinia welcomed the
Muslim refugees from Makka into his kingdom. He gave them sanctuary, and
they found peace and security, and they enjoyed freedom of worship.

It is reported that about a year later, the Muslim refugees in
Abyssinia heard rumors that the Quraysh in Makka had accepted Islam. If
it was so, then there was no reason for them to live in exile, and they
were very homesick. They, therefore, returned to Makka. But in Makka
they found out that not only the reports of the conversion of the
Quraysh to Islam were false but also that the latter had stepped up the
persecution of the Muslims. They, therefore, left Makka once again but
not alone. Many other Muslims accompanied them to Abyssinia. This new
group comprised 83 men and 18 women, and may have included both the old
and the new emigrants; among them were Abdur Rahman ibn Auf, Abu Salma
Makhzoomi, and Abdullah ibn Masood. Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of
Allah, appointed his cousin, Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the elder brother of
Ali, as the leader of this group.

The second migration of the Muslims to Abyssinia took place in the
sixth year of the Call (Proclamation), which corresponds to A.D. 616.
The migration of the Muslims, and their reception in Abyssinia, alarmed
the Quraysh of Makka. They entertained the fear that the Muslims in
Abyssinia might grow in strength or might find new allies, and then,
some day, might return to Makka to challenge them. Therefore, to head
off this potential threat, such as they saw it, they decided to send an
embassy to the court of the king of Abyssinia to request him to
extradite the Muslims to Makka.

The Muslim refugees who had expected to be left in peace, were
surprised and dismayed by the arrival, in the Abyssinian capital, of an
embassy from Makka, led by a certain Amr bin Ass. Amr had brought rich
presents for the king and his courtiers to ingratiate himself with
them.

When the king gave audience to the emissary of the Quraysh, he said
that the Muslims in Abyssinia were not refugees from persecution but
were fugitives from justice and law; and requested him to extradite them
to Makka. The king, however, wanted to hear the other side of the story
also before giving any judgment, and summoned Jaafer ibn Abi Talib, the
leader of the refugees, to answer the charges against the Muslims.

Jaafer made a most memorable defence. Following is a summary of his
speech in the Abyssinian court in reply to the questions posed by the
Christian king.

"O king! We were ignorant people and we lived like wild animals. The
strong among us lived by preying upon the weak. We obeyed no law and we
acknowledged no authority save that of brute force. We worshipped idols
made of stone or wood, and we knew nothing of the human dignity. Then
God in His mercy sent to us His messenger who was himself one of us. We
knew about his truthfulness and his integrity. His character was
exemplary, and he was the most well-born of the Arabs. He forbade us to
worship idols and he invited us to the worship of One God. He exhorted
us to speak the truth, and to protect the weak, the poor, the humble,
the widows and the orphans. He ordered us to show respect to women, and
never to slander them. We obeyed him and followed his teachings. Most of
the people in our country are still polytheists, and they resented our
conversion to the new faith. They began to persecute us, and it was in
order to escape from persecution by them that we sought and found
sanctuary in your kingdom."

When Jaafer concluded his speech, the king declared that he was
convinced of his veracity, and added, to the great disappointment of Amr
bin Ass, that the Muslims could live in his kingdom as long as they
wished, without any fear.

But Amr bin Ass bethought himself of a new argument which, he felt
confident, would appeal to the king who was a Christian. If it did, he
was certain, it would tilt the scales against the Muslims, and they
would be extradited.

On the following day, therefore, he returned to the court and said to
the king that he (the king) ought to waive his protection of the Muslims
because they rejected the divine nature of Jesus, and asserted that he
was a mortal like other men. When questioned on this point by the king,
Jaafer said: "Our judgment of Jesus is what was revealed to our Prophet,
viz., that Jesus is the servant of God, and is His Prophet, His Spirit,
and His Command given unto Mary, the innocent virgin."

The king said to Jaafer: "Jesus is just what you have stated him to be,
and is nothing more than that." Then turning toward the Muslims, he
said: "Go to your homes and live in peace. I shall never give you up to
your enemies." He refused to extradite the Muslims, returned the
presents which Amr bin Ass had brought, and dismissed his embassy.

**Washington Irving**

"Among the refugees to Abyssinia, there was Jaafer, the son of Abu
Talib, and brother of Ali, consequently the cousin of Mohammed. He was a
man of persuasive eloquence and a most prepossessing appearance. He
stood forth before the king of Abyssinia, and expounded the doctrines of
Islam with zeal and power. The king who was a Nestorian Christian, found
these doctrines so similar in many respects to those of his sect and so
opposed to the gross idolatry of the Koreishites, that so far from
giving up the fugitives, he took them more especially into favor and
protection, and returning to Amr b. Ass and Abdullah, the presents they
had brought, dismissed them from his court." (The Life of Mohammed)

The Muslims spent many years in Abyssinia. Thirteen years later, they
returned, not to Makka but to Medina - in 7 AH. (A.D. 628), i.e., seven
years after the migration of the Apostle of God from Makka to Medina.
Their arrival synchronized with the conquest of Khyber by the Muslims.
Jaafer ibn Abi Talib was the leader of all those Muslims who had
migrated to Abyssinia in 615 and 616. He appears to have been the only
member of the clan of Bani Hashim to leave Makka for Abyssinia with the
other refugees. All other members of Bani Hashim stayed in Makka.


**Chapter 9 : Hamza Accepts Islam, A.D. 615**

Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and his
Ahlel-Bayt), though safe under the protection of his uncle, Abu Talib,
was not immune from harassment by the infidels. Whenever they found an
opportunity for baiting him, they didn't miss it. On one occasion, Abu
Jahl found him alone, and used much offensive and vulgar language toward
him. That same evening when his uncle, Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib, came
home from a hunting expedition, his slave-girl recounted to him the tale
of Abu Jahl's gratuitous insolence toward him (Muhammed), and the
latter's forbearance, of which she had been an eye-witness.

Hamza was a warrior, a hunter and a sportsman, and was little
interested in the day-to-day affairs of the city. But Abu Jahl's conduct
toward his nephew so roused his anger that he seized his bow, went into
the assembly of the Quraysh where he (Abu Jahl) was reviewing the events
of the day to his compeers, struck him at his head with his bow, causing
it to bleed, and shouted: "I too have become a Muslim."

This was a challenge to Abu Jahl but he figured that silence was the
best part of valor, and did not tangle with Hamza, even restraining his
friends who wished to rise in his defence.

Hamza became a devout Muslim and a champion of Islam. He was the
comrade-in-arms of his other nephew, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and it were both
of them who carried slaughter and dismay into the ranks of the Makkan
army in the battle of Badr - the first battle of Islam - fought a few
years later.

The battle of Uhud was the second battle of Islam. In that battle,
Hamza killed one of the standard-bearers of the pagans of Makka. When
they charged the Muslim line, Hamza plunged into their midst. He was
hacking his way through their ranks when Wahshi, an Abyssinian slave,
hurled a javelin at him. Wahshi was engaged for this very purpose by
Hinda, the wife of Abu Sufyan and the mother of Muawiya. The javelin
caught Hamza in his groin; he fell on the ground and died immediately.

In the battle of Uhud the Muslims were defeated. After their rout,
Hinda and the other harpies she had brought with her from Makka,
mutilated the bodies of the slain Muslims. Hinda cut open Hamza's
abdomen, plucked out his liver and chewed it up. Muhammad ibn Umar
Waqidi, the historian, says that she made a fire in the battlefield,
roasted Hamza's heart and liver and ate them. Not satisfied with this,
she cut the limbs, the ears and the nose of Hamza, strung them into a
"necklace," and entered Makka wearing it as a "trophy" of victory.

Hamza had killed Utba, the father of Hinda, in the battle of Badr. In
the battle of Uhud, she slaked her thirst for vengeance which had given
her no rest since the battle of Badr. Muhammed Mustafa, the Apostle of
God, was deeply aggrieved at the death and at the mutilation of the body
of such a stalwart of Islam as Hamza. He bestowed upon him the titles of
the "Lion of God," and the "Chief of the Martyrs."

Hamza accepted Islam in the fifth year of the Proclamation. May God be
pleased with him, and bless him.


**Chapter 10 : Umar's Conversion to Islam, A.D. 616**

The most notable event of the year 6 of the Call was the conversion to
Islam of Umar ibn al-Khattab, a future khalifa of the Muslims. He was
one of the most rabid enemies of Islam and Muhammed Mustafa, the
Messenger of Allah, and was a great tormentor of the Muslims. The modern
Egyptian historian, Amin Dawidar, says in his book, Pictures From the
Life of the Prophet, that Umar's hatred of Islam, and his hostility to
Muhammed Mustafa, were matched only by the hatred of and hostility to
them, of his own maternal uncle, Abu Jahl.

It is said that one day Umar resolved, in sheer exasperation, to kill
Muhammed Mustafa, and thereby to extinguish the flame of Islam itself.
He left his home with this intention.

As noted before, the Muslims at this time (the end of the year 6) still
gathered in the house of Arqam ibn Abil Arqam to say their
congregational prayers. They were just beginning to assemble, when one
of them, looking out the window, saw Umar approaching the house with a
drawn sword. In a state of considerable alarm, he told other members of
the congregation what he saw. Presumably, they too were alarmed. But
Hamza, who was also present in the house of Arqam, reassured them, and
said that if Umar was coming with good intentions, then it was all
right; if not, then he (Hamza) would run him (Umar) through with his
(Umar's) own sword. But it so happened that Umar had come with the
intention of accepting Islam, and he did.

The story is told that Umar was going toward Dar-ul-Arqam with the
intention of killing the Prophet when a passer-by stopped him, and
informed him that his own sister and her husband had become Muslims; and
advised him to put his own house in order before undertaking any other
grandiose and chimerical project.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Umar went there (to Dar-ul-Arqam) resolved to kill Muhammad and thus
relieve the Quraysh of its burden, restore its ravaged unity, and
re-establish respect for the gods that Muhammad had castigated. On the
road to Makkah he was met by Nu'aym ibn Abdullah. Upon learning what
Umar was about, Nu'aym said, "By God, you have deceived yourself, O
Umar! Do you think that Banu Abd Manaf would let you run around alive
once you kill Muhammad. Your sister is a Muslim now. Why don't you
return to your own house and set it straight?" (The Life of Muhammad,
Cairo, 1935)

Umar was furious to hear this. He immediately changed his direction
from the house of Arqam to the house of his sister to investigate the
allegation. In reply to his question, she gave him a discreet but
evasive answer.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Umar came to the door (of the house of his sister) as Khabbab (a
companion of the Prophet) was studying the Sura Taha and When the Sun is
Overthrown. The pagans used to call this reading "rubbish." When Umar
came in, his sister saw that he meant mischief and hid the sheets from
which they were reading. Khabbab slipped away into the house. Umar asked
what was the gibberish he had heard to which she answered that it was
merely conversation between them... (The Life of the Messenger of God)

Umar exploded in wrath at what he thought to be a prevarication, and
struck his sister in her face. The blow caused her mouth to bleed. Umar
was going to strike again but the sight of blood made him pause. He
suddenly appeared to relent, and then in a changed tone asked her to
show him what she was reading. She sensed a change in him but said: "You
are an unclean idolater, and I cannot allow you to touch the word of
Allah." Umar immediately went home, washed himself, returned to his
sister's house, read the text of Quran, and then went to Arqam's house
where he bore witness to the Unity of the Creator and the Prophethood of
Muhammed.

Sir William Muir says that Umar's conversion to Islam took place at the
close of the sixth year of Mohammed's mission.

**Sir William Muir**

It (Umar's conversion) occurred in Dzul Hajj, the last month of the
year. The believers are said now to have amounted in all to 40 men and
ten women; or by other accounts, to 45 men and eleven women. (The Life
of Mohammed, London, 1877) Umar was in his thirties when he became a
Muslim.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

At that time, Umar ibn al-Khattab was a mature man of thirty to
thirty-five years of age. (The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)


