Chapter 10 : Umar's Conversion To Islam, A.d. 616
=================================================

The most notable event of the year 6 of the Call was the conversion to
Islam of Umar ibn al-Khattab, a future khalifa of the Muslims. He was
one of the most rabid enemies of Islam and Muhammed Mustafa, the
Messenger of Allah, and was a great tormentor of the Muslims. The modern
Egyptian historian, Amin Dawidar, says in his book, Pictures From the
Life of the Prophet, that Umar's hatred of Islam, and his hostility to
Muhammed Mustafa, were matched only by the hatred of and hostility to
them, of his own maternal uncle, Abu Jahl.

It is said that one day Umar resolved, in sheer exasperation, to kill
Muhammed Mustafa, and thereby to extinguish the flame of Islam itself.
He left his home with this intention.

As noted before, the Muslims at this time (the end of the year 6) still
gathered in the house of Arqam ibn Abil Arqam to say their
congregational prayers. They were just beginning to assemble, when one
of them, looking out the window, saw Umar approaching the house with a
drawn sword. In a state of considerable alarm, he told other members of
the congregation what he saw. Presumably, they too were alarmed. But
Hamza, who was also present in the house of Arqam, reassured them, and
said that if Umar was coming with good intentions, then it was all
right; if not, then he (Hamza) would run him (Umar) through with his
(Umar's) own sword. But it so happened that Umar had come with the
intention of accepting Islam, and he did.

The story is told that Umar was going toward Dar-ul-Arqam with the
intention of killing the Prophet when a passer-by stopped him, and
informed him that his own sister and her husband had become Muslims; and
advised him to put his own house in order before undertaking any other
grandiose and chimerical project.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Umar went there (to Dar-ul-Arqam) resolved to kill Muhammad and thus
relieve the Quraysh of its burden, restore its ravaged unity, and
re-establish respect for the gods that Muhammad had castigated. On the
road to Makkah he was met by Nu'aym ibn Abdullah. Upon learning what
Umar was about, Nu'aym said, "By God, you have deceived yourself, O
Umar! Do you think that Banu Abd Manaf would let you run around alive
once you kill Muhammad. Your sister is a Muslim now. Why don't you
return to your own house and set it straight?" (The Life of Muhammad,
Cairo, 1935)

Umar was furious to hear this. He immediately changed his direction
from the house of Arqam to the house of his sister to investigate the
allegation. In reply to his question, she gave him a discreet but
evasive answer.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Umar came to the door (of the house of his sister) as Khabbab (a
companion of the Prophet) was studying the Sura Taha and When the Sun is
Overthrown. The pagans used to call this reading "rubbish." When Umar
came in, his sister saw that he meant mischief and hid the sheets from
which they were reading. Khabbab slipped away into the house. Umar asked
what was the gibberish he had heard to which she answered that it was
merely conversation between them... (The Life of the Messenger of God)

Umar exploded in wrath at what he thought to be a prevarication, and
struck his sister in her face. The blow caused her mouth to bleed. Umar
was going to strike again but the sight of blood made him pause. He
suddenly appeared to relent, and then in a changed tone asked her to
show him what she was reading. She sensed a change in him but said: "You
are an unclean idolater, and I cannot allow you to touch the word of
Allah." Umar immediately went home, washed himself, returned to his
sister's house, read the text of Quran, and then went to Arqam's house
where he bore witness to the Unity of the Creator and the Prophethood of
Muhammed.

Sir William Muir says that Umar's conversion to Islam took place at the
close of the sixth year of Mohammed's mission.

**Sir William Muir**

It (Umar's conversion) occurred in Dzul Hajj, the last month of the
year. The believers are said now to have amounted in all to 40 men and
ten women; or by other accounts, to 45 men and eleven women. (The Life
of Mohammed, London, 1877) Umar was in his thirties when he became a
Muslim.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

At that time, Umar ibn al-Khattab was a mature man of thirty to
thirty-five years of age. (The Life of Muhammad, Cairo, 1935)


**Chapter 12 The Death of Khadija tul-Kubra and Abu Talib A. D. 619**

The five paladins of Makka had trampled upon the covenant of the
Quraysh to boycott the Bani Hashim. Thanks to their chivalry and
gallantry, the Bani Hashim could return to the city, and live in their
homes once again. But they had barely begun to recover from the rigors
of living in a mountain hideout for three years, when Khadija, the wife,
the companion and the friend of Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of
Allah; and the benefactress of Islam and the Muslims, fell ill. Her
illness was brief but fatal. All her life she had lived in the midst of
abundance and luxury but the three years of exile had been a time of
excessive austerity for her which inevitably took its toll.

As noted before, Khadija was the first woman to declare that the
Creator was One, and that Muhammed was His Messenger. The glory and
honor of being the First Believer in the whole world, is hers to all
eternity.

When Islam came under mounting pressure from its enemies, Khadija
sacrificed her comfort, her wealth and her home for it; and now it would
appear that she sacrificed her life also. Without a doubt, if she had
lived in her palatial house in Makka, surrounded by her maid-servants,
she might have lived for many more years. But she preferred to stand by
her husband and his clan, and to share the bitters of life with them.
During the siege, she had to endure not only the pangs of hunger and
thirst but also the extremes of heat in summer and cold in winter; yet
she never complained to her husband about them. Whether times were good
or bad, whether she had plenty or she had nothing, she was always
cheerful. Austerity and privation never soured her. It was this
temperament that was an unfailing source of comfort, courage and
strength for her husband during the bleakest moments of his life.

During the years of the siege, Khadija spent all her fortune on buying
essentials like food and water for the clan of her husband. When she
returned to her house, her last cent was gone; and when she died, there
was not enough money available in the house even to buy a shroud. A
cloak of her husband was used as a shroud for her, and she was given
burial in it.

Muhammed Mustafa never took another wife as long as Khadija lived, and
if she had not died, it is most probable that he would never have
married any other woman.

**Edward Gibbon**

During the 24-years of their marriage, Khadija's youthful husband
abstained from the right of polygamy, and the pride or tenderness of the
venerable matron was never insulted by the society of a rival. After her
death, the Prophet placed her in the rank of four perfect women, with
the sister (sic) of Moses, the mother of Jesus, and Fatima, the best
beloved of his daughters (sic). (The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire)

Muhammad ibn Ishaq, the biographer of the Prophet, says that when there
was resumption of Divine revelation, after its cessation following the
first two visits of Gabriel, Khadija received a tribute and a salutation
of peace from Allah Ta'ala. The message was communicated to Muhammed by
Gabriel, and when he conveyed it to Khadija, she said: "Allah is Peace
(as-Salam), and from Him is all Peace, and may peace be on Gabriel."

Muhammed forever remembered Khadija with affection, gratitude and love.
During her illness, he kept a nightlong vigil nursing her, comforting
her and praying for her. He told her that Allah had promised Eternal
Bliss to her, and had built for her a palace of pearls in Paradise.
Toward morning her frail frame could not endure the attack of fever any
more and her sanctified and noble soul left this earth for its
destination in Heaven where it entered the company of the immortals. Her
death filled Muhammed's heart with sorrow.

Khadija died on the tenth of Ramadan of the tenth year of the
Proclamation of Islam. Khadija was buried in Hujun above Makka. Muhammed
Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, himself descended into her grave to lie
in it for a few moments. Then he assisted the other mourners in lowering
the body into it. After the burial, he smoothed the earth on her
grave.

Thus died Khadija, the first woman to believe in the Oneness of the
Creator.
Peace on Khadija to whom Allah Ta'ala sent His greetings and
salutations.
Peace on Khadija for whom Allah Ta'ala built a palace of pearls in
Paradise.
Peace on Khadija, the best of women, and the chief of all women.

Khadija died in 619. One month after her death, Muhammed Mustafa had to
sustain another shock in the death of Abu Talib, his uncle and guardian,
and the bulwark of Islam. The death of these two friends - Khadija and
Abu Talib - was the greatest shock that the Apostle of God had to endure
in the fifty years of his life. The two lamps of his life were
extinguished. He was overwhelmed with sorrow. He called the year of
their death "the Year of Sorrow."

The year 619 turned out to be a year of sorrow for Muhammed Mustafa in
more than one sense. The death of one's loved ones is naturally an
occasion for sorrow. But in the case of Muhammed, the death of these two
friends was not merely a subjective experience for him. He was soon made
conscious of the meaning of their death by a series of extraneous
events.

**Muhammad ibn Ishaq**

Khadija and Abu Talib died in the same year, and with Khadija's death
troubles came fast one after another. She had been a faithful supporter
for him in Islam, and he used to tell her of his troubles. With the
death of Abu Talib he lost a source of strength in his personal life and
a dcfence and protection against his tribe. Abu Talib died three years
before he (Muhammed) migrated to Medina, and it was then that Quraysh
began to treat him in an offcnsive way which they did not dare to follow
in his uncle's lifetime. A young lout actually threw dust on his head.
Hisham on the authority of his father, Urwa, told me that the Prophet
went into his house, and he was saying: "Quraysh never treated me like
this when Abu Talib was alive." (The Life of the Messenger of Allah)

**Washington Irving**

Mohammed soon became sensiblc of lhC loss he had suslained in the dealh
of Abu Talib who had becn not merely an affectionate relative, but a
steadfast and powerful protector, from his great influence in Mccca. At
his death there was no one to check and counteract the hostilities of
Abu Sofian and Abu Jahl.

The fortunes of Mohammed were becoming darker and darker in his native
place. Khadija, his original benefactress, the devoted companion of his
solitude and seclusion, the zealous believer in his doctrine, was dead;
so also was Abu Talib, once his faithful and efficient protector.
Deprived of the sheltering influence of the latter, Mohammed had become,
in a manner, an outlaw in Mecca, obliged to conceal himself and remain a
burden on the hospitality of those whom his own doctrines had involved
in persecution (sic). If worldly advantage had been his objective, how
had it been attained? (The Life of Mohammed)

Washington Irving has erred in stating that Muhammed had become "a
burden on the hospitality of those whom his own doctrines had involved
in persecution." Muhammed was never a burden to anyone at any time. The
members of his clan - the Bani Hashim - considered it an honor and a
privilege to defend him and to protect Islam - both of them their
greatest treasures. They were aware that with Muhammed in their midst,
they had become the recipients of the blessings of Heaven, and they had
no intention of forfeiting those blessings at any price. Who else but
the clan of Bani Hashim would defend Muhammed and protect Islam?
Muhammed was its flesh and its blood, and Islam was its life and its
love.

Another error that the distinguished historian has made the question
which he has posed: "If worldly advantage had his (Muhammed's)
objective, how had it been attained?" Attaining worldly advantage was
not Muhammed's objective. The Quraysh had offered him all the worldly
advantages; they offered him wealth, kingdom and beauty. They were all
his for the asking. But he kicked at them. Could they offer him anything
else? Muhammed had only one objective and that was to carry out the duty
imposed upon him by Allah Ta'ala, namely, to promulgate Islam - the
Religion of Allah.

**Sir William Muir**

The sacrifices to which Abu Talib exposed himself and his family for
the sake of his nephew, while yet incredulous of his mission (sic),
stamp his character as singularly noble and unselfish. They afford at
the same time strong proof of the sincerity of Mohammed. Abu Talib would
not have acted thus for an interested deceiver; and he had ample means
of scrutiny. (The Life of Mohammed, London, 1877) Sir William Muir
further says in this connection:

"If indeed, it had not been for the influence and steadfast protection
of Abu Talib, it is clear that the hostile intentions of the Coreish
would have imperilled the liberty, perhaps the life, of Mohammed." (The
Life of Mohammed, London, 1877)

**Jurji Zaydan**

The reason why Abdul Muttalib made Abu Talib the guardian of Muhammed,
was that Abu Talib and Abdullah were the children of the same mother.
Without a doubt, the proteclion of Abu Talib was the major cause not
only of the success of Muhammed's mission but also of his physical
survival. Abu Talib was a dignitary of Quraysh, and a man of great
prestige. Muhammed lived in his house like one of his children...
(Complete Works, published by Dar-ul-Jeel, Beirut, Lebanon, Volume 1,
page 91. 1981) Lt. General Sir John Glubb writes in his book, The Life
and Times of Mohammed, that Abu Talib is not considered a hero by
Muslims because he died in unbelief. But he adds, "Nevertheless, if it
had not been for the staunch courage with which he stood by his nephew,
Islam might have died in its cradle."

Both Sir William Muir and Sir John Glubb and many other historians have
insinuated that Abu Talib died in unbelief. If challenged to prove this,
they would advert to an authority like Imam Bukhari. Bukhari says in one
of the "traditions" that he has collected that when Abu Talib was on his
deathbed, the Apostle urged him to become a Muslim but he said that
doing so would embarrass him with his Qurayshi friends.

The aulhors of this "tradition" forgot one thing. Abu Talib was dying,
and knew that he was not going to see his Qurayshi "friends" any more.
He knew that he was going into the presence of his Creator. At a time
like this he could not have cared less for the Quraysh. His anxiety at
all times was to win the pleasure of Allah. He proved by his deeds more
than anyone else could ever prove by his words that his faith in the
Oneness of God and in the mission of Muhammed as His messenger, was
rocklike and unshakable.

Amin Dawidar, the modern Egyptian historian, says that Abu Talib was
like a fortress for Muhammed which sheltered him from all the heat and
cold and the contrariness and cussedness of the world outside. "And when
Abu Talib died," he says, "Muhammed found himself face to face with the
enemy for the first time in his life. Without a doubt, the death of Abu
Talib was a great tragedy for him."

Abu Talib could not but be a Muslim and a Momin. No man can love
Muhammed and idolatry at the same time; the two loves are mutually
exclusive. And no man can love Muhammed yet hate Islam. The love of
Muhammed and the hatred of Islam cannot coexist. Whoever loves Muhammed,
must inevitably love Islam. If there is any one thing beyond any doubt
in the history of Islam, it is the love of Abu Talib for Muhammed. As
noted before, Abu Talib and his wife, loved Muhammed more than they
loved their own children. Such love could have had only one
fountainhead, namely, their conviction that Islam was divine in its
origins.

Abu Talib was proud that Allah had chosen Muhammed, the son of his
brother Abdullah, in all creation, to be His last and greatest messenger
to mankind. Muhammed was the greatest love and the greatest pride of his
uncle, Abu Talib. In His Book, Allah Ta'ala identified the protection
that Abu Talib gave to Muhammed Mustafa, as His Own protection as per
the following verse: DID HE NOT FIND THEE AN ORPHAN AND GIVE THEE
SHELTER (AND CARE)?

Allah Ta'ala gave shelter (protection) and care to His Messenger,
Muhammed Mustafa, through His slave - Abu Talib. Abu Talib worked in
Makka for the glory and power of Islam, and he was the guardian of its
absolute and incontestable values. For ten years, he steered the
"vessel~ of Islam through dark and turbulent seas with a skill, vision
and faith that became the dismay of the guardians of the idols of the
pagans of Arabia. His deeds are an integral part of the story of Islam,
and they are also the most eloquent testimony of his faith in Allah and
His Messenger - in Islam!


May Allah bless His loving slaves, Khadija and Abu Talib. Both of them
put obedience to Him ahead of everything else in life.


**Chapter 13 : Khadija, the Mother of Believers**


Before Islam, Khadija was the Princess of Makka. When the sun of Islam
rose above the horizon, Allah was pleased to make her the Princess of
Islam also. Allah was also pleased to make her the Mother of the
Believers, as He says in His Book: THE PROPHET IS CLOSER TO THE
BELIEVERS THAN THEIR OWN SELVES, AND HIS WIVES ARE THEIR MOTHERS.
(Chapter 33; verse 6)

**Translators Note**

"This Sura (chapter 33) establishes the dignity and position of the
Holy Prophet's wives, who had a special mission and responsibility as
Mothers of the Believers. They were not to be like ordinary women: they
had to instruct women in spiritual matters, visit and minister to those
who were ill or in distress, and do other kindly offices in aid of the
Prophet's mission." (A. Yusuf Ali)

The title of the Mother of Believers appears to have been specifically
designed for Khadija. Without Khadija, this title becomes meaningless.
She and she alone gave the sacred love which a mother alone can give, to
the believers. A mother may be hungry but if her children are hungry,
she will feed them first. In fact, if necessary - in an exigency - she
will feed her children her own share of food and will gladly go hungry.
This has happened on countless occasions in history, especially during
wars and famines. The fact that her children are well-fed and contented,
is enough to make a mother happy and contented, and is enough to make
her forget her own hunger and thirst. A mother's love is unconditional;
it is all-protective, all-enveloping.

Most of the Muslims of Makka were poor. They had no source of income,
and they had no means of making a living in a city the economic life of
which was controlled by a cartel of idolaters. The members of the cartel
had decreed that no one would pay a Muslim any wages for any work done
by him, and no one would buy anything from him. They knew that material
privation affected the body as well as the spirit, and they figured that
when the resistance of the Muslims breaks down through economic
attrition, they would repudiate Islam, and they would abandon Muhammed.
A concurrent aim of this policy was to starve the Muslims. But Khadija
fed the poor Muslims, day after day, so that no one among them ever went
hungry, and she provided shelter to them. For her, charity was nothing
new but the size and scope of the commitment were; she spent money
prodigiously on the poor and the homeless Muslims of Makka, and thus
foiled the aims of the cartel.

The support that Khadija gave to the Muslim community in Makka, was
indispensable for the survival of Islam. Her support to the Muslim
community guaranteed its survival when it was in a state of blockade. In
this sense, she was a maker of history the history of Islam.

All wives of Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, are the Mothers
of Believers; but between them and Khadija there is a basic difference.
All the women he married in Medina, received a stipend from the
Bavt-ul-Mal (the Public Treasury). Some of them claimed special
prerogatives, and demanded "perks" from him. They said that the stipend
paid to them was insufficient for their needs, and they could not buy
enough food to eat from it.

Khadija, on the other hand, never asked her husband for anything. Far
from asking him to bring anything for her, she made her own purse a
public treasury for the Muslims. In Makka there was no Bayt-ul-Mal, and
it was the boundless generosity and the unlimited wealth of Khadija that
saved the Community of the Faithful from starving. She was so solicitous
of the welfare of the followers of her husband that she didn't withhold
even the last coin that was in her possession, and spent it on them. May
Allah bless His slave, Khadija, the Mother of the Believers, par
excellence.

**Khadija as a Mother**

Dr. Sir Muhammad Iqbal (d. 1938) was the Poet-Philosopher of
Indo-Pakistan. He was also a catalyst in the renaissance of the Muslims
in the 20th-century. He says that as a creator, a mother ranks next only
to God Himself. She brings new life into the world, i.e., she creates;
and that act - the act of bringing new life into the world or the act of
creating, calls for sacrifice. In bringing new life into the world, a
mother risks her own life. She therefore merits the greatest honor and
respect. What makes her willing to sacrifice her life is love - the love
of her child. Her love for her child is the most sacrosanct love. In
sanctity, a mother's love for her child ranks second only to the love of
God Khadija was the proud mother of three children - two boys and a
girl, as noted before. The two boys - Qasim and Abdullah were still
infants when they died. Her last and the only surviving child was her
daughter, Fatima Zahra.

If Khadija was the ideal mother, Fatima Zahra was the ideal daughter.
Fatima Zahra, the ideal daughter of Muhammed Mustafa and Khadija, also
became the ideal mother. She was the mother of two boys - Hasan and
Husain - and two girls - Zaynab and Umm Kulthum.

Khadija and Fatima Zahra - the mother and daughter - were two of the
only four perfect women in the world. Both of them made motherhood
sacrosanct. They brought glory and honor to motherhood. As noted earlier
in this book, women had no status in pre-Islamic Arabia. In the
male-dominated Arab society they were ruthlessly exploited and were
treated like cattle. Muhammed Mustafa, the Messenger of Allah, put an
end to their exploitation by men, and gave them a status which they
didn't have in any country, at any time. About mothers, he said:

"Paradise is under the feet of one's mother."

This means that no one may entertain the hope of entering paradise if
one has displeased one's mother. One's admission to paradise hinges upon
one's ability to win salvation, and no one who has displeased one's
mother, will ever win salvation. The Prophet of Islam has thus made the
winning of the pleasure of one's mother - a woman - a
condition-precedent for one to win salvation and to enter paradise.


