Chapter 17 : Khadija and Her Co-wives
=====================================

Surprisingly, all the ladies in the household of Muhammed Mustafa, the
messenger of Allah, were not altogether free from some of the weaknesses
which are supposed to be characteristic of women. Some of his wives
suffered from jealousy, and they were not very squeamish about showing
it either. The incident of "honey" will make this point clear.

One of the wives of the Messenger of Allah was Zaynab bint Jahash. She
knew that her husband was fond of honey. She, therefore, obtained the
variety of honey which he liked very much. It so happened that Zaynab
was the most beautiful of the wives of the Messenger of Allah. He
thought very highly of her. This was a cause of some anxiety to Hadhrat
Ayesha bint Abu Bakr, another of his wives. She feared lest he gave all
his love to Zaynab, to the exclusion of his other wives. Therefore, she
and Hafsa bint Umar, a third wife of the Prophet, worked out a scheme
the purpose of which was to make him dislike honey.

The rest of the story is told by Hadhrat Ayesha herself Imam Bukhari
has quoted her in his Book of Talaq (Divorce), and Book of Tafsir (of
Sura Tahreem) as follows:

I and Hafsa made this plan that when the Messenger of Allah visits any
one of us, she should tell him that his mouth reeks with "maghafeer."
(maghafeer is something sweet to taste but has a pungent and unpleasant
odor. Muhammed Mustafa was very sensitive on this point. He hated strong
odors). It so happened that Hafsa was the wife he visited first. As soon
as he entered her chamber, she said: "O Messenger of Allah! Your mouth
has the odor of maghafeer." He said: "I did not eat maghafeer. But when
I was with Zaynab, she gave me some honey to eat. It is possible that
the honey had the odor of maghafeer. But in future, I shall not eat
honey."

Here two wives of Muhammed Mustafa - Ayesha and Hafsa are seen working
against a third wife - Zaynab. Zaynab had not done any harm to Ayesha
and Hafsa. She was a cousin of the Prophet; he was the son of her
maternal uncle. She loved him and he loved her. She knew his likes and
dislikes, and kept a certain variety of honey at home which she knew,
was his favorite.

Muhammed's love for Zaynab kindled the flames of jealousy in the heart
of Ayesha. To quell those flames, she hatched a scheme with Hafsa
against Zaynab and implemented it. Apparently, these two ladies did not
trust their husband for fairplay. They thought that he was being partial
to Zaynab - perhaps at their expense. If they had trusted him, they
would not have hatched such a scheme.

Abul Kalam Azad says that jealousy is an instinct of women, and it can
overcome all other instincts in them. Ayesha, he says, was led by this
very human instinct to improvise an artifice to make her husband spend
less time with Zaynab than he was doing.

Muhammed Mustafa told these two ladies that he would not eat honey
again. This must have pleased both of them because they probably
believed that their plot was successful. But at this point, Revelation
intervened and clinched the matter with the following verse:

O PROPHET! WHY HOLDEST THOU TO BE FORBIDDEN THAT WHICH ALLAH HAS MADE
LAWFUL TO THEE? THOU SEEKEST TO PLEASE THY CONSORTS. BUT ALLAH IS
OFT-FORGIVING, MOST MERCIFUL. (Quran Majid. Chapter 66; verse 1)

Hadhrat Ayesha and Hadhrat Hafsa did not want their husband to eat
honey, and he agreed not to, but then Allah Ta'ala Himself had to remind
him that the consumption of honey was quite lawful, and that he ought
not to deny himself the pleasure of eating it. Muhammed Mustafa, of
course, returned to Zaynab's apartment and enjoyed honey as he had done
before.

**Mary the Copt**

In the year 10 A.H., the governor of Egypt, sent a slave girl called
Mary the Copt to Medina to wait on Muhammed Mustafa. Mary soon won a
place for herself in his affections and his home. He loved her and she
also loved him. From her, he had a son whom he called Ibrahim. Ibrahim
was born late in the life of his father. The father, therefore, loved
him immensely.

Ibrahim was a special gift which Allah bestowed upon His slaves,
Muhammed Mustafa and Mary the Copt. TO GOD BELONGS THE DOMINION OF THE
HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. HE CREATES WHAT HE WILLS (AND PLANS). HE BESTOWS
(CHILDREN) MALE OR FEMALE ACCORDING TO HIS WILL (AND PLAN), OR HE
BESTOWS BOTH MALES AND FEMALES, AND HE LEAVES BARREN WHOM HE WILL: FOR
HE IS FULL OF KNOWLEDGE AND POWER. (Quran Majid. Chapter 42; verses 49,
50)

Muhammed Mustafa and Mary the Copt were blessed by Allah with the birth
of their son, Ibrahim. They thanked Him for the great blessing which
filled their life and their home with.

But the birth of Ibrahim did not bring happiness to some other wives of
his father.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

His (the Prophet's) last years were brightened for a time by the birth
of a son to his Coptic concubine (sic) Mary whom he acknowledged as his
own, and whom he called after the mythical (sic) founder of his
religion, Ibrahim. This concubine (sic) having been the object of the
extreme envy of his many childless wives, the auspicious event
occasioned them the most painful heartburnings; which indeed were
speedily allayed by the death of the child (who lived only 11 months).
(Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, London)

One of the wives of the Prophet to whom the birth of Ibrahim occasioned
heartburning, was Hadhrat Ayesha. Hadhrat Ayesha was of course jealous
of Mary - her new co-wife, and hated her. Unfortunately, her hatred of
Mary was not confined to Mary alone; it went beyond her, and reached her
infant son. Ayesha hated Ibrahim. It never occurred to her that she
ought to love Ibrahim, not only because he was the darling of the
Prophet, but also because he was an infant. But if Ayesha was unable to
overcome jealousy and hatred, and was unable to show any love to the
baby, she ought, at least, to have pretended to love him, if only to
please his father. Ayesha could not do even this. Ayesha could not show
any love to Ibrahim, not even for the sake of appearance. But there is
one thing she could have done, and that was to refrain from showing her
hatred for him.

It is amazing that whereas Ayesha was so abundantly endowed with
feelings of hatred, jealousy and resentment, she appears to have been
singularly devoid of the tenderness which is a universal characteristic
of women. She did not show any tenderness. In the matter of children,
and especially the infants, even a cruel woman becomes tender. But not
Ayesha. Far from being tender to the beloved son of her husband, she
cursed him and cast many aspersions on him. Alas, Ibrahim did not live
long. He died in infancy.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

"When Mary gave birth to Ibrahim, the event brought to Muhammad, a man
past sixty years of age, great joy. Because of the birth of the baby,
the position of his mother - Mary also improved. Muhammad now looked
upon her as a free wife, indeed, as one enjoying a most favored
position.

"It was inevitable that the birth of Ibrahim would kindle fires of
jealousy in the hearts of the other wives of Muhammad who were all
barren. It was also natural that the Prophet's love and affection for
the newborn baby and his mother, fanned the flames of that jealousy.
Muhammad had liberally rewarded Salma, the wife of Abu Rafi, and the
midwife for Ibrahim. He also distributed grain to all the poor in
Medina. He assigned the infant to the care of Umm Sayf, a wet nurse, who
owned seven goats, and she was to give their milk to him. Every day
Muhammad visited the house of Mary to see his son's bright face and to
take him in his arms. All this incited fierce jealousy in the hearts of
the barren wives. The question was how long these wives would endure
this agony.

"One day the proud new father, Muhammed Mustafa, walked into Ayesha's
chamber, carrying his son in his arms, to show him to her. He called her
attention to the great resemblance of the baby to himself. Ayesha looked
at the baby, and said that she saw no resemblance at all. When the
Prophet expressed delight how his son was growing, Ayesha responded
tartly that any child given the amount of milk which Ibrahim was
getting, would grow just as big and strong as he. Indeed, the birth of
Ibrahim brought so much heart-burning to the wives of the prophet that
they went beyond these and similar caustic answers. It reached such
proportions that Revelation itself voiced a special condemnation.
Without a doubt, the whole affair left an imprint on the life of the
Prophet as well as on the history of Islam.

Since the Prophet granted to his wives special rights and privileges at
a time when Arab women amounted to nothing at all in society, it was
natural for them to abuse the liberty which none of their peers had ever
enjoyed before. This liberty led some of them to criticize the Prophet
himself so severely as to roil up his disposition for all day. He often
ignored some of his wives, and avoided others in order to discourage
them from abusing their privileges. Even so, one of them was so driven
by her jealousy as to exceed all limits of decency. But when Mary gave
birth to Ibrahim, they lost all composure and self-control. It was for
this reason that Ayesha went as far as denying all resemblance between
the Prophet and his son, a denial which amounted to an accusation of
adultery on the part of the innocent Mary." (The Life of Muhammad,
Cairo, 1935)

Allah saved His loving slave, Khadija, from the torment of being
forced, by the customs of the country, to share the attentions and love
of her husband with his other wives. But if she had a co-wife, how would
she have treated her? Would she have been jealous of her? Never.
Jealousy was as far from her as one pole is from the other. She would
not have hurt her co-wife or co-wives. She never hurt a neighbor, a
maid, or a slave. She never hurt even animals, much less any humans. She
passed through life graced with angelic qualities.

After the death of Khadija, Muhammed Mustafa married many other women.
But no one among them could ever approximate Khadija for excellence.
Among them, there were women of different backgrounds, and they were of
very different casts of character. Some of them, it appears, never
realized that their husband was the chosen one of God Himself, and had a
rank and a status beyond the reach of every other mortal.

**D. S. Margoliouth**

The residence of the wives in the Prophet's harem was short, owing to
unsuitability of temper; in one or more cases the newcomers were taught
by the jealous wives of the Prophet formularies which, uttered by them
in ignorance of the meaning, made the Prophet discharge them on the
spot. One was discharged for declaring on the death of the infant
Ibrahim that had his father been a prophet, he would not have died - a
remarkable exercise of the "reasoning power." (Mohammed and the Rise of
Islam, London)

To Muhammed Mustafa the conduct of some of the women he married in
Medina, must have seemed to be a strange counterpoint to the deportment
of Khadija. The latter's deportment had been all sweetness and light.
Her every word and every deed had comported with her aim to fill the
house of her husband with bliss, and she was eminently successful in
realizing it.

Muhammad Husayn Haykal of Egypt and Abul Kalam Azad of India, have
quoted various collectors and commentators of Hadith as saying that
Hadhrat Abu Bakr and Hadhrat Umar once sought permission of the Prophet
to visit him. When they were admitted to his presence, they found him
sitting silent, surrounded by his wives. (These ladies were demanding
more money from their husband as they said, they could not live in
poverty). Umar said: "O Prophet of Allah, if my daughter was ever seen
or heard asking me for money, I would surely pull her hair." The Prophet
laughed, and said: "Here are my wives surrounding me and asking me for
money." Immediately, Abu Bakr rose and pulled the hair of his daughter,
Ayesha; and so did Umar to his daughter, Hafsa. Both Abu Bakr and Umar
said to their daughters: "Do you dare ask the Prophet of Allah what he
cannot afford to give?" They answered: "No, by God, we do not ask him
any such thing."

"It was in connection with this conversation between Abu Bakr and Umar
and their daughters," says Muhammad Husayn Haykal, "that the following
verses were revealed:" O PROPHET! SAY TO THY CONSORTS: "IF IT BE THAT YE
DESIRE THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD AND ITS GLITTER, - THEN COME! I WILL
PROVIDE FOR YOUR ENJOYMENT AND SET YOU FREE IN A HANDSOME MANNER.

BUT IF YE SEEK ALLAH AND HIS APOSTLE, AND THE HOME OF HEREAFTER, VERILY
ALLAH HAS PREPARED FOR THE WELL-DOERS AMONGST YOU A GREAT REWARD.
(Chapter 33; verses 28, 29)

Though perhaps all wives of the Prophet were united in demanding more
money for food and other necessities from him, Ayesha and Hafsa were
pressing the demand more vigorously. Abdullah ibn Abbas says that he
once asked Umar bin al-Khattab who were the two wives of the Prophet who
were most persistent in demanding money from him, and he said: "Ayesha
and Hafsa."

The Prophet himself lived like an ascetic. He invariably put the needs
of the poor and the hungry ahead of his own needs. His lifestyle was
known to everyone in Medina and those who knew it better than anyone
else, were his own wives. Therefore, when they told him that life for
them was exceedingly austere, and that he ought to alleviate its
asperity for them by granting them more money, he was surprised. He had
perhaps assumed that his wives would also imitate him, and would live
lives of strict self-denial as he did. He, therefore, found their joint
"representation" most shocking; he perhaps thought that it was prompted
by too much attachment to food and material comforts. Abul Kalam Azad
says that the wives of the Prophet, after all, were human, and they too
had their human needs and desires. Their demarche, therefore, he adds,
is quite understandable.

The Prophet, however, was so displeased with his wives that he
separated himself from them for a whole month.

**Muhammad Husayn Haykal**

Muhammad isolated himself from all his women for a full month and
refused to talk about them to anyone. Nor did anyone else dare to talk
to him concerning them. Abu Bakr, Umar, and his other in-laws as well,
were deeply concerned over the sad fate that awaited the "Mothers of
Believers" now that they had exposed themselves to the anger of the
Prophet, and the consequent punishment of God. It was even said that
Muhammad had divorced Hafsah, Umar's daughter, after she had divulged
the secret she had promised to keep. The market-place of Medina was
abuzz with rumors about the impending divorce of the Prophet's wives.
The wives, for their part, were repentant and apprehensive. They
regretted that their jealousy of one another had carried them away, and
that they had abused and harmed their gentle husband. Muhammad spent
most of his time in a store-house he owned, placing his servant Rabah at
its doorstep as long as he was inside. Therein he used to sleep on a
very hard bed of coarse date branches. (The Life of Muhammad, Cairo,
1935)

Some of the wives of the Prophet showed themselves extremely
suspicious. Their suspiciousness could not have made him very happy in
his conjugal life. Professor Margoliouth has quoted the Musnad of Imam
Ahmad bin Hanbal (Vol. iv, p. 221) in this regard, in his book Mohammed
and the Rise of Islam as follows:

"At dead of night, it is said, the Prophet went out to the cemetery
called Al-Baki, and asked forgiveness for the dead who were buried
there. This indeed he had done before; Ayesha once followed him like a
detective when he started out at night, supposing him to be bent on some
amour: but his destination she found was the graveyard."

The 66th chapter of Quran Majid called Tahreem, deals exclusively with
the subject of the conduct of the wives of the Prophet. One of its
verses has been quoted above in connection with the incident of "honey."
Its fourth and fifth verses read as follows:

IF YOU TWO TURN IN REPENTANCE TO HIM (TO ALLAH), YOUR HEARTS ARE INDEED
SO INCLINED; BUT IF YOU BACK UP EACH OTHER AGAINST HIM, TRULY ALLAH IS
HIS PROTECTOR, AND GABRIEL, AND (EVERY) RIGHTEOUS ONE AMONG THOSE WHO
BELIEVE, - AND FURTHERMORE THE ANGELS - WILL BACK (HIM) UP. IT MAY BE,
IF HE DIVORCED YOU (ALL),THAT ALLAH WILL GIVE HIM IN EXCHANGE CONSORTS
BETTER THAN YOU,

There is not a consensus of the commentators of Quran Majid and the
historians upon the particular incident which is under reference in
these two verses. Some of them say that the Prophet told something in
confidence to Hadhrat Hafsa. She was, however, unable to keep the
secret, and disclosed it to Hadhrat Ayesha. This breach of confidence
drew the foregoing censure upon one of them for "betraying a confidence,
and upon the other for encouraging the betrayal," thus "abetting each
other's wrong."

Explaining the verses of the 66th chapter of Quran Majid, A. Yusuf Ali,
its translator and commentator, writes as follows:

The Prophet's household was not like other households. The Consorts of
Purity were expected to hold a higher standard of behavior and reticence
than ordinary women, as they had higher work to perform. But they were
human beings after all, and were subject to the weaknesses of their sex,
and they sometimes failed. The imprudence of Hadhrat Aisha once caused
serious difficulties: the holy Prophet's mind was sore distressed, and
he renounced the company of his wives for some time.... Hadhrat Umar's
daughter, Hafsa, was also sometimes apt to presume on her position, and
when the two combined in secret counsel, and discussed matters and
disclosed secrets to each other, they caused much sorrow to the holy
Prophet, whose heart was tender and who treated all his family with
exemplary patience and affection.


**Chapter 18 : Khadija and Ayesha**

Hadhrat Ayesha was jealous not only of those wives of Muhammed Mustafa
who were living at the same time and in the same house as she was, but
also of a wife who was long since dead, viz., Khadija. In fact, she was
more jealous of Khadija, the dead wife, than she was of any of her
living co-wives. She was so jealous of Khadija that she reserved her
most bitter blasts against her.

Abbas Mahmud al-Akkad says in his book, Avesha:

"Ayesha did not nurse such strong feelings of jealousy toward any wife
of the Messenger of Allah as she did toward Khadija. The reason for this
jealousy was that Khadija had made a place for herself in the heart of
her husband which no one else could take. Muhammed Mustafa recounted her
merits night and day.

Muhammed Mustafa was constantly helping the poor and the sick. On one
occasion, Ayesha asked him the reason for this, and he said: "Khadija
had told me to treat these people with kindness and love. It was her
last wish." When Ayesha heard this, she nared into a rage, and shouted:
"Khadija! Khadija! It seems that for you there is no other woman on the
face of the earth except Khadija."

The Apostle was a man of unlimited forbearance. But when he saw
Ayesha's outburst, he stopped talking with her."

If this incident points up the love that Khadija had for the poor and
the sick, it also points up the esteem in which she was held by Muhammed
Mustafa. He acted upon her wishes, notwithstanding the overt reaction
and resentment of Ayesha. He, in fact, acted upon the wishes of Khadija
as long as he lived. Didn't he know that any reference to Khadija
displeased Ayesha? Of course he did. Therefore, when she asked him why
he was feeding the poor, clothing the naked, and comforting the
cheerless, he ought to have given her a "discreet" answer, one that
would not have frayed her nerves. But he didn't. He just said: "I am
carrying out the wishes of Khadija."

Was this a coincidence that the last thought that Khadija had in this
world, was the welfare of the poor, the sick, the orphans, the widows
and the disabled? No. There is nothing coincidental about it. Everything
that Khadija ever said or did, was precalculated to win the pleasure of
Allah. And she knew that she could win the pleasure of Allah by giving
love and service to the most vulnerable of His humble slaves. Khadija's
largess was reaching the hungry, the poor and the sick, even after her
death. Her charity never came to a halt - in life or in death! The name
and image of Khadija were etched on the heart of Muhammed Mustafa, and
neither the hand of time nor the tantrums of Ayesha could efface them.

Hadhrat Ayesha was aware that she could not dissuade Muhammed Mustafa
from praising Khadija, and from talking about her. But this knowledge
did not put a crimp upon her vis-a-vis her "anti-Khadija" stance. Abbas
Mahmud al-Akkad of Egypt, relates another incident in his book, Ayesha,
as follows: One day the Messenger of Allah was praising Khadija when
Ayesha said: "O Messenger of Allah! Why do you talk all the time about
that old woman who had inflamed gums? After all, Allah has given you
better wives than her."

Muhammed Mustafa said: "No Ayesha! Allah never gave me a better wife
than Khadija. She believed in me at a time when other people denied me.
She put all her wealth at my service when other people withheld theirs
from me. And what's more, Allah gave me children only through Khadija."
It appears that Ayesha's hatred of Khadija which she expressed so
blatantly, backfired upon her. Her husband told her that Allah gave him
children only through Khadija whereas his other wives could not give him
any child.

To be childless, is a very painful experience for a woman. But if she
is told that she is barren, the pain for her becomes a torture. And if
it is her own husband who taunts her for her barrenness, then the pain
becomes an agony.

But Ayesha could never repress her hatred of Khadija. She herself said
once: "I have never been so jealous of any woman as I am of Khadija."
She showed her jealousy over and over again, and each time she elicited
from the Messenger of Allah the same anger and displeasure. The last
child of Muhammed Mustafa and Khadija was their daughter, Fatima Zahra.
She was born in the fifth year of the Proclamation, and eight years
before the Migration. Her brothers, Qasim and Abdullah, had died before
her. It was the pleasure of Allah that the line of descent of His
messenger and friend, Muhammed Mustafa, should begin with his daughter,
Fatima Zahra. She was the joy of her father's heart, and the light of
his eyes. He cherished her and her children as his greatest treasures.
They were, for him, the epitome of the purest of all joys - both
terrestrial and celestial.

From time to time, Muhammed Mustafa had to leave Medina on his
campaigns. It was his invariable practice that he sent his army ahead of
him, and he himself was the last one to leave the city.

The last thing that Muhammed Mustafa did before leaving Medina, was to
visit his daughter, Fatima Zahra, the blessed one, and her children. He
entrusted them to the protection of God, and bade them farewell.

The first thing that Muhammed Mustafa did when he returned to Medina,
was to visit the house of his daughter. He invoked God's blessings upon
her and her family. During his frequent absences from Medina, there was
nothing that he missed so much as the children of his daughter. When he
saw them, he exchanged greetings with them, kissed them, dandled them,
and played with them. Once he was with them, his weariness from the
campaigns, and from long marches in the dust and heat of Arabia,
vanished, and he was refreshed and restored. It was a pattern of life
for Muhammed Mustafa, and he never veered from it. His emotional life
revolved around the house of his daughter.

Hadhrat Ayesha didn't share her husband's love for his daughter. Abbas
Mahmud al-Akkad says in his book, Avesha: In the first place, Fatima was
the daughter of Khadija; and the Messenger of Allah loved Khadija so
much that he was constantly praising and complimenting her. Ayesha
resented this. In the second place, Ayesha was childless. Whenever she
saw her husband coddling and cuddling the children of Fatima which he
was doing all the time, she was further embittered being painfully
reminded of her own sterility. The relations, therefore, of Ayesha and
Fatima, were not very "friendly."


