Venom
=====

Once upon a time there was a boarding school where lived teenaged
girls. Some of the girls were from well off families while others were
from poor families and had joined the school by getting scholarships.
There were among them two girls who were the best of friends. One was
called Sarah while the other, Shelina. Sarah's father was a millionaire
and Shelina's an ordinary clerk; yet for them difference in wealth did
not matter.

Once Shelina, while talking to one of her friends, was saying "After
all, people make friends for some purpose or the other, there is no
friendship without any aim. For instance, I have made a strong
friendship with Sarah because...." before she could finish, a third girl
called Shahin standing at a hearing distance from them, went away. No
one missed her as she was not very near.

Shahin thought for a while, "Well, who was to know that of all the
people Shelina would be after something from Sarah?"

She met Sarah just round the corridor and stopped to talk to her. She
told her what she had just overhead and in addition, she said, "She must
be after your wealth as you are so rich and she has nothing to spare. So
beware, Sarah, do not give her too much."

This report destroyed the well built friendship between Sarah and
Shelina because Sarah could not bring herself to talk to Shelina. She
came to believe that Shelina was a deceitful girl. But Shahin was
worried. She had not meant to break the friendship. She just wanted to
warn Sarah as Sarah was her friend too.

Shahin's self accusing soul constantly nagged her, and she felt guilty.
She tried to shake off her guilty feelings by saying that she had not
meant to do it and after all, she had said what she had heard and so it
was the plain truth. But then something happened which increased
Shahin's guilty feeling.

A girl came into her room. It was the same girl to whom Shelina was
talking the other day. She told Shahin how quickly such a well founded
friendship had broken. "It was so surprising." She said, "That just
before the breakage of friendship, Shelina was telling me that she had
made friendship with Sarah for no other purpose but her good moral
values.

Shelina wanted to improve herself and that is why she had chosen Sarah
as her friend. She said that no friendship is without a purpose and this
was her purpose. Strangely enough the very next day it had all blown
away. I wonder why?"

This talk made Shahin sit up. She had not heard the full conversation,
but just jumped at conclusions. She had not only done gheebat
(backbiting) but put a tohmat (false allegation) on someone, which was
even worse than gheebat. She was worried all day long and could not
decide what to do. In the evening she was reciting the Qur'an. She came
across the 12th Verse of Sura-e-al-Hujurat which says:

"O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it;

and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning
(to mercy), Merciful." (49:12) Shahin was deeply worried and felt that
the only remedy was to ask for forgiveness from both Sarah and Shelina
as Allah would not forgive her unless they did. At first she thought she
would do it in the morning. By then she would pluck enough courage.
"But," she thought, "What if I die tonight? A man's life is not in his
hand and if I died tonight, I would never be forgiven."

She immediately went to find the two girls and bringing them together
asked for their forgiveness. Both Sarah and Shelina became extremely
happy to learn the truth which had restored their friendship, they also
promised not to let anyone know what she, Shahin had done. Shahin felt
very pleased to see her bad deed put right again.

The next morning she started reciting Sura Hujarat again and she came
across the 10th Verse of Sura-e- Hujarat:

"The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace between your
brethren and be careful of (your duty to) Allah that mercy may be had on
you." (49:10)

Shahin felt a sense of relief and happiness that she had done a right
thing. She made a promise to Allah, never to speak ill of others, be it
a fact or a made up story.


