The General Fast
================

The general fast is the fast that is obligatory on every one who meets
the conditions of fasting.  Basically it is to refrain from eating,
drinking, copulation, and all those things mentioned by the esteemed
jurists in their books of Divine law.  To abstain from some of the basic
necessities is really a challenge, but its result is so rewarding that
it can determine the eternal salvation of the human being.  There is a
universal law Almighty Allāh mentions in the Qur’ān which despite its
brevity reveals a world of meaning.  After excusing the traveler and
ailing one from fasting in this holy month and allowing them to fast
after the holy month, He says:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُ اللٌّهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلاَ يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ الْعُسْرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…God desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for
you…***”[^1]

Although this clause is brought after a particular case, it should be
known that it applies in every dimension of human life.  The ambiguity
that remains however is that ‘what is the definition of ‘*yusr*’ (ease),
and whether ‘one who is healthy’ does not feel the pangs of hunger and
thirst.  To respond to this query, we should look at the following
verse:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا. إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For indeed ease accompanies hardship; Indeed ease accompanies
hardship.***” [^2]

Most commentators, appreciating the lexical intricacy involved in the
verse say that ‘difficulty’ is interlinked with two kinds of ease- ease
in this world and ease in the Hereafter.  Or, more accurately, ease in
this world, and ease in the realm beyond; the latter, due to our limited
comprehension cannot be fathomed, save by one who is endowed with the
penetrating sight mentioned in the following verse of *Sūrat Qāf*:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هٌذَا فَكَشَـفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ
فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You were certainly oblivious of this.  We have removed your veil
from you, and so your sight is acute today.***”[^3]

Some traditions clearly state that Paradise can be achieved (only)
through the pains and difficulties of worship in this world.  The Holy
Prophet (s) is reported to have said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُفَّتِ الْجَنَّةُ بِالْمَكَارِهِ، وَحُفَّتِ النَّارُ بِالشَّهَوَات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Paradise is enveloped by difficulties and Hell Fire is enveloped by
desires.”[^4]

Imām ‘Alī (‘a) is reported to have said in a lengthy tradition:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَاللٌّهِ إِنَّ صَائِمَكُمْ لَيَرْتَعْ فِي رِيَاضِ الْجَنَّةِ،
تَدْعُو لَهُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ بِالْفَوْزِ حَتّى يُفْطِرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I swear by Allāh, surely the fasting one among you enjoys in the
gardens of Paradise, and the Angels pray for his success until he breaks
his fast.”[^5]

Observe the tone of the tradition: Imām ‘Alī (‘a) swears when he informs
his true followers about their state when they fast.  Many of those who
sincerely fast do enjoy these stations in Paradise *while they fast*,
but the curtains that veil them from perceiving the higher realms of
existence do not allow them to appreciate this reality.  If the curtains
were lifted they would witness their exalted state while they still
reside in this mortal world.

In the introduction to his anthology ‘*Shahrullāh fī al-Kitāb wa
al-Sunnah*’, when explaining the kind of Divine Banquet that believers
should anticipate in the holy month of Ramadān, Hujjat al-Islam
Muhammadī Ray Shahrī quotes *al-Risālah al-Majdiyyah* of Shaykh Ridā
al-Isfahānī, where the latter explains the kind of Divine Repast that
the believers are invited to.  At one point he says:

Indeed I have heard several times and repeatedly from one who is closest
to me in terms of relationship and kinship[^6] saying: ‘ I was busy
reciting the well-known *Ziyārat Amīn Allāh*’ in the holy sanctuary in
Najaf, and when I reached the verse ‘*wa māwā’id al-mustat‘īmīna
mu’addah*” (and the banquets of those who seek sustenance are ready) and
reflected over its meaning and thought about it, I was suddenly made to
see a banquet on which lay different kinds of food and drinks, which I
had never thought of, and I was eating from them, and in the course of
that state I was contemplating about an Islamic ruling.  Surely it is an
amazing state which renders one perplexed! The truth is that this is the
reality of [Paradisal] food, which does not break the fast…’[^7]

Al-Isfahāni later continues[^8] saying:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا تظنن أنّ تعبيرات هذا العبد هي من قبيل خيالات الشعراء وأوهامهم، أو
من شطحيات غلاة المتصوفة، فحاشى أن أتجاوز لسان الكتاب والسنة، أو اتخطى
في معتقدي غير ما جاء به الله والنبي وأمر به، وإنما المقصود هو قول الله
نفسه في سورة "هل أتى" حيث يقول سبحانه: وَسَقٌهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ شَرَابــاً
طَهُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

 “Do not think that the expressions of this servant resembles the
imaginations of the poets and their vain ideas or the theopathetic
utterances (*shatahiyyāt*) of the extremist so-called sūfīs
(*mutasawwifah*).  I dare not transcend the bounds of the speech of the
Book of God and the Sunnah, or adopt a course in my belief that is other
than what Allāh and His Messenger brought and ordered [us to follow]. 
What I only mean here is the word of Allāh in chapter ‘*Hal Atā*’ where
Allāh says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ شَرَابًا طَهُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and their Lord made them drink a pure drink.***”[^9]

Therefore despite the apparent hardship of fasting, ‘the ease that it
accompanies’ is inexpressible.  Those endowed with deep insight also
term hunger as the ‘the clouds from which rains of wisdom heavily
fall’.  In his poetic masterpiece of Islamic laws & their secrets called
*Nibrās al-Hudā*, Mullā Hādī Sabzawāri says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْجُوْعُ لِلْحِكْمَةِ مُزْنٌ مَاطِرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And hunger is a rainy cloud of wisdom.”[^10]

[^1]: Holy Qur’ān, 2:185 .

[^2]: Holy Qur’ān, 94:5-6.

[^3]: Holy Qur’ān, 50:22.

[^4]: Rawdat al-Wā‘izīn, vol. 2, pg. 421.

[^5]: Mishkāt al-Anwār, pg. 170.

[^6]: It is highly probable says Raysharī, that he is referring to his
father who was a well known saint in his time. 

[^7]: Shahrullāh fī al-Kitāb wa al-Sunnah, pg. 21.

[^8]: Shahrullāh fī al-Kitāb wa al-Sunnah, pg. 21.

[^9]: Holy Qur’ān, 76:21.

[^10]: Nibrās al-Hudā, pg. 236.


