The Most Specific Fast
======================

The highest level of fasting is to disengage oneself from other than
Allāh (SwT).  Every thought, speech, action, etc.  is solely for Allāh
(SwT).  The fasting one in this level ensures that not only does he
observe the first two levels of fasting, but protects his heart from
other than Allāh (SwT).  Perhaps this noble dictum of Imām al-Sādiq (‘a)
refers to this very station:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْقَلْبُ حَرَمُ اللٌّهِ، فَلاََ تُسْكِنْ فِي حَرَمِ اللٌّهِ غَيْرَ
اللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The heart is the sanctuary of Allāh; therefore do not make other than
Allāh reside in the sanctuary of Allāh.[^1]”

The result of such a fast is ‘the Paradise of Divine Encounter’[^2]
(*Jannat al-Liqā’*).  If we ponder over the supplications of the Holy
month of Ramadān and try to understand what kind of reception and
banquet we can anticipate, we would realize that it is this level of
fasting that we must struggle to attain.

Imām Khumaynī in one of his sermons to the seminarians in Najaf
al-Ashraf says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأَنِرْ أَبْصَارَ قُلُوْبِنَا بِضِيَاءِ نَظَرِهَا إِلَيْكَ، حَتّى
تَخْرِقَ أَبْصَارُ الْقُلُوبِ حُجُبَ النُّورِ فَتَصِلَ إِلـى مَعْدَنِ
الْعَظَمَة. ضيافة اللّه همان «معدن عظمت» است.  خداوند تبارك و تعالى
براي ورود به معدن نور و عظمت از بندگانش دعوت فرموده است.‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And enlighten the eyes of our hearts with the light of Your vision,
until the vision of the hearts tears through the curtains of light and
reaches the Source of Greatness (*ma’din al-’azamah*).’[^3]  
 The banquet of Allāh (SwT) is that very “source of greatness.”  God,
the Blessed and Exalted, has invited His servants to enter the source of
light and greatness.”[^4]  
 He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و جزاي چنين روزه‏اي خداست چنانكه فرموده است: أَلصَّوْمُ لِي وأَنَا
أَجْزِي بِهِ.  چيز ديگر نمي ‏تواند پاداش چنين روزه‏اي باشد.  جنات نعيم
در مقابل روزه او بى‏ارزش بوده نمي ‏تواند پاداش آن به حساب آيد.  ولى
اگر بنا باشد كه انسان به اسم روزه دهان را از مطعومات ببندد و به غيبت
مردم باز كند و شبهاي ماه مبارک رمضان، كه مجالس شب نشينى گرم و داير
بوده وقت و فرصت بيشتری است، با غيبت، تهمت و اهانت به مسلمانان به سحر
انجامد، چيزي عايد او نمي ‏شود و اثري بر آن مترتب نمی‏گردد. 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*The reward of such a fast is God*, as He has stated: “The fast is for
Me and I am its reward.”[^5] Nothing else could be the reward of such a
fast.  The Gardens of Blessings would not count as a worthy reward for
such a fast.  If a man takes fasting to mean closing his mouth to food
but opening it for backbiting, and he engages in backbiting until sahar
in the warm and friendly company in the nights when there is opportunity
and time, such fasting will be of no benefit and have no effect…”[^6]

Elsewhere he also says:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در اين ماه شريف، كه به مهمانسراي الهي دعوت شده‏ايد، اگر به حق تعالى
معرفت پيدا نكرديد يا معرفت شما زيادتر نشد، بدانيد در ضيافة اللّه درست
وارد نشديد و حق ضيافت را به جا نياورديد...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In this noble month, in which you have been invited to the divine
banquet, if you do not gain insight (*ma’rifah*) about God the Almighty
nor insight into yourself, it means that you have not properly
participated in the feast of Allāh and failed to observe the etiquette
of the feast...[^7]”

Therefore our aspirations should be high, and we should struggle to
attain the position which would enable us enter the Divine Feast.  In
the supplication of Abū Hamzah al-Thumāli, which Imām al-Sajjād (‘a)
taught to his noble companion, we are taught to pray in the following
way:  
    
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلَدَيْكَ أَرْجُوْ ضِيَافَتِي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…And I aspire to be a guest near You…”[^8]

Notice ‘to be a guest near Allāh’ is quite different from being just an
ordinary guest.  In the above verse we seek that kind of insight and
knowledge that is obtained *ladā Allāh* - in the neighborhood of Allāh;
In simpler terms, we are not just after any kind of knowledge, but that
which is Divinely inspired, which is also known as *al-‘ilm al-ladunnī*
and is, according to the Qur’ān, a product of piety; it is not a
knowledge acquired from a human tutor. 

It is, using the words of the Holy Prophet (s) ‘a light that Allāh
infuses in the heart of whosoever He wishes to guide.’[^9] This is the
kind of knowledge, say some exegetes of the Qur’ān, that the following
verse speaks about:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ اللٌّهُ وَاللٌّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Be God-wary and God shall teach you, and God has knowledge of all
things.***”[^10]

And the path towards achieving *taqwā*, as clearly specified in the Holy
Qur’ān, is *siyām* (fasting).  The Holy Qur’ān says:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا
كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَـتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Prescribed for you is fasting as it was
prescribed for those who were before you, so that you may attain
taqwā.***”[^11]

Hence, ‘fasting’ is a factor that can refine the spirit of the human
being so much that he can qualify to be taught directly by Allāh (SwT).

Some supplications teach us to ask Almighty Allāh to be hosted in
‘paradise’ in this month.  In one of the supplications recommended
during *sahar* time of the nights of the Holy month of Ramadān, we ask
Almighty Allāh for Paradise:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ أَوْجَبْتَ لِكُلِّ ضَيْفٍ قِرىً، وَأَنَا ضَيْفُكَ، فَاجْعَلْ
قِرَايَ اللَّيْلَةَ الْجَنَّةَ، يَا وَهَّابَ الْجَنَّةِ، يَا وَهَّابَ
الْمَغْفِرَةِ، وَ لاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِكَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…And very you have made obligatory for every guest to be entertained;
and I am Your guest; therefore make my banquet tonight to be ‘Paradise’,
O the Bestower of Paradise, O Bestower of forgiveness, and there is no
strength nor any power save by You…”[^12]

It is possible that the reason why this supplication was followed by the
two sublime names of Allāh - ‘*Yā Wahhāb al-Jannah*’ and ‘*Yā Wahhāb
al-maghfirah*’ was to ask Allāh (SwT) for Paradise, and thus,
necessarily also ask Him for relief from the Hell Fire, which enables
one to enter Paradise.  In other words, we are trying to seek the same
‘*qirā*’ (meal served to the guest) that we seek in holy precincts of
Ka’bah during the seventh round of our circumambulation around the
Ka’bah.  We are taught to say:  
  

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ الْـبَيْتُ بَيْـتُكَ، وَالْعَبْدُ عَبْدُكَ، وَهٌذَا
مَقَامُ الْعَائِذِ بِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ، أَللٌّهُمَّ اِنِّي حَلَلْتُ
بِفِنَائِكَ، فَاجْعَلْ قِرَايَ مَغْفِرَتَكَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh, the house is Your house; and this servant is You servant; and
this is where one who seeks Your Refuge from Hellfire stands; O Allāh,
surely I have stopped at Your courtyard; therefore *make my banquet to
be Your forgiveness*.”[^13]

In fact there is clear mention of seeking salvation from the Hell Fire
in many supplications that we are taught to read in the Holy month of
Ramadān.  In the famous *du*‘*ā* that most of us recite after every
prayer, we say:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ يَا عَظِيمُ يَا غَفُورُ يَا رَحِيمُ...مُنَّ عَليَّ
بِفِكَاكِ رَقَبَتِي مِنَ النَّارِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Exalted One, O All-Great, O All Forgiving, O All-Merciful….bless me
with freedom from the Hell Fire.”[^14]  
 And during the *ā‘māl* of *laylat al-qadr* we are taught to open the
Holy Qur’ān and say:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَفِيهِ اسْمُكَ الأَكْبَرُ، وَأَسْمَآؤُكَ الْحُسْنَى، وَمَا يُخَافُ
وَيُرْجَى، أَنْ تَجْعَلَنِي مِنْ عُتَقَائِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and in it is Your Great Name and Your Most Beautiful Names and that
which should be feared and hoped for, that you make me from those whom
you have freed from Hell Fire…***”[^15]

Another very important point to bear in mind is that since these
supplications were from infallible masters, the Paradise sought is not
that which the laity like the author aspire, but levels beyond.

The mystics have classified Paradise into different levels, the highest
of which is *Jannat al-liqā’* (Paradise of meeting the Lord).  And this
is what a true believer’s delight is in.  The following prophetic
tradition alludes to this verity:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلصَّائِمِ فَرْحَتَانِ؛ فَرْحَةٌ عِنْدَ إِفْطَارِهِ، وَ فَرْحَةٌ
عِنْدَ لِقَاءِ رَبِّهِ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“For the one fasting there are two joys: joy when breaking his fast, and
joy when he meets His Lord.”[^16]

[^1]: Bihā r al-Anwār, vol. 70, pg. 25.

[^2]: Some scholastic theologians being ignorant of the truth of meeting
Allāh have resorted to different fruitless interpretations.  Ayatullāh
Maliki Tabrīzī in his treatise on Meeting Allāh (Risāleye Liqā’ullāh)
criticizes them, saying: “One who tries to understand with a mind free
from foreign ambiguities that penetrate the heart, and looks at these
different expressions would be convinced that the meaning of meeting God
is not encountering His reward, examples of which are ‘entering
Paradise’, ‘eating apples’, ‘sharing the company of heavenly damsels’,
etc.  How is this meaning related to such expressions? If one can
attribute the word liqā’ to a meaning of remote relevance, what should
he do with regard to the other words [used to indicate the encounter of
God]? For example, how should he translate the phrase ‘looking at God’s
countenance’? How should we interpret the statement ‘wa alhiqnī
binūrika’l abhaj’ (and attach me to your most delightful light)? Can we
say that the statement ‘And enlighten the eyes of our hearts with the
light of their looking at You’ means ‘to eat pears?

[^3]: This is a reference to a part of the well-known whispered
supplication of Sha‘bān called Munājāt Sha‘bāniyyah.  See Mafātīh
al-Jinān, pg. 158.

[^4]: Jihād-e-Akbar, pg. 45.

[^5]: It should be noted that this dictum is translated in two different
ways.  From the context of Imām’s speech, it is apparent that he reads
the dictum as ‘wa ana ujzā bihi’ (I am its reward) unlike when it is
read as ‘wa anā ajzī bihi’ (and I grant its reward).  Other divine
scholars such as Mullā Hādī Sabzawārī in his Asrār al-Hikam and Ustād
Shujā’ī in his Maqālāt [vol. 3, pg. 127] have translated this dictum is
a similar manner.  Nevertheless, both the meanings are correct.

[^6]: Jihād-e-Akbar, pg. 44.

[^7]: Jihād-e-Akbar, pg. 39.

[^8]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, pg. 194.

[^9]: al-Mahajjat al-Baydā’, vol. 5, pg. 45.

[^10]: Holy Qur’ān, 2:282.

[^11]: Holy Qur’ān, 2:283.

[^12]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, pg. 201.

[^13]: al-Mahajjat al-Baydā’, vol. 2, pg. 171.

[^14]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, pg. 176.

[^15]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, pg. 225.

[^16]: al-Mahajjat al-Baydā’, vol. 2, pg. 122.


