Have You Considered the Lovers in the Cave?
===========================================

Sometimes the Beloved invites His lovers to a banquet and hosts them for
a very long duration in the state of ‘union’ in which state, nothing is
beheld save the Beloved.  The self also subsides.  According to some
leading mystics like the late Ayatullāh Shāhābādī - the mentor of Imām
Khumaynī in mysticism, the companions of the cave were privileged with
such union.  In volume 2 of his *Rashahāt al-Ma’ārif*, a collection of
transcripts of his lessons, while describing a group of the *muqarrabūn*
(those near to Allāh) he says:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يک دسته از سلسله بشر که مقربين اند لباس بقاء در دار فناء پوشيده، برای
تکميل مردم زندگی می کنند لکن دسته ديگر از همين سلسله در رياضات و
مجاهده حالشان حال جذبه می شود ومثل اصحاب کهف، گمان کنند که مردگانند،
نه، بلکه از شدت عشق مجذوب حق شده و از خود خبری ندارند از شدت عشق مدت
سيصد و نه سال به آن حال باقيمانده اند و پروردگار بدن آنها را حفظ
مينمود تا اينکه مشيت حق تعلق گرفت که از آن حالشان برگردند اين مقام
ولايت و قرب تام است...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A group among the human beings who are the near ones of God, clad in
the attire of subsistence through God (*baqā’ bi Allāh*) in the world of
annihilation (*fanā’*), live to perfect other human beings; another
faction among the same group (of human beings), however, in their
spiritual struggle and exercises are overtaken by the state of Divine
Attraction[^1] (*jadhbah*), and like the companions of the cave, are
thought by people to be dead; no; rather, out of intense love for God
they have been overtaken by Divine attraction and are unaware of
themselves; out of extreme Divine love they remain for three hundred and
nine years in that state; and the Lord protected their bodies, until He
wanted them to come back to their previous state of attention.  This is
the state of *wilāyah* (*nearness to God*) and complete proximity to
God...”[^2]

These men despite being politically aware and active, were so
spiritually elevated, that they were overtaken by Allāh’s (SwT)
attraction for more than three hundred years, in which state they saw
nothing but Allāh (SwT).  They were oblivious of themselves too. 

Some authoritative mystics like Imām Khumaynī opine that this state is
no more ‘a banquet’.  Here there is no more guest, host and a banquet. 
Only the Host remains.  Rather, the Host who only was, “is”.  In one of
his sermons Imām Khumaynī says:

“Right from the Holy Prophet (s) until the Imām of time (upon whom be
Allāh’s peace) all were afraid of sinning.  Their sin was not what you
and I possess.  They comprehended such greatness that paying attention
to the world of plurality was deemed as a major sin to them.  Hadrat
Sajjād (‘a), as has been narrated, would recite the following
supplication until morning:

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ ارْزُقْنِي التَّجَافِيَ عَنْ دَارِ الْغُرُورِ،
وَالإِنَابَةَ إِلــى دَارِ الْخُلُودِ، وَالإِسْتِعْدَادَ لِلْمَوْتِ
قَبْلَ حُلُولِ الْفَوْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh I implore Thee to save me from the house of deception and help
me return to the abode of joy and provide me with readiness for death
before the soul is taken.[^3]”

This indeed is a great issue.  When they consider themselves in front of
the Greatness of God, they behold that they are nothing and have
nothing.  So is the reality.  Other than Him there is no one and
nothing.  When they focus their attention to the realm of plurality,
even if that is by Divine command [they consider themselves at fault]. 
This is the reason why the following saying is attributed to the Holy
Prophet (s):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيُغَانُ عَلى قَلْبِي، وَإِنِّي لأَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ فِيْ
كُلِّ يَوْمٍ سَبْعِِيْنَ مَرّةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In order that my heart should not gather rust, I seek the forgiveness
of God seventy times a day.”[^4]

He enjoyed a different station form that which we possess.  They
benefited from the Divine Banquet, and soared beyond that too.  They
were in the Divine Banquet and because they would comprehend their
presence before God and at the same time call the people to the truth,
they would sense turbidity in the heart.  Paying attention to the
manifestations of God, switching the attention from the Unseen to the
visible world - i.e.  to the Divine manifestations, despite their divine
nature, [for they perceive the entities as Divine manifestations] is a
great sin [for them]. 

This is because since the unseen (*ghayb*) that they seek is ‘The
perfect connection to God’ (*kamāl al-inqitā’ ilayk*), when they pay
attention to the manifestations, it is a great sin...This is an abode of
deception for Imām al-Sajjād A.  Paying attention to the celestial realm
[too] is the abode of deception.  Paying attention to the realm beyond
*malakūt* also is *dār al-ghurūr* (the abode of deception).  Attention
to Almighty God, such that there is no more any banquet comprehensible
is specific to the perfect friends of God.  In that realm, there is no
Divine Banquet any more.[^5]”

Then Imām Khumaynī pointing to a significant reality says:  
 “May God make us such that we do not deny these issues.  Among the
impediments of the path of humanness is to deny the stations of the
wayfarers and confine everything to what we commonly comprehend.[^6]”

*And All Praises belong to Allāh, the Lord of the Universe.*  
*Holy Month of Ramadān 1425 AH [lunar]  
 Holy Proximity of Bibi Ma’sūmah (‘a)  
 Qum al-Muqaddasah*  
* *

[^1]: Some of the Muslim mystic saints would fall into such a swoon for
a long duration of many days and would then come into realization and
attention to this world of plurality.  Such a state is narrated about
the Egyptian mystic poet Ibn al-Fārid.

[^2]: Haydar Tahrānī (mu‘jizeh), Lessons of Ayatullāh Mīrzā Mūhammad
‘Alī Shāhābādī, Rashahāt al-Ma‘ārif, vol. 2, pp. 9-10, published by
Intishārāt-e-Payāme Azād, first print.

[^3]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, pg. 236.

[^4]: Chehel Hadīth, pg. 342.

[^5]: Sahīfeye Imām, vol. 20, pp. 267-269.

[^6]: Sahīfeye Imām, vol. 20, pg.269.


