Preface
=======

Each year, as we approach the Graceful Month of Ramadān, we are
considered as the ‘Special Guests’ of Allah (SwT). What does it mean to
be a special guest? What is the difference between an ‘ordinary’
invitation and a ‘special’ invitation? Why is the Holy Month of Ramadān
described by the Holy Prophet (s) as ‘The Banquet of Allāh’?

This book goes beyond providing logical analysis to these questions. It
is typical of the style the author adopts in his other profound titles
for a spiritual wayfarer ‘Soaring to the Only Beloved’ (a brief treatise
on the presence of the heart in prayer) and ‘Manifestations of the
All-Merciful’ (a commentary on a daily supplication of the Holy Month of
Ramadan), published by the Islamic Education Board of the World
Federation.

Such an  approach is ideal for Mubalighīn, proactive ‘Urafā’ and the
youth,  for it combines beautifully the theme with lexical origins, Āyāt
from the Holy Qur’ān , ahādīth of the A’immah (‘a), mystical narrations,
poetry, fadāil of the Ahlu’l Bayt (‘a) as well as touch of historical
accounts relevant to the subject.

We live in a time when people feel an urgent need to examine the
spiritual dimensions of their lives. The materialistic tendencies which
have dominated so much of the modern age are beginning to lose their
lustre. People are beginning to realize that their deepest needs cannot
be satisfied by consumer products. This book together with a series of
related books can go a long way to quench the thirst of spiritual
wayfarers and be a catalyst in guiding the traveler towards ‘The Host’.

IEB is indebted to Sheikh Muhammad Khalfan who is also an active member
of the Editorial Advisory Committee (EAC) that was recently established
by the World Federation to ensure high quality, sustainable and
effective publications.

Sheikh Muhammad Khalfan studies at the Seminary in Qum specialising in
philosophy and theoretical gnosis. Besides the three books mentioned
above, he has also translated various articles on philosophical issues
for the Transcendent Philosophy Journal (published by the Islamic Centre
London) as well as the introduction of the Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-Karīm of
Mullā Sadra (written by the esteemed research scholar Aghā Bidār Far)
for the same institution.  
    
 Safder Jaffer  
 Chairman  
 Islamic Education Board  
 The World Federation of KSIMC  
 London  
 Ramadān 1426 ah


