Preface
=======

" According to Islam, from the very beginning, State and Government are
assumed to take as basic principles the religious thinking and ideas. In
accordance with the definition given by the Iranian theologues:

"Religion is equivalent to a complex of rules, which together with the
essence and the moral substance, essays to correlate the acts of
government with ideas of divine inspiration, to answer all needs in the
political and the development of social life sphere."

According to Muslim religion, the religious rule stands for the vital
duty to aspire to Good and to avoid Evil, aspect which involves the
social organization and the cooperation between people in order to
accomplish its future tasks.

Unlike in Occidental society where P^gmatism and Rationalism prevail,
in Islamic society, religion and Politics are interdependent and they
cannot exist without each other.

In the process of studying and defining religion towards social action,
the founder's role takes an important aspect: "Religion is an ordinary
symbolic binding, which through belief and religious ceremonies received
from the creator; it can secure connection and permanence at the same
time".

E.DURKHEIM offers a first sociological definition of religion: "A
religion is a solidary system of beliefs and relative practices of
sacred acts, namely, acts separated from the forbidden ones (beliefs,
practices) which unify all believers in the same spiritual community,
which is called church."

According to Islam, religion consists of "the totality of fundamental
beliefs which refer to human nature and universe and apply to human
life."

Etymologically speaking, the word Islam means "obedience" and
"obedience" signifies submitting God's commands. Submitting means
applying God's orders. The basic principles of Islamic belief are God,
angels (malaaikah), books (kutubullah), messengers (rusulullah), Day of
Judgement (yawmuddin), predestination (al-qadr), and life after death
(akhirah).

The holy book of Islam is the Quran, which represents the main source
of religious thinking in Islam and the traditional source as well of
which formal and external aspects of religion derive. The seven
principles are classified in three basic elements:

o Tawhid (God's oneness) is the most important part of iman (belief).
According to this element: "God is omniscient and almighty. He is kind
and merciful; he is present anytime anywhere, he is the First and the
Last.

o Risalah is the means of communication between God and humanity. This
element is the one designating God's "chosen" on earth, embodied by the
Prophet (Mohamed) and the imams following him.

o Akhirah represents life after death. On preparing for the Doomsday;
man is obliged to do what God asks him to through the "voice" of the
Prophet (Mohamed) and of the imams following him.

On Imam Ali's view, religion can be defined as it follows: 'The basis
of religion is God and the improvement of knowledge to confirm his
existence. This veneration must be done without any doubt or hesitation,
man being fully aware of God's merit, whom he has to follow. That is why
God has chosen prophets among Adam's sons, who through revelation,
allowed them to bestow the content of religion by forbidding polytheism
and by asking to move away from idols."

In the Vll-th century, MOHAMED, an Arab from a Bedouin tribe, preached
a new religion which "confused" the world. This religion arose in the
territories of present Saudi Arabia, in a perimeter dominated by the
practice of religious concepts of "magi".

The new religion has ordered the worshipping of only one God and the
destruction of idols. "Mohamed, aged 40, has begun his mission being
supported by his wife, relatives and some friends and later by poor
people, handicraftsmen, free people and slaves, like Bilal, the negro
slave."

In 612, the prophet, as a result of a vision commanding him to make
public his mission, started his apostolate by laying stress on "God's
might and glory".

Mircea Eliade considered that: "Mohamed didn't intend to create a new
religion. He just wanted to awake his fellow citizens and convince them
they must worship God only, as he is the creator of Sky and Earth and
the only guarantor of fertility."

In 622, Mohamed and his disciples left Mecca to Medina and there came
to an agreement with other Arab groups, this moment being marked as the
period of Arab expansion. In 624, Mohamed defeated the Meccans and for
the first time the Prophet spoke to his followers about the holy war
(JIHAD) against God's opponents.

In accordance with the quranic verses, Islam is the religion of peace
and forgiveness, this representing the starting point in the Prophets'
mission.

The quran imposes each follower to defend religion as duty and natural
right: light in Islam is allowed and legal only when it is framed in a
holy war. It pursues praising God's words and the revival of Islamic
values, any other form of aggression not being permitted."

The first fundamental principle of Islam is the Monotheism, which is
the belief in the unique God called Allah. The second principle is being
represented by the establishment of a social equity on the basis of the
quranic verses, the Holy Book being assimilated with law.

The third principle is represented by the Prophets' role in social
life. For individuals, the Prophecy consists in the sharing of Divine
Law which was revealed by God to the Prophets in order to lead the world
to perfection.

In Islam, it is said that: "priesthood (the imamate) represents the
promotion and the establishment of divine law in society." Imam's duties
are the following:

o The Imam has to be a model which people have to follow in every day
life; he is the secular reflection of quranic virtues.

o He has to establish the order of the society and divide the
responsibilities.

o The imam is supposed to change the divisions between Muslims into one
unity as God sent prophets to guide people to unity, solidarity and
moving away the differences between them.

o He has to promote virtues and forbid evil.

o He has to set equity and social right, to prevent aggression and
discourage social deviation and corruption.

o The Imam is the one leading the war against enemies and divides
properties and income.

o He has to organize the pray ritual.


