The Holders of Authority and Legitimacy in Mahdism Doctrine the Detroit News Coverage
=====================================================================================

Many in the business and political community view support of Israel as
important. But what happens when news editors get in on the act? You end
up with people like editorial page editor for the Detroit News Nolan
Finley, who made many an incendiary comment against those who protested
Israel\\'s actions.

The Detroit News\\' coverage of the Israeli-Hizbullah conflict was
similar to that of the Detroit Free Press although it seemed that the
Detroit News was more sensitive to the feelings of the Lebanese early in
the conflict. One July 13 Detroit News article was titled, "Local
families fear for loved ones\\' safety - Metro Detroit Jews say Israel
is doing what it has to do; Lebanese-Americans call actions
aggressive."

The major difference in the coverage between the Detroit Free Press and
the Detroit News was how Finley showed his colors in several editorials.
Rather than seeing the conflict for what it was, a highly controversial
event affecting many locals, Finley used his pen to make a series of
highly alarmist and extreme articles in support of Israel.

Editors in most American newspapers do not generally sign their names
to such articles out of fear of losing credibility-but not Finley. He
was single-handedly responsible for virulently pro-Israel material while
also presenting stereotypical views of Arabs and Muslims.

Finley didn\\'t develop his aggressiveness as a result of the
Israel-Hizbullah conflict-he was already far to the right even before
the conflict began. In a June 25 Detroit News editorial, titled, "Use
nukes to keep the bad boys in line," Finley grossly simplified
America\\'s relations with "rogue states." He did not give any room for
those states to note their grievances with the U.S. and reduced nations
of millions to a few bogeymen that needed to be wiped out.

Finley did not mention what the fallout from the use of such nuclear
weapons could do to civilian populations and seemed to think that such
ideas are a sign of weakness. He wrote:

Witness the fact that we\\'re wringing our hands while Iran\\'s insane
mullah posse, all hopped up on jihad, push defiantly ahead with a
nuclear program they boast will \\'wipe Israel off the map\\'. … Or that
our soldiers -- our sons and daughters -- are dying everyday in Iraq at
the hands of an enemy that fights in sandals and makes bombs in the back
of somebody\\'s garage. Am I the only one who wonders:

Why don\\'t we just nuke \\'em? What good is all that shock and awe
hardware if we aren\\'t willing to use it to spare our own children from
murderous butchers like the ones who mutilated two American soldiers in
Iraq last week? Why do we waste our breath bargaining with nut balls
like Kim Jong Il when in a blink of an eye we could make him disappear?
The answer: Because we know as well as our enemies do that we\\'ll never
push the button. And so our amazingly potent hardware does us no good in
deterring threats from rogue regimes.

America will never launch the Big One, unless someone drops a big one
on us first.

Finley\\'s article is delusional on a number of levels, not least
because the U.S. is the only country that has used nuclear weapons, not
only once, but twice against Japan during WWII. This use of "shock and
awe hardware" was started by the U.S.-America never was responding to a
nuclear attack when it used its weapons of mass destruction on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. Finley goes on to state that the solution to deterring
"regimes like Iran and North Korea" is the design and use of "smaller
nukes" on those countries.

With such an openly aggressive pro-Israel stance, it should have been
no surprise that Finley would have supported Israel\\'s assault on
Lebanon. In an article titled, "Israel\\'s Right to Defense," Finley
wrote, "The cries that Israel is wreaking a humanitarian disaster in
Lebanon, wantonly killing innocents and destroying homes and
infrastructure, are reaching a hysterical pitch." In a superb example of
double-talk, Finley said that Israel had to be allowed to destroy
Hizbullah, otherwise the "Lebanese people [would be] as vulnerable as
they were before the fighting began."

Finely added:

When the smoke clears, Israel must have a wide buffer between itself
and Hezbollah\\'s Iranian supplied rockets. If Lebanon can\\'t guarantee
that safe space, then Israel must be free to do it itself.

… Compounding the hazard is Israel\\'s tiny size. It\\'s less than
one-sixth the area of Michigan, with roughly the same amount of people.
The enemy is always within shooting distance. If nothing else, we have
relearned during the past two weeks that as long as there are Jews in
the Middle East, someone will try to kill them.

Since when does a country being small mean that it is vulnerable? The
American-backed Israel has the strongest military force in the Middle
East. It is capable of easily crushing its neighbors whenever it sees
fit. It would seem that Finley\\'s notion of Israelis being beleaguered
in relation to their neighbors is so lacking in evidence that he has to
argue on the basis of the size of their country, an utterly clichéd and
irrelevant point of debate.

Although there still were many letters to the Detroit News supporting
Israel unconditionally, after Finley\\'s "Support for Israel\\'s
defense" article, letters in opposition were seen more often. The
Detroit News, to its credit, ran a number of letters criticizing
Finley\\'s position and also allowed guest editorials by Sheikh Mohammad
Ali Elahi, the imam of Dearborn Heights\\' Islamic House of Wisdom, and
Imad Hamad, director of the Michigan Chapter of the American Arab
Anti-Discrimination Committee.

Both Elahi and Hamad were highly critical of Israel\\'s actions against
Lebanon. Hamad was even able to say, "The disturbing fact is that people
who are justifiably critical of Israel immediately become targets of
harassment." However, this did not undo what Finley had said and he
never apologized for his comments.

**Conclusion**

Most editors who are part of the mainstream western media are much more
subtle if they support Israel because readers do not like to feel they
are perusing propaganda. Regarding reporters, they are sometimes biased
but often times may be ignorant. The same may be said about film
producers. However, in all cases, the negative portrayal of Arabs and
Muslims can be seen as a direct attack on the interests of al-Imam
al-Mahdi\\'s movement, which must be addressed.

One may take hope in Warikoo. He visited Lebanon on behalf of the
Detroit Free Press after the conflict and his reporting since the trip
was of markedly better-in this case meaning more balanced-regarding
incidents involving Arabs and Muslims. He wrote several stories that
showed far more empathy for Arabs and Muslims, including a piece titled
"Stares, whispers take toll on metro Muslims - They tire of defending
religion, ethnicity."

Perhaps part of the solution to cutting through ignorance regarding the
Arab and Muslim world is that the Shi\\'a facilitate meetings and visits
by dignitaries. Israel is far ahead of us in this regard and savvy when
it comes to winning the hearts and minds of undecided policy makers.

The Israelis have invested time and money into speaking English and
French fluently which are the lingua franca of intellectualism today
just as Arabic and Persian were in the past. To speak Persian and Arabic
is good and to be commended, but there is a time and place for
everything and we must be flexible to address the rapidly evolving world
we live in today.

Without our having a strong, principled media that operates with
efficient and logical systems, it is difficult for nonbiased but
ignorant reporters to maintain balance and hear our grievances.
Reporters can be influenced by the same propaganda that many in the
pro-Israeli lobby have skillfully produced and even very experienced and
good hearted writers, although careful not to offend sensibilities
ordinarily, may write the same kind of clichéd journalism that fuels
stereotyping in the public. The world must know the truth about what we
are, what we believe in and what we want to see.

American support of Israel may generally seem extreme and
incomprehensible to outsiders, but it is the product of years of
gradually ratcheting up paranoia in the American public about Arabs and
Muslims.

Such paranoia does not make our cause any easier. In the days after
9/11, there was widespread support of the idea that Islam needed to be
better understood and that by allowing terrorism to create splits in the
public, the attackers/ terrorists would have achieved their goal of
sowing chaos. There was sensitivity to the idea that perhaps Muslims and
Islam would have to be addressed in more sophisticated terms than in the
past. Sales of the Qur\\'an and books about Islam were all the rage.

However, today the bestsellers\\' lists are filled with anti-Islam and
anti-Arab books, many relying upon the same old clichéd stereotypes of
the past. Rather than address the important topics and address the
rights and wrongs of both sides of the clash between the West and Islam,
it is discouraging to see that for the most part, popular literature and
media on the issue of Arabs and Islam are tremendously emotional,
lacking in depth and perpetuating the notion that Arabs and Muslims are
predisposed to violence.

The war on Iraq might not have taken place if emotional arguments based
on conjecture rather than evidence had been screened out by the media.
What the American media did was to amplify whatever anti-Arab and
anti-Islam biases existed in the population, reducing very the complex
issues to a bogeyman-Saddam was a vicious dictator to be sure but hardly
an ally of Al Qaeda-who was to be seen as the source of terrorism in
America. With the fall of Saddam, the Iraqi people were to receive the
Americans with open arms, throwing flowers and rose water. This did not
happen. In fact, the opposite occurred.

Outside America there was almost universal opposition to the war, based
on most of the concerns that Bush and his ilk ignored or ridiculed but
now are known to be valid. For example, the French voiced the concern
that the war in Iraq was doomed to failure with no plan for a civil war
or the struggle spreading to other countries.

Instead of taking the idea seriously, it popularly became a sign of
patriotism to refer to criticism of the war effort as being
"French-inspired," a stance that the American media did not oppose.

But because the French were sophisticated in making their stance known,
they have greater leverage today on the issues that matter. So to for
that matter does Qatar because of Al Jazeera\\'s active involvement,
however biased that also maybe. The same cannot be said for the
followers of al-Imam al-Mehdi. Many Americans, even at the highest
levels of the government cannot tell the difference between a Shi\\'i or
a Sunni. We may laugh, but our lack of placing representatives across
the western world, trained in the ways of the media, is part of the
problem.

As followers of al-Imam al-Mahdi, our community must make a more
concerted effort to reach out to the ordinary people of the western
world and in their languages if we are to assist our Imam in creating a
platform for action there. By merely perpetuating misinformation and
emotional appeals rather than a plan for action in doing this ultimately
everyone involved loses out-and that is not only the followers of
al-Imam al-Mahdi but the people who might come to our side inside
American and Israeli borders.


