Religious Deviations
====================

The religious history of mankind reveals that not only have religious
differences crept into the purity of religion, but in many cases further
alienation has existed because of those who have been motivated by
politics and avarice to deceive themselves and/or the people. We are
reminded of Ayatullah Muttaheri's words: Sometimes a religious creed is
misused in a social system. [^9]

In any case divisions, many of which have been accompanied by bloody
battles, have marred the essence of religion of those in the past. On
the other hand, there are those who have gradually grown away from the
Path, replacing it with a cultural by-way. Whatever the case, today we
witness a mere glimmer of that which had once been a powerful glow.

**Hindusim, Buddhism and tribal cultures**

Taking into account some of these areas regarding religious
differences, we should mention that Hinduism and Buddhism still exhibit
some areas within their ancient books which allude to a time when
polytheism was not their focus. Tribal cultures also appear to contain
elements of a past monotheism.

**Judaism**

Unlike the previously-mentioned religions, Judaism [^10] , as we now
describe it, originated from an identifiably pure source as seen with
Prophet Abraham (a.s.) and was passed on by the Will of Allah through
major and minor Prophets (a.s.), as is witnessed Qur'anically: "We did
aforetime grant to the Children of Israel the Book, the Power of
Command, and Prophethood; We gave them for sustenance things good and
pure; and We favoured them above the nations." Surah Al Jathiyah
(45:16).

However, as also witnessed Qur'anically, those who were entrusted with
this Pathway of Allah fell away from His Truth. So far did they fall
that we see, even in their scriptures where human sacrifice, for a time,
became part of their ritualistic belief.[^11] Their un-Godly Pathway was
prompted by their arrogance and wilfulness,

and Allah has given us this insight into their thought processes:
"….they inherited the Book, but they chose the vanities of this world
saying: (everything) will be forgiven us" Surah Al A'raf (7:169). Had
they chosen to remain on the Straight Pathway it would have led them,
even as their Scriptures testified, to acceptance of the the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and the perfection of Islam.

\>From Judaism have come a number of sects - today's orthodox branch of
Judaism has stemmed from Pharisaism, the prevailing religion at the time
of Jesus (a.s.). Branches of Judaism include the ascetics and Cabalists
with their esoteric teachings, as well as the modernists who want an end
to male circumcision and the Sabbath, and the upholding of what is known
sin (in reality they have completely dispensed with all the old
teachings referred to as Torath Yahveh or Yirath Yahveh - see note
10);

Zionism is not an accepted religious branch of Judaism, being more a
political faction and is, in fact, dismissed as heretical by the true
orthodoxy while being eagerly accepted by irreligious Jews. However, a
growing number of Rabbi's and sects are teaching that unless Zionism is
a part of their system of belief, they are not true Jews.

**Christianity**

Digressions in Christianity came early in its existence. History will
testify to the fact that for a short time during the early Christian
era, the true Church responded to the needs and teachings of the people.
However, with the Rome-centred deviation and spread to the farthest
reaches of the known world, the truth became anathema and alarming
philosophies and practices became orthodoxy with devastation for those
who believed otherwise.

In Christianity monotheism was supplanted by polytheism. Of this the
Qur'an makes mention: "They take their priests and their anchorites to
be their Lords in derogation of Allah, and they take (as a deity) Christ
the son of Mary; Yet they were commanded to worship but One God: There
is no God but He." Surah Al Tawbah (9:31)

Digression from monotheism and Divine Guidance, brought corruption and
arrogance. History witnessed great wealth and power in the hands of the
ruling Popes; the merging of Church and State, through client Royals;
loss of social justice with vast gulfs between the rich and poor;
resultant slavery; denial of education to the common people, and
anathematisation of science as being evil.

History elaborates on the many military forays into unknown regions,
blessed and financed by the church; wars waged on countless unsuspecting
indigenous populations the most famous of these holy wars, the Crusades,
promising immediate absolution for those who would rescue the Holy Land
from the evil Muslims.

Today's Christianity owes its survival to several factors: (a) the
commencement in the 13th Century Renaissance lasting approximately 300
years, in which ordinary people demanded their rights to education,
skills and cultural learning. (b) The Seventy Years Captivity which
commenced in 1305 with a French Pope, Clement V being crowned in Lyon,

and the papal court being moved from Rome to Avignon in 1309 where it
remained throughout the reign of the next seven Popes, ending in 1377
with return of the papal throne to Rome under Pope Gregory XI. (c ) The
Reformation in 1517 with Martin Luther's stand against certain Church
practices, and from which the Protestant movement sprang. The
Reformation went further, questioning Church dogma, with
reinterpretation and publishing of Scriptures, a blow to the established
Church from which she has never fully recovered.

It must be noted that none of the above factors, the Reformation
included, brought back the monotheism taught by Jesus (a.s.). Hence its
polytheism continued, in essence preventing recognition of the revealed
truth of Islam, still leading man away from salvation. Shifts in
Christian religious beliefs have continued and may be seen in
innumerable diverse sects and cults. Man's spiritual desire for
monotheism may be seen in the large numbers of adherents leaving the
churches, searching for religious substance.

**Contemporary New Age Religions**

Cults: It would be very remiss not to mention the "New Age" cults and
religions which are gaining sway throughout the world, particularly the
Western world at this time. Many appear to be a melange of elements of
Hinduism, Buddhism, Wicca (witchcraft), Gaia worship (Earth worship),
Goddess worship and further hocus pocus, mostly influenced by
Pantheism.

Pantheism et al. : Recognising that Pantheism is an ancient cult, it is
included because of its far-reaching effect in newly-merging cults, even
in some modern Christian teachings. In Pantheism we note that "God" is
in everything and everything is God. Therefore, one may live as one
chooses, for to obey one's instincts and desires is to be obedient to
"God". Seemingly in conflict is what is termed Deep Ecology in which the
inherent belief is that man is of no more intrinsic value than an animal
or plant, etc. However, if pantheism over-rides, then all are equally
"God" .

Further into this aspect is that which is now designated as
"speciesism". An interesting quotation from financier, Sir James
Goldsmith gives further indication of this: No matter how brilliant the
technological revolutions, no matter how useful the economic and
political initiatives, there can only be hope if man cast away his
anthropocentric delusions… and find his place in nature." [^12]

Speciesism states that man must remember that he is no more valuable
than a blade of grass or an ant. Therefore we find man being tossed from
one extreme to another - from God to insect! For him to consider his
origin as being of special significance and nobility, is a view regarded
as harmful and incorrect.

Goddess and Gaia worship: An article in the Religion column of
(U.S.)Time magazine May 6, 1991 headed When God was a Woman, with the
sub-heading Worshippers of Mother Earth are part of a Goddess
resurgence, mentions the following: "To mark Earth Day last week, four
women and two men stood on a hilltop outside Mount Horeb, Wisconsin,
literally praying to Mother Earth………..

The ceremonies were part of a growing U.S. spiritual movement, Goddess
worship, the effort to create a female-centred focus for spiritual
expression. Most participants are women who seek a deity other than God
the Father, and a faith less patriarchal than the Judeo-Christian
tradition seems to offer. Adherents claim the movement involves as many
as 100,000 U.S. women. …… Isis or Astarte are often invoked,
[though]most worship a vague generic "Goddess" often depicted as Mother
Earth or Gaia, in line with environmental awareness…..some old-line
churches are opening up to the Goddess".

Feminism: It is notable that in one North American mosque, Islam has
been tainted by Feminism, having a female muezzin and a female Imam to
lead the prayers. Certainly placing women's un-Islamic desires for
leadership ahead of obedience to Allah, upholds what has been written by
Imam Ali, Commander of the faithful (a.s.): Do not obey them even in
good things so that they may not attract you to evils.[^13]

Syncretism: Syncretism, classified as "Religion of all Religions". This
is not Islam but "the blending of the best of all religions"…. reminding
of the Pagan Meccans when they suggested to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
that they would bow down and worship "his god" if he would worship
theirs. Syncretism is part of a global agenda reported by the first
General Secretary of the World Council of Churches, Dr. W.A. Visser 't
Hooft as such:

The word syncretism should be reserved for another type of religious
attitude which deserves to have its own name because it is such an
important, persistent and widespread religious phenomenon.

This is the view that holds that there is no unique revelation in
history, that there are many different ways to reach the divine reality,
that all formulations of religious truth or experience are by their
nature inadequate expressions of that truth, and that it is necessary to
harmonize as much as possible all religious ideas and experiences so as
to create one universal religion for all mankind." [^14]

Islam's inflexibility in this regard is being questioned, even by some
Muslims, as other religions adjust belief to fit a global theology.
Interfaith organisations are working towards this end with the
development of a new "Interfaith Ministry". Prayers intoned have
segments from all religions, and one phrase used in a recent combined
prayer was "La Illaha Illallah, Muhammadan Rasooloollah" which so
completely negated every other polytheistic utterance - obviously this
phrase has not been understood by the authors of the prayer. We await
with interest the day their vision is unveiled.

**2.3 Human responses to deviations - revolutions without divine
guidance**

Man who is unschooled in true spiritual matters has no base from which
he may judge matters of spiritual significance. This does not prevent
him from using his natural inclination towards justice in which he may
determine that ills have resulted from religious deviations. This has
tended to lead man to discard religion entirely without searching for
truth, at times proclaiming it to be the causation of all ills.

One result of religious digression, Revolution without the guidance of
Allah, may be seen as the great swing away from religion itself.
Prompted by social injustice wearing the guise of religion, the swing
away from "religion" after the reformation, continued in the direction
of politics free of religion. In eighteenth century France, revolution
took place during which time thousands of aristocrats were executed,
including the King, who had claimed the Divine Right of Kings. During
this time that an ugly scene was enacted wherein a prostitute was lifted
high above the cheering crowds and given the title, "Goddess of
Reason".

Atheism finds ready root in this fertile soil. Other revolutions were
the direct result of uprising against unjust and oppressive regimes
labeled as having had Divine favour. While freedom may be the primary
goal, materialism appears to transcend it, and Marx, for example,
believed that freedom is nothing except consciousness of historical
necessity.

Although an intellectual, he never appeared to give credence to the
higher essence of man, or a Higher power. As late as 1986 another former
Russian President, Mikhail Gorbachev is reported as saying: We must lead
a determined struggle against religion, and we must reinforce atheist
propaganda" [^15]

The upholding of atheistic policy, even while upholding human rights
values and ethics, eventually leads to destabilisation - usually this
comes about due to man's unfailing tendency towards tyranny in order to
control the multitudes.

**3.1 Responses to revolutions and wars - the UN and its
background.**

Man's condition without spiritual guidance has caused pain and
tribulation upon the Earth. It was not without reason that Allah has
instructed us of man's many failings. The greatest of these with regard
to human Society is his propensity toward tyranny and war. Therefore,
Society has had to look for ways in which to curb the outcome of this
evil.

As early as 1307 the French legislator, Pierre Dubois drafted a plan
for forming a union of Christian nations under the lead of the King of
France. However, there have always been those who have believed in unity
for mankind as a whole, and in contemporary times the principle is to
seek peace through global unity, irrespective of religion.

The late 19th, and early 20th centuries saw Western European efforts
for prevention of war through the Hague Conferences, which proved
unsuccessful with the outbreak of the First World War. In 1918,
associations to prevent wars were formed in Europe and sections of early
treaties, namely Westphalia and Vienna, were included in the Versaille
peace treaty, as well as proposals for a League of Nations which was
formalised on 1st January 1920 with a membership of 28 Allied and 14
neutral States.

This membership later increased to some 60 States. The purpose was to
prevent future wars by establishing relations on a basis of justice and
honour, promoting co-operation and supplying material and intellectual
aid. The official seat was Geneva and the official languages French and
English.

As organisations before it, the League of Nations proved not only
inadequate, but in some aspects its decision-making and lack of control
were considered negative. Its failure is considered to have been due to
cases wherein "vital interests" of powerful totalitarian nations were
involved. Only the minor states were pressured to obey the League. The
final Assembly was held on April 8th 1946.

**UNITED NATIONS**

The United Nations came about in response to the failure of the League
of Nations but its aims did not change. Representatives of nations
opposed to Germany, Italy and Japan, met in San Francisco in April 1945,
working on what we now know to be the Charter of the United Nations
which was signed in June 1945. The UN was established on October 24th,
1945 before the end of the Second World War, and before the final League
of Nations Assembly.

The UN Charter has many fine aspects relating to the maintaining of
peace on the basis of justice, with promotion of friendly relations and
co-operation in all matters for all nations. There is also commitment to
the collective encouragement for respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion.

Nation Members are encouraged to settlement of disputes where peace and
justice are not compromised. It is said that States that are not members
are also to observe the same principles, although the UN has no
jurisdiction in the internal affairs of States unless the UN Council is
taking action to settle a dispute. World Health, Education, Affairs in
respect of Women and Children, even of religion, receive attention in
Covenants which are duly ratified by member States.

Some authors have considered the UN Charter to be approaching the
excellence of civil laws relating to governance and justice, which were
designed by Imam Ali (a.s.). Nevertheless, there are some UN Covenants,
sections and statements which may be regarded as ambiguous, or may even
translate into actions being disadvantageous, depending on
perspective.

Therefore, we are reminded of the fact that although of the highest
degree of excellence, it is still the works of men's hands. Looking at
the personalities of men who have had the most to do with this charter
and this organisation, one cannot but see that it has not been brought
about through obedience to the Creator, but as a very clever
interpretation of mankind's contemporary needs.

One personality who had a great deal to do with the UN, being the first
Director of UNESCO, was Sir Julian Huxley. His academic and scientific
record is impeccable and many of his writings show that he was a man of
intellect, a great man by human standards, an Evolutionist who advocated
scientific principles to moral, social and political issues. We gauge
further of his feelings on the spiritual and eternal in the following:
In the evolutionary pattern of thought, there is neither need nor room
for the supernatural.

The earth was not created; it evolved. So did all the animals and
plants that inhabit it, including our human selves, mind and soul as
well as brain and body. So did religion. The Humanist Frame (1961) p.
18

**3.2 UN in practice as opposed to its charter.**

While recognising the charter and its very important Human Rights
statements we question: Does the UN function more effectively than
earlier charters and conventions? Certainly it has remained for a longer
period of time than past similar organisations.

There have been times when the UN has, as in the case of the League of
Nations, been unable to withstand the contentions and actions of strong
nations. In many instances it has been referred to as a "paper tiger".
This is particularly so in recent years with the growing strength of the
US together with its allies. We have noted the complete rejection of the
UN stand regarding certain nations, and the UN's inability to make reply
and to prevent wars. We have noted in some instances that injustice is
not perceived, and rejection of its mandates goes without penalty.

Or in other instances the UN has delivered a just decision and in later
years this decision has been revoked by members with a different
agenda.[^16] In 1850 an erudite William Penn said: Either nations will be
governed by God or they will be ruled by tyrants. This is the case with
nations undoubtedly, but what of the UN?

**4.1 False Mahdism from non-religious viewpoint, political and
apolitical**

The coming of a Saviour from the non-religious point of view within the
framework of politics: (a) One would have to consider that in many
instances man is placing his trust in the UN as a body which will
ultimately save the Earth through wise governance(b) On the other hand
there are those who believe that the UN will make way for the coming New
World Order which will bring salvation for those on Earth. This latter
theory makes way for a tyrannical form of world Government.

**4.2 False Mahdism from religious aspect**

As seen in section 2.2 there are many false teachings. Of Judaism we
find the belief of "The Messiah". This doctrine does not accept of what
is known of Imam Al Mahdi (a.s.), so it is reasonable to suppose that it
is a false Mahdi.

In Christianity there are several beliefs regarding the return of Jesus
(a.s.) but there is no teaching which equates with Imam Mahdi (a.s.).
Some go as far as to preach against any that would rise up in such
circumstances, for all other than Jesus (a.s.) will be false. However,
there are those who believe that the return of "Jesus" will place Jews
at the head of world government.

Of the New Age religions there are several areas of concern: In Gaia
worship it is taught that God is to "mate" with Mother Earth and Lord
Matreya will come forth. This would have to qualify as a false Mahdi as
he is to save the Earth. Syncretists have probably forgotten any need at
all for a Mahdi, as they have all the love and peace and are working on
formulating the "best of religions"; Pantheist-based religionists see no
need whatsoever for salvation after all they are "one with God and
nature".

\>From the point of view of Islam we know that there have been false
Mahdi's in the past, and no doubt in the future it is possible where the
pathway has been diverted.

**5. Conclusion: Recognition of true Mahdi (a.s.) and its outcome.**

"Allah has promised to make those of you who believe and do good deeds,
successors in the land, as He has made those before them, and will
establish their religion which He has chosen for them and change their
fear into security. They will worship Me, and ascribe nothing as a
partner to Me. Those who disbelieve are the wicked indeed." Surah An-Nur
(24:55) This verse which refers to the establishment of a Just, and
Righteous, Government by Allah's Vicegerent, our Imam of the Age (a.s.),
undoubtedly is the promise for which the soul of mankind longs. We note
again the repeated theme of Islam, monotheism and remember the commands
and decrees of Allah which accompany it.

Over the centuries Believers have been told of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and
the great events which will occur when he appears to mankind. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) told of his coming(a.s.): Allah will raise a man from
my progeny, from my Ahlul-Bayt, by whom the earth will be filled with
justice thoroughly, just as it has been filled with injustice and
oppression[^17], identifying him : Al Mahdi is from my progeny from the
sons of Fatima (a.s.) [^18]

All Muslims have knowledge of this to some extent - though differences
remain in traditional understanding of the birth and history of the 12th
Imam(a.s.). The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (a.s.) has quoted
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) as saying, Happiness is for the one who will
attend the Gha'im of my Ahlul-Bayt and will follow him before his
rise.

This person will love his lovers and hate his enemies, and will accept
the leadership of the Imams from before his advent. These ones are my
friends, and are the most sincere members of my Ummah whom I honour very
much." [^19]. In some of the other collections we see the following: The
Holy Prophet (pbuh) said: 'The person who dies and has not known the
Imam of his time has died the same as one who died during the Age of
Ignorance." [^20]

The Imam of our Age, Imam Al Mahdi (a.s.) is , by the determination and
Command of Allah to bring a Governance which will restore the order of
mankind and the Earth. For us to be unaware of this vital part of our
religious heritage is to place us in danger of Jahilliyah, not only in
death, but in the way we live and in our system of values.

This era has witnessed turmoil of immense proportions worldwide.
Morality and decency have been lost and justice has dwindled. Humanity
staggers from one terrifying calamity to another and the world itself is
reeling under the weight of wretchedness. Mankind has truly entered dark
days. The door of hope is that of the return of our Imam (a.s.).

However, the timing is with Allah, and we do not know how long we will
have to wait. Nevertheless, even to be awaiting his deliverance gives us
hope and prevents despair. As has been quoted by Ayatollah Ibrahim Amini
in his book, Imam Zain Al-Abideen (AS) has been reported to have said,
"To hope for deliverance and release in itself functions as the most
profound form of deliverance."

**References:**

[^1] Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahheri, Man and Universe, p.86
[^2] Imam Ali, Nahjol Balagha (compiled by Sayyid Shareef ar-Razi)
Sermon 197
[^3] Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahheri, Man and Universe, p.96
[^4] Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, vol.3 p.109.
[^5] Ibid, vol.3 p.151; Ibn Hajar, Al-Sawaiq al-Muhriqah, pp. 184,234;
[^6] Kamal-ud-Din, p.445
[^7] Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahheri, Man and Universe, p.95
[^8] Al-Allamah as-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabatabai, Al- Mizan, vol.
3 pp. 167,168
[^9] Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahheri, Man and Universe , p.85
[^10] Originally known as Torath Yahveh (instruction or moral law
revealed by Yahveh) or Yirath
Yahveh (the fear and reverence of Yahveh (Allah)
[^11] Bible - Old Testament - Jer. 7:30,31
[^12] Sir James Goldsmith, 1989 Adam Smith Lecture, London., as reported
in The Roman Chronicle
Bolton, England, No. 57, December 1989.
[^13] Imam Ali, Nahjol Balagha, Sermon 79.
[^14] Dr. W.A. Visser 't Hooft, No Other Name: The Choice Between
Syncretism and Christian
Universalism, p.11.
[^15] F. Thorn, Gorbachev's Politics of Religion, The Salibury Review,
England, Spt. 1988, p.46.
[^16] Resolution 3379 (1975) qualified Zionism as a form of racism. This
was revoked by resolution 4686
in 1989.
[^17] Al-Musannif, vol 11, p.371; Also found in Sahih Muslim and Sahih
Bukhari
[^18] Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol.4, p.107
[^19] Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol.52, p.129
[^20] Musnad-I-Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, vol.2p.83, vol. 3, p.446, vol.4,p.96;
Sahih Bukhari vol.5,p.13;
Sahih Muslim vol.6,p.21, no.1849.


