2. Shiism, the Historical Moment of Division
============================================

The term Shiism has appeared making reference to Imam Ali's followers,
the first ruler of Prophet's house and the one who first embraced the
Islamic religion. He was assured after Mohamed's death he would be
called his successor and heir. The supreme proof for the shiits that Ali
was the legitimate successor of the Prophet was the Ghadir Kuhumn event,
when Mohamed assigned Ali as the major protector (walayat-immah).

After the Prophet's death, Ali's partisans believed the caliphate and
the religious authority (marjaya-ilmi) belonged to him. Instead, the
Prophet's close friends didn't appoint Imam Ali their caliph, situation
which led to division and the forming inside Islam of the "Ali's
partisans - the shiah" minority. This minority was first condemned due
to the political circumstances of the moment.

The fist appointed Caliph, Abu Bakr, also called "the imam of God"
(khalifat al-rasul), has designated Omar as his successor in 634, to
whose succession followed Othman who was killed in 644.

The new caliph of Medina was appointed Imam Ali, circumstance which
marked the short ascension of the shiits. Due to the divergences with
Muavie, the governor of Syria, there took place many military confronts
which finally determined some of Ali's adepts to leave him (the
kharigits). In 661, at Kuffa, one kharigit assassinated Ali, moment
which coincided with Muavie's appointment as the new caliph of Medina
and which marked the beginning of the dark period of Shiism.

The differences between Shiits and Sunnis don't lie in principles but
in spirit "Shiism has doubts in accepting the idea of majority and
pursues the ethic superiority of an active minority or the rational
defense of oppressors". This idea was expressed, in 683, in the
fundament of revolt of Imam Hossein and the other 72 allies of his,
revolt which ended with his martyrdom at Kerballah.

The doctrinaire essence of Shiism could be summarized in the expression
"Great Hope", which consists in the final victory over oppression and
oppressors, through the appearance of the divinized Imam, (mahdaviat).

"Over the history, the appearance of the savior Imam prepared the
collective conscience in order to face Mahdy's revolution and the
world-wide reform."

The Mahdaviate followed up the religious rebirth by respecting
Prophets' experiences and considered the incomplete temporary rebirths
as dangerous, being known they couldn't determine people adhere to
religion unless a sacred personality pertaining to the Prophets'
category was present among them.

The Iranian philosopher, Dr. A. Souroush stated that: "The Mahdaviate
is accepted in our religious society. It is part of the religious life
of our nation both before the Islamic Revolution and moreover, in
present, when Islamic government is developing. Mahdy's epiphany will
usher in for the Islamic world a new era of justice and wealth."


**3. Philosophy- Politics and the great thinkers of Islam**

One of the greatest philosophers of Islam, FARABI (257-338 according to
selenary calendar), brought a major contribution to the political
philosophy of Islam. He was the one who debated upon the bases of
political judgment and social ideas with regard to town in the Islamic
world. According to FARABI's conception, Politics is part of Philosophy
or of a well organized system, presented by philosophers like a rational
structured organism.

The tradition FARABI followed in elaborating the political thought was
taken over from the great philosophers of ancient Greece, Platon and
Aristotle. Two of his most important philosophical works are The Civil
Politics and Judgments of the inhabitants of the city of Utopia
(Judgments of Utopia's inhabitants).

'The Civil Politics" presented a hierarchy of existence:

1. origin in primary condition;
2. origin in secondary condition;
3. active reason in third condition;
4. instinct in fourth condition;
5. form in fifth condition;
6. substance in sixth condition;

Further on, the author defined and explained each condition reaching
"the tenth reason", also called "active reason", which, in his opinion,
would be responsible for the way the spiritual and material existence of
human being are organized. His conclusion is that perfection can be
reached provided that people get rid of their savage instincts and leave
aside the material world.

In Judgments of Utopia's inhabitants, reasoning followed the same
direction except for it was much more detailed.

The first chapter, Introduction to the primary essence, described man
as having no defects and acquiring eternal existence and absolute
perfection. In the next chapters, the author spoke about God's oneness
and his qualities.

The philosopher described the way existent things take shape and
depicted the hierarchy of existence in the chapter Introduction to the
world's appearance from primary cause. In depicting the world, FARABI
inspired himself from the tradition of Greek philosophy, familiar to him
from the Neo-Platonists' work.

In the fifth chapter, FARABI, mentioned that man's way to virtue
depends on the urban community which can stimulate dignified good acts
of the urban inhabitants and of peoples in general, making possible the
aspiration for the accomplishment of this ideal. All this social
structure is possible only in the presence of a leader who encourages
good manners in his town and helps people understand and respect laws.

This system called monarchy or ruling is elected by people. Therefore,
through Politics it is understood the definite expression of people.
FARABI considered that man's perfection arises from the collaboration of
two spiritual forces, the theoretical reason which is gifted to
understand the truth and the practical reason, which perceives beautiful
perfect things, contributing to people's understanding of dignified true
acts. In conclusion, man differs from animal by the uncommon strength of
will, called choice.

Choice is a more profound and more rational conscience than meanings
and imagination. Choice represents an aspiration to perfection and the
procedure in order to reach it. According to FARABI, man is above all a
social human being. Solitude impoverishes him and finally makes him
loose humanity and qualities that represent the basic condition to reach
happiness.

FARABI stated that society has two basic components:

o The complete society (humanity (big), nations (medium), town (small),
and confession).
o The incomplete society (family, rural environment).
The philosopher appreciated that only in complete societies man can
aspire to virtue and supreme perfection. He developed the concept of a
worldwide community whose ruler must be the leader of the entire
civilized world not only of a nation or of community.

Continuing FARABI's work, ABUL HASSAN AMERI considered that "man in his
essence is a social being and only the keeping of good traditions
(sunnat) might lead him to happiness. Tradition is an explanation given
to reason and teaches man how to avoid and distinguish between meanness.
Politics is a proper transposition of customs by politician in city's
social life. The politician is indebted to rule people firmly to the
goal dictated by tradition. His goal consists in accomplishing every
person's welfare in accordance with his needs."

In AMERI's view, wisdom, honor, courage and sense of justice embodied
the same meanings and features like in Platon and Aristotle's. AMERI
divided cities in good ones (Utopian) and bad ones (anti-Utopian).
Speaking of equity and inequity, he suggested the tyrant to respect
tradition accrediting the idea that respecting law is compulsory for
everyone, even for prophets like MOHAMED and Imam AL AMERI specified
that proper Politics is

determined by two elements:

o Tradition and proper appliance of laws;

o Politician's dignity and wisdom;

When these factors strengthen, society will be able to reach happiness.
The stability of a society is assured if good traditions are respected
and the politician is dignified. Bad customs always lead to the
weakening of the society and unworthy politicians determine
disagreements between people and even worse they cause the destruction
of the society.

In AMERI's opinion, the best tradition belongs to the Islamic religion,
and in his vision, the Persian king embodies the best politician. In his
paper, Alsaadatol Assad, AMERI considers that "God created kings to
materialize his wishes and to protect slaves. This is why I say kings
are God's followers on earth. God appointed them in their position and
not people. God Almighty appointed him Monarch and not those who are
being ruled and aspire to perfection.

AMERI mentioned three fundamental elements, which pave the Monarch the
way to wisdom:

- Education, legislation and the system of moral standards.
- Ruling projects depending on demographic factors, the support for
handicraftsmen.
- Election of high officials, ministers and counselors among
submissive.

The monarch can reach perfection and integrity if he respects the right
prophecy and the consolidation of the perfect kingdom. AMERI believed
that Politics cannot reach the wisdom necessary to lead society to
happiness, unless there is a connection between the Imam and the
Monarch. This approach of Politics is called Imamat. Kingdom does not
infringe The Imamate, the perfect kingdom is the Imamate, and politician
is God's representative.

The worst kingdom is that of tyranny and its goal is to enslave people
and impoverish the society.

AMERI appreciated that the Islamic prophet is a man embodying both
Prophecy and Kingdom. The result of his actions conducts to the grandeur
prosperity and nations' progress, driving the tyrants away from their
throne.

The greatest merit of the Prophet was that he brought with him the good
traditions, which are the basis of religious principles, traditions that
he implemented in the social life of the strongest kingdoms,
consolidating important dynasties. Thus, if Shariah relies on these
factors, Prophet's followers, politicians and kings relying on tradition
and Prophet's preaching become the Imams of their times.

Moreover, these people are perceived as sources of forgiveness and
divine mercy for the whole world, attitude, which should be followed by
the entire humanity.

ABUZEID ABDULRAHMAN IBN KHALDUN, considered "the sociologist of
tyranny", was one of the most important philosophers of the Islamic
world. He witnessed two major historical events: the dissolution of the
state of the Seljuciz Turks by the Othmans and the forming of the
Mongolic state. IBN KHALDUN met TAMERLAIN six months before his death,
during besiege of Damascus.

That period was one of transition, Europe passing from Middle to Modern
Ages. IBN KHALDUN was born 11 years after Dante's death being
contemporary with Boccacio and Petrarca. It has to be mentioned that
soon after the Muslim philosopher's death, printing press was invented.
All his work and especially Muqaddama were spread by the Othman kings.

Multilateral research of Politics during early Islam didn't find place
in the ideological circles of Islam resuming itself to quotations and
legends chosen according to the moment. In IBN KHALDUN's view: 'The more
crisis and struggle for power were increasing; emotional confrontation
was amplifying, situation which drew the attention upon certain sects
and confessions and less upon tyranny.

Therefore, the tyrant, member of a sect, was being adulated by his
adepts who believed by the force he was empowered with he could
eliminate the enemies existent in social life." IBN KHALDUN exposed the
idea that: 'Tyranny is an inevitable natural form of Politics in all
human communities, and it can be compared with the stars' move, plants'
growing and with maternal love, elements which lie at the basis of
humanity's perpetuation.

The philosopher considered the Utopian town as fantastic but unreal.
This statement bases on the idea that: "Humanity needs society being
obliged to have a leader. The ruler's acts must rely on Shariat, all
members of the community being obliged to respect the laws which were
sent to them by Divinity."

For Muslim kings, Politics must be done in compliance with Shariat, and
the promulgated laws must be of divine inspiration consenting the
aspirations to enrichment and the fanatical manifestations of the
king.

IBN KHALDUN defined human society as: "the mutual coexistence of people
in a specific city, or in one of its arias, based on the relations of
ethnical kinship and aiming at satisfying personal necessities, as
cooperation in the name of existence is determined by human being's
nature."

In this sense, IBN KHALDUN considered that the most obvious example
would be TAHER IBN HOSSEIN's letter to his son ABDULLAH IBN TAHER, which
was a collection of religious, ethical and political rules conceived in
order to rule the kingdom: "King is one of the members of society,
situated on its highest rank, and rules people so that nobody can hurt
community. Therefore, the sense of the existence of monarchy consists in
this."

IBN KHALDUN appreciated that the followers of the Holy Book (the Quran)
and of the Prophet are in minority compared to the followers of Other
Books (the Bible, the Tore), whom he called pagans. He considered them
numerically superior, situation which would facilitate the building of
cities and states.

Thus, the philosopher stated that: "there's no need to bring any other
arguments which to prove the necessity of prophecy except for the belief
in the existence of prophecy and the maintaining of order through
Shariat. Monarchy known during the entire history of humanity is the
supreme power held by a member of society in order to maintain order."

The book "Introduction" is divided in six parts, each of it approaching
human society with the mention that the third part explicitly treats the
notions of city, state, caliphate, monarchy and hierarchy of
government.

The city is governed by a wise ruler who in IBN KHALDUN's vision is
vested with power so that he wouldn't let anyone hurt the citizens. In
defending the city from the attacks of the enemies he uses the force of
guns. "In Bedouin society, appreciated and respected old men assume
their authority, stopping the members of the tribe acting violent one
each other. In case of an outer aggression courageous young soldiers
assume their role as protectors, therefore the duty of defending the
country can be accomplished provided that the defenders should be
fanatics."

IBN KHALDUN added: "In case of danger, such a fanatic attitude, to
which task is protecting people, residences and lands, is necessary.
Prophecy and the forming of State cannot be accomplished without fight
being known disobedience is a characteristic of human nature. Man cannot
be asked to do a thing or other without being convinced or obliged by
means of war.

The philosopher was convinced that the best example of tight ethnical
relations can be noticed in "the environment of those leading a similar
way of life to that of Arab Bedouins, the existent social order impeding
the relations between different tribes (Marriages to people from
different ethnics)", IBN KHALDUN referred to the existence of a basic
factor in society and Politics which he called "priority force".

Therefore: "the central power can appear only in one clan but not in
all. As this cannot be instituted except with the victory upon the
others, it is necessary that the thirst for power of the clan's members
to be stronger than the other forms of fanaticism. When defeating all,
they'll be empowered to rule forever. Hence, power is always maintained
by a specific fanaticism of a certain clan."

Analyzing the bases of social life, the author drew the conclusion that
fanaticism led to the foundation of monarchy which represents the final
form of expressing fanaticism. In KHALDUN's view, not any ruler can be
called shah, and not any public order can be a monarchy.

In conclusion: "King (shah) and monarchy represent the highest stages
of progress which human society can reach. In other words, although
tyranny is a cause of the forming and consolidation of power, obedience
towards ruler isn't bound to violence but to his natural superiority and
authority, universal fanaticism being a guarantee of the efficiency ui
authority. Still, these conditions aren't always and forever enough to
rule.

Monarchy is tyranny and it is superior to ruling because ruling means
control and the one who detains the power even if he is a ruler he
doesn't use violence in the relations with his obedient, while monarchy
means control and rule based on violence.

Monarchy initially developed into tribes with various infrastructure
and different dispositions. Kingdom, consisting in all people embracing
fanatical principles, appeared there where fanaticism was stronger.
Hence, it can be stated that tyranny is the last stage of fanaticism.
IBN KHALDUN appreciated that: "In Politics, monarchy promotes the Good
and the Dignity.

The monarch is respectable to be God's deputy on earth. He is an
intermediary between divinity and state and has the duty to rule the
latter. He is highly regarded for his status to which origin stays in
fanaticism. Monarchy is a necessity of collective life and requires
legislation and order. If laws are elaborated by wise officials, the
prevailing Politics of the State is wise and if laws are of divine
provenience, Politics is religious". IBN KHALDUN divided political rule
of society in three categories:

1. natural monarchy (people's life develops according to necessities
and its innate feelings);

2. political monarchy (based on the rational rule of society in the
name of utility and of getting rid of the sins committed in laic
life);

3. the caliphate (social rule according to Shariat with the purpose of
satisfying the laic interests and those related to the belief in life
after death, in this case Politics being ruled by God's deputy on earth
on behalf of protecting religion and human society.)

Several harmful aspects and phenomena can characterize monarchy but
overall it does not contain a negative prevalent role. Religion does not
utter monarchy must be given up but only judges its passions and
violence: the purpose of religious precepts does not mean giving up
reason but its use in an adequate way. When monarchy brings violence and
cruelty with it, Shariat forbids it considering it prejudicial to the
society."

IBN KHALDUN considered that: "old people's assembly must appoint the
Imam and nation must obey this appointment because God said: Obey God,
the Prophet and your rulers. In order for the Imam to be elected he must
be endowed with four qualities: knowledge, thirst for justice,
competence, and mental and physical health."

As for the confrontation between Imam Ali and Muavie, it represented
the anxieties during the period of transition and the war against
fanaticism, which appeared after a period of religious domination. Even
if he appreciated that, in this war, justice belonged to Imam Ali, he
did not blame Muavie, as he considered the latter was not bad
intentioned either: "when monarchy imposed an absolutist-monopolizing
ruling, MUAVIE embraced fanaticism."

On brief, IBN KHALDUN concluded that: 'lanaticism is a phenomenon
gradually developing which will not disappear but which can considerably
change under the influence of religion. The hereditary election of the
follower would not be specific to the religious precepts as ruling is a
condition given by God to the Imam whom he chose to rule."


