4. the Relation Between Religion and Power
==========================================

Asabady, born in Iraq, played an important role among the contemporary
thinkers of Islam. He considered "internal dictatorship and colonialism
as the great enemies of the Islamic societies".

During his journeys to Asia, he advised Muslims to assimilate
occidental science but still to keep some reserves towards it. He
supported stoutly: "interdependence between Politics and religion and
each Muslim's necessity to involve in the Politics of the country".
Asabady stressed the idea of Islamic unity, which he considered more
than necessary, because it reduces the external danger and strengthens
the collective conscience.

He was one of the thinkers who had a major role in Islamic
acknowledgment of the notion of Jihad (holy fight). Asabady's ideas
inspired the ayatollah Khomeini the ruler of the Islamic revolution and
the founder of the first Islamic Republic: "Asadabady tried to prove
that Islam represents the foundation of an ideology guiding to
prosperity and moral success of people and tried to make clear social
philosophy and Islamic laws by defining the secondary elements of
religion.

From his Islamic position he opposed Occidental culture and way of
thinking announcing the national revolution against English, in Iraq, in
1920."

The same conceptual approach was used in 1963 by the Imam Khomeini who
opposed the Shah's reforms and started "the White Revolution" by
denouncing the connections established by the Shah with the United
States and Israel. The word "politics" used in Persian is of Arab origin
and derives from "sas" and "iasus". It has more significance, the most
important one being "absolute ruling".

A basic principle of Iranian Politics is found in Imam Hossein's
testament: "I do not selfishly oppose against corruption and oppression.
My goal is guiding Muslims according to Islamic precepts. I consider
that one who does not obey the Holy Book and does not act for justice
and respect for the true way cannot be called Imam or ruler. In Islam,
right to legislation and appliance of laws belongs to prophets." The
Islamic government's goals are:

o Use of wealth and budget in the interest of the Islamic nation.
o Defense of Islam and nation.
o Providing security and humans' peaceful life.
o Protection of weak people.

When Islamic Revolution burst, the Imam Khomeini expressed his
intention to fight against tyranny (the shah's), dependence on foreign
powers, and corruption and to institute a society based on Islamic
principles: "the idea that religion must break up with Politics and
Muslim scientists should not get involved in political and social
affairs is a strategy launched by colonialists. Not only that Islam
isn't separated from Politics but even it is the religion of Politics,
prayers having political substance."

Dr. Abolhamid from the University of Teheran appreciated that: "Islamic
revolution corresponds to a fundamental change both in social, moral,
economic, juridical sphere and moreover in the political one. Violence
is often used in removing a political regime, situation which causes
human victims.

In Khomeini's opinion, the origin of Islamic Revolution should be
regarded from Iranian and Lebanese Shifts' point of view that supported
the Islamic renaissance. Three fundamental principles lie at the basis
of this concept and they are:

1. the Islamic constitutional movement;
2. the spread of Islam;
3. martyrdom.

In Iran, the 1906 constitutional revolution was the symbol of the
confrontation between Islamic culture and tradition and occidental
values.

Due to the misunderstandings between modern fundamentalists and
conservationists-traditionalists regarding to the establishment of the
Islamic state, constitutional revolution was soon over, making way to
anarchy. In these circumstances, in 1911, Russia supported the
institution of a dictatorship regime.

After the assassination of two representatives of the Iranian Clerics,
in 1961 and 1962, Imam Khomeini became marji al-taghid, the supreme
juridical and religious authority. In 1963, he made reference to the
Islamic revolution and asked people to adhere to his ideas.

In 1979, Imam Khomeini proclaimed the Islamic republic in Iran and
Islam became state religion, the Islamic state being ruled by an Imam
who would impose, by governing, the basic principles of Islam.

According to the great ayatollah Mohamed Bakr Al-Sadr, the Islamic
governing shouldn't rely on Individualism and the uninvolvement of the
individual in the society or on the imperialists or social values. The
Islamic state is similar to God's state, it is neither absolutist or
tyrannical to respect the rules mentioned in the Coran being a must for
the governors.

**The Islamic state has two spheres:**

1. Internal, which bases on the applying of the Islamic rules and on
the creation and education of the Islamic identities.
2. External, the promotion of Islam across the world, the support for
poor Muslims in their fight against Imperialism and Communism, the
assurance of material-spiritual security of the Islamic nation.


