5. Islam and Terrorism
======================

After the burst of the Middle East crisis, in great part, caused by
Israel's creation in 1948, the imminence of a conflict between
Occidental civilization assimilated to Christianity and the oriental one
dominated by the Islamic values has become obvious. The dispute between
Jewish and Muslims for the Holy City reached its peak during crusades,
this confrontation between the Occident and the Islamic world taking one
of the most violent facets -the terrorism.

The Afghan mujahediins, disposing of American technology and funds
generously offered by Saudi Arabia, have obtained a historical victory
over the orthodox Russians. For Islam, this victory may be considered as
important as Jerusalem's freeing by the caliph Sallahudin. This moment
represented a turning point for Islam and gave hopes to the millions of
Muslims to continue Jihad till the final victory over the Infidels.

Another reference point on the international terrorism spiral
constituted 2001, September 11-th event, when the most representative
symbols of American civilization embodied by The Twin Towers (bourse-
finance) and The Pentagon (military force) were stricken.

It was obvious for everyone that Samuel Hungtington's prophecies were
justifying the collision between civilizations which had reached its
critical point.

The entire Islamic world was to suffer due to the anti-Islamic
campaign, terms like Islamic terrorist and Muslim fundamentalist being
associated to it.

In the Quran, the word "jihad" means "the supreme effort in order to
accomplish a goal" and it also can be interpreted as "a means of
sacrifice for God's cause in order to eliminate dishonest people and to
re-establish a correct new system." The Jihad's goals are presented in
the Coran as it follows:

o To broaden belief in God and to accept unconditionally his commands
(Fight against your enemies in the way God asked you to.)

o To help weak and oppressed people (What indeed stops you to fight for
God's cause and for vulnerable defenseless people?)

o To cease persecution (Fight against your enemies by believing in God
and do not commit aggressions. Muslims are not allowed to use any
weapons and burning people alive or committing acts of cruelty a^e
forbidden by God when waging Jihad.) The notion of Islamism particularly
used after 1980 by the ultra-nationalist Arab organization "Muslim
Brothers" to which adept it was, should be very well understood. This
term represents "the political measures resulting from Islam which
pursues to use religion in freedom and fight's ideology".

Hence, the supreme expression of Islamism is fundamentalism, which is
an infrastructure, common to radical movements, and able to generate
resistance to the secularization and inequity process by the constant
use of religious conditions." Moreover, Hassan Al-Banna, founder of
"Muslim Brothers" organization released the doctrine: "neither west nor
east, but Islamic republic".

Presently, the Islamic world is looking for a means of communication
with the Occident and the Christian Values. Tradition and new
philosophical Iranian thinking consider the dialogue is necessary
because world relies on individual's liberty and independent will.

The fact that there is an iranian concept 'THE DIALOGUE BETWEEN
CIVILIZATIONS", Teheran makes great efforts to calm the regional
situation and to normalize Iran's relations with the International
Community, represents a first step made by Islam for the
inter-confessional reconciliation.

It is important to mention that International Community shows an
increased interest in iranian's thesis, this representing one of the
viable constructive solutions for Middle East crisis.

The fact that European sociologists among whom we find follow with
great interest the present operative situation from Iraq and Autonomic
Palestinian Territories is the natural result of Romania's involvement
in the peaceful settlement of the conflicts which afflict the Islamic
World.

The Publishing of some valuable papers, which I consulted as
bibliographical source, made possible the elaboration of the present
dissertation with regard to a new increased interest theme approached
during the course.

It is not settled yet whether Pentagon's plans to destroy "The Axis of
Evil" would continue in the future with an invasion in Iraq, plan stated
also by the American president G.W. BUSH on his re-investiture at White
House. It looks like the project is temporarily postponed from both
circumstantial purposes (Iraqian crisis and the respect of the traveling
warrant for the Palestinian problem) and diplomatic purposes.


**Bibliography:**

Samuel Hungtington - 'The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of
World Order" M. Hosein Tabatai - "Shiism in Islam" Mohammad Khatamy -
"Fear of the Wave" Morteza Motahari - "Man and Belief Alvin Tofler-'The
third Wave"

Ali Beman Eghbalizarch - "Religion and Politics in the Islamic World"
April 2008, Bucharest BIRCA MIRCEA, FACULTY of SOCIOLOGY, from Bucharest
University.


