The Holders of Authority and Legitimacy in Mahdism Doctrine
===========================================================

In the lights of Mahdism teachings Shia' Muslims have to fight to the
improvement of the world, to bring it closer to that model of perfect
society that should bring peace to the world, to prepare the world for
the coming of the Mahdi.

The awaiting of the Mahdi's return is an inspiration to the Shia and
concretizes as a doctrine of hope making policy more optimistic,
determining the Shia to believe in a better future of humanity, as well
as motivating them to help to its construction. The awaited victory of
right, virtue, peace, justice, freedom and truth over forces of evil in
all its forms, motivates continuously Shia society and will help to its
every day improvement.

However, what until the time of reappearance, what should Shia society
do, until the time of reappearance? Who should govern the Shia society
and through what means of government? Is Wilayat-e-faqih a copy of
Mahdism or should the system improve in itself?

Mahdism argues about just government with equal distribution of wealth
and property among men, eradication of vices, war and restoration of
peace, good governance, friendship cooperation and benevolence.

With Mahdism as the central axis of the Shia theology, covering the
most important doctrines of Islam, Shia Doctrine assumes a
future-oriented history. Shia Doctrine because of Mahdism founds itself
in a perpetual state of progressiveness, giving it a built-in mechanism
of self-improvement.


**A Divine Chain of Leadership**

Since the beginning of creation, man becomes a ruler (Khalifa) of God
over its creation and throughout its representatives, God rules over
whole of its creation. Since the beginning, there was always a mediator
between God and its creation. Mediators acted as proofs of God onto the
earth as transmitters of divine emanation. They were perfect and
infallible men. Through them man was instructed to follow the path of
divine realization and the knowledge of God in order to gain deliverance
and salvation.

God delivered his message and law through which believers could worship
him. He appointed chosen men to guide the human community throughout its
existence. They are the vice-regents of God and leaders of the human
community. All Abrahamic religions believe in a chain through which God
will is revealed and known to humans, through which God guided them
towards salvation.

The Shia doctrine, by Mahdism Doctrine is though the only religion that
kept such a relationship alive. It looks like a chain of representatives
of God links the human community from its beginning until the end of
time to God and His will.

This holy chain is portraying and guiding men towards worship. Shia
Doctrine can be seen in this aspect as a progressive creed, indulged in
the belief of continue divine leadership. According to Shia Doctrine,
God created man for a noble purpose, which is to worship Him and lead a
virtuous life based on His teachings and guidance.

How would man know his role and purpose of his existence unless he
received clear and practical instructions of what God wants him to do?
Here comes the need of this divine chain. As what else would be the
purpose of creation if not worshiping the Creator, knowing the creator
and obeying Him? Moreover, how else can this relation been kept alive if
not by delivering continuous divine representation? How else can
believers obey if not sensing God's greatness and leadership?

Only by understanding such a continuous relation will we be able to
understand the Shia believes, to recognize its progress throughout
history and to see its present as a stage in its development.
Nevertheless, let us have a historical perspective on this divine chain
linking humanity to the Divine, to be able to understand the Shia and
Mahdism Doctrine as well as the Iranian Islamism.


