1. the Prophets of God- Guidance and Leadership For Humanity
============================================================

At first, there were the prophets of God. Prophethood is a common
belief to heavenly revealed religions, having a special status and
significance. Prophethood is God blessing and favor that He may bestow
on whom He wills.

Every prophet stated clearly throughout history that what he receives
is not of his own, but from God for the well-being of humanity. Prophets
confirmed what was revealed before him and what may be revealed after
him.

A prophet does this to show that he is simply conveying the message
that was entrusted to him by the One True God of all people in all ages.
Therefore, the message is one in essence and for the same purpose; it
should not deviate from what was revealed before him or what might come
after him.

Prophets are necessary for conveying God's instructions and guidance to
humankind. We have no way of knowing the reason we were created. What
will happen to us after death? Is there any life after death? Are we
accountable for our actions? In other words, is there any reward or
punishment for our deeds in this life?

These and so many other questions about God cannot be answered without
revelation from the Creator and Knower of the unseen and does it not
knowing God, one of the fundamental duty of the believers? Those answers
must be authentic and must be brought by individuals whom we trust and
respect. That is the reason why messengers are the select of their
societies in terms of moral conduct and intellectual ability.

Supported by God and instructed divinely prophets affirmed and
delivered from the beginning of creation a continuous message. They
presented clear concept of God, His attributes, His creation and the
unseen. They delivered the reason of creation, rewards and punishments
to humanity for obeying or disobeying God. However, most important for
the purpose of my thesis, they showed humanity how to run their
societies according to His testament.

That is, clear instructions and laws that, when applied correctly and
honestly, will result in an ideal society.

The Quran mentions the names of 25 prophets and indicates that there
have been others that are not mentioned to Prophet Mohammed (PBUH).
These 25 include Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad (PBUT), who
are the greatest among God's messengers.

"Say (oh, Muslims) we believe in God and that which is revealed to us
and that which was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael, and Isaac and Jacob,
and their children, and that which Moses and Jesus received and that the
prophets received from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of
them and unto Him we have surrendered."

The last prophet in the chain of God was Muhammad (PBUH). He was born
in Arabia in the sixth century C.E. He descends from the lineal chain of
Abraham and his son Ishmael, being a member of Banu Hashim family, who
were the holders of Mecca. People knew him as a man of excellent
character, cultured manners, and called him "the trustworthy", even
before his delegation as a prophet.

His revelation by God, claims to be the book of guidance for the whole
humanity for all times, and mentions Muhammad as the last Prophet of
God- The seal of Prophets. Once he died, Prophethood ended but not the
divine guidance and leadership of humanity that continued in the mind of
the Shia.


**2. Imamate**

The Shia believes that humanity is in need of sustained spiritual
guidance, provided by the Imam, who is the guardian and guide of all
Muslims politically and spiritually. They hold that Muhammad explicitly
designated his cousin and son-in-law Ali as his Khalifa (Successor).
Thus, Shia believes Muhammad designated Ali and his direct descendants
to serve as the Imams (wali-leaders) of the Muslim community.

This assertion implies that, while the cycle of Prophethood ended with
Muhammad, the cycle of Imamate began with Ali and continues amongst his
direct descendants. For Shia Muslims, an Imam is a leader (wali), whose
guidance extends to spiritual and temporal matters. In other words, an
Imam can sanction new laws because he has direct contact with God.

This direct contact makes an Imam infallible and invests in him the
prerogative of interpreting the Quran, thereby gradually revealing its
esoteric meaning. On the ground of Ghadir Khumm, Muhammad declared "To
whomsoever I am Master, Ali is his Master" and following this principle
is one of the fundamentals of Shia Doctrine, therefore, they believe
that Ali ibn Abu Talib is the 1st Imam to teach the correct
interpretation of Islam, the successor of Muhammad.

The Imam is the leader and example "from whose intellectual power and
insight, those traveling toward God benefit, whose conduct and mode of
life they imitate, and to whose commands they submit." In a very large
and comprehensive sense, Imamate includes both intellectual authority
and political leadership.

"After the death of the Prophet, the Imam was entrusted with the
guardianship of his accomplishments and the continuation of his
leadership, in order to teach men the truths of the Quran and religion
and ordinances concerning society; in short, he was to guide them in all
dimensions of their existence..." "The true and veritable Imam is that
exalted person, who combines in himself intellectual authority and
political leadership."

He is the one "who stands at the head of Islamic society, being enabled
thereby both of convey to men the divine laws that exist in every sphere
and to implement them; and who preserves the collective identity and the
human dignity of the Muslims from decline and corruption."

The community saw itself well organized under the leadership of the
Prophet (PBUH) and when he was gone, it was due for someone to replace
him in the same position and authority. Imam Ali was the Imam from the
day the Prophet Muhammad closed his eyes as he appointed him rightfully.
He continues the divine light of guidance, regardless whether he became
a Khalifa or not. The imam is the person who has comprehensive
leadership in religious as well as worldly matters as the successor of
the Prophet." The Imam was therefore the universal authority entrusted
divinely on both of the mentioned aspects.

Based on the succession of the Prophet, Imamate does not only reflect
the spiritual guidance and leadership, it includes the social and
political leadership also. Imamate is a position that combines the
spiritual and religious leadership as well as the socio-political and
worldly leadership. For the Shia, Ali is the first imam as well as the
first Khalifa of the Prophet.

Therefore, we cannot consider rationally that Ali is the first Imam but
not the immediate successor of the Prophet. The difference between Shia
and Sunnis is not about the spiritual leadership; it is on the
socio-political leadership immediately after the death of the Holy
Prophet.

God appointed Prophet Muhammad as to be the leader of the community, a
community being religious, as well as social and political. It was a
civil and a moral community that God entrusted to him, so he had a
comprehensive authority and leadership. The appointment of a successor
had to mean that Imams would benefit with the same authority and
leadership.

Assuming that because imams did not historically exercise their
political authority and leadership, they do not have this authority and
leadership designated to them is a false supposition that cannot stand
for itself. Not exercising one's role and function does not prove the
non -existence of the authority as is obvious.

"The twelve Imams themselves, and above all, the present twelfth or
hidden Imam, were held to be necessary to the constitution of the
Universe and of true religion. The Imam is God's proof, he is the pillar
of the Universe, the 'gate' through whom God is approached."

The Imams are considered to be the successors of the Prophet (PBUH) and
therefore the right holders of his authority, not because they are from
his family but because they possessed the qualities of being pious,
obedient to Allah and because they embody characteristics that are
pre-required for this level of religious-political leadership".

The Shia considers Imamate, like Prophethood, to be a fundamental
belief, and obedience to the authority of their Imam, a religious
obligation. Other than receiving divine revelation, which is
specifically for the prophets, the Imams have all the qualities, duties
and authority of the Prophet (PBUH); in consequence, they have the
political and social as well as religious authority.

Political and religious guidance emanate from them and they are
guardians over the believers, as God is the guardian of believers and as
God delegated this guardianship to the Prophet, his authority is rooted
in the mentioned Divine authority. As the authority of imams is rooted
in the divine, why should not be the same applied to the deputies of
Imam during the time of occultation?

Guardianship of the Prophet was originally established and legitimized
by God's appointment. Following this interpretation, the followers of
the imams provide a large number of traditions and historical evidence
that confirm the delegation of the imams, by God, through the Prophet,
as "guardians of the believers" (wali).


