3. the Holders of Authority During the Age of Occultation of Imam Mahdi
=======================================================================

After the death of Prophet Mohammad, Ali and his descendents exercised
God vice regency on earth. This authority and governance in both
religious and political matters was to remain theirs until the end of
time. What can we say about authority and legitimacy in the time of
occultation of the Mahdi, a time we are now experiencing according to
Shia Doctrine?

We are currently living in the age of the Twelve Imam, the Mahdi. He is
found in a state of occultation. Does it mean that being in this state
of occultation he does not govern the Shia society? Occultation of the
Imam is divided according to Shia in the minor and major occultation.

During the time of minor occultation, the Mahdi had appointed public
deputies to guide the Shia in his absence. What does Shia Doctrine say
about the Great Occultation? Has the deputation stop in the time the
Shia community is currently experiencing?

According to Shia political doctrine, authority bestows upon a deputy
by the infallible Imam and we can observe there is an important
distinction between the specific designation of a deputy, and the
'general' designation of a number of deputies.

As while, there was an explicit nomination for each of the Imams to
undertake leadership, and for the vice regency of the four deputies
during the minor absence, the guardianship of the jurists during the
greater absence is a 'general' designation. This means that no one is
exclusively appointed as leader and deputy. Therefore, jurists who are
just and qualified in Islamic jurisprudence have the right to exercise
the Imam's authority as his deputies.

Regarding the leadership of the Islamic community during the period of
greater occultation, the authority as well as leadership is entrusted to
the just and capable scholar, who acts as a deputy to the absent Imam,
through a system of vice regency. So the guardianship of a jurist is
legitimized and his authority is related to the original and absolute
authority of God.

In plus the jurist must be accepted by believers. As I mentioned above,
a clear distinction should be drawn, however, between the authority of
an imam and the guardianship of the scholars.

The Imams, whose authority is established upon their explicit
designation by the Prophet, delegate and entrust a degree of their
authority to those who possess specific qualities (such as justice and
jurisprudence in the case of the scholar). Therefore, whereas the Imams
were specifically appointed as guardians of legitimate authority, the
jurists are not explicitly selected by name, but rather implicitly
chosen as those who possess the correct qualities for leadership.

God has appointed prophets to run humanity in spiritual as well as in
social and political matters. The last prophet appointed imams as
legitimate holders of authority in religious as well as in political and
social matters. Therefore, it is only logic to assume that in an era of
occultation, the present Imam appointed his deputies to order in matters
religious as well as political and social.

The doctrine of "guidance of the jurisprudent"( wilayat-e-faqih) forms
the central axis of contemporary Shia political thought, advocating a
guardianship based political system, which relies upon a just and
capable jurist to assume the leadership of the government in the absence
of an infallible Imam.

Today, in a time of the Hidden Imam, the guidance of the jurisprudent
is the authority designated to learned jurist so that they may direct
and advise the Muslim community in the absence of an infallible Imam.
This authority derives from the Imam; therefore, the believers have the
religious duty to obey their commands as the only legitimate
authority.

The concept of leadership encompasses many degrees of authority,
summing up to the total scope of the scholar's vice regency in the
absence of an infallible Imam.

Some erroneously assume that it is something new and in essence
distinguishable from the traditional status of marjayat. This
misunderstanding is caused by a lack of attention to the definitions of
and the relationship between 'wilayat' and 'marjayat' and the
distinction between 'fatwa' and 'hukm' (the commands of faqih as wali,
leader).

This misunderstanding comes from the wrong conception that the role of
a marja'a taqlid is solely a juridical authority to whom the Muslim
community may refer to in the case of religious questions and
commandments concerning the practical and personal side of Islam.
However, this definition is not comprehensives as it concentrates itself
exclusively on one of the legitimized functions of a jurist, while
overlooking the others.

He is an expert in Islamic Law, a guide and proof of God's existence, a
model to follow and a leader as the deputy of the imam. He is wali
(leader) when he acts as a leader of someone and a marja'a taqlid when
he is referred to in religious matters.

Wilayat al-faqih refers to the all-comprehensive authority of the
jurist (faqih) in the absence of the twelfth Imam. "Wilayat al-faqih"
may include functions like wilayat al-nizam (the authority to manage
public order), wilayat al-qada (the authority to administer justice),
wilayat al-siyasa (the authority to administer a government and hold
political office and wilayat al-tasarruf (authority for the jurist to
act in a way that he judges to be the best in the interest of the
community).

A corollary to the wilayat al-faqih may include the duty to declare a
jihad. It is to be noted that not all mujtahids accept the concept of
the all-embracing and comprehensive view of wilayat al-faqih.

Marja al-taqlid refers to the role of a mujtahid who is competent to
derive juridical rulings from the Quran and hadith literature and is
able to arrive at solutions that are not explicitly stated in the
sources, by having recourse to the principles as stated in usul al-fiqh.
Such a mujtahid is qualified to issue juridical verdicts (or fatwa) and
is a source of reference for followers, who pursue him by doing his
taqlid (which literally means to imitate his acts).

Thus, it is possible for a person to be a marja al-taqlid without
occupying the position of wilayat al-faqih. In addition, the other way
around in also accepted, since in the Iranian constitution the leader is
not obligatory a marja, and can be a simple mujtahid having leadership
and managerial abilities.


Wilayat is a part of marjayat in the culture of the Shia.

The great marjas not only guided people with respect to the divine Law,
but they also led people in the particular problems of society, for
example when judging between people in particular matters and domestic
disputes.
The reason that the jurisprudent is an authority in matters of the law
is because of his specialization in jurisprudence and his power to
derive the rules of God from their sources. The reason aside from the
above-mentioned qualities, for a jurisprudent to become a leader depends
on his ability to manage society according to the principles and values
of Islam.

It is because of this that it becomes possible for a person to be
chosen as a leader due not so much to his aptitude in jurisprudence as
much as to his better management skills. The separation of the offices
of the marja and the leader becomes a reasonable, and in some instances,
a necessary expedient. In principle, leadership is confined to a single
person, whereas the marjayat is applicable to numerous individuals, just
as does the possibility that the two offices to be combined in a single
individual.

Since following the orders of the leader is obligatory upon all people,
including other jurisprudents, and it is forbidden to disobey his
orders, hence it is not possible for people to follow other than the
leader in matters related to the social order and the running of
society.

What was said above regarding the authority of the jurisprudent was in
reference to the individual order and to matters of a personal nature;
it is in these matters that people can follow other than the leader.

When the jurisprudent refers to the religious sources in order to
obtain the general rule of God regarding a certain problem and uses the
special techniques that exist for obtaining the rules of the Law, it is
called giving an edict or "fatwa". When the leader pays attention to the
general rules of God, the various systems in Islam, and the conditions
of the time, and according to these delineates a person's or a specific
group's responsibility with regards to a certain matter, this is called
giving an order or a "hukm".

In doing this, he not only pays attention to the general rules of Islam
and the lofty aspirations of the religion, but also to the specific
conditions that exist in that time. The rules of God and the edicts of
the jurisprudent who has all the necessary qualifications are mandatory,
just like the rulings of the leader, but with this difference that the
jurisprudents rulings are mandatory to him and his followers only, while
everyone must follow the orders of the leader.

According to the logic of the "leadership of the jurisprudent" and its
proofs, the jurisprudent takes upon himself the management of society
and in accordance with the values of Islam, he takes on the
responsibility of leadership. Nevertheless, marjayat means simply to
issue an edict and is a completely different matter.

The reason that the jurisprudent is an authority in matters of the law
is because of his specialization in jurisprudence and his power to
derive the rules of God from their sources. On the other hand, the
reason that a leader is what he is is because aside from the
aforementioned qualities, he has the ability to manage society according
to the principles and values of Islam.

It is because of this that it becomes possible for a person to be
chosen as a leader due not so much to his aptitude in jurisprudence as
much as to his better management skills. It is possible that there be
numerous specialists in society. Moreover, this is something that is to
be sought after, so that everyone can refer to them with ease and obtain
their rulings.

A multiplicity of centers of decision-making would cause disturbance
so, it is imperative for the Shia that the leader to be one. It is not
however necessary that various jurisprudents issue one edict in order
that society remains undisturbed. Leadership is confined to a single
person, whereas the marjayat is applicable to numerous individuals.

That the office of Wali-e faqih and the Marja do not have to be one and
the same according to the Iranian Islamic Republic, Constitution as I
mentioned above. It could be or it could be not. It depends on the
person who assumes that position. When it is one and the same, he should
be considered a marja when issuing a fatwa and a wali when issuing
orders in political as social matters.


**Conclusions**

The beginning of Islam is not separate from the beginning of the Shia
as it started with the Prophet Muhammad (PUBH), and has been preserved
in its original form by the succession of Imams.

Prophet Mohammad had the duty to propagate God's message, to teach the
laws of religion and guidance, to judge between people and to lead and
manage the society. These qualities and functions existed for the imams
and exist for the jurisprudents in the time of the occultation of the
Last Imam. They too have three functions, to act as judges, to give
edicts in law and to expound the general rules of the Divine law for the
people and to lead.

A system of government by the jurist is therefore understandable for
the Shia. Its legitimacy comes from God himself, throughout history. It
is a chain through legitimacy transmits itself. Prophets, then imams,
managed God's rule on earth at first and today, the jurist manages it.
Jurists are divinely legitimated and are accepted by believers.

Understanding this governance of the jurisprudent as well as the
general guidance of a marja is of high importance in understanding the
legitimacy of the jurisprudent today when guiding the Shia Community.

This chain of guidance and legitimacy, as well as of authority is
confined in the Mahdism Doctrine. Without the believe in the Mahdi's
return at the end of time to establish equity and justice, without the
believe that during his absence the believer must await positively, by
acting rightfully and establishing a close to perfection society, the
chain would have been cut dramatically.

While studying in one of the numerous seminaries in Qom, I had the
opportunity to ask a great scholar about Mahdism and the guidance of the
jurisprudent. His answer…though simple and concise was that Wilayat-e-
faqih is an exact replica of Mahdism.

**Bibliography**

o Ahmad Waezi, Shia Political Thought, Islamic Center of England,
London, 2004

o Akbar, Ahmed, Discovering Islam. Making Sense of Muslim History and
Society, Revised Edition

o Allamah Sayyid Sa'eed Akhtar Rizvi, Imamate, The Vicegerency of the
Prophet, translated by Sayyid Muhhamad Redhewi, Ansariyan Publications,
Qom, 2007

o Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, A Shi'ite Anthology,
Translated by William C. Chittick , www.al-islam.com

o Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini, Al-Imam Al-Mahdi, The Just Leader of
Humanity, translated by Abdulaziz Sachedina, found on line
www.al-islam.com

o Ayatullah Muhamad Baqir As-Sadr, An Inquiry Concerning Al-Mahdi, ,
Ansariyan Publications, Qom, 2007

o Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi al-Gulpaygani,
Discussions Concerning al-Mahdi, translated by Sayyid Sulayman Ali
Hasan, Ansariyan Publications, Qom, 2007

o Jassim M. Hussain, The Occultation of the Twelfth Imam (A Historical
Background), The Muhammadi Trust of Great Britain & Northern Ireland,
The Zahra Trust, San Antonio, USA

o Kamrava, Mehran, The Modern Middle East. A Political History since
the First World War, University of California Press, Los Angeles, 2004

o Sayyid Hasan Islami, Imam Khomeini, Ethics and Politics, translated
by Mansoor L. Limba, International Affairs Department, The Institute for
Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini's Works

o Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari, Imamate and Leadership, Lessons on
Islamic Doctrine, translated by:

Hamid Algar, Islamic Education Center, Potomac

o Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari, La Question De L'Imamat, Foundation of
Islamic C.P.W., Qom, Iran

Ayatullah Murtada Mutahhari, Master and Mastership, Islamic Seminary
Publications

o Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Shi'ism: Imamate and Wilayat, Al-Ma'arif
Books, Ontario,1999

o Sayyid Murtada al-'Askari, The Twelve Successors of the Holy Prophet,
translation by: Al-Qalam Translators and Writers Bureau, World Islamic
Network (WIN), Mumbai

o Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari, Seal of the Prophets and His Message,
Lessons on Islamic Doctrine, translated by Hamid Algar, Islamic
Education Center, Potomac

o Sayed Ali Asgher Razwy, A Restatement of the History of Islam and
Muslims, World Federation of KSI Muslim Communities,United Kingdom,
www.al-islam.com

o \*\*\* La Tradizione di Ghadir, Manifesta documentazione della
Wilayah,la Guida Islamica, A cura del Gruppo Culturale e di Ricerca
Islamica della Santa città di Qom , "Islam Shi°ita",Associazione
Islamica "Imam Mahdi(aj)"

o \*\*\* A Brief History of the Fourteen Infallibles, Ansariyan
Publications, Qom, 2007


