Stereotyping of Arabs and Muslims in the Western Mass Media: an Obstacle To the Movement of Al-imam Al-mahdi That Must Be Confronted
====================================================================================================================================

Stereotyping of the "other" is still alive and well in America. The
portrayal of Arabs and Muslims in both movies as well as the news is
highly influenced by pro-Israeli interests. The portrayal is meant to
shock at times and other times to subtly manipulate the masses into
supporting Israeli and American policy and taking a stand against its
opponents.

The bias has been seen many times in American coverage of the Middle
East but was clearly seen in the Israeli-Hizbullah Conflict during the
summer of 2006. Muslims globally have an uphill battle in promoting the
movement of al-Imam al-Mahdi because of the mainstream western media\\'s
biases. A discourse analysis of two Detroit newspapers shows how this is
the case.

**Arabs and Muslims as the "Other"**

The portrayal of Arabs and Muslims in the popular press is highly
inflammatory and stereotypical. It is highly contemporary in that it is
driven by current political situations. At the same time, such
stereotyping is based on old archetypes created in the past to demonize.
To understand what it happening and how it is will be an obstacle to
Imam al-Mahdi\\'s movement, it is beneficial to begin with a review of
Jack G. Shaheen\\'s book, Reel Bad Arabs.

Shaheen\\'s book is a review of racist images of Arabs in the media
collected over a span of 20 years. An encyclopedic attempt, the book
covers more than 900 movies, most of which depict Arabs and Muslims as
inhuman. By the end of the book, one can clearly see that Arabs and
Muslims are the last ethnic groups who are still negatively portrayed by
Hollywood without consequences. The Arabs are almost always part of five
different plot schemes:

villains, sheikhs, maidens, Egyptians, and Palestinians. Shaheen ranks
the movies in several appendices including a "best" and "worst" list.

"Other" groups have long been caricatured by Hollywood. These groups
include African-Americans, Jews, Latinos and East-Asians. Generally they
were depicted devoid of individual character and even when the subject
of the movie was shown as an individual it was almost always within the
context of a stereotype. Shaheen points out that much has happened in
the last century-women\\'s suffrage, the civil rights\\' movement, the
collapse of the U.S.S.R, numerous wars-to change how minorities are
represented, Arabs are still portrayed in much the same stereotypical
way that they have been in the past.

While the stereotypes against other groups are today widely rejected in
the media, Arabs are still fair game. Shaheen notes:

Pause and visualize the reel Arab. What do you see? Black beard,
head dress, dark sunglasses. In the background-a limousine, harem
maidens, oil wells, camels. Or perhaps he is brandishing an automatic
weapon, crazy hate in his eyes and Allah on his lips. Can you see
him?

As was the case with other ethnic groups in the past, Arabs are often
depicted as oversexed and desiring pure, beautiful, white women. If Arab
or Muslim women are portrayed, they are almost always either sexually
inviting or faceless. In the case that they are sexually inviting, their
seduction is almost always rejected by the "pure" white men as being
below their dignity. Arabs are also depicted as being hook-nosed and
devious. In many ways these caricatures mirror past western stereotyping
of the Jews: thick lips, crooked nose, scruffy beard, angry faces,
different dress.

The Arab is made to look ugly and thus evil. Even Arabs who may seem
peaceful on the surface should be suspected of being violent. Shaheen
notes that the same imagery which was used by Nazi propagandists to
dehumanize the Jews is used today by Hollywood to dehumanize Arabs.

Shaheen notes that Islam is also an unfair target for Hollywood.
Although most Arabs are Muslims, most Muslims are not Arabs, a fact that
Hollywood seems to ignore. Throughout Reel Bad Arabs, "Arab" and
"Muslim" are shown as being interchangeable.

Because mentioning every single review is not possible for this short
paper, this reviewer is looking at examples of four different
Arab/Muslim archetypes: villains, sheikhs, maidens, and Palestinians.
All the examples mentioned below are taken from the "worst" film
list-it\\'s striking that many of the films to be mentioned in this
paper were shot in Israel and even use Israeli actors to portray Arabs
and Muslims.

This is surely no accident; such a portrayal is a part of winning
hearts and minds to support the Israeli cause. Pro-Israelis achieve a
number of objectives through negative portrayals of Arabs. Through
repeatedly viewing images of Arabs and Muslims as angry, over-sexed,
lazy, incoherent and strange, audiences come to give essential meaning
to concepts which should only be viewed as incidental.

In this way, a concerted effort is being made to shape the subconscious
image that the Western world has of the Muslim world, especially
vis-Ã -vis the Palestinian question. By promoting the image of Arabs as
incapable of peace, the pro-Israeli lobby is constructing a rationale
for not bringing Arabs and Muslims to the same table as the Israelis.

Shaheen also points out that many of the most virulent images of Arabs
as militant have come about after the creation of Israel. That
Hollywood\\'s movies are spread around the world and gross millions
every week enforces these stereotypes not only on a national level but
on an international one.

Shaheen doesn\\'t say in Reel Bad Arabs that Arabs should never be
portrayed as "bad guys" or that there are no movies which portray Arabs
positively. The author makes it clear in introducing his book that Arabs
can be bad guys like individuals from any other ethnic group.

Furthermore, he compiles a list of movies in which Arabs are portrayed
sensitively. However, Shaheen makes it clear that Arabs are too often
exclusively portrayed as evil, backwards, sexual, and incompetent. It is
seemingly acceptable for Arabs and Muslims to be painted with a
stereotypical broad brush. One may refer to Shaheen\\'s book for
hundreds of examples.


**Toleration of Stereotyping Breeds Discrimination**

The consequences of stereotyping minorities are manifold. In the case
of Arabs and Muslims, the problems are compounded because approaches to
the groups in the international arena can be seriously flawed,

as mentioned earlier in the case of Iraq. Widespread informal
racism-racism which is not institutionalized-helps shape attitudes that
can support legalized discrimination. Examples of attitudes like this
abound in American history. The city of Detroit is a great example of
how prejudicial attitudes can result in institutionalized
discrimination, discrimination that contributes to more prejudice with
potentially long lasting effects.

In the past, Metro-Detroit residential areas were ranked on a scale of
green (good) to red (bad). Areas that had African Americans living in
them were automatically given a red ranking. The reasoning was that if
African-Americans moved into white neighborhoods, they would be sure to
bring in crime, driving down property values and increasing taxes on
residents in the area.

The fact was that for African-Americans to move to the neighborhoods in
the first place required significant capital, money almost always
procured through hard work and years of saving. This was ignored. White
Americans labeled African-Americans as having a tendency to commit
criminal activity, violence and prostitution.

African Americans were shuttered out of opportunities-even if they were
the most qualified-which included moving into prime real estate areas.
If African-Americans dared move into white areas, they were often met
with psychological pressure and violence so that they would move back
where they came from. Such is the power of stereotypes.

In the end, whites could not openly stem the tide of African-Americans
moving out of the city. Housing discrimination was declared illegal
through passing of civil rights\\' amendments. But today, Detroit is
more segregated then any other metropolitan area in North America. What
happened?

Danzinger, Holzer and Farley identify four reasons that people give for
the persistence of the race divide in Detroit. These reasons are 1.
Economic differences that lead blacks and whites to seek differently
priced housing; 2. Blacks and whites may differ in their knowledge of
the housing market so that blacks consider suburban areas outside their
purchasing ability; 3. Each racial group just wants to stick to its own
area; and 4.

Discrimination from real estate agents keeps the groups separate.
Although it is now illegal, even today, blacks have to worry that even
if they manage to move into a white area that they would face hate
including destruction of their property and psychological
intimidation.

Discrimination, including stereotyping and racial segregation, clearly
has negative long-term consequences that Arabs and Muslims should take
note of. Arabs and Muslims are the latest in a long line of caricatured
minorities to be at the mercy of policy-makers who benefit from bigotry.
In this case, those policy-makers represent a wide range of
personalities and interests but are united in tolerating the open
denigration of people of Middle Eastern descent or those who practice
Islam, as part of a larger agenda.

Such rhetoric and images are valuable tools in shaping the hearts and
minds of a public that is often times skeptical if politicians care for
its best interests. The American coverage of the Israeli-Hizbullah
Conflict of 2006 was one of the best examples of how this stereotyping
contributed to a filtering of information available to the public.


