Overall Coverage of the 2006 Israeli-hizbullah Conflict
=======================================================

Coverage of the 2006 Israeli-Hizbullah Conflict was very heavily skewed
in favor of the Israelis. This trend was seen across the country.
However, bearing in mind that south-east Michigan has the highest
concentration of people from the Middle East outside of the region, it
was shocking to see that such negative images were presented on a daily
basis by the Detroit Free Press and the Detroit News, especially at the
beginning of the conflict.

One would think that having such large and vibrant Arab American and
Jewish communities nearby, both newspapers would take seriously the
issue of depicting the conflict sensitively. Editors and writers at both
newspapers surely are aware of Metro-Detroit being the most ethnically
segregated city in America.

Instead of being even-handed in local coverage of the conflict,
Detroit\\'s media invariably portrayed it as a struggle between good
(Israel) and evil (anyone opposing Israel). The coverage of the
month-long conflict covered a number of events, yet the tone through out
the first half of the month was tremendously pro-Israeli. Stereotypes
were also de rigueur.

Coverage of the conflict revolved around a number of themes: that the
Israelis were attacked first, that the Shi\\'i militia Hizbullah was a
"state-within-a-state," that Israeli civilians were bravely facing their
enemies (while the Lebanese remained largely faceless) and, contrary to
all evidence, that the Israeli response to Hizbullah\\'s capture of two
Israeli soldiers was not disproportionate and that it was a natural
extension of the "right to self-defense."

In the case of the Detroit News, it seemed that editorial page Editor
Nolan Finley put his pro-Israeli bias on display for all to see which
spurned somewhat of a backlash, not only from Arab-Americans but from
the public at large. Although the coverage in both papers improved as
the conflict went on and afterwards as well, the damage had already been
done.

Since the Detroit Free Press and the Detroit News are different
publications, they are separated for the ease of the reader and to see
the different ways in which pro-Israeli bias was present in each.

**The Detroit Free Press Coverage**

As mentioned, coverage revolved around a number of themes: that the
Israelis were attacked first, that the Shi\\'i militia Hizbullah was a
"state-within-a-state," that Israeli civilians were bravely facing their
enemies while the Lebanese remained largely faceless and, contrary to
all evidence, that the Israeli response to Hizbullah\\'s capture of two
Israeli soldiers was not disproportionate and that it was a natural
extension of the "right to self-defense."

The Detroit Free Press\\' Niraj Warikoo-singled out largely in this
paper as he was at least partially responsible for most of his
newspaper\\'s articles on the conflict-wrote in a July 14 article:

The second day of fighting between Israel and Hizballah militants
quickly escalated into all-out warfare as Israel bombed the Lebanese
capital\\'s suburbs and crippled the airport, and bombed roads early
today leading from Beirut to Damascus, Syria. Hizballah - the militant
group that kidnapped two Israeli soldiers Wednesday, setting off the
fierce Israeli response - responded by firing more than 100 missiles
into northern Israel.

Warikoo went on to add, "Hizballah\\'s audacious raid Tuesday into
Israel to capture soldiers - which followed another operation in Gaza by
Palestinian militants that accomplished the same goal - set up this
round of violence."

The problem with the way Warikoo frames the conflict here is that it
begins with Hizbullah\\'s capture of the two Israeli soldiers. Hizbullah
and Israel were sworn enemies since the creation of the Shi\\'i militia
in the 80s as the Lebanese Civil War raged. The Shi\\'i militia was
organized to fight Israel after the state occupied Lebanon. The conflict
by no means began with the altercation repeated so often by the American
media as the cause for the fighting.

Israel itself crosses Palestinian and Lebanese borders with impunity
and has captured thousands of Palestinians and Lebanese it deems as
being enemies. Not to ignore what Israel\\'s enemies have done, but
Israel has itself committed numerous atrocities throughout the course of
its history.

None of these were mentioned in the above article to give any sense of
the longer term struggle taking place between the two forces.

At the very beginning, Warikoo\\'s articles indicated an attempt to
mention both Israeli and opposing positions. He noted that Hizbullah is
seen as heroic by many Lebanese for fighting the Israelis. However,
Warikoo wrote about Hizbullah in such a way that one might think it was
exclusively supported by the Shi\\'a when in fact the movement has often
been supported by factions of other religious communities also.

This was especially true by the end of the conflict when many
Christians who had initially criticized the Hizbullah for starting a war
without consulting outsiders to the organization had their hometowns
leveled and saw the Hizbullah\\'s continued stand as either a source of
hope, a vindication of the group\\'s capture of the Israeli soldiers or
both.

Christians, Druze and Sunnis Muslims throughout the conflict provided
shelter to fellow Lebanese and sought to protect them from Israel\\'s
onslaught. This rapprochement was also largely absent from the
discourse.

The question of who should be quoted during the conflict also showed
considerable bias. When showing the Lebanese side of the conflict,
almost invariably it was Lebanese residing in America who were asked
their opinions, not citizens of Lebanon proper. Lebanese people living
in Lebanon were almost entirely absent from the discourse analyzed for
this project. Israeli citizens on the other hand were constantly being
interviewed.

This is problematic in that all Israelis regardless of their political
or religious affiliation were portrayed as victims united by a common
enemy but Lebanese were reported as divided into factions, not helping
one another. Here is a typical example of how Israelis were portrayed:

Israeli leaders have warned that the battle could be a long one. They
say that Israel will not accept a return to the conditions that existed
before the fighting broke out, with Hizballah, not the Lebanese army,
controlling Lebanon\\'s southern border with Israel. … Most northern
Israeli cities are now ghost towns. Residents have fled south, taking
refuge in bomb shelters or remaining inside their homes. \\'We never
dreamed the terror would arrive here\\', Kamisa said as he inspected the
damaged home. One Israeli man, Rafi Cohen, traveled north to show
solidarity with people in the coastal town of Nahariya, which has been
hit hard. But when he showed up at the beach, which is usually crowded
on Saturdays in the summer, he was alone and a bit surprised. \\'We
should show Hizballah how strong we are and live our lives as normal\\',
Cohen said.

Wrote Warikoo on July 14: "Some Christian Lebanese-Americans in metro
Detroit also blamed Hizballah for the latest conflict. \\'Lebanon is
being held hostage by an armed militia that has not listened to the
world\\' nor to Lebanese peace agreements, said Milad Zohrob, 53, of
Redford Township. \\'They are leading the people into a really horrible
situation. And the people paying the price are the Lebanese civilians,
not the militias\\'. Zohrob and others also said that Iran and Syria are
supporting Hizballah and fomenting the current trouble."

It is often mentioned in the American media that one of the reasons
Hizbullah is considered a terrorist organization is that it bombed U.S.
military barracks in Lebanon, killing over 200 soldiers. The issue of
what the U.S. military was doing in Lebanon is not given the attention
it deserves and it is often accorded the nebulous yet charitable title
of "peace- keeping."

Warikoo did not make mention of that assertion in his July 14 article
but he noted that the local Jewish population opposes Hizbullah and
considers the militia a "terrorist organization." Yet this treatment of
the issue did not go into the issue of Israel\\'s presence in Lebanon
being illegitimate and Hizbullah being created to drive out the Zionist
state.

Hizbullah to its credit had evolved since its creation into a political
party and held a number of seats in the Lebanese parliament. Despite
that, its important role in providing valuable social services,
especially in the south of the country, was not highlighted and often
received passing mention. Affinity to Hizbullah was portrayed more often
than not because of unreasonable hatred for Israel and not out of
respect and affinity towards the organization\\'s efforts to relieve
poverty.

In this light, Hizbullah\\'s "kidnapping"-and which was pointedly never
referred to as a "capture"-of the Israeli soldiers is seen by unaware
readers as a completely unprovoked attack, a fight by terrorists
supported by Iran on one side against Israel, a peaceful and threatened
democracy on the other.

The fact that the U.S. forks over one-third of its foreign aid budget
to Israel and that the two countries enjoy a "special relationship" was
not questioned in the media. How the news was framed with Iran\\'s
support of the Hizbullah being "ominous" while the mantra that "Israel
had the right to defend itself" and that the U.S. would support
Israel\\'s right showed that Detroit newspapers had a serious agenda.
Wrote Warikoo, "In [an] … ominous sign that the struggle could spread,
Israel accused Iran of helping fire a missile that damaged an Israeli
warship, a charge Hizballah and Iran both denied."

Warikoo, Suzzette Hackney and David Crumm wrote an article on one of
the first gatherings of Lebanese in Dearborn. To see such a small
article-Warikoo\\'s next article ran over 1,000 words-on what was such
an emotionally charged event, written in such sterile form, was
shocking. The article about the Arab American event is in its entirety
below.

Muslims attending a memorial service at a Dearborn mosque Sunday
evening called upon businesses along Warren Avenue in Dearborn to shut
down at 5 p.m. Tuesday to protest Israeli action in Lebanon and the Gaza
Strip. About 1,500 people attended the service at the Islamic Center of
America in memory of 12 family members of a Dearborn family who died
after a building in Lebanon was struck last week by an Israeli
warplane.

Speakers at the service criticized Israel and asked the U.S. government
to help U.S. citizens trapped in Lebanon.

With picture slides behind him showing the attacks in Lebanon, Ned
Fawaz, chairman of the board of the Islamic Center, urged the crowd to
"call Washington, call all your senators ... send e-mails" voicing
opposition to Israel\\'s actions.

Mohammad Bazzi of Dearborn Heights said that business owners are
planning to shut down at the start of a march scheduled for Tuesday
along Warren Avenue - the main commercial strip in east Dearborn.

In actuality, the event had been tremendously emotional with anger
among attendees at a fever pitch. None of that came out in the Detroit
Free Press article quoted above.

Sayyid Ibrahim Saleh, a Shi\\'i religious scholar, noted that Lebanon
is not Shi\\'i, Sunni, or Christian, but an Arab country encompassing
all of these religious communities. Saleh spoke passionately, noting
that Imam Hussain-the grandson of Muhammad whose stand against the
Ummayad caliph Yazid is commemorated by the Shi\\'a-gave his blood, but
is remembered for his principled stand against injustice even today.
Christians and Muslims on the panel alike applauded him. In fact, it
seemed almost everyone present in the audience, Christians and Muslims
alike, applauded Saleh\\'s remarks.

Saleh called for unity between Muslims and Christians to stand together
and put an end to petty fighting and said that we are a people with "one
position." Shouting, "Oh God, remove from us our horrible situation and
make our feet firm to stand up for the truth," he received a standing
ovation from the over 2,000 people present.

Reverend Rani Abdel Masseih of the Church of the Magnificent Life spoke
next: "The truth that we are united behind has to do with truth and
standing up for justice in the face of injustice. This is not just a
Muslim or a Christian problem, it is affecting all of us Arabs," said
Masseih.

Abed Hammoud, President of the Congress of Arab American Organizations
and a Wayne County assistant prosecutor, gave the most impassioned
speech of the evening. He said, "Those who are fighting us have no
heart, and they have no mind, but we have a heart and a mind."
Hammoud-who had two children trapped in Lebanon as he spoke-said, "Every
kid deserves to be protected, not just American children. … Israel is
going to hell!" As the crowd cheered, he added, "I don\\'t want to hear
any more about Hizbullah, you\\'ve got a problem with them, go get them,
don\\'t go bombing the bridges and kids."

Although coverage also began to be more focused on whether the Israeli
position during the conflict was worthy of defense, perhaps in part
because of critical letters from readers. The Arab-American community,
principally those of Lebanese descent, was quite vocal about what it saw
as Israel\\'s "disproportional response" to what was supposed to be a
"kidnapping." The local media coverage still was tremendously skewed in
favor of the Israelis but in the Detroit Free Press at least there
appeared to be more of an attempt to portray the events fairly.

The day after the above event, another article by Warikoo, Hackney and
Crumm came out. Although the previous day\\'s event was not mentioned,
there was a recognition that the Lebanese were suffering greatly.
However, the focus was still mostly upon Lebanese who were American
citizens, not human beings suffering as how Israeli citizens were
portrayed. Lebanese citizens were largely absent from the reports.

Warikoo and Ben Schmitt finally followed up their story about what
happened at the Islamic Center with a much more intense article
regarding a rally in which a mostly Lebanese crowd of over 10,000
protestors took to Dearborn\\'s streets. The article, titled "Crisis in
the Mideast - In Metro Detroit: 10,000 Rally in Dearborn in Support of
Lebanon," was much more accurate in its portrayal of Arab-Americans
feelings regarding the conflict. The article noted that over 220
Lebanese and about 25 Israelis had been killed. It began by saying,

Carrying banners saying \\'Stop Israeli Terrorism\\' and chanting
antiwar slogans, some 10,000 people rallied in the center of metro
Detroit\\'s Arab-American community in Dearborn on Tuesday, demanding
that the U.S. government put pressure on Israel to halt attacks in
Lebanon. Although the protesters were peaceful, their message was
strong, representing a profound difference of opinion between two of
metro Detroit\\'s most vital communities.

In portraying the above event, Warikoo and Schmitt did a much better
job of showing that Israeli policies were causing pain, even if it was
mostly a portrayal of pained Lebanese-Americans, and that there were
many locals who supported Hizbullah in principle if not in practice. If
the title of the article did not show much condemnation of the Israeli
response, it might have been because editors, not writers, generally
come up with the headlines. Even if the writers of the Detroit Free
Press began seeing the conflict differently and addressing it in a way
sensitive to both the pro-Israeli camp and its opponents, that would not
affect whether the editors at the paper had changed their stance in any
way.

As is usually the case in American media reports about attacks on
Israel, an attempt to link the Holocaust with support for Israel was
made in the above article. That the Jews suffered greatly as a result of
the Holocaust is without question, but that the Holocaust can be brought
up to dominate whatever policy decision is made in support of Israel is
problematic on a number of levels. It is an act of reductionism to
present Zionist Jews as bravely carrying on in the face of horrors that
they are all too familiar with while the Israeli government\\'s
aggression against Arabs, both within the state and outside, is given
token representation or not even mentioned.

The Detroit Free Press duly presented the line of thinking that the
Holocaust had something to do with the Israeli-Hizbullah conflict as
seen in a quote made by a local whose relatives were in Israel.

… [In] Farmington Hills, Hannan Lis called his parents, aunts, uncles
and cousins in Haifa several times a day. \\'We talk a few times a
day\\', Lis said. \\'My parents are concerned by these constant threats
of missiles, but my parents also survived the Holocaust and lived
through all the major wars Israel has faced, plus the wave of suicide
bombings in the last five or six years that have been so dangerous.
\\'So far, they\\'ve decided to stay in Haifa even though there is a
threat of missiles\\'.

An event taking place-a pro-Israeli rally at Southfield\\'s
Congregation Shaarey Zedek-garnered a notice that was larger than the
story on the event at the Islamic Center (233 words). That was before
the pro-Israeli event even took place. The event at the synagogue was
covered in a longer article (690 words) with the headline, "Mid East
Crisis Comes Home in Support of Israel: Southfield Crowd Says Fight\\'s
Right - 4,000 Gather, Urge Israelis Not to Yield to Terrorists." The
article presented the pro-Israeli Jews who attended the event as
believing that they were under an attack similar to that made against
Jews by the Nazis.

The article mentioned that "many members of the Jewish community-and
the U.S. government-consider Hizballah a terrorist group. And at the
rally, a host of speakers, including Michigan Attorney General Michael
Cox, said Israel\\'s fight is America\\'s fight." Not only that but
"[the speakers] repeatedly compared the threat of Islamic extremism with
the Nazis. The speakers also promised to keep fighting against what some
called \\'Islamo-fascism\\'. \\'When our backs are against the wall, we
are going to fight\\', declared Rabbi Martin Peled-Flax, an Israeli
official, to loud cheers."


