Introduction
============

These are my comments I sent to the reverend scholar Dr. Abdul Aziz
Sachedina for his perusal. My intention was to solicit his clarification
whatever he might deem necessary in case of my being erroneous in
understanding any of the themes on the contents of his book. I even
rather went too far to request him to translate himself his comments
into English. He favored me with answer:

“I have read your comments about my book. I see it befitting, it is what
you have explained and commented in a way of your own view of the
universe, should be published either along with the book or into a
separate edition. As for its translation into English is concerned I
consider it a labor of unbearable endeavor. Hence, I may be excused and
my apology be accepted. In the cases at the close of my lecture when
your letter and comments reached, we debated there on and indeed
benefited from. I pray to Allah, the Merciful, the Just, and the Knower
of the intentions hidden in the bosoms to prowling the shadow of your
existence and presence on our heads that is a paternal one to me. Please
don’t forget me in your prayers.”

I have given the above extract from his letter in order to appreciate
the greatness of character and the eximious quality of endurance that is
in his bosom; and the generosity of Dr. Sachedina. Secondly, once again
I have drawn out of it, the striking-sincerity of his strong faith in
Islamic principles and in the guardianship of Infallible Imams, (the
Members of the Prophet’s House,) particularly that of Hazrat Mahdi (as)
(The twelfth of them).

Thirdly I have to remind that his thesis on the bases of explaining the
causes of events due to historical factors as occurrence without taking
into consideration of divine view of universe to make familiar that
category of people who adopted the above method for analysis, enabling
them to analyze faith to mastership (Imamate) and Mahdaviat (Mahdism)
with the same Idea, limited cognition which they have had from that
Religions and Islamic principles.

Of course we reject the root of this assumption and it’s clear from the
explanation that this method of study could neither be generalized to
all events and occurrence nor answerable.

The misunderstanding which is comprehend from this hook is that
(respected author) has not given importance to such a very basic point
cleanly, And this may lead the readers of little information to conclude
that the Real and Right Islam which Shia’sm is what this analysis says.

Such misunderstanding will be removed by this explanation as well as
makes it clear that this type of analysis is not reliable; (because)
subjects such as birth of Faith to God, the unseen world, prophet-hood,
the mastership (Imamate) and Mahdaviat (Mahdism) cannot be analyzed by
this method.

To look into the causes of events whether historical ones or common ones
is a different thing and to impose the analysis into the facts and the
cause of the events and to trim a cause to run away from facing the real
cause and the reason of the facts is quite a different thing.

So it became clear that in such explanation or index according to Dr.
Sachadina we do not have any main dispute.

By the power of Allah and His strength we both are in the line of Islam,
following the book and progeny (of Holy Prophet), brother of each other.

We have only tried to clear that this type of writing and introducing
Shia does not create misunderstanding for some people The comments shows
the weakness, unreliability and unreality of such cognition about Shia
the real principles of Islam which comes out form such analysis.

We announce our readiness to answer to any type of question around our
comments and explanation and welcome to receive any kind of question and
objections.

May peace be upon those who follow the guidance.

**Lutfullah-Safi**
**Qum, Iran**

\*\*\*\*

**Thanks to God who bestowed to us the power of thinking and that of
distinguishing the right from wrong.**

Salutations to the pure soul of the last of the Messengers, Mohammed Bin
Abdullah who, through his radiant mission removed the veil of ignorance
and darkness from the human eye, and guided his followers to the right
path and showed them how to live in the best manner. Blessed be his
progeny, the members of his house, Caliphs, and his successors, the
twelve Imams, particularly the twelfth one - Imam of the present age,
Mahdi, the awaited one, the Redeemer of the Universe, he who will bring
the long awaited justice.

This book debates and discusses the contents of the book “Islamic
Messiah-ism” written by the respected scholar, Abdul Aziz Sachedina.
Although the contents of this book have an immediate bearing on the
contents of the previously named book, yet, it stands with an
independent entity of its own due to the magnitude of the discussion
framed within historical, Islamic and scientific bounds, which is in
itself a fascinating factor. Indeed, this book at the same time, helps
to complete where that one lurks short, and corrects the image, if
obfuscated in the other book.

Matters are so discussed that the reader could grasp the sense without
referring to the other book. Whoever walks in the corridors of the
edifice of this book will become acquainted with the building of the
other one without paying a visit there. Those who adhere to their
subject because of their belief, and those who look into this subject
because of their curiosity, and those to whom desire of investigation
has approximated to this subject would in any case, feel interested in
their excursion and their fatigue would be compensated as they relax in
its premises.

Indeed, it is my wish from the Almighty to guard the pen either mine or
that of others from deviation. May He determine the end, no other than
to focus the light upon truth when we comment on other’s writings or
express our views about their composition? Not at all is it the desire
nor is it ever in design to disparage one’s literary efforts or conceal
them or belittle a wit or dig into other’s research in order to point
out their mistakes or personal errors. No. Never. May God ward off such
malevolence? “There is no success to me except from Allah whom I depend
upon and whom I resign to.”


