9. The Shia Doctrine and Ideology
=================================

The writer says that the conflicts, which confronted Bani Ummayah,
provided the opportunity for the Imams to prescribe a doctrine and
arrange an ideology framing, its rules and regulations. He says that
under the supervision of Imam Baqir and Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq an ideology
for a sect of Imamiah was arranged.

If the writer means to say that the ideology of Imamate or Shi’ism was
invented by the sixth Imam, he was mistaken or he is deliberately
telling what is not true. Shi’ism is in the womb of Islam; and, hence,
delivered only by the Prophet (S). The sayings and the Lectures of Imam
Ali in Nahjul Balaghah point to this fact.

Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq only explained its aspects and dilated its
corners and expounded its angles to the people. In other words they
brought to attention what had been neglected and re-established what had
been ignored. Indeed, the sense of Shi’ism became complete in their
times. Deviations were steered to the fight direction and the extreme
ideas were nullified by their teachings. This ideology proved to be a
right one and made it clear that it was the same in which Islam proposes
or points to. They also made it known to the people that only an Imam
was competent enough to give interpretations, fix the limits or expound
the boundaries.

People too acknowledged that their knowledge was a Divine deposit with
them; and the vast hidden meanings of the Quranic literature was made
known only to them. People also experienced that no scholar among them
equaled or stood parallel to them. But, the writer has acknowledged the
unique and the elevated position of Imam Zainul Abideen.

This means that the similar position of the other Imams could easily be
proved. In support of this we can refer to the book “Al-Ba’eth
Al-Hadith” written by Ahmad Shaker in which he says that the most
authentic and creditable narration are those narrated by Imam Zainul
Abideen, Imam Mohammad Baqir, and Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq.

With regards to the fact that the Imams were the speaking Quran the
writer says that this belief was invented during the time of Imam Baqir.
He should know that it was not an invention. It was told by Imam Zainul
Abideen, Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn, Imam Ali and finally the Prophet
himself. The Imams were introduced as equal to the Quran, parallel with
the Quran. If the Quran is a book, they are its utterance. What they say
and what they practice is within the frame of the Quran. Their deeds
correspond to the Quran and do not contradict it. In other words they
are as sacred as the Quran. Why should we doubt it?


