10. Support to the Imams
========================

Either the writer has not understood the events or evil intentions are
his. When a mischief is made deliberately it is with a preplanned
design. He says that Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq at various intervals were
invited by the people to revolt against the governments of the time.
Both the Imams in their respective periods did not accept the
invitation.

They, the Imams - each in his time, knew that the support of the people
could not be relied upon because their support did not go beyond the
terrestrial government. The Imams knew that the people desired the
regime to change hands from the Abbasids to the Alavies.

It was not possible to establish a rule or government of the Imamate.
For example the uprising of Abu Muslim and his like to take the affairs
in their own hands and to establish the government of the Imam; such a
thing never entered the remotest of possibilities. In order to correct
his misunderstanding we should furnish him with some explanation.

Not only did Imam Baqir and lmam Sadiq refrain from undertaking the
establishment of another government but all of the Imams did. Why? They
knew that the support that was being offered was no more than a
transaction. Bani Ummayah and then Bani Abbas had both established an
example, which attracted and tempted all to taste its sweetness.

Under the pretext of the caliphate they had turned it into an empire and
ruled as dictators not in accordance with the Prophet’s (S) teachings
and the Quran but in line with their own lust, desires, and sinful ways.
The exaggerated show of dignity that had taken shape, indeed, was a good
temptation for others. But the Imams could not go that way.

They were to help establish the government of God under the strict rules
of the Quran and within the boundaries of the Prophet’s tradition. So,
if any Imam accepted the support, he was to give favor in return to
those who gave their support.

Therefore, they refused the offer because of the unworkability of the
bargain. People were not ready for the rule of Imamate because they
would receive that justice had to give. For this reason Imam Ali also
rejected the support offered by Abu Sufyan. The support was in
anticipation of worldly gains, which contradicted the Divine justice,
which was in them (the Imams). When one misses the opportunity or
rejects a support he should assume something lies within and beyond
one’s understanding of knowledge.

The Imams have had the obligation vested to them by the Divine and
prescribed by the Prophet. Each had his duty assigned according to the
conditions and circumstances surrounding him at the time. As it was a
Divine design so they prognosticated the advent of Mahdi whose
responsibility is to establish the government of God.


