12. Various phases of the Deeds of the Imams
============================================

The activities of all Imams are one and the same. According to their
circumstances and the demand of that particular time they acted
accordingly. So we cannot frame them in the terms presently known to us
such as ‘radicals’, ‘liberals’, ‘extremists’, ‘moderates’ and so on.
Each one adopted a strict policy to avoid any division among the Shias.
Likewise, the Prophet (S) and Ali Bin Abi Talib.

Of course, we notice the actions of some as being conservative while the
other’s as extremist. Their school of thought was the same although it
might have posed as being different as per the circumstances of the
time. They were strict followers of the instructions of the Quran such
as;

***“Take to forgiveness and enjoin good and turn aside from the
ignorant” (7:199)***
***“The good is not at equity with evil. Do what is good.”***

And,

***“Whosoever offends you, you too offend him in the same which he has
offended you.”***
***“Pity should not overtake you in the religion of God.”***

In general the situation and the environmental condition in the era of
the Imams caused them to act for the safeguard and protection of Islam.
The Shia did adhere to the original line of Islam, which the Imams knew
and defined for all. As they were better qualified to know the position
and to rescue the religion from taking a different turn, they did not
move an inch in their advices and admonishment; and that few were called
Shia. Imam Sadiq did nothing new except that he explained and taught the
religious boundaries obligations, duties etc. which was, of course, for
all but only Shia acted thereon and adhered thereto.


