13. Division of the Dominion of Leadership
==========================================

The writer again here too speaks wrongly. He says that in the days of
Imam Sadiq the leadership split into two - that of terrestrial and the
other of spiritual. Each one separated from the other. Shias have never
thought nor did they ever consider that the Imams should not possess a
worldly leadership and that they are fit only for a spiritual
leadership. They did and do consider that they hold both offices, that
is, the leadership of worldly affairs and the spiritual leadership.

Both positions are combined in their authority. Shias, therefore, regard
those who seized power out of the hands of the Imams as tyrants. They
could not revolt without the Imam’s permission. They took to propagate
the facts. They confronted the tyrants. They acted prudently and with
caution so as not to provide the slightest pretext that could result in
a general massacre of Shias. Shia conduct has always been such as to
make the rulers of their time sympathetic towards them.

It was unacceptable that the leadership be divided into sectors. It can
be said that before the martyrdom of Imam Husayn both dimensions were
combined in the leadership. For example, Omar Bin Khattab and Osman Bin
Affan were regarded as such. But when the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
occurred the Muslims themselves regarded the leadership as forming two
separate angles, which was a result of that unique Holy war. They gave
the most important one, that of religion and its issues to the Imams
because they never considered the caliphs as their real spiritual
leaders.

They respected the caliphs as a symbol towards maintaining the unity and
preserving the existing state. The advantage of the influence which the
blood of Imam Husayn exercised on the preservation of Islam cannot be
computed neither by the Shia nor by the Sunni.

In some cases if this be said, it will sound reasonable, that the
readers were satisfied that the Imam would not create a danger of
uprising against them. For example, to some extent we see such a
conviction in Mansoor with regards to Imam Ja’far Sadiq. But, still he
was not convinced because he adopted provisionary measures such as to
keep a vigilant watch on the Imam and to have spies watch over him.

Finally in order to relieve himself of this suspense of danger he
poisoned him Imam Sadiq and ended his life. Likewise did Haroon to Imam
Musa Bin Ja’far. He imprisoned him for years and finally got rid of him
by terminating his life. This clearly indicates that the Shia regarded
both the dimensions of leadership, of worldly and spiritual, in the
person of the Imam.

The Imams were individuals who worked and toiled to the benefit and
profit of all Muslims. A dead earth is brought to life by rains and the
naked trees of autumn are clad by spring in a new dress of a uniform and
universal green. It is befitting similitude to provide a resemblance for
our easy comprehension of the task and toil of the Imams for Islam and
common good to all.

Therefore, such a project could not have progressed without inspirations
from the Divine or a secret plan designed and given to them by the
Prophet (S). Why should it not be a divine decree communicated to them?
We cannot find any other possibility. The best argument is to question
the very performance itself.

Ali Bin Abi Talib sat home for twenty five years, Imam Hasan adopted the
policy of peace, Imam Husayn did not take rest till he and his sons,
nephews and friend’s blood was not shed, Imam Zainul Abideen adopted a
language of supplication in his gospel “Sahifa Sajjadia” Imam Mohammed
Baqir and Imam Ja’far Sadiq broke the beds of the fountain of knowledge
which inundated all the dry lands - even the deserts, and the other
Imams, each acted uniquely, independently and differently. Why? What
for?

Why was there uniformity in their policies or methods? They acted only
on instructions beyond common vision and far from a general
comprehension. Whatever their ways and whatever their methods their
variety preserved the unity.

What else could one do if he were to have a treasure amidst robbers and
thieves? Gangsters, spies, enemies, hypocrites, fake and feign friends,
were like snakes crawling under grass: and one had to make a movement!
How hard an ordeal for one not to be robbed, cheated and deceived, not
be fooled and not to be bitten by the venomous snakes and cobras hidden
under his paces - sometimes hissing in a friendly tone and sometimes
hissing in hatred.

Danger and terror waited always at the steps of the door. To call for
help was to declare helplessness and encourage the enemy; and to fight
was to be exposed to certain and annihilate the very signs for future
generations. Still, in spite of those hardships, and regardless of those
setbacks, they kept Shi’ism safe and secured so that the sweet smell of
the original Islam could fill the air. When a putrid stench disturbs the
senses there should be an ever-fresh flower in the shape of an
everlasting lili or an eternal rose to refresh the mind and redress the
nerves.

This flower shall ever remain reminding that a Mahdi is to come and what
is taken will be returned.


