16. Extraordinary Qualities of Imams and the Knowledge of Secret
================================================================

The writer is again uneasy here. He said, that the Imams felt happy when
their followers attributed them with super natural and extraordinary
qualities and that they did not protest nor did they try to stop them.
The arcanum knowledge or the concealed knowledge is another thing that
has discomforted the writer. In order to comfort him here we shall try
to be kind to him, only reminding him that he might have either
forgotten or might not have studied enough to obtain the knowledge in
which to speak and write.

There is a general law in which it is said that where there is no wrong
there is no protest. Yes, the Imams have even cursed them who happened
to attribute them with divine qualities or any other exaggerated
particularities. They, the Imams, were never happy of such ignorance.
They corrected the mistake. What contradicts Islam has no link with
Shi’ism. The treasures of knowledge in every aspect was deposited with
them by God, that is, knowledge to them was God’s gift.

But, if they claimed any divinity on the strength of the huge funds of
knowledge, the writer’s discomfort is justifiable. They have always
stressed on the need of worship to God and not one among the Shia has
ever fancied in his remotest imagination that they are equal to God;
they are created ones not the creator; they need to be fed - hence,
needy; they depend on God - hence, not on themselves; they are men like
us - hence, no similitude with God; such is the belief of a Shia. God
has vested them with the knowledge not common to all. So, they were
superior to all in knowledge. This is a fact. Where is it wrong?

Does the writer mean to say that they should have protested to God for
having given them (the Imams) the gift of knowledge? Ibn Khaldoon
believes that the knowledge of the unseen was with Imam Sadiq. In Nahjul
Balagha too we see evidences that knowledge of the invisible world was
with the Imams.


