18. Doctrine of Imamate and super exaggeration
==============================================

As the writer takes rest he enjoys the relief which is in his conclusion
that the fundamental of Imamate and its doctrine is at congruity with
the birth of Shiaism of Imamiah then its growth into a belief full of
exaggeration, and from a belief to a roll of a redeemer taking a form
and shape of a leader and that leader is the Imam, qualified in divinity
or divinity giving him quality. What a perfect plan it is and how nicely
designed and delicately determined!

This cannot be but the result of efforts abortive and vain, which
Shi’ism had undergone to find the Alawi caliphate and which deservedly
crushed and brought a political defeat for them. But their defeat in the
political arena took their Shiaism to higher and writer plains of
expansion in spite of the hindrances that impeded their way from the
Sunni side. Such is his rumination.

Firstly, he should know that the fundamental of Imamate is among the
original fundamentals of Islam. It is a spring of faith and a fountain
wherefrom flows the faith. The Quranic verses and the repeated
conversations of the Prophet further establish this faith. The passage
of time has no part in it. The victories neither added there on nor did
the defeats reduced there from. It is solid; it is pure; it is real; it
is original.

Secondly, the belief in Imamate has no relation with exaggeration. It is
an evil design to administer a relation with exaggeration. The qualities
of an Imam are described by the specifications given by the Prophet (S).
The constant traditions are there in this respect. What the Prophet (S)
says is authentic and the authority incontrovertible and irrefragable.
The tributes of the Imams are fixed, are told, indicated, shown and
proved. The Imam is a creature of God like others, He is dependent upon
God like others.

***“He does not possess for his self any gain nor any loss unless it
should be from God.” (Quran, 10:49)***

The Imam is not a prophet. In other words, no religion is revealed to
him nor is any Divine Decree communicated to him nor does descend upon
him any Revelation. Unlike an apostle or a prophet he is not in contact
with the Angel who constantly used to descend with God’s commandments.
Since the Imam succeeds the prophet he is the guardian of the religion
brought down by the Prophet (S).

The divine communication through angels or revelations terminates at the
prophet upon who descends a mission or a religion to be delivered to
people. Therefore, there remains no necessity for this communication
with the Imam because of his care taking office for that religion or
mission introduced by his predecessor the prophet.

It is quite likely that the pens of animosity misinterpreted the office
of the Imam and his status while it is quite a plain and simple thing
within the frame of reason. It is obligatory and incumbent upon one to
recognize the Imam of his time and acknowledge his authority. By the
Imam we mean him who is installed by a Divine Decree through the
Prophet. Such an Imam has absolute worldly and religious authorities.

He represents the qualities of those possessed by the Prophet (S),
except the prophet hood. He is immune of sin. He is the rightful
successor of the Prophet and a legitimate occupant of his seat.

The writer has obfuscated the things, which are plain and easy. Mahdism
and the absence of the present time Imam too is made complicated, as he
seems to have been confused. Mahdism is a thing foretold by the Prophet
Sunni scholars have acknowledged this thing. There exists an Imam in our
time whether present or absent, visible or invisible. The traditions
have established it. So why the argument? Why so much confusion? To
believe the Prophet but not to believe his words is a deplorable act.

We cannot believe in some and reject others. Partly we believe in the
Prophet’s sayings and partly we deny them. What kind of Muslims are we?
Religion is wholesome. Belief too should be wholesome, total, full,
consummate and complete.

The writer exaggerates. If he himself is a believer he should not tell
such things. Belief is an exaggeration not to a believer but to him who
sees only matter and investigates matter alone. A believer no matter in
what faith he believes, Christianity, Judaism, Islam, he has taken for
granted what is invisible to him, remote to him, not tangible to him. A
divine and a divinity; is it an exaggeration? For a materialist the very
religion itself is an exaggeration.

What to a believer is a tangible fact, although out of vision, although
invisible, although remote to touch; to a materialist is an
exaggeration. Well, the miracles of Moses, Abraham, Jesus and the other
apostles or Imams are only exaggeration to one who has no belief in the
other world which for the present is unseen to us. If we deny the
Prophet as a partner in divinity; yet, it is contrary to faith and
tantamount to pagan hood.

But when we do not trespass the boundaries and believe within the frame
fixed by God and His Prophet (S) where the falsehood is? An Imam is not
a prophet or a prophet God. Stations are known; positions are
prescribed; status stated; ambit is put there to avoid the ambition; so
how can deception creep in?


