20. The Issue of absence or occultation is a reality and not a theory or a fancy
================================================================================

The writer has this to say. The atrocities of Bani Abbas towards the
progeny of Ali and the sons of Imam Ja’far Sadiq had created unrest and
confusion as well as the problem of succession to Imam Hasan Askari
(260, 874 AD). At Samarra there rendered elements and factors, which as
a result brought on the theory of the Imam’s occultation.

However it was not a theory but a reality, a fact, a truth. It was
written in books before Imam Hasan Askari had become Imam that the
twelfth Imam would take shelter in absenting himself and that he would
take refuge in his own disappearance and that for his safety he would
resort to his own occultation under God’s command. Some took advantage
of the opportunity that Ja’far claimed that he was the awaited one.
People did not believe him because of his reputation. This claim further
strengthened the belief of the Shia in the Imamate of Mahdi. Their trust
nullified the false claims.

What we can understand from the writers tone, is that in a sense from
the time of Imam Sadiq and onward the term Imamate did not carry any
political meaning, that is, Imamate was bleak of political platform and
barren of political performance. The Imams and their followers remained
safe to a certain extent.

The writer should know that the Imams possessed the combined offices,
that of political leadership and that of the religious one. Both the
Imams and the Shias knew that the Imams held both offices. In addition,
the Shia views them as the sole heirs of the Prophet. The rulers of Bani
Abbas were no more than the robbers and confiscators of their right and
what belonged to them.

The rulers too were aware of this fact that they were transgressors and
trespassers to that which was not theirs. Time and again Mansoor,
Haroon, Ma’mun, and other rulers had acknowledged the fact that the
religious position was not theirs to hold, nor that of the political
position. They were only occupants while the right was that of the
Imams.


