22. Imamate of Imam Musa bin Ja’far
===================================

The writer writes that there was a dispute about who would succeed as
Imam. He twists and turns the understanding of the reader and tries to
make the subject as much murky as possible. Dispute is a common thing to
occur when a matter happens to be of importance. The more important the
matter the deeper the dispute. The outcome is important.

The Imamate of Kadhim took its seat in the hearts. A general love
surrounded him and a certain respect was rooted in the hearts, which
received him. His succession became authentic and legitimate by his own
life, which was in the eyes of the people. His straightforwardness,
simplicity, truth, humbleness, worship, piety, generosity, and charity,
all these qualities gave the proof of his right to succession and his
worthiness to be the Imam.

His death in the prison which was obtained by means of poison, left far
reaching effects on the regime of Haroon. Shafi’ee, the founder of the
Shafi’ee sect among Sunnis left Baghdad in protest for Egypt. All have
praised the personality of Imam Kadhim. Similarly the death of Imam Reza
which too was by poison and likewise the death of Imam Jawad which too
was by poison. The martyrdom of these Imams left a very bad reflection
on the regime of the day.

Another blunder of the writer is that he consider Imam Hadi and Imam
Hasan Askari to have had witnessed the total downfall of the Bani Abbas
dynasty. The fact is that the collapse of the Bani Abbas dynasty took
place in the era of Mostasam, as he was killed by Halako in the year 656
Hijrah. So, in the time of these two Imams the Bani Abbas dynasty was
fast going down, and the military officers were handling the
installation of a caliph and again dismissing or discarding him.


