23. The appearance of the Imam and his administration of Justice worldwide
==========================================================================

That the Imams through their own agents or elements acquired information
and knowledge current with the affairs of their time is not to be
debated. However, the writer claims that they became aware of the fact
that an Alawi Imam by the name of Mahdi would come, and that he would
not be able to stop the flow of events due to the severe corruptness in
general. Therefore the writer says, they decided to postpone the
reappearance of the “Awaited One” indefinitely.

Yes, the events had become such, however the writer fails to understand
that the reappearance of the twelfth Imam was not postponed by Imam Hadi
nor Imam Askari, for they had no such power. It was a Divine secret in
which only Allah himself knew and planned. According to various
narrations, those of Shia and those of Sunni, nobody knew nor does know
the person who is to appear and when he will appear. Even the Imams,
except Mahdi himself, knew not the specified man. It is a Divine
responsibility. And, it is in Divine hand. Its knowledge is with God.

Its delay or its urgency is the concern of God. The writer fails to dig
any deeper. For it is the insight that probes and opens the horizons of
a vast sight to see. What we know is that which the Prophet (S) and the
Holy Quran has taught us.

That is a redeemer will come to rescue the world from tyranny and to
spread therein justice is a promise committed by God to mankind; and it
has been foretold by the Prophet. But no one is competent to set its
timing. It is not a human program. Hence, it is not for human to decide.
When one cannot decide he can deny. Here denial is not important,
because to deny facts does not uproot them.


