26. The first writer who wrote the book about the occultation
=============================================================

The Imam’s scholars have classified political and social grades. From
Kulaini to Tusi Nomani who are regarded as some of the first ones to
write about the absence of the Imam. Prior to them there was a group of
scholars who dealt with this subjects and wrote books. Fazl Bin Shozan
(died in 260) and still further back there were Ibrahim Bin Husham Abul
Fadl Al-Nasheri and others constitute a class of writers.

Imamate of two brothers
-----------------------

Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Husayn (as) were two brothers and at the same
time Imams. In that period and age both were Imams one obeyed the other;
the younger brother obeyed his elder, as he became Imam. Imam Hasan (as)
actually held the political authority as well as the religious one. He
administered social affairs and held the government over them. Imam
Husayn (as) had no say as long as his brother Hasan was alive.

The writer now tries to establish a link on this precedent and suggests
that the Imamate was of Abdulla Ajta instead of Musa al-Kadhim or to the
both of them and similarly to Ja’far brother of Imam Hasan Askari. The
office of Imamate is Divine. As such, the Imamate is not dependent on
our pleasure.

It is not our right to suggest one for the Imamate or not to approve the
others. When Musa al-Kadhim became Imam, Abdullah goes out of question.
Likewise Ja’far is not Imam because Hasan Askari is the Imam. The
Imamate of Hasan and Husayn cannot be a base for any who happens to be a
brother of the Imam to become Imam. To avoid such a kind of mischief or
this type of interpretation the Prophet (S) in his life time had
repeatedly disclosed the names of the Imams individually. He had even
specified the characteristics of them. So, that no doubt nor suspicion
would remain.


