27. Division of Groups
======================

Regarding the Imam after the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari a man by the
name of Nou Bakhati had written a book under the title “Freq Al-Shia”
(sects of Shia). This man says strange things never heard before nor
will be heard anymore. A few examples of his findings: After the
martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari the Shia divided into groups and sects.

They split into fourteen sects although it is not a fact he says. His
book gives a wide range of sections, groups, and divisions. As one goes
further into this book he sees that the word Group cannot be applied at
all since there was none.

A sect cannot be called a sect since that sect did not exist at all. A
division cannot be named a division since there were not one or two
persons who differed or said anything different. But all such trifles
and superfluous conjectures have gone a great deal to give bulk to the
book. In what times they existed; he does not say. What were the names
of those divisions or sects or groups; he himself knows not because he
does not say.

How long did they remain in their difference? Why didn’t their group or
their division gain ground so as to attract followers? Who was their
leader or chief? All these and such questions remain without answer.
There is nothing real in the hook. The great scholars Sheikh Mufeed and
Sheikh Akbar Tusi have rejected the existence of divisions. They replied
in “A story of Nou Bakhti” it was “Al- Fosool Al-Mukhtara” (The selected
chapters).

In a book by Sheikh Mufeed he says in its second volume, “There is no
sect, no group in existence. In our times till the year 372 there has
been no sect other than the twelve Shia Imamiah.” This is an
introduction for our readers to form a background for themselves, for
their own judgment or opinion because the writer has brought forward Nou
Bakhti’s book in his argument.

There are books written about nations, creeds, and so on. But these
books were written under a prejudice of exaggeration and not on fact.
Whatever one sees in print does not mean it has authority behind it
therefore be accepted. History can not show any trace of any of those
sects. No date can be fixed as to when; no location can be pointed to as
to where; then the very debate on it is of no sense nor of any use
discussing. Probabilities do not become facts. A man might have existed
who deviated, divided, disgruntled, deprived, and depraved; but surely
he was not a sect, division and group.

There is no evidence to show that Ja’far had a following. There is a
likelihood that political and or animosity of some might have given a
wider range to Ja’far.

But he gained nor established a following. The only sect that was there
and that is still there in spite of the ups and downs of the passage of
time, regardless of the vicissitudes of political events, and despite
the changes that are common to man is the sect which believes in the
Imamate of the 12th Imam, son of Imam Hasan Askari. The Shia Imamiah
which as said, did not surrender to temptation but adhered to faith and
preserved the belief, although however difficult. Great scholars
appeared in this sect. Many great books have been written in this field.

Whatever differences might have happened concerning the person of Mahdi,
it was not as wide as is pretended and not as serious as is said. There
were no fourteen sects as is now claimed. The writer cannot gather a
hundred men as the followers. To tell, one can also tell that Omar
caused a division or created a division among Muslims as, after the
Prophet’s death he shouted and clamored that the Prophet had not died.
This divided the Muslims into two groups - one who believed in the
eternal life of the Prophet taking his death for his absence and the
other one who believed in his death.

But a lunatic opinion, single and alone, uttered with a calculated
mischief aimed at a particular deliberate purpose or intention cannot be
a criterion on which an ideology can be rested. As soon as it is said,
it is dismissed because it reflects the mind of the sayer.

The sect that acknowledges the Imamate or the lmam hood of Mahdi, son of
Imam Hasan Askari has existed for centuries. From the 3rd century the
sects that are mentioned in the book have had been without existence.
They have vanished. They never existed. Leaving aside the alleged sects,
the truth is that the Authority of God cannot be absent from the earth.
This authority is vested in the person of Mahdi, the Imam of our time.
The Shia cannot ignore the Imam. Here ends the circuit of fictitious
sects.


