29. Saleem relates a news
=========================

What is attributed to Saleem does not exist in his (Saleem’s) book.
Saleem is reported to have narrated that the Prophet (S) had told Ali
Bin Abi Talib that he and twelve ones from his progeny are the rightful
and legitimate Imams. The very authentic copies of the book of Saleem
Bin Qais mostly possessed by scholars do not have what it is alleged to
him. What the book of Saleem Bin Qais carries is the various narration
of several sayings of the Prophet (S) all to the effect that the Imams
are twelve and their names starting from Ali Bin Abi Talib down to Mahdi
are indicated.

This book came into being in the first century of Hijrah and remains
till now well credited and well trusted. The names of the twelve Imams
were mentioned at a time when they were not yet born. So what is a false
accusation or an unfounded allegation merely attributed to Saleem Bin
Qais is only a matter of prejudice, to obfuscate the very subject and
infuscate the understanding.

It is common practice to fabricate a fiction and then set out in
conquest of a writer who may transact this counter note on his credit
because of the customers who bank in him their trust. Better than Saleem
Bin Qais they could not have found. As his notes are plenty, one counter
can easily be mixed therein. If at all it is deducted, a general clamor
would stout that it is Saleem’s; since Saleem’s would obtain currency
and circulate from hand to hand. Such a fraud is also played with Abi
Sahal Noubakhti. This silly trick has persisted deliberately. Writer
should have checked them. Translators also proved negligent in this
respect.

Anyway, we should pronounce here that such a stratum will not be of
benefit to any nor will it serve as a religious cause nor will it
advance any religion forward. It would only create a mist on the
understanding of readers. The root of belief in a ‘Mahdi’ is also to be
found in the Tora and that of the Bible prior to Islam. Any literature
that could be traced in the distant past will say something of this
kind. This is the pedestal of the Divine Religion.


