30. Titles of the Twelfth Imam
==============================

The writer sees everything from a material aspect. He has not yet
reached a destination. Everywhere he stops and wanders again and says
something in the pain of fatigue. Muslims believe generally in Mahdi; it
is a political belief. The Shia believes in Mahdi particularly; it is a
political effect. What is a belief? He has several titles such as Mahdi,
Redeemer and etc; they are invented by history.

Let him at least for once tell something of sense. Any link with the
world, the other one, is out of question to the writer. He compares
natural phenomenon with religion. The moon, earth, sun and animals all
appear and disappear in a cycle, come and go; likewise religion too is
to him. He wants to reach a religion after having lost the religion. The
world that is next, the self that is in a man, the ulterior influence of
invisible on visible, the unseen on the seen, the spirit and its
environment, the soul and its surroundings; all these things carry no
sense to him.

What holds a matter matters to him. So, he is altogether on quite a
different track, which never joins the straight path of belief. He
displays a series of historical events as his discoveries. He has
assorted the events, adjusted the episodes, rejected and accepted some
while misplacing others in an order to prove his point. When he offers
his cargo he misleads the customer. The titles such as Mahdi, Ghayeb,
Hujjat which are rooted in the Quran and transplanted in the Prophet’s
sayings are regarded by him as the names that came into being due to
certain incidents or events in history.

Had he cared for traditions he would have come to know that the titles
‘Al Qayem’, ‘Hujjatullah, ‘Khalifatullah, ‘Al Mahdi’ belong to the
twelfth Imam. But the language of tradition is strange to him nor is he
familiar with the tone of the Prophet (S).

In some time or some era one title might have been widely spoken. Again
in certain conditions some other title might have given more consolation
or satisfaction to the people. For this reason some among the titles of
the twelfth Imam are more famous. We observe this in the names of God
also. Al-Shafi, Al-Salaam, Al-Hafiz, Al-Rahman, Al-Razzaq are more
uttered.

The personal circumstance has a bearing on this as one resorts to a
particular tribute or quality moves them to the other. But this could
not mean that God was lacking those qualities in ancient times and got
them as time progressed. Such results are the natural outcome of the
analysis done on the basis of matter.

Therefore, the very method of analysis, that is, the material one, is
wrong and will lead one astray. The belief in God is the consequence of
a centipede of things and a train of suppositions. Before that, there
was no belief in God.

Likewise, the qualities which are the names of God. This is the result
of a materialistic view of the things. Finally, one has to deny all God
and prophets. Such a result of such a wrong method of analysis cannot
convince one nor could it be justified in rejecting God. It will not
succeed to shake the belief of a believer.

The moment Mahdi came into being the titles were fixed to him because of
the qualities he possessed. Mahdi the rescuer, fixed one, good doer,
master of the command, master of time, master of age, and master of
moment is he. Each of those titles reflects a particular dimension of
his personality and of his task. The possessor of those titles is the
twelfth Imam. Mahdi is the same twelfth Imam and the twelfth Imam is the
same Mahdi that the scholars of Sunni have acknowledged. Abu Dawood is
one of them. He in his book “Al Mahdi” says that the twelfth Imam is the
seal of the Imams.


