31. The title “Al Qayem”
========================

Although the writer’s uproar, this time he quotes page 282 from the book
“Ghaybat” (absence) of Tusi that, “Qayem means he will upraise after
meeting his death.” About this sufficient explanation Tusi has provided;
“but to deal this subject we first should necessarily speak of the
Imamate.” As the ramification is getting wider we shall speak about the
Imamate only briefly because its short summary suffices to take in the
details.

Imamate in Shiaism is based on the Holy Quran. There are numerous
traditions of the Prophet that support the establishment.

1. Imamate is a Divine obligation. Persons competent enough become the
choice of God. They are vested by God with this mission. God’s choice of
the person to this office is pronounced to the people by the Prophet at
God’s desire.

2. The prime and the supreme condition for an Imam that qualifies him to
be the Imam is his infallibility, that is, immunity from sin or wrong
doing, and his superiority in knowledge with the others so that all
could obey his instructions and follow his guidance. Khalil Bin Ahmad
narrates a description of Imam by Ali Bin Abi Talib: “All need him while
he needs no one. This is an indication that he is the Imam of all.”

3. The earth cannot be without an Imam or the Authority of God. Everyone
should know and recognize the Imam of his time. If he dies without
knowing his Imam, he has died as though in ignorance.

4. Imams are twelve as per the sayings of the Prophet.

5. All the Imams are from the Prophet’s House. They do not exceed twelve
including Ali. According to the Prophet’s words, repeatedly said, they
are at parity with the Quran and as heavy (important) as the Quran
itself. They never part with the Quran. They remain always associated
with it.

6. All Imams individually possess the worldly and the spiritual
leadership. The only thing that they do not share nor possess is the
prophet hood, which was terminated at the Prophet himself. Nahjul
Balaghah describes them as God’s Authority over His creatures. They are
the boat of safety. They are the refuges for the nation. They are the
guards to protect the people from divisions and deviations. He who does
not recognize them and they do not recognize him shall not enter heaven.
He who denies them and they who denies him shall enter hell.”

7. The Imams were introduced beforehand by the Prophet (S) who disclosed
their names and specifications individually. Each Imam has introduced
the following one his successor indicating his name and his person.
These are the fundamentals of principle belief. There is no likelihood,
no possibility for any mistake or confusion in the order and the person
of the Imam, because of the precautions already taken by the Prophet (S)
in his time in disclosing their names individually.

Also each Imam pointed out to the people his successor (the next Imam).
One should take these matters into consideration if he were to know
something of the Imamate. For a believer who acknowledges God and the
Next world the ground is reason on which the pillars of belief rest.
These fundamentals are irrefragable and incontrovertible because they
are supported by the Quran and the constant circuit of the Prophet’s
traditions.

This subject that the Imamte is a Divine obligation has been established
by the Quran and the tradition that took the wing of constancy. Dr.
Allama Hilli in his book “Two Thousands” (Alfain) has brought forward
two thousand arguments and evidence to prove this subject only.
Basically this subject springs from Tawheed (oneness of God) and it is
the oneness of God that gives origin to this subject. Imamate is so
basic and so fundamental that it is deep-rooted in Tawheed. Tawheed is
the essence of Islam.

And, it is this Tawheed that establishes Imamate thereby making it
obligatory upon all Muslims. The importance of Imamate is reflected form
this where we suffer: “To Him is the Command and to Him is the order and
He is the Sultan and He is the Ruler and He is the Guardian and He is
the cognizant of the interests of the creatures. There is no order nor
is there a dismissal to any one without Him.”

The matter of immunity from sin gives strength to this subject besides
the superiority of knowledge. The Quran here says:

***“He who guides to the truth more deserves to be followed; he who does
not guide should be guided.” (10:35)***

The Imam should necessarily be infallible. Reason requires so. Dr.
Allama Hilli has established this fact through two thousand arguments.
One many refer to the book Alfain.

There should be God’s Authority over the earth.

***“To each nation there is a leader.”(13:7)***

***“And we have reached the word to them.”***

***“A day (in which) we call every people with their Imam.” (17:71)***

These Quranic verses with due consideration to their interpretation and
the sayings of the Prophet thereon prove that the earth cannot be empty
of an Imam. The books, those of Sunnis, Shias, Zaidis, and those of
Imamiahs all say collectively the same. There is uniformity of opinion
at this point. Tazkarat Al Hoffaz of the Sunnis has acknowledged the
necessity of the presence of an Imam on earth. Whether the Imam is
hidden or apparent, concealed or absent or open he is there as should
be.

In the book Sawayeq and other books of Sunni scholars a long statement
of Imam Zainul Abideen is narrated. The Imam in his long statement says
that the earth cannot remain without an Imam from the House of the
Prophet (S). If there happens to be any word coming to this fundamental
it is worthless and groundless.

Imam Zainul Abideen says in his supplication in his Sahifa Sajjadiah:
“O, God, you have supported your religion in all times by the Imam whom
you made a banner to your servants and a tower in your dominion after
making his rope to reach yours and you made him a medium to your
paradise. And obedience to him you made obligatory. And you warned about
disobedience to him. To carry on his orders, you ordered; and to stop at
what he stops the action, you commanded. No advancer advances from him
nor does a delayer lag behind him. He is the Fortress of seekers and the
cave of believers and the path of adheres and the worth of the worlds.”

In this supplication the Imam is well sketched. The states and the
station of the Imams is made clear. Shiaism can be observed in this
supplication.

After all these discussions it is a wonderful thing to say “The uprising
of Qayem after death was acknowledged earlier but later on this thought
was rejected by scholars.”

Any thought in a Shia atmosphere if expressed by the Prophet (S) and Ali
Bin Abi Talib and all other Imams are a fixed truth. Any other thought
contrary to it is of no credit and is void of truth. In an analysis some
seek to find out a trifle and enlarge it magnifying it in order to avoid
the truth or to reject the fact. Some non-Muslim Islamic scholars have
done this to serve their venom.

It is not our point to overlook the loophole. What we say is, do not
overlook the important ones. One should examine and compare both and see
which one is acceptable.

The Imam first dies and then upraises. This is contrary to the
fundamental. The earth in that case would remain without an Imam, which
is not possible. The age of the Imam is lengthy as his occultation too.
If we accept his death first and then his becoming a redeemer, we have
to reject what the Prophet (S) and Ali (as) and the other Imams have
told us.

A narrator by the name of Musa Bin Sadan Hannat (whom is not regarded as
a man of reputation) quotes another man by the name of Abdulla Bin
Qassim. Abdulla Bin Qassim was called ‘the heir’. Such a man cannot be
trusted. This liar hero quotes his source as Abu Saeed Khurasani. Abu
Saeed Khurasani’s whereabouts are not known. Besides this, there is not
other source to have had told the same thing or a similar one to it.

If we look at the word Qayem we understand it to mean that an upriising
is ahead, and this Imam is to be the doer or possessor of that ‘Qiyam’.
An uprising which is to be against the political conditions and
religious perversion and social depravations of that time. He will
uproot every root of tyranny and fill the world with justice. Generally
the word ‘Qiyam’ (upraisal) is contemporary with sunrise. All Imams were
Qayem that is ‘responsible’. But each of them was in accordance with the
conditions of his time.

The situation he was in was one concerned to him. But in a broader view
and a broader sense this title Qayem is particular to Mahdi because the
Qiyam is going to be a wider, universal one not confined to a specified
time and place. His Qiyam (upraisal) will embrace the conditions of
individual, social, political, and economical ones. The application of
this title brings to mind that of only the twelfth Imam and no other
one.

Saddooq has narrated a tradition. His source is Kamaluddin, Kamaluddin
narrates that he (Kamaluddin) heard the 9th Imam, Mohammed Al-Taqi (as)
say: “The Imam after me is my son. His word is my word. His order is my
order. To obey him is to obey me. The Imamate will run to his son, Hasan
Askari. What he says is to be obeyed. His word is his father’s word. His
order is the order of his father.” Then he became quiet. Kamaluddin
asked; “Oh, son of the Prophet of God! Who is the Imam after Hasan?” The
Imam wept. Then he said; “Imam Hasan Askari’s son, Al-Qayem
Al-Montadhar.” Then Kamaluddin asked; “Oh, son of the Prophet of God,
why is he called Al- Qayem?” The Imam answered; “Because he will bring
an uprising.” Kamaluddin asked; “Why is he called the awaited one?” The
Imam replied: “Because there will be an absence that will be very long.
Faithful ones will await his appearance. Those who have doubt will
reject him. Those who believe in him will be redeemed.”

In another source “Ma’ani Al Akhbar”, the same is also mentioned. Some
have indicated other reasons too for his title ‘Qayem’. One is that he
will appear and raze a war against tyranny with his sword. Now, for his
other title, Mahdi, there are several interpretations. Al-Mahdi is as
independent a title as is Al- Qayem. One whom God has guided is called
Mahdi.

According to predictions, the reforms and the deeds that Mahdi will
perform will suit the title Al- Qayem. It is also known that these
titles, “Al- Qayem” and “Al-Mahdi” were heard from the Prophet’s mouth.
There is no sense in arguing that one title is superior to the other.
Both belong to one and both were given and pronounced by one.


