36. Absence of Imam al-Mahdi
============================

The disappearance of the Imam was an event of most importance. Shias
became upset and much disappointed they were uncertain as to what would
happen politically, religiously and socially. It’s far reaching effects
in every as peek at every field was alarming. Some remained dumbs
founded, perplexed and confused knowing not what to do.

A true Shia’s concern was as to how to confront the adversary who was a
staunch appetent, a Sunni, and how to protect his own strategy in that
political hurricane; and to this added his worry as to how to guard an
ordinary Shia whose belief was their hunt in which it was a moving
object in the jungle that had engaged their arrows and could fell prey
to the beast of their propaganda.

The safety of a common Shia, and the danger of the security of a learned
Shia was the anxiety of the hour. Although they saw themselves exposed
to an ambush from behind a tree in that society, which to them had
turned into a forest ruled by wild and bestial animals, yet the most
learned scholars of Shia were safe in their hidings. They were armed by
the Prophet’s (S) traditions and the verses of the Holy Quran, which had
established the truth of Imamate to rescue them and to guard a common
Shia against the danger.

As a result we now see that Shiaism has survived every risk of
eradication. It has preserved its originality rejecting any deviation.
Whose make up is her original face and whose ornaments are her natural
features. Indeed, malice incited the ugly to abnubilate her beauty by
any fuliginous way or to fash its admirers. But her admirers stood a
grueling test and her own numinous beauty stood a palladium. However, no
matter their practice the Shi’ism deranged its entity. The learned ones
gave refuge to the thought of the people. The Nawabs took the affairs of
the Shia in their hands.

While everything was in order, the belief in the twelfth Imam was never
shaken; Nou Bakhti says that in the town of Qum, there existed a sect
that believed in thirteen Imams. We have heard nothing of that kind, and
know that all there believed and believe in twelve Imams. Everyone in
books of narration claim that there existed scholars during the past two
and half centuries to tell people about the Imamate of the twelve Imams.

Yes, a deeper look will show that a few who had turned aside from the
original path in search of personal gains or to whom a deliberate
deviation had taken far away from the track, later regret persuaded them
and repentance returned them back to their right path and to which they
adhered in fealty and stuck in faith.

B. Earlier to Ibn Babway and Nomani others like Fazi Bin Shazan (died
260) have written books about both the periods of the absence of the
twelfth Imam. These books had appeared before the birth of Imam Hasan
Askari. Mashikha Hasan Bin Mahboob (died 224) has also written about
this subject. The writer too maintains that the two periods of the
absence of the Imam has brought forward changes in the views.

We should point out here that both periods were of importance and of a
new kind in the history of Shiaism but not in the sense that the theme
of Shiaism varied with that of the past. These two periods further
cemented the faith of those who were having a pre knowledge through the
sayings of the Prophet (S) and the Imams.

The way of installing a proof or housing evidence was at variance among
the lecturers. But at the same time they all depended on the traditions,
that is, the sayings of the Prophet (S). Side by side they used reason
as well. This method of presenting or producing evidence of reason or
logical proofs became wider and wider during the space of time. From the
time of Sheikh Mufeed to the time of Allama Hilli and toward this method
took an entity to itself.

The proof for divinity, the evidence for prophet hood attained a wider
range. Likewise, there is still a possibility that it may still go
beyond. But the evidence of narration, that is, the narrative proofs
remains what they had been because the words could be invented to
install in the Prophet’s (S) sayings.

The absence of the Imam is reflected in a way to give an impression that
to revolt against tyrant rulers is not an obligation on the people.
Therefore, the scholars, that is, the Shia clergymen and their
jurisprudents in association with the family of Buyid did not oppose the
caliphate of the Bani Abbas dynasty. They propagated Shiaism. If the
Buyid family (Ale Buye) committed atrocities, Shias had no obligation to
oppose it.

It was only the right of the Imams to revolt or upraise against the
tyrant rulers and their governments. If the occultation of the twelfth
Imam makes an uprising impossible then no upraising should take place
and the concern should be only towards the protection of Shiaism. To
bring down a government is the only right of the twelfth Imam.

Such an impression is quite wrong and misleading. First: Shias were in
no circumstances and under no conditions obliged to bring down the
governments of the Bani Abbas dynasty. Shias were and are obliged to
obey the Imam. The Shia ponders, thinks and considers himself under the
yoke of twelve Imams, individually and collectively. Even to this day
the yoke of the Imamate of the twelfth Imam is around the neck of the
Shia. Bani Abbas knew this. They knew that to bring down their
government was not the responsibility of a Shia.

It depended on the stand and outlook of the Imam of that time. Obedience
of the Shia to their Imam, their love, affection, and faith in him was
to Bani Abbas a dread and a matter to take into calculations and
something to bestow consideration to. On the other hand, the conduct,
character, behavior, abundant knowledge, truth, honesty, up
righteousness, straightforwardness, endurance, tolerance, forbearance,
and forgiveness of the Imam was in itself an element and a factor that
weakened the Bani Abbas politically, socially and morally.

This the Bani Abbas well knew that they very presence of the Imam,
whoever he be, was their own weak point because his existence
demonstrated what he possessed and what they were deprived of. Whatever
qualities and abilities they had, the Bani Abbas caliphs were short of.
They lacked. The people too witnessed the same what the Bani Abbas saw.

The ability of the people to judge and compare could not be taken away
from them. As they compared, they hated one and liked one; they hated
one and honored one; they hated one and obeyed the other. This being out
of their power, the Bani Abbas remained always uneasy, harassed,
confused, and uncertain.

To secure their own rescue from this harassment the easiest thing to do
was to detain the very object of fear. This they did. They imprisoned
the Imams. They put them under home arrest. They implied secret agents,
police to keep a watch on them. They broke the link of the people with
them. Motawakkil brought the tenth Imam, Ali Al-Naqi, from Madina to
Samarra so that he may keep a direct watch on him and control his every
movement.

In any circumstance there was never the question that the Shia would
revolt. In the days of the tenth and eleventh Imams, Ali Al-Naqi and
Hasan Askari, there was no probability of any such thing. It was a
general belief that it was up to the Imam to decide what to do. But
there was a strong belief running among Shias that each Imam did what he
was under commission to do. The Prophet (S) had a charted the program by
the command of God for every Imam, framing his responsibility.

So, every Imam in his time acted and behaved accordingly. This secret
chart was transferred from one Imam to the other. The other factor to be
considered is this, that in those days conditions had become so bad and
the people were in such a low mentality that there was no preparedness
on their half to consume a change. In such a probability of failure it
was wise to avoid the upraising. Its consequences would have been more
futile and reverse rather prolific and useful.

The Buyahid’s stand did not totally discard the caliphates of the Bani
Abbas dynasty although they took the helm of affairs in their hands.
They installed a caliph and they even dismissed a caliph. But they did
not declare their disagreement with the machinery of the caliphate. Had
they done so they would have had to confront a huge front of opposition
of Sunnis. A total chaos would have entailed posing a general danger to
Shias. Any change in their stand would have reflected a religious basis
for that change.

To avoid Bani Abbas and appoint an Alawi caliph was tantamount to the
continuation of the same trend. Some say that the interests of Ale Buye
was in keeping the Bani Abbas dynasty in order to retain their own
power. Anyway, Ale Buye was neither to do nor think of any other way.
This should not be forgotten that in the time of the absence of the
twelfth Imam some of the Bani Abbas clan was not bad towards the Shia.

They even pretended to be Shia. Nasiruddin was a scholar among the
caliphs of Bani Abbas. He believed in the Imamate of the twelfth Imam
and in his absence. He even considered himself as the deputy of the
twelfth Imam.

There runs a theory that no one has a right to revolt against tyrant
governments during the absence of the twelfth Imam. This is absolutely
wrong. To upraise against tyranny in the event of possible conditions is
in jurisprudence an obligation. This obligation becomes a general one in
case the tyranny of a ruler happens to consume one’s property, life, or
one’s honor so that all people should go to the victim’s help. To defend
against a tyrant needs no sanction of a religious jurisprudent.

Defense is a sacred liability. To defend a Muslim, or to defend a Muslim
society is obligatory no matter whether the enemy be an outsider or one
from inside. For example the ex-Shah of Iran wanted to change the
Islamic identity of Iran.

So to defend such a danger becomes a liability. In jurisprudence these
questions are discussed, the defense or the effort to oppose the tyranny
of a ruler who is not a jurisprudent or a believer. These issues during
the period when the Imam is absent are decided by the scholars of
jurisprudence. In the span of the absence of the twelfth Imam the tyrant
governments in certain conditions become compulsory to be brought down.

D. The motive of Ale Buye in their upraising obviously was political
with lust for power. But it cannot be waived off that originally they
should have been motivated by religious matters or the atrocities
committed against the Shia might have incited them to revolt against the
tyrant rulers.

On the ground that their upraising was contrary to Shia religious
standards we cannot condemn them. There are several considerations. When
their upraising had succeeded their behavior in general and that of some
of them in particular was far better than all their predecessors. They
even surpassed in their competency and good conduct with others. The
rulers among them showed no enmity with the Shia.

They were jealous and very much enthusiastic towards propagating the
Shia belief and at the same time advertent enough to not encroach the
Sunni sanctity. In other words they had brought freedom for the Shia and
obliterated those conditions that necessitated the Taqia (concealing
one’s belief). In any case, their policy was not to invalidate the
Sunnism or to crush any other religion. They did quite the opposite to
what their predecessors had done.

They provided liberty for Shias and also opened avenues for them to
enter any government service. Ale Buye nullified the previous policy for
restricting Shias in every aspect of social life.

So, they in fact protected Shi’ism and helped it. What they gave to
others by way of freedom they gave to Shias as well. Because of the
equity, which they maintained with the Shia, they were accused of
religious bigotry. However, we are not here to defend the Ale Buye’s
policies. This cannot be denied that they too were a dynasty, which
appeared on the political scene and became recorded in history.

They differed with their previous rulers who were Sunnis and did
everything against the Shias by way of harm. One of them was Motawakkil
who even tried to annihilate the Shia belief. But the Buyid dynasty did
not act to take revenge nor did they adopt any negative attitude towards
the Sunni.

They opened opportunities of jobs and propaganda to them. They were more
human comparing to their predecessors like Motawakkil, Salahuddin Ayubi
and Taqhrool Saljokhi. The Buyid dynasty was in fact Shia. They believed
in Imamate and also the disappearance of the twelfth Imam. But they did
not intervene nor did they interfere in religious matters. What they
pondered they used to pronounce openly. The Shia clergymen coordinated
with the Buyid’s harass on the basis that, in the politics people should
not take part nor should they participate in revolts against the
governments. This is wrong. The Shia religion does not dictate such a
thing.

If we look from a political angle, the Buyids were Shia. Therefore they
felt themselves secure from any Shia revolt against them. Since they
were good with the Sunnis if by any case the Shia were to make any
upraising it would have been crushed by the forces adversary to the Shia
thought. All the political fronts of the Shias would have been lost. If
Shia clergy would have revolted the result would have been the same. On
the other hand, Buyids had paved the way for the Shias to enter into
jobs and have well stations in society.

So, the Shia thought it prudent to support the Buyid rules. In such
circumstances the Shia clergy took to serve the expansion of knowledge
and the propaganda of the Shia ideology and at the same time made it
obligatory upon themselves to support the Buyids.

As things took shape an understanding opened its umbrella shadowing the
Shias and the Buyids without these being a contract or an agreement.
Their understanding was the result of the security which the Buyid
rulers felt at the hands of Shia, and the contemplation of the Shia
clergy that the harm of a revolt would be more than the gain. To not
make a movement was a religious conviction to one party while to the
other a good prudent policy to honor that conviction.

In any case let us pronounce that we cannot repudiate the legitimacy of
their rule, at least, some of them.


