37. The absence from the view of narrators
==========================================

Difference in the date has opened avenues to the writer to tell what his
lust is and to say what is his wish and to write what is his pleasure.
Yes, there is a difference; So what? Does this difference change
anything? Does it bear on any dimension? The beginning of the Imam-hood
of the 12th Imam is in the very year 260. To penetrate deeper we see
that the very pregnancy of his mother remained unnoticed. Miraculously
it was a concealed matter.

Then, his birth; this too was a secret known only to very few close
ones. In other words, this Imam ever since he began life either in the
womb of his mother or in the vast of this universe, either as a baby or
as an infant, a veil surrounded, concealing him or any sign of his or
any symptom that could indicate his whereabouts or his existence.

He was destined to remain under the veils of secrets. It was for the
absence to steal his presence into disappearance. He is in reservation
kept most cautiously by the Divine for the future. Several curtains
should hide him under the guard of wonder and the vigilance of surprise.
Several hands of doubt collectively could not lift any of the curtains
nor could a deliberation peep through it. The mystery is beyond the ken
of human, and the ambit of the calculation of two and two is four,
because Godâ€™s job cannot be circumferenced by our understanding.

He is that treasure which should be kept secret till time is ripe, till
sight can tolerate the fire of its diamond. His absence was a calculated
affair. The Imamate of the Imams had its cycle and Imam Hasan Askari was
still peddling it. So, it is wrong to suppose that the era of the
Imamate had ended. When the eleventh Imam was still alive the era was
alive too. In the year 260 the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari put an end
to an era and opened a new one. The twelfth Imam took the office. Then
he went into hiding. Then he appeared. Then he went into hiding.


