40. The writer regarding the 2nd Ambassador says that it was a period of chaos and tumult in the history of the Shia
====================================================================================================================

People were left adrift in an ocean of uncertainty knowing not where the
stand is for them and to which shore they should land. The writer has
magnified the things because he is looking through a microscope of
prejudice. Any little thing would appear to him big. The things were not
as he is pretending to have been. A little commentary on his statements
seems necessary. Chaos and tumult; they are a natural corollary of
uncertainty. There were those who were faithful to their belief and
ardent in their faith. They knew who their Imam were and who the present
one was.

They also had pre-knowledge of the absence of the Imam as they had heard
or read the Prophet’s (S) sayings. It is a common practice to ask. They
should have told as they should have been asked. Had there really been a
chaos where was it? In the center town of the Shias in Qum we did not
hear nor did we witness such chaos.

What the writer says come out to prove that the Shia belief of twelve
Imams hails from a strong origin. The scholars, the thinkers and other
personalities of the day were believers in the Imamate of the son of
Imam Askari (as) and in his occultation (Ghaybat). He refers to the
ministerial families of Bani Furat and the relations of Abu Suhail Nou
Bakhti.

This is the strength of a religion. The curiosity of the enemies should
have tried to find out the fact. They could not establish otherwise.
During the Ghaybat a link of deputies with the Imam take his orders, it
seems practicable as well as reasonable.

All the traditions about the Ghaybat narrated by Shazan, Nomani,
Kamaluddin are attested by sources of authority and based on evidence
passed on from the Imams by the Prophet (S) himself. All these sayings
were predictions, that is, years behind the events and the events far
ahead the sayings.

The Shias who were in various provinces and parts would not have
accepted to revert, refer or consult to the Nawabs (deputies) of the
Imam had there not been a cogent conviction for them. There had been
links that establish the connection with the Imam. It was a
well-organized and systematic network of communication to the Imam and
from the Imam. Ali Bin Babway, a man of thought and knowledge, writes a
letter to the Imam through the Nawab (Imam’s deputy) and gets an answer
through the same channel.

Had there not been a truth in it a man of Ali Bin Babway’s like would
not have corresponded with the Imam. This in itself is proof.

The writer says on the authority of Fathia that a group of Shia believed
in the Imamate of Ja’far and many yielded to his authority. By saying so
the writer wants to say what he, of course, does not say but means to
say, however does not want to go that far. Well, we say that he means
that Mahdi was fake Imam because of Ja’far. Why does he not ponder the
other way? Why wasn’t Ja’far a false Imam? The biography of Ja’far was
known to one and all. His reputation, his conduct his behavior, his
temperament brought him no respect from the people.

Therefore, he was immediately ignored although he was supported by the
government of the day in order to create a rift and split. Those who
gathered around him were the paid agents of the government.

Another mistake. The writer sees the Imam as an infant. But the
consensus shows that the Imam had attained his boyhood.

The unity among Shias is of course due to a belief common among them. In
a stock all are shareholders; and all are united too. The belief in the
Imamate of the twelfth Imam has brought all Shias together. But the
writer says that the

Imam’s deputies (Nawabs) had brought all together. Of course they were
men of reliance and respect in all the Shia places. For example,
Abulafer Omravi was very much respected. They were symbols of unity and
honor of the Shia but not the reason for it. The Nawabs were only agents
of the Imam. The cardinal and supreme factor was the very Imamate of
Mahdi, which held the mosaic together. Today too this belief in Imamate
holds the jurisprudents in awe and reverence and the deputies of the
Imam.


