45. In spite of the congruity conditions what is the philosophy in Imam Mahdi still remaining absent?
=====================================================================================================

In view of the writer, conditions were favorable for the appearance of
the Imam in the days of the Ale Buye government and there existed also
militarily possibilities. But on what ground was the Imam to make his
appearance?

The answer to such a question lies in what Saduq has said, and that is
the conditions were not secure enough as to ensure his appearance. There
was no assurance as to how many people and whom he could actually trust.
Was there any security in finding 313 people as associates or
companions? I have said before that a number of 313 men absolutely
perfect in belief, completely humble to the orders, totally resigned to
the will of God, and whole heartedly ready for any sacrifice or ordeal
cannot be expected among us.

In words all stand but in practice who stands? To give a test all will
fail. Who knows how many agents there were in their guise. So on what
tested ground is it said that conditions were favorable? It is only a
pretext. It is a pretension. The time is only known to God alone. He
knows and He decides the hour, because He is aware of even what is in
concealed hearts. We have nothing but to resign to Him who is the Master
mind of religion.

Hesitation among the followers of the school
--------------------------------------------

The matters written or told by Ibn Babway shows the scale of hesitation
and the extent of surmise and the amount of doubt among the followers of
the Shia school. This statement of the writer is not true. Why? He says
or imagines that a majority of Shia was dubious not quite certain, that
is, certitude missed them and doubt gained them.

Where there is a question, there is an answer. This does not mean that
the question is the consequence of doubt. If a thing is answered by way
of explanation, it is not that the society is drowned in doubts or it is
overpowered by uncertainty, there is question and a question is espoused
with reply. What Ibn Babway points out is a thing plain and common.

He says that the enemies, opponents and adversaries were creating doubts
and pushing them by way of propaganda. They aimed at misguiding people
who were poorly educated or had little knowledge and less information.
It was such doubts that were used to be answered. In every society, in
every religion it is a common thing. Anyone either a Shia or a Sunni can
ask as to why the Imam is absent or as to when he will appear. This is a
good symptom in a society. It indicates a mental awareness or a
religious awakening or an uprising of spirit.

He wants to base his belief on the foundation of knowledge and the
pedestal of cogency rather than on a track, which was paced by his
forefathers. He asks, interrogates, inquires, and investigates but still
does not change his course. This shows his staunch belief in the
correctness of his path, which ascertains him of the destination he is
heading to. To most questions the answer of the Prophet (S) applies:
“This is God’s command and a secret among the Divine secrets”


