3. Shia’sm and the meaning of Imam, the Redeemer
================================================

We will present explanations of some magnitude in order to obviate
mistakes since there are several. The taking shape and the Foundation of
Shia’sm in the epoch of prophet-hood:

**A.** Historical events and constant traditions indicate that during
the prophethood itself, the Shia faith started taking shape and gaining
ground by its Salient feature that is the belief in Imamate fixed by the
text. In the early years of his prophet hood when the Prophet commenced
the call, a foundation was laid and officially announced to the people
with much stress on the need for their adherence to it. This is quite
obvious in the much known tradition of Thaqalain (two heavy things).

The Prophet did not suffice on that. He wanted to write it down in his
will which he said was important and that they would never go astray if
they adhered to it. He demanded a pen and paper for this purpose. As he
was sick in his deathbed no one obeyed his order. Those who were present
around him opposed him openly and said, “The man is uttering nonsense.”
They stopped him from writing down his will by not giving him a pen and
paper.

Those who accepted the Prophet’s invitation and stuck to this faith was
and is a Shia. It is the contents of the Prophet’s call and the essence
of his Mission. As for the leadership of the nation, on every occasion
and in every opportunity this issue has been made known to the people by
the Prophet (S).

Imamate is a comer stone in the proclamations of the Prophet (S). The
importance of it comes to light by this saying of the Prophet (S), which
he narrated on various occasions. “He who dies without knowing the Imam
of his time dies a death of ignorance.” What we infer from this
tradition is that to ignore the Imam or not to recognize him is
tantamount to death, a death prior to Islam.

The station of Imam is such. The Prophet (S) has specified the qualities
of the Imam as to who and how he should be, also as from which class and
which clan he should be. Their number too which is twelve was told by
the Prophet (S). He in his lifetime had disclosed their names
individually.

Every Imam is a perfect man of his time. His conduct, moral, and
knowledge is superior to all. He is the example in every aspect to be
followed. The Quranic verses as well support this. Imamate is a Divine
office like that of Prophet Hood.

As God chooses His prophet, He chooses His successor too because the
office is the same; the prophet introduced a mission and the Imam was
and is the guardian of that mission. One propagates while the other
preserves.

The writer says that in the early years of Islam there was no sign of
either Shi’ism or Sunnism. If he means by this that the Shia thought had
no root in Islam in its early years; he is mistaken. He says openly
quite contrary to the fact. The leadership of Ali (as) or his succession
to the Prophet (S) was the most original thought expressed by the
Prophet (S) himself. It is as old as Islam itself. In addition to the
Prophet’s sayings, there are several incidents and occasions of no less
importance which occurred and which pointed to the issue of Imamate,
that is the leadership after the Prophet.

During that time a division had not yet occurred. Opposition to the Shia
thought and Imamate took years to develop and identify itself by the
name of Sunni. The individuals who channeled things to flow in quite the
opposite direction, which caused the division, were quite resigned to
the original Islam because that was the age of the Prophet, which to
them was the age of ambush. The Islam of that age, that is, the time of
their ambush, remained in its originality that later begot the name of
Shi’ism because they had invented ‘Sunnism’ - a contrary school.

The life of the Prophet (S) rather shielded them. The death of the
Prophet (S) exposed them. There they were feeble. Later they were
cunning. What the Prophet had set up they upset. The upset one took the
name of Sunni. The original setup preserved its entity in Shia.

Zero hour was the death of the Prophet (S). The meeting place was
Saqifa. They gathered; laid bare their intentions. The clamor died down
and a successor to the demised Prophet was suggested, nominated, and
appointed – all in no time. Why was Ali not there? Ali (as) was occupied
in the funeral of the Prophet (S). Actually the gathering at Saqifa drew
a line between Islam dividing it into two.

Now, their allegation. The Holy Quran has not located a center nor
accommodated the scholars with a choice in interpretation of the issues
and of fashioning the affairs into a discipline. This is not correct.
The Quran says in the chapter ‘Women’:

***“If they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority
among them, those of them whose task it was investigate would have known
the mailer.” (4:85)***

Of course, its interpretation requires a separate chapter. But at a
cursory view we come to know that the term, ‘those in authority’
purports to the Imams, immune of sins.

The Prophet had often said that the Quran was with them, and they with
the Quran are inseparable from earth other. In this respect readers may
refer to the traditions ‘Taqalain’, ‘Safeena’, and ‘Imam’ and several
other ones.

In another tradition the Prophet says: “In every generation to come out
of my nation, there are just people alongside the members of my House,
who cleanse the religion from deviation of the arrogant and wrong of the
wrong doers.”

History of Leadership and Caliphate
-----------------------------------

This issue has always been much in attention. The prophet hood was still
in its start and the Revelations had started coming down, this issue too
made its appearance as a matter of no less magnitude. There is a story
of a man who approached the Prophet and told him that he would embrace
his faith on one condition and that was that he becomes leader after the
Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) rejected the man.

In the meantime, it is true that in the current of some great events of
historical significance the religions view of Shi’ism sometimes used to
palpitate and sometimes the Islamic rays have had so glared through the
prism that its reflection has astonished the viewers and captured their
attention.

It is a historical fact that governments came to power, which were quite
incompetent and not fit for the leadership. Although bad they were
imposed on the people because they facilitated the ground which became
easily accessible for the leadership. Leadership thus obtained their
rule over the people. People were helpless. They could do nothing beyond
disdaining and cursing them. The governments in spite of the power could
not rule over the dominion of hearts.

In the lifetime of the Prophet (S) nobody dared to show his true
identity.

As there was no opposition openly, the underground movements took root.
What they could not accept was the leadership of Ali (as), announced
many times and again by the Prophet. Secret plots were concocted. The
Prophet himself was to be assassinated.

After the death of the Prophet (S) what was underground became open. The
Prophet was no more to be feared; but his house and its members were
there. The opposition had a plan, and they proceeded with it. Now the
front was the very house of the Prophet (S). Whoever was a member,
friend or sympathizer to the Holy Prophet’s household was to be crushed,
so that their opposition should gain ground. Thus the division became
wider and the opposition reached every house, if that house was a friend
of the Prophet’s house. Those who were supporters of the Prophet’s
household were called Shia. In other words, those who adhered to the
Prophet’s household or remained in his camp became Shia. Wherever a Shia
be, he had to confront this opposition.

The only daughter of the Prophet (S), Zahra (as), was not excluded. They
came to her house and tortured her and showed the people that they could
go to that extreme and beyond. Thereafter the events took their course.
Some of the followers of the Prophet went astray and a split was now the
rule. This deviation from the original course became a school and
whoever adhered to it became a Sunni. And a Sunni was to oppose a Shia
who remained in the line of the Prophet (S) which was under the
protection of his household.

Although such was the case, however face to face confrontation was very
prudent but avoided in the time of Abu Bakr and also in the regime of
Omar. What did the people do? The legality or the legitimacy of the
government mattered to some, which others remained indifferent. Some
people rather enjoyed the opportunity as they affiliated themselves to
the ruling junta. There were also three who considered the issue as
finished and settled. But a few among them, like Omar, never considered
themselves safe and secure, because the legitimacy of their rule was
under question by some.

As long as doubt existed the danger too existed that the people might
return to the original track. Therefore Omar adopted very calculated
policies in which to keep Ali (as) at a distance from power. So, Omar
wrote a plan, which introduced the proposal of a six men committee.
Othman carried out the plan. As a result Ali once again stayed away from
power. In the meantime, this occasioned for the people to recall the
words of the Prophet (S) about Ali (as) when he had introduced him as
the one who would succeed him.

An outpour of memory excited the passions in such an effective way that
they, the people, showed and expressed their disappointment as they saw
the deviation from the track of the Prophet (S) was getting wider.

The hatred and abhorrence towards Othman was in such an abundance that
Muslims could not restrain their anger and anguish. The huge fire, which
had erupted, was fueled by the irregularities and injustice of Othman
himself. The original Islam was in need of the rightful successor of the
Prophet. As there was no other than Ali, huge crowds of Muslims gathered
around to support him. After twenty-five years of straying off the right
path, people were once again shown the correct path. Ali (as) and a holy
war under his command was considered by Muslims a great honor.

Allegiance to him was pledged and his succession to the Prophet’s place
was celebrated. Shi’ism considers nothing wrong with this, but quite the
contrary, this was done in compliance with logic and reason.

This is a fact that the faith of the Shia was never forgotten. The
hearts of the people have always hung to the Prophet’s household. They
were victims and deprived of their rights. People gave their support as
the occasion arose and the opportunity invited. Poets have narrated this
faith. Farazdog is a good example of one of these poets whose famous
laudation addresses Husham telling him as to who Imam Zainul Abideen
was. Musa Bin Naseer was the governor of Africa.

He had a slave by the name of Tariq. Tariq conquered Spain. Even though
they held offices in the government of Bani Ummayah, they were Shia.
Because of his being a Shia, Tariq’s properties were confiscated and he
himself was dismissed, regardless of his services. The Shia belief had
penetrated even into Mawiya’s family. Mawiya’s grandson, Yazid, was a
Shia. He openly accused his father and grandfather and announced his
allegiance to Ali and other members of the Prophet’s House. Likewise was
the situation in the Bani Abbas dynasty.

It is the Truth and the originality that the Shia faith has survived
throughout ages in spite of the ups and downs that has disturbed it and
posed as a threat to its holder. From the political aspect, any Shia was
restricted from holding any office in the government. The tyrant and
cruel rulers of the Bani Abbas dynasty like Mansoor, Haroon and Ma’mun
had knowledge of Shi’ism, however contrary to their knowledge they
crushed the Shia thought in order to obtain and keep their power.

Going down the line of the Bani Abbas dynasty we see another ruler,
Muntasar, who held the Shia thought. Again, another by the name of
Naser; he too was Shia. At Samarra (Iraq), the place of disappearance of
Mahdi (as), the twelfth Imam, had been entrusted to and was repaired by
Nasir. There are narration from Shia sources, which say that Nasir was
Shia and regarded himself as a deputy of the twelfth Imam, Mahdi (as).
The Shia faith is Islam.

Neither greed corrupted nor ambition has polluted it. They did not
desert the Prophet. When he was no more, the tradition of Thaqalain
goaded them to the Prophet’s household - the Imams, twelve in
succession. Nothing was added there to; nothing was reduced there from.
It was the same in the Prophet’s lifetime and remained the same
throughout the fourteen centuries. What had history to do with it? They
attribute it to history. What we do understand is that the Shia faith
has been the cause for uprisings, movements either open or underground
ones, revolts, and revolutions.

The Shia faith has always stood against tyrants. It is quite contrary to
what some think and say. Of course, there who think such are men of no
knowledge or little information. They do not know; and those who know
conceal; but history knows and tells and does not conceal. There were
Shia governments. In Egypt, Dyalama, North Africa, Iran, and Iraq. The
upraising of the Safavids was an event caused by Shi’ism. All these
dominions were under Shia rule. There were the events that the Shia
faith caused; and not the other way around.

Sunnism and its sectarian term against Shia’sm after the lifetime of the Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The analysis of the writer in his book in this chapter is such as to
indicate that Shi’ism as well as Sunnism were political forms and that
they gradually took the status of a religions support which was
necessary to their political ends. Failure of Shi’ism in political
avenues, the writer attributes to the lack of a corresponding ideology.
In this respect, that is, the ideology we would like to correct the
writer because he has made himself free to tell what is not a reality.
The Shia was opposed to accepting the successor to the Prophet who had
been wrongly appointed. This is itself a political dimension.

This very policy and the reason for this policy resulted in the
division; this division, in fact, stretches to the difference of belief
in leadership. To make it short, a new belief came into existence
against the belief of a divinely fixed or established Imamate. As a
result, the real followers of Islam or the adherents to real Islam were
cornered into taking the guise of a group or a party or a sect under the
name of Shia to oppose the politics by listing and leaning to a
particular quarter. But why is this fact deliberately overlooked?

The policy, the Shia as a political group introduced after that
undesired division for the administration of society was itself a real
Islamic ideology. It is untrue to say that Shia lacked an ideology. They
had one; this was a religion, a faith, a belief before it took a
political tint. It was so rich that it provided shade to politics.

Politicians were against this belief. So, their effort was to create a
group so as to face the belief of Shia. They gave to that adversary
group a religion form. What was the most valuable treasure to them, was
the caliphate, which they had already snatched from its rightful owner
and had diverted it in their own direction. In order to keep it they
spent money, dissipated their tactics in creating terror among the
people and purchasing the silence of those whose voice was a threat to
them.

To hold the administration of society in their hands as long as
possible; this was the fundamental of their politics. It is quite simple
that a group by the name of Sunni would have never been invented had the
Shia not opposed the point where they had departed from. The only
element of opposition with Shi’ism is the politics.

On the other hand, it was that they who did not have an ideology. Had
they one, they would have announced it or introduced it. In that
confused hour of time they only captured the moment without announcing
what their ideology was.

They could have at least prevented an armed conflict between the
religions rivalry groups for the safety of Islam. There was no interest
of any ideology at their hearts except to capture the opportunity. Later
on which ideology did they follow? The writer is mistaken. The people
had already long ago accepted Ali (as) as the successor to the Prophet
(S) at Ghadir, however this decision had not been respected by the
rivalry group (Sunnism). The ideology they had was, yes, that of terror
and fear which stood as the base of their government. Why has the writer
forgotten the sword of Omar? Abu Bakr was nominated at Saqifa.

Later, Omar started sauntering, loitering and roaming about in the
streets with a naked sword in hand calling the people to yield to the
authority of Abu Bakr or choose to taste the blade. People were dumb
founded. Such a force and violence was their ideology. He continued his
rampage through the streets until he approached the house of Zahra, the
only daughter of the Prophet (S), demanding Ali’s surrender to Abu
Bakr’s authority. Ali (as) retrained from doing that. He was tortured
and dishonored at his door; and taken away by force to the mosque in
order to acknowledge Abu Bakr’s caliphate.

At the end of his life on the verge of death he wrote a will. Abu Bakr
was rarely in his senses, he wrote the names of Othman and Omar leaving
it a guess as to which are of the two was to succeed him. When he came
to his senses he was asked as to whom he actually meant. In reply he
confirmed both. He died. Omar succeeded him. No one pointed out that
“the man is uttering nonsense” or “The pain has overtaken him.” A man
who has lost his senses cannot make a will.

But when Prophet (S) wanted to write down his will they did not allow
him by refraining to give him pen and paper. In the progress of all
these events we do not see any fixed ideology. Omar came to power
without any rival and any opposition. Omar too appointed a committee of
six men. Till here there seems to be no ideology or any respect to the
public opinion. Only after Othman had been killed did the people rush to
Ali’s house and yield to his authority and acknowledge him as caliph.
This they did with their own will, as there was no force, no compulsion
and no violence. From the view point of Shia Ali (as) had been the
caliph since the moment the Prophet had died.

Regardless to what they have written in their books the fact is that the
people were compelled to accept whom the caliph had appointed in
advance. Therefore, the Sunni people had no ideology in their
government. Even to this day of ours one of their scholars says that
Islam has no specific method in appointing a ruler.

The Factor of Religious difference by dividing Islam (Muslims) into two sects Shia and Sunni
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Love to govern and to attain pomp and ostentation is the prime factor.
They pondered and saw nothing would avail them nor would they avail a
thing if they left things go as they were in the preaching and the
teachings of the Prophet. In his lifetime they should plough so as to
harvest after his death: Ambition held them together and the secrecy of
intentions brought a confederation between them. They contrived a plan.
What the Prophet says or orders or permits or prohibits should not
constitute a binding upon them nor should it have a bearing on what they
wished. Such a line suited the trend and fitted to the taste.

So a thought, void of the Prophet’s teachings should be pushed ahead
side by side along the Prophet’s line, a banner, a slogan, a title that
could deceive much and do nothing was a necessity to push the thought
ahead. “The book of God is enough for us”, this they chose and adopted
as their mission. The name of God and the name of His book served as a
tool. They turned it in whatever direction the need was. The screw was
tightened and loosened.

Whatever direction it turned, the banner stood a justification for it.
In other words, so to say, it actually served as a fortification for
them where they were quite safe.

They obeyed and disobeyed the Prophet; they accepted and rejected the
Prophet; they believed and disbelieved in the Prophet; they were the
Prophet’s friends and also his enemies. Such was the banner and such was
the use they drew out of it.

It was through this means that they invalidated the sayings of the
Prophet. Thus they were preparing for the great event which was yet to
come. They put it to test when the Prophet (S) in his last days demanded
a pen and paper to write down his will. They said; “Pain has overtaken
him. The Book of God is enough for us.” According to some narration they
said; “The man is uttering nonsense.” So, by this slogan they stood up
against the Prophet. We need not go into long discussion. It is quite
obvious that their lust for power was the prime factor of the division
in Islam. It is true, it was the Prophet (S) who gave the name of Shia
to the followers of Ali (as).

But this did not create nor did it cause a division. The presence of
close friends of Ali (as) like Salman, Abuzar and Migdad had no part in
creating a sect by the name of Shia. When the Prophet called the
followers of Ali (as) by the name of Shia he meant it for all. His
desire was that all should be Shia. All should follow Ali (as). It is
not even forcibly convincing that the Prophet himself should divide his
own nation. If we reflect back we see the division actually took place
and came into being the moment the Prophet died.

Who was to govern? Who was to succeed? This was the issue. This issue
was a long awaited one; and long anticipated; and some had toiled hard
for it. Although the Prophet (S) had introduced Ali (as) as his
successor, yet they were still hopeful to steal it. At the cost of
division among Muslims they attained their goal.

If at all we ignore this division and find a justification for it, we
cannot overlook a factor, which did play a part. Some of the Muslims
held a view which justified their disobedience to the Prophet or to
discard his orders. They did not regard the sayings or the instructions
of the Prophet (S) as Divine revelations. As such, according to them,
there was no binding. The Book of God they sufficed on and they saw no
need for the Prophet’s (S) words.

They regarded themselves in the same level of that of the Prophet (S) in
conceiving the Quranic text. So why should they remain in the very same
line prescribed by the Prophet (S)? Whatever they thought necessary with
reports to their personal interest or that of a group stood in
preference to the Prophet’s words. With such a view, the instructions of
the Prophet (S) became to them amendable in accordance with the time,
place, circumstance or the condition.

In the administration of Society the word of the Prophet to them was not
final nor did it constitute an obligation upon them to its obedience.
The lawful and the unlawful to them were not a divine legislation.
Likewise, the issue of the caliphate too was in the same category.
Although the Prophet had appointed his successor, they felt they were
not obliged to accept his choice because they wrongfully thought it had
no validity of a divine revelation.

Therefore, to oppose him was lawful. Such was their reason and such was
their belief; and such they have even proved. They changed the whole
cause immediately after the Prophet’s death by appointing their own man
as the caliph.

They had said that for the administration of a society it was not
prudent to have one as the caliph even though he should be the Prophet’s
candidate or appointed by him. They can go against his choice... On the
other hand, in several matters they insisted that the Prophet’s
instructions should be carried out strictly. But, with regards to the
caliphate they did quite the opposite. This shows that personal
interests mattered to them much.

There is another instance where they openly disobeyed the Prophet (S).
The Prophet (S) had appointed Asama as the commander in chief, however
they refaced to accept him as their chief. They gave themselves the
right to either obey the Prophet or to disobey him. They did both. They
obeyed him and also disobeyed him. When the Prophet’s orders were
contrary to their interests, they did not obey him.

Now we ask; who was the opposing group? Followers of Ali. They believed
in the Prophet’s words. What the Prophet said was a divine word to them.
In this respect their point was this verse of the Quran:

***“And he does not utter upon lust; but it is a Revelation that he is
vested with.”(53: 3-4)***

This argument sounds reasonable. So they regarded the Prophet’s (S) word
a binding upon them because of its being a Divine Revelation. This
Quranic verse too is put forward in support of their thought:

***“What is brought to you by the Prophet, take it, and what he
prohibits you refrain from it.”(59:7)***

Therefore, the orders of the Prophet, to them, were to be obeyed and
followed. They believed that every instruction of the Prophet (S) was
and is valid and cannot be ignored. This group of believers was also
called ‘people of the text’. They also believed that the interpretation
was beyond their understanding. To them the caliphate of Ali (as) and
his guardianship over the Muslims was a thing desired by God.

They depended upon this Quranic Verse in support to their belief:

***“O Messenger, announce that which has been revealed to you from your
Lord, and if you do not, then you have not conveyed His message. And
Allah will protect you from the people. Indeed, Allah does not guide the
disbelieving people.” (5:67)***

Such is a brief sketch of the start of the division. It can be well
noticed that the name of ‘Ahl Sunnat’ (people of tradition) to those
ones who actually did not adhere to it is not fair. The more deserving
ones to this name are those who saw incumbent upon them to stick to the
Quran and the tradition of the Prophet (S). They are Shia. Some clamored
“The Book of God is enough to us”; and some maintained that in addition
to the Book of God the Prophet’s instructions too are necessary. For the
sake of one we cannot forego the other. In the absence of either, one
falls short of the other.

Anyway, these two thoughts are fundamental ones. The belief of the Shia
rests on the second one. “The Book of God is enough” is a thought that
rejects the dimension of what the Prophet said and did. And this thought
resulted in the division of Muslims. Well, in exploring this thought
“The Book of God is enough” we come across disagreement among some of
this very school. There are some that openly campaigned against the
Prophet’s word and his text so far as Ali was concerned.

Some insisted that in politics or in the political field there was no
necessity to follow the Prophet. Some on some occasions resorted to the
Prophet’s tradition because they well knew that the thought “The Book of
God is enough” was bleak and barren that it could not hold long. Little
by little it dawned that the thought “The Book of God is enough” was
void of a sense. It was only an approval to invalidate the divine
legislation.

In the beginning this slogan worked well to their advantage. In
deceiving the people who generally were illiterate and not well
informed, this thought went a great deal of length. It was under this
pretext that they prevented the Prophet (S) from writing down his will.
And, they stood against those who used to say that the Prophet’s decree
was essential for the office of caliphate by saying that only a Quranic
text could determine such an issue. So, the events of Ghadeer as well as
that of Yum Al-Daar were both overlooked.

As time went on, experience told them that the affairs could not be
ruled or administered without the backing of the Prophet’s traditions;
they resorted to interpretation. This paved the way for them to deduce
from the Divine Decrees and the Prophet’s words as the demand suggested
or as the need stood. They justified; they interpreted; and they
expounded God’s laws; and had it been possible they would have even
questioned the very text of the Holy Quran.

Not a correct analysis
----------------------

The religious matters are viewed from both a material and political
dimension. For instance, they say that the Shia did not see things to
their advantage, therefore they refused to yield to the caliphate and
choose a different way.

The prime error that entails several other subsequent errors is that
they do not consider Shi’ism a religious reality or an entity of a
belief. They regard it as a political phenomenon. The writer says that
it gathered support as people joined the movement even though at times
it was given different names. The name of Ahlul Bait (The Prophet’s
household) gave them a push. As time advanced they too advanced. But
this theory is wrong. The existence of the Shia belief has no relation
to any historical episode.

The writer considers historical events as a proof for the birth of the
Shia thought. Likewise the Sunni. The writer struggles his way through
such blunders till he reaches the occultation (the disappearance) of the
twelfth Imam, Mahdi. Amidst the conditions and circumstances he sees the
gleam of reason. The mist rises and he sees the light!

There has always been this fact - that people will mingle in political
events or take no part in the governmental posts, or oppose openly, or
flouting a proposal, or scouting an idea. But, in no way could this have
a link with a religion, as a religion cannot be founded or established
or propagated on such a ground.

According to some narration, the disappearance of Mahdi happened in
order that some could avoid the obligation of yielding to his authority.
However, such a thing has happened, has taken place, has occurred. It is
a fact. It is a reality. It is a tyrannical conjecture or a wounding
lies, that the Shia had no other way but to switch their belief in such
an event after the death of the eleventh Imam, Hasan Askari.

One, who is a stranger to religions, is totally ignorant to the
realities of the invisible or unseen world, who has seen only matter or
any other tangible thing; he wants to see, justify and even interpret
the religious matters, no matter of its magnitude, and then decide or
pass judgment. Everything he thinks is the effect of a cause or a policy
in a political class. Similar is the argument of Marxists too. Such
should be, because of no acquaintance, no awareness.

From the ancient times they have questioned, because they want to see
the matter and they have rejected, because they know not of anything or
something beyond. Ulterior dimensions are sealed to their sight. It
would be accepted if he shouts that he has seen; but, no, the cry of a
blind has always been that he has discovered.

Of course, such type of analysis we see runs in all religions, true or
otherwise. Such analysis is only workable in religions, which are not
true because there is no other way. The viewpoint of the Sunni is vague.
According to them there was no text nor was there a religious basis. The
appointment of Abu Bakr to the caliphate was the consequence of the
turmoil and confusion among Muslims that followed the death of the
Prophet (S).

A gathering took place at Saqifa and to avoid a conflict or a civil
disorder or any other danger it was important that Abu Bakr be
appointed. Abu Bakr too in his turn with the same intention appointed
Omar. Omar created a six men committee to decide after his death. These
events were influenced by outside causes and which were gestate with
historical aspects too. But political ends supervised and exercised
guidance upon them.

In the light of these analysis’s it is acceptable that the governments
that came into being after the Prophet (S) were absolutely due to the
causes and effects which were never religious. But with regards to the
Shia belief, these interpretations are not true nor are they acceptable
because they believed in Imamate as they believed in the prophet hood.
Their belief was in that which was a reality and their religion was a
fact. They did not go beyond that.

To support the Leadership of Ahlul Bait (Members of the Prophet’s house) A religious Fundamental
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this chapter the writer has composed comments which history and
traditions reject. Documentary evidences and historical events repudiate
his conclusions.

For instance, says he: “The support to the leadership of Alavees was at
first not on the basis of any planning...” The fact is opposite. The
religious basis pushed the people to the support of the Alavees. Those
who opposed the events took place at Saqifa and consequently rejected
the authority of Abu Bakr, did so on a religion ground. Else, there was
no other motive. The Prophet’s (S) words, his recommendations in this
respect stood obligatory to them for their obedience.

People embraced the Shia faith only on a religion basis. The motive was
religion. The instigation was the obedience to the Prophet (S). One has
to refer to the books “Reality of Shi’ism and its principles” (Asl
Al-Shia Wa Asooloha), “The History of Shi’ism” (Tareekh Al-Shia) and
“Shi’ism in History" (Al-Shia Fil Tareekh).

To become convinced of the facts. The speeches of Ali Bin Abi Talib
compiled in Nahjul Balaghah (the tone of eloquence) throw light on this
fact that the position of Ahlul Bait (Members of the Prophet’s House)
was that of leadership morally and materially. The angle of government
is subordinate to it.

The writer in this chapter gives this opinion that it was exaggeration
that gave shape to Imamate and brought forward the belief in the
guardianship of Ali Bin Abi Talib. Why in this respect and in this
particular regard has he not studied or searched or collected the
sayings of the Prophet (S). Had he too heard as others had heard
directly from the mouth of the Prophet (S) would have never told what is
false and would have respected the truth? Since history has recorded
every word uttered by the Prophet (S) he could have made himself
acquainted with the Prophet’s trend or tendency. But the writer appears
to be prejudice; not willing to take his look beyond the angle he has
chosen.

Since l0 A.D writers have collected the sayings and the conversations
and the speeches of the prophet (S); all point to the way Shi’ism and
all indicate what an established fact Shi’ism is. To turn a blind eye to
all these and to say that till the tenth and twelfth century there was
no sign of the Shia belief, is not only injustice but a shear lie. The
blood that was shed prior to this period of those who were Shia by Ziad
and his like is also neglected and ignored.

Why were they martyred? They adhered to this belief. Such a type of
research into the history of Shia the writer has made and with such an
outlook he has emerged that one cannot but doubt his honesty and fear
his intention which is full of venom.

Since the beginning, the Shia have acknowledged, the Imamate. “Oulil
Amr” (Master of command) he attributed to the twelve Imams individually.
It is an irrefragable fact that ever since the beginning the Shia has
had a religious fundamental. Denial of this fact is to deny the
existence of historical personalities. To reject is to admit.

Sometimes the writer says that Shi’ism from the very beginning was a
party, which stood opposing the Sunnism. How wrong he is! The very Islam
in its pristine purity and in its virgin originality is the Shi’ism -
Committed to the sayings of the Prophet (S) and adhered to the text. On
the other hand, Sunnism came into being in the periods subsequent to
Islam and subject to the circumstances that were forced into existence
immediately after the Prophet’s death.

The text was not important to them. It was a party created to oppose a
prescribed program of Islam. It was a party only to impede the progress
of Islam. In order to not hurt the feelings of our Sunni brothers we
will not go further. It was a deliberate creation to stop the current of
a religion; up not be stopped, to divert its flow; or if not, to deviate
the people and to confuse the thing for them.

Finally we should pronounce that party which balanced the text of the
Prophet’s words and that of the Quran in the scale of interests,
fostered its own conclusions against the authority of the Prophet, and
preferred its own interpretation to justify its ends. This was a
particular class grouped together with a deliberation; as the time
elapsed, their scholars who were courtiers worked out an ideology to it.
Theirs is an invention and Shia’s is the religion.

Many Mistakes
-------------

The writer has made so many mistakes that to point them out one by one
is indeed a great task. For instance, one is this. He says that the
radical Shias, as he has them termed, who believed in the armed
uprising, were too lavish in attributing extraordinary tributes to Imam.
To give him information we would like to comment here:

Those who had insisted on an armed uprising were the Shias of the Zaidi
sect. They thought that the Imam should carry a sword and he should
carry the armed upraisal. Unlike the Shia, that is common Shia, they had
some particular specification and tributes for the Imam, which was
special to themselves.

The revolution that took place against Bani Umaiyah cannot be attribute
to any group among the groups of Shia. The atrocities committed by them
and the cruelties, which they showed against the people of the Prophet’s
House (Ahlul Bait) constitute the real reason, the cardinal cause and
the fundamental factor of their downfall. A general turmoil and a common
turmoil had already emerged everywhere and had established a ground of
uncertainty.

The situation was that of excitement either to deliver a revolution or
to lead people to revolt. As is usually the case every opponent tried to
gain benefit of the situation. Of course, the most zealous of all was
the Zaidaia faction. Besides, there was also another faction by the name
of Bani Abbas who considered themselves heir to Ali Bin Abi Talib
because of the link to Abu Hashim Abdulla Bin Mohhamad Hanefi.

In these groups and factions there was, indeed, one who had the right to
the leadership and to whom the leadership had been offered however he
rejected the offer. He was Jafar Al-Sadiq, the sixth Imam. This policy
which he adopted and practiced was what the Prophet (S) had fixed for
him, was to the greater interest of Islam. The Islamic justice, the
Islamic teaching were promoted by not accepting the political
leadership. He re-opened the school for lessons long forgotten and
corrected those, which were wrong.

The flurry settled down and the turmoil ended as the government of Bani
Abbas came into being. They came as one should have come. The ground
itself paved the way for an armed revolt; they did not pave the way for
the armed upraisal. All counted the armed revolt effective but the Zaidi
faction thought that the armed revolt was effective but exercised by the
Imam. He who does so is the Imam, no matter whether he comes out a
victor or vanquished.

Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq and Religion
---------------------------------

The prime factor for the disappointment of the Shia was the lack of a
uniform or coherent ideology; and this continued to be so till the time
of the great Imam of the Shias, Ja’far Al-Sadiq. This is what the writer
says.

We do not know what he actually means. If he means, positively, that the
uniform ideology of Shia as it was, the friends and the supporters of
Ahlul Bait (The Prophet’s Household) had not known it or were not aware
of it or had not recognized it correctly but they were made acquainted
with it by the Imam Al-Sadiq. And that he, Imam Al-Sadiq, subsequently
due to the awareness, which he had brought about amongst them, could
establish that great school of knowledge, which educated the people with
the true Islam to follow Ali and his offspring, the AHLUL BAIT, was its
reality and entity.

In his time, Al-Sadiq’s, the knowledge was spread and made within the
reach of all those to whom mattered the facts. Many misconceptions.
Wrong conclusions, and mistaken ideas about Islam that were propagated
earlier were revised for the people reputed, rescinded, repudiated and
retained only realities. This was a great achievement.

Now, if the writer means, negatively, that Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq was the
inventor of the ideology; it is not true.

Who was he to invent one? The ideology of Shia is what Islam is. From
the very beginning, from the days of the Prophet (S) it was at a
uniformity. The Prophet’s words his sayings and his addresses had
already made it clear. The passage of time had no bearing on them. It
was in itself complete and consummate. The Shia ideology was the element
that made the propagation perfect. The events which occurred, in
themselves carry the element of truth, goes a long way to establish the
truth of this ideology and manifests the mistaken aspect of the
opponents and adversaries.

The behavior and the conduct of Bani Ummayah, who led the government in
their hands, itself gave the awakening to the people. They as successors
to the Prophet (S), adopted wicked ways and deeds which made the people
hate them because their actions were not coherent with the seat of the
Prophet they had occupied. The more they hated them the more they
pondered the position of Ahlul Bait (The Prophet’s House members).

There was not the remotest resemblance with the teachings of Islam. Soon
it became obvious that the leadership must go to its rightful owners,
those of the Ahlul Bait. The very difference in the mode of life of the
Members of the Prophet’s household and that of the caliphs of Bani
Ummayah was quite open to the observation of the people, it brought the
Shia ideology closer to their hearts.


