50. Reality of reason or audience
=================================

Reality of reason, as the writer says, is it preferable over the reality
of hearing? This is a question well drawn and it can be well answered.
The subject of Imamate is like that of prophet hood and the conditions
surrounding a prophet. To prove a general Imam-hood, that is, the need
for an Imam and the conditions of Imam; reason is enough to prove it.

Had the issue of Imamate been one of those that remained out of the
premises conception and reason, not independent enough to have say in
it, the hearing of the proof would suffice like that of the Prophet’s
(S) teachings. What the Prophet (S) has advocated or instructed is in
itself a ground for the reason to be taken in account.

The condition that an Imam should have immunity from any wrong doings,
that is, ‘Ismat, and for his appointment people have no part; it is
reasonable. On the other hand, what is heard form the Prophet (S) in
this regard is also a proof - a ground to establish the truth. What the
Prophet (S) said and what we heard from him is alike with reason
sufficient to establish the truth.

Reason cannot accept what one accepts by hearing. For some items only
hearing of the proof is essential. For example, the existence of an
Imam, the benefits, the blessings that ensue there from cannot be proved
by reason; they can be established only by audible evidence. This is
also applied to the prophet hood.

With regards to a particular Imam, the previous one introduces the
coming one, that is his successor - exactly the same as the prophets
did. Jesus (as) foretold the prophet hood of Mohammed (S). The
predecessor informs the people as to whom his successor is. The
testament of one prophet or Imam to the prophet-hood or the Imam-hood of
the coming one is a proof to establish the truth of that prophet or the
Imam. To explain here we should say that a miracle is a proof for the
prophet.

Almost all the prophets were blest with this power to perform miracles
by the Greatness of God. The first Prophet cannot establish the truth
unless he should show or comply with the demands to show a miracle. God
has sent His Prophet with the power to perform miracles because a
miracle cannot be denied, and it establishes the truth of his being a
prophet. A miracle is a proof that of reason and that of hearing.

The miracle can be seen by those who are there and cannot be witnessed
by those who are somewhere else. Here to them only the narration, the
hearing is proof authentic enough to establish the truth. The Quran is
the only miracle, which does not demand any hearing proof because of its
eternality. It is the perfection of Islam and its rules and its morals.

The Imamate of the first Imam. A text that of Divine establishes its
truth. It is the Prophet (S) who should establish the Imamate of the
Imam he is appointing. The Prophet’s word here is authority because it
is God’s command through the Prophet’s word.

Imam too performs miracle. The proof of Imamate is his miracle or the
Prophet’s appointment or word. Since the Imam is appointed by the
Prophet (S) by the command of God is the proof of his truth.

In other words it is upon the Prophet (S) to establish the Imamate whom
he has introduced under God’s order. Supposing the proofs, which are
forwarded by the Prophet, were not available to us or they become
doubtful or various interpretations had made it dubious, then the one
man to turn to would have been Ali Bin Abi Talib.

As there being no one other than him referred to or mentioned by the
Prophet. Since the man in guardian is one, the benefit of doubt cannot
be availed by anyone else. It was one man, as told by the Prophet (S),
instructed and specified by him. Here the truth goes to the favor of Ali
Bin Abi Talib because there was no one second to him.

An Imam appointed by God through His Prophet is infallible and immune
from sin. He should act as a leader, guide, and guardian of the people
in all their religious, social, political and social spheres. Ali Bin
Abi Talib was a Divine Imam immune from sin, infallible and impeccable.

The earth should have God’s representative, ‘Hujjat’, that is, the
authority, the witness. In no age can the earth remain without one. The
claim of Imamate is made to him alone. So he stands as the Imam whether
present or absent. The others who made the claim proved themselves
liars. In the denial of Imamate we deny justice to God. It is the demand
of justice, as reason dictates that God should keep His Authority in the
world. If evil grows and is not checked then it could be attributed to
God and that is absolutely unreasonable.


