51. Standard of mercy “Lutf”
============================

The writer has discussed this subject in length. The main theme is the
dispute which has argued both Asha’ria and Motazila. We have repeatedly
said that Shi’ism is an independent school, its originality is that of
Islam, it is not influenced by any extraneous thoughts or any exotic
ideas, it is strictly in line coherent, congruous, and concurring with
the teachings of the Impeccable and Infallible Imams.

In logical issues, arguments have included the standard of Lutf (mercy
or grace). The Shia has followed and benefited from the Holy Quran. The
gist of belief, the theme of faith, the kernel of trust lies with the
holy persons of the Imams in the Shia school of thought. This is very
close to reason that the Itezal sect might have extracted many things
from Shia’sm, and depended on Shia thought. Their leaders could have
been the pupils of our Imams.

‘Lutf’, or grace with the Ghaybat (absence) of the twelfth Imam is
mostly rejected by the Sunnis. The writer has reiterated the reply from
the Shia sources. We suffice on that. The occultation of the twelfth
Imam is a thing in itself an independent subject, already foretold by
the Holy Prophet (S) himself. Ali Bin Abi Talib too has referred to it.
Shia and Sunni traditionists have both mentioned it. Jaber too has said
that the absence of the twelfth Imam is a grace (Lutf).

The Prophet (S) said: “By him who has sent me with the Message, they
will be illuminated by his light, and they will benefit from his
guardianship, as people benefit from the sun from behind the clouds.”

To deny every ‘Lutf’ (Grace or mercy) of the existence of the absent
Imam, and to deny its influence, that is, the graceful or merciful one,
in the era of his absence (Ghaybat) does not fall in line with reason.
The grace, mercy or the ‘Lutf’ exists, as it is contemporary with the
existence of the Imam whether he be present or absent from touch or
sight. If not so, then for humans what is the usefulness of him - a
Divine choice - obliged by Divine will to remain in hiding. God does not
do a thing, which is vain and void of sense, or short of benefit, or
lame in advantage.

Whatever proceeds from the wish or will of God bears fruit to mankind.
Fecundity is His intention; prolific to His design; grace and mercy his
degree; and Lutf His Imam the hidden Imam is an absolute personification
of His mercy. It is through ‘Lutf’ that the Imam should be appointed by
God and designated through the Prophet (S).

Imam is in Ghaybat, that is, he is absent; but the mercy is current -
the snows of the Himalayas are far from sight, but the Ganges flows down
to the Bay of Bengal. In Bengal, the Himalaya peaks are not visible nor
are they in other regions; but the Ganges flows, irrigating vast patches
of land throughout the Northern Belt to the East.

Since we do not see the snows of the Himalayas should we deny the
existence of the Ganges river as well? If it is not a mercy, then Mahdi
is not an Imam. It is his Imamate that makes him graceful to man. It is
the scent of a flower that gives it worth. Flowers made of paper could
be more elegant; but they have no grace of odor and no Lutf of
fragrance. Tosi says: “The Imam’s existence is Lutf, his action Lutf.”

Ali Bin Abi Talib says: “Else, the proofs of God will be void and vain
will be His signs.” An Imam whether present or absent is a ‘grace’, a
‘mercy’, a ‘Lutf’ of God because he is His sign, guardian of His
religion, holds His office and was chosen by Him.

The Imam who can carry out or execute the office of Imam-hood also
imparts the Grace of God. To deny him the Grace is to deny the Imamate.
It is not possible that, a Prophet cannot guide or influence the people.
The mercy of his prophet hood cannot be denied, because of its
essentiality with prophet hood, and its being in consistence with the
office of prophet hood. To appoint an Imam is God’s mercy, and mercy
from God is His obligation towards His servants and creatures.

God has appointed the son of Imam Hasan Askari as the Imam. If we deny
it, it tantamount to say that God has abstained from bestowing mercy
upon us in the period of Ghaybat. To say so is to deny God. It is by His
Mercy that we have an Imam. His Ghaybat (absence) does not reject the
reality whatever hails from God - is Lutf; the 12th Imam is Lutf and his
Ghaybat is Lutf because it is God’s order.


