53. A collective rejection to the Caliphate of Abu Bakr
=======================================================

As for ‘Ijma’, or ‘agreement’, the writer says at the end of ‘Ismat. The
Shia Imamia regard this method as being void and null because of the
pressure on an Imam amidst the people. The writer adds that the Shia
have chosen to disregard the consensus (Ijma) of Sunnis who did the same
to give a legitimacy to the caliphate of Abu Bakr.

Let us explain here that it had no bearing on the caliphate of Abu Bakr
at all. An Imam should enter into consensus (Ijma); else, he has no
validity. To give value or credit or authenticity to an ‘Ijma’ in which
the Imam might not have participated is wrong and not valid.

Next, Abu Bakr did not carry any consensus. He became caliph on the
strength of terror, and tyranny. People were forced to acknowledge his
authority. Is it a consensus? So; why wasn’t that consensus present with
Ali Bin Abi Talib? Why didn’t the men of importance among the Bani
Hashem, not surrender to his authority? But the writer still calls it a
consensus ‘Ijma’. If Ijma (consensus) was the way or a salutary ground
that gives validity to the caliphates; why didn’t Omar go through it? No
‘Ijma’ (consensus) took place; however Omar became caliph.

The criterion cannot be conceived? They advocate and they act
differently. Othman as well came to power through a committee of six men
appointed by Omar. Where had the ‘Ijma’ gone? They act as though public
opinion means something to them. However what is obvious, is that they
did not care at all about the ‘Ijma’ or consensus that is the public
opinion.

The obvious and apparent evidence points out that three men came to
power in three different ways. One, with a so called ‘Ijma’ (consensus),
another, no consensus at all, just by force, the third, by a
pre-appointed six men committee. Mawiyah too openly made his resurgence
to the caliph of his time, Ali.

He was a dictator, he cared for neither law nor rule, and no power
limited him. Where was the ‘Ijma’ consensus now? The writer ignores that
the ‘Ijma’ was scalped, and changed to meet their demands. The writer
knows well that those rulers and caliphs had no popular backing nor a
publish support. The ‘Ijma’ then was a slogan, a protect, and no more.
If a real ‘Ijma’, or in our acquainted term, a referendum were to be
launched they would see who would succeed and who would lose.

Caliphs such as Abu Bakr, Othman and Mawiyah were put into power by a
few people who were motivated by their own interests. They met and
agreed; they designed, decided and acted - there always hung a veil and
they named this secrecy as a referendum ‘Ijma’. Tyranny stood at hand to
come to their aid.


