54. About “Ijma” again Mistakes
===============================

The writer says that in order to invalidate the authority of Abu Bakr
the Shia subjected the ‘Ijma’ to the participation of an infallible
Imam. It was a reality that any ‘Ijma’ or referendum could lose
authenticity, if the Imam did not participate in it. If ‘Ijma’ is their
ground why was Ali absent in that ‘Ijma’? There were many besides Ali
who did not know of such an ‘Ijma’ at all. The Imam was not referred to;
he was not asked at all; his opinion was never sought; in fact, it was
kept an arcanum from him.

Then what referendum or “Ijma” was it !?! This is a trick, misleading
the public under the name of ‘Ijma’. The result is always deceiving
because the Ijma is deceiving. In truth, in reality, in fact, can the
writer tell us that Abu Bakr reached power on the strength of public
opinion - Ijma? If so, why was it that in the Ijma many were not
present? Ali’s opinion was not important? Was he not one among Muslims;
was it not important what he said? His opinion was never sought.

So, this was not an ‘Ijma’. Let them seek for some other name. This
‘Ijma’ with a design preplanned and a malefic motive worked out into
long concealed implacability.

Acrimony was from its very foundation, and from the very beginning it
was invalid, vague, void, and null nothing beyond a show. But the name
still stood ‘Ijma’. The Prophet’s (S) corpse was still fresh in the
ground. It was only Ali (as) busy and occupied in his funeral, and they
in their plan and feigned ‘Ijma’. It originated, as we said earlier, in
order to save face. The Prophet (S) died.

They left his side and hurried to Saqifa. Abu Bakr was declared there as
caliph. None knew except some who held contradicting motives adversary
intentions and inimical designs. To this the writer has given the name
of ‘Ijma’. The course of Islam was changed while the body of the Prophet
(S) still on the ground was not yet buried. People were astonished.

Force was used and terror was applied in order to silence them and
obtain their acceptance. They conceived of plan in order to give them
legitimacy. They decided to brand it with the mark of ‘Ijma’.

A saying from the Prophet (S) too imputed; “My nation does not gather
over wrong nor go astray.” If this was the ground of legitimacy, then
what was the legitimacy for Omar, Othman, Mawiyah and several others
becoming caliphs? Why was the Ijma not practicable there or why did they
not resort to it? No answer.

Important Point
---------------

The writer goes so far as to say that the Shia belief or Shi’ism took
its form gradually on the ladder of events. That it was product of
accidents and a manufacture of episodes is completely untrue. We
reiterate that the Shia belief or Shi’ism is rooted in Islam. As the
Book said so it is; as the Prophet demonstrated so it is. A great
scholar, Aban Bin Taqlab, of the Sunni thought, was asked as to what a
Shia and Shi’ism is.

He replied: “A Shia is he who follows Ali (as). If for instance all the
companions or associates of the Prophet (S) happened to agree over an
issue and Ali happened to differ from it, or the whole Nation agreed
over a thing and Imam Ja’far Sadiq’s word differed with it, a Shia would
obey the Imam’s word.”

The authority is the word of the Imam, although ‘Ijma’ might have
preceded it. The Imam is immune from sin and the Shia depends on the
Imam and act by his guidance. The oldest Sunni sources have confirmed
the truth of Shi’ism.


