56. The Rise (Qiyam) of Al-Mahdi
================================

The writer has tried with obvious efforts to minimize the value of the
belief in Mahdi. He constantly repeats his allegations. He goes on
saying that the Ummayids, as well as the Abbasids lost ground and power.
The Shia became hopeful and encouraged. This did not last long. Despair
and disappointment overtook him. The writer says next that a few
appeared in the role of Mahdi. Shias again became hopeful. A new
dimension was given to Mahdism.

The writer proceeds to say that several faces were given to the belief
and to the Redeemer. Also several Hadith (traditions) were told in this
respect. The writer says that sometimes various signs were pronounced as
to the appearance of the Imam in order to tranquilize the Shia and drown
him into intoxication.

The defeat of the Bani Abbas rulers had no part in the bloom of Shi’ism.
They were like Halako dictators. The Bani Abbas rulers were more or less
believers in Mahdi - the twelfth Imam. One of their caliphs, Nasir,
considered himself as a deputy of the twelfth Imam. The story of Ismaeel
Harqali indicates that caliph Mostazee had a belief in Mahdi.

Secondly, the Shia never despaired. There was no reason for this nor any
cause. The writer’s conclusion is unfounded. As we have said before, the
Shia has maintained his own belief. Since the early days of Islam all
Muslims inclusive of the Shia believed in the advent of a Redeemer.

The Holy Quran says that good doers will inherit the earth. The
believers in Mahdism are charged with vigor in waiting that day. The
science books of ancient times, like the Zaboor and Tora also give
similar promises. Certain people have always tried with great effort to
create chaos and discolor this belief. It was by Divine consent that
this belief was revealed to the Prophets David, Moses and Mohammad (S).
It was revealed to Prophet Mohammad what the future would hold.

These hidings has circulated from mouth to mouth and traveled on the
wings of time, ages have fluttered, and centuries have flustered to
carry it to us to remind us of the advent of Mahdi. Whatever the
endeavor, whatever the effort, whatever the try; this tower cannot be
pulled down by any distraction because reason has stood as a foundation
to its erection.


