57. Near future, the Rise (Qiyam) of Al-Mahdi
=============================================

In this chapter one does not read the writer’s mind but sees his
identity. With whatever weapon available to him, he assaults Shi’ism
with a malicious intention. How sad it is to see one, such as him giving
in to worldly advantages. However flagitious the intention we shall not
despise him. An imperturbable soul gapes for understanding. We shall
endure the writer, to pity him in his attempt to plot against Shi’ism.

In my good will I had considered him to be a Shia in the prelude of this
treatise, however now I may censure off predilection towards him. He
seems not to have any obligation or malevolent ends toward writing the
book.

However he cannot be vindicated in not having one. I have met him
briefly, and to me, he posed as an ardent believer in the Shia faith and
a staunch adheres to the Shia school. I still think good of him and
still entertain goodwill towards him. I am willing to conjecture that
this man should have written the book in order to echo what the
adversaries have said, or make his book popular with those who are
researchers in Islam or in Middle Eastern studies so as to show himself
disguised as a Muslim bigot.

I have nothing better to say of him. God alone knows; He is All knowing
and He knows the secrets hidden in one’s heart. Quite likely he wants to
please many groups at the cost of the anguish of Shi’ism. We should
regretfully admit that a strange and unearthly notion is in vogue and
the vogue is effulging among new comers.

Of course, they hold themselves amenable to their conscience; and they
only display their own derailment. If they wish to barrow their own
faith it will be their own mistake in which they have chosen the smelly
stench over the fresh, sweet fragrance of flowers.

The time too is encouraging, and books are being written which could
propagate the vilification of a religion rather than a religion itself.
To mock faith is to gain a furor. To negate, nullify, and invalidate, is
the most befitting style that a writer may choose to follow.
Unfortunately writers without a zeal to keep the faith in whatever they
are born in or to maintain one at whichever they are, or to seek one
instead of posing as nullifidians.

Under a membrane of religion they enter and rob the belief leaving
behind traces of doubt. In such a hurricane stands firm the mansion of
Shi’ism; the waves ever falling beat themselves upon the tower and
return scattered and split, feeble and flaccid having had squandered
their strength and lost their prowess.

Therefore, they like the books, which interrogate the essentiality or
reality of a religion and debate it on the ground of visible and
tangible matter rather than to prove its truth. They reward such a
writer and regard such a book. The proof whether that of hearing or that
of reason to them is not wholesome. They want doubt - to be said, to be
read, and to be believed in. We have no dispute with the writer himself
nor do we wish to quarrel him. We leave it to him to mend his mistakes.
We have indicated in the proceeding discourses the way and method of
analysis.

We face here two angles; One - the wrong conclusions, accusations and
wrong allegations are made by a particular man; Two - the way of
research that amounts to science or knowledge seems to us personal. So,
we cannot take a seat of judgment nor do we like to pass one.

Now we draw the attention of our readers to his statements and
afterwards to our answers. Partly his statement runs thus:

Some narrations (i.e. ‘Hadith) like that of Abi Hamza he refers to; in
which the appearance of the Imam was considered a relief and rescue.
However the Imam did not appear which imputed the change of God’s mind.
At first God has made up His mind then later changed it. He says that it
was ‘Bada’.

‘Bada’ means first occurrence of a thing, that is, an ‘occurrence’
without precedent or without pre-knowledge or a pre-plan.

He says: “In the principal beliefs of a Shia it is permissible to think
that God decides to do something but because of unforeseen circumstances
which impede and becomes a hindrance, he of Shia either delays His plan
or totally cancels it. The name of this theory is “Bada” means
‘Occurrence’ without a precedent. He continues that the doctrine of
“Bada” was introduced by the earlier leaders of Shia. They brought
forward this theory in order to justify or vindicate or extenuate their
own defeats or failures in establishing an Islamic just government,
which they had claimed to do. Their defeat again was justified to be for
their own good. So the writer says similar things.

According to the writer Bada goes a long way to establish that the
knowledge of the Imams was parochial and limited. He argues and in his
words he seems quite certain that Ismaeel was appointed Imam by his
father, Imam Sadiq (as), but died in his father’s lifetime. Hence, the
Imamate was switched to another son of Imam Sadiq (as) by the name of
Kadim.

This was, says the writer a “Bada” which the Imam could not have been
known earlier. He appointed his son Ismaeel as Imam but he was not aware
that the Imam-hood was to go to Kadim his other son. The Divine
decisions too change as the conditions do. The writer even questions the
divine knowledge. God is not omniscient, because at some times His
calculations too go wrong.

In the writer’s opinion the Shia deans and speakers were having in
Divinity the same belief as that held by Motazelis which included the
theory of ‘Bada’ (occurrence). But the ‘Occurrence’ (the Bada) was
regarded by the Motazelis as being true, because God does the best for
his creatures. But Ash’aries have repelled and exorcised this theory on
the ground that it shows the inability of God to foresee what is to
happen. So, God is short of foresight and short of full knowledge. This
contradicts the quality of God.

But that the Shias adopts this theory with a great mastery, so as to
obviate the contrast of words and adjust this thing without
contradicting their own advocacies. The writer here dwells on the theory
of Sadduq in the interpretation of creation. The writer has also quoted
a narration (Hadith) from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): “Whoever says that God
does a new thing without pre knowledge; I seek distance from him. And he
who says that God sometimes does not like His own performance; he has
denied God.”

The writer has mentioned several other Hadiths, and narration quoted in
the Quranic verses, which all prove that God’s knowledge is absolute and
circles everything and circumferences all. The Shias have always held
this belief. It is a false accusation that the Shias regard God as not
being firm in His determinations. We exorcise this allegation. The
writer claims that the change of Imam-hood from Ismaeel to Kadim still
remains an unsettled issue.

Ibn Babway has narrated the uneasiness of Imam Sadiq (as) with regards
to the death of his son Ismaeel. He reports the Imam having had said:
“Nothing has indicated God’s will more evidently than what has happened
by the death of my son.” He adds: “perhaps he would have been the Imam
after me had he lived.” This appears as a mistake in translation. His
actual words mean this: “Let people know that he is not the Imam after
me.

Actually there is no any such word that confirms the Imam-hood of
Ismaeel. The thing that is confirmed is his death and the Imamate of
Mosa Al-Kadim.”

Then the writer narrates the interpretation of ‘Bada’ from Sheikh Mufid,
which is most accurate and conspicuous. Then he writes the statements of
Sheikh Tusi. But the pity is, instead of reaching to a conclusion he
remarks this; “All these things puts one into hesitation with regards to
all the traditions pertaining to the appearance of the Imam.”

He paces the paths that of Mufid, and that of Tusi, but did not reach
the destination because his fate was to wander. He combines and says:
“It seems that to appoint a day of the appearance of the Imam for Shia
scholars was less than to appoint a year for this issue of dispute.” He
perhaps wants to say that they abstain from fixing a month and a day in
order to guard themselves against the results. But he goes on further to
which we draw our reader’s careful attention.

Abi Hamza has narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that, Ali Bin Abi Talib has
said that after seventy there will be relief. Here the writer comments:

Because of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn it was delayed until the year
140. Then when the Shias did not keep it a secret, it was once more
delayed. God did not keep the knowledge of its time with any of the
Imams.

This narration is discrepant. In the books of ‘Rijaal’, that is the
biography of the narrators, Abi Hamza died in the year 150. Hasan Bin
Mahboob who has narrated on the authority of Abi Hamza died in the year
224 at the age of seventy-five. This shows that when Abi Hamza died
Hasan Bin Mahboob was only a child of one year. So, this narration is
invalid because a child of one cannot possibly tell what the writer
wants to be told.

There should be someone else between him and Abi Hamza. Since it is
unknown as to who he was we cannot credit this narration. As we said
before, the source of news must be accepted and supported by authority.
This news is quite vague because there is no support to it.

What appears to us is this; in spite of the innumerous sayings of the
prophet (S) and the Imams (Hadith) all of them from reliable sources,
and quite clear to us say that the appearance of the twelfth Imam will
be unknown and an indefinite length of time will have to elapse. In the
horizon near and close there would be no sign to see of his appearance.

There are lectures and speeches by Ali Bin Abi Talib, in which he has
elucidly said that the Imam would appear at a time when time will be at
the threshold of the end. He has also foretold the ordeals that the
believers would have to undergo, and the sufferings they would have to
endure. The writer pays no regard to these sayings but sticks to the
utterance of one man!

The determination of God varies, differs and changes. If the translation
be correct; we take refuge in God alone from this nonsense. Destiny is
changeable but not the will of God. Does God make a decision in
ignorance, and then turn it down at the time of cognizance and
knowledge? Is God unknowing at some- times and knowing at others? May
God forbid. The writer believes such and such a belief suits the writer
himself. Shias never believe in such a ‘Kufr’ pagan-hood.

This conjecture is totally refuted, and rejected by the Shia. Shi’ism is
clear, cogent, and candid; and a Shia is clean. God is almighty and far
from being what His enemies attribute Him to be. The Shia knows Him that
His qualities are perfect and they worship Him accordingly. Qualities of
perfection and those, which complete the beauty, are His.

What happened is in the cronical of His cognizance. What occurs is in
His knowledge and what will be is in His attention. Time has no province
on His Being. He governs time. Everything is circumvented and
circumferenced by His Absolute awareness. He knows what each womb hides.
To say that He is partly ignorant and partly wise is wrong. Ignorance is
for humans.

Whatever we know; was known before by Him. Knowledge is His tribute
while to us it is an achievement; knowledge rests with Him whereas it is
sought by us. What is sought can amount to more or less, because it
depends upon the length of seeking. However God’s knowledge is boundless
and unlimited.

We need knowledge; we crawl from ignorance towards knowledge; so we
leave one to gain another. We are in constant migration from want to
need, from less to more, from short to perfection. But perfection is a
tribute of God. He never stands needy to seek that which supplies and
caters this is the outlook of the Shia towards his God.

Doctrine of “Occurrence without precedent” (Bada) is not a Shia
invention nor is it his fancy. This has long ago been waired off and
reputed by Shia scholars. If it is to be discussed; it is a factor that
of Quranic and Islamic values as well as that of the Unity of God. First
of all the Shia neither handled this element justify any defeat, nor to
accommodate political end. This theory of “Bada” is a column in the
science of divinity. It is not a tool so as to be tightened or loosened
as needed. The Holy Quran says;

***“If the people of the villages had believed and feared we would have
opened over them blessings from heaven and the earth. But they lied and
we punished them for what they were doing.” (7:96)***

Also:

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea by what the hands of
the people have earned.”(30:41)***

***“And told your Lord; ‘Call me I answer to you.” (40:60)***

***“Repent to your Lord. He is the Forgiver. He sends rains for you
through the sky.”(11:52)***

***“And, We promised thirty nights to Moses and completed them by
ten.”(7:142)***

***“It’s Faith was its advantage had believed a village. But the nation
of Yunus when they believed we waived off the punishment from that of
shame in the world and left them for a while.”(10:98)***

***“If you are thankful, I, indeed, will increase it for you.”(14:7)***

***“And he who fears God, He makes a way out to him and provides him
that he calculates not.”(65:7)***

***“That God never changes His boundaries which He favored upon a nation
unless they change what in themselves.” (8:53)***

And several other such verses. The Shia believes in the absolute power
and all comprising knowledge of God. “Nothing is hidden from Him in the
earth or in the sky. He is the knower of the conditions of His servants
and His creatures - their past, their present and their future are at
parity to Him. Nothing hides from Him and never poses a thing to Him
from ignorance to knowledge.”

These are what Shias believe of God. From the foregoing verses of the
Quran this secure is known. Gratitude becomes reason for the increase of
the bounties from God. Piety paves a way to come out of the
difficulties, and God sends to him Provision from the quarters, which he
cannot think of. He sends His rains. He attends the needs at
supplication. Faith, repentance, and compunction. He wards off the
punishment. His advantage of His bounties causes one to miss His
bounties.

To support this there are traditions from both Sunni and Shia sources
which abound much. Events too, there are in this respect. Religious
programs, instructions, supplication, and dependents on Him.
Compunction, alms, establishing link among family relations, gratitude,
good hidings, warrant, negative and positive teachings, relieving ones
soft and getting rid of self-purity and purgency all cannot be justified
on the ground of Bada as the writer has interpreted it. “Bada” means the
influence of the things on man’s life and his good ending and likewise
his bad ending; and not in the sense of ignorance of God.

Sometimes there are causes that result in a thing or reasons that cause
a thing. Likewise the causes result in something not to happen, or
impede an occurrence. Or its effects further go ahead in advancing
negative influence or positive ones. So, the outcome of it comes out
strange neither a calculation could anticipate nor could anticipation
calculate.

It is an odd cycle of currency of events or the sudden anicut of
impediments, obstacles, hindrances - a flux and reflux, a wave and a bed
of sea, a vacuum and a tower of equitation, a total obviation and an
apparent surprise; all this is a well-organized decree of Divine
projected, planned, and programmed for man and man has no say in it.

All these things, effects, reflections, action of the causes and their
stagnancy are recorded in the gist of the Book. These things have
bearing on the choice of man but occur by the will of God in accordance
with the destiny He has dictated. So there is no coercion nor is it a
delegated one, but it is in between the two. “Neither a compulsion nor
an assignment but something between the two things.” God has decreed
that the fire burns; every creature thrives in its own line.

But the causes of annihilation and establishment, that is, the
essentialities of ‘being’ for many incidents or many obstacles, which in
some cases are materialistic humans, are adhibited to them; these are
not called ‘Bada’.

The term of Bada implies to the occurrences unusual and uncommon, like
charity, supplication, links amidst relatives that influence or
happenings or hinder the happenings, and man regards them by judging the
visible material causes as a certainty, but occurs the opposite. Both
the cases are the same. In one a man notices the flow of affairs and
calculates thereon as to where they would end, and makes out the
consequences in anticipation. In the second, the flow of affairs gives a
man an impression on which he makes up the result in advance; but occurs
quite the opposite of what was once a certainty.

Human is not acquainted because it is from an invisible atmosphere.
Since man knows not, he tries to establish arguments whereas from Him is
everything. The synopsis of Bada in the sense gives this verse of the
Holy Quran;

***“And the Jews said that both hands of God are tied. Tied are their
hands; they are cursed for what they said; for God’s both hands are
open.”(5:64)***

Like the belief of the Jews that Gods hands are tied, cannot do a thing;
this is to negate ‘Bada’, while its correct meaning is that, God’s hands
are open; His Power is Absolute without stint and with Absolute
knowledge.

In order to make it clear we would like to repeat our explanation:
Supposingly, the correct meaning of ‘Bada’ is the sense in which God is
taken for granted as being ignorant; and whit does not contradict the
idea that God’s power is limited, runs opposite to reason.

***“He is powerful over everything and aware of everything” (3:29, 6:17,
65:12..)***

This seems the best synopsis of ‘Bada’. God has so designed things that
they possess particular reasons for the being, which is, the How of
events, likewise their effects. The hidden causes, which in thousands is
the work of God either immediately or otherwise have a bearing on God’s
decree.

Fire burns - cause and effect is deposited in it; but the efficacy of it
that is, the eventuality of it depends upon the will of God. In this
respect the invisible causes and absence of matter, also play a part,
their influence is effective and for stretching, such a dependency upon
God and supplication and so forth. Now the factors among those of
material and moral ones superseded the stranger. For example a general
corollary of maintaining family links among relatives is longevity.
‘Bada’ does not depend on material causes.

Moral causes as for God’s design are effective. Above all, what God
intends - overruns all. Where effect work, it gets ground; where
obviation eradicates the track of a thing, it is also due to reasons of
its own. The rule of cause and effect is superseded by God’s decree.
Therefore, the unseen causes become a ground to be believed in.

***“Every day He is in business” (55:29)***

Which proves this. “To Him is the Command, order and creation. To God is
the rule that of present and that the past”; and the continuity of His
government and all the qualities of action which should be believed in.

Without His consent, intention, sanction and without His order nothing
moves and nothing happens. Our inability to understand Divine affairs
and the links therein and therefrom does not change anything. Human
beings are unable to understand Divinity. Many have belief in God but
they do not have knowledge about Him. God is a reality that remains
remote from human. Understanding which gives sanctuary and sanctity to
the entity of God.

Minds can not avail the conception although reason provides the proof.
It is very knowledge that we are absolutely unable to conceive God. A
delicate datum of mysticism it is. ‘Bada’ could mean obliteration of
effect. The inter-links are corollary to God’s plan. We see an incident
that is saved from happening, a danger that is warned off; is due to
causes invisible from us and from the unseen origin.

We can say briefly that it should mean that everything is under God’s
command. Certainties fail if not concomitant with His Will. This
conception is supported by “And with Him is the gist of the Book.”

Such interpretations are made by many scholars, which go to prove that
Bada’s logic and reason does not attribute to God’s inability to
conceive the haughtier. Shi’ism deals with the fact that man should
never forget God, and should not depend on outer elements or visible
causes. Man should believe in this verse:

***“Say o, God you are the Possessor of things, give the things to
whomever you like and take back the things from whomever you want and
give respect and vilify, in your Hand is the good; You are powerful over
everything.”(3:26)***

Without such a belief, which is the true reflection of ‘Bada’, man
cannot cultivate wisdom nor can he pace the path of knowledge. To him
the ladder of ascendancy to higher altitudes would not be available in
which to attain the exalted anagogic that could bring to his sight the
divine regions to enjoy.

This belief is natal to him and innate with him. His conscience cannot
deny that which his ignorance rejects. In times of dread one remembers
God and calls Him by His exalted nouns - Provider (Razzaq), Curer
(Shafi), Sufficer (Kafi), and Protector (Hafiz) all these have a bearing
on “Bada” “Nothing worships God like Al-Bada”; shows the importance of
Bada. The compendium of Bada comes out that it does not limit the power
of God, and does not contradict the absolute knowledge of God.

The sense of Bada is misrepresented. It is imputed to the limit of God’s
knowledge. It is not so. It has been confused with the saying of the
Jews. There appear to be two confusions:

First: The compulsion; whatever occurs is with and in the knowledge of
God, however the knowledge comes to Him later. Of course, this is not
permissible for God’s tributes. Everyday occurrences happen that are in
His knowledge;

He creates, provides, and create obstacles. All are His performances.
Nothing would nor will happen beyond the province of His knowledge and
nothing He could do is beyond the limit of His knowledge. This shows,
where He has no knowledge, He is ignorant, and where He is ignorant He
can do nor create anything. But the qualities of God do not accept such
specifications. God is above all these things. His knowledge cannot be
limited or His Power.

This is quite a worthy logic that negates the omnipotence of God, and as
a result invalidates the very Divinity. We are judging God on our own
capacities, which are, of course, limited in knowledge and in practice -
this is a repelled conjecture. The conscience of man knows whether he is
bound or free. It is just like when one doubts the heat even though he
sees the fire.

Second is; God creates and God annihilates. There is no complexion on
the part of God. To obviate the effect or to create a cause is God’s
will. Whether we agree or not will not be of any difference. Divine’s
performance is not of His Mercy. God’s knowledge is not an obstruction
to the flow of events. God knows, and His knowing has no negative effect
on the occurrences. Similarly God knows His creation. His knowledge does
not stop man from taking choice, or deprive him of the power to choose.
This sense is reflected in the following couplet, which is said in reply
to Khyam: “Because Divine knowledge is disobedience; Reason rejects this
portentous ignorance.”

This question comes to mind even while the philosophy of ‘Bada’ exists
and that is; how was it that news and events of the future were related
to the prophets and our Prophet (S) as well?

‘Bada’ has no bearing. The unseen, foretold by the prophets or the Imams
is due to the knowledge vested in them by the Divine. It is an
accusation on the honesty of the prophets or Imams because what they
have foretold came true. Their knowledge of the unseen is the knowledge
of God given to them. They saw what they forecast to happen.

What God has informed or taught the prophets, and authorized them to
tell, ‘Bada’ has no province in it. The prophet (S) had informed Ammar
that he would be a killed at the hands of tyrants. The Prophet (S) had
also foretold of Ali Bin Abi Talib’s assassination, the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn and the events that would ensue. The Prophet (S) had said in
advance that Fatimah, his daughter would be the first one to meet him
after his death. The Prophet (S) had given predictions of Mahdi and his
appearance.

Ali Bin Abi Talib also predicted some future happenings. Sunni
authorities have all accepted these predictions given by the Prophet (S)
himself, as well as those given by Ali Bin Talib. We cannot say that
they said something and something else happened. There are reports and
all of them untrue just like one narrated by Abi Hamza. Such fake and
false reports abound in History. They cannot be trusted because they are
told by one person only. Had it been true others too would have reported
it as they could not have remained blind to an event or deaf to a word?

For instance, there was another claim reported by Omar Bin Homaq to this
effect, that he had visited Ali Bin Abi Talib and that Ali (as) had been
wounded by Ibn Muljim. He told him that he would soon leave him and that
in the year seventy there would be havoc and calamity. The narrator
proceeds and says that he asked Ali (as) as to whether after the havoc
there would be ease and comfort, but Ali (as) condition worsened and he
did not reply, Umm Kulsoom cried.

The Imam asked Umm Kulsoom not to cry which was torture to him, and that
she did not see what he had been seeing then - Angels that were in the
skies, and behind them the prophets and apostles who had come to receive
him. And that, the Prophet had held his hands and told him to come, for
it was a better place. The narrator adds that hence once more repeated
his question which Ali (as) replied that every calamity is followed by
comfort and that there is ease after every havoc. He said: “God
eradicates what He desires and establishes what He wants and with Him is
the gist of the Book.”

As can be observed in this narration the information is watery. Nothing
is said directly. The Holy Quran says;

***“Indeed, after every hardship there is ease.”(94:6)***

This report has nothing to do with the appearance of Mahdi. To take this
narration for something else is an exaggeration. Here ‘Bada’ has no
part.

There are many such narrations.

I would like to apologize from all dear reader in having dwelt over this
subject too long. If anyone would like to learn more about ‘Bada’ he can
refer to my book ‘Sir Al- Bada’ (Secret of Bada), in which I have gone
into much detail - there are other books too useful in this field. What
my intention was from this discourse; was to bring to the attention of
the writer and the readers that the subject of Bada is not a simple one.

Such a complicated matter cannot so easily be understood, and when a
thing is not fully understood it is not wise to give or pass a judgment.
Likewise, without proper knowledge information and proofs it would be
far from justice to accuse and attack Shia’sm, and it’s school of
Imamate. My point was just to make the writer understand that he has
gone astray.

The material advantage or political end has tempted one to say what he
himself knows is untrue, to write what he himself well knows is false,
to reject where acknowledgement is due and to acknowledge where it
should be repelled, to create doubts if not he himself doubts in the
Divinity, in the unseen causes and the invisible universe, in the purity
of Imams and the perfectness of their office, in the Absolute tributes
of the Almighty shows the shallowness which is in itself a proof that
there is no fish because there is no depth.

The mysticism, Islamic issues and the Mahdism all should be whirl off
because there is delay in the appearance of Mahdi. The writer should
ponder a little and think as to where he stands in relation to his own
conscience.

A researcher cannot believe the faith of a sect, or a religion of a
multitude or trifles and superfluous ‘hear-says’. He should turn that
heavy rock which is kept as a door to hide the truth, instead of
sweeping the ground only to be blinded by the dust, and to say he sees
only dust. This is his own failure not the religion’s shortage.

In the end the writer has dwelt on the ‘Raj’at’ or ‘the return’ based
very much on the narration of Mufazzal Bin Omar. Here we only suffice on
three points and will not add to the length of this article.

1. The belief in the Imamate of the twelfth Imam, Mahdi, and in his
reappearance is not concomitant with the belief in the return (Raj’at)
of all dead ones. May be one has belief in Mahdism and not in the
‘Raj’at’ (the return of the dead ones). On the other hand both these
beliefs have a Quranic ground and the Prophet’s (S) words. The Imamate
of the twelve Imams and the salutary of Mahdism is a thing particular
and especial that constitutes a fundamental, and forms a pillar in the
principles of the religion. The two matters - Mahdism, Imamate and the
‘Raj’at’ have no interwoven course, nor does one depend on the other for
support.

2. ‘Raj’at’ that is the return of the dead back to this world is not a
Shia belief or a Shia fundamental; but it is purely an Islamic issue -
common to Shias and Sunnis as well. The Quranic verses predict it and in
this, both sects, Shia and Sunni, equally share.

***“And the day we resurrect from every nation groups from those who
belied our signs while they despise.” (27:83)***

***“And we will resurrect them not letting an anyone go.” (18:47)***

That the details of ‘Raj’at’ was not based on authentic narration are
void.

3. The narration of Muffazzal, the base for the writer, is not trusted
by many scholars and researchers in the science of traditions ‘Hadith’,
that is, traditionists. Whatever the narrator has said by way of details
is unfounded. The book, which the writer is depending on is a book
scarcely known among Muslims. It is rarely read by any and seldom could
be of use except to only a few, and those few belong to a category,
which have no acquaintance with the Shia belief, ideology or Shia logic.

If the writer had read the bottom of page 53 in the first volume of
‘Bihar’, where this narration is mentioned, he would never have trusted
that narration and would never have made it the base and mentioned in
his book.

I pray to God the Almighty to bless the researchers and the writers in
the toil of their task, and to provide them with a correct outlook, so
that deliberation may not blind them nor bigotry persuade them. Indeed,
to err is human. But to avoid is also in human power. We should not
allow ourselves to impute others’ mistakes, deliberations or to
attribute to any intention.

We must follow and trust reason and not go astray, we should believe in
the decency of reason and truth, to see myself very much in want in this
field, I take refuge in God, seeking His help and His guidance. I should
here like to offer my apologies, in case, I have been short of
politeness. I bank on the funds of their understanding and their
forgiveness.

**Saafi Golpayegani**
**Qum, IRAN**


