4. The Shia and the meaning of Mahdism
======================================

As he earlier proceeded, here too he proceeds on the same basis of the
materialistic aspect. The historical causes, social trend and the
political ground to him is the reason for the belief of the Shia in
Mahdism. Political defeats and victories, in his view, have a part in
the buildup of this belief. It is quite easy to deny what is not seemed
or to doubt what is not found in a material search. In religious
studies, a belief is a fundamental. First to avoid the belief and then
to search is to first become blind and then to set out on sightseeing.

In such a way even the prophet hood and even the presence of God can be
discussed in order to deny or can be put to question so as to obviate
its credibility. To believe wrong could be the consequence of social
causes or of the illiteracy. The real belief is above these things
because it is in the root of human nature. There were many who claimed
to be Mahdi. Their claim did not gain ground because they were after a
political end. These interpretations, deviations and analyses do not
touch the root but show the prejudice.

God, revelation, and prophet hood is a fact; there is a motive in man to
accept this fact. Since it is so, on the other hand, persons have lied
and have claimed to be God or a prophet.

Between those two can there be a parallel?

The matter of Mahdism was told by the Prophet (S). His associates and
companions heard it. It is a fact foretold by the Prophet (S). Here it
attains authenticity. It has been utilized for personal gains towards a
political end. But it is not true that this issue was the product of
events which later took the shape of belief and immuned its object with
a sin, that is, ‘Ma’soom’. Events, happenings or incidents sometimes
guide a man towards truth.

For example, Abraham the prophet, that great believer in the oneness of
God, educated the people to believe in one god in a very odd and at the
same time very efficacious way[^1]. As the night fell and the stars
glittered, he said it is god. When it disappeared he was disappointed
and said,

***“I do not like that which vanishes.”(6:76)***

He made it clear that the star is not god. Then in the next stage the
moon ruled the sky with its serene and silent light. Abraham said;

***“This is god.”*** ***(6:77)***

The moon too disappeared. Abraham again became disappointed and said
that he could not love what does not stay. Then in the day when the sun
shone brightly, Abraham said;

***“This is god.” (6:78)***

But in the evening the sun too disappeared. Here Abraham shouted;

***“The sun is not god. I worship the God who never disappears.”***

Yes, incidents can lead to facts. But the truth of a belief is never the
effect of a cause and nor is it a second grade fact.

If we persist in our denial under some pretext or the other, the
philosophy of true religions and their schools shall confront us. As
time lapsed people became more ardent towards Ali and his offspring, and
the Shia ideology penetrated deeper and deeper into the hearts; this we
can say as a fact. But that the very ideology, the very religion, the
Shi’ism, the occultation of Mahdi, all was a consequence of events or a
product of age or a built up structure, is wrong to say and not correct.

It purports to say that evidence matters not. The Prophet (S) had more
than once told about the twelve Imams. He had foretold their names
individually. He had also prognosticated (predicted) the conditions that
would prevail in that time of each one of the twelve Imams. He foretold
all these details when at the time only three of the future Imams
existed.

All heard this and recorded it. Along the passage of time the Imams too
ended at twelve as the Prophet had foretold. As such there remains no
margin of doubt nor room to surmise. No one can say that it was made-up.
Anyone with some information of history and a scant knowledge of
traditions and a fundamental knowledge of Islam will not believe what
the writer has argued. For example, the Prophet (S) had predicted that
Ammar would be martyred. In fact, Ammar was killed by Mawiyah. There are
several such examples.

Then, what is correct to do? To lay aside such method of analysis and to
search the tributes and particulars of Mahdi in traditions and the
narration that have descended to us so as to find out whom these
qualities correspond and specifications apply to. Destinations are
pawned in the right roads. A journey is in the mortgage of a path. If
the path is wrong the journey shall ever wander.

[^1]: For the whole story, refer to Quran, 6:74- 83.


