5. Mahdi, a term and a sense, and the false claimers
====================================================

The word ‘Mahdi’ means one who is guided. Anyone guided by God is Mahdi.
The word is common and general in its sense. According to the sense that
this word reflects, all the apostles, messengers, and prophets of God
were - the guided ones. If we term the Prophet (S) himself and Ali Bin
Abi Talib and every other Imam as ‘Mahdi’ we have not committed a
mistake. Of course, all of them were guided ones; so they were Mahdis.’
Even this word (Mahdi) can be applied to those who were taught in the
schools of the Prophet or the Imams.

For instance, the companions of Imam Husayn or of any other Imam or the
particular ones among the Shia or any other Shia who attained the
guidance or were guided to the path if called ‘Mahdi’ it is not an
exaggeration. But, all know that it is confined and limited to one. When
the Prophet (S) disclosed the tidings he did not mean it in a general
sense. His words specify a particular one as he says to his daughter,
Zahra (as); “Mahdi is from your sons; give the tidings.” “Al-Mahdi is
from my sons.” “Al Mahdi is from the sons of Fatimah.”

So, this is a title or a distinction for one particular person, extra
ordinarily dear to the prophet (S) who has kept the members of his house
and the Muslim in waiting for him.

The word ‘Mahdi’ embraces a range of sense that could be extracted from
guidance. To show the way, to take to destination, or any other thing to
which guidance could be applied; is among the meanings. This word also
applies to other than human. The Quranic verse says:

***“Our Lord who bestowed to everything its creation then guided.”
(20:50)***

In the research of this word it appears that it has been applied only to
those whom God has guided and whose guidance over-flows in him. He has
consumed the guidance to the extent that he can show the path to others.
The guidance has so overtaken him that he becomes a prism reflecting it
from every angle. His conduct, his character, his behavior, his word,
and his life as a whole become a beacon for others to be followed. In
such a sense this word is generally applied to the apostles of God and
the Imams.

As per the traditions that abound in this respect, Mahdi is the very
same one whom the Prophet (S) has identified as having every good
quality. He is the Redeemer from God and to do justice to all is his
task, other synonyms too are his titles.

In case, Mukhtar or any other bestowed this title on Mohammed Hanafia is
only to seek blessing out of it, and not in a trust that he was Mahdi.

There were reasons for the uprising of Mukhtar. Important of them was
that Maitham Tammar in prison had informed him that he would escape from
the prison of Ibn Ziad and that he would take the revenge of Imam
Husayn’s blood and that Ibn Ziad would be killed by him. The uprising
that developed was on the ground and the pretext of revenge for the
bloodshed of Imam Husayn.

This pretext brought together all those who were ashamed of their
participation against Imam Husayn and, therefore, they wanted to amend
their mistake or purge the stain from their record. They thought it
obligatory on them to join the movement against Bani Ummayah. For this
very reason Bani Ummayah could not crush the movement. Mas’ab on behalf
of his brother Abdullah, who regarded himself a caliph, fought with
Mukhtar and defeated him.

Abdullah Ibn Zubair after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn took the issue of
Imam Husayn’s blood as a pretext. The martyrdom of Imam Husayn was the
greatest weak point of Bani Ummayah. This shows how distant they were
from Islam.

Indeed, this fact cannot be denied that the title of Mahdi was misused.
Under this brand personal interests have had been transacted. The writer
has elaborated what we too admit, that is that the occultation of Mahdi
and his reappearance again stood for some to take an undue advantage.
Some claimed that Mohammed Hanafia would take reappearance. For the
first time a trade was established with the capital of this belief. But
the belief remains in its original entity.

It is an evergreen, which never loses its leaves, but is forever green.
The prophet (S) first talked about it. Ali Bin Abi Talib has also spoken
on it. Mawiyah too, according to the book “Malahem Wa Fitan” is reported
to have discussed this issue with Abdullah Ibn Abbas. He on his part
regarded Mahdi to be from Bani Ummayah.

In any case, it is not new that there have been persons who claimed
themselves to be Mahdi and even a prophet. There have also been some
that have claimed to be god! In our age we have seen the same from
different movements, human rights, justice, democracy, social equality
and so forth.

These are the ladders for some to climb to their political ends. In the
past the belief of Mahdi too has served a ladder for many who have
aspired a political elevation or a social altitude, to attain a station
higher than others. Anyway, these claims did not fool the people because
they were fully aware that the qualities Mahdi has these claimers have
not.

Generally the term of Mahdi remained open. Although Shia and non-Shia
know the family root of Mahdi, There are some who still believe those
claiming to be Mahdi even though Imam Mahdi’s background is well known.
Likewise, such allegations with regards to Mohammed Hanafia do not
establish that Mahdism is a recent product. This belief is coeval with
Islam. This belief held such a strong hold on the people that they
became too enthusiastic, too zealous, and too staunch towards it.

They were ready to welcome and embrace him who could rescue them from
tyranny and deliver justice. Therefore, the claims although met the
acceptance of the people. In some cases, this claim furnished an avenue
for various revolts and scattered uprisings.


