Imam `ali (a.s) Intervenes
==========================

Imam \`Ali (a.s) was once passing by date sellers when he saw a
slave-girl crying. He asked the reason, and she said, “My master sent me
with one dirham to buy dates. I bought the dates from this man and took
them home. But my master did not like them. I have returned them but
this man refuses to take them back.” Addressing the date seller, Imam
\`Ali said, “O servant of Allah! This is a slave-girl having no
authority of herself. Give back her one dirham and take back the dates.”
The date seller rose up and gave him a fist.” People said, “What have
you done? This is Amir al-Mu’minin.” The man turned pale and started
gasping out of fear. He took back the dates and returned the one dirham
to her. he then said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! Be pleased with me.” The Imam
said, “The fact that you have amended your conduct has satisfied me. I
am pleased only to see that you have given people their due right.”[^1]

**A Beautiful Pardon**

Amir al-Mu’minin had sent an agent to arrest Labid ibn \`Utarad
al-Tamimi for having uttered certain words. The agents passed by the
alley of Banu-Asad where Nu\`aym ibn Dajajah al-Asadi captured Labid.
Imam \`Ali (a.s) sent agents to arrest Labid. When he was arrested, the
Imam ordered a physical punishment. Nu\`aym said, “By Allah, to be with
you is humiliation and separation from you is atheism!” The Imam said,
“I pardoned you. Allah says: ‘Repel evil by what is best (23:96)’. As
for your saying, ‘to be with you is humiliation’ it is something bad you
have acquired; and as for ‘separation from you is atheism’ it is
something good you have acquired. So tit for tat.”[^2]

**Another Example Of Pardon**

Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) entered Mecca for some affairs. He saw a Bedouin
clutching the curtain of Ka\`bah saying, “O Lord of the House! The House
is Yours and the guest is Yours. Every host prepares certain means to
receive his guest. Tonight, bless me by receiving me.” Addressing his
friends, Imam \`Ali said, “Are you not listening to this Bedouin?” They
said, “Yes, we are.” The Imam said, “Allah is too Great to return His
guest empty-handed!”

On the second night, Imam \`Ali found the same man clutching the same
pillar of Ka\`bah saying, “O Almighty! There is no one mightier than
You! By Your Honor! Honor me in a way no one knows how! I resort to you
by the honor of Muhammad and the Family of Muhammad! Grant me something
no one but You can grant and avert from me what none but You can
avert!”

Amir al-Mu’minin said to his friends, “By Allah! These words are the
chief name of Allah in Syriac. My beloved, Allah’s Messenger, has
informed me that tonight this Arab has asked for Paradise from Allah and
his prayer was granted and asked for the aversion of Hellfire, which was
granted too!”

On the third night, Imam \`Ali (a.s) again saw him in the same place
saying, “O Allah Who is not contained in a space and no space is devoid
of Him! Give this Arab four thousand Dirhams as sustenance!” Imam \`Ali
went forth saying, “O Arab! You asked Allah to host you, and He did; you
wished Paradise; and it was granted to you; you asked for aversion of
fire; and your prayer was granted; tonight, you are asking for four
thousand Dirhams?” The Arab said, “Who are you?” The Imam said, “I am
\`Ali ibn Abu-Talib.” The Arab said, “By Allah! You are the one I desire
and you can meet my need!” The Imam said, “O Bedouin! Ask for it.

” The man said, “A Thousand Dirhams for dowry; a thousand for paying my
debt; a thousand for purchasing a house; and a thousand for running the
affairs of my life!” The Imam said, “You have been fair in asking for
your needs. Whenever you left Mecca for Medina, ask for my house.” The
Arab stayed in Mecca for a week and then came to Medina looking for Amir
al-Mu’minin, shouting, “Who will lead me to the house of the Leader of
the believers?” Husayn ibn \`Ali who was then a child said, “I will lead
you to his house. I am his son.” The Arab asked, “Who is your father?”
Husayn said, “Amir al-Mu’minin, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib is my father.” He
asked, “Who is your mother?” Husayn said, “Fatimah al-Zahra’, the
doyenne of the women of the world is my mother.

” He asked, “Who is your grandfather?” Husayn said, “Allah’s Messenger,
Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib is my grandfather.” He
asked, “Who is your grandmother?” Husayn said: Khadijah daughter of
Khuwaylid is my grandmother.” He asked, “Who is your brother?” Husayn
said, “Abu-Muhammad, Hasan ibn \`Ali, is my brother.” the Bedouin said,
“You have got the whole world! Go to Amir al-Mu’minin and tell him that
the Bedouin whose needs you had guaranteed to meet in Mecca is beside
your house.” Husayn entered the house saying, “O father! The Bedouin
whose needs you have guaranteed to meet is at the door.” Addressing
Fatimah, Imam \`Ali said, “Is there any food at home for this Bedouin?”
Fatimah said, “No.” Hearing this, Imam \`Ali put on his clothes and went
outside home saying, “Call Abu-\`Abdullah, Salman the Persian.” When
Salman came, the Imam said, “O Abu-\`Abdullah! Put to sale the orchard
whose trees the Holy Prophet planted!” Salman too sold the orchard for
twelve thousand Dirhams. Imam \`Ali took the money and called for the
Bedouin. Four thousand Dirhams were given to him to meet his needs and
forty Dirhams for his expenses.

The news spread among the needy in Medina. They too came to Imam \`Ali.
A man from the Ansar went to Fatimah’s house and informed her of the
event. Fatimah said, “May Allah reward you for this news.” \`Ali was
sitting there giving away handfuls of Dirhams to the needy so much so
that there was nothing left for him.”[^3]


