Those On Foot Not To Follow Riders
==================================

Imam al-Sadiq has reported: Amir al-Mu’minin, once, was riding when his
companions started following him on foot out of respect. At this moment,
he turned to them saying, “Are you in need of something?” They said, “We
would like to accompany you.” The Imam said, “Go back, for walking or
running on foot along with a rider will be a cause of corruption for the
rider and a cause of humiliation for those on foot.”[^8]

**A Jew Becomes Muslim**

During Imam \`Ali’s caliphate, Shurayh was the judge. The Imam came to
the court with a Jew so that Shurayh will judge between them. The Imam
said, “The cuirass which is in your hand is mine, for I have neither
sold it nor have I given it as a present.” The Jew said, “The cuirass is
mine and now it is in my hands.” Shurayh asked the Imam to present a
witness. Imam \`Ali said, “Qanbar (his servant) and Husayn testify that
the cuirass is mine.” Shurayh said, “sons’ testimonies for their fathers
are not valid nor are these of servants, for they will witness in your
favor.” Imam \`Ali said, “Woe to you, Shurayh! You have certainly made
several mistakes. Firstly, I am your leader and you obey Allah because
you obey me and you know that what I say is not false. Secondly, you
claimed that Qanbar and Husayn witnessed in my favor.

The punishment for this is to judge among the Jew for three days.” The
Imam sent the judge to a Jewish neighborhood to judge among them and
then to come back to his place of work. When the Jew heard that although
\`Ali had two witnesses but did not misuse his authority and the judge
too passed a judgment against him, said, “This is truly the Leader of
the believers.” Hence he became Muslim; he confessed that the cuirass
belonged to Imam \`Ali, it had fallen off the Imam’s black and white
camel during the Battle of Siffin and he had taken it for himself.[^9]

**Justice in The Court**

Once a plaintiff lodged a complaint before Umar ibn al-Khattab, the
Caliph of those days. Both parties of litigation should appear before
the court and lay their complaints. The one against whom the complaint
was lodged was Imam \`Ali (a.s). Convoking both parties, Umar went and
sat down on the seat of judgment.

According to the Islamic law, both parties ought to station next to
each other and the principle of equality before the Tribunal should be
respected. Accordingly, the Caliph called out the plaintiff by name and
beckoned him to stand up in a peculiar place before the judge. Then he
turned to \`Ali and said, “O Abu’l-Hasan! Place yourself next to your
plaintiff.” On hearing these words, \`Ali became apparently angry.” The
caliph said, “O \`Ali, you do not want to stand next to your adversary.”
\`Ali said, “No, that is not the reason for my anger; the reason is that
you have not entirely respected the norms of justice, for you called me
respectfully by my nickname Abu’l-Hasan but you called the other person
by his ordinary name.” Umar hugged the Imam and kissed him between the
eyes saying, “May my father be your ransom! Allah guided us with your
mediation and brought us out of darkness into light through you.”[^10]

**Contentment**

After the Battle of the Camel, when Amir al-Mu’minin was about to leave
Basrah for Kufah, said, “O people of Basrah! Why are you displeased with
me?” Referring to his shirt and cloak, the Imam said, “By Allah, I paid
the price of this shirt and cloak through spinning. So why are you
truing to find fault with me?” Referring to the purse which he held in
his hand, the Imam said, “By Allah! The money in this purse is from
selling what I have produced in Medina. If there is anything with me
more than this, I will be a traitor.”[^11]

**Generosity**

Being a child, some children of my age and I went to Rahbah one day. We
saw \`Ali standing beside a pile of gold and silver coins, pushing the
people backward. He, then, divided the coins among them and took nothing
home!

When I returned home, I said to my father, “Today I have seen the
wisest and the most unwise person in my life.” My father asked, “Who is
he?” I said, “He is Amir al-Mu’minin…” As I told him the whole story, my
father said, “O son! You have seen the best man.”[^12]

**No Desire For Wealth**

Qanbar, Imam \`Ali’s servant, asked his master to go to a room where he
had hidden bags full of gold and silver vessels. The Imam asked, “What
are these?” Qanbar said, “You always divide every thing among people but
I have reserved all these for you.” Imam \`Ali asked, “Would you like to
bring fire to my house?” Being angry, he drew his sword and broke those
vessels into pieces ordering him to divide them among people. He further
said, “O Gold and silver! Deceive anyone but me.”[^13]

**Justice**

Fu¤ayl ibn al-Ja\`d reports: The main reason the Arabs did not support
Imam \`Ali was the wealth. He never preferred an Arab to a non-Arab or
an aristocrat to an ordinary man. He never compromised with the chiefs
of tribes nor with the kings. That is why the people abandoned \`Ali and
joined Mu\`awiyah. \`Ali complained to Malik Ashtar of his companions,
failure to support him and the escape of some of them to Mu\`awiyah.
Malik Ashtar too would say, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! Some people cannot
tolerate your justice, for they are the people of the world! May Allah
pave the way for your justice, oppress your enemies, disperse them, foil
their plan and break their unity against you: Surely He is Aware of what
they do.”
In response, \`Ali said, “As for our just acts, Allah says:

مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا وَمَا
رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِّلْعَبِيدِ (46)

Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it is
against it; and your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants.
(41: 46)

As for your opinion that justice is hard for them hence they abandoned
us, Allah knows that they did not leave us for any injustice. They left
us for worldly riches, a world which they will leave and on the Judgment
Day. They will be questioned whether they fought for the world or Allah!
As for saying that we do not give away to them from the public fund, we
cannot give them more than what they deserve. Allah says:

كَم مِّن فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ
وَاللّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ (249)

How often has a small party vanquished numerous hosts by Allah’s
permission, and Allah is with the patient. (2:249).

Allah commissioned Muhammad as a prophet with a small number of people
around him but they increased in number and honored them while they were
humiliated before. If Allah wills, He will support us, remove our
problems and sorrows. I approve of your union which pleases Allah. You
are the most benevolent and trustworthy of them with me, Allah
willing.”[^14]


