Public Fund
===========

One night Imam \`Ali entered the house of public fund for apportioning
the funds. At this time, Talhah and Zubayr came to him. The Imam put out
the torch before him and ordered to bring another torch from his house.
They asked the reason. The Imam said, “The oil in that torch belonged to
the public fund and it was not right to speak to you under its
light.”[^15]

**Old Garment**

Quoting his father, Harun ibn \`Antarah reports: I went to the presence
of \`Ali at Khawarnaq. He was wearing a coarse old garment shivering
from cold. I said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! You and Ahl al-Bayt, like
others, have a share in the public fund. So why aren’t you using your
share?” The Imam said, “By Allah, I do not take anything from the public
fund. The garment I am wearing is the same I brought from Medina and I
have no garment other than this.”[^16]

**No Love Of Wealth**

\`Aqil ibn \`\`Abd al-Rahman reports: My aunt, wife of \`Aqil ibn
Abi-Talib, came to see \`Ali in Kufah while he was sitting on a
packsaddle. At this time, a wife of \`Ali, from Banu-Tamim, entered. I
said, “Woe to you! Your house is full of goods and here Amir al-Mu’minin
is sitting on a packsaddle!” She said, “Do not blame me! By Allah! He
put everything which is unfamiliar to him in the public fund.”[^17]

**Giving Clothes To The Naked**

One day when Imam \`Ali (a.s) was in the presence of the Holy Prophet,
he was found with a worn-out garment. So Allah’s Messenger said, “What
happened to the good garment I gave you?” \`Ali said, “O Allah’s
Messenger! I saw one of your companions complaining of his own nakedness
and of his wife. So I gave it away knowing that Allah will give me a
better one.”[^18]

**Charity**

Once Imam \`Ali (a.s) had four Dirhams. He divided them into four. He
gave away one dirham for the sake of Allah by night and one dirham by
day. He gave away the third dirham secretly and the fourth openly. The
following holy verse was revealed on the same occasion,

الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ سِرًّا
وَعَلاَنِيَةً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلاَ خَوْفٌ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ (274)

As for those who spend their property by night and by day, secretly and
openly, they shall have their reward from their Lord and they shall have
no fear, nor shall they grieve (2:274)

**Charity Changes People**

On the above-mentioned story, ibn \`Abbas, commenting on the following
holy verse, “Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the
remembrance of Allah… without measure (24:37-38)” says: The occasion of
the revelation was that one day the Holy Prophet gave \`Ali three
hundred Dinars, which they had given to him as gift. \`Ali said: I took
the money and said to myself by Allah, I will give such a charity with
these Dinars that Allah will accept. When I completed the night prayer
with Allah’s Messenger, I took a hundred Dinars and left the mosque. On
my way, I came across a woman to whom I gave one hundred Dinars. The
following day, people said, “\`Ali has given charity to a corrupt
woman!” It was a grant sorrow for me. The night of that day, I performed
the night prayer, took a hundred Dinars in my hand, left the mosque and
said to myself, “By Allah! I will give a charity which will be accepted
by my Lord. I saw a man and gave away the one hundred Dinars to him.”
The following day, the people of Medina said, “\`Ali has given away a
hundred Dinars to a thief.” Again a great sorrow came to me but said to
myself, “By Allah! I will give a charity tonight that Allah will accept
from me.”

So, I performed my night prayer with Allah’s Messenger and then left
the mosque having a hundred Dinars with me. I saw a man to whom I gave
the money. The next day, the people Medina said, “Last night, \`Ali gave
a hundred Dinars to a rich man.” Again, a great sorrow came to me. I
went to Allah’s Messenger and told him the story. The Holy Prophet said:
O \`Ali! Gabriel says to you: Allah has accepted your charity and
purified your acts: The one hundred Dinars you gave as charity was put
at the disposal of a corrupt woman who repented to Allah and used the
money as earnings for her living. She also intends to get married with
this money. The charity of the second night went to a thief who repented
thereafter and used the money for running business. The charity of the
third night went to a rich man who had not paid alms for years. He went
home and blamed himself saying, “How miser I am! This is \`Ali ibn
Abu-Talib who gave away a hundred Dinars to me while he has nothing
whereas I am a rich man who has not paid his obligatory alms!” So, he
reckoned his alms and put it aside. It was for this reason that Allah
revealed the above-mentioned verses.[^19]

**Altruism**

Both Shi\`ite and Sunni scholars report: One day \`Ali was extremely
hungry so he asked for food from Fatimah who said, “There is no food
except the one I preferred to give to you than to myself as well as
Hasan and Husayn two days ago.” \`Ali asked, “Why didn’t you tell me to
prepare a food for you?” Fatimah said, “O Abu’l-Hasan! I was ashamed to
charge you with what is not in your power!” \`Ali left the house, went
to the Holy Prophet and borrowed one Dinar to buy food. On his way, he
met al-Miqdad who said, “Whatever Allah wills (will come to pass)!”
\`Ali gave his one Dinar to him, went to mosque, lay down and went to
sleep! Allah’s Messenger went to the mosque and found \`Ali in that
position.

Awakening him, the Holy Prophet asked, “What did you do?” \`Ali told
him the story and then prayed with the Holy Prophet. When Allah’s
Messenger completed his prayer, he asked, “O Abu’l-Hasan! Do you have
any food to share with you?” \`Ali kept silent and gave no answer out of
shame. Allah revealed to the Holy Prophet to have the dinner with \`Ali
that night. So they both set out for \`Ali’s house. When they entered
the house, Fatimah was engaged in prayer and behind her was a big bowl
steaming. Fatimah brought that big bowl which was replete with food and
placed it before her father and her husband. \`Ali asked. Where has this
food come from? She said: From Allah’s Favor and Benevolence,

إنَّ اللّهَ يَرْز ُقُ مَن يَشَآءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ (37)

Surely, Allah gives to whom He pleases without measure (3:37)

The Holy Prophet put his hand between the two shoulders of \`Ali
saying, “O \`Ali! This is in lieu of your Dinar.” Then he was choked
with tears saying, “Thanks Allah that I have not died to see in my
daughter what (Prophet) Zachariah saw in (Saint) Mary.”[^20]


