The Battle of Siffin
====================

Siffin was a region by the river Euphrates. When the army of \`Ali
reached it, he was told to block the army of Mu\`awiyah from having
access to the river, but \`Ali did not accept the idea. Mu\`awiyah took
advantage of this situation, seized all the ways leading to the river
and blocked the army of \`Ali from having access to the river. By his
command, the army opened ways to the river. To retaliate, Imam \`Ali’s
companions decided to block Mu\`awiyah’s army from access to river, but
again \`Ali did not permit. The Battle of Siffin lasted for eighteen
months. The offensive by \`Ali’s army was started hoping that the
Syrians would give up and less blood would be shed!

**The Battle Of Nahrawan**

The best definition we can use in describing the Kharijites is that
they were people afflicted with the disease of enmity with \`Ali and
they did not stop this enmity until they killed him. If we use the word
disease, it is because enmity with anyone needs a reason. A person bears
enmity to someone for personal reasons, for being jealous of that
person’s position, for having been hurt or harmed by that person, for
having experienced a tyranny, a family feud or religious differences.
None of those reasons existed for those who were hostile to \`Ali. They
simply could not see \`Ali alive and victorious.

These people were in the army of \`Ali in the Battle of Siffin but when
he overcame the enemy, they drew their swords against him and deprived
him of victory. They did not accept the intelligent arbiter Imam \`Ali
had chosen and selected the arbiter who was \`Ali’s enemy! They were the
enemies of Mu\`awiyah too but unknowingly assisted him and compelled
\`Ali to accept the mediation of the arbiters.

When the treachery of mediation became clear, they started to disagree
with \`Ali so much so that they disrespected him in his presence and
absence. \`Ali too had left them to themselves showing no reaction to
what they said and did.

\`Ali’s friends who could not tolerate hearing their sarcastic and
insulting remarks would often ask \`Ali to suppress and imprison them or
check their activities. However, \`Ali would not agree, saying, “As long
as they do not do anything against us, we will not harm them nor will we
cut their stipend from the public fund. We will allow them to come to
the mosque but if they kill anyone, we will retaliate.”

The inner disease of Kharijites was being intensified. Hence, they
could not stay in Kufah, for they saw \`Ali there. So, they left it for
Nahrawan. Still \`Ali let them act freely and had nothing to do with
them. When he set out to suppress Mu\`awiyah, he wrote a letter as such,
“We are going to suppress your enemies, a common enemy; come long with
us.” The Kharijites did not accept the offer and declared war against
him! Still \`Ali did not go to them and set off for Syria. \`Ali was
asked to put an end to the enmity of Kharijites first and then set out
for Syria. It was not accepted and the order to move to Syria was
issued.

\`Ali’s army was or the way to Syria when news reached that the
Kharijites have become active, forcing people to curse \`Ali and anyone
who does not comply with it, is killed. \`Ali headed for Nahrawan, the
Kharijites base. He still refused to enter battle against them. So, he
started to admonish and guide them. He managed to dissuade many of them
from fighting though they refused to assist \`Ali in suppressing
Mu\`awiyah. Those Kharijites who were dissuaded to fight \`Ali returned
to Kufah but remained \`Ali’s enemies.

The seeds of Kharijites in the history of Islam were sown by same
people and the rest did not accept any option but fighting and preferred
death to living with \`Ali. So they attacked \`Ali’s army with the motto
of ‘we are going to Paradise’. Still no order of counterattack was
issued until one of \`Ali’s soldiers was killed. It was then that Imam
\`Ali said, “It is now the right time to fight them.” \`Ali’s army
started its attack which put the Kharijites to flight.[^21]

**A Light Diet**

Suwayd ibn Ghaflah reports: I went to see Imam \`Ali while he was in
governor’s seat. Before the Imam was a bowl of sour yoghurt the smell of
which I could feel. A loaf of bread of barley the husk of which I could
see was in his hand. The Imam was breaking the dry bread either with his
hand or with his knee!

At this time, I said to Fi¤¤ah, his slave-girl who was standing by him,
“Don’t you fear Allah for treating this old man as such? Don’t you sieve
the barley flour?” Fi¤¤ah said, “He has asked me not to sieve the
flour.” \`Ali asked, “What are you talking about?” I told him the story.
At this time, \`Ali said, “May my parents be ransom for the one for whom
the flour was not sieved, nor did he ate fill bread of wheat for three
straight days until he passed away.”[^22]

**One Of The Days**

Abu-Matar, one of the inhabitants of Basrah, reports: I was coming out
of Kufah Mosque when suddenly a man called from behind, “Hold up your
garment which makes it last longer and cut your hair short, if you are a
Muslim.”

I followed him while he had covered himself with a cloak and held a
lash in his hand like a Bedouin, “Who is this man?” He said, “I find you
a stranger in this city!” I said, “Yes, I am a man from Basrah.” He
said, “This is \`Ali, the Leader of the believers.”

I followed him until he reached the neighborhood of Banu-Mohit which
was the camels’ market-place. There, he said, “Sell but do not take
oath, for it will destroy goods and blessing.” Then, he went to date
sellers. There, he found a slave-girl crying. He asked the reason. She
said, “This man sold me date for one dirham but my master did not like
it and he does not take it back.” The Imam said, “Take back your date
and give her back the one dirham, for she is a slave and has no
authority.” He pushed back the Imam! I said, “Do you know this man?” He
said, “No.” I said, “He is \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Leader of the
believers.” The man took back the date and gave back her money.

Then, the man said, “I hope you are pleased with me.” He said, “Now
that you have given people’s right, I am pleased with you.” Then while
passing through the date sellers, he said, “Give of these dates to the
needy so that Allah will bless your business.” Then he went to fish
mongers telling them to be careful not to sell the fish which has died
in water! Then, he went to the market of canvas sellers and visited an
old man selling canvas and said, “I want a shirt for three Dirhams.” As
soon as the man recognized him, he refused to sell anything to him. He
went to another seller but since he too recognized the Imam, he did not
buy from him until he came to a young man. He bought a shirt for three
Dirhams, put it on while praying as such to Allah,

<p dir="rtl">
ألحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي رَزَقَنِي مِنَ الرِّيَاشِ مَا أتَجَمَّلُ بِهِ فِي
النَّاسِ وَأوَارِي بِهِ عَوْرَتِي.
</p>

“Praise be to Allah who provided me with a good garment to adorn myself
and to cover my private parts with.”

He was asked whether these were his words or he had heard it from
Allah’s Messenger. He said, “I heard from the Holy Prophet saying it
while he was wearing a garment.”

Amidst this, the father of the young man arrived. He was told that his
son sold a shirt for three Dirhams to Amir al-Mu’minin. Turning to his
son, he asked, “Why did you charge more than two Dirhams?” The father
took the one dirham and came to Amir al-Mu’minin who was now sitting
with Muslims at the gate of Rahbah, saying, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! Take
this one dirham!” The Imam asked about the story of this dirham. The man
said, “The price of the shirt was two Dirhams.” The Imam said, “He sold
it with consent and I bought it with consent.”[^23]

**Recompense**

In the eighth year after Hijrah, Mecca was conquered by Allah’s
Messenger. The House of Allah was purified from the filth of idols with
\`Ali’s idol-breaking act. Allah’s Messenger sent groups to propagate
Islam and to invite people to monotheism. He did not declare war. One of
these persons was Khalid ibn Walid who was dispatched not as fighter but
as propagator. On his way Khalid came to a tribe one of whom had killed
his uncle in the pre-Islamic era and had looted whatever belonged to
him. When Khalid was alight near the water sources of Banu-Judhaymah,
they took arms. Khalid said, “Put aside your arms, for people have
become Muslims.” He had their hands tied and killed whomever he wished.
When the news came to Allah’s Messenger, he raised his hands saying, “O
Lord! I seek immunity from what Khalid has done!” Then, the Holy Prophet
sent \`Ali with money to look into their affairs. \`Ali gave them back
whatever Khalid had taken from them.

He paid the blood money for all and the extra money which \`Ali had
with him was paid to them by the command of the Holy Prophet. When \`Ali
came back, the Holy Prophet said that what he had done was good and
right. On the words of Ya\`qubi, the Holy Prophet said, “What you have
done is better than the red camels.” It was at this time addressing
\`Ali, Allah’s Messenger said, “May my father and mother be your
ransom.”[^24]


