The Blazing Iron Bar
====================

Mu\`awiyah asked \`Aqil to tell him the story of the blazing iron bar.
\`Aqil said: Life had become extremely hard for me. I pleaded with my
brother \`Ali but he took no heed of it. One day, I took my children in
whose appearance poverty and indigence could be seen to \`Ali. He said,
“Come at night so that I will give you something.” At night, when one of
my sons was holding my hand led me to \`Ali. I said to my son, “Go and
sit at a distance.” Having this impression that \`Ali was going to give
me a purse of money, I stretched out my hand. But what I touched was a
blazing iron bar. I withdrew my hand with a loud cry. At this moment
\`Ali said, “This is the iron bar blazed by the fire of the world. How
will be our situation on the Judgment Day when we are fastened with the
chains of Hell?” Then he recited this verse:

إِذِ الْأَغْلَالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَالسَّلَاسِلُ يُسْحَبُونَ (71)

When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks; they shall be
dragged (40:71)

Imam \`Ali (a.s), commented, “You have no right on me except what Allah
has made obligatory for you. Go back home!”

Mu\`awiyah was extremely amazed and said, “Alas, alas! Women are barren
to give birth to his peer.”[^25]

**An Extraordinary Example of Piety**

Imam al-Sadiq has been reported by Mu\`awiyah Ibn \`Ammar as saying:

If there were two options for \`Ali to do something for the sake of
Allah, he would choose the harder. O people of Kufah, you all know that
when he was ruling in this city, he used his income in Medina for
living. He would put the roasted flour he ate in a bag and seal it not
be mixed with anything else. Who was more pious than \`Ali in the
world![^26]

**Dry Bread And Sour Yoghurt**

\`Aqabah ibn \`Alqamah is reported by Na¨r ibn Mansur as saying: I went
to \`Ali’s house in Kufah, finding before him a bowl of sour yoghurt
which harmed me as well as several pieces of dry bread. I said, “O Amir
al-Mu’minin! Are you eating such a food?” He said, “Allah’s Messenger
ate from bread drier than this.” Referring to his garment, \`Ali said,
“Allah’s Messenger would wear a garment with a more rough texture. If I
do not follow his example, I fear not to join him.”[^27]

**Self-Sacrifice and Generosity**

In the Battle of the Camel, the soldiers who fought along with him were
twelve thousand in number. When the fighting came to an end with the
defeat of the enemies, Amir al-Mu’minin had the public fund divided with
each person having five hundred Dirhams as a share. \`Ali took the same
amount of dirham for himself. Addressing the public fund, he said,

<p dir="rtl">
غُرِّي غَيْرِي
</p>

“Deceive anyone but me.”

After the division of the public fund, a man came about saying, “O Amir
al Mu’minin! My heart was with you though I could no take part in the
battle. Do me a favor by giving something to me.” The Imam gave his
share to him, going back home empty-handed.”[^28]

**Pardon**

One day, Amir al-Mu’minin was in the gathering of his companions. While
a biased man of Kharijites was present, the Imam was admonishing his
friends. His heavenly words were so charming which impressed that
blind-hearted man but because of his inner enmity to \`Ali, he
impudently said, “May Allah kill him for his unbelief. How knowledgeable
he is!”

Hearing such insolence, the companions of the Imam made an attempt to
kill him but Imam \`Ali said, “Grant a respite; calm down; either curse
against curse or pardon against sin.”[^29]

**A Model Of Generosity**

An indigent man came to Imam \`Ali saying, “I am suffering from three
diseases: body, poverty, and ignorance.” The Imam said, “O Arab brother!
You should see a physician for your physical disease, a wise man for
ignorance and a generous person for poverty.” The Arab said, “You are a
physician, a wise man, and a generous man at the same time.” Amir
al-Mu’minin ordered to give three thousand Dirhams from the public fund,
saying, “Spend one thousand Dirhams on your physical disease, one
thousand Dirhams on your poverty and one thousand Dirhams on your
ignorance.”[^30]

**Favoring A Servant**

When Amir al-Mu’minin ruled over the vast Islamic territories, he along
with Qanbar (his servant) went to a draper, asking, “Do you have two
shirts for five Dirhams?” The young draper said, “Yes, but one is better
than the other; one costs three Dirhams and the other costs two
Dirhams.” Imam \`Ali said, “Bring both of them.” When the young man
brought the two shirts, the Imam said to Qanbar, “Take the shirt which
costs three Dirhams.” Qanbar said, “O Amir al-Mu’minin! You go up the
pulpit and deliver sermons for people. You take the better one.” The
Imam said, “Qanbar! You are young and have the desires of a young man. I
am ashamed before Allah to count myself superior to you! I heard Allah’s
Messenger saying:

Whatever you wear, let your servant wear too and whatever you eat let
your servants eat too.” Then, the Imam put on the shirt which cost two
Dirhams realizing that the sleeves were too long so he said to the
draper, “Cut the sleeve short a little bit.” He did so and said, “Let me
fold it, old man!” The Imam said, “Let it be as it is. There is no time
for such a thing.”[^31]


