Supplicating to the Almighty
============================

The holy month of Ramadhan is a special time for supplicating to Allah.
Dua, or supplication, is especially encouraged. Believers spend a lot of
time in this month praying to the Almighty, asking for their needs of
this world and the Hereafter. Apart from the recommended duas for the
nights and days of this blessed month, we are told to be in a constant
state of prayer and dua.

The following Ahadith show the importance of Dua in the month of
Ramadhan:

• Supplicate (in Ramadhan) with your hands raised at the times of
prayer, as these are the best of times during which the Almighty looks
at His servants with mercy. (He) answers if they supplicate, responds if
they call, grants if they ask, and accepts if they entreat. Holy Prophet
(S)

• Pray and seek forgiveness more frequently in the month of Ramadhan.
Prayer wards off misfortune, and forgiveness cleanses your sins. Imam
Ali (a)

What is Du\`a?
--------------

Dua is a simple acceptance of the difference between the existences of
God and the human being.

-The existence of Allah as the source of all good, perfection,
independence and bestowal.

-The existence of the human being as a vessel of poverty, need,
dependant on constant bestowal and favor.

Thus the human being needs to ask for and receive the favors of the
Almighty. He is in constant need for what only Allah can give Him. To
help him achieve his dreams, to give him success and happiness in this
world and the Hereafter, he needs the favors of Allah.

The Almighty God, in His mercy and love for the human being, has allowed
believers to ask from Him, and has promised to answer them. This is a
great favor of God. The following Qur'anic verses show how Allah invites
believers to ask from Him:

• ***“And when my servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the supplicant when he calls upon Me, so they should
answer My call and believe in Me, that they may walk the right way.”***
(2:186)

• ***“Call unto Me, I will answer you. Those who are too proud to
worship Me will enter Hell.”*** (40:60)

• ***“Call your Lord humbly and secretly, He loves not the
transgressors.”*** (7:55)

• ***“And call on Him, fearing and hoping, surely the mercy of Allah is
near to those who do good.”*** (7:56)

Many Hadith also emphasize the importance of supplicating to Allah:

• “*Du\`a is the weapon of the believer, and the pillar of faith, and
the light of the heavens and the earth.”* Holy Prophet (S)

• Know that He who owns the treasures of the skies and the earth has
permitted you to pray to Him, and has promised you acceptance of the
prayer. He has commanded you to beg of Him in order that He may give
you, and to seek His mercy in order that He may have mercy on you.

• He has opened for you the door of repentance. Therefore whenever you
call Him, He hears your call, and whenever you whisper to Him, He knows
the whisper. You place before him your needs, unveil before Him
yourself, complain to Him for your worries, beseech Him to remove your
troubles, seek His help in your affairs, and ask from the treasures of
His mercy what no-one else has the power to give, namely long life,
health of body, and increase of livelihood. Imam Ali (a) Letter 31,
Nahjul Balagha

Allah loves the believers who ask from Him, and supplicate constantly.
The Holy Prophet (S) has said that on the Day of Judgement, two men with
very similar deeds will enter Heaven. One of them will see that the
other is granted a rank above him. He will ask Allah: "My Lord! We have
the same actions. Why have you preferred him over me"? Allah will reply,
"He asked from Me, and you did not".

Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (a) often encouraged his companions to ask from
Allah. He once said to Maysar, his companion : O Maysar! Supplicate, and
do not say the affair has been destined. Surely there are ranks with
Allah which cannot be reached except through asking. If the servant (of
Allah) closes his mouth and does not ask, he will not be given anything,
so ask and you will get. O Maysar, the door that is knocked often is
most likely to open.

Dua is a great tool given to believers by Allah. Using du\`a they can
achieve great things and overcome many problems. One who has been given
the power of Dua can never lose hope, as in his hands lies a great
weapon. It is man's own loss if he does not make use of the tremendous
potential of Du\`a.

Effects of Dua
--------------

### Pleases the Almighty

Allah loves that believers should pray to Him constantly. He says in the
Holy Qur'an: ***“Allah would not care for you were it not for your
supplications.”*** (25:77).Ahadith also tell us of how Allah loves those
who pray and ask from Him:

    • *“God loves nothing better than that His servants ask from Him.”*
Imam al-Baqir (a)

    • *“Supplicate, for there is nothing like Dua to get you closer to
Allah, and do not leave out your minor needs, for the One who is the
Master of the major needs is also the Master of the minor ones.”* Imam
as-Sadiq (a)

### Gives Peace and Contentment

A person who prays to Allah, putting all faith and trust in Him, never
feels alone or lonely. He has harnessed his own insignificant power onto
a being who is the Supreme Power, and who has promised to answer His
call. This gives him great peace of mind. It makes him confident that
with the help of Allah, all things can be done. He knows also that
whatever happens to him is the decree of the Wise, the almighty. Says
the Holy Qur'an:

***“Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the
remembrance of Allah, surely by Allah's remembrance are hearts set at
rest.”*** ( 13:28)

### Increases Knowledge and Humility

Most duas teach us about the greatness of Allah, and His qualities. They
also make us aware of our lowly position and our helplessness. That is
why Allah says:

***“Call unto Me, I will answer you. Those who are too proud to worship
Me will enter Hell.”*** (40:60)

Those who do not ask from Allah are described as the proud ones.
Believers are encouraged to pray all the time, and for all things - even
those which seem minor. Allah once told Nabi Musa (a), O Musa! Ask Me
for everything, even the mending of your shoelace. When a human being
realizes that he is in constant need of the favors of Allah, this will
prevent him from becoming proud and arrogant. It reminds him of his own
neediness and poverty.

### Changes what is destined

Du\`a reverts what has been destined. Although Allah decrees all things,
He has given us the ability to make changes through Dua. The Holy
Prophet (S) has said: What is destined cannot be averted except through
Dua. Another Hadith says: Indeed caution cannot save you from what is
destined, but what can save you from it is Dua. Imam \`Ali(a)

### Averts Difficulties

*“Many problems and difficulties in life can be avoided by praying to
Allah. He is in complete control, and can keep away all afflictions from
those who ask Him for that. The following Ahadith explain the importance
of Dua for avoiding difficulties: Whoever fears difficulties should
supplicate, Allah will never let the difficulties come to him. Imam
as-Sadiq (a) Surely Dua meets the difficulties, and the two join
together until the Day of Judgement.”*  
 Imam al-Kadhim (a)

Etiquette of Du\`a
------------------

As we spend more and more time reciting Duas during the holy months of
Rajab, Sha\`baan, and Ramadhan, it is necessary to know the correct
etiquette of Dua. Supplicating to the Almighty should be done in the
appropriate manner - in the manner that Allah loves - in order to
benefit fully from it. The following are some of the Etiquette of Dua
according to Hadith.

Begin with Bismillah: A Hadith of the Holy Prophet (S) says: No dua
which has Basmalah (saying of Bismillahir Rahmaneer Raheem) at the
beginning of it is rejected. A dua should begin in the name of Allah,
putting all trust and hope in Him alone. Describing Him as Kind and
Merciful creates confidence that the dua will not be rejected.

Send Blessings on Muhammad and his family: A Hadith of the 6th Imam (a)
says: Whoever has a wish he wants Allah to fulfill, let him begin with
blessings on Muhammad and his family, then let him ask his wish, and end
by sending blessings on Muhammad and his family. Allah is nobler than to
accept the first and the last (the blessings) and reject the middle.
Salawat is a dua for the Holy Prophet (S) and his family. Whoever
includes that dua is assured of the acceptance of his dua for himself.

Praise and Glorify Allah: Every Dua should begin with the praise of
Allah, the recognition that He alone has the Power and Might over
everything. A supplicant increases in his humility as he acknowledges
the greatness of the Almighty. He realizes that everything is in the
control of God, and if He wishes, the dua can be accepted and answered
immediately.

Acknowledgement of Sins: When supplicating to Allah, one should be aware
of and confess that one is a sinner, undeserving of the favor of Allah.
Humility and apprehensiveness are commendable qualities in the one who
supplicates.

Pray emotionally: Allah says in Hadithe Qudsi to Nabi Isa (a): O Isa!
When you ask from me, supplicate to me the supplication of the grief
stricken, the overwhelmed, the one who has no helper . . . and do not
supplicate to Me except in an emotional state. Your grief should be only
one. Whenever you pray to Me in such a way, I shall answer you. A soft
heart and tears are the best weapons of a human being in his quest to
achieve nearness to Allah. When one prays emotionally, the Dua is very
sincere and acceptance is assured.

Pray for others: Whoever prays for others pleases the Almighty greatly.
A Hadith of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a) says: Nothing is more swiftly
answered than a Dua recited for others. According to the Holy
Prophet(S), the Dua of a believer for other believers is returned to him
as many times as the number of believing men and women from the
beginning of creation to the Day of Judgement.

Have confidence that Allah will answer your prayers : When praying, the
supplicant must have trust that Allah will answer his prayers. A Hadith
says, Whenever you recite Dua, assume that what you need is at the door.

Du\`a is always answered
------------------------

Whoever asks something from Allah, his du\`a is always heard and
answered. Sometimes it is not answered in the way the supplicant
expects. No du\`a is rejected. Allah is more noble than to tell His
servants to ask from Him, and then reject their du\`a. Many Ahadith tell
us of how Allah always answers the supplicant, and is pleased with Him.
A believer who prays and asks from Allah, is guaranteed one of three
things:

• Either his du\`a is answered immediately

• Or he is given a reward for it for the Hereafter

• Or a difficulty is averted from him

During the month of Ramadhan, believers try and spend as much time in
du\`a as possible. This is the month in which du\`a carries even greater
reward than usual, a month in which the mercy of Allah guarantees
immediate acceptance of du\`a.

Exercises
---------

The following are some examples of what children could do as they study
the importance of dua. Teachers can choose to study a specific dua,
encourage students to compose poems, write essays, or even write a play
on the effectiveness of dua on daily life.

1. Write a story of someone who was in a great difficulty. Show how
faith in Allah and dua helped the person. Explain the change in
emotional and mental state after supplicating to Allah, and entrusting
Him with the problem.

2. List ten things you usually do each day for which you could ask help
from Allah. Remember that dua is not only for major problems. Even
simple everyday tasks could be improved greatly with the help and
support of the almighty.

3. Read the section from Nahjul Balagha where Imam Ali (a) advises his
son about Du\`a in Letter 31. Write in your own words how you would use
that section of the letter to advise one of your friends.

4. Choose one of the whispered duas (Munajaat) from Saheefa
as-Sajjadiyyah to read and ponder over. What does Imam say which makes
his duas very effective? What do you understand about the relationship
Imam has with Allah.?


