Seeking Forgiveness from Allah
==============================

The holy month of Ramadhan is an excellent opportunity to have one's
sins forgiven. Allah's blessings and mercy are so abundant in this month
that anybody who truly repents in it, becomes as free of sins at the end
of the month as when he was born. It is a glorious chance offered to us
by the Almighty, a chance to cleanse and purify ourselves from the filth
of sins and evil. The Holy Prophet has advised believers: O people . . .
your back is breaking under the heavy load of your sins, so prostrate
yourself before Him (in Ramadhan) for long intervals, and make it
lighter.

It is a proof of the love of the Almighty that each year he gives us a
chance to clean our record and make a fresh start. Contrary to those who
think that Allah is strict and harsh, that He will punish us as soon as
we err, Allah gives us many chances to undo the wrong we have done
towards Him. The month of Ramadhan is the best of these chances. All the
duas for this month teach us to plead for forgiveness and deliverance
from the punishment. One who recites these duas sincerely, and is truly
repentant, is assured of forgiveness.

The Holy Qur'an says about seeking forgiveness:

• ***“And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden the
extensiveness of which is the heavens and the earth, prepared for those
who guard against evil.”*** (3:132)

• ***“And whoever does evil, and oppresses his soul, then seeks
forgiveness of Allah, he will find Allah to be Forgiving, Merciful.”***
(4:110)

• ***“Will they not turn to Allah and seek His forgiveness, and Allah is
oft-forgiving, Merciful.”*** (5:74)

The following Hadith talk beautifully and eloquently on Istighfar
(seeking forgiveness):

• Fortunate is the person who finds in his record of deeds a lot of
seeking forgiveness.

Holy Prophet (S)

• The similitude of Istighfar is like the leaves on a tree. The tree is
shaken, and the leaves fall off.

Imam Ridha (a)

• Fragrance yourselves with Istighfar so the stench of sins does not
disturb you.

Imam Ali (a)

• Seek forgiveness abundantly, for Allah has not taught you how to seek
forgiveness except because He wishes to forgive you.

Holy Prophet (S)

Necessity of Istighfar in the life of a believer
------------------------------------------------

When Allah created the human being, He gave him the faculty of good and
evil. The human is free to choose his actions. He can decide to do a
good deed, and stay on the right path. Or he can decide to do an evil
deed and disobey his Lord. He has two sides to him; the intelligence and
conscience that guide him towards good, and the evil soul that invites
him to do wrong. The status of the human being with Allah depends on the
type of actions he chooses to commit. The record of deeds he commits in
this world will determine his end, whether in Heaven having earned the
pleasure of Allah, or in Hell, deserving of the wrath and displeasure of
Allah.

What happens when a human being sometimes chooses wrong, submits to his
evil soul and ignores the dictates of his conscience? Is he doomed to
forever carry the burden of that sin? Knowing that human beings were
prone to slip, Allah in His immense mercy and wisdom, has opened the
door of Istighfar for His servants, the door of seeking forgiveness
after a sin. So whoever commits a sin, but repents and wishes he had not
committed it, and knows that he will not do it again - at least will try
never to repeat it again - can enter that door, and have the sins erased
from his record.

Istighfar is the weapon of believers against the Shaytan who tries to
lead them into Hell through inviting them to sin. According to a hadith
of the Holy Prophet (S), Iblees declared to Allah that he would
continuously try to lead humans astray so long as they were alive. Allah
answered that He would continuously forgive them so long as they sought
His forgiveness.

The best time to seek forgiveness is during the early hours of the
morning before dawn. That is a very special time, when all duas are
accepted. The Holy Qur'an describes the believers as those who seek
forgiveness at the time of dawn.

The holy month of Ramadhan is a time when there is a general amnesty for
sinners. Allah invites the sinners to come and seek His forgiveness.
This is an opportunity that must not be missed, for no-one knows if
he/she will be alive for the next year. When a criminal is told that the
government is issuing pardons for those who seek it, to commemorate a
happy event, he will jump at the chance to avoid punishment. He can save
himself years in jail, a lot of misery and torture, by seeking pardon.
It is a golden opportunity which no sensible person would miss. Similar
is the case of the sinner who has disobeyed his Lord. He is a criminal,
and when Allah offers a special pardon, the sinner seizes the chance. He
would like to erase his sins and relieve himself of the burden of
disobedience.

Conditions of Istighfar
-----------------------

It is important to note that to seek forgiveness, and then continue
committing the same sin, is a sin in itself. It is wrong to mock and
deceive oneself into thinking that one can seek forgiveness without
having a firm intention to quit sins. That kind of Istighfar is a
mockery, and will earn the displeasure of Allah. The following Ahadith
clearly illustrate the evils of that type of attitude:

1. Seeking forgiveness but continuing to sin, is a new sin. Imam Ali (a)

2. One who seeks forgiveness for a sin, and does it, has mocked his
Lord. Imam Ali ar-Ridha (a)

3. The best way of seeking forgiveness is through regret and avoidance
(of sins)

Holy Prophet (S)

Once Imam Ali (a) heard someone saying: Astaghfirullah. Imam told him:
Do you know what Istighfar is. Istighfar is meant for people of high
positions. It is a word that stands on six meanings:

1. To repent over the past.

2. To make a firm determination never to repeat it.

3. To discharge all the rights of people so that you may meet Allah
quite clean with nothing to account for.

4. To fulfil every obligatory act which you ignored (in the past) so
that you may now do justice with it.

5. To aim at the flesh grown as a result of unlawful earnings, so that
it may melt by grief (of repentance) till the skin touches the bone and
a new flesh grows between them.

6. To make the body taste the pain of obedience as you previously made
it taste the sweetness of disobedience.

On such occasions you may say Astaghfirullah.

Exercises
---------

1. Let the students familiarize themselves with the Arabic words:
Ghafar, al-Ghafur, Istighfar. Write the Arabic as well as the English
equivalent. Older children could write and memorize some of the relevant
verses and hadith on Istighfar.

2. Choose a hadith to work on. The hadith could be displayed with
illustration on a board, written in calligraphy, use cut out letters,
felt etc. to make a decorative hadith.

3. Write an essay on one of the following:

    • Shaytan's reaction upon finding out that Istighfar is allowed and
encouraged for believers.

    • The difference between our record of deeds with Istighfar, and
without Istighfar.

    • The story of a person's regret on the Day of Judgement when he
sees his record devoid of Istighfar while the records of others shine
brightly because of Istighfar.

    • How seeking forgiveness constantly helps us stay away from sins
and be closer to the Almighty.


