Eighteen reasons why a Muslim Fasts
===================================

Every year the month of Ramadhan comes and goes; every year we fast, yet
without proper appreciation of the potentials of character building that
the fasts hold for us. We find ourselves as spiritually backwards after
the fast are over as when the month began. In fact our lack of knowledge
of the real objectives of fasts often tends to produce an adverse effect
in us, for, as is well known, the best of medicines could have ill
effects if not taken in accordance with the physician's directives and
instructions.

Thus it is, that the fast tends to make many of us irritable and quick
tempered (expecting, as we do, VIP treatment from others, especially our
subordinates and family members because of our fast) while the fast was
in fact meant to mellow us into exhibiting the finer tracts of human
character as illustrated by our Imams.

Imam Zaynul Abidin (a) would record the lapses of his servants during
the month of Ramadhan, without telling them anything at the time. As the
month would draw to its close, he would gather the servants before him
and apprise them of their mistakes, for giving them at the same time and
beseeching the Lord to forgive him, even as he had forgiven them. The
holy Imam, Masoom that he was, only sought by this practical
demonstration to draw attention of his followers to the fact that they
would be accountable to God for their actions and should they desire His
forgiveness, they would have to forgive their subordinates as well. This
practical lesson taught by the Imam ought to be rigorously pursued
during the month of Ramadhan by the followers of the Imam.

As in this case, so in other spheres of life, our attitude to fasts
ought indeed to be radically changed. We ought to welcome fasts as a
practical means of reforming ourselves rather than nearly consider them
as an inevitable religious bondage, eagerly awaiting to free ourselves
there from at the month end to resume our ways of old again.

Besides of course being a means to acquiring the pleasure of God, for
which all acts of devotion are basically meant, fasting could be used as
a stepping stone to build up the various traits of character in
accordance with the clear injunctions of the Qur'an itself that fasts
have been prescribed with a view to developing piety in man.

In the hurry and bustle of the present day life, man often finds himself
ill-equipped to battle through life's odds if he is not equipped with
the proper attitude to face the various problems. While we find
ourselves frustrated or look to other directions in such difficulties,
we have most unfortunately overlooked the character building force that
the fasts provide us every year.

Ramadhan is a month of fasting and prayers for the Muslims. The fast
consists of total abstinence from food and drink from dawn to dusk.
There is however, a greater significance to fasts than mere abstinence
from eating and drinking. The real objective of fasts is to inculcate in
man the spirit of abstinence from sins, and cultivation of virtue. Thus
the Qur'an declares that the fasts have been prescribed with a view to
developing piety in man. How are the many facets of piety sought to be
cultivated through fasts? This article tries to list as concisely as
possible, the various benefits the fasts would confer upon Muslims.

1. The most important consideration in undertaking a fast, as in any act
of devotion, is to seek nearness to God, and seek His pleasure and
Forgiveness. This itself generates a spirit of piety in man.

2. Creating the conditions of hunger and thirst for oneself, simply in
obedience to the Divine order, measures the faith of man in God and
helps strengthen it by putting it to a severe test.

3. Fasting enhances through creation of artificial non-availability, the
value of the bounties of God which man often takes for granted. This
inculcates in man a spirit of gratitude and consequent devotion to God.
Nothing else can bring home to a man the worth of God's bounties than a
glass of water and a square meal after a day long fast. This also
reminds man that the real joy in enjoying God's bounties lies in
moderation and restraint and not in over indulging.

4. Fasting makes us deeply conscious of the pangs of hunger and
discomfort suffered by the less fortunate among our brethren. They have
to put up with difficult conditions all through their lives. It thus
kindles in man a spirit of sacrifice leading to change towards his
suffering brethren.

5. Fasting gives man an unfailing training in endurance, a spirit of
acceptance. This could well prepare him to put up with the unchangeable
situations in life in the same spirit of resignation as cultivated
during the fasts.

6. Fasting develops courage, fortitude, and a fighting spirit in man to
surmount the heavy odds in life with a cool and tranquil mind. It
sharpens his power of concentration to overcome obstacles through a
vigorous exercise all throughout the month, leading to a steeling of his
will power and resolve, that could help him in challenging situations in
life. It is seen than many an undesirable habit which is difficult to
give up, is more easily given up during the days of fasting.

7. Fasting teaches man reliance on God, and confidence in Him. Just as
the vigorous state of fasting for a whole month is undertaken with His
assistance, bitter situations in life could also be surmounted with His
help.

8. Fasting develops a spirit of patience in man, with the realization
that the days of fasting, though seemingly unending, do have a
successful and happy end. Thus is life. All bitter situations pass, and
come to an end.

9. Fasting is meant to conquer anger and develop self-control in man.
The vigorous effort required to put up with hunger and thirst can well
be extended to conquer other infirmities of human character that lead
man into error and sin.

10. Fasting inculcates a spirit of tolerance in man to face unpleasant
conditions and situations without making his fellow beings the victim of
his wrath. Many people, when facing discomfort and deprivation, become
irritable and annoyed. This anger is then vented on those around them.
Fasting helps a man become more tolerant despite his own discomfort.

11. Fasting mellows a man and enhances his character, giving a jolt to
the human instincts of pride, haughtiness, jealousy and ambition.
Fasting softens his character, and clears his heart and mind of many
negative emotions.

12. Fasting exposes the weakness of man in the event of his being
deprived of two basic bounties of God; food and drink. It infuses into
him a spirit of weakness and submission, generating humility and prayer
in an otherwise arrogant being.

13. Fasting breathes the spirit of forgiveness in man towards others, as
he seeks God's forgiveness through fasts and prayers.

14. Fasting gives lessons in punctuality. Man has to adhere to a strict
schedule of time in the observance of the fast.

15. Fasting could affect the economy of the individual as he is less
wasteful on food and meals.

16. Fasting demands a rigid sense of discipline, mental, spiritual and
physical. This forms characteristics which are an essential ingredient
to success in life.

17. Fasting creates spiritual reformation in man, infusing him with a
spirit of enthusiasm and zest to change and become a better human being
in the eyes of God. This is an excellent opportunity, given to believers
each year, to change themselves and consequently their destinies.

18. On the physical side, fasting cleanses the human system of the
accumulated impurities of uninterrupted eating throughout the year. It
prepares the body to face diseases or conditions of scarcity. The rigid
abstinence of a fast regulates man's health, sharpens his intellect and
enhances the qualities of his heart.

Fasting is thus a bounty in itself, encompassing within itself many
bounties. It instills a spirit of reformation in man, creating a wide
awakening in him to fulfil his duties towards God and man, and towards
himself.

(Adapted from an article by Marhum Ahmed Sheriff Dewji, published in the
Light Magazine)


