A Message from the Holy Prophet (S)
===================================

O People! The month of Allah has come with His mercies and blessings.
This is the month that is the best of all months in the eyes of Allah.
Its days are the best of days, its nights are the best of nights, its
hours are the best of hours. This is a month in which you have been
invited by Him. You have been given the opportunity in this month to
receive the honors from Allah, the Merciful.

In this month if you fast as ordained by Allah, every breath you take
has the reward of Tasbeeh, and your sleep has the reward of worship.
Your good deeds are rewarded more than usual, and your duas are accepted

Therefore you must invoke your Lord in earnest, with hearts that are
free from sin and evil, and pray that Allah may help you keep the fasts,
and to recite the Holy Qur'an. Surely the person who in this month does
not receive the mercy and benevolence of Allah is most unfortunate.

O people! You have made your conscience the slave of your desires. Make
it free by invoking Him for forgiveness. Your back is breaking under the
heavy load of your sins, so prostrate yourself before Him for long
intervals and make it lighter.

Anybody who does not annoy others in this month, Allah will keep him
safe from His anger on the day of Judgement. . . Anybody who treats well
his relatives in this month, Allah will bestow His mercy on him on the
day of Judgement.

Whoever offers sunnat prayers in this month, Allah will save him from
Hell. Whoever, in this month, offers one wajib prayer, the angels will
write the rewards of seventy such prayers that were offered by him in
other months. Whoever recites salawat often, Allah will keep the scales
of his good deeds heavy . .. whoever recites in this month, only one
ayat of the Holy Qur'an, he will be rewarded in a manner as if he had
recited the entire Qur'an in other months.


