Imam Sajjad (a) Welcomes the Month of Ramadhan
==============================================

Praise be to Allah, who ordained this month, the month of Ramadhan, the
month of fasting, the month of Islam, the month of purity, the month of
purification, and the month of prayers. In this month the Qur'an was
made to descend as a guidance to mankind and contains clear instructions
and distinctions. He gave this month superiority over all other months
by giving it abundant honor and dignity. He prohibited in it what He has
allowed in other months in order to exalt it, and forbade in it food and
drink in order to honor it.

O Lord! Bless Muhammad and his family, and inspire us to know this
month's excellence, and to honor its dignity, and to abstain from
whatever You have forbidden in it. Help us to observe its fast, by
restraining our limbs from disobeying You, and by employing them in that
which would please You, so that we may not lend our ears to any vain
speech, and may not direct our eyes, hands and feet towards anything
forbidden, and that nothings fills our stomachs except what You have
made lawful, and our tongues may not utter anything except what You have
allowed.

O Lord! Bless Muhammad and his family, and give us grace to perform
timely the five prayers with due regard to their limits which You have
enjoined, and the rites which You have prescribed. In this respect,
raise us to the rank of those who performed them with success, who duly
observed their essential points, who always performed them at proper
times, in most perfect and complete humility according to the rules laid
down by Your Prophet, may You blessings be on him and his family.

And our Lord, give us grace in this month, to show favors to our
relations, and do good to them, and to take care of our neighbors and do
good to them, to take care of our neighbors with kindness and
benevolence, to purge our property of obligations, and purify it by
giving charity, and to call back those who have left us, and be just to
those who were unjust to us, and make pace with those who were hostile
to us.

O Lord! Erase our sins with the disappearance of this month's crescent,
and free us from our penalties with the completion of its days, so that
the month may pass from us while You have cleansed us of our guilts, and
freed us from our sins. O Lord! Fill this month with our worship of you
alone, and adorn its moments with our service to You, and help us in the
daytime to observe the fast, and at night to pray and beseech You, help
us to humble ourselves before you and lower ourselves in Your presence.


