A Muslim's Thoughts on Ramadhan
===============================

Ramadhan is always a great time for me. In my life, I'm always
struggling with the ideal of putting God first in every aspect of my
life. I know that God Alone should matter in my life, but in the hectic
pace of life, ordinary mundane things start to crowd that feeling out.

In Ramdhan, fasting from food, water and other things sets a context
within which I can try to establish God's presence in my life. I also
know that we are not supposed to only fast from food, drinks etc., but
from all hypocrisy, all lies, all dishonesty, all backbiting and all
evil. To my surprise, I am able to achieve that to some extent. I can
carry that for some months. I think it is like the fourth or fifth month
after Ramadhan that it starts to slacken.

It was once said that the true meaning of Fasting is to Fast from
anything that distracts you from Remembrance of God. I have loved that
ever since I first read it. I think this became a shortcut for me to
evaluate every situation before I get involved.

Ramadhan also helps me in my day to day situation in one other way. No
matter how bad the situation, I can look past it and say that as Quran
says: ***"life of this world is but an illusion."*** Once I have done my
best, I should give the rest to Him. I know that His Will always work
for my highest good, no matter how difficult it may seem at that time.
His Will \*always\* work for our highest good.

Every time this faith has been proven true, and as time passes this
faith turns and matures into Conviction. Hopefully, this Conviction,
this Yaqeen, will translate into the rest of my life and in every month.

I feel very close to other human beings and the rest of creation as
well. I am much more forgiving and accepting of my coworkers. I am more
liable to overlook their frailties and petty jealousies. I'm like a man
who knows that at the end of the day there is a pot of gold that awaits
him. Every offering of love we make to Him and His creation, brings us
that much closer to Goal. The Goal of The Eternal Bliss, where Allah,
the Beloved God will lift the Veil from His Beautiful Face and reveal it
to us in all its Splendor, Glory and Beauty. I long for that day. Yes, I
do long for that day.

I long for the day that I will earn the privilege of being in company of
the Prophets. Then all the worries and problems become petty annoyances.
And the mind becomes a little quiet, a little more quiet and a little
more quiet, until I hear the quiver of that fragile flame of love and
faith in my heart of hearts. It is like when we go to Pilgrimage to
Mecca we don our coffins by symbolizing our deaths from this world and
we exclaim at the top of our lungs: I have come my Lord, I have come.

If only I could do a minor pilgrimage to Him every day of my life by
exclaiming through my life and effort: I have come, my Lord, I have
come. I have come to you and I won't go, I have come and don't let me
stray. I have come, so make me yours. For verily Allah has promised in
His Quran: "Certainly we are His, and to Him shall we return."

I hope this presence of God will persist all through the year until the
next Ramadhan comes and I will have no room for anyone but Him and His
Lovers and loved ones.


