Preface
=======

When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away
childish things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face
to faceâ€¦."

As a Christian and as a researcher who has been studying Islam and
Islamic civilization-particularly Mahdist beliefs and movements among
Sunni Muslims--for many years, these verses from the New Testament
immediately sprang to mind when I began configuring this paper.

My thesis is that previous historical examples of Muslim leaders who
declared themselves mahdis--as imperfect , impetuous and immature as
they may have been--can nonetheless be instructive for anyone today
studying Islamic notions of the future Mahdist state.

This I will humbly seek to do herein, for despite my experience and
academic training in Islamic history, I would no more presume to lecture
a learned assembly in Iran on their own beliefs than I would, even as a
Christian (albeit non-Catholic), to give a paper at the Vatican on
Catholic doctrines. I might, however, be able to shed some light on the
typology of historical Mahdist movements (mainly, but not all, Sunni)
and in particular their leaders' universalistic claims and attempts to
reconfigure the international geopolitics in what they saw as a
Mahdistic form.

As we proceed I will in particular examine how previously-declared
Mahdiyahs dealt with four issues: 1) the status of the madhahib, or
schools of Islamic law and the intepretation of the Qur'an and Hadith;
2) Ahl al-Kitab, Christians and Jews; 3) Sufis; and 4) international
relations with other Muslim polities (as well as, if data exists,
non-Muslim ones).


