Urbanism Guidelines For the Islamic State of Al-mahdi (a.s)
===========================================================

The developments and transformation of the components of urban spaces
should be taken into consideration in the process of establishing a
package of precepts and urbanism guidelines for the future Islamic State
of Al-Mahdi (a.s). Components of such package -in addition to the
previous notes- include:

Implementation of town planning law and building law that is based on
Islamic doctrine as the main reference, and the main source of
legislation rather than specific urban forms that might not be
completely related to Islam. The key element for this derivation is the
originality of those sources.

Synthesizing with other ideas, practices, professions and with
communities, which may lead to further innovation Adoption of
transnaitional and trans-cultural planning process, that takes place
between nations, and provide a framework for spatial analysis that
extend beyond them, and construct strong relations and unity between
them, while acknowledging their different requirements.

Implementation of the socially progressive planning policies that
enhance the fixed identity (distinctive character and heritage), reflect
it on the urban environment, and diminish the negative impacts of
flexible identities (imported forms and models) to create a compatible
urban fabric Strong institutions that enhance education, training,
research and development, to promote productivity Strategic policy
developments and management to ensure adequate resources for sustainable
development and lead to economic stability Diversity and freedom of
choice for people,

considering the great variety of locals (elite or weak members) Strong
accessibility and connectivity with different networks, which achieve
linkages between different cities and societies, so that people enjoy
the freedom and brotherhood atmosphere of the Islamic State.

**Conclusion**

Globalization, associated with complexity, social, and spatial
fragmentation, has had major implications for the nexus between social
relations and space. Thus, the question remains as how invading global
cities could be channelled and how cultural production, as the only way
to create or restore genuine and authentic places, could be the cure to
the current problematic of place.

Islamic globalization in the future Islamic State of Al-Mahdi (as),
would achieve a balance between positive aspects of globalization, on
one hand, and cultural and authentic characteristics of place, on the
other hand. Islam is a timeless and livable religion; it doesn't belong
to a specific place or specific time. In the process of producing town
planning laws that are based on Islam, Islamic doctrine and legislations
should be questioned and analyzed, in order to deduce the right rules
from their origins. Monuments from the past maybe questioned and
analyzed to add to the experience, but not to be considered as the main
references.

Islam provides Divine judgment for every occurrence, understands
human's physical requirements, and establishes rules and regulations
that are based on values sufficient for him. With the respectful vision
to the city's own criteria, establishing stabilization between
collectivity and particularism, accommodation with various and
innovative urban concepts, flexibility in dealing with the continuous
changes in the urban environment, and in the shade of the Divine and
prudent rules, Islamic globalization is capable of providing a superior
and extraordinary experience to urbanism.

**Bibliography**

The Holy Quraan, Text translation and commentary, Ayatullah H. Yazdi
and S. Ali, Elmhurst, New York 11373-0115, 1995 Akkach, S. On Culture,
Proceedings of 3rd Symposium, Centre for Asian and Middle Eastern
Architecture, De-Placing Difference Editors: S. Akkach, Faculty of the
Professions, The University of Adelaide, 183-189, 2002.

Al-Balagh Foundation, The Islamic Principles, second edition,
1415AH/1994AD

Alexander, Christopher, The Timeless Way of Building, New York, Oxford
University Press, 1979 Arefi, Mahyar, Non-place and Placelessness as
Narratives of Loss: rethinking Notions of Place, Journal of Urban
Design, Vol. 4, No. 2, 179-193, 1999 Encyclopedia, Free encyclopedia,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urbanism, 2006 Grabar, Oleg, 'Places, Citadels,
and fortifications', Architecture of the Islamic World, edited by George
Michell, 1995

Khair-el-Din, A.H., Islamic Culture and the Arab City: Influences, New
Approaches, and Strategies, Symposium on The Arab City, Medina, 1981
Ministry for the Environment, The New Zealand Urban Design Protocol,
Wellington, 2005, Ref. ME579

Nasr, Joe, and Mercedes Volait (eds), Urbanism: Imported or Exported,
Wiley, Chichester, 2003, 354pp., ISBN 0470851600 Ouf, Ahmad M. Salah,
Authenticity and the Sense of Place in Urban Design, Journal of Urban
Design, Vol. 6, No. 1, 73-86, 2001 Said, Edward, Orientalism, 25th
anniversary edition 2003, 328pp., ISBN039474067x

Sibel Yardimci, Interlocking Flows: Globalization, Urbanism, and
Culture in Contemporary Istanbul, Paper presented in the Critical
Management Conference, Manchester, 2001


