Ii. Examples of Successful Sunni Mahdist States
===============================================

Despite the higher profile that Mahdism has acquired in recent years,
many Western commenatators and analysts-even scholars of the Islamic
world, who should know better-are still unaware that belief in the Mahdi
exists not just in Shi\`i but also in Sunni Islam. It is not my place to
ascertain, or argue, which view of the Mahdi is correct. As a historian
of Islamic societies, however, it is my place to observe, and comment
upon, Mahdism as a historical phenomenon-of which there are numerous
examples.

In my book I discuss eight Mahdist movements over the last millennium
of Islamic history, all of them Sunni. (These represent but the tip of
the Mahdist iceberg; some scholars, in fact, think that over the last
fourteen centures of Islamic history there have been thousands of such
movements. ) That analysis reveals that while Sunni Mahdism shares with
Shi\`ism the general delineation of the Imam Mahdi, that he will be
God's instrument for Islamizing the world, it differs in a number of
way, primarily in that:

\*Global Islamization will occur via jihad and conquest, rather than
more peacefully, as in most of Shi\`i thought \* The Mahdi will emerge
onto the historical stage for the first time, rather than returning as
the final Imam who has already been here \*Lacking any institutional
apparatus to verify Mahdist claims, Mahdism is much more likely to
occur, and as the province of freelancers in Sunnism-and this is exactly
what history demonstrates.

Mahdist movements within Sunnism have tended to move through three
stages:

1) Dissemination of revivalist propaganda aimed at undermining a Muslim
government

2) Formation of a renegade military theocracy and attempts to seize
power

3) Conquest of formation of a territorial state that eventually wanes
in religio-ideological fervor.

Since generally only a Mahdist movement which has taken power can
indulge aspirations of universality and engage in even marginally
realistic attempts to influence the international order, the focus
herein will be on Mahdisms that have reached level three-although some
groups that have reached levels analogous to number two will also be
examined.

The most successful Sunni Mahdist movement in history was that of
Abu\`Abd Allah Muhammad b. Tumart al-Susi (d. 1130 CE), better known as
Ibn Tumart, founder of the al-Muwahhid (Almohad) movement that ruled
much of the Maghrib for over a century, until 1269 CE.

Ibn Tumart was a pious, mystically-minded Muslim who after returing
from the hajj decided that God had ordained him, as Mahdi, to overthrow
the impious al-Murabit (Almoravid) rulers. Exploiting tribal differences
in Maghribi society, and capitalizing on opposition to the al-Murabits,
Ibn Tumart's intensity, piety and conviction of God's guidance convinced
many that he was indeed the Mahdi.

Starting out as a critic and disseminator of anti-Murabit propaganda,
before his death in 1130 he created an extra-legal military theocracy,
the leadership of which was taken up by his caliph and amir al-mu\`minin
("commander of the faithful")\`Abd al-Mu'min who, before his own death
33 years later, ruled over a Muwahhid state that included much of what
is now Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Spain. This state lasted until
1269, although before then al-Muwahhid caliphs disavowed that Ibn Tumart
had been the Mahdi.

In terms of administration, Ibn Tumart seems to have intended to
replace the Maliki madhhab with his own Mahdist one, but his premature
death prevented that from actually happening (this can be contrasted
with the examples of the Fatimids and the Sudanese Mahdists, on which
more later in this paper).

He did, while he was alive-and based on his belief in his own \`ismah,
or "infallibility" as Mahdi-reserve to himself the sole right to
interpret the Qur'an and the Hadith, disregarding ijma\`. Ibn Tumart and
al-Mu'min, as well as later Muwahhid caliphs like Ya\`qub al-Mansur,
were very intolerant of Jews and Christians, threatening them with
conversion or death in many cases.


To be fair, the militant Catholicism emanating from the Normans of
Sicily and the Reconquista in Iberia probably had as much to do with
this as did religious doct rine. Regarding Sufism, after intial
opposition and suppression, the Muwahhid courts became patrons of famous
Sufi scholars. As for its universalist claims and international affairs,
sources are few and/or not yet well-researched; but a clear sign of
Muwahhid idea of their own Islamic primacy is found in the fact that Ibn
Tumart's caliph \`Abd al-Mu\`min did take the title-the first non-Arab
to do so, since he was a Berber-of amir al-mu\`minin,

a rank that until then had been used only by the Abbasid caliphs in
Baghdad. And the Muwahhids should get credit for at least facilitating
regional Pan-Islamic unity, in that "through unifying the Maghrib under
their rule, the Almohads gave for the first and only time a concrete
historical existence to the conception of the Maghrib as a distinct
religio-cultural entity."


