Iii. Shi`i Mahdist State(s) in History
======================================

The most successful, overtly Mahdist Shi\`i movement in history-and the
only one that will be treated in this paper--would almost certainly be
that of the Fatimids, who ruled Egypt for almost a quarter of a
millennium, from 969-1171 CE, following a period of 60 years of power in
what is now Tunisia.

They of course traced their descent from \`Ali and Fatimah, via
Isma\`il, son of Ja\`far al-Sadiq. In the 10th c. CE Isma\`ili da\`is
won over the Kutama Berbers of the Maghrib and, when the chief Isma\`ili
da\`i \`Ubayd Allah arrived in Tunisia, he was soon put in power and
took the title of al-Mahdi, although he likely thought that the
successor (and possibly son), al-Qa'im, was the true Mahdi.

Under the fourth caliph-mahdi, al-Mu\`izz, the general Jawhar conquered
Egypt and the Fatimid Mahdiyah was transferred there. Although even
before taking Egypt the Fatimids "proclaimed aloud that universal
sovereignty was given to them by divine decree and that they were called
to displace the Umayyads of Spain as well as the Abbasids of Baghdad and
the Byzantine emperors…."

So there is little doubt about the universalistic Mahdist aspirations
of the Fatimids. And unlike the modern views of most Shi\`is, at least
in the Twelver World, the Fatimids saw no problem with openly
proclaiming and waging jihad against their enemies, be they Abbasid or
Seljuq Muslims or Christian Byzantines. However, internally, the
Fatimids were very tolerant of Christians-and to a lesser extent, of
Jews-with the notable exception of the reign of al-Hakim (996-1021).

In fact "Christians and Jews were massively employed in the Fatimid
administration," and a number of Christians even became viziers-which is
remarkable for Muslim states of the period. Furthermore, the Fatimid
government tolerated and even sometimes participated in Christian
ceremonies such as Epiphany and Palm Sunday processions.

There is little data on the Sufis under Fatimid rule, but as for the
administration of law under the Fatimids: while the Fatimid
qa'im-caliphs never arrogated to themselves the status of interpreting
the Qur'an and Hadith without recourse to any other input, they did
attempt to create a Fatimid madhhab and give it precedence over the
other schools of law, enforcing the situation with a Fatimid qadi
al-Islam. But by the 11th c. it was relegated to the status of primus
inter pares, at best.

And as for disseminating the Fatimid da\`wah, that was done outside the
borders of the state, chiefly via "subversive activities against foreign
states" -- but not inside; this meant that the masses in Egypt remained
practicing Sunnis, while Isma\`ili doctrines and beliefs remained the
province of only the ruling elites.

As for whether the masses actually believed the ruler in Cairo was the
Mahdi-well, even if they didn't, they no doubt kept that to themselves,
rather like the Roman citizens who had doubts about the divinity of the
pre-Christian emperors.

The Fatimids are the only major Shi\`i movement in history that both
ruled a powerful state and openly avowed a living, breathing
Mahdi-Caliph in their palace. Subjecting them to the same analytical
scorecard as the aformentioned Sunni Mahdist movements-al-Muwahhids,
Sudanese Mahdists and Saudi Mahdists-we find them also batting, to use
an American baseball metaphor, .

667 in terms of fulfilling the Mahdi's major functions: they were more
assuredly universalistic in aspirations, if not reality, and they did
try to construct a new, Mahdist interpretation of Islamic law; however,
they were not so enamored of wealth redistribution as the real Mahdi
will be.

And eventually, despite the Fatimids' undenied military, diplomatic and
cultural power in the medieval Middle East, "they were confronted with
the fact that the hopes which the Isma\`ili community had placed in the
appearance of the Mahdi had not been realized, the law of Muhammad had
not been abrogated, the hidden meaning…of the Qur'an had not been
revaled, a more perfect law…had not been promulgated,

Fatimid rule had not spread throughout the world….[and] the complete
reversal of positions and the victory over the Infidels which the Mahdi
was expected to bring about had been postponed to the end of time…" And
in fact in 1171 the Fatimid Imamate was extinguished by a Sunni leader,
Salah al-Din.


