Iv. Past "mahdis" Vis-Ã -vis the Future Mahdi: Alternative Views
===============================================================

Muslim commentators, whether Sunni or Shi\`i, rarely have anything good
to say about past claimants to the mantle of the Mahdi. At best they are
seen as deluded irrelevancies, at worst at mutamahdis, sowers of
dissension, bloodshed and fitnah within the ummah. But might there be
another way to look at them that would be of at least some
historical-theological, analytical value?

There is a Christian school of hermeneutics known as typology in which
"an element found in the Old Testament [Jewish Scriptures] is seen to
prefigure one found in the New Testament." For example, the sacrifices
the Hebrews practiced in Old Testament times are seen, in this view, as
presaging the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross (this indeed seems
to be the viewpoint of the writer of the New Testament book of
Hebrews).

A more specific example of the Christian understanding of typology is
found in the passage from the Gospel of John 3:14: "Just as Moses lifted
up the snake in the desert , so the Son of Man must be lifted up."

Might it be possible to see previous Mahdi claimants as something akin
to Islamic types of the eschatological Mahdi-to-come, and previous Mahdi
movements as Islamic types of the true Mahdist movement that will
accompany and follow its founder in the future? This does NOT mean
ascribing to \`Ubayd Allah, Ibn Tumart, Muhammad Ahmad or al\`Utaybi
actual guidance from God-but it would mean, in essence, sometimes giving
such men (well, probably not al-\`Utaybi, but the others) the benefit of
the doubt as to their motives-treating them, in effect charitably, as
putative Islamic reformers--and, more analytically, viewing them, to a
limited extent, as historical types of the future Mahdi.

If I may: one might indeed argue that a type of typology is implied by
Imam Khomeini himself, for according to one understanding of his
relevant writings while the Prophet and the Imams will always have a far
superior status to almost all of humanity, the fuqaha' can in certain
ways fulfill the functions of the Imams, at least insofar as running a
government. Thus, in a certain sense, the differentiation between
function and status is analogous to the idea of type and fulfillment or
reality about which I have been speculating.

Following this line of reasoning, an Ibn Tumart, \`Ubayd Allah or
Muhammad Ahmad-and to a lesser degree, other less successful "mahdis"
over the millennia-are each types of the coming Mahdi, able despite
faults to perform some of the functions of the Awaited One on a much
less effective and much more limited scale, while never reaching the
actual status of Mahdiyah.

Indeed, if God is in charge of human history-and both Muslims and
Christians agree that He is-then He must have allowed the development of
the movements of Ibn Tumart, \`Ubayd Allah, Muhammad Ahmad and even the
despised, deluded al-\`Utaybi. Perhaps He allows such false mahdis both
to test people's faith, but also perhaps to provide a dark glass, or a
dim mirror, through which believers can view a foreshadowing of what
true Mahdism will consist when it arrives.


