Mahdism Doctrine and Urbanism
=============================

The basic concept of Mahdism is that the just ruler and the virtuous
awaiting Imam Al-Mahdi (a.s.), the twelfth Imam of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.),
will appear in the future -in an unknown time- to fill the earth with
justice and equality as it would have been filled with oppression and
injustice. At that time, humanity would reach highest levels of
integration and amalgamation, so everything would be ideal and perfect
in that ideal Islamic state.

The idea of 'filling the earth with justice and equality' suggests a
global system and regulations that rules the earth under the tenets of
Islam, which could be called as 'Islamic globalization'.

The term 'globalization' refers nowadays to a global system based on
the increasing integration of economies around the world, particularly
through trade and financial flows. It also refers to the movement of
people (labour), knowledge (technology) across international borders, in
addition to the broader cultural, political, and environmental
dimensions. The most dominant fields are the economic and communal
globalizations, which are critiqued for encouraging domination,
unparalleled growth, and increased inequality, because the strongest
gains have been made by the advanced countries only.

In urbanism, globalization refers to the adaptation of urban forms that
are out of their native habitats. It has been the material of debate and
conflict between urban designers in the last fifty years. It is strongly
rejected and critiqued for it's by products like domination,
segregation, placelessness (diminishing importance of place), isolation,
and insertion. At the same time, urban designers are in favour of a
retrospective view that recognizes the social and cultural dimensions of
urban life and maintains the authenticity and identity of place.

This paper discusses globalization phenomenon from the urban design
perspective, which is related to social policy. The paper first reviews
the literature of urbanism in the historic Islamic cities, and discusses
the preliminary arrangements and tools necessary to build the future
State of Al-Mahdi (a.s).

Then the paper explores issues of globalization and culture, aiming to
contribute to this growing literature by bringing together diverse
themes to be discussed in conjunction with one another. The main purpose
is to establish a new theoretical approach for 'Islamic globalization'
in the field of urbanism, and determine the positive issues that could
lead to create the right regulations and guidelines for building a
perfect Islamic state.


**Introduction**

The attempt to establish conceptual linkages between urbanism,
globalization, and cultural studies on one hand, and Mahdism theory,
which is strongly related to Islam, on the other hand, is a critical
one. The researcher is responsible to bring out clear discussion of
issues of methodology embedded within this type of study. The wrong
understanding of Islamic ideals, the difficulty of constructing a clear
image of pure Islamic experience from the Islamic history, the ambiguity
of some aspects of the Mahdism doctrine; especially for non-Muslims, the
bias attitudes of those strongly admiring Western civilization, and the
lack of correspondent studies regarding these issues, are all challenges
to the researcher.

Moreover, there is the important question of the researcher's position
as an insider or outsider in the process of transferals of Islamic ideas
and methodologies, "If the method of research and thinking is not an
Islamic one or does not, at least, go along with its tendency, the
effects will be wrong to unite with the Islamic spirit" (Al-Balagh,
1994). The complicated factors that shaped traditional Islamic cities
make it a dilemma to explore them, and establish subtle conception of
those factors them, and the main forces that controlled the building
process at that time.

This study aims to bring out a discussion of the conflict of the
interlocking terminologies of urbanism, globalization, and culture, in
relation to Islamic principles and fundamentals. For this purpose, the
paper briefly reviews Islamic doctrine in relation to urbanism, the
urbanism practice in historic Islamic cities, and how globalization
effects has reshaped their urban fabric interconnectedly, in order to
reconstruct Islamic urban theory and reconceptualize globalization to
develop the notion of 'Islamic globalization'.

Thus, the first section focuses on urbanism experience in the historic
Islamic cities, including the economic, social, and political conditions
in which they were produced, and the influences exercised on their
production. The second section concentrates on the current issues of
urban design and its implications on urbanism in the future Islamic
State, particularly recent theories of globalization and culture. The
third section tries to address the context of urbanism in the future
Islamic cities based on Islamic doctrine, and depict a picture of
'Islamic globalization' in the Islamic State of Al-Mahdi (a.s).

However, it is important to note that this study attempts at analyzing
concepts and establishing a broad image of the planning regulations for
the state of Imam Al-Mahdi (as). Further studies and extensive
researches are essential.

**1. Islam and Urbanism**

The perfect Islamic state, associated with the appearance of Al-Mahdi
(a.s) would not be built from scratch. Current urban fabrics of existent
cities are the basis for its construction. This realistic vision
requires a pragmatic analysis of the current urban forms. Although
future Islamic State of Al-Mahdi (a.s) would conjoin all the cities in
the globe together, this study focuses on the specific features of
traditional Islamic cities, as they are considered idols and references
for many of the researchers in this field.

Before analyzing issues of urbanism in Islamic cities, it is useful to
define the term 'urbanism' and its related components, which would
emphasize its significance in building our cities.

**Urbanism, Meaning and Objectives**

Urbanism is defined as "the study of cities; their economic, political,
social and cultural environment, and the imprint of all these forces on
the built environment" (Encyclopedia). Urbanism is about creating human
communities and living together. It is about 'quality of life'. It is
dynamic, diverse, moving, consistent, aesthetic, and systematic.
Urbanism is beyond limits, the urban designer is an artist, ecologist,
archaeologist, socialist, scientist, historian, and philosopher.

The word 'urban' refers to the city life, in contrary to rural.
Urbanism is a system established to overcome problems of urban rural
areas, and pursue a clear understanding of contemporary living. In the
beginning of 20th century, the awareness of urbanism increased in many
parts of the world, basis for planning established, and town planning
laws and building laws for urban areas were adopted.

Urban design regulations are important to create a new art of city
planning that encompasses policies and strategies regarding land use,
zoning regulations, urban change, living standards, sustainable use of
resources , and economic proficiency, based on the social structure of
the city. The essential urban design qualities include; context,
accessibility, connectivity, versatility, legibility, compatibility,
creativity, choice, and collaboration.


