Urbanism of the Historic Islamic Cities
=======================================

"The most mystical, most religious, most wonderful, they are more
ordinary than most things" (Alexander, 1979)

Historic city discourse in the field of urbanism usually associated
with the notions of culture (a framework that recognizes social and
historical dimensions of urban life), identity (specific characteristics
of place), and authenticity. These concepts where invented and adopted
as the main focus of a retrospective attitude in the confront with
modernity and globalization.

In the case of Islamic historic cities, questions of culture, identity,
and authenticity were often misjudged and misunderstood. Orientalism,
which is a kind of Western intellectual authority and a style for
dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the Orient within
Western culture, has dominated the area. Orientalist's knowledge of
Islam was superficial; as a result, some concepts were misunderstood,
wrongly chosen or incompletely applied. Orientalism was developed during
the colonialism era that represents imbalance of power. However,
powerless people had some capacity, this reticulation made the process
of sorting and differentiation between authentic and exotic, much more
complicated.

The history of traditional Islamic cities regarding urbanism, could be
categorized into three phases; the early decades after the expedition of
Prophet Mohammed (s.a.w), the following two centuries (Umayyad and
Abbasid States), and the colonialism era.

**Urbanism of the Historic Islamic Cities**

First, it is important to note that Islam, the eternal message, has
reformed the lives of Islamic societies, and had great impact on the
social life. It is a religion of action and a system of life, conveyed
to guide humanity, so that people march in its light and build life and
culture according to its teachings.

During the early decades of Islam, cities that witnessed remarkable
changes were the cities with majority converters to the new religion.
The city of Al-Medina was the first city that witnessed changes. Prophet
Mohammed (s.a.w), who was the ruler and the highest authority,
established the cornerstone for the city of Medina. The most apparent
features and policies to build the city were as follows:

Building a relatively big and central mosque (Masjid), which was a
place for administration, and social gathering, in addition to
worshipping Encouraging people to build their city with respect to each
others' rights and with the sustainable use of available resources The
urban form of the past wasn't rejected, it was developed and improved to
correspond to the new requirements Collective life was encouraged;
people were urged to perform their prayers in the Masjid, and deal with
each other as brothers and sisters regardless their roots and social
status However, the time the prophet Mohammed (s.a.w) was going through
was very harsh; too many challenges and too many people wanted to stop
the new faith and to do so many plots to injure and kill him. The
battles between Muslims and unbelievers dominated their life activities.
As a result, Islamic theory and principles didn't come to be fully
practiced in urban life.

**Urbanism in the First Two Centuries of Islam**

"Islamic culture has always been primarily urban" (Grabar, 1995) In the
first two centuries, Islamic civilization attained high level of
cultural productivity. Ostentation, which is almost an expression of
power (not related to Islam), was the most remarkable feature of
architecture, "whatever it's social or personal function, there hardly
exists a major monument of Islamic architecture that does not reflect
power in some fashion" (Grabar, 1995). In this regard, it is useful to
emphasize that urban features of the city are centre to this paper
rather than individual buildings details.

The urban fabric of the traditional city consisted of central mosques
that were multi-purpose and accessible to all, markets that encompassed
other public services, a net of compressed streets of all shapes and
sizes, few squares (maidans), and series of detached houses, which often
contain courtyards.

The main features of urbanism were as follows There were no strict
rules for the buildings' construction, however, Islamic Jurisprudence
(Fiqh) endeavoured to deduce Islamic laws and extract the regulations
from their sources (Qur'an, the word of Allah, and Sunnah, sayings of
Prophet Mohammed), provided systems of decision-making to organize the
building process and the urban physical character.

Tyrant rulers were controlling the building process, their decisions
were macro. As a result, the urban form (the three dimensional state of
the city) was often an expression of their desires, and didn't conduct a
pure message of Islam Although ruler's decisions where macro in nature,
Islamic laws could affect the road restrictions and legislations, and
the citizens aggregate significant impact on building process to some
instant. Islamic affairs of the road rights and the relations with
neighbours,

Islamic law of 'waqf' which resulted into real-estate perpetuity, the
obligations of controlling visual overlooking for the sanctity of the
family, and Islamic recommendations of beauty and aesthetic values, are
some examples of that impact Traditional Islamic city was shaped by some
structural elements,

including; the domes and minarets that dominated the skyline, the
street qualities; such as rhythm, repetitiveness, and walkability, the
axial composition with clustered houses, and the use of the square forms
and courtyards The question of identity and authenticity, in terms of
following Islamic theory, became very critical. The structure of the
city was immense and astonishing production of coherent cultures, which
responded to the rulers' wishes, building requirements and construction
capabilities, but relatively engaged with Islamic thoughts Islamic
teachings urge people to learn, work hard, be productive, be honest, and
contribute to the civilization and the restoration of the globe. These
teachings collaborated with the spiritual and love interactions to rise
great commitments and devotions to build and develop all aspects of
life.

Islamic conquests resulted into a great mixture of civilizations that
contributed to the produce of the urban fabric. This patchwork turned
the city into a panoramic displays of various cultures, and affected the
building process, which made it a dilemma to separate between the
genuine Islamic production and the imported one, because of some
similarities between cultures, "all cultures were originally and
internally coherent, bound together by a spirit and genius"(Grabar,
1995).

**Urbanism of the Colonialism Era**

The 19th and 20th centuries were an era of accelerated diffusion of
Western ideas around the world, with no exception regarding urban
design. In this period, many historic Islamic cities came under the
control of different non-Islamic forces that have different ideologies
and diverse policies of building and urban life. Orientalism was
developed during this period, and foreign ideologies dominated. As a
result, alien building modes and strange urban forms were imposed, which
contributed to the loss of identity.

Urbanism features of this period were as follows Irrespective of the
interpretation, colonial urbanization constructed new urban forms as a
result of the coincidence between cultural hegemony and political
domination. Those forms delivered a segregation system that was both
ethnic and social, reflecting the colonial environment.

The urban fabric was still compact, inherited some distinctive features
from the previous period. However, discrete rulers and colonizers kept
dominating the decision-making process and adding dramatic changes to
the coherent fabric of the city.

Sometimes, the aspirations of some of the colonized may coincide with
the objectives of the colonizer, which made planning techniques and
visible symbols of specific cultures easily integrated into the local
context. The local context may assimilate Western style urbanism,
resulting into endogenous policy of importation of Western born forms
and techniques rather than from an exportation of these via colonial
dominance. Introducing new forms and techniques with multiple identities
weakened the cultural influence and cultural appreciation of the
colonized and enhanced globalization.

The 'urban ills' associated with colonial urbanization urged the need
to adopt new planning techniques, which contributed to the development
of town planning. New concepts and notions evolved regarding place and
space.

This demonstration of the urbanism process in the history of Islamic
cities outlines the difficult and complicated task of extracting the
concepts and methods that related purely to Islam, and stresses the need
to study and analyze basic Islamic doctrine in relation to town
planning, in order to establish a firm basis for the policies and
regulations necessary to build the future Islamic State of Al-Mahdi
(a.s)

2. Globalization and culture in the Current Urbanism Practice of
Islamic cities

"Places are constantly in tension between what they are, what they
ought to become and what the mediations of global capital and power make
of them" (Arefi, 1999)

The process of urbanization and the cultural production have developed
in a dialectical relationship, as they have influenced, constructed,
shaped and reshaped each other. The urban fabric of most Islamic cities
has changed drastically due to the influence of colonial urbanism. The
diverse and tangled urban forms emerged from the colonized period, the
loss of identity and authenticity due to the ideologies of the rulers
which were remote from Islamic ideology, the consecutive foreign and
dictator governments, and the gradual diverge of Muslims' thoughts from
the basic Islamic beliefs, have evolved into a great rejection of the
past and glorification of the new standards and techniques, which
promoted the proliferation of inauthentic places and the emergence of
placelessness.

Moreover, the invention of the car and the wide spread use of it as a
way of transportation, had great impact on the urban fabric. New
neighbourhoods were built on the borders of old neighbourhoods without
planning strategies for integration, which widened the gap between the
old and the new. In addition to that, new roads were cut into the old
fabric without any considerations to the urban and social values. "In
addition to commodification and devaluation of place, the roots of
placelessness lie deep in globalization" (Arefi, 1999).

In the last few decades, sensible and knowledgeable architects led a
retrospective revolution for cultural and identity appreciation. As a
result, new attitudes like urban infill and urban conservation practice
were adopted to enhance authenticity and allow flexibility to integrate
the old fabric into the modern city development plans. International
standards became less important and local historical identity was
enhanced.

However, the contemporary discourse on the authenticity of place "has
been largely influenced by modernity and globalization" (Arefi, 1999).
Due to this influence on urban conservation process, cultural production
has turned into a "source of opportunities and threats" (Ouf, 2001) in
urban restructuring.

Cultural production, in the meantime, represents basically visible
signs and symbols that express a distinct history, provide art display,
and attract tourists and public with the spirit of the past "business of
cities" (Sibel, 2001), without comprehensive studies for the basic
elements and tools required for a successful urban practice that
considers the basic principles of Islam rather than architectural
symbols of a specific time.


