Local Or Global
===============

"The call for proper connections between places goes far beyond a test
of architectural ability and talent for urban design. The dilemma lies
deep in our social norms and collective consciousness" ( Arefi, 1999)

The subtle arguments of local verses global are significant to the
evolution of our understanding of global systemic change. The critique
of the social evolutionism literature has dominated the efforts to
locate globalization, because globalization, in general, weakens local
ties and enhances homogeneity and sameness, based on the tenets of
consumerism and capital mobility. On the other hand, social relations
strengthen local ties and identity, and promote the process of place
development.

The current problematic of place evolved from using criteria such as
applicability and importance in selecting Western models, "the input of
experts whose work was closely modeled on foreign examples was often not
appropriate for the special context" (Nasr, eds., 2003).

The debate about global urbanization, which is based on the
significance of cities and the development process, revolving around the
process of framing a relationship between globalization and locality
impacts, exportation or importation of urbanism techniques, the network
structure of globalizing cities, the methodological debates about
understanding global networks with urban change and with the
synchronization movement of people. Continuous urban change draws
conceptual framework for local changes and transformation.

The theoretical synthesis of 'transnational urbanism' presented by the
urban theorist,

Michael Peter Smith, is considered as "the most balanced theoretical
approach to globalization, seeing it as it works, without any
vilification or glorification" (Encyclopedia). The term 'transnational
urbanism' refers to a sophisticated and complicated process involving
cultures, policies, institutions, actors, and localities. The primary
sites of this 'cultural metaphor' are global cities.

This theory deepens our conceptual complication on globalization. It
frames stimulating connections between the field of urban studies and
the field of transnational studies, suggests methods for reconstructing
urban theory to coincide with socio-spatial dynamics and the changing
urban international relations. Smith suggests that we need to look
beyond the intention of globalization and post-modernity, to recognize
locality and the growth of cultural practices from a different point of
view.

The theory of 'transnational urbanism' could bring a rational balance
to the problematic of globalization and the loss of identity, but with
the unbalanced laws that govern the earth and the dominance of man-made
laws and the commanding forces, this balance will be restricted and
confined to specific societies.

On the contrary, in the case of 'Islamic globalization' and the State
of Al -Mahdi (as), when the Divine law controls the earth and brings out
unity, justice, and equal opportunities to all societies, 'transnational
urbanism' would achieve its fundamental goal of the balance between
those conflicting issues.

**Islamic Globalization and associated Teachings of Islam**

In order to enrich our ideas about 'Islamic globalization', it is
important to specify some Islamic teachings that enhance globalization.
Islamic message is extensive and global, it was forwarded to all nations
on the globe, not only one nation. It was conducted for building and
spreading civilization on the earth. It is a broad message that covers
the matters of ideology, culture, health, education, social life, and
every aspect of our life.

Prophet Mohammed (s.a.w) is the Messenger of Allah (s.w.t) for all
people in the globe. Quraan declared that Prophet Mohammed (s.a.w) was
appointed as a messenger of goodness, truth and grace for all people
living on the earth "And we sent thee not (O' Our Apostle Muhammad) but
a mercy unto all the worlds" (Holy Quraan 21:107)

Humanitarian Equality is another feature of Islamic teachings. Islam
considers all people on earth equal in their humanitarian rights,
without any differentiations between them. The only distinction would be
with more fear of Allah (s.w.t) "Verily the most honoured of you with
God is the one of you who guardeth (himself) the most against evil"
(Holy Quraan 49:13).

Islam considers all Muslims as brothers, despite their origins,
languages, and cultures. Love, loyalty, and responsibility are the key
elements of the countenance of this brotherhood, and this bond of unity
and cooperation attaches Muslims to each other, any where on earth.
Islamic doctrine encompasses many collective aspects that encourage
social bonds. While respecting the rights of individuals, Islam
expresses plenty of regulations for the right of groups. Islam
encourages collectivity in all kinds of worshipping, eating, and various
aspects of social life.

**3. Towards a New Approach**

The developments in political, economic, cultural and social spheres
restructure urban spaces. These changes could affect the fabrication of
urban space and lead to more invention of concepts. Consequently, town
planning law and the building law for urban areas will develop and
change. Before suggesting some urbanism guidelines for the future
Islamic State of Al-Mahdi (a.s), it is useful to analyze parts of the
Islamic theory and their Implications on town planning process, in order
to propose a conceptual framework for a pure Islamic practice in
urbanism.

**Islamic theory and its Implication on urbanism**

The term 'Islam' means submission and obedience. It can be
defined -descriptively- as "following the orders and prohibitions
without objection" (Al-Balagh, 1994). The religion of Islam is composed
of three key elements; doctrine, legislation (social laws), and morals.
Islamic message is complete, can solve all the problems, and encompass
all aspects of life, including urbanism, "Never is there anything
without a law concerning it or a known Sunnah" (Imam Sadiq/Al-Balagh,
1994).

The basic goal of the Islamic message is to guide people towards the
perfection and happiness in their lives. Following are some Islamic
beliefs that would affect urbanism and the building process The belief
of the Oneness of Allah in himself, His attributes, His actions, and
worship, has a perfecting impact on the human spirit, as the ultimate
goal of a Muslim is to attain Allah's pleasure.

This spiritual interaction can be reflected on life affairs and
translated into an integral system that aims to establish perfect
society and perfect urban life The aim of creating humanity is to
worship Allah (s.w.t), reform the earth, and achieve longevity with good
and sustainable use of the available resources. People are urged to
mobilize their energies in the domain of good and constructive work, and
avoid being dissipated and lost In Islam, the basic criteria and guide
for various life activities is that they should respect their nature and
impact on social life.

In other words, they should be clear from crime and evil. Islam
strongly challenges injustice, corruption, tyranny, and despotism. This
criteria should be considered in the process of framing planning
policies, specially land use proposals The incorporation of religious
activities with different aspects of life is emphasized in Islamic
theory, and could be translated into mixed use developments,

and reflected on some facilities -like mosques- in discrete diversity
of functions and a lively social life The belief in justice,
socio-equality, and distribution equity would strongly affect planning
strategies and regulations There is no coercion in Islam.

Freedom of choice is represented in Islamic legislations, in a
condition that no damage or harm will occur to anybody as a result of
that freedom Noxious ethics such as monopoly, bribery, egoism,
subversion, and perversion are prohibited in Islam, and should be
prevented in town planning process Worshipping in Islam is not always
individually performed. Islam urges Muslims to perform worshiping
together, which would promote collectivity and affect urban life Islamic
teachings provoke people to demand knowledge, wisdom, and be flexible to
change.

Islam has provided unchangeable rules for the constant needs of
humanity, but with fluctuating needs, the rules are much more changeable
as far as they coincide with Islamic key principles. This would enhance
flexibility in dealing with urban change Duties in Islam are within
man's ability.

There is never a duty or an obligation that is beyond people's
forbearance Islamic recommendations of beauty, adornment, and
cleanliness would preserve public health for individuals and for the
society, and affect the aesthetic components of urbanism The belief in
the eternal life after death and the resurrection notion can create a
spiritual motivation and movements in mankind and the design thinking
Islamic doctrine stresses the significance and eternity of the soul,
which may result in the perpetuity of special buildings -such as tombs-
which affects urban rules and regulations.


