Introduction and Biographical Background
========================================

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***


Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds who in His essential
divine substance is before time and ever‑existent, who in His own
necessary independence is the beginning and the end and whose eternity
does not admit of end.

Praise belongs to Him who by His essence is Him. The Beloved is He who
is Allah, the Soul Being, the Beloved is Him. He is the Independent, the
Eternal, who begets no one. The One, who was not begotten, without
opponent or rival. He is the Possessor of Splendour, the One, the
Eternal. His Oneness is not, however, of the kind to be counted. He is
without likeness, existent before creation and time. There has been, nor
is nothing similar to Him.

He is untouched by time and place. The chapter of The Unity (in the
Qur'an) is an indication of this. He is Existence from before time and
without need. He is the Real and the Creator of the different essences.
He is without annihilation, subsistent of Himself. He exists by His
essence, the Source of Outpouring of all essences.

May blessings and peace without end be on Muhammad, the first radiant
manifestation of the Essence, the first of the messen­gers of Allah,
whose reality is the radiant point of manifestation of the essence of
the Lord of the Worlds, who is himself also the seal of His prophets,
and on his caliph and successor, the greatest of caliphs, the most
excellent of guardians and the seal of spiritual authority from the
Maker of the heavens and the earth, the Commander of the Faithful and
the just divider of people between the Fire and the Garden, the *yamin
of Allah'* ‑ one of Allah's people of the right ‑ as mentioned in the
Qur'an.[^1]

May peace and blessings be also on the family and progeny of Muhammad,
the purest of the pure who are the joy and gladness of the worlds, and
in particular on the last of these, the lord of the age and time itself,
the caliph of the Merciful, the leader of men and jinn ‑ may God grant
him great favours. By the family of Muhammad was the correct path made
known. It was in their houses that the Book was revealed. They are the
proofs of Allah for mankind. In them and their forefathers there is no
doubt. In particular Abu Hasan \`Ali is revered for his high station of
knowledge. He is the tremendous news, the ark of Noah, the door of Allah
and the final word in eloquence.

He is the first wave from the ocean of Allah's beauty and love.
He is of the depths of the sea of nobility, from the Majestic.
He is the witness and the witnessed and, by your life, endowed with
great eloquence,
He is the guide of the path leading to the fortunate abode. From God
through him issues the intellect in its entirety. He is the king of the
gathering of those messengers,
The completion of the prophets by the divine overflowing from before
endless time,
The source of light for all the friends of Allah.
There is one sole sun which possesses radiance,
Although from him many lights of dawn appeared on the horizon.
It was that same face of the moon whose light broke though,

But it was by him that the twelve came to rejoice in their blessing.
The state of Muhammad issues from the outpourings of the essence,
And the family of Muhammad are the nobility of creation. The family of
the Prophet are the lords of the two worlds.

The family of the Prophet are the keys to the doors of the gardens.
The family of the Prophet are the light of His beauty from before
time.
The family of the Prophet are a source of gnosis which never dries
up.
May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon them
Until the moment the trumpet is sounded on the day of rising.


\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*


The divine decrees come into being in a world other than our own and
they are governed by an order and time which is par­ticular to them ‑
such that whenever the will of Allah impinges on this world, then the
decree passes from the Tablet of knowledge in the *malakut* (the
invisible world of spirit and angel) to the pages of material forms in
the world of men. Since different manifestations of the divine decrees
become visible in this world, we have taken to calling them \`events
which happen by chance' or \`occurrences.' It is because we interpret
what happens in relation to ourselves that we react with surprise when
the decree of Allah causes something to come into being, or not to come
into being, and we become happy or unhappy accordingly.

The work before the reader came about in the following man­ner. One day
some years ago one of my friends said that he had purchased a modest
library wherein were several handwritten volumes. He asked me to take a
look and to choose any book that I found interesting.

However much I tried to refuse his offer ‑ saying that, although
handwritten, they remained for me a mere adornment and a financial
investment for the book collec­tors, adding that after the death of
their owner these papers would be sold again in the market for a
ludicrous price ‑ there was nothing I could do but peruse the books for
the sake of our friendship and to avoid offending him.

Of all the books ‑ most of them of great value by reason of their
illuminated pages, calligraphy and age ‑ one in particular, which in
contrast con­tained very bad calligraphy and not even the name of the
author, attracted my attention. Despite its worn exterior, I purchased
it at an extravagant price. This book was in fact \`The Mysteries of the
Revealed Law, the Stations of the Way and the Light of the Truth'
*(Asrar al‑Shari\`ah)* which the decree of God was now placing before my
path.

By the style of the text I realized that it was the work of the lord of
gnostics and divines Sayyid Haydar Amuli, an Iranian gnostic of great
standing of the eighth century AH. His writing is eloquent and he
fulfils the demand for spiritual knowledge among those persons whose
mother tongue is Persian. Despite the poor calligraphy, it was
nevertheless exceedingly correct and had been copied from the actual
work of the author himself, may Allah protect his secret; moreover,
there were marginal notes elucidating most places in the book written in
950 AH.

Despite research in different libraries of Iran and Turkey I could find
no trace of another copy which would permit a cross‑check of my copy.
The copy possessed by the University of Tehran was only a selection
containing no more than five or six pages of the book; the copy I found
in the Islamic Consultative Assembly (previously the National Assembly)
was half missing and full of defects. I thus made a photocopy of my copy
and made up for the defects of the Assembly's copy. It was again the
workings of the divine decree which caused me to then find a copy in the
library of Ayatullah Mar'ashi of Qum.[^2]

Although the copy from the library of Mar'ashi was good, having been
written during the time of the Qacharis, it was not as correct as the
copy I myself possessed. For this reason I made a further copy of my
text and substituted it for the other which had been registered under
the number of 388. I then completed correcting that work, spending many
years in the process.

It so happened that one day I went to meet some friends at the Iranian
Academy of Philosophy; the head of the academy was talking about the
lack of correct texts and the plethora of unedited annotated works. It
was at this point that the manifestation of another divine decree caused
the bringing to a head of those previous incidents of destiny which I
had all but forgotten.[^3]

Thus I disclosed that a rare text, of which no more than two copies
existed in the world, lay in my hands ready for printing. Mention of
this was greeted with great pleasure, and after attending to the
technical matters of publication, the work was then actually printed.

As for the biography and historical importance of this divine prodigy,
the men with whom he studied and the date of his death, in the majority
of cases such details are recorded inaccu­rately; biographers have
plagiarized details from others and in their ignorance some have added
material to inaccurate material of a previous date.

In investigating these matters great care must be taken to look closely
at what actually happened and to weigh the matters up with precision in
order to discriminate the chaff from the grain and jumbled invention
from reality. Most of the books containing such material are sources of
erroneous data not only with regard to the life of this man but also
with regard to his works.

One such book is *Al‑Kashkul fi* *ma jara li ali'l‑rasul* (Album of
Events concerning the Family of the Prophet) which is attributed to
Sayyid Amuli but in fact is the work of Haydar ibn 'Ali, a contemporary
of Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin, the teacher of Sayyid Amuli. He is mentioned
with regard to the strife which broke out between the Sunnis and the
Shiahs in 735 in Baghdad[^4] when in fact at that time Sayyid Amuli was
only sixteen years old and had never been in Iraq. The source of this
and many other pieces of false information is the book *Majalis
al‑Mu'minin* (The Gather­ings of the Believers).

As for the various (dubious) biographies there is that of Sayyid Haydar
Tuni. It is significant that it is included in *Rawdat al Jin­nah* (The
Meadow of Paradise) as an appendix to the biography of Sayyid Amuli
wherein many miraculous feats are ascribed to him. It is for this reason
that we have not made any commentary on these matters.

The stations, inner states and spiritual journey­ing are described in
his own words, they being truer and clearer than any one else's, so that
any contradictory statements may be avoided. We have thus avoided the
usual method employed which is to record anything which one has heard or
read without checking its veracity and without assuming any
responsibility for the facts presented.

Such writings only serve to obscure the true spiritual path of this
friend of Allah and give a completely distorted picture of the story of
his life; as a result his way of illumination has become hidden for
subsequent generations and access to the right path, the path of light
indicated by him, has been obstructed for the seeker, concealed from the
sight of man­kind.

Until now, no complete biographical commentary on this great gnostic,
which is free from extraneous and erroneous material and which contains
material written by himself, has been written in Persian.

Little, moreover, has been written in Arabic: the introduction which
precedes his book *Jami \`al‑Asrar* (A Compen­dium of Secrets) is
lengthy and tiring, and that which accom­panies his work *Nass al‑Nusus*
(The Text of Texts) is concise but uninformative and does nothing to
elucidate those matters about which we are ignorant.

It was for this reason that I decided to take the task upon myself. It
was with the help of God that I set about composing this biography,
using material from within his own works and avoiding any commentary or
marginal notes.

Sayyid Amuli was born in 819 AH. His birth heralded the tremendous
influence of his life. He illumined the world of dark­ness and
tribulation, and embellished this world, this planting­ ground for the
next. He says himself at the end of the introduction to *Nass al‑Nusus*
(The Text of Texts), which is a commentary on the *Fusus* *al‑Hikam*
(The Bezels of Wisdom) of Shaykh Muhyi al‑Din ibn 'Arabi: \`I completed
this commentary in 782 AH at the age of sixty three.'

A brief genealogy and biography of his life appears in the first volume
of his commentary entitled *Al‑Muhit al‑A\`zam* (The Mighty Ocean) M.S.
301, Mar'ashi Library, Qum. The following is a translation of this: I am
Rukn al‑Din Haydar, the son of Sayyid Taj al‑Din 'Ali Padashah, the son
of Sayyid Rukn al‑Din Haydar, the son of Sayyid Taj al‑Din 'Ali
Padashah, the son of Sayyid Muhammad Amir, the son of 'Ali Padashah, the
son of Abu Ja\`far Muhammad, the son of Zayd, the son of Abu Ja\`far
Muhammad, the son of Ibrahim, the son of Muhammad, the son of Husayn
Kusaj, the son of Ibrahim, the son of Sana'illah, the son of Muhammad
Harun, the son of Hamzah, the son of \`Ubayd ullah al‑\`Araj, the son of
Husayn Asghar, the son of Imam 'Ali ibn al‑Husayn Zayn al‑\`Abidin, the
son of Husayn the Shahid ‑ the martyr, the son of the Commander of the
Faithful 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, may the peace of Allah be upon them
all.'.

In the introduction of *Jami\` al‑Asrar* (The Compendium of Secrets) he
further states: \`Know that from the earliest vigour of my youth, namely
from my childhood to the age of thirty or thereabouts, I was engaged in
studying the religion of my own forefathers, the *ma'sumin ‑ the*
infallible ones.

With regard to the outer aspect of the *shari\`ah,* I undertook a study
of the Im­amiyah sect and their juridical school *(madhhab) ‑ which* is
daily practiced amongst the Shiahs; and with regard to the inner, namely
the study of the truth and reality *(haqiqah), I* devoted my attention
to the Sufis and the masters of the science of the unity of Allah
*(tawhid).*

The two aspects came together and a joining of the outer *shari\`ah* and
the inner *haqiqah* was effected such that I reached the station of
constancy and firmness. This I say not through any sense of pride, but
rather as an expression of the endless bounty of Allah. Indeed I swear
by Allah that if the seven heavens were made of paper and the trees of
the earth were pens, if the seas of the world were ink and the spirits,
mankind and the angels were scribes, then they would be unable to write
even a jot of what I had witnessed of the divine gnoses and realities
referred to in the authentic or divinely inspired *hadith, "I* have
prepared for the chosen of My slaves something no eye has seen, no ear
has heard and no heart has perceived" and in the Qur'an:

***"So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
their eyes; a reward for what they did" (32:17).***

The least of these truths was such that after seeing reality from both
sides and the true and false aspects of each side, after perceiving in
what manner the one was true and the other false, I was able to
understand how every one of these matters was connected to a point of
reality and *tawhid* ‑ just as the line which is drawn from
circumference of a cycle is connected to the central point. I was also
able to understand the meaning of Allah's words:

***"There is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock; surely
my Lord is on the right path" (11:56)***

and

***"Allah's is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah's purpose" (2:115);***

and the secret contained in the words of the Prophet, "The ways leading
to the Real are as many as the persons in creation".

The saying of the Commander of the Faithful, "Knowledge was no more than
one point ‑ and it was the ignorant who added to it" also became clear
to me. I became as the incipient form before materialization, the form
which is capable of taking on any other form, the form which accepts and
understands any belief structure or desire, such that all was swallowed
up in my boundless existence. This is as the sublime station of the
Prophet when he stood before Allah saying, "O Allah, show me the
realities of the beings of creation just as they are"; this is highest
of the stations of *tawhid* and the most sublime of positions in the
world of unveilings.

***"That is Allah's grace; He grants it to whom He pleases, and Allah is
the Lord of mighty grace" (62:4).***

\`From the poetry of Shaykh Muhyi al‑Din ibn 'Arabi:

Before this I used to deny my friend, for my heart could not accept his
religion.
Now my heart has adopted every shape of belief; It has become a pasture
for the fine‑eyed gazelles and a place of worship for the monk in his
monastery.
It is the temple of idols and also the Ka'bah above which they make the
rounds.
It is the tablets of the Torah and also the book of the Qur'an.
I have drawn close to the religion of love and passion such that From
wherever their caravans leave I set off too ‑ for passion has become my
way of life and faith.

\`After my affirmation of the truth of Sufism, certain persons were
troubled by some of its more abstruse and esoteric aspects with regard
to the Real ‑ such people imagined that I was availing myself of invalid
and other spurious means. May they realize that this was not the case
and that in reality I was only drawing upon the religion of my own
forefathers ‑ the infallible Imams. Because of their extreme ignorance,
the majority of Sufis think that the Imams were devoid of the
excellencies and superior insights of Sufism.

Moreover many Shiahs also believe that the knowledge of their Imams is
restricted to that same knowledge which is in common use amongst
themselves. In fact there is not a single form of knowledge but that the
Imams are the source of that knowledge; there is not a secret or hidden
wisdom but that they are the mine from which it may be extracted; they
are the teachers of the *shari\`ah* and the leaders of the *tariqah* and
the poles of the *haqiqah;* they are the caliphs and the vicegerents of
Allah in the heavens and the earth; they are the manifestation of the
power and majesty of Allah in His *mulk* ‑the earth and heavens ‑ and in
His *malakut ‑ the* realm of the spirits and angels. I swear by God that
if they did not exist, then the heavens would not be standing, the earth
would not be outspread and the creatures would not be living in them.

This is the meaning of Allah's words to His Prophet, "If you were not,
then I would not have created the cosmos"; here what is meant is the
abode of the different creatures. According to the scholars of the
divine sciences, the whole world is maintained in existence by reason of
the reality of the Perfect Man and the planets are kept in orbit by his
very breaths.

Muhyi al‑Din ibn 'Arabi says in his book *Nuskhat al‑Haqq (Copy* of the
Truth): "Allah established the Per­fect Man as the teacher of the angels
and has caused the planets to turn by his life and breath ‑ and this by
reason of his nobility, sublimity and elevated station.' By the
consensus of the nation of Muslims, there are none greater than those
great persons ‑ neither from an intellectual standpoint, nor from
conclusions drawn from the body of the traditions, nor from the station
of unveilings.

\`It was the Prophet's own successor ('Ali) who proclaimed with pride:
"I am the sign and indication of Allah, the All‑Pow­erful and the
Conqueror; I am the reality of the secret truths; I am the leader and
guide of the heavens; I sit with the angels who make praise and with
Gabriel and I am the friend of Mika'il; I am the guide of the planets; I
am the tree of Sandalwood of the planets; I am the guardian of the
thunder and the dazzling lightning; I am the face of Allah, the flank of
Allah, the hand of Allah; I am the first and the last, the manifest and
the hidden." '

Sayyid Amuli also says in his own commentary: \`After under­standing
religion and its associated sciences and after mastering the different
degrees of knowledge with regard both to the intellect and the related
body of *ahadith* (traditions of the Prophet) this study being
undertaken partly in the town of Amul, birth­place and childhood home of
myself and my forefathers, partly in Khurasan and Astarabad, and partly
in Isfahan ‑ I con­tinued to strive until I arrived at the core and
inner meaning of these matters.'

These studies lasted for approximately twenty years until for the
second time I returned from Isfahan to Amul. Here I took up employment
in the service of the just and temperate Padshah Fakhr al‑Dawlah, the
son of Shah Kay‑Khisraw ‑ may Allah grant them both a fair place in the
Garden. Fakhr al‑Dawlah treated me with particular respect and honour
and placed me with those of his entourage who were intimate with him.

After a while he made me one of his most trusted confidants and
thereupon one of his special deputies and chamberlains; he ac­corded me
this special treatment as he himself was descended from Anusharvan,
Yazdagird and Perviz, one of his close relatives being a Padshah by the
name of Ardishir, son of Hasan, the son of Taj al‑Dawlah whom Tahir
al‑Din Faryabi Sha'ir, Siraj al‑Din Qamari and other poets and reciters
of *qasidahs* (odes) would honour and praise in their writings.

\`After some time, the just padshah, the champion of his time, the
living padshah of padshahs, the brave unflinching warrior Fakhr
al‑Dawlah made a request to me. Thus it was that just as Jalal al‑Dawlah
Iskandar and the majestic Sultan Gustaham and Tus Malik came to be
employed in the service of Fakhr al‑Dawlah's brother, I also came to
take up duties in his service. It was not long before ‑ by the blessing
of his company ‑ I acquired such great position and wealth that it is
impossible to imagine. In this way I came to live a life of luxury,
prosperity and honour amongst the people, my friends and my fellow
townsfolk.

\`I passed some time in this state until a desire for the truth, a
desire both instinctive and natural, began to flare up within me and
Allah made me aware of the evil and corruption growing in me as a result
of my ignorance and forgetfulness of Him. It became clear to me that I
was following a way of perversity far from the straight path; it became
manifest to me that I was treading the path of misguidance, close to the
precipice of sin and crime.

It was at this moment that I prayed to the Lord from deep within myself.
I implored him to free me from these actions of mine ‑ all my passion
and desire was to leave this world and its pleasures. I found within
myself that I was ready to turn in the direction of the Real and to set
out on the path of *tawhid* (divine unity).

\`It was for this reason that I no longer wished to keep the company of
those padshahs nor to continue living in my own locality and place of
birth, despite my love of that place; nor too could I continue to sit
with my friends and brothers. It seemed the best thing to do was to
abandon them completely and to move away to a place where I could carry
out those duties necessary for a life devoted to the Real and where the
form of my existence would be of the highest order.

Thus it was that I freed myself forthwith from the rulers, as well as
from the wealth of my sons and of my mother and brothers[^5] and I put
on a patch­ed garment ‑ not worth more than a dirham ‑ that had been
thrown into an alley at the back of the house. It was in this that I set
out via Ray, Qazvin and Isfahan with the intention of making the
pilgrimage and visiting the sacred House of Allah and with the intention
of visiting my forefather, the Messenger of Allah and the infallible
Imams. In this way I arrived in Qazvin where I had previously spent a
long period of my youth amidst wealth and honour.

\`It was because a contract of brotherhood had been made with the young
men of that town (and by this I mean with the group of Sufis) that a
contract was also made between myself and the perfect shaykh, the one of
arrival, Nur al‑Din Tihrani ‑ Tihran being a village on the way to
Isfahan in the region of Dardasht and which is pronounced with the open
\`t' sound by the people in contrast to the Arabic \`t' with which it
was originally spelt.

\`Shaykh Nur al‑Din Tihrani was a gnostic of Allah and an ascetic. All
the people, both the common and the elite, accepted him and became his
disciples. I spent a month, or rather, a little less than a month, in
his company ‑ until he gave me the real patched garment of the Sufis to
wear,[^6] and I came to master the *dhikr* (remembrance of Allah) of the
elite rather than that of the common people; by sitting with him, I was
able ‑ by an al­chemic transmission ‑ to profit greatly, despite the
extreme brevity of my stay.

After this I went on from Isfahan to two other places, namely Aydhaj and
Maliamir, where in company with another man of perfection and spiritual
gnosis, I spent some time while waiting for the caravan to form which
was bound for Baghdad. The caravan never materialized, however, and
this, and the onset of a severe sickness, caused me to return to
Isfahan. After a time, I did finally reach Baghdad and from there I had
the honour of visiting the sacred site of the martyrdom of the
Com­mander of the Faithful, the graves of Husayn, Musa and Jawad
together with the Imams of Samarra. I spent a whole year in these places
before setting out in the direction of the Ka'bah with the intention of
performing the pilgrimage. I was alone and destitute when I set out.

\`Having visited the tombs of the Messenger and the four Imams in
Madinah, I returned to Iraq and in the holy city of Najaf – may Allah
bless those who visit it ‑ I took up residence and busied myself with
spiritual exercises, periods of isolation *(Khal­wah),* worship, and the
seeking of *\`ilm al‑laduni* (knowledge bes­towed by Allah on His slave
through no effort of his own).

There was no one in the region who had knowledge of this kind of
activity and of these states. I associated, however, with a gnostic and
man of perfection of this locality who, although living in obscurity,
was in fact the leader of the saints of Allah; he was known amongst the
people as \`Abd al‑Rahman ibn Ahmad Muqaddasi and although enjoying the
most meagre of means was among the finest and most excellent of the men
of knowledge.

I took to studying *Manazil al‑Sa'irin* (The Stages of the Gnostic
Travellers) together with its commentary, thereafter *Fusus* *al­ Hikam*
(The Bezels of Wisdom), together with its commentary and other books of
the same nature. It was during this period of study that most of the
realities contained in the books on Sufism (including both the simple
and more detailed treatises) were revealed to me with clarity ‑ and this
by the blessing of that holy place, this holy person and the Imams.

Thus it was that I came to write many commentaries, made many notes on
this subject and then wrote several other books. Twenty years have
elapsed since that date and the books which I have written now number
between twenty and twenty‑four; these I catalogued with an index, the
last of the books being a commentary on the Quran.'

Up to this point Sayyid Amuli records in detail the spiritual journey
upwards to his Lord by a process of divine attraction. As for the
journey through the self and the death of desire, he continues the
description of his own states in the introduction of his commentary of
the *Fusus* *al‑Hikam* entitled *Nass al‑Nusus* (The Text of Texts)
(with regards to the second aspect of the *wilayah of* Shaykh Muhyi
al‑Din ibn 'Arabi):

\`I remained for a period in Isfahan occupied with the states *of* the
spiritual path. It was then that, intending to go to Baghdad in order to
visit the places of martyrdom of the Imams, the saints and the shaykhs
of that region, and whilst planning to go to the house of Allah to
perform the *hajj* and to remain forever close to this house, I suddenly
saw one night in a dream that I was standing in the middle of a bazaar.
I perceived that my body was as if dead, wrapped in a white shroud and
fallen flat on the ground.

While trying to discover the cause of this, I was at the same time in a
state of great surprise: how was it that I was both standing and lying
flat on the ground. It was in this state that I awoke. This in fact was
the beginning of the death of desire and the start of my spiritual path
‑ the same death alluded to by the Prophet when he says, "Die before you
die" and the same as that described by the sage who said, "Die by your
own will so that you may live the true and natural life".[^7] God says:

***"Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people, like him whose likeness is
that of one of utter darkness whence he cannot come forth?" (6:122)***

I thanked God for His blessings; it is He who is the cause of eternal
life and constant prosperity:

***"Most surely this is the mighty achievement. For the like of this
then let the workers work). (37:60‑6l )***

\`Likewise I saw again on another occasion that I was sitting in the
shop of some friends. On my back there was copper recep­tacle ornamented
with gold, just like those of the water carriers who would tour the
bazaars pouring water for the people to drink. This receptacle had a
strange mouth; just like that of the large jars which they make out of
fired clay.

I was giving water to those present from this receptacle while at the
same time I was searching for myself. I was also sitting at the same
time as I was standing. Moreover, just as I was giving water to the
people to drink, I would take a drink myself. Because of this strange
picture, I would repeatedly burst out laughing at myself and I felt
great amazement at this state until I finally woke up. This dream was
instrumental in bringing me many tremendous insights.

\`On another occasion, in Isfahan, I saw myself seated holding a
severed head in my hand; at the same time my own head had been severed,
although I had no knowledge of this. I was busy turning and playing with
the head and at any moment would be seized by laughter at this strange
picture, until I finally woke up.

This dream was the means by which I arrived at many of the most precious
spiritual truths; indeed a wealth of the finest insights were revealed
to me as they flowed out from the generosity of the divine unseen. In a
similar dream to this, I heard that my father gave no more nor less than
a thousand dinars to the person who could interpret such dreams, and
this sum was also paid without delay by some of the padshahs by the law
of the exoteric.

As for the inner world of meaning, a thousand things of note and worth,
purer than the finest gold and clearer than the most translucent jewels
promised to man in the Garden, were received from the real Padshah,
namely Allah may He be exalted:

***"That is Allah's grace; He grants it to whom He pleases, and Allah is
the Lord of mighty grace." (62:4);***

***"And none are made to receive it but those who are patient, and none
are made to receive it but those who have a mighty good fortune"
(41:35).***

Such events often occur to myself and our spiritual friends, but despite
being far‑removed from the state of man, they are not extraordinary for
God:

***"And this is not difficult for Allah" ' (14:20).***

At the end of *Muqaddimah Fusus* (An Introduction to the Bezels), which
is about the meaning for him *of* the unveilings and secrets of the
*Fusus* *al‑Hikam,* he describes the holy city of Najaf as being the
cause of openings from the unseen occurring in his heart ‑ just as one
night Makkah became the cause *of* openings for Shaykh Muhyi al‑Din and
thereafter Madinah inspired the Madinan disclosures.

He then goes on to explain the course *of* his own spiritual journey
both in relation to himself and to the cosmos: \`Know that since God has
commanded me to leave everything which is other than Him and to
concentrate the heart completely on Him, there arose in my heart such a
feeling of divine inspiration that I decided to take the noblest and
most sublime locality on earth as my place of residence and worship of
Him.

Thus it was that I set out for Makkah ‑ may Allah increase it in every
way. It would be impossible to contain in a whole set of books the
trials and hardships, the misfortune and toil which I underwent on the
journey from Isfahan to that place. Despite all this, however, the words
of Allah were always on my tongue:

***"And whoever goes forth from his house flying to Allah and His
Apostle, and then death overtakes him, his reward is indeed with Allah
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful" (4:100),***

and also the lines of that gnostic and lover of the Truth who says:

I have left all men for the sake of Your satisfaction.
I have abandoned as orphans my own sons for the sake of Your
witnessing.
Even if You cut me to pieces, my heart would still long for no one but
You.

This was my state when I arrived in Makkah and completed the obligatory
pilgrimage together with all the necessary and supererogatory rites. It
was at this point ‑ in 751 AH ‑ that I conceived the desire and
intention to stay forever in the proxim­ity of that illustrious house.
It was not long, however, that there arose within me the desire to live
in the illuminated city of Madinah and it was for this reason that I set
out for this city, where I visited the tomb of the Messenger of Allah
and conceived the intention of staying within the confines of his
splendid grave. At that moment, however, many obstacles were placed in
my path, the greatest of these being a physical sickness, which made it
necessary for me to return to Iraq and take up residence in the familiar
surroundings of Najaf.

\`Thus I returned without further trouble to this spiritual city and
busied myself with religious exercises, pious seclusion and acts of
worship ‑ of an intensity and severity never before achieved. By this
means, throughout all this period, meanings, gnoses, realities and
truths flowed into my heart from the direc­tion of Allah, the Lord of
the unseen. It would be impossible to' reckon these things for they are
divine utterances and as such cannot be contained within clearly defined
limits.[^8]

God, however, commanded me to reveal some of these gnoses to the elite
of His slaves and so I set about writing a book about divine unity
*(tawhid)* and an explanation of its secrets. Within a short time, I
completed it and named it *Jami'al Asrar wa Manba'al‑Anwar* (Compendium
of Secrets and Source of Lights).

I then wrote two more books called *Risalat al‑ Wujud fi* *ma\`rifat
il‑Ma\`bud* (Treatise on Existences on the Knowledge of the Worshipped
One) and *Risalat al‑Ma\`adfi* *ruju\` al\`Ibad* (Treatise of
Eschatology; on the Return to the Godhead). After these I composed some
forty other books and essays in both Persian and Arabic. It was then
that Allah com­manded me to undertake a commentary of the Qur'an and so,
after completion of the above‑mentioned essays, I composed a work of
seven thick volumes under the title of *Al‑muhit al‑A'zam wa'l‑Tawd
al‑Asham fi* *Ta'wil Kitabillahi 'l‑\`Aziz al‑Muhkam* (The Mighty Ocean
and Lofty Mountain: esoteric exegesis on the clear and precious Book of
Allah).

With the help of the Lord it was completed in the best and most perfect
manner and in the finest and most eloquent language such that no one
surpassed me in this matter, neither in the way it was arranged nor in
the way it was edited.

\`Allah then commanded me to undertake a commentary on the *Fusus*
*al‑Hikam* which is a work directly inspired by His Messenger ‑ it was
the latter who gave it to Shaykh Muhyi al‑Din in a dream saying:
"Communicate it to those slaves who are worthy of it and who are ready
to receive it". Thus I began this work, some thirty years after first
taking up residence in Najaf, in 781 AH and completed it in 782 AH, a
period of one year or less; my age at that time was sixty three
years.'

The rest of what happened to him is described in different places of
his own commentary; it is thus that he says: \`After this activity I
began service with the great shaykh of perfection, the sultan of the
scholars, the Honour of the Truth and the Religion, Abu Mutahhir Hilli.

In his company I studied many of the books which contain both the
foundation and ramifications of the sci­ences of the Family of the
Prophet. The Shaykh bestowed on me a license in which he addresses me as
"Zayn al‑\`Abidin the Sec­ond" ‑ having witnessed something in my
behaviour which caused him to believe that my station was only second to
that of infallibility.

He also issued many other licenses for me ‑ both of a general and
explicit nature ‑ in all the sciences, one of which I shall now give:

The most excellent Sayyid, the great Imam, the worthiest of the
scholars of the world and the most knowledgeable of the noble amongst
men, the guide to those on the spiritual path, the saviour of the souls
of the gnostics, the renewer of the faith and the giver of life to the
way of his forefathers, the one who combines the sciences of tradition
with those of reason, and those of the foundations of juris­prudence
with its branches, the possessor of a purified soul and the courtesy of
a prophet, the pride of the family of the Prophet, which is the object
of the special attention of the Lord of the Worlds, the pillar of the
nation, of the truth and of the religion, Haydar ibn Sayyid al‑Said Taj
al‑Din 'Ali... (including the rest of his genealogy to the Commander of
the Faithful) has read and studied with me in the most scrupulous manner
the following books: the Qur'anic commentary, *Jawami\` al jami\`* by
the great shaykh and protector of the faith, shaykh Tabrisi, *Shari\`ah
al‑Islam* by the great jurist Shaykh Najm al‑Din Muhaqqaq Hilli,
*Manahij al‑Yaqin* concerning the science of theology *(kalam)* by my
father, may Allah have mercy on him, *Tahdhib al‑Ahkam* (An Education of
the Laws) by Shaykh Tayfah Tusi, *Nahj al‑Balaghah by* the Commander of
the Faithful and *Sharh Nahj al‑Balaghah* by the sage Ibn Maytham.

Thus do, I give permission for him to transmit all of these books, just
as I give permission for him to transmit all of his own works and
writings concerning the sciences based both on the traditions and
reason. I also hand over to him all the above‑mentioned books which he
may use with his own direct chain of transmission from them ‑ in
particular the books of my father which he has acquired through me.
Moreover, he has permission to transmit the books of Shaykh Mufid (there
being thus two paths of transmission from himself to Shaykh Mufid)
together with the books of Shaykh Tusi, Sayyid Murtada and all the
*ahadith* transmitted from the family of the Prophet (the "Four Books"),
all with a complete chain of transmission.'

This detailed license *(ijazah)* was given in Ramadan, 761 AH in
Hillah; the Arabic text is in my possession, but for reasons of brevity
I have omitted to mention the full chain of transmission, making do with
a translation and resume of the whole.

After recording this *ijazah* he says: \`This kind of license given to
me with regard to the sciences based on the *ahadith* (traditions) and
on reason is well‑known only amongst the Arabs.' In Rajab 753 AH be was
given a license to teach *Manazil al‑Sa'irin* and *Fusus al‑Hikam,*
together with their commentaries, by \`Abd al­ Rahman ibn Ahmad
al‑Muqaddasi; this license is written in much the same manner as that of
Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin and in it we read: \`I have benefited from him more
than he (Sayyid Amuli) has benefited from me.'

He then mentions a method of *dhikr* (remembrance of Allah) from
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr Simnani. It is possible that he was instructed by
this man himself because he was one his con­temporaries. Sayyid Amuli
goes on to say: \`Some of the *fuqara' ‑* the bereft in Allah ‑ have
explained their own way of *dhikr',* and the following is quoted:

\`This poor fakir Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr Simnani ‑ may God bestow on him
the same as those who receive eternal life after the annihilation of
this world ‑ was instructed in the way (of *dhikr)* by Shaykh Salih
al‑Din Abi'l ­Khayr Shams al‑Din Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn Muhammad Isfahani
and the latter learnt the *dhikr la ilaha illa'llah* on the \`Id al‑Fitr
703 AH in the *khanqah's* assembly (Sufi spiritual retreat) of Samisati
in the Bayt al-Ahzan quarter near the Friday mosque in Damascus from
Shaykh Salih Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr Is­farayni Zayn al‑\` Ibad, the Flag
Bearer of the ascetics, the Honour of the virtuous, the one of constant
*dhikr* in the morning and the evening.

He in turn learnt it from Shaykh Sayf al‑Din Abu'l­Mu'ali ibn Mutahhir
ibn Said Badarzay and he from the Shaykh and Pole of the Age,
Abu'l‑Janab Najm al‑Din Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah Khiyuqi, the
same Shaykh Najm al‑Din al‑Kubra, one of the poles of the "golden"
chains of trans­mission (indeed any "golden" chain of transmission
connected to him is known as a "major golden chain"); the latter in turn
received it from Shaykh Isma'il Qasri and he from Shaykh Muhammad ibn
Mankil who got it from Shaykh Daud ibn Muhammad known as the Servant of
the Poor.

The latter re­ceived it from 'Abbas ibn Idris who got it from
Abu'l‑Qasim ibn Ramadam who in turn got it from Abu Ya'qub Tabrisi, from
Abu \`Abdullah ibn \`Uthman, from Abu Ya'qub Nahrjuri, from Abu Ya'qub
Susi, from \`Abd al‑Wahid ibn Zayd, from Kamil ibn Ziyad Nakh'i (may God
be content with them all), from the Commander of the Faithful, from the
Messenger of Allah, from Gabriel the Guardian of Revelation, from the
Lord of Power may He be exalted.’[^9]

Sayyid Amuli describes the method of instruction of the *dhikr:*
\`Transmission of the *dhikr* takes on a distinct form and order amongst
the people of this science'; a concise description is con­tained in the
detailed *ijazah of* the above‑mentioned fakir, namely Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr Simnani; in it we see an affirmation of the transmission of the
following *hadith* by the Sufi shaykhs: \`One day 'Ali came in to see
the Messenger of Allah saying: "Instruct me in the way which leads
quickest to Allah and which is the most acceptable to Him and the way
which is easiest for His slaves."

He replied: "O 'Ali, may you be blessed in that which has come to you by
way of prophethood." 'Ali then asked: "And what is that, O Messenger of
Allah?" He replied: *"Dhikr* of Allah." He then said: "If the excellence
of *dhikr is so* great, then all the people would make *dhikr* of
Allah." He replied: "Abandon such thoughts ‑ the Day of Resurrection
will not take place so long as there is someone on the earth saying
\`Allah Allah.'

He then said: "O 'Ali, be silent. I will say this *dhikr* to you three
times and you should listen; when I am silent, you should then say it so
that I may hear it from you." Thus it was in this way that the Messenger
of Allah instructed 'Ali in the way of *dhikr,* who then transmitted it
to Hasan al‑Basri, to Habib al‑\`Ajami ‑ to Da'ud al‑Ta'i, to Ma'ruf
al‑Karkhi, to Sid al­ Saqti, to Junayd al‑Baghdadi, to Mimshad Daynuri,
to Ahmad Aswad Daynuri, to Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah Bakari Suhrawardi,
known as \`Awami, to Qadi Wajih al‑Din \`Umar ibn Muhammad Bakari, to
Abu'l‑Najib \`Abd al‑Qahir Suhrawardi, to Shihab al‑Din \`Umar ibn
Muhammad Suhrawardi Bakari, to Mu'in al‑Din, one of the companions of
the Shaykh of the Shaykhs of the land of Rum (the west or Byzantine), to
Ahmad ibn Mas'ud in the town of Konya, one of the shaykhs of my father
and forefathers, who then transmitted it to myself, the fakir, Muhammad
ibn Abi Bakr Simnani on the 10 Jumada al‑Ula in 731 AH.'

As for the taking on of the patched robe, this has been trans­mitted
from the Commander of the Faithful in various chains of transmission. He
goes on to say: \`The *kharqah ‑ the* patched garment ‑ both among the
common and the elite is an expression of the secret of *wilayah*
(intimacy with Allah) and the hidden wisdom of *tawhid.*

This *wilayah* and wisdom was bestowed by Allah on Adam' (as we have
explained earlier); he continues: \`As for an investigation into the
relationship of the *kharqah* to the Commander of the Faithful and his
infallible progeny ‑ both in the outer realm of the manifest and in the
inner realm of meaning ‑ then it is as follows: \`as for what is
manifest, I am Rukn al‑Din Haydar, the son of Sayyid Taj al‑Din...' and
the ancestry here given is the same as that stated earlier.

As for the realm of meaning, the account of his own childhood, spiritual
development and his donning of the outer *kharqah* has already been
mentioned; he himself says: \`Most of the chains of transmis­sion of the
*kharqah* come through Junayd al‑Baghdadi, as he was the leader of a
community, the Shaykh of a spiritual order and lived soon after the time
of the infallible Imams."[^10]

He then relates the chain of transmission of the patched robe of the
perfected shaykh Sa'd al‑Din Hamawi and thereafter the chain of the
gnostic and *muhaqqiq* (he who has arrived at the station of inner
truth) Shihab al‑Din Suhrawardi according to the license that he had
given to some of his own disciples ‑ a chain which stretches back in
three different paths of transmission to the Commander of the
Faithful.

He quotes this license given by Shaykh Shihab al‑Din to his disciples
saying: \`Know that the way of the Sufis has two aspects: the aspect of
company and that of the patched robe. As for the aspect of company, I
trace my relationship to my shaykh, Shaykh al‑Islam Muhammad ibn Hamawi
who himself held company with Khidr. As for the aspect of my *kharqah,*
know that Muham­mad ibn Hamawi took it on from his grandfather Imam
Muham­mad ibn Hamawi... from Ibn 'Ali Farmadi, from the pole of the age
Abu'l‑Qasim Gargani, from Ma'ruf al‑Karkhi, from 'Ali ibn Musa al‑Rida
and the latter took it on from the Seal of the Prophets (Muhammad).

Shaykh Shihab al‑Din Suhrawardi, known as Abu Hafs says: "My paternal
uncle Shaykh al‑Islam Abu'1‑Najib Dia' al‑Din \`Abd al‑Qahir \`Abdullah
ibn Muhammad Suhrawardi invested me with the patched robe and he himself
was invested with it by his paternal uncle Wajih al‑Din Muhammad known
as \`Amawiyya... and he, by two great shaykhs, the first Akhi Faraj
al‑Din... whose chain of transmission reaches to 'Ali ibn Musa al‑Rida
and the second by his father Muhammad ibn \`Amawiyya from Shaykh Aswad
Daynuri whose chain also reaches to 'Ali ibn Musa al‑Rida.’[^11]

In the same book *Al‑Muhit al‑A\`zam,* he relates how, besides the
chain of transmission of the patched robe of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
Simnani, he also took on another *kharqah* from the hand of Shaykh Nur
al‑Din Tihrani: \`I (Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr), the shaykh of the shaykhs
of Abu'l‑Hasan ibn \`Umar ibn Abi l‑Hasan, have been invested with the
*kharqah* from \`Imad al‑Din \`Umar ibn Abi'l‑Hasan 'Ali ibn Muhammad
Hamawi and he held company with his grandfather Imam Muhammad ibn Hamawi
(this being an indication that Sayyid Amuli also took on the *kharqah*
from the hand of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr Sim­nani).'

In conclusion he says: \`My arriving at the Truth and my unveilings
were not dependent on the above; my arrival was first and foremost
because of God rather than on account of my own spiritual progress. I
was a *majdhub ‑ a* person intoxicated by divine attraction ‑ amongst
spiritual travelers: I was of the beloved of Him rather than of those
who love Him and the former have precedence over the latter ‑ just like
the prophets, the saints and their followers in the correct path for
Allah says: "Those who have been recorded with good deeds from Ourselves
they are far removed from the bad"; I had achieved the desired goal
through the care and grace of God, not through any action on my part nor
through any knowledge I possessed.’[^12]

Up to this point we have described the life of this great gnostic
Sayyid Haydar Husayni Amuli, the pole of the gnostic cosmos and the moon
in the heaven of glory and sublimity up to the year 782 AH, using his
own words of truth and drawing from different places from a variety of
his works.

Many of the works of this great gnostic resemble the name of the
fabulous Simurgh; nothing remains of them but their titles. From 782 AH
onwards we have no information about the life of this sage. We know
nothing about when and where he died ‑ except that he wrote a book
entitled *Risalah fi'l‑\`Ulum il‑\`Aliyya'* (A Treatise concerning the
Sublime Sciences) in 787 AH, and as Sahib Dhari'ah has noted: \`In it is
mentioned that it was written after the book *Muntakhab al‑Ta'wil* (An
Anthology of Hermeneutics),' but other than this we have no other
information or indication of any date.

As for the body of gnostic writings he has left us, it is better that I
describe them by quoting from his own illuminating words which are the
truest and most appropriate record of the matter; indeed his work is as
a burning torch in the darkness of history and a shining lamp in the
darkened hearts of the ignorant.

In the introduction of *Nass al‑Nusus* (The Text of Texts) he himself
says, after the opening section entitled \`The historical circumstances
related to the writing of the books':

1. Realize, O seeker of knowledge, that God painted the eye of the
heart with the light of guidance and success after I finished writing
*Majma'al‑Asrar wa Manba'al‑Anwar* (Collection of Secrets and the Source
of Lights);[^13] this work contains an explanation of *tawhid* (the
unity of Allah) and the hidden truths, which are connected to *tawhid*
(general definitions, classifications, states of doubt and ambiguity,
subtleties and points of wisdom, secrets and indications), and a
description of how *tawhid* may be defined in terms of divine *tawhid*
or existential *tawhid.*

It also shows how the science of *tawhid* may be divided in another way,
namely into the *tawhid* of essence, of attribute and of action, or to
express this otherwise, the *tawhid* of knowledge, of experience and of
absolute truth; thereafter follows a clarification of these matters with
respect to prophethood, to the message of prophecy and to *wilayah;* in
conclusion there is an investigation into the *shari\`ah, tariqah* and
*haqiqah* together with an investigation into submission, faith and
certainty accompanied by appropriate examples.

2. I then undertook *Risalat al‑Wujud fi* *Ma\`rifat al‑Ma\`bud*
(Treatise on Existence; on the Knowledge of the Deity) concern­ing the
nature of existence ‑ with respect to absolute, acciden­tal and
necessary existence and also with respect to the oneness of existence,
the manifest existence and the plurality of existence. In this work I
have proved that He, that is

***"Existence", is the necessarily existent by His essence and that He
necessarily cannot be conceived as non‑existent; I have also shown that
that which is in the outward is not other than Him for "He is the First
and the Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the Knower of hidden
things, and He is Cognizant of all things" (57:3).***

3. After this I completed *Risalal al‑Ma\`adfi* *Ruju\`il‑\`Ibad*
(Treatise of Eschatology, on the Return to the Godhead) together with a
study of those matters pertaining to the Last Day and the rising from
the grave, according to its three aspects: the minor day of rising, the
intermediate day and the major day – and a proof of these according to
the twelve risings of the outward and inward within the balanced
framework of the cosmos as a whole and within that of the human self.

4. I then finished *Al‑Usul wa 'l‑Arkan fi* *tahdhibi 'l‑Ashab wa‘l
Ikhwan* (Principles and Pillars, concerning the Reform of the Companions
and Brothers). This work describes the five princi­ples of belief, and
each belief is examined with regard to the three classifications of
*shari\`ah, tariqah* and *haqiqah,* and the five pillars of the religion
(prayer, fasting, alms tax, pilgrimage and *jihad ).*
* *
5. I then completed *Risalat al‑I1m* (Treatise of Knowledge) which
deals with the three groups of men, namely the Sufis, the sages, and the
scholastic theologians *(mutakallimun);* in it I de­scribe the different
spheres of knowledge of the three groups, including the principles,
major subject matters and finer points associated with each.

6. There then followed the *Risalat al‑\`Aql wa 'l‑Nafs* (Treatise on
the Intellect and the Soul) which contains an examination of the
difference between the intellect and the soul ‑ with regard to both the
particular and the general ‑ together with an inves­tigation into other
related matters.

7. ... thereafter *Al‑Amanat al‑ilahiyah fi* *tayin al‑khilafat al
­rabaniyyah* (Divine Trusteeship in Man, determining the Divine
Caliphate) which is concerned with the *ayah:*

***"Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth..."
(33:72)***

and offers an explanation of why the mention of the injustice and
ignorance of man is as a form of praise of the highest order on behalf
of Allah ‑ in contrast to those shortsighted persons who think that this
*cyah* refers to the disgrace and ignominy of man.[^14]

8. *... Al‑Hujub wa Khulasatu 'l‑Kutub* (The Veils and Quintessence of
Books), containing a study of the *ayah:*

***"Then thrust him into a chain the length of which is seventy cubits"
(69:32),***

an expla­nation of the saying of the Prophet, "There are seventy
thousand veils of light and darkness before God...", and a comparison of
these two statements. Such a comparison presents considerable
difficulties, especially with regard to the whole sum and its parts,
with regard to the parallel drawn between the Qur'an and the Prophetic
traditions and with regard to the phrases "a thousand years," "five
thousand years" and "three hundred thousand years"; such metaphors are
similar to the statement of one of the great shaykhs: "I am two years
younger than my Lord", and that of another: "Between myself and my Lord
there is no differ­ence except that I come first in the state of
slavery."

*9. ...Risalat al‑Faqr wa Tahqiq al‑Fakhr* (Treatise on Poverty and the
Fulfilment of Glory) containing a comparison of the three *ahadith
related from* the Prophet concerning *faqr ‑ poverty:* "Poverty is *my*
honour and by it I gain distinction over the rest of the prophets and
messengers" and "Poverty means blackness of face in the two worlds" and
"Poverty brings one almost to a state of unbelief *(kufr)."*[^15]
* *
10. *...Risalat al‑Asma'i‑Ilahi wa Ta’yin al‑Mazahiruha min al­-Ashkhas
al‑Insaniyah* (Treatise on the Divine Names and Identifi­cation of their
Epiphanies among Human Beings) which deals with the prophets from Adam
to Muhammad ‑ may peace be upon them.

11. * . ...Risalat al‑Nafs fi* *Ma\`rifat al‑Rabb* (Treatise of the
Soul; on the Knowledge of God) which contains the saying of the Prophet:
"Whoever knows himself knows his Lord" and which is composed in the
light of the words of Allah:

***"And He is with you wherever you are (57:3)***

and

***"And in your own souls (too); will you not then see?" (51:21).***

12. *...Asrar al‑Shari\`ati wa Anwar al‑Haqiqah* (Mysteries of the Law
and Lights of the Truth) containing a description of each by the people
of each group ‑ just as Allah says:

***"For every one of you did We appoint a law and a way" (5:48)***

and just as the Prophet has said: "The law *(shari\`ah) is* my speech,
the spiritual way *(tariqah)* my work and the truth *(tariqah)* my inner
state.[^16]

13. *...Risalat al-Jadawal* (Treatise of the Diagrams) also entitled
*Madarij al‑Salikin fi* *Maratib al‑\`Arifin* (Degrees of the pilgrims,
concerning the Ranks of the Gnostics) describing the hundred basic
stations of the journeying and the thousand subordinate grades, drawn
from a cycle ofone hundred divisions each contain­ing ten grades:

14 *. ...Naqd al‑Nuqud fi* *Ma\`rifat al‑Wujud* (Final Examination of
the Knowledge of Existence) which is a selection from our *Risalat
al‑Wujud.*[^17]
* *
*15. ...Muntaqa al‑Ma\`ad* fi *Murtada il‑\`Ibad* (A Quintessential
Es­chatology of the Chosen One amongst the Slaves) which is a selection
from our work *Al‑Ma\`ad.*
* *
*16. ...Risalat al‑Tanbih fi* *l‑Tanzih* (Treatise of Advice in the *via
negations) which,* as is clear (by its title), is about Allah ‑ may He
be exalted.

17 *. ... Amthalat al‑Tawhid wa Abniyat al‑Tajrid* (Examples of Divine
Unity and the Principles of Divestment) after the manner of the book
*Lama\`at \`Iraqi.*[^18]
* *
18. *... Risalatu Kanz al‑Kanuz wa Kashf al‑Rumuz* (Treatise of the
Treasure of Treasures and the Unveiling Symbols).

19. *... Nihayat al‑ Tawhid* fi *Bidayat at‑ Tajrid* (The Conclusion of
Divine Unity in the Beginning of Divestiment) which is a selec­tion from
*Jami \`al‑Asrar* and *Manba \`al‑Anwar.*
* *
20. *…. Tayin al‑Aqtab wa 'l‑Awtad* (Identification of the Poles and
Supports) containing mention of nineteen persons (seven great prophets
and twelve Imams) ‑ no more nor less (neither three hundred nor forty
nor seven nor three nor one) since the number is nineteen with regard to
the station of realization; I have also composed a further forty or so
writings in a similar vein, in both Arabic and Persian.

21*.* ...after completion of the above mentioned works ‑ during a long
period extending over thirty years ‑ I wrote a commen­tary on the Qur'an
entitled *Al‑Muhit al‑A\`zam wal‑Tawd al­ Ashamm fi* *Ta'wil Kilab
illahi 'l‑\`Aziz al‑Muhkam* (The Mighty, Ocean and Lofty Mountain;
esoteric exegesis of the clear and precious Book of Allah), comprising
seven large volumes.

I com­posed it in the manner of the great shaykh Najm al‑Din Razi, known
as "Dayah", who wrote a further six volumes of his book after completing
the volume called *Bahr al‑Haqa'iq wa Manba' al‑Daqa'iq* (The Sea of
Truths and Source of Subtleties). Our commentary is also written in
accordance with the *hadith* of the Prophet which says "The Qur'an has
an outer and an inner aspect: as for the inner there is always another
aspect within this ‑ extending to seven inner aspects"; all of the
.great and well‑known figures of spiritual realization and all those
intimate with these matters affirm that this work has no equal, in
particu­lar with respect to Qur'anic knowledge. Moreover, this work is
not a product of any effort of any effort on my part, but rather it is
the result of the outpourings from the unseen ‑ from the Beneficent
Himself.[^19]

22. After completion of all these writings a group of persons of
perspicacity together with a number of eminent men of Allah were
exceedingly desirous that I write for them a commentary on the *Fusus
al‑Hikam...* and this work is the same *Nass al‑Nusus fi* *Sharh
al‑Fusus* (The Text of Texts Elucidating the Bezels) men­tioned at the
beginning of the introduction.'

These are books and essays *(Rasa'il)* written by Sayyid Amuli up to
*782* AH and which have been described by his own hand in the
introduction to the *Nass al‑Nusus ‑ the* commentary on the Fusus
*al‑Hikam* of Shaykh Muhyi al‑Din Ibn 'Arabi.

He has made no reference to any other essays, but other works written
in his graceful hand have been recorded by the bibliog­raphers:

23. *Risalat al‑Ta'wilat* (Treatise of Spiritual Hermeneutics), a work
of Qur'anic commentary which is a selection from the book *Al‑Bahr
al‑Khadm* (The Great Sea) and which is also known as *Muntakhab
al‑Ta'wil* (Extract of Hermeneutics).

24. *Masa'il al‑Amulial* (Amuli Questions), a copy of which,
con­sisting of approximately six pages and written in the hand of the
author, exists in the Central University Library of Tehran (under the
file no. *1022);* in it he says: \`These treatises are concerned with
questions of jurisprudence and take the form of questions, posed by
myself (on various occasions), and the corresponding answers in the form
of legal opinions *(fatwas)* by the great Shaykh, the sultan of the
scholars of the earth, the honour of the Arab and non‑Arab alike, the
example and model of realization for the whole or creation, the object
of special favour by the Lord of the Worlds, the Imam and eminent
scholar, Fakhr al‑Haqq wa 'l‑Millat wa 'l‑Din, the son of \`Allamah
Hilli; the first of these interviews took place at the end of the month
of Rajah in *759* AH in the town of Hillah; I, the questioner, am the
slave and fakir Haydar ibn \`Ali ibn Haydar al‑\`Alawi al‑Husayni
al‑Amuli.'

The questions are twelve in number and cover a variety of sub­jects in
the realm of theology and jurisprudence. They, together with the
accompanying treatises, are all in Arabic and all are written in the
hand of Sayyid Amuli; the replies in the form of *fatwas* are in the
hand of Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin Hilli; the date of the writing of the
*Masa'd is 761* and the other *risalahs 762* AH.[^20]

25. *Risalatu fi'l‑\`Ulum al‑\`Aliyah* (Treatise on the Sublime
Sci­ences), related by the author of *Al‑Dhari\`ah* and composed and
written in 787 AH.[^21]

As for the other treatise which have been attributed to him in such
bibliographies as *\`Iyan al‑Shi \`ah, Idah al‑Maknun* (The Unveil­ing
of the Hidden), *Majalis al‑Mu'minin* (The Gatherings of the Believers),
*Mu\`ajam al‑Mu'alifin* (The Encyclopaedia of Authors), *Fuwa'id
al‑Ridawayah* (The Benefits of al‑Rida), *Hadiyat al‑Arifin* (The
Guidance of the Gnostics), *Rawdat al jannah* (The Meadow of Paradise),
*Al‑Dhari\`atu* (The Dhari'ah), *Rayhan al‑Adab* (The Scent of
Courtesy), and others it should be said that it cannot be ascertained
for certain whether they are actually his works or not; indeed there is
more evidence to indicate the contrary; the following is a list of such
works:

26. *Rafi\`at al‑Khilaf \`an Wajh Sukut Amir al‑Mu'minin \`an
al‑Ikhtilaf* (Justification for the First Imam's attitude to the three
first Caliphs).[^22]

*27. Risalat al‑Mu\`tamid min al‑Manqul fi‑ma Awha ila al‑Rasul*
(Treatise of the Trustworthy Narrations concerning the Revela­tions to
the Messenger).

28. *Risalat al‑Zad al‑Musafirin* (The Treatise of the Travellers'
Provision).

*29. Lubb al‑Istilahat al‑Sufyah* (Kernel of Sufi Terms) ‑ which is a
selection of the *Istilahat* of Kamal al‑Din \`Abd al‑Razzaq
al‑Kashani.

30. *Kitab al‑Kashkul fi‑ma jara li'l Alil‑Rasul* (Album of Events
concerning the Family of the Prophet) which has already been
mentioned.

If these works had actually been written by him, then he would have
mentioned them in the introduction to *Nass al‑Nusus ‑ in* particular
*al‑Kashkul* which dates from 735 AH. *Nass al‑Nusus* was composed in
782 AH; if we examine the rest of the books from this perspective, then
it is clear, just as it is clear at first glance to those who are
familiar with the style of Sayyid Amuli, which of the works are actually
his and which are merely attributed to him: \`Whenever we scrutinize a
particular art, it seems that art belongs to a particular person.'

In conclusion we should not forget that *Asrar al‑Shari\`ah is* twice
mentioned by Sayyid Amuli in *Jami \`al‑Asrar;* as we have seen from
above list many of the works of Sayyid Amuli are either shortened
versions of his own books or ‑ to use the language of the logicians ‑
they are either complete abridge­ments or abridgements with regard to
one aspect only; thus the content of one of his books may closely
resemble that of another, or the structure of one may reflect that
another.

Thus, for exam­ple, the important work *Ta'wilat Qur'an al‑Karim* (The
Hermeneu­tics of the Noble Qur'an), which I read in the Mar'ashi library
in Qum, usually treats the *ayat* according to the same three levels,
namely *shari\`ah, tariqah* and *haqiqah,* and the text of *Asrar
al­Shari'ah is* almost always perceptible throughout the whole of the
commentary.

Similarly, the book *Jami \` al‑Asrar* revolves around the three levels
of *tawhid* ‑ essence, attribute and action ‑ to­gether with *tawhid of*
knowledge, experience and truth, a study of prophethood, prophecy and
*wilayah,* a study of *shari\`ah, tariqah,* and *haqiqah,* and the
subjects *of* submission *(islam),* faith *(iman)* and certainty
*(iqan).* The *Risalat al‑Ma\`ad,* which is about the resurrection of
God's slaves, contains amongst other matters the three‑tiered aspect of
the day of rising ‑the minor, intermediate and the major ‑ which has
already been dealt with in a more comprehensive manner in *Asrar
al‑Shari\`ah.*

Similarly, the book *Usul* *wa'l‑Arkan* (Principles and Pillars) is an
abridge­ment of this same book and the abridged text of *Risalat
al‑Hujub* (The Treatise of the Veils) is to be found in the chapter
concern­ing the Day of Resurrection, just as the subjects of prophecy
and the Final Day are dealt with in *Risalat al‑Asma'* (Treatise of the
Names) in an abridged and different form. *Risalat al‑Tanbih* (Treatise
of Advice) explains the three levels of divine unity, and *Risalat
al‑Wujud* (Treatise of Existence) ‑ in particular in the introduction ‑
deals with many of the questions of *tawhid,* albeit in a different
manner.

Thus this precious work contains the subject matter for seven or eight
of his main books of research into the divine truths; it contains the
finest selection of Sayyid Amuli's ideas, both with regard to the
Islamic system of belief and to the acts of worship ‑ drawn from the
Possessors of Divine Inspiration, the pillars of divine unity, the
store‑houses of boundless knowledge, namely the infallible Imams ‑ drawn
by way of unveilings and witnes­sing after long years of divine
attraction, spiritual exercises and acts of worship and then set down in
this book at the command of Allah as if without any effort on his
part.

*Shari'ah, tariqah* and *haqiqah‑are different* names indicating one
truth ‑ namely the pattern of behaviour of Muhammad. Each, however, has
its own specific realm of meaning: just as the almond consists of a
shell, an outer skin and the kernel, so the shell is as the *shari\`ah,*
the outer skin the *tariqah* and the kernel the *haqiqah* ‑ the inner
core; the almond as a whole embraces all three.

In the *Majallah* (Place of Manifestation) of Ibn Abi Jamhur and *Bahr
al‑Ma\`arif* (Sea of Gnosis) by Mulla \`Abd al‑Samad Hamdani prayer is
treated as consisting of three different levels: *khidmah* (service),
*qurbah* (a drawing closer through humility) and *wuslah* (union);
*khidmah is* thus on a level with *shari\`ah* and the physical actions
of the prayer, *qurbah* on a level with t*ariqah* and the concentration
of the heart during prayer, and *wuslah* on a level with *haqiqah* and
the core meaning of prayer; all three are also contained in the word
prayer. Sayyid Amuli also says in *Jami\` al‑Asrar: \`Shari'ah is* on a
par with the divine message, *tariqah* with the prophecy and *haqiqah*
with *wilayah* (intimacy with Allah); all accept these truths: anyone
who rejects them or who rejects just one of them is an unbeliever.'

Therefore, do not deny something simply because you cannot understand
it. It is by purifying the heart of the impediments and troubles caused
by this world, and by deep reflection on the words of these great people
that the outward meaning of what they are saying will become
comprehensible to you; this is be­cause their speech comes from the
world of witnessing and vision and not from the realm of mere knowledge
and explanation; however much one tries to express this state in the
language of knowledge and explanation, it is never more than secret
com­pounded upon secret; God himself says:

***\`And they do not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him'
(6:91).***

Imam Ahmad Ghazali has said: \`Anyone who has no portion of *tawhid,*
then I fear for him that the outcome of his affair will be a bad one ‑
that is his final seal and judgment on death will be as one of the
unfortunate'; the minimum portion is that he accept and submit to the
people of realization ‑ who are the saints or friends of Allah.

Our Imams have also said: \`To deny is to cover up the truth: those who
speak of the essence, the attributes and the actions of God are speaking
only in order to increase our aware­ness and to encourage us'; in fact
nobody really understands the *wali* (the intimate friend of Allah) and
the attributes of the *wali* but the *wali* himself the unripe cannot
encompass the ripe so it is better to be brief and say: Peace!

The denial of those who deny is merely a physical response to what they
hear: their very efforts not to understand such matters are all‑powerful
and all contentment and submission have been extinguished in them. Since
this group live on the level of the senses, they are incapable of
understanding anything but tangible things; they are incapable of going
beyond this level.

Since the worm is hidden in the apple, it knows nothing but that as its
world and heaven.

If they were to step out of the prison of the senses into the world of
the heart, they would perceive that:

The heavens are contained in the wali whose divine Inti­macy causes the
ordering of this world's heaven.

Most of mankind is in the station of those who are anxious for their
sustenance, who are greedy and miserly, and who are caught up in all the
material aspects of the world. Imam Baqir has said:

Most men are beasts and *four‑footed animals ... .*

Open the eye of your heart that you may see the soul and the unseen.

If you enter the realms of divine passion, you will see all horizons as
a garden.

Rise above all the people of this world by your intent and look around
the heavens.

The heart wants that which you see and that which your heart wants you
shall see.

The heart will see its sun in every splitting of the atom. If you give
everything you have with passion, then call me an unbeliever if you ever
suffer loss in your desiring. If the soul burns up with the fire of
passion, then you will see passion as the elixir of the soul.

Travel beyond the confines of this life and see the vastness of His
kingdom beyond space.

Let your ear listen to what it has not heard and your eye see what it
has not seen, until it leads you to where you see the One of the world
and all the worlds.

Express your passion for the One from your heart and soul until you see
Reality with the eye of certainty:

There is only One and nothing but Him, He is Alone and there is no god
but Him.[^23]

It is for this reason that the teaching shaykhs always warn their
students and disciples against denying the people of Allah saying: The
expressions of these people are obscure; it is hard to understand them
when they talk about their thoughts and intentions because such matters
are far removed from the minds of ordinary people.

Shaykh Mahmud Shabistari comments in the following way: \`The saints of
this path, both before (Muham­mad) and after (him) have given
indications of their inner experiences. When they became aware of the
parameters of the self, they described both the one who acquires
knowledge and the source of this knowledge. Since each man's speech is a
reflection of his station, the common people find it difficult to
understand this variety of experience.'

Shaykh Sa'd al‑Din Hamawi said to some of his own disciples: \`Do not
be duped by the variety of terms, and do not be negligent of their inner
meanings, for on the day when the people are raised from their graves
and when that which was hidden in their breasts becomes known, when the
great plain of the Last Day encloses all of mankind, out of every
thousand persons who are raised up, nine hundred and ninety nine of them
will be killed by the sword of those expressions or by the arrow of
those indications ‑ blood will be split on the necks of those very
people who were careless with regard to the meanings, who pursued the
way of rejection and denial and abandoned the edifice of knowledge.'

Allah will forgive the person who desired that his actions be just and
who, with the help of his intellect, avoided any dispute because he
realized that he had no knowledge in these matters; this is the way of
the spiritually advanced *(salihun)* and the sincere of His slaves. He
says:

***\`Those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it; those are
they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the men of
understanding' (39:18)***[^24]

It remains to me to thank those at the Cultural Studies and Research
Institute of the Islamic Iranian Academy of Philosophy and all those
who, whatever the circumstances have a passion for Islamic texts and who
have a profound love for the truths of gnosis ‑ all those who by the
music of spirituality awakened my lifeless heart and broken spirit after
an extended period away from any research of this nature. I have
completed this introduc­tion with the desire that it be of particular
interest to the honoured scholars and researchers of this institute.

I have added to it a list of contents which shows in detail the
principles on which each section is based, principles which are as it
were the links in the golden chain of this divine religion and which
reflect the progression from *shari\`ah,* through *tariqah* to *haqiqah.
I* hope that I have managed to portray the beauty, radiance and
splendour of these gnostic truths and subtleties which issue from behind
the subtle veils of that garden of profundities, that abode of
magnificence and elegance (which is the heart). I desire as reward for
my efforts nothing but increase in God's grace and generosity, nothing
but illumination by the lights of the Muhammadi realm and nothing but
spiritual assistance on the path from Sayyid Haydar \`Alawi. It is thus
that I present this brief work as a service to Allah who is reward can
only be received in the next world.

This introduction was completed in the evening of the first of Muharram
1403 after the *hijrah,* lunar dating (26 Mehr 1361 AH, solar dating); I
ask Allah that He bless all those who under­took that *hijrah.*
* *
Sing the song of goodness in this echoing dome of the world.
For it shall return your song generously after death.

Muhammad Khajavi (26/7/1362 AH solar dating)


Postscript
----------


The burial place of Sayyid Amuli is to be found in the town of Amul, at
the lower end of the bazaar in a quarter known as Buqayye Mir Haydar
(\`Say Tan'); the building contained therein dates from the Seljuk
period and the dome resembles that of Baba Rukn al‑Din Shirazi, the
renowned gnostic who died in 769 AD in Isfahan. On two small doors on
either side of the building is written in Arabic: \`Construction of this
revered burial ground was undertaken on the instructions of the Pole of
the men of spiritual realization and the Proof of the spiritual
travelers, Sayyid \`Izz al‑Din ibn Sayyid Baha' al‑Din Amuli.' Again I
express the hope that God willing, in the future, the illuminated visage
of Sayyid Amuli will reveal itself more clearly to us from the dark
mirror of history.

[^1]: 'Ali is the yamin (right hand) of Allah, guarded by the army of
Truth. The phrase ashab al yamin (the Companions of the Right Hand)
indicates none other than the people of 'Ali.

[^2]: It was with much charm and kindness that the employees of this
fine library put a photocopy of the work at my disposition. The director
of the library also supplied me with a copy of Al‑Muhit al‑A\`zam. (The
Mighty Ocean), which had been handwrit­ten by the author himself this is
the only copy which exists in Iran ‑the only other extant copy is in the
library of Najaf ‑ and I shall subsequently refer to it. When my eyes
fell on the amber‑like calligraphy of this sayyid, written as it were in
the ink of the Cathay musk deer, they brightened with joy, and on a
thorough reading I was apprised of his knowledge of the chains of
transmission, of his way of the patched garment and granting of
permission to his students.

[^3]: The reason for my forgetfulness was that I was totally absorbed in
correcting the books of commentary of Sadr al‑Muta'lihin The Core of the
Divine Gnostics ‑ which number fourteen detailed volumes ‑ and Kitab
Mafatih al‑Ghaib (Book of Keys to the Unseen). The latter is the last
introduction to the commentary of this great commentator and the key to
understanding the deeper meanings of the Qur'an.

[^4]: This strife ‑ mostly occurring in the Karkh area of Baghdad
inhabited by the Shiahs ‑ was caused by political motives, according to
historical testimonies (in particular that of al‑Kamil Ibn Athir).

[^5]: Thus acting in accordance with the ayah: \`Say: If your fathers
and your sons and your brethren and your mates and your kinsfolk and
property which you have acquired, and the slackness of trade which you
fear and dwellings which you like, are dearer to you than Allah and His
Apostle and striving in His way, then wait till Allah brings about His
command; and Allah does not guide the transgressing people' (9:24).

[^6]: With regard to the patched robe, he himself says in AI‑Muhit al‑A
zam (The Mighty Ocean): \`This garment which is well‑known amongst the
common and elite of the muwahhidin ‑ those who affirm the unity of Allah
‑ is an indication of the secret of wilayah ‑ friendship with Allah ‑
and the secret wisdom of tawhid which came from Allah by means of
Gabriel to Adam and then to his son Seth: this wilayah was transmitted
as an inner reality by means of this lineage. Thereafter, it was
transferred to Noah through a chain of prophets and saints (awliya)
until it reached the Mahdi, may Allah speed his appearance on earth.
With the Mahdi this transmission came to an end and it is for this
reason that he is the seal of the awliya'. Thus the patched garment is
not an indication, as the ignorant maintain, of something made of wool
or cotton or the like ‑ all are aware that the outer garment itself is
not an indication of tile taking on of the qualities of human perfection
‑ rather it is connected to the right‑guidance of the prophets, saints
and the great amongst the shaykhs and men of perfection. As an
explanation of the taking on of the inner meaning of the way of these
great men ‑ through an embodiment of their character and qualities and
obedience to: their way of life ‑ the patched garment is a term both
noble and subtle; thus it is that God says: \`Say: If you love Allah
then follow me, Allah will love you, (3:31).'

[^7]: That is according to the divine pattern or sunnah which holds sway
over nature; this means that those whose desire has not died are,
according to the natural pattern of life, themselves dead. This pattern
of nature is an order of interconnected harmony based on wisdom and the
whole cycle of beneficence is as a spark from the inner divine order.

[^8]: This is an allusion to the ayah: \`And if you count Allah's
favours, you will not be able to number them'. (14:34)

[^9]: A biography of each of these great shaykhs requires detailed
investigation; there does in fact exist ample biographical material, but
since it would be difficult to include in this introduction these golden
chains of wilayah will be investigated according to the strict
methodology of this science (of determining the veracity of the men and
chains of transmission) if a suitable opportunity arises, God willing.

[^10]: The form of my ijazah to wear the outward kharqah ‑ which I
received from Shaykh Nur al‑Din Isfahani ‑ was in accordance with the
way he himself had received it and under the same conditions imposed by
the shaykhs of this realm; indeed all the shaykhs without exception took
it on in this way ‑ right up to the perfect shaykh, Junayd al‑Baghdadi,
who himself received it from his maternal uncle Sirri al‑Saqti, who
received it from Ma'rufal‑Karkhi and in turn from \`Ali bin Musa.

[^11]: The three dots indicate that some of the links in the chains are
omitted to avoid repetition. They are delineated in Sufi books; it is
possible that they will vary somewhat in who they include or omit.

[^12]: My opinion was and still is that when the state of profound
divine attraction overcomes a person ‑ just as it overcame Ibrahim Adham
and Shaykh \`Ala' al‑Daw­lah Simnani and many others like Uways
al‑Qarani, then the Real transports them to His court where He himself
undertakes to bestow perfection and courtesy on them ‑this has been
witnessed to be true in the case of many of the majdhubs, who are
amongst the great saints of God: people such as Shaykh Abu I‑Hasan
al‑Kharaqani who drew perfection from the spirituality of Bayazid
Bastami; indeed Sayyid Amuli also received perfection directly from the
spirituality of the infallible Imams, from the poles of previous ages
and from the poles and saints of his time, and in the course of his
spiritual path he crossed the station of the majdhub ‑ and Allah knows
best the truth of such matters.

[^13]: This book was printed in 1347 (Persian solar calendar) by the
Iran and France Institute.

[^14]: This work is wrongly entitled Risalat al‑Amanah (Treatise of
Divine Trusteeship) in some copies.

[^15]: Sayyid Qutub al‑Din Nayrizi, one of the great gnostics and torch
bearers during a time of declining Sufism and darkness, says in his book
Fasl al‑Kitab (The Decisive Book on the subject of the gnostics who
believe in the unity of existence). \`Sayyid Haydar bin 'Ali al‑Husayni
al‑Amuli of the country of Tabaristan and Mazandaran possesses boundless
excellence and is of the station of unveiling and witnessing; from among
his beautiful works there are those entitled Jami\` al‑Asrar (Compendium
of Secrets), Muhit al‑Azam wa 'l‑Bahr al‑Khadam (The Mighty Ocean and
the Great Sea).' These works which are in my possession are amongst the
most precious of books. The commentator of Fasl al‑Kitab who it appears
had seen the Risalat al‑Faqr (Treatise on Poverty), relates: \`I have
written this book after seeing some of the ignorant believing that there
is a contradiction in terms between the way of faqr (the state of the
fakir on the path to Allah) and the way of the Shi'ah. In it I have
demonstrated that any Shi'ah who is not of the people of poverty and
spiritual journeying is not of the Shi'ah and every fakir who is not a
Shi'ah is not a true fakir nor a salik (spiritual traveler), since these
two matters are of their nature connected ‑ the way of poverty being the
way of the infallible Imams: to profess Shi'ism means that one follows
them in their actions and their worship. Thus anyone who is neither a
faqir nor a salik is in reality beyond the pale of Shi'ism, even though
he may call himself a Shi'ah. I have composed the following lines about
the people of the outward:   Such people are unaware of both the outward
and the inner, and so they go astray by their ignorance and lack of
guidance; They are immersed in worship of other than Him, while to tell
the truth, There is in reality no actor save Allah.'

[^16]: This book is referred to sometimes as Asrar al‑Shari\`ati wa
Anwar al‑Haqiqah and sometimes as Anwar al‑Haqiqah wa Asrar al‑Shari\`ah
in the book Jami al Asrar; according to the text in my possession it is
Anwar al‑Haqiqah wa Atwar al‑Tariqah wa Asrar al‑Shari’ah; according to
the index of the university it is Asrar al‑Shari\`ati wa Anwar
al‑Haqiqah; in the library of Ma'rashi in Qum it is Anwaral‑Haqiqah wa
Asrar al‑Shari\`ah.

[^17]: This book together with Jami'al‑Asrar was printed by the Iran and
France Institute in 1347 AH (solar dating).

[^18]: These two books, namely Risalat al‑Tanbih and Amthalat al‑Tawhid
in addition to Jami\` al‑Haqa'iq were written in Persian and the another
indicates this at the end of Jami\` al‑Asrar.

[^19]: In another volume of this book (No. 301 in the library of
Mar'ashi in Qum) he says: \`I completed this at the end of the month of
Shawwal 777 AH in Najaf'

[^20]: These risalahs are written in the hand of Sayyid Amuli, a hand
more fair and beautiful than a ravishing face; the fatwas of Fakhr
al‑Muhaqqiqin, the teacher of Sayyid Amuli, are to be found in the
margins and between the different sections of the work; the following is
a list of these thirteen risalahs:   1. Masa'il Amuliat consisting of
twelve questions put to Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin by Sayyid Amuli: (1)
concerning the necessity of divine gnosis and concerning the attri­butes
which may or may not be associated with Him; (2) concerning the mukallaf
(the one on whom some duty is incumbent) who does not have the capacity
to carry out that duty, who by his ignorance is in a state of extreme
weakness and by his foolishness is in great need of sustenance; (3)
concerning the duty of the mukallaf and how a portion of it may be more
difficult than the rest (4) concerning the trader who does not pay the
khums tax on his wealth; (5) and (6) concerning the \`Alawi Sadat (those
who are descended from the Prophet by the lineage of 'Ali) and the way
in which khums is given to them; (7) and (8) concerning the khums of
those who are not descended from the Prophet and who are either
employees or workers; (9) concerning the love of the mukallaf for the
Prophet and the Imams and concerning what kind of love it should be ‑
whether it should be the same as that associated with mankind ‑ a love
caused by inclination, natural passion or some other kind of love (10)
concerning the request for blessings on the Prophet and whether or not
it is obligatory or recommended and whether it is obligatory in the
prayer and at other times just recommended; it also concerns the
question as to whether it is an absolute obligation and deals with the
difference between the asking of blessings on Muhammad and his Family
and the asking of blessings merely on His family; it discusses too the
difference between ahl and al, both linguistically and in terms of their
application; (11) concerning the saying of amin after the al‑Hamd surah
(something which is done by the Sunnis), whether or not the saying of it
invalidates the prayer and whether or not this word is part of the
Qur'an or not; (12) this particular page is torn and patched up and the
fatwa of Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin is missing.   Within this collection ‑
apart from the Masail Amuliat there are also twelve other treatises, all
written in the hand of Sayyid Amuli:   2. Masa'il Madaniyat (Madinan
Questions) by \`Allamah Hilli; written on the back of this manuscript is
the ijazah of Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin and in the work itself he corrects
several points of the risalah of his own father.   3. Risalatu fi Hajj
al‑Mutamatti\` bihi wa Wajibatuhu (The Treatise of the Hajj al­Tamattu\`
and its obligations) by Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin.   4. Risalatu Mi\`raj
al‑Salamah wa Minhaj al‑Karamah (The Treatise of the Ascent to Safety
and the Miraculous Way) by 'Ali ibn Sulayman al‑Bahrani.   5. Kitab
Suyun al‑Hikmah (The Book of the Springs of Wisdom) by Fakhr.   6.
Risatatu l‑Hudud (The Treatise on the Legal Parameters and Punishments)
by Ibn Sina.   7. Masa'il Mutafarriqah (Miscellaneous Questions).   8.
Risalat al‑Tawhid (The Treatise on Divine Unity).   9. Istalahat Hukama
(The Terminology of the Wise).   10. Risalah Khwajah Nasir al‑Din Tusi.
11. Risalat at‑\`Ilm (The Treatise on Knowledge).   12. Questions put
by Shaykh Sadr al‑Din Qunyawi to Khwajah Nasir al‑Din Tusi.   13.
Risalat al‑Qada' wa l‑Qadr (The Treatise of the Decree and
Predestination) by Hasan Basri.

[^21]: I saw this work ‑ written in the hand of the author ‑included
with the book Muhit al‑A\`zam in the library of Najaf (there is another
copy of the same volume in the library of Mar'ashi in Qum). In it the
author says: \`I wrote this brief treatise concerning the sciences of
the three groups (the Sufis, the philosophers and the theologians) at
the behest of certain respected persons. It consists of an introduction
and ten subjects of investigation: the introduction deals with the three
types of knowledge, the first an explanation of the knowledge of the
people of Allah, the second concerning the way in which revelation and
inspiration are transmitted, and the third concerning the nature of
unveiling together with the different orders of divine names ‑ the names
of action, the names of the attributes and the names of the essence.'
This risalah is the same Risalat al‑Ilm which has already been mentioned
above (no. 5) or rather it is a shortened version of it; the year 787
AH, however, does seem rather late; Sayyid Amuli would describe each
year of his life in the course of his writings but from 782 AH, the year
in which he completed the commentary on the Fusus to 787 AH, there is an
inexplicable gap of five years of which we know nothing; with regard to
the date of writing of the commentary (in the library of Mar'ashi ‑
written in the graceful hand of the author) the year 777 AH is recorded,
and it is possible that this treatise, which is part of another volume
of commentary, has been wrongly dated by the writer or has been misread
‑ that is that the middle number has been inverted: and Allah knows
better the truth of all matters.

[^22]: Henry Gorbin attributes this work to Haydar Amuli and states that
it was written at the request of his teacher Fakhr al‑Muhaqqiqin. See La
Philosophic shi'ite (Tehran and Paris, 1969), p. 41

[^23]: This set of verses ending (in the original) with the refrain 'you
see' is an indication of divine passion and the witnessing of the Truth
‑ which is the basis of divine gnoses. Such witnessing entails a divine
attraction towards oneness by means of the attributes of tawhid, then an
entering into the different levels of unveiling ‑ in which the heart
becomes aware of every molecule ‑ and then a passing into the levels of
fana' (annihilation) whereby the spiritual traveler gives up everything
he possesses to his desire for the divine existence. In doing so, all
excess or lack of material wealth ceases to exist since his own illusory
existence has disappeared into oneness with God. Thereafter there is the
baqa' ‑ in which one abides in Allah; in this state passion is
transformed by alchemy into the elixir of existence and one moves beyond
the limits of the world of the senses and the four dimensions.

[^24]: The editor's commentary on the text has been omitted since it
largely comprises a selection of passages translated into Persian for
the benefit of the Persian reader with a poor knowledge of Arabic.


