Volume 2: Surah Baqarah, Verses 183
===================================

Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me, and
do not be ungrateful to Me. ( 152)


**COMMENTARY
**
Allah first mentioned His favor on the Muslims that He sent to them a
Prophet from among them a favor that cannot be measured in any way. Then
he pointed to another great favor in that He guided them to the straight
path and led them to the highest perfection. Then game the third favor
of giving them a qiblah of their own through that rule, their religion
began its journey to perfection, their worship was unified and their
religious and social virtues were enhanced. Reminding them of these
threefold favors, He calls them to remember Him and to be thankful to
Him. They should remember Him with their devotion and obedience, so that
He remembers them with His favor He will increase for them His bounty
and grace, if they are thankful to Him, and if they are not ungrateful
for His favors. He had already said to them: and remember your Lord when
you forget and say: 'May be my Lord will guide me to a nearer course to
the right than this"(18:24); If you are grateful, I would certainly give
you more; and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe
(14: 7). These two verses were revealed before the verse of the qiblah
in this chapter.

"adh Dhikr"( remembrance )is sometimes used as opposite of" al
ghaflah"( inattention and heedlessness ). Allah says: and do not follow
him whose heart We have made inattentive to Our remembrance (18: 28).
Inattention is" not knowing that one knows although the original
knowledge is present in memory"." Remembrance", as its opposite, means"
knowing that one knows.

The word" remembrance" at other times is used as opposite to" an
nisyan"( forgetfulnes). Forgetfulness is" cessation of knowledge from
mind"; and as its opposite, remembrance means" presence of knowledge in
mind". It is to this meaning that the words of Allah refer in the verse:
and remember your Lord when you forget ...(18:24). This remembrance,
like its opposite" forgetfulness", is a concept which has its own
special effects and exclusive characteristics. Sometimes when those
effects and characteristics are found, we say that one remembers,
although there is no actual remembrance; or that one has forgotten,
although there is no actual forgetfulness. For example, if you do not
come to the aid of your friend when you know that he needs your help
then people say that:" You have forgotten him", although in fact you
remember him very well.

The word" remembrance" is also used in the same way. Apparently, the
use of this word for" verbal remembrance"( e. g., reciting or repeating
the names of Allah comes in this category, because you cannot express
something in words unless you remember it in mind. Allah says: Say;" I
will recite to you an account(a remembrance )of him" (18: 83). There are
many other examples like it. But if verbal remembrance is counted as a
real meaning of the word 'remembrance' then it will be one of its( lower
)degrees.

However, remembrance is of many degrees. Allah says: now surely by
Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest(13: 28) ; And remember
your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing and in a voice not loud in
the morning and the evening, and be not of the heedless ones (7: 205);
then remember Allah as you remember your fathers, rather a more intense
remembrance(2: 200). Now, it is the thought or feeling which becomes
intense, not the words. Also, we have quoted the above verse.: and
remember your Lord

when you forget and say:" May be my Lord will guide me to a nearer
course to the right than this"(18: 24). The last sentence, beginning
with Say:" May be...", tells the servant to hope for a rank higher than
his present one. Its connotation will be as follows: If you slip down to
a lower rank, that is, if you forget what you knew before, then remember
your Lord and then you may hope for a higher rank that is nearer to the
right course than the present one. It shows that the remembrance of the
heart, per se, is of many degrees. It also proves the validity of the
saying," Remembrance is the presence of an idea in the mind"; because
even" presence" has various degrees and ranks.

Remember Me: In this sentence, the object" Me" refers to Allah. As we
explained above, remembrance is the knowledge of knowledge; and
knowledge is defined as" attainment of the form and idea of a thing in
the mind of the Knower". Knowledge confines the thing so known and
encompasses it within the knower's mind. Obviously, Allah cannot be
known, or remembered( i. e., known to be known )in any way like this. He
is beyond the description of describers. He Himself says: Hollowed be
Allah from what they describe, except the servants of Allah freed( from
sins ) (37: 159 160) ; they do not comprehend Him in knowledge (20: 110)
We shall write later on, Allah willing, somethings related to these two
verses. (In view of this established fact, if we were to say that the
words," Remember Me", have been used here in their real, and not
metaphorical sense, then we will have to say that man has, or can have,
a knowledge whose definition would be quite different from the one known
to us.


**TRADITIONS
**
Numerous traditions, on the virtue of remembrance of Allah, have been
narrated by the Shi'ah and Sunni narrators. For example, it has been
narrated through various chains of narrators that:" Remembrance of Allah
is good in all conditions.

It has been narrated that the Messenger of Allah( s. a. w. a. )came up
to his companions, and said:" Feast you in the meadows of the Garden."
They said:" O Messenger of Allah! And what are the meadows of the
Garden?" He said:" The gatherings of remembrance; go there in the
mornings and in the evenings and remember( Allah ). And whoever likes to
know( what is )his position near Allah, he should see what is the
position of Allah near him( i. e., in his heart ); because surely Allah
gives a servant the same position which the servant gives to Allah
vis-a-vis, his own self. And know that your best deeds( near your King
)and the purest and the highest of them in ranks, and the best of all
that the sun shines on, is the remembrance of( Allah ). the High,
because Allah the High, has said concerning His Own Self: 'I am the
companion of him who remembers Me'; and He, the High One, has said:
'Therefore remember Me; I will remember you with My bounty; you remember
Me with obedience and worship, I will remember you with bounties, and
beneficence, and comfort, and( My )pleasure. '"( 'Uddatu 'd da'i) as
Sadiq( a. s. )said:" Surely Allah, the Blessed, the High, says: 'Whoever
is too preoccupied with My remembrance to be able to ask Me( for his
needs ), I give him the best of what I give to him who asks Me." '( al
Mahasin; ad Da'awat, ar Rawandi ) al Husayn alBazzaz said:" Abu
'Abdillah( a. s. ) told me: 'Should I not tell you the most difficult)
thing (which Allah has made obligatory for His creatures? ' I said:
'Yes, certainly. ' He said: 'To do justice to the people(even )against
yourself, and your beneficence to your brother, and remembrance of Allah
in every place. Why,( by remembrance )I do not mean( recitation of ):"
Glory be to Allah and praise be to Allah and there is no god except
Allah and Allah is Great" although this is from that( i. e., it is one
aspect of remembrance ); but remembrance of Allah in every place) means
that you should remember Him (when you rush to His obedience or to His
disobedience."( Ma'ani 'l akhbar)

The author says: This theme has been narrated through numerous chains
from the Prophet and his Ahlu 'l bayt) peace be on them all (; and there
is, in some of them, the following addition:" And it is the words of
Allah: Surely those who fear) Allah (, when a visitation from the Satan
afflicts them they become mindful( they remember ), then lo! they
see."(7: 201)

The Prophet said:" Allah says: 'When I know that the predominant trait
of My servant is to be engrossed in Me, I transfer his desire to My
invocation and My secret conversation. When My servant becomes like
this( i. e., when he attains this position ), then if he wants to( i.
e., if he is about to )forget, I come between him and his
forgetfulness(i. e., I protect him from it ). They are truly My friends;
they are truly the heroes; it is they that when I want to destroy the
people of the earth in chastisement, I remove it( the chastisement )from
them because of those heroes. '( Uddatu 'd da'i) as Sadiq( a. s. )said:"
Allah, the High, has said: ' 0 son of Adam! Remember Me in your mind, I
will remember you in My Self; 0 Son of Adam! Remember Me in seclusion, I
will remember you in seclusion; remember Me in a gathering, I will
remember you in a gathering better than your gathering. '" And he said:"
No servant remembers" Allah in an assembly of the people but" Allah
remembers him in the assembly of the angels".( al Mahasin) The author
says: Both groups, that is, the Shi'ah and the Sunnis, have narrated
this theme with numerous asnad.

as Suyuti writes in ad Durru 'l manthur:" at Tabarani, Ibn Marduwayh
and alBayhaqi) in his Shu'abu 'l iman (have narrated from Ibn Mas'ud
that he said: 'The Messenger of" Allah said:" Whoever is given four(
things )is( also )given( other )four( things ). And its explanation is(
found )in the Book of Allah. Whoever is given remembrance," Allah
remembers him, because" Allah says, 'Remember Me, I will remember you';
and whoever is given ad-du'a( invocation )is given response( i. e., its
acceptance ), because" Allah says; 'Call on Me, I will answer you'; and
whoever is given thankfulness, is given increase, because" Allah says,
'If you are grateful, I will certainly give you more'; and whoever is
given to ask forgiveness, is given pardon, because" Allah says, 'Ask
forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most Forgiving.

It is written in the same book:" Sa'id ibn Mansfir, Ibnu 'I Mundhir and
al-Bayhaqi) in his Shu'abu 'l iman (narrate from Khalid ibn Abi 'Imran
that he said that the Messenger of Allah said: 'Whoever obeys Allah he
indeed has remembered Allah even if his prayer and his fast and his
recitation of the Qur'an are small in quantity. And whoever disobeys
Allah, he indeed has forgotten Allah even if his prayer and his fast and
his recitation of the Qur'an are abundant.

The author says: This tradition indicates that man commits sin only
when he forgets Allah and becomes inattentive to Him. Had he remembered
what was the reality behind his sin and what effect it would produce, he
would not have gone near it. If some one disobeys Allah and does not
care even if he is reminded of Him and gives no importance to his Lord
and Creator, then he is a transgressor(who )does not know the dignity
and the sublime majesty of his Lord, nor does he understand how Allah
encompasses every thing. This theme is also found in another tradition,
which has been narrated in ad Durru 'l manthur from Abu Hind ad Dari who
said that the Prophet said: Allah says: 'Remember Me by obeying Me, I
will remember you with My forgiveness. And whoever remembers Me and he
is obedient then it is My duty to remember him with My forgiveness. And
whoever remembers Me and he is disobedient then it is a right on Me to
remember him with hate... '" The last sentence of this hadith has used
the word, remembrance( at the time of disobedience ), in its opposite
meaning; the verse under discussion and other traditions used the word
'forgetfulness' to convey that same idea.

We shall give some more details of this subject in some other
place...

