Volume 2: Surah Baqarah, Verses 106-107
=======================================

Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring one
better than it or like it. Do you not know that Allah has power over all
things? (106). Do you not know that Allah's is the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth, and that besides Allah you have no guardian or
helper? (107).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

**COMMENTARY
**
The verses deal with the subject of abrogation. The word, abrogation,
when used as a term of Islamic fiqh, means as follows: To show that the
time of an order has come to its end; that it is no more valid, is no
longer in force. This definition is based on the above verse; and is one
of the manifestations of its connotations.

QUR'AN: Whatever signs We abrogate . . . : "an-Naskh” is removal, to
remove, to annul. The Arabs say: Nasakhati 'sh­shamsu 'z-zilla (the sun
removed the shadow). Allah says: And We did not send before you any
apostle or prophet, but when he desired, the Satan made a suggestion
respecting his desire; but Allah annuls that which the Satan casts, then
does Allah establish His signs; and Allah is Knowing, Wise (22:52).
Also, they say: Nasakhtu 'l-kitab (I copied the book); it is as though
the writing was removed and its place changed. That is why another verse
uses the word "at-tabdil" (= to change) in place of abrogation: And when
We change (one) sign for (another) sign, and Allah knows best what He
reveals, they say: "You are a forger". Nay, most of them do not know
(16:101).

Abrogation, however, does not entail obliteration of a verse, turning
it into a non-being. Its only effect is the cancellation of the order
which the verse had promulgated. It should be noted that the Qur'anic
verse has been described as a "sign", that is, a mark that points to
another thing - a verse is a sign pointing to a Divine Command. The
second verse, "Do you not know that Allah's is the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth…” gives the reason as to why Allah abrogates some
Qur'anic verses. All these factors indicate that abrogation removes a
verse as far as its quality as a sign, as a symbol, is concerned. When
abrogated, the verse remains in existence as before, but loses its
quality as a sign - no longer does it point to an order, as the order is
now cancelled. The next phrase, "or cause to be forgotten", clearly
supports the foregoing explanation. "al-Insa” is to make one forget, to
erase out of memory, to eradicate from knowledge. By putting the two
phrases side by side, the Qur'an makes it clear that abrogation entails
erasure of a verse's effect, while "al-insa' " causes eradication of the
verse itself from the memory.

Symbolism - the quality of being a sign of something varies with
various signs having various aspects and directions. The Qur'anic verses
are the signs of Allah because the jinn and the men are jointly and
severally unable to bring its like; the rules ordained by Allah are His
signs inasmuch as they create piety in man and bring him nearer to his
Lord; every created thing is His sign, because it, by its existence,
proves the existence of its Creator, and by the qualities of its being,
leads to His attributes and names; the prophets and the friends of Allah
are His signs inasmuch as they, with their words and deeds, call the
humanity to Allah, and so on and so forth. Consequently, a sign may be
great or small, strong or weak; that is why Allah says: Certainly he saw
of the greatest signs of his Lord (53:18).

Also, a sign may contain only one aspect of symbolism, and another may
comprise of various such aspects. The former, when abrogated, is
obliterated in its entirety, is completely destroyed. But in the case of
the latter, it is possible to abrogate only one aspect of its symbolism,
leaving the other ones intact; for example, a Qur'anic verse could be
abrogated as far as its law was concerned, and yet continue as a Divine
Sign because of its eloquence and miraculous qualities.

This generalized meaning of abrogation has been inferred from the
reasoning given in the second verse: "Do you not know that Allah's is
the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . . . " There are only two
objections possible against the factuality of abrogation; or, as the
reports say, these were the two arguments advanced by the Jews against
it.

First: A sign given by Allah contains an actual benefit which cannot be
obtained from any other thing. If that sign is abrogated, its inherent
benefit would be lost; nothing could take its place to preserve that
benefit. Allah is not like His creatures, nor is His knowledge like
theirs. His knowledge does not change with the changes in external
factors. It is not that one day He knew one thing and issued an order
according to that knowledge; then next day the knowledge changed and He
became aware of another factor which He did not know before, and
therefore He had to cancel the previous order, replacing it with a
fresh-one. Such inconsistency is not worthy of Divine Sublimity. Of
course, it is all right for us mortals, because we cannot comprehend all
the aspects of an affair; and as a result of this incomplete knowledge,
our decisions are frequently changed and amended. But we should not
compare Divine Knowledge without limited and defective perception.

Here it is necessary to point out that such an objection arises from a
notion that the power of Allah is neither comprehensive and
all-encompassing nor unrestricted and unconditional.

Second: Accepted that the Divine Power is all-encompassing and
limitless. But once a thing is created it goes beyond the sphere of that
power, and cannot be changed. Even in our case, we have power to do or
not to do a certain work - so long as we have not done it; but once we
have done it, it becomes an essential being, and goes beyond the limits
of our power.

This argument is based on the rejection of the all-encompassing
ownership of Allah; it presupposes that once Allah has managed a certain
affair in a certain way, He cannot change that arrangement in another
way. This Jewish belief is portrayed in the verse: And the Jews say:
"The hand of Allah is tied up" (5:64).

Allah replies to the first objection with the question: "Do you not
know that Allah has power over all things?" He certainly has power over
all things. Therefore, He may replace a sign with an equally good or
even a better sign. The second objection is dealt with by the next
question: "Do you not know that Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens
and the earth, and that besides Allah you have no guardian or helper?"
Allah is the Owner of the heavens and the earth; He can do whatever He
likes with His property. No one besides Him owns any thing; otherwise,
that owner could interfere in the management of Allah or put restriction
on His authority and control. None else owns any thing neither in his
own rights nor even when Allah gives to him a partial ownership. When we
transfer the ownership of a property to another person, the transferee
gets all the rights which we had in that property and our rights are
rendered null and void. But when Allah gives a property into someone's
possession, Allah's ownership of the property is not disturbed in any
way - it does not come to an end, is not even diminished. He continues
to be the real Owner and Controller of the property which He has given
to others. His is the unrestricted ownership and unconditional
management.

If we look at what He has put under our ownership - without our having
any independent authority over it - then He is our Guardian. And if we
look at the apparent independence enjoyed by us, with His grace -
although it is a poverty in the shape of plenty, a dependence disguised
as independence then too we cannot manage our affairs without His help;
and He is our Helper.

The above explanation is based on the sequence and style of the two
verses. First, there is the exclusivity of the declaration: "Allah's is
the kingdom . . . " Then there is the sequence: "Do you not know that
Allah has power over all things? Do you not know that Allah's is the
kingdom of the heavens and the earth…?” The two sentences have not been
joined with any conjunctive, a sure indication that each is independent
of the other, and that the first sentence deals with one objection and
the second with another. The last sentence, "and that besides Allah you
have no guardian or helper", gives a finishing touch to the above
replies: Even if you are oblivious of Allah's all-encompassing power and
ownership, and are looking at this nominal ownership of yours, you will
know that it is not a permanent or independent ownership; you cannot
manage it independently; you need a guardian to look after your
interests and Allah is that guardian. He can and does manage your
affairs and your property as He likes.

On the other hand, if your eyes are so fixed on this possession as to
make you forget your dependence; if you think that you are the
independent and absolute owner of your property, even then you will have
to admit that you cannot manage your own affairs, cannot obtain the
results you want, without the help and assistance of a super power. And
Allah is your real Helper; it is He who manages your affairs and your
property for you. From whatever angle you look at this matter, Allah's
power over all things and His ownership of every thing remain
unchallenged and undisputed.

"and that besides Allah you have no guardian or helper": Apparently it
should have been 'besides Him.' Then why did the Qur'an use the noun
instead of the pronoun? It was to indicate that the foregoing sentences
contain the complete replies, and this sentence is not their integral
part; rather it is an independent declaration to strengthen those
replies.

This discourse leads us to the following conclusions:

First: Abrogation is not a thing confined to only the religious laws;
it holds its place in the sphere of creation too.

Second: Abrogation cannot take place without two sides: (i) The
abrogated thing or verse, (ii) the abrogative, that is, the thing or
verse that abrogates.

Third: The abrogative contains all the benefits and the perfection that
was found in the abrogated thing.

Fourth: Although the abrogative differs from the abrogated in its form,
both have one thing in common - the perfection and the benefit. When a
prophet dies and another is sent in his place - and both of them are the
signs of Allah, one abrogating the other - it takes place in total
conformity with the natural system. Life, death, sustenance and other
such things often replace each other, the succeeding factors abrogating
the preceding ones. It all depends on the varying needs of the society's
welfare, on ever-changing level of the man's perfection. Likewise, when
a religious law is replaced by another, the abrogating one has the same
power as the abrogated one had, to lead to the spiritual and temporal
well-being of the individual and the society; each perfectly suitable
for the time it was, or is, in force; each more beneficial in the
context of its time. For example, the order to "forgive" in the
beginning of the call when the Muslims had neither the manpower nor the
armaments, and the command to "fight" when Islam had gained some
strength, when the Muslims had gathered enough force and the
disbelievers and the polytheists were frightened of them. However,
seldom is an abrogated verse devoid of some phrase showing that it was a
transitory order which would be abrogated in due course. For example:
The verse: But pardon and forgive (them) until Allah should bring about
His command (2:109), which was abrogated by the verse of fighting; and:
. . . confine them until death takes them away or Allah makes some way
for them (4:15), which was abrogated by the verse of flogging. The
phrases, "until Allah should bring about His command", and, "or Allah
makes some way for them", give clear indication that the order given
therein was temporary and transitory which would soon be abrogated

Fifth: The relation between the abrogative and the abrogated is quite
different from that which is found between a general statement and a
particular, between an unconditional clause and a conditional, or
between an unspecified proposition and a specified.

What removes the apparent contradiction between the abrogative and the
abrogated, is the society's and the individual's good and well -being
which is found in both of them. But the apparent contradiction between a
general statement and a particular, between an unconditional clause and
a conditional, or between an unspecified proposition and a specified,
emanates from the strong (or weak) manifestation of the intended
meaning. The true intention of the speaker is reflected much more
strongly and clearly in a particularized statement, a conditional clause
and a specified proposition; and that strength and clarity removes the
above-mentioned apparent contradiction - by explaining the general in
the light of the particular, the unconditional with the help of the
conditional and the unspecified in the frame of the specified. These
things are the subject of the Principles of Jurisprudence. The same
applies to the decisive and the ambiguous verses, as we shall explain
under the verse: . . . of it there­ are some verses decisive, they are
the basis of the Book, and others are ambiguous . . . (3:7)

QUR'AN: or cause to be forgotten: "Nunsiha” is derived from "al- insa
(to cause to be forgotten; to erase from memory or knowledge), as we
have described earlier. It is a general and unconditional statement. It
is not restricted to the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.a.); nay, it does not
include him at all. Allah had said about him: We will make you recite so
you shall not forget, except what Allah pleases (87:6-7) It is a Meccan
verse, while the verse of abrogation is of Medina period.

Obviously the Apostle could not forget anything after the promise of
Allah "so you shall not forget".

Question: This clAllah is untenable because the promise has the
proviso, "except what Allah pleases". It means that the Apostle
(s.a.w.a.) could forget what Allah was pleased to make him forget.

Reply: Such exceptional clauses serve only to emphasize the power of
Allah; they do not necessarily mean that the thing mentioned in that
clause would actually take place. Look for example at the verse: . . .
they shall be in the garden, abiding in it as long as the heavens and
the earth endure, except as your Lord pleases . . . (11:108). It just
shows that Allah does have power to change the arrangement made; but all
the Muslims agree that the people of the paradise will never be taken
out of it. The same is the import of the exceptional clause, "except
what Allah pleases", in this verse.

Moreover, if the said clause were to prove that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
could actually forget the things taught by Allah, depending on the
pleasure of Allah, there would be no sense in putting him under
obligation by promising him, "you shall not forget". My human being who
remembers any thing, or forgets it, does so by the pleasure of Allah.
The same is true about the animals who remember and forget by His
pleasure and decree. And the Prophet too, before this promised grace of
Allah, remembered by the pleasure of Allah, and forgot by the pleasure
of Allah. What new grace was added here if the promise meant only a
quality which the Prophet had already had? If that promise were to make
any sense, it would have to mean that the Prophet could never forget
anything, although Allah had full power to make him forget.

Some people have recited the word as "nansa'aha” derived from "an-nas”
(= to delay). According to this recitation the meaning would be as
follows: Whatever Signs W e abrogate by nullifying it, or put it off by
delaying its appearance, We bring one better than it or like it, and the
Divine management in advancing something or putting it off, does not
diminish its perfection or benefit.

The fact that the Divine Management always brings out a thing's
perfection and benefit, is inferred from the clause, "We bring one
better than it or like it". The goodness emanates from the perfection of
a thing or benefit of a laid down rule.

The abrogated thing or rule was surely good; and the abrogating thing
or rule too is at least as good, if not better. So, every Divine
Management is the ideal of goodness, perfection and benefit.

**TRADITIONS
**
Innumerable traditions have been narrated by both sects, from the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), his companions, and the Imams of his Ahlu l-bayt,
that there are abrogated and abrogating verses in the Qur'an.

The Commander of the faithful (Ali - a.s.) said, after enumerating
various abrogated and abrogating verses: "And the word of Allah: And I
did not create the jinn and the human beings except that they should
worship Me (51:56) was abrogated by His word: and they shall continue to
differ, except those on whom your Lord has mercy; and for this did He
create them (11:118-119), that is, for the mercy did He create them."
(at-Tafsir, an-Nu'mani)

The author says: In this tradition the Imam has used the word,
abrogation, in a wider sense than its terminological meaning. The latter
verse mentions a reality which restricts the reality described by the
former. The first verse affirms the Divine Worship as the purpose of
creation. While doing a work, Allah keeps a purpose in view; and He
cannot be defeated in His purpose. On the other hand, he has decreed
that they should choose their own path, and consequently some of them
progress on the right path, while others go astray. Those who by their
own choice choose the path of guidance are covered by the mercy of Allah
and it is for this mercy that He has created them. In this way, the
second verse affirms another purpose for the creation: The mercy which
accompanies the worship and guidance. This goal is reached by only a
selected few, while the first verse had affirmed a goal for all the jinn
and the men, and that is the Divine Worship. Some people are created for
some others, and those others for yet others; this chain continues till
it reaches the group which sincerely worships Allah. Looking from this
point of view, it is easy to understand why all the jinn and men have
been said to be created for the worship. We plant a garden and nurse the
trees for their fruits. The real purpose is the fruits, but the trees
and their branches and leaves are planted, protected and looked after
because they are the means to get the fruits. And it will be quite right
to say that the garden's purpose was its fruits.

In the same way, the second verse "abrogates" the generality of the
first verse, focusing its sight on the true worshippers who are the
recipients of the mercy of Allah.

The same book narrates from the same Imam that he said: "And the word
of Allah: And there is not one of you but shall come down to it; this is
a decided decree of your Lord (19:71), was abrogated by His word: Surely
(as for) those whom the good has already gone forth from Us, they shall
be kept far off from it; they will not hear its faintest sound, and they
shall abide in that which their souls long for. The great fearful event
shall not grieve them (21:101-103)."

The author says: It must be noted that the relation between these two
verses is not that found between a general declaration and a particular
one. The first verse says that it is a decided and unavoidable decree of
Allah and such a decree cannot be rendered null and void, it cannot be
cancelled. What the "abrogation" mentioned in this tradition means will
be explained, God willing, in the exegesis of the verse 21:101,
mentioned above.

al-Baqir (a.s.) said: "Among the (various types of) abrogation is
"al-bada’”\* contained in the word of Allah: Allah effaces what He
pleases and establishes (likewise), and with Him is the basis of the
Book (13:39); and (demonstrated in) the saving of the People of Yunus."
(al-'Ayyashi)

The author says Its reason is clear.

Some traditions of the Imams of the Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.) count the death
of an Imam and his being succeeded by another Imam as an example of the
abrogation.

The author says: We have already explained this matter. The number of
the traditions containing this theme reaches to nearly mutawatir.

'Abd ibn Hamid, Abu Dawud (in his an-Nasikh wa'l-mansakh) and Ibn Jarir
have narrated from Qatadah that he said: "(During the lifetime of the
Prophet) a verse used to abrogate (another) verse; and the Prophet of
Allah used to recite a verse, and a chapter, and as much as Allah wished
of a chapter, then it was raised (i.e. erased) and Allah caused His
Prophet to forget it. So, Allah said narrating it to His Prophet:
Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring one better
than it; He says: There is (some) ease in it, some allowance in it, some
order in it, (and) some prohibition in it." (ad-Durru l-manthur)

The author says: The same book quotes numerous traditions on the theme
of "causing to be forgotten"; but all of them have to be discarded
because they go against the teaching of the Book of Allah, as we have
explained in the meaning of this word.


\* al-Bada' is a terminology of Shiite theology. It means that Allah
makes known His plan to His chosen servants only to that extent which is
beneficial to the mankind or which is necessary to make a test
meaningful. When the time comes when the angel, prophet or Imam
concerned thinks that the plan of work is coming to its end, a new
development extends the plan or brings it to an unexpected end. The
saving of the People of Yunus and the intended sacrifice of Ismail are
among its examples. (tr)

