Volume 2: Surah Baqarah, Verses 118-119
=======================================

And those who have no knowledge say: “Why does not Allah speak to us or
a sign come to us?” Even thus said those before them, the like of what
they say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed We have made the signs
clear for a people who are sure (118). Surely, We have sent you with
truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner, and you shall not be
questioned as to the companions of the flaming fire (119).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

**COMMENTARY
**
QUR’AN: And those who have no knowledge say: It refers to the
polytheists and the unbelievers other than the people of the Book. It is
set in contrast with the verse 113: And the Jews say, “The Christians do
not follow anything (good)”, and the Christians say, “The Jews do not
follow anything (good), while they recite the Book. Even thus say those
who have no knowledge, like to what they say. In this verse, the People
of the Book were joined to the polytheists and unbelievers of Arabia;
and the verse under discussion joins those polytheists and unbelievers
to the People of the Book: “And those who have no knowledge say: ‘Why
does not Allah speak to us or a sign come to us?’ Even thus said those
before them (i.e. the People of the Book, including the Jews) the like
of what they say”, because the Jews had disputed with their prophet,
Musa (a.s.) and demanded from him the like of what these pagans say.

The People of the Book and the pagans of Arabia are alike in their way
of thinking; the former say what the like of the latter say, and vice
versa: their hearts are all alike.

QUR'AN: Indeed We have made the signs clear for a people who are sure:
It is the rebuttal of the demand of those who have no knowledge. The
signs they are demanding have already come to them, already have been
made clear to them. But they cannot benefit from them because only those
who are sure of those signs may get their benefit. As for these people
who have no knowledge, their hearts are submerged into ignorance, sick
with the disease of prejudice and envy. That is why they have lost the
ability to benefit from the signs sent by Allah.

The above explanation makes it clear why they have been described as
"those who have no knowledge".

After exposing the falsity of their demand, Allah directs His speech to
the Apostle, declaring in clear terms that he has been sent by Allah
"with the truth as the bearer of good news and as a warner". The verse
was meant to bring comfort to the Prophet's heart and to make him
realize that these adversaries were the people of the Fire, and they
would not come to the path of guidance.

QUR'AN: and you shall not be questioned as to the companions of the
flaming fire: Its import is similar to that of the verse: Surely those
who disbelieve alike is to them whether you warn them or do not warn
them, they will not believe (2:6).

