Desensitization
===============

*Friday Sermon, 5 Dec. 2008*

One of the common problems of social life is the sensitivity that many
of us have against people’s comments or attitudes towards us. Suppose
you have a very abrupt classmate who makes sharp comments on your
personal issues. How can we deal with people around us whose comments
hurt?

1. Revenge: one of the most common reactions to hurtful comments is to
get them back. Tit for tat. Spite doesn’t solve the problem, it worsens
it.

2. Ignore it: Imam ‘Ali (a.s) says:

> ان صبرتَ صبر الاکارم و الا\` سلوت سلو\` البهائم.- نهج البلاغة

“If (could) endure the patience of noble people, otherwise pretend the
heedlessness of the beasts.”

Although ignoring often works, there is a limit to which you can ignore
the person. Once it hits the threshold you blow up and may react with a
severe revenge.

3. Desensitization. In medicine there is a method to reduce or eliminate
an organism’s negative reaction to a substance or stimulus. This method
is called desensitization. For example, if a person with diabetes
mellitus has a bad allergic reaction to take a full dose of beef
insulin; his doctor gives him a very small amount of the insulin at
first.

Over a period of time, larger doses are given until the person is taking
the full dose. Vaccination is another form of desensitization.
Therefore, desensitization is the technique of making an organism less
sensitive.

Desensitization is a cognitive therapy. Most of mental pains or
pleasures have in fact internal causes. The best way to deal with
people’s unpleasant comments is to desensitize yourself against their
comments. The following are some methods of desensitization:

A) Be optimistic: Most people are not sadists and don’t have any evil
intentions for what they say or do. It is often our assumption that
brands a speech or attitude negative. For instance, a mother whose
daughter has been sick for quite a long time had become sensitive to
people repeatedly asking her about her daughter. As a result she went
into isolation.

In a short consultation she managed to realise that people’s inquiries
are in fact a sign of their concern to pray for her or offer any
assistance. Of course, often people don’t have the best choice of words
to express their concern in the manner, but rest assured that they are
sincere. Thus, we should judge them for their good intention. For this
reason negative assumption is considered a mortal sin in Islam. The
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Avoid much suspicion; indeed some suspicions
(negative assumptions) are sins….” (the Holy Qur’an 49:12)***

B) Justification: We must understand that people’s behaviour is the
effect of many factors. The healthy way to deal with people’s attitude
is to endeavour to find justification for it. Imam al- Sadiq (a.s) said:

> اطلب لأخیک عذرا فان لم تجد له عذرا فالتمس له عذرا.- بحار الانوار
> 75:197

“Seek an excuse for your brother (friend), and if you couldn’t find any
excuse for him, seek an excuse (from someone else) for him.” [^1]

C) Compliance (with someone’s mood): the bottom line is that we are not
living in Paradise. As people look different, they also think and behave
differently. We cannot possibly expect everyone to behave the way we are
pleased with. Thus, it is very much recommended in Islam to comply with
them as much as possible. It is narrated from the holy Prophet of Islam
(S) to have said:

> امرنی ربی بمداراة الناس کما امرنی بالفرائض. -الکافی 2:96

“My Lord commanded me to comply with people as much as He commanded me
for obligations.” [^2]

The term ‘al-Modarat’ in Arabic has two possible roots: if the root of
it is درأ (مهموز اللام) then it means to avoid people’s evil (اتقاء شر
الناس), but if the root of it is درا (غیر مهموز اللام) then it means
tricking a prey to hunt it. It is assumed that by complying with
people’s moods we will be able to eventually win their hearts.

In fact, no so-called negative comment can create a problem unless the
receiver reciprocates it. It is only then that a family quarrel or a
clash between two friends begins. Therefore, if one party supposedly
makes a mistake and throws an inappropriate comment at you, unless you
take revenge it will die out.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s) advised his son Muhammad In Hanafiya:

> یا بُنی\`! الکلام ذَکَر، و الجواب انثی، فاذا اجتمع الزوجان فلابد\` من
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انتاج.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سلیم العِرض من حذر الجوابا و مَن داری الرجال فقد اصابا
  </p>
</blockquote>

> -وسائل الشیعة 12:220

“My dear son! A statement is a male, and a response to it is a female.
When a couple is united then the production is necessary.” [^3] He then
poetically said:

The one who avoids a (negative) response has kept his honour

And whoever complies with people has met the right target.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, 75/197

[^2]: Al-Kafi, 2/96

[^3]: Wasa’il ush-Shi’a, 12/220


