Bewildering Interpretations
===========================

The scholars of the school of Caliphate are at pains to explain the
traditions that mention the Twelve Successors. We present herewith, in
brief, their contradictory explanations.

Ibn al-'Arabi says in his *"Sharh Sunan al-Tirmidhi"*:

We have counted the Amirs after the Holy Prophet (S) as twelve.

We found them as follows: Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, ‘Ali, Hasan,
Mu'awiyah, Yazid, Mu'awiyah ibn Yazid, Marwan, 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan,
Yazid bin 'Abd al-Malik, Marwan bin Muhammad bin Marwan, As-Saffah...
After this there were twenty-seven caliphs from the Bani Abbas.

Now if we consider twelve of them we can reach only till Sulayman. If we
take the literal meaning we have only five of them and to these we add
the four Righteous Caliphs, and 'Umar bin 'Abd al-'Aziz...

I cannot understand the meaning of this Hadith.[^1]

Qadi 'Iyad, says in reply to the claim that there shall be only twelve
Caliphs;

"The number of Caliphs are more than that. To limit their number to
twelve is incorrect. The Holy Prophet (S) did not say that there will be
only twelve and there is no scope for more. Hence it is possible that
there can be more.[^2]

Al-Suyuti says:

There are only twelve Caliphs until Qiyamat. And they will continue to
act on truth, even if they are not continuous.[^3]

It is mentioned in *Fath al-Bari* that:

Four of them (the Righteous Caliphs) have passed. The rest also must
pass before Qiyamat.[^4]

Ibn al-Jawzi says:

"It can be concluded that the phrase "then there will be discord"
implies the disturbing events like the coming of Dajjal and whatever
will come after it."[^5]

Al-Suyuti has explained as follows:

We see that from the twelve, four are the Righteous Caliphs, then Hasan,
then Mu'awiyah, then Ibn Zubayr, and finally 'Umar bin 'Abd al-'Aziz.
They are eight. Four of them remain. Maybe Mahdi, the Abbasid could be
included as he is an Abbasid like 'Umar bin 'Abd al-'Aziz was an
Umayyad. And Tahir 'Abbasi will also be included because he was a just
ruler. Thus two more are yet to come. One of them is Mahdi, because he
is from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).[^6]

It is also said:

It could also mean that the twelve Imams will remain during the period
of Islam's supremacy. The time when Islam will be a dominant religion.
These Caliphs will, during their tenure, glorify the religion. All the
Muslims will collect round them in unison.[^7]

Al-Bayhaqi says:

"This number (twelve) is found till the period of Walid ibn 'Abd
al-Malik. After this, there was chaos and disturbance. Then came the
Abbasid dynasty. This report has increased the number of Imams. If we
neglect some of their characteristics which came after the disturbance,
then their number will be much higher."[^8]

And they said:

The Caliphs around whom the people had collected were the first three
Caliphs, then ‘Ali, until the Battle of Siffin against Mu'awiyah when
pages of Qur'an were raised on spears. Then the people collected around
Mu'awiyah, and then again at the time of the treaty with Imam Hasan.
Then with Mu'awiyah's son Yazid. But the people did not collect around
Imam Husayn (a.s.). He was murdered before he could gain this type of
support. When Yazid died, they collected around Marwan after the killing
of Abdullah ibn Zubayr.

Then they supported the four sons of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan; Walid,
Sulayman, Yazid and Hisham. There was a break between Sulayman and Yazid
when 'Umar bin 'Abd al-'Aziz occupied the throne. The twelfth of them
was Walid ibn Yazid. After that Hisham collected people around him. He
ruled for four years.[^9]

On the basis of this the Caliphate of the twelve Caliphs was valid due
to the people's support. The Holy Prophet (S) had given the good tidings
of their Caliphate; that they will propagate Islam among the people. In
this connection Ibn Hajar says, "The above reason is correct and it is
more preferable."

Ibn Kathir says:

Whosoever follows Bayhaqi and agrees with his assertion that Jama'ah
means those Caliphs who came intermittently till the time of Walid ibn
Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik the transgressor comes under the purview of the
tradition quoted by us criticising and denouncing such people. It is a
controversial sect. The Caliphs are till Walid bin Yazid. Their total is
more than twelve. And their argument is that the Caliphate consisted of
Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman and ‘Ali. (The Righteous Caliphate).

After this the Caliphate of Hasan was true because he had been nominated
by ‘Ali and the people of Iraq had also pledged their allegiance to him.
It continued till the time of his treaty with Mu'awiyah. Then came Yazid
the son of Mu'awiyah. Then his son Mu'awiyah ibn Yazid, then Marwan bin
al-Hakam, then 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, then his son, Walid ibn 'Abd
al-Malik, then Sulayman ibn 'Abd al-Malik, then 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz,
then Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik, then Hisham ibn 'Abd al-Malik. This takes
the total to fifteen. Then after this, Walid ibn Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik
became the Caliph.

And if we accept the Caliphate of ibn Zubayr before 'Abd al-Malik the
total shall be sixteen. Whereas their total should be twelve before
'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz. In this method Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah will be
included and not 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz. However, it is established
that the majority of the *'ulama* accept 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz as a
truthful and a just Caliph. There was complete peace and justice during
his reign. Even the *Rafidi* accept this fact.

Suppose we say that we will accept the Caliph as the one who has the
acceptance of all the Ummat, then we cannot accept ‘Ali and his son.
Because the whole Ummat had not supported them.

The Syrians had accepted their superiority but not their Caliphate. In
this way they cannot be accepted as Caliphs.

He (Bayhaqi) has also written that some people included Mu'awiyah, his
son and his grandson among the Caliphs. The time of Marwan and ibn
Zubayr is also not included. For none of them had the unanimous support.
Therefore we say about this sect that they believe in the first three
Caliphs, then Mu'awiyah, then Yazid, then 'Abd al-Malik, then Sulayman
ibn 'Abd al-Malik, then 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, then Yazid ibn 'Abd
al-Malik, then Hisham ibn 'Abd al-Malik. This comes to ten. Then they
consider Walid ibn Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik the transgressor as the
Caliph. In this way they exclude ‘Ali and his son. Now this is
absolutely against the belief of the majority of Muslims , whether
Shi'as or Sunnis.[^10]25

Ibn al-Jawzi has offered two explanations in his book, "*Kashf
al-Mushkil*":

The Holy Prophet (S) has informed about whatever is going to occur after
him with his Companions. And that the actions of the Companions will be
similar to those of the Prophet's. At that time he had also indicated
the number of Caliphs of Bani Umayya. As the Messenger of Allah (S) has
said, "*La Yazaluddin*" (the religion will not decline), it indicates
the chain of Wilayat till the Twelfth Caliph. The Second and the more
serious meaning is that after the passing of the twelve Caliphs the
conditions will deteriorate. The first Caliph of Bani Umayya was Yazid
ibn Mu'awiyah and the last, Marwan Al-Himar. Their total is thirteen.
'Uthman, Mu'awiyah and ibn Zubayr are not included as they were among
the Companions of the Holy Prophet (S).

If we exclude Marwan bin al-Hakam because of the controversy about his
being a Companion or that he was in power even though Abdullah ibn
Zubayr had the support of the people. Then we can get the figure of
Twelve.

When the Caliphate came out of the Bani Umayya, a great disturbance
arose. Until the Bani Abbas established themselves. Hence, the original
conditions had changed completely.[^11]

Ibn Hajar in *Fath al-Bari* has refuted this.

The second explanation of Ibn al-Jawzi is as follows:

Abu al-Husayn bin Mauaadi in his book, "*Al-Mahdi*" says, "The more
probable meaning refers to the Mahdi who will come towards the end of
the world. I have seen in the book of Daniel, "When Mahdi will die five
men from his elder grandson, then five men from his younger grandson
will succeed him. Then the last of them will make a will in favour of
one of the descendants of the elder grandson. After this his son will
become the King. This proves the twelve Imams mentioned in the hadith of
the Prophet (S). All of them will be known as Imam Mahdi."

He says, "...This affair will continue with the twelve persons. Six of
them will be from the progeny of Hasan and five from the progeny of
Husayn. The last will be someone else. After his death, confusion will
prevail upon the earth."

Ibn Hajar says, "This tradition is without any chain of narrators and
hence we cannot rely upon it."[^12]

And some people say:

Maybe the Holy Prophet (S) has meant to say in this perplexing tradition
regarding the future, that at one and the same time the people will be
divided under twelve kings. If he had intended something else he would
have described the activities of the Amirs who were to succeed him.
Therefore it is possible that they will be present
contemporaneously.[^13]

It is also said:

In 500 A.H. in Andalus, there were six people in power at one and the
same time. Each of them claimed to be the Caliph. Included among them
were the Abbasid of Baghdad and the ruler of Egypt. The Alawis and the
Kharijis also claimed to be the rulers of the earth.[^14]

Ibn Hajar says:

"No one has much knowledge about this particular *hadith* of *Sahih
Bukhari*."[^15]30

Then he says:

"It is not correct to say that these Imams will be present at one and
the same time." [^16]

There is no agreement in the explanation of the above tradition. These
scholars have not paid attention to those reports which mention the
names of the twelve successors. For it was against the political
expediency of the time. However, the Hadith scholars of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) have recorded numerous such traditions with proper chains of
narrators going back to the trustworthy Companions of the Holy Prophet
(S). We mention herewith a few of these traditions.

[^1]: Ibn al-'Arabi, Sharh Sunan Tirmidhi 9:68-69.

[^2]: Al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, 12:201-202. Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani,
Fath al-Bari 16:339.

[^3]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol 12.

[^4]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:341.

[^5]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:341.

[^6]: Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa Vol 19. Al-Suyuti,
Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol 12. There is unanimity in the School of Caliphate
that the awaited Imam is Mahdi, as is the belief of the followers of the
School of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

[^7]: Al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim ,12:202-203.

[^8]: Ibn Kathir, Ta'rikh, 6:249. Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa Vol 11.
Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa Vol 19. Ibn Hajar
al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:341.

[^9]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa Vol 11.

[^10]: Ibn Kathir, Ta'rikh, 6:249-250.

[^11]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:340 quoted from Sibt Ibn
al-Jawzi.

[^12]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:341. Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, Al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa.

[^13]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:338.

[^14]: Al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, 12:202. Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani,
Fath al-Bari 16:339.

[^15]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:338.

[^16]: Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari 16:339.


