The Twelve Imams According to the School of the Caliphate
=========================================================

Al-Juwayni[^1] reports that Abdullah ibn Abbas remarked that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said, "I am the chief of the Prophets and 窶連li
ibn Abi Talib is the chief of successors, and after me my successors
shall be twelve, the first of them being 窶連li ibn Abi Talib and the last
of them being Al Mahdi."

Al-Juwayni has also mentioned another tradition from Ibn 'Abbas (r.a.)
that he narrates from the Messenger of Allah (S):

"Certainly my Caliphs and my legatees and the Proofs of Allah upon his
creatures after me are twelve. The first of them is my brother and the
last of them is my (grand) son."

He was asked: "O Messenger of Allah, who is your brother?"

He said, "窶連li ibn Abi Talib"

Then they asked, "And who is your son?"

The Holy Prophet (S) replied, "Al Mahdi, the one who will fill the earth
with justice and equity like it would be brimming with injustice and
tyranny. And by the One Who has raised me as a warner and a give of good
tidings, even if a day remains for the life of this world, the Almighty
Allah will prolong this day to an extent till he sends my son Mahdi,
then he will make Ruhullah 'Isa ibn Maryam (a.s.) to descend and pray
behind him (Mahdi). And the earth will be illuminated by his radiance.
And his power will reach to the east and the west."

Al-Juwayni also narrates from his chain of narrators that the Messenger
of Allah (S) informed:

"I and 窶連li and Hasan and Husayn and nine of the descendants of Husayn
are the purified ones and the infallible."[^2]33

Among the scholars of the School of the Caliphate it was the general
tendency, due to the political expediency, to conceal such traditions
from the people. A majority of their scholars have tried their best to
explain away these traditions in a confusing manner. They have
endeavoured to make vague guesses regarding the names of the Caliphs
mentioned in these reports. On the other hand the Holy Prophet (S) has
mentioned clearly, by name, his Twelve Successors.

It is not possible to relate all such traditions in this brief treatise.
However we shall present the biographical sketches of the Imams (a.s.)
who have been named by the Messenger of Allah (S).

[^1]: Al-Dhahabi says in Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 4, p. 298, that
Sadruddin Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin al-Hamawayh al-Juwayni al-Shafi'i was
a great scholar of Hadith. Also see his biographical note in Ibn Hajar
al-'Asqalani, al-Durar al-kaminah, vol. 1, p. 67.

[^2]: Al-Juwayni, Fara'id al-Simtayn, pg 160.


