Q46: Can We Have a Direct Contact With Our Imam?
================================================

A. Yes. If any Ithna-Asheri is really anxious to meet him (A.S.)
personally, he should spend 40 Tuesday nights at Masjid-e-Sahla (near
Kufa), or 40 Thursday nights (Shab-e-Juma) at the grave of Imam Husain
(A.S.) in prayers and remembrance of Allah. At the end of that period he
will surely see and meet the Imam (A.S.).

Q47: Can you, please; direct us with reference to Qur'an when, why and
where our Imam was "Ghayab"?

A. 1. When and Where? Well, what is the use of seclusion if people are
made aware of his "whereabouts"? So, the question "Where" cannot be
answered if you mean "where is he?". But if you mean "where was he
living at the time of Ghaibat?", then I may tell you that he became
Ghayab from "Samarra" in the year 329 Hijrah.

2. Why? Here is a Hadith from Imam Jafer Sadique (A.S.) explaining
about Ghaibat some 200 years before that event :-

Abdullah bin Fadhl heard Imam Jafer Sadique (A.S.) talking about the
"seclusion" and its long period in which every man of wrong belief would
start doubting (even the existence of Sahib-ul-Amr). Abdullah asked the
reason of ghaibat, to which Imam replied :

"The reason of his "Ghaibat" is the same as of the ghaibat of other
representatives of Allah before him.Verily its reason will not be clear
until after his re-appearance; as the reason of the actions of Khidhr
(i.e. damaging the boat, killing the child and repairing the wall) was
not explained to Musa (A.S.) until the time came for them to separate. O
Son of Fadhl, this is an Amr from Amr of Allah, a secret from the
secrets of Allah, and hidden thing from the hidden things of Allah; and
when we know that Allah is Hakeem (Creator of wisdom) we confirm that
all of his actions are based upon wisdom though its reason at the time
might be unclear to us.(Ihtijaj, Volume II, p. 140). So, you see that
the actual reasons cannot be known till our Imam (A.S.) ends his
seclusion. Then, we will know the facts.

Still, the following reasons which have been mentioned in the Hadith of
Imams right from Ameerul-Momeneen upto our present Imam (A.S.) will
throw some light on this question of 'Ghaibat' :-

1. He is in seclusion so that when he stands to put the world on right
path, he is not bound by an oath of allegiance to anybody.

2. Safety of his life.

3. Testing the strength of the Iman of believers, as was done in the
case of Hadhrat Nuh (A.S.) when the coming of the flood was repeatedly
postponed and each postponement saw many so-called 'faithfuls' deserting
Hadhrat Nuh (A.S.) and becoming kafir.

You have not put "How" in your question; but I think I should reply
this question also, to make the picture clearer. Ghaibat does not mean
that our Imam has got an invisible body. The meaning of Ghaibat is that
people, even when he is among them, do not recognise him. Here is a
Hadith from Imam Jaffer Sadique (A.S.) on this subject :-"And why do
these people think it strange? Verily, the brothers of Yusuf were
Asbat - the children of the prophets - they made business transaction
with Yusuf, and bought things from him and talked with him and they were
his brothers and he was their brother - and they did not recognize him
until Yusuf told them, "I am Yusuf". So why does this cursed Ummat
reject the idea that at a certain time Allah may want to hide his
Representative.

Surely, Yusuf was the ruler of Egypt (and, thus, a famous man) and
there was between him and his father a distance of only 18 days journey
and had Allah wanted to reveal to Yakub where Yusuf was, He had power to
do so (By God, when they got the good news of Yusuf, Yakub and his
children covered that distance in 9 days only).So, why does this Ummat
think it objectionable if Allah wanted to do with His Representative
what He did in case of Yusuf, i.e. the 12th Imam may be visiting their
markets, walking on their floors and yet they would not recognize him
till Allah allows him to disclose his personality, as He did to Yusuf
when he said, "And did you know what you did with Yusuf and his brother
when you were ignorants?". They said, "Say, Art thou Yusuf?" He said, "I
am Yusuf and this is my brother"(Biharul-Anwar Vol. 13)

So far as the question of long life on this earth is concerned the
following Ayat about Hazrat Yunus is to the point: "And, verily, Yunus
is from among the Apostles; when he fled to the boat. And had he not
been from those who say the Tasbih, he would have stayed in its stomach
till the day when they would be resurrected"

This ayat clearly shows that but for his Tasbih, Yunus would have
stayed in the stomach of the fish till Qiyamat. Then what is strange if
a man stays on the earth till Qiyamat? Then there is the long life of
Hadhrat Nuh. According to Qur'an, he preached to his people, before
cursing them, for 950 years. Then came the Flood and he lived long after
the Flood. In all he lived 2500 years. Compare it with the age of our
present Imam which at this time is 1132 years only and you will not see
any cause for objection.

Q48:What is the main difference George Chiteri, Mombasa, Kenya.

A. In this connection, first let me explain that, according to Islamic
belief, Jesus Christ was a prophet sent by God to guide the children of
Israel unto the right path. His Prophethood continued till the arrival
of Muhammad, (S.A.W.W.) the Last Prophet sent by God. Thus Islam and
Christianity both have come from the same source; but the difference is
that Christianity was for a specific tribe and for a specific period,
while Islam has come for all mankind for upto the last day of the
world.

By the passage of time many such things had crept into Christianity
which had made it necessary to send anotner Prophet to remove those
wrong ideas and beliefs. For Example :-

1. The Muslims believe that there is only one God. The Christians,
while claiming to have the same belief, actually believe in 3 gods :
God, Christ and Holy Ghost. They want to reconcile both their claims by
saying that these 3 are 'one' and at the same time '3'. How this strange
arithmetic is believed is beyond comprehension. They say that first you
believe it then you can understand it.

2. The Muslims believe as they have been taught in Qur'an :-

"Say, He is God, The One and Only; God, the Eternal, Absolute; He
be-getteth not, nor is He begotten; And there is none like unto Him".

The Christians believe that God begot a son who was Jesus Christ. Thus
God became a father. And as Christ also is a god and he is called "the
son of god", so god became a son also. How God became father of Jesus is
not explained. The only argument is that Jesus was born without father,
so Allah was his father. To this claim, the Qur'an replies :- "The
example" of Jesus before God is as that of Adam; He created him from
dust, then said to him, "Be" and he was"

If Jesus can be claimed to be "son of God" because he had no father,
Adam has far stronger claim to be the son of God because he had neither
father nor mother.

3. The Muslims believe that every man is responsible for his own
actions. No man will be punished for other's sin. Qur'an says, "that no
bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another"

The Christians on the other hand believe that as Nabi Adam ate from the
tree in Jannat, he committed a sin; and that sin has been inherited by
every human-being; thus every person is born with that sin and will be
punished for it. It is also diametrically opposed to the Muslims belief
that all children are born free from every sin and disbelief.

4. Resulting from No. 3, the Christians believe that it was to remove
that sin from mankind that Jesus Christ died on the cross. Now anyone,
believing that Jesus Christ died on the cross for atonement of the sins
of mankind, will automatically become free from every sin and thus will
be saved from punishment.

Muslims emphatically refute this belief, because it is based on the
wrong and illogical assumption of the "original sin" of Nabi Adam.

5. Christians believe that one of their gods (i.e. Jesus Christ) died
and again became alive after 3 days. The Muslims' God is the Creator of
death and life. Death cannot reach him. Resulting from these
differences, many, other differences have arisen. But I think this much
is enough for this letter.

Q 49: Is Islam related in anyway with the Chritianity?

A. You have asked about the relationship between Islam and
Christianity. Being a Muslim, you must be aware that Allah sent 124,000
prophets beginning with Hadhrat Adam (A.S.) and ending with our Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.W.). All these prophets came from Allah and
brought His message. As they all came from one Allah, their basic faith
(e.g. Unity of God, His Mercy and Justice, the Day of Judgement, etc.,)
was always the same. But the rules of prayers, of family system, etc.,
etc., changed according to the needs of the time.

Consequently, five new sheriats were sent one after another through
Hadhrat Nuh, Ebrahim, Musa, Isa and Muhammad Mustafa (peace of Allah be
on them). Every later sheriat abrogated and cancelled the previous one.
Thus, the sheriat of Hadhrat Muhammad Mustafa (S.A.W.W.) cancelled the
sheriat of Hadhrat Isa (A.S.) and all the previous sheriats.

In this background you may easily understand the relationship between
these two religions; Islam and Christianity both came from the same
source, but Islam was sent to cancel all the previous religions
including Christianity.

Q50: What is the message of Islam to the non-Muslims?

A. The message of Islam to the non-Muslims is found in the following
ayat of the Holy Qur'an:- "Say, O People of the Book, come on the word
agreed between us and you; that we shall worship none but Allah and that
we shall ascribe no partner unto Him and that none of us shall take
others for lords besides Allah". (Ale-lmran : 64).

Q51: Why is Islam and Ahmadiyyas not same in their beliefs?

A. Here also there are many differences; but the basic differences are
as follows :-

1. Muslims (without exception) believe that Hadhrat Muhammad (S.A.W.W.)
is the Last Prophet. No prophet is ever to come after him.

The Ahmadiyyas (commonly known as Qadianis) believe that Mirza Ghu-lam
Ahmad of Qadian (died in 1908 A. D.) was prophet.

2. The Muslims believe that Imam Mahdi will re-appear before Qiyamat
and that Hadhrat Isa(A.S.)willcomeasoneofhisfollowerstohelphim.

The Qadianis believe that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Qadiani was Imam Mahdi and
Nabi Isa - all in one, like the "3-in-1" god of the Christians.

3. The Qadiani's belief about angels and Satan appears to be quite
different from the belief of the Muslims.

There are other differences which it is not possible to explain in a
short letter. Q52: I am really confused about my attitude towards the
Ahmadiyya Sect. What should my standpoint be? Is it merely a dissident
group which differs in its opinions as to the interpretation of certain
Islamic beliefs or do its contentions differ fundamentally with the
basic Islamic tenets? And if so how should we (Muslims) regard them?

A. Ahmadias (commonly known as Qadianis) differ with the Muslims in
many of the basic tenets, the most important one being the finality of
Prophethood.

Also they do not believe in 'Malaika,' and resurrection of the dead.
There are many items in religion which are called "Dharuriyaat-e-Deen",
i.e., such Basic Tenets which are known to every Muslim as part of
religion. Take for example, the 5 times prayers, Fast of Ramadhan, Hajj
of Kaaba, etc.

If any person rejects even one of Dharuriyaat-e-Deen, he according to
the unanimous belief of the Muslims, becomes Kafir, though he may be
reciting "La llaha Illallah Muhammadun Rasulullah".

The belief that our Holy Prophet was the last Prophet and no other
prophet is to come after him, is one of the Dharuriyaat-e-Deen. Anybody
or any sect rejecting this belief is Kafir. (For details, see "Muhammad
Is The Last Prophet" published by this Mission.)

No. 53: ("Note: This letter was sent to Mr. Jamifur Rahman Rafiq, Chief
Missionary of Ahmadiya Mission of Kenya, Nairobi. No reply was ever
received).

"During the Agricultural Society Show of Mombasa you told some Shia
youths that Abdul Hamid bin Abil-Hadid (who wrote one of the
commentaries of Nahjul-Balagha) was Shia. When I asked you whether you
had seen that commentary, you told me that you had not seen it but that
you depended upon a book prepared by your headquarters in which he is
mentioned as Shia.

I gave you an old issue of the "Light" (March-June, 1967) in which your
claim that Ibn Abil- Hadid was Shia had been shown to be completely
against his own declarations. For your information, we have in our
Mission's Library the Mash-hadi edition of Nahjul- Balagha; and I have
in my personal library all 20 volumes of the Sharh of Nahjul-Balagha by
Ibn Abil-Hadid; and our Mombasa library has the Egyptian edition of
Nahjul-Balagha (with foot notes by Mufti Mohammad Abduh).

You are welcome to see all or any of the above editions at any time.

Then you showed me an Arabic writing in the same book of yours
purporting to be a letter of Ameerul-Mumineen Ali bin Abi Talib, some of
whose sentences praised the First and Second Caliphs as 'Siddique' and
'Farooque'. The writer of your book has given the reference of
Nahjul-Balagha. When you showed me that writing I knew that it was not
in Nahjul-Balagha. Still I wanted to check your reference once more and
I copied the said "quotation".

Now, I have checked the whole book and no such or similar paragraph is
in Nahjul-Balagha. Now you have two tangible items to check the
reliability of your writers :

(a)They wrote that Abdul-Hameed Ibn Abil-Hadid was Shia - while he
himself writes in the same book that he was a Mutazilite and propounds
the beliefs of Baghdadi Mutazilites from the beginning of his book to
the end.

(b)They claim a "quotation" to be from "Nahjul-Balagha" while there is
no such wording in Nahjul-Balagha.

If your writers can mislead you so blatantly in matters which can
easily be checked what trust can you put in them in other matters?

Q54: I write this letter in reply to your advertisement in the Uganda
Argus of 13th November, 1969. I am a student of Islam at Makerere
University College and at present I am faced with many unanswered
questions, theological, historical and others about Islam. For example,
"Western critics claim that Sufism was borrowed from Christianity or
other religions outside Islam"' and not within Islam itself.

I am not satisfied by answers given by my lecturer in Islamics, partly
due to the fact that he is a Christian and also his knowledge is western
orientated. I am also interested, and have been thinking for some time
on the following topic :-

**"ISLAM AND NOT MOHAMEDANISM".**

Therefore, I shall be most grateful if you send me literature (free or
otherwise) so that I could get answers to my questions and also defend
my religion Islam from some pamphleteers and critics.

A. So far as Sufism is concerned, it is almost certain that it was
borrowed from the sources outside of Islam. Muhaddith Dehlavi was of the
opinion that first Sufis were from Kharijites. Others trace its origin
to Hasan Basri who, undoubtedly, was against Ali bin Abi Talib, a fact
which must be remembered in view of the later generations' assertion
that he got his training from Ali.

I think the point of contention is not that whether Sufism sprung from
within Islam or it was imported from outside. The only point of argument
is whether it was borrowed from Christianity or Hinduism.

I think that both groups are partially right, because Sufism has taken
something from both. Your idea of "Islam and NOT Muhammadanism" is quite
right. Islam is the religion which was brought by all the prophets
beginning from Hadhrat Adam (A.S.) and ending with Hadhrat Muhammad
Mustafa (S.A.W.W.). All the prophets and apostles brought the same faith
(e.g., Unity of God, His Mercy and Justice, Day of Judgement, etc.
Etc.). Of course, their Sheriats concerning mode of prayer, family
system, penal code, etc., etc., were changing in response to the
maturity of humanity; but the basic faith was never changed.

Therefore, to give Islam the name of "Muhammadanism" is very misleading
and absolutely wrong. Islam was and is the Religion of Allah, not of
Muhammad (S.A.W.W.). I hope this will be sufficient to your needs. Q55:
Can a Sunni Muslim pray with Ismailis or Bohras in the same Mosque?
Bukere Suleman, Entebbe (Uganda)

A. I am not aware whether the Ismailis or Bohras will allow you to
enter Jamat Khanas or mosques during prayer time.

Moreover, Ismailis do not pray like other Muslim Sects. They have an
entirely different way of "Bandagi" which has no resemblance with
Muslims' prayers. Q56:ExplainwhyIsmailism Miss Minaz S. Hassan, Kampala,
(Uganda).

**is a complete way of life?**

A. It would have been better if you had put this question to the
Ismaili hierarchy. This question presupposes that Ismailism is a
complete way of life and you just want to know how is that so. Now, as
it happens, we cannot, in good conscience, concur with you in that
supposition. We know that Islam established the dignity of mankind by
rejecting all the ideas of human worship, nature worship or idol
worship. (You better read 'Islam' pp. 3-5). So if any group, calling
itself a sect of Islam, cultivates the idea that God was incarnated in a
certain person, and thus demands the prerogatives of God for that human
being, that group brings the human dignity down to the stage of
sub-humanity. Such a faith cannot be termed as a complete way of life.

I am afraid I may have offended your feelings. In fact, the main cause
of delay in replying to your question was that I did not like to give
you a shock, but on the other hand, I felt obliged to give the reply as
you have sought our help in this matter of religion. I would not go into
the details of my reply at this stage, but if you want some details and
quotations, please write to me again and I will supply the required
information. Q57: What is the difference between Shia and Sunni sects of
Islam?

A. You may refer to a cyclostyled article 'Sects of Islam' published by
this Mission which will give you a fairly comprehensive idea of all the
differences. If there is anything more which you want to be explained
fully, please write to me without hesitation. (now that article is
published as an Appendix of 'Your Questions Answered', Vol. 2, available
from this Mission). Q58: What is the difference between Shia and
Ithna-Asheri?

A. The word 'Shia' is from Arabic word. 'At -Tashayyo which means to
follow. This word has been used for the followers of the Prophets of
Allah in the Holy Qur'an. "And verily among his (Noah's) Shias
(followers) is Ibrahim" (Qur'an 37 : 83).

We are called Shia because we follow the Holy Prophet according to the
way shown by Hazrat Ali (A.S.) and other sinless members of the family
of the Holy Prophet. In fact, it was the Holy Prophet himself who named
followers of Hazrat Ali (A.S.) as Shia. The famous Sunni Scholars,
Allamah Ibn Hajar (in his book "As-Sawaiqul-Muhriqua") and Allamah Ibn
Athir (in his book 'Nihaya') recorded that the Prophet said : "O Ali,
verily thou wilt come in the presence of Allah,thou and thy Shias
happily and Allah will be pleased with you". 'Ithna-Asher' is the Arabic
for 'twelve'. As we believe in 12 Imams after the Holy Prophet, hence
this name.

No. 59:

The following letter was written in reply to some questions sent by
Sheikh Omar Schubert Al-Muhtadi, Vice-President of Islamic Community in
Hamburg, (West) Germany.

**RULES OF SHIA SHERIAT CONCERNING PERSONAL HYGIENE**

(a) AFTER URINATING :

1. It is wajib to wash the organ TWO times, with pure and Tahir Water.
The organ cannot be Tahir except by water.

2. ISTIBRA: It is a device to make sure that no drops of urine have
remained in the male organ. It is not wajib; but still is very much
necessary. The standard method is to : (a) Press a finger near the
beginning of the urine-passage at the bottom and rub it upward three
times upto the testicles.

(b)Likewise, put finger at the root of penis and rub the urine-passage
from the root upto the tip three times;

(c)Then, shake the penis three times to make sure that all urine has
gone out,

(d)Also at the time of shaking it, put pressure on it by coughing
gently. After the Istibra, the penis should be washed as mentioned have
no need of Istibra.

in No. 1. Women

3. The benefit of Istibra is that if after Istibra and washing, you
suspect that some wet material has come out of penis and you are in
doubt whether it is urine or not, you have no need of washing again. You
will say to yourself that I have done Istibra and taken out all urine,
so it is not urine. But, if you are sure that it is urine, or if you
have not done Istibra and you are doubting whether it is urine or not,
in both these conditions, you will have to wash again.

(b) AFTER THE ACTION OF BOWELS (LAVATORY)

4. If the stool (excreta) is somewhat dry so that it has not dirtied
more than the normal exit of the stool, it can be cleaned by :

(a) stone;
(b) or clay;
(c) or cloth;
(d) or paper:
(e) or other such things

which may rub out the stool (excrata). All such things must be Tahir
before starting the rubbing. Also, it is necessary that the rubbing
should be done at least 3 times. If you feel that there is still some
stool, you should go on rubbing (even after 3 times) until the paper (or
other material which is used for cleaning) comes clean. The third
necessity is that for every rubbing a fresh paper (or cloth etc.) should
be used. One paper cannot be used twice. It is necessary to mention here
that use of the water for cleaning is preferable in every case.

5. If the stool is not dry and has dirtied more than normal portion of
the body, it can be cleaned by Water only. Nothing else can clean it.

5(a) In cleaning by water, you must clean so much that you are sure
that the stool has been washed completely.

6. It is necessary to wash hand, after cleaning stool or urine, two
times. (C) OTHER RULES REGARDING URINATING OR BOWELING :

7. It is Wajib to sit in a place where nobody can see your genital
parts. This rule does not apply in case of husband and wife. It is not
necessary to hide from either of them.

8. It is Haram (Unlawful) to sit facing Quibla, or with back towards
Quibla.

9. It is haram to rub the stool (as mentioned in No. 4) with sacred
things like a paper of Qur'an or clay of the graves of Imams (A.S.).
Also it is Haram to rub it with any bone or any other stool of animal
like cow-dung, etc.

(D)OTHER THINGS:

10. It is highly stressed that the superfluous hair on the genital
parts should be removed regularly. Women are encouraged to remove it at
least twice a month, while men should remove it once a month at least.
Muslims, generally, do not wait so long. Many people shave it twice
weekly. Hair removing lotion or soap may be used by women. Indeed, it is
preferred in the Shariat. They are not encouraged to use razor. But I
have seen in many books that man should not use these lotions etc.,
because they harm his masculinity. He should shave it with razor. The
superfluous hair in the arm-pits also should be removed.

11. Nails should be cut at least once a week. If there is more than
normal dirt in the nails, Wuzu or Ghusl may become difficult. Therefore
attention is drawn to it.

12. Nail polish is a nuisance, because Wuzu cannot be done with nail
polish on. It is necessary that water should reach the nails without any
cover.

(E)CONCESSIONS FOR A NURSING MOTHER:

13. A woman (not man) who is rearing a boy infant (not girl), who has
got no other cloth to wear, and her only cloth becomes Najis by the
urine of the boy (not by any other Najasat) is permitted to pray in the
same cloth. There is only one condition. She must wash and clean that
cloth once in 24 hours. After that she may pray without any anxiety
though the child may urinate on her. This rule is for the cloth only,
not for parts of body.

Q60: Can a woman recite Qur'an or Dua during her monthly period?

A. Qur'an :

1. It is Haram to recite from those 4 Suras which have ayats of Wajib
Sajda. These are Alif Lam Meem Sajda; Ha Meem Sajda; Najm and Iqra. Even
reciting Bismillahir- Rahmanir-Rahim with intention of any of these
Suras is Haram.

2. It is Haram to touch writing of the Qur'an in that condition.

3. It is allowed (but strongly disliked) to carry Qur'an or touch it
(even without touching the writing) in that condition.

4. It is allowed to recite Qur'an (other than the 4 above mentioned
Suras) by memory but it is strongly disliked to recite more than 7
ayats.

Dua:

1. It is not allowed to touch the writing of those parts of Dua (in any
script) which contain the ayats of Qur'an or names of Allah, Prophets,
Imams or Masumeen. As almost all Duas contain these things, one MUST
avoid touching any part of the writings of Dua.

2. Reciting Dua by looking into it (without touching the writing) or by
memory is allowed during the monthly period.


