Q61: What Are the Rules Concerning White Secretion From Woman If It Is Not Connected With Sexual Act Or Thought?
================================================================================================================

A. If it has not come out as a result of sexual act or thought then it
is not Najis. But she should see her Doctor to make sure that her health
is all right.

Q62: The sweat produced on human body after masturbation but before
"Ghusl" is najis. Is the sweat produced after night ejaculations during
dream (wetbed) najis also?

A. No - And, according to the Fatwa of Agha-e-Khoui, even the sweat
produced during or after unlawful Janabat is not Najis. But if that
sweat is on the body or cloth, Namaz will not be valid.

Q63: Why do Muslims pray five times a day?

A. The Holy Prophet once asked his companions that if a man had his
house on a river-bank and bathed properly in that river 5 times a day,
would there remain any dirt on his body? The companions replied : "No, O
Prophet of Allah, he would remain absolutely clean. There would be no
dirt on his body". The Holy Prophet said : "The daily prayers of 5 times
are like that river and if a Muslim properly prays 5 times a day there
would remain no dirt of sin or immorality on him".

The same thing has been accepted by many Christian writers like Rev.
James Muller and Mr.

C. M. King. The latter writes that by nature, when a man is engaged in
worldly affairs or entertainments, he pays no attention to his moral
development; and some entertainments by their nature make the man forget
God. When I think how Islam has made its followers obliged to pray 5
times in a day and night and has ordered them to discharge this duty in
all conditions, I have to admit that the Muslim's prayer certainly is
the best way of guidance, as it removes unhealthy thoughts from minds
after short intervals. When the time comes to pray and the Muslims
gather Into the Mosque to pray, they become bound by sincerity, love and
unity, and prayer creates in them the humility and modesty. When rich
and poor stand together to pray, it demonstrates the equality of
Islam.

Q64: I always pray with sincere intention and wish but I cannot
concentrate while praying. So, are my prayers accepted and valid? Will I
ever be able to concentrate? I try very hard but in vain?

A. Your prayer is alright. Try to think about the meanings of the words
you recite. I think in this way you may be able to concentrate more and
more on the prayers.

Q65: I find it impossible to repay my KAZA fasts and prayers due to
lack of time and some personal reasons. Any other ways to repay them
back?

A. No personal reason can ever justify neglecting the Qaza of prayers;
and no so-called "lack of time" can save you from the Qaza of fasts. If
you have time to sleep and eat you have enough time to pray your Namaz;
and if you have time to rest even one or two days in a month you have
enough time to fast the Qaza.

Such lame excuses will serve no purpose on the Day of Judgement.

Q66: What happens when you combine all the prayers of the week and you
pray them all on one day?

A. It is the greatest sin not to pray in time. According to the Hadith
of the Holy Prophet the prayer is the boundry line between Islam and
Kufr. If someone leaves one of his prayers, he commits one of the
greatest sins. Then what will be his position if he leaves the prayers
of one complete day? And I do not find words to express the horror of
leaving the prayers of whole week.

Of course, if someone has committed this sin, then he MUST pray those
prayers in Qadha, as soon as possible.

Q67: Maghrib prayer time ends at midnight. How can we know the exact
midnight?

A. The time of Maghrib begins after sunset when the reddish colour at
East vanishes; and ends when only four Rik'ats' time remains to exact
midnight, because the four Rik'ats' time just before exact mid-night is
Isha's reserved time, and if someone has not prayed Maghrib by then, it
becomes Qaza; he should pray Isha in that 4 Rik'ats' time. If any person
did not pray Maghrib and Isha in time, owing to some justifiable reason,
he should pray both prayers before Subh-e-Sadique without niyyat of
'Ada' or 'Qaza'. Now coming to your question about mid-night. Mid-night
is the exact half between sunset and sunrise, according to the Fatwa of
Agha-e-Khoui.

Q68: Ghusl of Mass-e-Mayyit becomes wajib after touching a dead body.
Now if some-one is a doctor or nurse, and he/she has to touch
dead-bodies every now andthen,shouldhe/shedoGhuslaftereverycontact?

Roshanali M. M. Dewji, Essex (U.K.)

A. Ghusl of Mass-e-Mayyit becomes wajib, if one touches the dead body
of a human being after it has become cold (and, in case of a Muslim's
dead body, after being cold and before completion of Ghusl-e-Meyyit). If
a Doctor or Nurse touches a dead body (as mentioned above), he/she may
do one Ghusl-e- Masse-Mayyit, in the afternoon to enable him to pray
Zuhr and Asr, and shortly afterwards, Maghrib and Isha.

If he/she touches it in night, Ghusl-e-Masse-Mayyit should be done
before morning prayer. If because of unbearable cold, one is unable to
do this Ghusl, Tayammum should be done in its place.

Q69: Can Friday and Idd prayers be prayed individually?

A. Idd prayer, yes, Friday prayer, No. Moreover, Friday prayer is not
even necessary in the "Ghaibat of Imam (A.S.)".

Q70: What are the qualifications of a peshnamaz?

A. He must be

(a) Ithna-Asheri,
(b) Sane,
(c) Legitimately born,
(d) He must be 'Adil'. It means that he does not commit big sins even
unintentionally; and if he commits any small sin (not intentionally) he
repents at once and does not repeat it.
(e) He must have correct pronunciation of Arabic words.
(f) He must be a man (if he is leading in a prayer attended by men),
and
(g) He must not be praying sitting (if the people behind him are
praying standing); also
(h) he must know the necessary 'Masail' of Taharat and prayers
Q71: Can an Ithna-Asheri pray in a Sunni mosque (a) individually (b)
with Jamaat led by a Sunni?

A. (a) Yes.

(b)The Sunni shariat is not strict about the qualifications of a
'Peshnamaz'. Therefore, they often pray behind a Peshnamaz who is not
'Adil'. Therefore, you should avoid praying with them.

If, however, you have to join their Jamaat prayer, join but pray your
whole Namaz with 'Furada' Niyyet. Thus you will sit and stand with the
Jamaat, but pray your own Namaz. Q72: If there is no Ithna-Asheri mosque
in a town can the Friday prayer be prayed in a Jamaat led by a Sunni?

A. Already explained in the Answer of Question 71. Q73: In July, my
cousin and I went to the gathering of 'Federation of Students' Islamic
Society of England and Ireland (FOSIS). We prayed Jamaat namaaz. Now,
the Imam was a Sunni (as majority were sunn is); We prayed behind him.
My cousin and I had already prayed (Namaz) in our rooms and then we went
and prayed the Jamat Namaz. Was it alright what we did? Do we have to
have a special Niyyat if we pray Sunni Jamaat Namaaz?

A. Of course, if you had to pray in the Jamaat to avoid social
Embarrassment it was all right; but that Namaaz of yours behind a
non-lthna-Asheri Peshnamaz was not a Namaaz at all. It was good that you
had already prayed in your room.

Q 74: If, in a prayer, we don't keep 'mohr' (although we have it,
without any fear), is our prayer void? If I don't have 'mohr' on what
can I prostrate? A. The thing upon which you can do Sajdah is either
earth or anything growing from earth, provided it is from those things
which are not eaten or worn. Therefore, Sajdah is not allowed on cloth
or fruits or edible vegetables, or on such a thing which does not come
under the term 'Earth' viz, diamond or gold etc; or does not come under
the term Vegetation viz., ash or coal.

Also, Sajdah is not correct on hide or skin, because it does not grow
from the earth; nor is it allowed on carpets made of wool, cotton, jute
or silk, because wool and silk do not grow from earth and cotton and
jute are used in clothes.

Sometimes it is seen that people do Sajdah upon their hands or nails,
even while praying in the Masjid. Their Namaz is Batil, without any
doubt. Remember that the mats are made from a fibre which is neither
eaten nor worn and it is quite in order to do Sajdah on them, especially
if your forehead rests upon an uncoloured portion. Likewise, you may do
Sajdah on real (but not on artificial) marble. Cement and lime are made
from burnt stones; therefore a cemented floor or floor covered with lime
cannot be used for Sajdah. Likewise, Sajdah is not allowed on
earthenware, after it has been treated by fire.

Q75: During our Prayers when we have said "ADDUA U BAINAS SAJDATAIN" we
prostrate as before for the second time. There is book which I have read
and reads 'After that say Atlah-O-Akbar and stand up again for second
rakaat and do as you did before. After the Sura-tul-Fatiha and another
Sura or a portion of the Holy Qur'an. When you have done two
prostrations, sit down and read Tashah-hud! Please would you explain me
what this means so that I can start praying. Please, could you explain
all the 5 hours of praying. Is there any book which I can buy which
tells all about Islam translated in English. Please answer me these
questions.

A. The question about 2nd Rik'at: Every prayer is divided in Rik'ats. A
Rik'at ends after the 2nd Sajdah and when you stand up, the next Rik'at
begins.

Your quotation just says that at the end of the first Rik'at i.e.,
after the 2nd Sajdah of first Rik'at, you should sit down, say
Allah-o-Akbar and then stand up for the second Rik'at, which is to be
performed exactly like the first Rik'at. But when you have finished the
second Sajdah of 2nd Rik'at you have to sit down and recite Tashahhud
(which is called 'At-Tahayyat' in Sunni terminology).

You can refer to "Elements of Islamic Studies" which will tell you all
the necessary things about cleanliness, prayers and fasting.

Q76: Can you translate 'Tahiyatu' in English for me? Mohamed N.
Muakasa, Entebbe, (Uganda).

A. The following is the translation of 'Attahiyyatu' in English.
"Salutations, prayers and goodness are meant for Allah. Peace upon you O
Prophet! And mercy, blessing of Allah may be upon you Peace be upon the
righteous servants of Allah and I witness that Muhammad (S.A.W.W.) is
His servant and His messenger.

O Allah ! Send thy blessings upon Muhammad and his progeny. Peace be
upon you and the Mercy and Blessings of Allah upon you."


