Q94: Is It a Must That Every Muslim Must Go To Mecca, If So What of Those Who Don't Go There?
=============================================================================================

A. Not every Muslim. Only those whose health and wealth allows it and
who fulfill all other necessary conditions.

Q95: Is there any limitation to age of going to Mecca? If so, what is
the minimum? I am aged 23 years and I would like to go next year.

A. If a Muslim is adult and sane, has means to go to Mecca in the month
of Hajj and his/her health is good enough to make the journey, he/she is
obliged to go for Hajj.

A boy is deemed to be adult when :

(a) he is 15 years old, or
(b) rough hair grows below his navel, or
(c) if he discharges semen.
A girl is deemed to be adult when :

(a) a)she is 9 years old, or
(b) rough hair grows below her navel.

In your case, you are adult and sane and if other conditions of Hajj
(concerning health and wealth) are fulfilled, Hajj is wajib (obligatory)
upon you. When you go to Hajj, please remember me in your prayers. May
Allah reward your Hajj with acceptance! Amen.'

Q96: What is the most liked house to God?

A. "Kaaba in Mecca is the most liked house of God in this world, but
even more liked than that is the heart of the Mumin (faithful) which is
said to be the 'choicest house of Allah". Q97: What is Jihad-e-Akbar and
what steps would you take to fight Jihade- Akbar?

A. Jihad-e-Akbar: Fighting the enemies of Islam on command of Prophet
or Imam is called Jihad-e-Asghar (small battle). Subduing your own
desires and ambitions putting your whole self under the command of Allah
is called Jihad-e-Akbar (Great Battle). It means that you should
willingly sacrifice all that you have if obedience to Allah depends upon
it. Neither family ties, society's relations, nor financial holdings
should keep you away from right path if you happen to find it. If you
succeed in this test, you have won in the Jihad-e-Akbar.

Q. 98: I understand that Jihad is a holy war. Is it true that if
someone dies in the battle, he goes straight to Paradise? If so why is
that?

A. Jihad: Please refer to the booklet "Islam" (P.24-26) for this
subject. Remember that a martyr fighting in the cause of Allah (in its
true sense) sacrifices his whole being for the Divine cause, and that
Allah, in His infinite Grace and Mercy, has promised to give reward of a
virtue at the ratio of at least 10 to 1. Therefore Allah rewards a
martyr (who sacrificed his mortal life) with an immortal and
ever-lasting life under His Mercy. That is why the martyrs are assured
of Paradise.

By the way, if a martyr has some obligations towards other men which he
had not fulfilled, Allah will arrange to repay those persons on the Day
of judgement.

Q. 99: What is the purpose of marriage?

A. Purpose of Marriage : The institution of marriage has 3 aims, which
taken together constitute the purpose of marriage :

(a) Satisfying the natural urge of physical love and sex.
(b) Procreation which ensures the continuity of mankind.
(c) Establishment of a family unit which ensures that the children born
as a result of (a) and (b) above receive the love, protection and care
which is essential to make them useful and normal human beings.

Sexual desire can be satisfied without marriage, but it lacks the other
two (and especially the 3rd) benefits.

It should be observed in passing that those religions which try to curb
this natural urge are trying to say (by deeds, not by words) that the
Creator made a mistake in creating this natural desire. They fail to
realize that if all human beings responded to their call of celibacy
humanity will be extinct within a short period. Such teaching cannot
take humanity forward because of the simple reason that they tend to be
against the continuity of humanity.

Q100: The Islamic religion allows polygamy and not polyandry. Explain
briefly why a man is allowed polygamy and a woman forbidden polyandry
instead of both of them forbidden.

A. 'Light1 Vol. Ill, No. 6 will show the wisdom of permission of
polygamy. As for polyandry, here is an episode which answers your
question fully :-

Once some women came to Hadhrat Ali (A.S.) with the same question.
Hadhrat Ali (A.S.) told them to bring water in cups. When they came back
with the cups full of water, he ordered them to put the water in a
basin.

Then he told them to take out their water, but each one should take out
the same water which she had put in. They protested that it was
impossible as the water had been mixed. Hadhrat Ali (A.S.) said that it
was for the same reason that a woman was not allowed to marry more than
one husband at a time, because there would be no way to know who her
child belonged to, and who was to be responsible for that child's
upbringing.

Q101: Can a Muslim man be a husband of many wives - and if so how many
at least?

A. This question is on the subject of "Polygamy". A Muslim is allowed,
with certain conditions, to marry upto 4 wives at a time. What those
conditions are, you will find them in an article published in our
magazine "LIGHT". (Now see "Why Polygamy Is Allowed In Islam" available
from this Mission) Before Islam there was no limit to the number of
wives a man could marry. In every country from India to Rome and from
Russia to Africa a man could marry as many wives as he pleased. (Perhaps
you may have heard of some living Chiefs in Kenya having more than 50
wives).

Islam restricted the number to four. It is the maximum; and it has been
fixed keeping in view the average ability of a man to satisfy all
necessary conditions conducive to a happy household; physical,
emotional, financial, etc., all taken together. The 'essentiality' of
polygamy in certain circumstances cannot be denied; and once you allow
polygamy, you have to stop somewhere to prevent its misuse. Thus, a
number had to be fixed and Islam, after keeping in view the
above-mentioned requirements, has fixed it at four. Q102: Can a wife
divorce her husband if he marries another woman and does not care about
her?

A. She cannot divorce him at all. She may demand divorce if the husband
neglects to maintain her. And marrying a second, third or fourth wife is
no ground for demanding a divorce.

Q.103: Can a Muslim woman be married to a man who is not a Muslim or
vice- versa?

A. No - Nor will it be allowed by Christianity.

Q.104: Is civil marriage unlawful in our religion? Why?

A. Civil marriage is performed when the parties belong to two different
religions. A muslim girl cannot marry a non-Muslim boy; and a Muslim boy
cannot marry a non-Muslim girl (except marrying a Christian or a Jewish
girl in temporary marriage).

Thus you will see that majority of the civil marriages is unlawful
because it is against this basic rule. The remaining cases for civil
marriages become generally unlawful because they do not observe many of
the conditions laid down by Islam.

Q.105: Does Islam religion agree with family planning?

A. Yes. But with certain conditions. Abortion is not allowed on any
pretext.

Q106: The thing is that I have been brought up in a very bad
environment.

Mummy and Daddy are always quaretling, not sparing any thought for
children's feelings, and they never pray. I started praying because my
aunty explained its importance to me. This has been going on since my
childhood. I love my aunty more than anybody else. She also loves me.
Now please tell me if I am a sinner because I love my aunty more than my
mummy?

A. It is indeed very regrettable that your parents behave in the way
described by you. They are ruining their own happiness in this life, are
contriving to be deprived of the Grace of Allah in the life hereafter;
and, what is even more tragic, they are ruining the lives of their
children by putting such emotional strains upon them. Children brought
up in such an atmosphere have to be extra alert to protect themselves
from psychological effects of this negative influence. It is for this
reason that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.W.) said : "May Allah curse the
parents who (by their misconduct) instigate their children to disobey
them."

This much about your parents. Now about your duty towards them. It is
incumbent upon you to behave respectfully towards them, inspite of all
their shortcomings. Islam has emphasized the cardinal virtue of the
obedience towards parents even if the parents are 'Kafir'. It is
ordained in the Quran :

"And We enjoined on man (to be good) to his parents: Show gratitude to
Me and to thy parents. To Me is your return. And if they strive to make
you join in worship with Me things of which you have no knowledge,obey
them not; yet bear them company in this life with fairness and
consideration." (31 : 14-15).

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said : "There are three things about which one has no
option, (one has to fulfil them without any condition attached) :

To return to the owner the thing entrusted to one's care, whether the
owner be pious or debauchee; and to fulfil the promise whether it was
(made) to a pious or a debauchee; and to do good to the parents whether
they be pious or sinners".

So far as loving your aunt more than your parents is concerned, I think
in the circumstances mentioned by you, it is understandable; and
personally I see no harm in it, provided your dealing with your parents
is based on respect and good manner. Q107: Is homosexuality of any kind
Haram?

A. Yes. So far as Islam is concerned, it is not only a capital sin but
crime also. Its punishment, according to Islamic Sheriat, is to kill him
by sword, or to stone him to death, or to burn him, or to throw him from
a high place, or to demolish a wall upon him. The people to whom Prophet
Loot (A.S.) was sent, were indulging in this crime. And lastly they were
destroyed because of it.

If two women indulge in this heinous crime, they would be punished by
100 strokes of whip. If they persist in it the punishment will remain
the same upto the third conviction. Fourth time they would be killed.

The people of Rass were destroyed by Allah because this crime was
prevalent among them. Q.108: Is masturbation allowed?

A. No - It is strictly prohibited and absolutely unlawful and Haram.

Q.109: Adultery is forbidden, would you mind to write me a verse from
the Quran forbidding adultery?

A. "Adultery" and "fornication" are differently used in the English
Language; but the Arabic word for both is the same,i.e.(Zina). Two of
the Ayats of the Qur'an on this subject are :-

1. "Nor come near the unlawful sexual relation (Zina) for it is a
shameful deed and evil, opening the road (to other evils)." (Qur'an,
Sura 17,aya 32).

2. "The woman and man guilty of adultery or fornication, flog each of
them with hundred strips; let no compassion move you in their case, in a
matter prescribed by Allah, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day
:and let a party of the Believers witness their punishment." (24:2).

Q. 110: Is it unlawful to read a novel on sexual treatise such as the
Famous PERFUMED GARDEN written by Sheikh Nafzaoun translated by Sir
Richard Burton?

A. Such books are extremely harmful to a man's physical, psychological
and moral health. Remember, your life is moulded according to your
thoughts. If you indulge in such so called "books" you will go on
thinking like that long after you have finished with that book. Thus,
your outlook on life will be governed only by sexual desires; you will
look at every passing girl with lustful eyes; and in the words of Nabi
Issa (A. S.) "Whosoever looks on a woman with lust has committed
adultery with her already in his heart." In this way, the foundation of
your morality will be destroyed.

And such thinking creates great tension in your nerves and leads to
many infirmities. In short, if you go on thinking like that, your power
of manhood will suffer because of the tension; and, as a result, you
will find yourself at a loss at the time of marriage.

Q.111:I have been employed a shop where I have to accept orders of
delivering wines, write invoices, collect amount due for payment and do
correspondence for wines in addition to other commodities for which the
Company associates.

I would therefore beg for gratuitous information whether to continue
the service with a firm dealing with alcoholic commodities as well. I
mean to state that the Company deals with many other business
commodities including wine (beer) business. Further can I do at least
correspondence relating to wine in addition to other work?

A. About your employment: There is no harm in serving a non-Muslim
firm. But it is another matter when that service includes transaction of
Liquor. Our Holy Prophet has said, "Allah has cursed (Laanat) liquor,
and the man who sows the seeds of grapes or grain for that purpose, and
the man who stands guard to that farm; and the man who makes liquor, and
the man who drinks it, and the man who serves it to others, and the man
who sells it, and the man who buys it, and the man who transports it and
the man to whom it is transported, and the man who eats from its price".
I hope this Hadith answers your questions.

Q. 112: There are only a few of us Ithna-asheris in Mozambique. All of
us are engaged in trade and commerce. Some of us have ration shops. But
the difficulty here is that the population drinks liquor very much; and
beer and wine is considered a part of grocery. As we, the Ithna-asheris,
are not allowed by our religion to sell or keep liquor, we do not get as
much business as we could if we kept the liquor. The Ismaitis keep
liquor, in their shops, and as a result, their businesses prosper, while
ours remain small.

Therefore, I request you to request our Mujtahid to allow us to keep
and sell liquor in our shops, so that we may easily compete with other
traders. Recently, I was informed of a very good example of
farsightedness of our Mujtahids. I was informed that Agha Seyyid Mohsin
al-Hakim had prohibited cow-slaughter in India, to save the lives of the
Muslims in that country. Likewise, we know that giving or taking
interest is Haram. But the owners of the Habib Bank spend hundreds of
thousands rupees in charity and good deeds, and no Mujtahid has ever
condemned that money.

Therefore, I am sure that if you put our case properly before our
Mujtahid, he will grant our request about liquor business.

A. Your letter dated 19th July, 1971 addressed to the President of the
Federation refers. It appears that you have some grave misunderstandings
about the role of our Holy Mujtahids. Therefore, I would like to remove
those misunderstandings before replying to your main questions.

First of all, the Sheriat of Islam is the most comprehensive sheriat of
the world, and it has rules for every conceivable condition, whether we
like it or not. Secondly, in Islamic Sheriat, protecting a Muslim's life
is wajib; and, if, for any reason, his life is in danger because of some
of the religious practices, the sheriat says that he MUST protect his
life and SHOULD forget that religious practice so long as that danger
remains. It is called "Taquaiyya" (Protection).

Thirdly, this Taquaiyya is allowed only to protect from danger, not to
obtain something or increase the income.

Take for example, the sacrifice of cows in India which you have
referred to. First of all, the sacrifice itself is not wajib, it is
Sunnat-e-Muwakkada. Secondly, it is not necessary to sacrifice the cow.
A goat or sheep can easily be sacrificed instead of cow. Thirdly, the
Hindus revere and worship the cow and they are the rulers of the
country.

It is generally known that, because of the sacrifice of the cow,
Muslims' lives are always in danger in India. According to the rule of
sheriat (not by new ruling or opinion of the Mujtahid) that sacrifice
would have become Haram (even if it had been Wajib originally).

So, you see, Agha Mohsin Al-Hakeem did not turn a Halal into Haram. He
simply explained what was already the rule of the sheriat.

Now, we come to your second example. Taking or giving interest from or
to a Muslim is Haram. Here, I will not go into technical detail of what
is "Riba" in Shia sheriat. But I should mention here only one thing.
Banking is not just taking or giving the interest. There are many
aspects of banking which are perfectly lawful. For example, if you
obtain a Letter of Credit from your Bank to purchase a merchandise in
Japan, your Bank will pay on your behalf the money in Japan and will get
your consignment to Mozambique. Now suppose that the goods were of Shs.
10,000/- and the Bank charged you Shs. 10,500/-. That extra charge of
Shs. 500/- is perfectly lawful according to the sheriat, because the
Bank conveyed the money on your behalf to Japan and if they charge extra
for this service it is alright. They may term it as 'interest' but in
sheriat it will not be an interest; it will be a charge in lieu of
service. Another thing to remember is that if a Muslim has two types of
income, one lawful and another unlawful, nobody is required to ask
whether the money which he has used in purchasing a shirt was from
lawful income or the Haram one. It will be supposed to be from Halal
income unless it is known to be from 'Haram' income.

A third thing : It is not the duty or function of a Mujtahid or Alim to
go and see how a man is behaving or how he is earning his money. His
function is to tell that taking 'interest' from Muslims is Haram. It is
not his duty to investigate who is taking interest and who is not. I
think now you will understand why the money spent by Habib family on
religious matters is not denounced by the Mujtahids. It is because

1. Banking business is not 100% Haram,
2. The particular money spent on a religious purpose is not 'known ' to
come from Haram income; and
3. last but not the least, it is not the duty or function of a Mujtahid
to speak about individuals.

I think now you will understand why your question can never be replied
in your favour. Drinking liquor, or selling it or purchasing it or
transporting it or keeping its account, everything is absolutely
haram.

Whatever you have said is not like the sacrifice of the cow in India.
Taquiayya means seeking protection from a danger. It is not for the
purpose of increasing the benefit. I hope this will remove all your
doubts.


