How the Men of Knowledge are Ruined
===================================

   
 Caution and fear are the legacy of knowledge and its measure; knowledge
is the ray of gnosis and the heart of belief. Whoever is denied caution
is not a man of knowledge, even if he can split hairs in dealing with
obscure items of knowledge. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاء....
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***Only those of His servants who are possessed of knowledge fear
Allah.*** (35:28)

   
 Men of knowledge are ruined by eight things: greed and miserliness,
showing off and partisanship, love of praise, delving into things whose
reality they cannot reach, affectation by taking excessive pains to
beautify their speech with superfluous expressions, lack of modesty
before Allah, boastfulness, and not acting upon what they know.  
    
 ‘Isa (‘a) said, 'The most wretched of all people is he who is known for
his knowledge, not for his actions.'  
    
 The Holy Prophet said, 'Do not sit with every presumptuous caller who
summons you from certainty to doubt, from sincerity to showing off, from
humility to pride, from good counsel to enmity, and from abstinence to
desire. Draw near to the person with knowledge, who summons you from
pride to humility, from showing off to sincerity, from doubt to
certainty, from desire to abstinence, from enmity to good counsel.' None
are fit to preach to creation except that person who has gone beyond
these evils by his truthfulness. He sees the faults of speech and knows
what is sound from what is unsound, the defectiveness of thoughts, and
the temptations of the self and his fancies.  
    
 'Ali said, 'Be like the kind, compassionate doctor who places the
remedy where it will be of benefit.' They asked ‘Isa (‘a), 'With whom
shall we sit, O Spirit of Allah?' 'With one the sight of whom reminds
you of Allah,' he replied, 'and whose speech increases you in knowledge,
and whose actions make you desire the next world.'  
  


