Thankfulness
============

   
 With every breath you take, a thanksgiving is incumbent upon you,
indeed, a thousand thanks or more. The lowest level of gratitude is to
see that the blessing comes from Allah irrespective of the cause for it,
and without the heart being attached to that cause. It consists of being
satisfied with what is given; it means not disobeying Him with regard to
His blessing, or opposing Him in any of His commands and prohibitions
because of His blessing.  
    
 Be a grateful bondsman to Allah in every way, and you will find that
Allah is a generous Lord in every way. If there were a way of
worshipping Allah for His sincerest bondsman to follow more excellent
than giving thanks at every instance, He would have ascribed to them the
name of this worship above the rest of creation. Since there is no form
of worship better than that, He has singled out this kind of worship
from other kinds of worship, and has singled out those who practise this
kind of worship, saying,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَلِيلٌ مِّنْ عِبَادِيَ الشَّكُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***

***Very few of my servants are grateful.*** (34:13)

   
 Complete thankfulness is to sincerely repent your inability to convey
the least amount of gratitude, and expressing this by means of your
sincere glorification of Allah. This is because fitting thanks is itself
a blessing bestowed upon the bondsman for which he must also give
thanks; it is of greater merit and of a higher state than the original
blessing which caused him to respond with thanks in the first place.
Therefore, every time one gives thanks one is obliged to give yet
greater thanks, and so on ad infinitum, and this while absorbed in His
blessings and unable to achieve the ultimate state of gratitude. For how
can the bondsman match with gratitude the blessings of Allah, and when
will he match his own action with Allah's while all along the bondsman
is weak and has no power whatsoever, except from Allah?  
    
 Allah is not in need of the obedience of His bondsmen, for He has the
power to increase blessings forever. Therefore be a grateful bondsman to
Allah, and in this manner you will see wonders.  
  


