Dress
=====

The best adornment of the believer's garment is precaution and the most
blessed garment is belief. As Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىَ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And clothing that guards [against evil]; that is best.*** (7:26)


Outward dress is a blessing from Allah in order to preserve the modesty
of the sons of Adam; it is a mark of honour which Allah has given to the
descendants of Adam. He did not give that honour to any other creature;
it is given to the believers as a means of carrying out their
obligations. Your best garments are those which do not distract you from
Allah, those garments, in fact, which bring you closer to remembrance of
Him, and gratitude and obedience to Him. They do not, however, move you
to pride, conceit, pretence, boastfulness or arrogance: those things are
the scourge of the faith, and their legacy is hardness of heart.

When you put on your clothes, remember that Allah veils your wrong
actions with His mercy. You should clothe your inward part as you clothe
your outward part with your garment. Let your inward truth be veiled in
awe of Allah, and let your outward truth be veiled in obedience. Take
heed of the overflowing favour of Allah, since He created the means to
make garments for covering physical immodesty and opened the gates for
repentance, regret, and seeking succour, in order to veil the inward
parts, and their wrong actions and bad character.

Do not expose anyone's faults when Allah has concealed worse things in
yourself. Occupy yourself with your own faults, and overlook matters and
situations which do not concern you. Beware lest you exhaust your life
in other people's actions and exchange your irreplaceable endowed wealth
with someone else, thereby destroying yourself. Forgetting wrong actions
brings about the greatest punishments of Allah in this world, and is the
most ample cause for punishment in the next. So long as the bondsman
occupies himself with obeying Allah, with recognizing his own faults and
leaving alone whatever might devalue faith in Allah, he is spared ruin
and is immersed in the sea of Allah's mercy, attaining the gems and the
benefits of wisdom and clarity.

But as long as he forgets his own wrong actions, is ignorant of his own
faults, and falls back on his power and strength, he will never be
successful.


