Truthfulness
============

Truthfulness is a light which radiates its reality in its own world: it
is like the sun, from whose reality everything seeks light without any
decrease occurring in this reality. A truthful person, in fact, is a man
who believes every liar, due to the reality of his own truthfulness. It
means that nothing which is opposed to truthfulness, nothing, even,
which is not truthfulness, is permitted to coexist with it; just as
happened with Adam, who believed Iblis when he lied because Iblis had
sworn a false oath to him and there was no lying in Adam. Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ نَجِدْ لَهُ عَزْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We did not find in him any determination.*** (20:115)


because Iblis originated something previously unknown, both outwardly
and inwardly. Iblis will be gathered with his lie, and he will never
benefit from the truthfulness of Adam.

Yet it benefited Adam that he believed the lie of Iblis, as Allah
testified for him when He said that he was not constant in what was
contrary to his custom. This really means that his being chosen was not
at all diminished by Satan's lies.

Truthfulness is the attribute of the truthful. The reality of
truthfulness demands that Allah purify His bondsman, as He mentioned
regarding the truthfulness ‘Isa (‘a) on the Day of Reckoning. He
indicated it by referring to the guiltlessness of the truthful men of
the community of Muhammad, saying,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا يَوْمُ يَنفَعُ الصَّادِقِينَ صِدْقُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>



***This is the day when their truth shall benefit the truthful ones.***
(5:119)


The Commander of the Faithful' said, 'Truthfulness is the sword of
Allah in His heaven and earth: it cuts everything it touches.' If you
want to know whether you are truthful or lying, then look into the
truthfulness of what you mean and the conclusion of your claim. Then
gauge them both according to a scale from Allah, as if you were present
on the Day of Resurrection. Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And measuring out on that day will be just.*** (7:8)


If there is balance and harmony in what you mean, then your claim is
successful, and your truthfulness is in the fact that the tongue does
not differ from the heart, nor the heart from the tongue. The truthful
person with this description is like the angel who draws out his soul;
if the soul is not drawn out, then what is it to do?


