Sincerity
=========

   
 Sincerity lies in all distinguished actions: it is a notion that starts
with acceptance and ends with Allah's pleasure. Therefore he whose
actions Allah accepts and with whom He is content is the sincere one,
even if his actions are few. Whoever does not have his actions accepted
is not sincere, even if his actions are many, as we can see when we
consider what happened with Adam and Iblis, may he be cursed.  
    
 The sign of acceptance is the existence of integrity and correctness,
by expending all that is desirable with accurate awareness of every
movement and stillness. In upholding what he has, the self of the
sincere one is consumed, and his life is spent so as to put what he has
in order, unifying knowledge and action, the doer and what is done by
the action. For if he has attained that, he has attained all, and if he
misses it he misses all; and that is brought about by purifying the
meanings of disassociation (tanzih) in His unity. As the first Imam
said, 'Those who act will perish, except for those who worship; those
who worship will perish except for those who know; those who know will
perish except for those who are truthful; those who are truthful will
perish except for those are sincere; those who are sincere will perish
except for those who have precaution; those who have precaution will
perish except for those who have certainty, and those who have certainty
are of exalted character.' As Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And serve your Lord until there comes to you that which is
certain.*** (15:99)

   
 The lowest level of sincerity is when the bondsman exerts himself as
much as he can, and then does not consider his action to have any worth
with Allah so that he does not make his Lord recompense him for his
actions according to his knowledge, for if Allah asks him to fulfill the
full duties of slave hood ('ubudiyah) he would be unable to do so. The
lowest station of the sincere person in the world is safety from all
wrong actions, to be rescued from the Fire and to win the Garden in the
next world.


