Precaution
==========

Precaution (taqwa) has three facets:  
    
 1. Precaution by dependence on Allah, which means leaving behind
contradiction and going beyond any shade of doubt, and this is the
precaution exercised by the highest.  
    
 2. The precaution of Allah, which means to abandon all doubtful matters
and to leave the forbidden (haram) alone; this is the precaution of the
elite.  
    
 3. The precaution of the Fire and Punishment, which results in leaving
alone what is forbidden; this is the precaution of the general public.  
    
 Precaution is like water flowing in a river. The three levels of
precaution are like trees of every colour and variety planted on the
bank of that river, each tree absorbing water from that river according
to its essence, capacity, delicateness and thickness.  
    
 Then the benefits, which creatures take from these trees and fruits,
are according to their value and worth. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزَرْعٌ وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَى بِمَاء وَاحِدٍ
وَنُفَضِّلُ بَعْضَهَا عَلَى بَعْضٍ فِي الأُكُلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***

***Palm trees having one root and [others] having distinct roots - they
are watered with one water, and We make some of them excel others in
fruit.*** (13:4)

   
 Precaution in acts of obedience to Allah is like water for the trees,
and the natures of the trees and their fruits in their colours and
tastes are like the measures of belief. Whoever has the highest degree
in belief and the purest nature with respect to the soul has the
greatest precaution. He who is precautious has the purer and more
sincere worship: whoever is like that is nearer to Allah.  
    
 But every act of devotion that is founded on something other than
precaution comes to nothing. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَى تَقْوَى مِنَ اللّهِ وَرِضْوَانٍ
خَيْرٌ أَم مَّنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَىَ شَفَا جُرُفٍ هَارٍ
فَانْهَارَ بِهِ فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***Is he, therefore, better who laid his foundation on fear of Allah and
[His] good pleasure, or he who laid his foundation on the edge of a
cracking, hollowed bank, so it broke down with him into the fire of
Hell?*** (9:109)

   
 The explanation of precaution is to avoid entering an affair which
contains no harm simply out of fear of one which does. It is, in
reality, obedience without rebellion, remembrance without forgetfulness,
knowledge without ignorance, and it is accepted by Allah and not
rejected.  
  


