Sleep
=====

   
 Sleep the sleep of the mindful, do not sleep the sleep of the heedless.
For the mindful among the astute sleep only for rest, and do not
purposely sleep through laziness.  
    
 The Holy Prophet said, 'My eyes sleep, but my heart does not.' When you
go to sleep, have the intention to lighten your burden on the angels and
disengage the self from its appetites, and to examine yourself by your
sleep; be aware of the fact that you are incapable and weak. You have no
power over any of your movements and stillnesses, except by the
judgement and measure of Allah. Know that sleep is the brother of death.
Use it as a guide to death, for there is no way to wake up in death or
to return to correct action once you have missed it. Whoever sleeps
through an obligatory, recommended or supererogatory prayer is at fault,
and his sleep is the sleep of the heedless and the path of the losers;
he is at fault. Whoever sleeps after he has discharged his duties
concerning obligatory and recommended prayers, and has carried out his
responsibilities, sleeps a praiseworthy sleep. I do not know of anything
that is safer than sleep for the people of our times who have attained
these qualities: this is because people have ceased to guard their faith
and to take care in observing their conduct. They have taken the
left-hand path. When a sincere bondsman strives not to speak out of
place, how can he avoid hearing that which would prevent him from not
speaking unless there is a safeguard? Sleep is one such safeguard. As
Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولـئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ
مَسْؤُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***

***Surely, the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these shall
be questioned about that.*** (17:36)

   
 In excess sleep there are many evils, even if it is done in the way we
have mentioned. Too much sleep is brought about by excess drink, and
excess drinking is brought about being excessively satiated. Both of
these things weigh heavily on the self to keep it from obedience, and
they harden the heart from reflection and humility.  
    
 Make your sleep your last affair in this world; remember Allah with
your heart and your tongue. Let your obedience to Allah overpower your
wrong doings and seek help from Him while you sleep, fasting until the
morning prayer, since if you are awakened at night, Satan whispers to
you, 'Sleep again, you still have a long night,' for he wants you to
miss the time of intimate contemplation and exposure of your state
before your Lord. Do not be distracted in seeking forgiveness at dawn,
for at that time there is much yearning for those in devoted
supplication.  
  


