Pilgrimage
==========

If you intend to go on pilgrimage, before resolving on it devote your
heart to Allah, stripping it of every preoccupation and every barrier
between you and Allah. Entrust all your affairs to your Creator; rely on
Him in all your actions and moments of stillness. Surrender to His
decree, decision and judgement. Abandon this world, repose, and all
creation. Perform those duties which you are bound to fulfill for other
people. Do not rely on your provisions, the animal you ride, your
companions, your food, your youth nor your wealth, for fear that they
will become your enemies and be harmful to you; in this way you will
realize that there is no power, no strength, nor might except by the
guardianship of Allah and His granting of success.

Prepare for the pilgrimage as someone who does not hope to return. Keep
good company, and be diligent in observing all your obligations to Allah
and the prophetic practices. Take care to show courtesy, endurance,
patience, thankfulness, compassion, and generosity, always putting
others before yourself at all times, even those who reject you. Then
perform an ablution with the water of sincere repentance for wrong
actions; put on the robe of truthfulness, purity, humility and fear. By
donning the garments of pilgrimage, withhold yourself from everything
which hinders you from remembering Allah, or that will impede you from
showing obedience to Him.

Fulfill His call with an answer whose meaning is clear, pure and
sincere when you call on Him, holding on firmly to your belief in Him.
Circumambulate with your heart along with the angels who circumambulate
the Throne, just as you circumambulate with the Muslims who go around
the Ka’aba. Hasten as you run in flight from your passion, freeing
yourself of all your personal assumptions of strength and power. Leave
your heedlessness and errors behind when you go out to Mina; do not
desire what is unlawful for you and what you do not deserve. Confess
your errors at Arafat: set out your contract with Allah by His Oneness,
draw near to Him and fear Him at Muzdalifah. Climb with your soul to the
highest assembly when you climb the mountain of Arafat. Slit the throat
of passion and greed in the sacrifice.

Stone your appetites, baseness, vileness, and blameworthy actions when
you stone the Pillar of Aqabah. Shave off your outward and inward faults
when you shave your hair. Enter into the security of Allah, His
protection, His veil, His shelter and His watchfulness and abandon the
pursuit of your desires by entering the Sacred Precinct. Visit the
House, and walk around it to glorify its Master, His wisdom, His majesty
and His power. Embrace the Stone, being content with His decree and
humble before His might. Leave everything that is other than Him in the
valedictory circumambulation. Purify your soul and your innermost being
for the meeting with Allah, on the day when you will meet Him when
standing on Safa'.

Take on valour and courtesy from Allah by annihilating your attributes
at Marwah. Be consistent in the conditions of your pilgrimage and
fulfill the contract you have made with your Lord, by which you will
have obliged yourself to Him on the Day of Judgement. Know that Allah
made the pilgrimage obligatory, and singled it out from all the acts of
worship in respect of Himself when He said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ
سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>



***Pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of Allah,
and [upon] everyone who is able to undertake the journey to it.***
(3:97)


The Holy Prophet established the organization of the rituals of
pilgrimage as preparation for, and an indication of, death, the grave,
the resurrection and the Day of Judgement. In this lesson for mankind he
discriminates between those who will enter the Garden and those who will
enter the Fire, through his demonstrating the pilgrimage rites from
beginning to end to those with intelligence and prudence.


