Charity
=======

   
 Obligatory charity for the sake of Allah is due from every single part
of your body, even from every root of your hair. In fact, charity is due
for every instant of your life.  
    
 Charity of the eye means looking with consideration and averting the
gaze from desires and things similar to them. Charity of the ear means
listening to the best of sounds, such as wisdom, the Qur'an, the
benefits of the faith contained in warnings and good counsel, and to
that in which your salvation lies, and by avoiding their opposite, such
as lies, slander, and similar things.  
    
 Charity of the tongue means to give good counsel to the Muslims, to
awaken those who are heedless, and to give abundant glorification and
remembrance (dhikr), and other, similar things.  
    
 Charity of the hand means spending money on others, to be generous with
Allah's blessings to you, to use it in writing down knowledge and
information by means of which other Muslims will benefit in obedience to
Allah, and to restrain the hand from evil. Charity of the foot means to
hasten to carry out one's duty to Allah by visiting virtuous people,
assemblies of remembrance (dhikr), putting things right between people,
maintaining ties of kinship, engaging in jihad, and doing things which
will make your heart sound and your faith correct.  
    
 We have mentioned here just some of the ways of zakat, namely, those
understood by the heart and those the self can deal with; although there
are others too numerous to mention, mastered by no one but His sincere
and intimate bondsmen. Indeed, these latter are the lords of zakat and
to them belongs its mark of distinction. Oh Allah, give me success in
what You love and in what makes You content.


