Remembrance
===========

   
 He who truly remembers Allah is the one who obeys Him: whoever forgets
is disobedient. Obedience is the mark of guidance, disobedience the sign
of misguidance. The root of both states lies in remembrance (dhikr) and
forgetfulness. Make your heart the focal point of your tongue, which
should not move unless the heart indicates, the intellect agrees and
your tongue accords with belief. Almighty Allah knows what you conceal
and what you reveal.  
    
 Be like someone who has shed his soul from his body, or like someone
who is attending the great parade on the Day of Reckoning, not
distracting yourself from the obligations which your Lord has laid on
you in His commands and prohibitions, His promise and His threat. Do not
be occupied with yourself rather than with the duties laid down for you
by your Lord. Wash your heart clean with the water of sorrow and fear;
make remembrance of Allah part of His most glorious remembrance of you.
He remembers you, but He does not need you. His remembrance of you is
more glorious, more desirable, more praiseworthy, a more complete and
more ancient than your remembrance of Him.  
    
 The knowledge you obtain by His remembrance of you will beget you
humility, modesty and contrition, which will in turn be the cause of
your witnessing His nobility and previous, overflowing favour. The
latter will then belittle your obedience in your own eyes, however
copious it may be as a result of His favours; and you will be sincerely
devoted to Him. But your consciousness and esteem of your own
remembrance of Him will lead to showing off, pride, foolishness and
coarseness in your character, for it means attaching too much importance
to your obedience while forgetting His overflowing favour and
generosity. It will only make you more distant from Him, and all that
you will acquire with the passing of the days is alienation.  
    
 There are two sorts of remembrance: sincere remembrance with which the
heart is in harmony, and remembrance which arises through banishing any
remembrance of other than Allah. As the Messenger of Allah said, 'I
cannot do justice in properly praising You as You praise Yourself.' The
Messenger of Allah did not set any limit on remembering Allah, since he
knew the truth that Allah's remembrance of His bondsman was greater than
the bondsman's remembrance of Him. Thus it is even more fitting that
whoever comes after the Holy Prophet should not set any limits, and
whoever wants to remember Allah should know that as long as Allah does
not remember the bondsman by granting him success in remembering Him,
that bondsman will not be able to remember Him.  
  


