Clarification of Truth and Falsehood
====================================

   
 Fear Allah and be where you wish to be among any people you choose to
be. There is no conflict for anyone in a state of precaution. Precaution
is desirable for all parties; in it is gathered all goodness and
maturity. It is the measure of all knowledge and wisdom, of every
accepted act of obedience. Precaution is the water which gushes out from
the spring of Allah's gnosis: every branch of knowledge is in need of
it. It does not need any confirmation of knowing how to be still in awe
of Allah and His power. Increase in precaution comes from Allah's
acquainting His bondman's secret with His subtle mercy: this is the root
of every truth.  
    
 Falsehood is whatever cuts you off from Allah- every group agrees on
this also. Therefore avoid falsehood, devoting your secret to Allah
without any attachment.  
    
 The Messenger of Allah said, 'The truest words that the Bedouins spoke
are the words of Labid when he said, ‘Indeed everything but Allah is
false And every blessing is most certainly ephemeral.'  
    
 So cling to what is agreed upon by people of purity, piety and
precaution in the roots of the faith, the realities of certainty,
Allah's pleasure, and submission. Do not enter into disagreement and
disputations among people, for then things will become difficult for
you. The chosen community has agreed that Allah is One and that there is
nothing like Him; and that He is just in His judgement, does whatever He
wishes, and governs what He wills. One does not ask 'why?' about
anything of His making. There has not been and will never be anything
that is not according to His will and desire; He has the power to do
what He wills, and He is true in His promise and His threat.  
    
 The Qur'an is His word, and it existed before phenomenal being, place
and time. The creation of phenomenal beings and their annihilation are
the same with Him: their creation did not increase His knowledge, nor
will their passing decrease His kingdom. His power is mighty and He is
majestic, glory be to Him.  
    
 If someone brings to you anything which falls short of this fundamental
truth, do not accept it. Devote your inward being to that and you will
see its blessings close at hand. You will be among the victors.  
  


