Introduction
============

   
 The path of Islam contains a most comprehensive and total system of
conduct for the wayfarer. The outer behaviour of a true Muslim reflects
what is deep in his inner consciousness.  
    
 As creation is based on unity, tawhid as it is called in Arabic, every
aspect of human experience reflects an aspect of unity. The Muslim is he
who has submitted and surrendered in peace and knowledge to this
wholesome and naturally balanced ecology. The outer courtesy of
behaviour emanates from an inner equilibrium. Outer certainty emanates
from inner submission and contentment. Outer nobility and courage
emanate from inner awareness of the immense mercy and compassion of the
Creator.  
    
 The outer behaviour, courtesies, practices and rituals of Islam are all
manifestations of a subtler and finer inner conditioning, and the
balanced fusion of the outer and the inner in the journey of this world.
If there is an inner attribute there must be a corresponding outer
expression, which is a symptom of an inner attribute.  
    
 In his teachings, Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq shows the way to equilibrium in
a most inspired way of tawhid. As a man of insight and knowledge he sees
the unified hand and demonstrates it to the sincere seeker. These
teachings can be of benefit to anyone who has an interest in spiritual
matters and is concerned with benefiting from the path of Islam.  
    
 The Imam's explanations in 'The Lantern of the Path' contain many
levels of understanding. Much depends upon the state of the seeker and
the extent of his sincerity. Although this book is small, its meanings
are vast. We pray to Allah to increase our knowledge and experience of
His vast compassion and mercy.  
    
*** Fadhlallah Haeri***  
  


