The Gnosis of the Prophets
==========================

   
 Allah has provided His Prophets from the treasures of His subtlety,
generosity, and mercy. He has taught them from the wealth of His
knowledge, and He has singled them out for Himself from among all
creation. No one from the entire creation possesses a state or character
similar to theirs, for He has made them the means for all creatures to
come to Him.  
    
 He made obedience to and love for them the cause of His contentment,
and opposition to them and rejection of them a cause for His wrath. He
commanded all peoples and groups to follow the religion of their
Messenger, rejecting any obedience other than by means of obedience to
them, praise of them, recognition of their love, respect and veneration
for them, esteem for them and deference to them, and rank with Allah.  
    
 Therefore glorify all the prophets of Allah, and do not place them in
the same position as anyone inferior to them. Do not exercise your
intellect regarding their stations, states, and character unless it is
by a precise clarification from Allah, and a consensus of the people who
have insight into the proofs which affirm their virtues and ranks. How
can you arrive at the reality of what they have from Allah? If you
compare their words and actions with any of the people below them, you
will be a bad companion to them; you will have disclaimed their gnosis
in ignorance of their being specially selected by Allah, and you will
have dropped below the level of the truths of belief and gnosis. So take
care, and take care again.


