Recognition of the Companions
=============================

Do not forsake certainty for doubt, and what is clear for what is
hidden. Do not pass judgement on what you cannot see because of
something you are told about it. Allah despises slander and bad opinion
of your believing brothers. What then does He think of boldness in
attributing a false statement, false belief or lie to the Companions of
the Messenger of Allah?

As He said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ تَلَقَّوْنَهُ بِأَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَتَقُولُونَ بِأَفْوَاهِكُم مَّا
لَيْسَ لَكُم بِهِ عِلْمٌ وَتَحْسَبُونَهُ هَيِّنًا وَهُوَ عِندَ اللَّهِ
عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>



***When you welcomed it with your tongues, and spoke with your mouths
that which you had no knowledge of, and you deemed it an easy matter
while with Allah it was grievous.*** (24:15*)*


As long as you can find a way to speak well and act well of people
whether or not they are present. Do not do anything else. Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُولُواْ لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Speak to men good words.*** (2:83)


Know that Allah chose companions for His Prophet, honoured them with
the noblest mark of honour and robed them in the robe of support,
victory and the correct keeping of his company in desirable and
undesirable situations. He made the tongue of His Prophet speak about
their virtues, excellent qualities and marks of honour; so believe in
their love, mention their excellence, and beware of the company of
people of innovation, for it will make disbelief and clear loss grow in
the heart. If the excellence of some of them is not clear to you, then
leave them to the Knower of the Unseen, and say, 'O Allah, I love anyone
You and Your Messenger love, and I hate anyone You and Your Messenger
hate.' There is no obligation beyond that.


