Humility
========

   
 Humility embraces every precious and noble rank and high position. If
humility had a language which people understood, it would speak about
the realities which are hidden in the outcomes of affairs. Humility is
whatever is undertaken for Allah and in Allah, and anything other then
that is trickery. Whoever is humble to Allah, Allah will honour over
many of His bondsmen. The people of humility have recognizable signs.
When one of them was asked about humility, he said, 'It means you are
humble to the truth and follow it, even if you hear it from a child.'
Many types of pride keep one from using, accepting and following
knowledge. There are certain verses about this, denouncing the haughty.
The people of humility have signs recognized by the angels in heaven and
the gnostics on earth. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَيْنَهُمَا حِجَابٌ وَعَلَى الأَعْرَافِ رِجَالٌ يَعْرِفُونَ كُلاًّ
بِسِيمَاهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***On the most elevated places there shall be men who know all by their
marks.*** (7:46)

   
    
 and elsewhere,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يَرْتَدَّ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللّهُ بِقَوْمٍ
يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ
عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*** ***

***Whoever from among you turns back from his faith, then Allah will
bring a people whom He loves and they shall love Him, humble towards the
believers, mighty against the unbelievers.*** (5:54)

   
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***Surely the most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you
with the greatest precaution.*** (49:13)

   
 And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا تُزَكُّوا أَنفُسَكُم...ْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***Do not attribute purity to your souls.*** (53:32)

   
 The root of humility comes from the majesty, awe, and immensity of
Allah. Allah is not pleased with any act of worship, nor does He accept
it unless it comes with humility. No one knows what is the true meaning
of humility except those of His bondsmen who are close and connected
with His unity. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ هَوْنًا
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The servants of the Merciful are they who walk on earth in
humbleness, and when the ignorant address them, they say; Peace.***
(25:63)

   
 He commanded the mightiest of His creation and the master of its
people, Muhammad, to be humble, saying,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***Make yourself gentle to the believers.*** (15:88)

   
 From humility grow submission, humility, fear and modesty; it is only
from within humility that these qualities appear. True and perfect
nobility is only given to those who are humble in the essence of Allah.


