Generosity
==========

Generosity is part of the nature of the prophets, and the buttress of
belief. A person cannot be a believer unless he is also generous; he
must also have certainty and high aspiration (himmah), because
generosity is a ray of the light of certainty. Effort is easy for him
who knows his objective. The Holy Prophet said, 'The friend of Allah is
but naturally disposed to generosity.'

Generosity is bestowed upon everyone beloved of Allah who has little of
this world. One of the signs of generosity is a lack of concern with the
wealth of this world, and with whoever owns it, believing or
unbelieving, obedient or rebellious, noble or low. The generous man
feeds others while he himself is hungry; he clothes others while he is
naked; he gives to others while he refuses to accept the gifts of
others. He is favoured by that, and does not indebt others by his
graciousness. If he were to possess the entire world, he would see
himself merely as an alien in it. If he spent it all for Allah in a
single hour, it would not be irksome for him.

The Messenger of Allah said, 'The generous person is near to Allah,
near to people, near to the Garden and far from the Fire. The miser,
however, is far from Allah, far from people, far from the Garden and
near to the Fire.' The only person who can be called generous is the one
who expends himself to obey Allah and for the sake of Allah, even if it
is only by a loaf of bread or a drink of water.

The Holy Prophet also said, 'The person who is generous is generous
with what he owns, and through it desires the face of Allah. As for that
person who pretends to be generous and rebels against Allah, he is the
recipient of Allah's wrath and anger. He is the most miserly of people
towards himself, so how must he be with other people, when he follows
his own passion and opposes the command of Allah?' As Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَأَثْقَالًا مَّعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>



***Most certainly they shall carry their own burdens, and other burdens
along with their own burdens.*** (29:13)


The Holy Prophet said, 'The son of Adam cries out, "My property! My
property! My wealth! My wealth!" O Wretch! Where were you when there was
the Kingdom, and you were not? Is there anything more than what you eat
and consume, or what you wear and wear out, or what you give in charity
and what you make last?' Either you are shown mercy by it or you are
punished for it; therefore use your intelligence, and understand that
you should not love the property of others more than your own.

The Commander of the Faithful said, 'What you have already given was
destined for those who now own it; what you have held back is for those
who will inherit it, and what you have now you have no power over,
except to become arrogant by it. How much you strive to seek this world
and to make claims! Do you wish to impoverish yourself and enrich
others?'


