Opening the Prayer
==================

   
 When you face the qiblah, you should despair of this world, what it
contains of creation and what others are occupied with. Empty your heart
of every preoccupation which might distract you from Allah. See the
immensity of Allah with your innermost being, and remember that you will
stand before Him. For Allah has said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ تَبْلُو كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا أَسْلَفَتْ وَرُدُّواْ إِلَى اللّهِ
مَوْلاَهُمُ الْحَقِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There shall every soul become acquainted with what it sent before,
and they shall be brought back to Allah, their true Patron.*** (10:30)

   
 Stand at the foot of fear and hope. When you recite the takbir, you
should belittle what is between the high heavens and the moist earth,
which are all below His glory, for when Allah looks into the heart of
His bondsman while he is saying the takbir, and sees in his heart
something obstructing the truth of his declaring that Allah is great, He
says, 'O liar! Do you try to deceive Me?  
    
 By My might and My majesty, I will deny you the sweetness of My
remembrance, and I will veil you from My nearness and from joy in My
intimate communion.'  
    
 Know that Allah does not need your service. He is independent of you,
your worship and your supplication. He summons you by His favour to show
you mercy, to put you far from His punishment, to spread some of the
blessings of His kindness over you, to guide you to the path of His
pleasure, and to open to you the door of His forgiveness. If Allah had
created what He created in the universe many times over, forever without
end, it would still be the same to Allah whether they all rejected Him
or united with Him. All that He has from the worship of creatures is the
display of His generosity and power. Therefore make modesty your cloak
and incapacity your shawl. Enter under the throne of the power of Allah,
and you will capture the benefits of His lordship, seeking help in Him
and asking for His succour.  
  


