Prostration in Prayer
=====================

   
 A person who performs true prostration (sujud) does not lose Allah at
all, even if it is done only once in his entire life; but the man who
deserts his Lord in that state does not prosper. He is like someone who
deceives himself, neglecting and forgetting the immediate joy and the
ease after this life which Allah has prepared for those who prostrate
themselves.  
    
 The person who does well in his prostration is never far from Allah;
while the person who shows ill courtesy and neglects to honour Him
because his heart is attached to something other than Allah in the state
of prostration will never come near to Him. Therefore prostrate yourself
with the prostration of some- one abased, who knows that he is created
from the earth on which people tread, that he is fashioned from sperm
which everyone finds impure, and that he was given being when he did not
exist.  
    
 Allah made prostration the occasion to draw near to Him in one's heart,
innermost being and spirit. Whoever draws near to Him is far from all
that is other than Him. Do you not see that in its outward appearance
the state of prostrations is not complete except by disappearing from
all things and being veiled from all that the eyes see? Thus does Allah
want the inward being to be. If someone's heart is attached to something
other than Allah in prayer, he is near to that thing, and far from the
reality of what Allah desires in His prayer. For He has said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لِرَجُلٍ مِّن قَلْبَيْنِ فِي جَوْفِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his breast.*** (33:4)

   
 In the words of the Messenger of Allah: “Almighty Allah said, ‘When I
look on the heart of a bondsman, I know if he has sincere love and
obedience for My sake and seeks My pleasure in it. Then I take charge of
him and draw near to him. Whoever is occupied with other than Me in his
prayer is one of those who mocks himself, and his name is recorded in
the register of the losers.’”  
  


