The Tashahhud
=============

   
 The tashahhud is praise of Allah. Be a slave to Him in your innermost
being, fearful and humble to Him in action as you are His bondsman by
word and claim. Join the truthfulness of your tongue to the pure
truthfulness of your innermost being.  
    
 He created you a slave and commanded you to worship Him with your
heart, your tongue and your limbs. Realise your enslavement to Him by
His lordship over you. Know that the forelocks of creation are all in
His hand. Creatures possess neither breath nor sight except by His power
and will: they are incapable of bringing forth the least thing in His
kingdom, unless it is by His permission and will. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاء وَيَخْتَارُ مَا كَانَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ
سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Your Lord creates and chooses whom he pleases; to choose is not
theirs. Glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what they associate
[with Him].*** (28:68)

   
 Therefore be a slave to Allah, remembering Him by speech and
proclamations, and join the truthfulness of your tongue to the purity of
your innermost being, for He created you. He is too mighty and majestic
for anyone to have will or volition except by His earlier will and
volition. Fulfill the state of enslavement by being content with His
wisdom, and by worshipping in order to carry out His commands.  
    
 He commanded you to send blessings upon His beloved Muhammad, may Allah
bless him and his family and grant them peace. Therefore join your
prayer to Muhammad with your prayer to Allah, obedience to Muhammad to
obedience to Allah, and your witnessing of Muhammad to your witnessing
of Allah. Watch out that you do not miss the blessings of knowledge
which are contained in one's respect for his sanctity, with the result
that you are denied the benefits of the prayer on him. Allah commanded
him to ask for forgiveness for you, and to intercede for you when you
perform what is obligatory in the command and prohibition, and in the
sunnah and courtesies (adab) demonstrated to man through the Holy
Prophet. You should know the majesty of his rank with Allah.


