Salam
=====

The meaning of the taslim (greeting of peace) at the end of the prayer
means security, that is, anyone who carries out the command of Allah and
the sunnah of His Prophet out of humility to Him and showing fear, has
security from the tribulations of this world and freedom from the
punishment of the next world. Al-Salam (peace) is one of the names of
Allah, which He entrusted to His creation so that they would make use of
it in their behaviour, trusts and contracts; in confirming their
companies and assemblies; and for the soundness of their social
relations.

If you want to establish this salam in its proper place, and to fulfill
its meaning, then fear Allah; and make your faith, your heart, and your
intellect sound. Do not sully them by the injustice of acts of
rebellion. Let your guardians be safe from you; do not weary, or bore or
alienate them through your bad behaviour towards them, nor with your
friend, nor with your enemy. If those who are close to someone are not
safe from him, then those furthest from him are safest. Anyone who does
not establish salam on the occasions when it should be established has
no peace and no submission: he is a liar in his salam, even if he uses
it as a form of greeting among people.

Know that man's existence lies between trials and afflictions in this
world. Allah may test him with blessings, to see his thankfulness, or
with hardship, to see if he will show steadfastness and nobility by
obeying Him, or disgrace in rebelling against Him, although there is no
way to reach His good pleasure and mercy except through His grace. The
only means to obey Him is when he grants success: none can intercede
with Him except with His permission and mercy.


