Corruption
==========

   
 The corruption of the outward being comes from the corruption of the
inward. If you put your innermost being in order, Allah will put your
outward being in order; if you fear Allah inwardly, He will not rend the
veil publicly. But he who betrays Allah inwardly, Allah will expose in
the open.  
    
 The greatest corruption is born of prolonged expectation, greed, and
pride, as Allah told us in the story of Qarun when He said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَبْغِ الْفَسَادَ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ
الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not seek to make mischief in the land; surely Allah does not love
the corruptors***. (28:77)

   
 Elsewhere He said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لَا يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوًّا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فَسَادًا وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 

***[As for] that Future Abode, We assign it to those who have no desire
to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief; and the good end
is for those who have precaution.*** (28:83)

   
 These defects come from what Qarun did and believed. The root of
corruption lies in loving this world, amassing its wealth, following the
self, elevating its appetites, loving praise, agreeing with Satan, and
following his footsteps: all of these faults combine with a love of
paying Allah no heed and forgetting His favours.  
    
 Therefore you should flee from people, reject this world, interrupt
your rest, break with your normal habits, cut off the source of worldly
appetites at the root by constantly remembering Allah and clinging to
obedience to Him, and enduring people's aversion, the over-dependence of
a comrade, and hostile malice on the part of your family and relatives.
If you do that, then the door of Allah's kindness will be opened to you,
since He has good regard for you, as well as forgiveness and mercy. You
will have left the company of the heedless and freed your heart from the
captivity of Satan. You will come to the door of Allah in the company of
those who come to Him, and you will travel a path on which you may hope
to be permitted to come to the Noble, the Magnanimous, the Generous, the
Merciful.


