Well-being
==========

Seek well being (salamah) from Allah wherever you are in every state
you may be in, for your faith, your heart, and the ultimate outcome of
your affairs. He who seeks it does not always find it. How then, is it
that there are some who expose themselves to affliction, travel the
opposite path to well-being and oppose its principles, seeing safety as
destruction and destruction as safety?

Well-being has been taken away from people in every age, especially
this one; yet it can be rediscovered through enduring antipathy and even
injury from other people, through patience in the face of disaster,
making light of death, fleeing from whatever is reprehensible and being
content with a minimum of material possessions. If you are not like
that, then you must go into retreat. If you cannot do that then be
silent, although silence is not the same as retreat. If you cannot be
silent, then speak what will help you and not harm you; but that is not
the same thing as silence. If you cannot find any way to do that, then
move about by journeying from land to land, casting your self (nafs)
into the uncharted territories with a pure intention, humble heart, and
steadfast body. Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَوَفَّاهُمُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ ظَالِمِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ
قَالُواْ فِيمَ كُنتُمْ قَالُواْ كُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِينَ فِي الأَرْضِ
قَالْوَاْ أَلَمْ تَكُنْ أَرْضُ اللّهِ وَاسِعَةً فَتُهَاجِرُواْ فِيهَا
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَسَاءتْ مَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>



***Surely, [as for] those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their souls, they shall say, "In what state were you?" They
shall say, "We were oppressed in the land." They shall say, "Was not
Allah's earth spacious so that you could have migrated therein?"***
(4:97)


Take whatever belongs to the rightly acting bondsmen of Allah. Do not
struggle with obscure matters, nor contend with contradictions. If
anyone tells you, 'I', say 'you'. Do not claim knowledge in anything,
even if you are an expert in it. Uncover your secret only to one who is
nobler in the faith than you, and thus you will find nobility. If you do
this you will obtain well being, and you will remain with Almighty
without any connection to anything else.


