Worship
=======

   
 Persevere in performing the customs and obligations in worship
('ibadah), for they are the source: whoever obtains them and performs
them properly has obtained everything. The best form of worship is that
which comes nearest to security. This is the one most free of harm and
the most consistent, be it ever so small. If you have performed your
obligatory and supererogatory prayers, then you are a true worshipper.  
    
 Beware of treading on the carpet of a king unless you do so with
abasement, acknowledgement of need, fear, and respect. Make your
movements free of showing off and your secret free of hardness.  
    
 The Holy Prophet said, 'The person who prays is conversing with his
Lord.' So be embarrassed before the One Who is Cognizant of your secret,
Who knows your conversation and what your conscience conceals. Be where
He will see you doing what He wants you to do, and performing that to
which He has summoned you. Those who have gone before us occupied
themselves from the moment they completed one obligatory prayer to the
moment they started another, so that they could perform both prayers
sincerely and correctly. It seems that in our times it has become a
virtue to leave the obligatory aside, which is like having a body
without a soul.  
    
 'Ali ibn al-Husayn said, 'I wonder at a person who seeks something
extra while he abandons an obligation; he only does so because he lacks
recognition of the matter and respect for it. He does not see Allah's
will in preparing people to obey His command and choosing that for
them.'


