Reflection
==========

Reflect on what has passed of this world. Has any of it remained for
anyone? Has anyone remained in it, be he noble or lowly, rich or poor,
friend or enemy? Similarly, what has not yet happened of it resembles
more closely that which has passed of it, than water resembles water.
The Messenger of Allah said, 'Death is enough of a warner; the intellect
is enough of a guide; precaution is enough of a provision; worship is
enough of an occupation; Allah is sufficient as an intimate friend; the
Qur'an is enough of a clarification.'

And elsewhere, 'Only affliction and trial remain of this world. If a
person is saved, it is only by sincerely seeking refuge.' And Noah said,
'I found this world to be like a house with two doors. I entered through
one of them and went out through the other.' Such is the state of the
one who was saved by Allah: so what is the state of one who feels at
ease in this world, relies on it, wastes his life by cultivating it, and
is full of worldly demands?

Reflection is the mirror of good deeds and the expiation of bad deeds.
It is the light of the heart, and guarantees ease to other people and
success in obtaining betterment for the next abode; it allows one to
foresee the outcome of one's actions, and causes an increase in
knowledge. Worship of Allah is unparalleled when accompanied by this
quality. The Messenger of Allah said, 'To reflect for an hour is better
than worshipping for a year.'

The station of reflection is only obtained by him whom Allah has
singled out for the light of gnosis (ma'rifah) and tawhid.


