Avarice
=======

   
 Do not covet anything avariciously; for if you ignore it, it will come
to you anyway, if it is destined to be yours. Then you would find ease
in your heart with Allah, praise for leaving it; but you will be blamed
for your haste in seeking it, for not trusting Him, and for not being
content with the decree. Allah created this world the same as a shadow:
when you chase it, it tires you out and you can never catch up with it.
If you leave it alone, it follows you inexorably, and gives you no cause
for fatigue.  
    
 The Holy Prophet said, 'A covetous man is bereft; yet in spite of his
deprivation, he is blamed wherever he is.' For how could he be other
than bereft when he flees from the covenant of Allah, and opposes His
words:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ رَزَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ
يُحْيِيكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah is He Who created you, then gave you sustenance, then He causes
you to die, then brings you life.*** (30:40)

   
 The covetous person is in the midst of seven difficult evils: thinking,
which harms his body but brings it no help; anxiety, which has no end;
weariness, from which he will find rest only in death, although he has
the greatest weariness when at rest; fear, which only makes him fall
into what he fears; sorrow, which makes his livelihood disturbed without
any benefit to him; reckoning, which will not save him from the
punishment of Allah unless He pardons him, and punishment, from which
there is neither flight nor escape.  
    
 The one who trusts in Allah spends morning and evening in His
protection and well-being. Allah has hastened for him what suffices him,
and prepared for him things which only Allah knows. Avarice is what
flows out from Allah's anger. When the slave is not bereft of certainty,
he is not covetous. Certainty is the earth of Islam and the heaven of
iman.


