Clarification
=============

   
 The intimate conversation of the gnostics possesses three roots: fear,
hope and love. Fear is the branch of knowledge; hope is the branch of
certainty, and love is the branch of gnosis (ma'rifah) . The proof of
fear is flight; the proof of hope is quest, and the proof of love is
preferring the Beloved over all others.  
    
 When knowledge is confirmed in truthfulness, he fears. When fear is
genuine, he flees. When he flees, he is saved. When he sees the light of
certainty in the heart, he sees overflowing favour. When the vision of
overflowing favour is firm, there is hope. When he feels the sweetness
of belief in hope, he seeks. When he has success in the quest, he finds.
When the light of gnosis is manifested in his heart, the breeze of love
stirs, he settles in the shadow of the Beloved, prefers the Beloved over
all others, follows His commands and avoids His prohibitions, and
chooses them over everything else. When he perseveres towards intimacy
with the Beloved while carrying out His commands and avoiding His
prohibitions, he has reached the spirit of intimate communion and
nearness.  
    
 These three roots are like the sanctuary, the mosque, and the Ka'bah:
whoever enters the Sacred Precinct is safe from people. If a person
enters the mosque, his senses are safe from being used in disobedience,
and if a person enters the Ka'bah, his heart is safe from being occupied
with anything other than the remembrance of Allah.  
    
 Take heed, O believer! If you are in a state in which you are content
to meet death, then thank Allah for His grace and protection. If it is
other than that, then move from it with sound resolution, and have
regret for that part of your life which passed in heedlessness. Seek
Allah's help in purifying your outward nature of wrong actions and
cleanse your inward being from faults. Cut the shackles of heedlessness
from your heart, and extinguish the fire of desires in your soul.  
  


