Judgements
==========

The heart may be described as belonging to one of four types: uplifted,
open, low, or stopped. The raf (uplifting) of the heart lies in
remembrance of Allah; the fath (opening) of the heart lies in the
pleasure of Allah; the khafd (lowering) of the heart lies in occupation
with anything other than Allah, and the waqf (stopping) of the heart
lies in paying heed to anything other than Allah . '

Do you not see that when a servant remembers Allah with sincere
respect, every veil that was between him and Allah is removed? If the
heart obeys the source of Allah's decree and is content with that, then
how do happiness, joy and worldly rest open up to him? When the heart is
occupied with some of the matters of this world and its means, how,
then, can it find what Allah has mentioned? Then the heart becomes
reduced and dark like an empty, ruined house which has neither
prosperity nor occupant.

When a person is distracted from remembering Allah, then you see that he
is 'stopped' from advancing, and veiled. He has become obdurate and dark
since leaving the light which issues from the servant's veneration of
his Lord. The sign of raf' lies in agreement in every respect, lack of
opposition, and constant yearning; the sign of fath lies in trustful
dependence on Allah, truthfulness and certainty; the sign of khafd lies
in pride, showing off, and greed; and the sign of waqf lies in the
departure of the sweetness of obedience, lack of the bitterness of
rebellion, and of confusion in the knowledge of what is permitted and
what is forbidden.


