Siwak
=====

The Messenger of Allah said, 'Using the siwak' purifies the mouth and
is pleasing to the Lord,' and he made it one of the confirmed practices.
It has benefits for both the outward and the inward being which even men
of intelligence cannot count.

As you remove the stains caused by food and drink from your teeth with
the siwak, so remove the impurity of your wrong actions by humble
entreaty, humility, night prayers, and asking for forgiveness before
dawn. Purify your outer being from impurities, and your inner being from
the turbidity of acts of opposition and committing anything prohibited,
all the while acting sincerely for Allah. The Holy Prophet made its use
an example for people for alertness and attention, in that the siwak is
a clean, soft plant and the twig of a blessed tree. The teeth are what
Allah created in the mouth as a tool for eating, an implement for
chewing, a reason for enjoying food and for keeping the intestines in
order. The teeth are pure jewels, which become dirty because they are
present when food is chewed, leading to a deterioration in the way the
mouth smells, and decay in the gums. When the intelligent believer
cleans with the soft plant and wipes it on these pure jewels, he removes
the decay and adulteration from them and they then revert to their
original state.

Similarly Allah created the heart pure and clean, and made its food
remembrance, reflection, awe and respect. When the pure heart turns grey
by being fed on heedlessness and vexation, it is polished by the burnish
of repentance and cleaned by the water of regret, so that it reverts to
its primal state and its basic essence. As Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>



***Surely Allah loves those who turn [in repentance] to Him, and He
loves those who purify themselves.*** (2:222)


In recommending the use of the siwak the Holy Prophet was advocating
that it be used on the teeth themselves; but he also implied the meaning
and example we have referred to above, that for anyone who empties his
faculty of reflection for the purpose of drawing inward lessons from the
outward examples, with respect to both the principle and roots of faith,
Allah will open the springs of wisdom, and will give him still more of
His overflowing favour, for Allah does not neglect the reward of those
who act well.


