Purification
============

If you seek purification and ablution (wudu'), then go to water as you
would go to the mercy of Allah, for He has made water the key to being
near to Him in intimate conversation, and a guide to the domain of His
service. Just as the mercy of Allah purifies the wrong actions of His
bondsmen, so are outward impurities cleansed only by water. As Allah
said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ الرِّيَاحَ بُشْرًا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَحْمَتِهِ
وَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء طَهُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is He Who sends the winds as good news before His mercy; and We
send down pure water out of heaven!*** (25:48) and elsewhere,



<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنَ الْمَاء كُلَّ شَيْءٍ حَيٍّ أَفَلَا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have made of water everything living. Will they not then
believe?*** (21:30)


As He gives life to every blessing in this world from water, so by His
mercy and overflowing favour He gives life to the heart and to acts of
obedience, and to reflection in the purity of water, its fineness, its
cleanness, its blessing and the subtleness of how it mixes with
everything; through water He also gives life to the heart, when you
purify those limbs which you have been commanded by Allah to purify, and
which you use to worship in your obligatory and customary prayers.

From each limb come many benefits. When you treat the limbs with
respect, then their benefits will soon spring up for you. Deal with
Allah's creation like water which mixes with things and gives everything
its due, while not changing itself in essence. This is expressed by the
words of the Messenger of Allah, 'The sincere believer is like water.'
Let your purity with Allah in all your obedience be like the purity of
water when He sent it down out of heaven and called it pure. Purify your
heart with precaution and certainty when you purify your limbs with
water.


