Entering the Mosque
===================

   
 When you reach the door of the mosque, know that you have come to the
door of a mighty King. Only the purified tread on His carpet, and only
the true are allowed to sit with Him. So be alert in your approach of
the court of the awesome King, for you are in great danger if you are
heedless. Know that He can do whatever He wishes in justice and
overflowing favour with you and by you. If He inclines to you with His
mercy and overflowing favour, He has accepted a small amount of your
obedience and has given you a great reward for it. If He demands His due
of truthfulness and sincerity by His justice towards you, He has veiled
you and rejected your obedience, even if you have had obedience in
abundance. He does what He wills. Acknowledge your incapacity,
inadequacy, fragility, and poverty before Him, for you have turned
yourself to worshipping Him and being close to Him. Turn to Him, and
know that neither the secret nor the revealed part of any creature is
hidden from Him. Be like the poorest of His servants before Him: strip
your heart of every occupation which might veil you from your Lord, for
He only accepts the purest and most sincere. Look to see in which
register your name will be written.  
    
 If you taste the sweetness of His intimate conversation and the
pleasure of His addressing you, and drink the cup of His mercy, and
those favours he has bestowed on you and those of your requests which He
has accepted, then you have served Him properly, and may therefore enter
the sphere of His permission and security. If not, then stand as one
whose power and ability have been cut off, and whose term has come to an
end. If Almighty Allah knows that in your heart you are sincerely
seeking refuge with Him, He will regard you with compassion, mercy and
kindness. He will cause you to succeed in that which He loves and which
is pleasing to Him, for He is generous. He loves noble generosity and
the worship of those who need Him, and who are burning up at His door
seeking His good pleasure. Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him, and removes
the evil?*** (27:62)


