Fasting
=======

The Holy Prophet said, 'Fasting is a protection from the calamities of
this world, and a veil from punishment of the next.' When you fast,
intend thereby to restrain yourself from fleshly appetites and to cut
off those worldly desires arising from the ideas of Satan and his kind.
Put yourself in the position of a sick person who desires neither food
nor drink; expect recovery at any moment from the sickness of wrong
actions. Purify your inner being of every lie, turbidity, heedlessness
and darkness, which might cut you off from the meaning of being sincere
for the sake of Allah.

Somebody said to one of the Companions, 'You are already weak; fasting
will weaken you further.' 'I am preparing that fast for the evil of a
long day,' he said. 'Patience in obeying Allah is easier than patience
in His punishment.' And the Messenger of Allah once quoted Allah's
words, 'Fasting is done for Me, and I am its reward.'

Fasting kills the desire of the self and the appetite of greed, and
from it comes purity of the heart, purification of the limbs,
cultivation of the inner and the outer being, thankfulness for
blessings, charity to the poor, increase of humble supplication,
humility, weeping and most of the ways of seeking refuge in Allah; and
it is the reason for the breaking of aspiration, the lightening of evil
things, and the redoubling of good deeds. It contains benefits which
cannot be counted. It is enough that we mention some of them to the
person who understands and is given success in making use of fasting, if
Allah wills.


