Delusion
========

   
 A person who is deluded is wretched in this world, and is duped in the
next world because he has sold what is better for what is baser. Do not
admire yourself. Sometimes you may be deceived by your property and your
bodily health into supposing that you will last forever. Sometimes you
are deceived by your long life, your children and your friends into
thinking that you will be saved by them. Sometimes you are deceived by
your beauty and the circumstances of your birth, which bring you your
hopes and desires so easily that you think that you are truthful and
successful in achieving your goal. Sometimes you are deceived by the
regret you show people for your shortcoming in worship, but Allah knows
the opposite of that is in your heart. Sometimes you make yourself
worship in a spirit of reluctance; but Allah desires sincerity.
Sometimes you imagine that you are calling on Allah when you are calling
on another. Sometimes you imagine that you are giving good counsel to
people, while your real desire is that they bow to you. Sometimes you
blame yourself when you are really praising yourself.  
    
 Know that you will only emerge from the darkness of delusion and desire
by sincerely turning in repentance to Almighty Allah, and to whatever
you know about Him, and to recognize the faults in your self which are
not consistent with your intellect and knowledge, and which the faith,
the law and the customary practices of the Holy Prophet and the Imams of
guidance do not tolerate.  
    
 If you are content with your present condition, there is no one more
wretched than you in knowledge and action, nor anyone with a more wasted
life. You will inherit grief on the Day of Resurrection.


