Brotherhood
===========

   
 Three things are rare in every age: brotherhood in Allah; a devout,
affectionate wife who helps you in Allah's faith; and a rightly guided
son. Whoever finds these three things has obtained the good of both
abodes and the fullest portion of this world and the next. Beware of
taking someone as a brother when you are moved by greed, fear,
inclination, money, food or drink. Seek the fraternity of the
Allah-fearing, even to the ends of the earth, and even if you spend your
entire life seeking them. Allah has not left anyone better than them
after the Prophets on the face of the earth, nor has He given a bondsman
any blessing like that of success in finding their company. Allah has
said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْأَخِلَّاء يَوْمَئِذٍ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ عَدُوٌّ إِلَّا
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The friends shall on that day be enemies to one another except those
who guard [against evil].*** (43:67)

   
 I believe that anyone who looks for a friend without fault in these
times will remain without a friend. Do you not see that the first mark
of honour which Allah bestowed on His Prophets when their call to faith
became known was a trusty friend or helper. Similarly, the most sublime
gift which Allah bestowed on His friends, supporters (awliya'), pure
friends and trustees was the company of His prophets. This is proof
that, after knowledge of Allah, there is no blessing in either abode
which is more sublime, more excellent or more pure than company in Allah
and brotherhood for His sake.


