Pardon
======

   
 Pardoning someone when you have the power to punish is one of the
customary practices of the messengers and the secrets of the
Allah-fearing. Pardon is when you do not charge your companion for what
he has done wrong outwardly, when you forget the cause by which there
was inward affliction, and when you extend great charity in your choice
despite having power over him. No one could find a way to that pardon
except by the one whom Allah has pardoned and forgiven for the sins
which he has committed and the deeds he has put off, and who has been
adorned with His mark of honour and clothed in the light of His
radiance.  
    
 This is because pardon and forgiveness are two of the attributes of
Almighty Allah which He entrusted in the secrets of His pure friends, so
that they adopt the manners of their Creator and Maker with creation.
This is why He said,  
    
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَعْفُوا وَلْيَصْفَحُوا أَلَا تُحِبُّونَ أَن يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ
لَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They should pardon and turn away. Do you not love that Allah should
forgive you? And Allah is forgiving, merciful.*** (24:22)

   
 If you do not pardon another mortal like yourself, how can you hope for
the pardon of the Compelling King?  
    
 The Holy Prophet said that his Lord commanded him to have these
qualities, saying, 'Unite with whoever breaks with you, and pardon
whoever wrongs you; give to whoever deprives you, and be good to whoever
is bad to you.' He commanded us to follow him when Allah said,  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانتَهُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he
forbids you, keep back.*** (59:7)

   
 Pardon is a secret of Allah in the heart of His select. Whoever is
gladdened by it has made Him happy. The Messenger of Allah said, 'Is any
of you capable of being like Abu Damdam?' 'O Messenger of Allah,' they
said, 'Who is Abu Damdam?' The Holy Prophet replied, 'One of your
ancestors who, when he woke up in the morning would say, "O Allah, I
have forgiven the shattering of my honour by the common people." '


