Exhortation
===========

The best form of exhortation is when the words used do not go beyond
the limits of truth, and the actions performed do not go beyond the
limits of sincerity. The warner and the warned are like someone awake
and someone asleep: whoever awakes from the slumber of his heedlessness,
opposition and rebellion does good to awaken others from that sleep.

Anyone who travels in the deserts of transgression and engrosses
himself in the wilds of misguidance, abandons his modesty because of his
love for reputation, showing off and fame, wasting his time with those
who wear the garments of the righteous, his outward appearance divulging
the substance, of what is inside of him. In reality he is devoid of any
substance and his inner destitution is flooded with love of praise and
enveloped in the darkness of greed. How seduced he is by his passion!
How he leads people astray with his words! As Allah has said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبِئْسَ الْمَوْلَى وَلَبِئْسَ الْعَشِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Evil certainly is the guardian and evil certainly is the
associate.*** (22:13)


But whoever Allah has protected by the light of tawhid, support, and
excellent success, his heart is cleansed of impurity. He does not
separate himself from gnosis and precaution; he listens to the words of
the misguided while he ignores the speaker himself, whoever he is. The
wise have said, 'Take wisdom, even if it comes from the mouths of
madmen.' In the words of ‘Isa (‘a), 'Sit with anyone who reminds you of
Allah when you see him and meet him, aside from when he talks. Do not
sit with someone when your outer being accepts him but your inner being
rejects him.' That is someone who lays claim to what he does not have;
if you are sincere, then they will yield to you. When you find someone
with these three qualities, then seize the opportunity to see him, meet
with him, and sit with him, even if it is only for an hour: this will
have an effect on your faith, your heart, and your worship, through his
blessing.

If someone's words do not go beyond his actions, whose actions do not
go beyond his truthfulness, and whose truthfulness does not contend with
his Lord, then sit with him with respect and wait for mercy and
blessing. Beware of the proof against you, and make his time in your
company pleasant, so that you do not reproach him and lose. Look at him
with the eye of Allah's favour upon him, His selecting him and His
honouring him.


