Trustful Reliance
=================

Trust (tawakkul) is a cup sealed with Allah: none may drink from it or
break the seal save the trustful. It is as Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On Allah should the trustful rely,*** (14:12) and



<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَتَوَكَّلُواْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On Allah should you rely if you are believers.*** (5:23)


Allah made trust the key of belief, and belief the lock of trust. The
reality of trust is preferring others to oneself; the root of preferring
others is to advance the other person's claim. He who trusts continues
to affirm one of two preferences in his trust. If he prefers what is
caused (i.e. phenomenal being), he is veiled by it. If he prefers the
Causer of the cause of trust (i.e. the Creator, glory be to Him and may
He be exalted!), he remains with Him. If you want to be a man of trust
and not a man of causes, then say the takbir over your ruh five times,
and bid farewell to all your hopes as death bids farewell to life.

The lowest level of trust is nothing more than placing your highest
aspiration before your own advancement; moreover, you should neither
seek for your own portion nor look for what you lack, for either of
those things would break the bond of your belief while you are unaware.
If you are truly determined to live by one of the marks of the trusting
one, and by His trust with respect to one of these two preferences, then
cling to this story for support. It is related that one of the men of
trust came to one of the Imams and said to him, 'Show me compassion by
answering a question about trust.' The Imam knew the man to be of
excellent trust and rare scrupulousness, and he saw his sincerity in
what he was asking before the man actually put the question. 'Stay where
you are and wait with me for awhile,' he told him. While he was
formulating his answer a poor man passed by.

The Imam put his hand into his pocket and, taking something out, gave it
to the poor man. Then he turned to the man who had asked the question
and said, 'Come and ask about what you have seen.' 'O Imam,' the man
said, 'I know that you could have given me the answer to my question
before making me wait. Why then did you delay?' And the Imam replied,
'Belief means reflecting on the meaning before I speak. For how could I
be negligent of my innermost being when my Lord perceives it? How could
I discuss the science of trust while there is a coin in my pocket? It is
not permitted for me to discuss that until after I had given it to him,
so understand!' The questioner sighed deeply and swore that he would not
seek shelter in a house nor rely on another mortal as long as he lived.


