Respect for One's Brothers
==========================

   
 The reason why brothers in the faith shake hands is Allah's love for
them. The Messenger of Allah said, 'Whenever brethren shake hands in
Allah, their wrong actions are dispersed so that they become as they
were on the day their mothers bore them.' No two brothers' love and
respect for each other increases without there being increase for each
of them also. It is obligatory for the one having most knowledge of
Allah's faith among the two to stimulate his friend to perform the
obligatory functions which Allah has made necessary, and to guide him in
going straight, in contentment and moderation, to give him the good news
of Allah's mercy and to make him fear His punishment. The other brother
must seek the blessing of his guidance and hold to what he calls him to,
adhere to his admonition, and be guided by him, all the while seeking
protection in Allah and seeking His help and success.  
    
 ‘Isa (‘a) was once asked, 'How are you this morning?' To which he
replied, 'I do not possess the benefit which I hope for, nor can I repel
what I am on my guard against, while I am commanded to obey and
forbidden to rebel. I do not think that any pauper is poorer than I am.'
And when Uways al-Qarani was asked the same question, he said, 'How is a
man in the morning when he does not know if he will be alive in the
evening, and in the evening he does not know if he will be alive in the
morning?'  
    
 Abu Dharr said, 'In the morning I thank my Lord and I thank myself.'
The Holy Prophet said, 'Whoever wakes up in the morning aspiring for
something other than Allah has become among the losers and
transgressors.'


