Good Opinion
============

   
 The root of good opinion is a man's belief and the soundness of his
heart; the sign of good opinion is that whenever he looks, he sees with
the eye of purity and virtue wherever he goes, and modesty,
trustworthiness, protection and truthfulness are cast into his heart.
The Holy Prophet said, 'Have a good opinion of your brothers: through
that you will gain purity of heart and firmness of nature.' And Ubayy
ibn Ka'b said, 'When you see a quality which you disapprove of in one of
your brothers, then give it seventy interpretations and see if your
heart can be at peace with one of them. If it is not, then blame
yourself if you cannot excuse him. If you yourself have a quality which
will easily make for seventy interpretations, then you should disapprove
of yourself more than you do of him.' As Allah revealed to David,
'Remind My slaves of My blessings and My favours. They have only seen
exquisite goodness from Me so they should only expect that what remains
will be like what they have already had from Me.' Good opinion invites
good worship. A person who is deluded continues to remain in rebellion
even while he hopes for forgiveness. The best opinion in Allah's
creation is reserved for those who obey Him, hope for His reward and
fear His punishment.  
    
 The Messenger of Allah said, relating from his Lord, 'I am with My
slave's good opinion of Me, O Muhammad.' Whoever fails to live up to the
reality of the gifts which come from his opinion of his Lord has
intensified the proof against himself, and is among those who are
deceived by the shackles of his passion.


