Certainty
=========

   
 Certainty will take the bondsman to every sublime state and every
wondrous station; thus did the Messenger of Allah make known the
immensity of certainty when he mentioned that ‘Isa (‘a) walked on water.
He said, 'If he had had more certainty, he could have walked on air.' By
this he indicated that in spite of the majesty of the place which the
prophets have with Allah, they also have different ranks according to
their certainty. Certainty is ever increasing, and remains so throughout
eternity. Believers also vary in the strength and weakness of their
certainty. A person whose certainty is strong may be recognised by the
fact that he finds himself stripped of all ability and power other than
what Allah has given him, and by his keeping to Allah's command and
worship both outwardly and inwardly. He considers the states of having
and not having, increase and decrease, praise and blame, might and
abasement, all to be the same because he considers them all on an equal
level. However, a person who weakens his certainty attaches himself to
external matters, and allows his self free rein therein. He follows the
customs and sayings of people without substantiating them, and strives
in the affairs of this world, accumulating its wealth and holding on to
it, acknowledging and affirming it with his tongue.  
    
 There is no withholder or giver except Allah, and the slave can only
obtain what he is provided with and allotted. Effort will not increase
provision, but he disavows that by his action and his heart. In Allah's
words,  
    
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُونَ بِأَفْوَاهِهِم مَّا لَيْسَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ وَاللّهُ
أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts; and Allah
best knows what they conceal.*** (3:167)

   
 Allah was compassionate to His bondsmen when He gave them permission to
earn money however they might as long as they do not exceed the limits
of Allah or abandon their obligations to Him and the behaviour of His
Prophet in any of their actions, or abandon the spirit of trust or
become caught in the field of greed. But when they forget this,
attaching themselves to the opposite of what has been delineated for
them, they are counted among the destroyed, who at the end have nothing
but false claims. Not everyone who earns is necessarily trustful: from
his earnings he brings for himself only what is forbidden or doubtful.
He may be recognized by the effect his gains have upon him, by his
insatiable hunger, and how he spends for this world without let.  
    
 He who is given permission to earn is one whose self gains while his
heart trusts in Allah. If he has a lot of money, he is like a trustee
who knows that having property and not having it is the same thing. If
he withholds it, he withholds for Allah; and if he spends it, he does so
in the way Allah has commanded. Both are for Allah.


