Fear and Hope
=============

Fear is the custodian of the heart, and hope is the intercessor of the
self; whoever knows Allah fears Him and sets his hopes in Him. They are
the wings of belief with which the true servant flies to Allah's
pleasure. They are the eyes of his intellect, with which he sees Allah's
promise and threat; fear contemplates the justice of Allah through
careful awareness of that threat. Hope calls for Allah's overflowing
favour and gives life to the heart, while fear kills the self. The
Messenger of Allah said, 'The believer has two kinds of fear: fear of
what has passed and fear of what is to come.'

In the death of the self lies the life of the heart, which leads to
firmness in practice. Whoever worships Allah with a balance of fear and
hope will not be misguided, and will obtain what he hopes for. How can a
slave be anything other than fearful when he does not know at what
action his record will be closed, while he has to his credit no deed
capable of helping him, no power to do anything, nor any place to fly
to? How can he fail to hope when he knows that despite his incapacity he
is drowned in the seas of Allah's blessings and favours, which cannot be
counted or numbered? The lover worships his Lord with hope by
contemplating his own state with the eye of wakefulness; and the
abstinent worships with fear.

Uways al-Qarani said to Haram ibn Hayyan, 'People act in hope.' 'But
you act in fear,' Haram replied. There are two types of fear: permanent
and changing. Permanent fear brings about hope, while changing fear
brings about permanent fear. Similarly, there are two types of hopes:
concealed and open. Concealed hope brings about permanent fear, which
strengthens the connection of love; while open hope fulfils a man's
expectations regarding his incapacity and shortcomings in the things he
has done during his life.


