Affliction
==========

   
 Affliction is an adornment for the believer and a mark of honour for
the man of intellect, because facing it directly needs steadfastness and
firm-footedness, both of which confirm belief. The Holy Prophet said,
'We, the company of the prophets, are the people who have the hardest
trials, then after us come the believers, then the others like them.'  
    
 Whoever tastes the food of affliction while under Allah's protection
enjoys it more than he enjoys Allah's blessing. He yearns for it when it
is not there, because the lights of blessing lie under the balance of
affliction and trial, and the balance of affliction and trial lies under
the lights of blessing. Many are delivered from affliction and then
destroyed in blessing. Allah praised none of His bondsmen, from Adam up
to Muhammad, until He had tested him and seen how he fulfilled the duty
of worship while in affliction. Allah's marks of honour come, in fact,
at the last stage, but the afflictions themselves come in the
beginning.  
    
 Whoever leaves the path of affliction is ignoring the lamp of the
believers, the beacon of those near to Allah, and the guide for those on
the right path. There is no good in a slave who complains of a single
trial preceded by thousands of blessings and followed by thousands of
comforts. Whoever does not show the patience required in affliction is
deprived of thankfulness in the blessings he receives. Similarly,
whoever does not give the thankfulness owed for blessings is denied the
patience owed in affliction. Whoever is denied both of them is an
outcast.  
    
 Ayyub said in his supplication, 'O Allah, verily seventy comforts and
ease did not come to me until You sent me seventy afflictions.'  
    
 And Wahb ibn Munabbih said, 'Affliction to a believer is like a bit to
a horse and a halter to a camel.' Ali said, 'Steadfastness in relation
to belief is like the head to the body. The head of steadfastness is
afflictions but only those who act righteously understand that.'


