Patience
========

Patience reveals whatever light and purity there is in the innermost
being of Allah's servants, while anxiety shows up the darkness and
bereftness inside them. Everyone claims to be patient, but only the
humble are firm in it. Everyone denies his anxiety, although it is quite
obvious in a hypocrite because the onset of trials and afflictions tells
you who is truthful and who is a liar.

Patience is a sensation that continuously prevails in one's
consciousness, but what occurs upon a sudden upset cannot be called
patience. Anxiety is what disturbs the heart and brings the person
sorrow, changing his complexion and his state. Every event whose
beginnings are without humility, repentance, and humble supplication to
Allah comes from someone who is anxious, not someone who is patient. The
beginning of patience is bitter, but its end is sweet for some people;
but for others both its beginning and end are bitter. Whoever enters it
at its end has entered it. Whoever enters it from its beginning has left
it. A person who knows the value of patience cannot bear to be without
it.

In the story of Moses and Khidr Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَيْفَ تَصْبِرُ عَلَى مَا لَمْ تُحِطْ بِهِ خُبْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How can you have patience in that of which you have no comprehensive
knowledge?*** (18:68)


Whoever is unwillingly patient, who does not complain to people and
does not become anxious when his veil is rent, is counted among the
common people. His share is as Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Give good news to the patient,*** (2:155)


That is, good news of the Garden and forgiveness. Whoever meets
affliction with an open heart, showing patience with tranquility and
dignity, is counted among the elite and his portion is as Allah said,


<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah is with the patient.*** (8:46)


