Modesty
=======

   
 Modesty is a light whose essence is the heart of belief, meaning
careful consideration in everything which is denounced by tawhid and
gnosis. The Holy Prophet said, 'Modesty is part of belief.' That is to
say, modesty is accepted through belief, and belief is accepted through
modesty. The modest person is all good. Whoever is denied modesty is all
evil, even if he worships and is scrupulous. One step taken with modesty
in the courtyards of Allah's awe is better than seventy years of
worship. Insolence, however, is the beginning of hypocrisy, schism and
disbelief.  
    
 The Messenger of Allah said, 'If you have no shame, then do as you
like.’ This means that when modesty leaves you, then you are punished
for all the good or evil that you do. The strength of modesty comes from
sorrow and fear, and modesty is the home of fear. The beginning of
modesty is awe, and its end is clear vision. A modest person is occupied
with his own affairs, withdrawn from people, and distant from what they
are doing, even if they all forsake completely person with modesty.  
    
 The Messenger of Allah said, 'When Allah desires good for a bondsman,
he makes him forget his good qualities, putting his evil qualities
before his eyes and making him dislike sitting with those who turn away
from the remembrance of Allah.' Modesty is of five kinds: shame for a
wrong action; shame for one's incapacity; modesty in the face of a noble
equality; the modesty of love, and the modesty of awe. Each of these has
its adherents, who are ranked according to these categories of modesty.


