Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful**

By Hasnain Walji

Islam espouses an enlightened mind and hence, it has been termed as the
path of *knowledge*. In the Qur\`an the number of verses in which *‘ilm*
(knowledge) or its derivatives and associated words are used is 704. The
aids of knowledge such as the book, pen, ink, etc. amount to almost the
same number while other words associated with writing occur in 319
verses.[^1]

By responding to the call of the Qur\`an to ponder over creation in
order to understand the greatness of Allah (awj) and reflecting this
honored the pursuit of knowledge, considered a meritorious duty, Muslim
scholars have amply demonstrated that knowledge elevates the sincere
seeker.

In response to a person who posed him a difficult question, Imam ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (ع) said: “Ask in order to understand, and do not ask in order
to find fault, for surely the ignorant man who wants to learn resembles
a man of knowledge, and surely a man of knowledge who wants to be
difficult resembles an ignorant man who wants to find fault.”In response
to a person who posed him a difficult question, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib
(ع) said: “Ask in order to understand, and do not ask in order to find
fault, for surely the ignorant man who wants to learn resembles a man of
knowledge, and surely a man of knowledge who wants to be difficult
resembles an ignorant man who wants to find fault.”

This then should be the spirit of inquiry as we are faced with many
challenges in this day and age. In particular, young Muslims growing up
in Western societies are crying out for rational and convincing
explanations in matters of their faith. In schools and colleges they are
confronted by their peers as much as professors, who engage them on
debates about reason and faith - in particular, whether faith is a valid
means for acquiring knowledge or the limits of reason in explaining
one’s faith.

This book, aptly named *‘Faith and Reason – A Compendium of Fifty
Questions and Answers Related to Islamic Theology, Jurisprudence and
Other Themes’* is timely, in offering some explanations.

The questions on such diverse topics as Divine Will and Human Will, free
choice Allah’s (awj) Will in human as well as Angels and free-will give
enlightening answers. In particular, questions relating to Imam al-Mahdi
(ع), address issues such as his marriage, place of residence, as well
the role of women in the government of Imam al-Mahdi’s (ع) and the
possibility of a decline in Imam al-Mahdi’s (ع) government.

It is hoped that this latest offering by the Islamic Education Board of
the World Federation will enhance the readers’ understanding of some
critical and relevant issues, which are rarely discussed in general.

As Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said: “The man of knowledge is the one
who recognizes that what is known is very little compared to what is not
known, and as a result he considers himself ignorant, and accordingly he
increases his efforts to know more by going out in search of knowledge.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّــي زِدْنِي عِلْماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

 *“My Lord! Increase me in Knowledge”*

Hasnain Walji  
 Plano, Texas  
 July 4th, 2006 ce / 7th Jumada II, 1427 ah

[^1]: Dr. Sayyid Wahid Akhtar, The Islamic Concept of Knowledge,
al-Tawhid, vol. xii, no. 3


