Question 9: Asking one’s need from other than Allah
===================================================

**Question:** Is it not polytheistic to ask for one’s needs from anyone
other than Allah (awj) such as the Prophet (ص) or the infallible Imams
(ع) since it is Allah (awj) who is the Fulfiller of Needs?

Brief Answer
------------

If one reveres, refers or takes recourse to, or seeks one’s needs from
these personages with the intention that are separate from Allah (awj)
and independent of Him in fulfilling our needs, such an intention and
notion is polytheistic and contrary to *tawhid af’ali* (the Unity of
actions—the independence of Allah (awj) from all else, and the
dependence of all other beings on Him in their actions) and *tawhid
rububi* (the Unity of Lordship—His being the sole Planner and sovereign
Lord, with all others, whether angels, prophets, or the natural worlds,
being Divine workers). Such an intention constitutes polytheism in one’s
understanding of Divine actions or Lordship.

But if this same respect, reference, and recourse are with the intention
of:

a. Obedience to a Divine command;

b. Repaying the debt we owe them by virtue of their being the conduit of
Divine grace in the creational and legal realms;

c. Follow their example or benefit from their special attention, without
viewing them as independent of Allah (awj);

then there is no contradiction with Unity of actions or Lordship or with
the fact that Allah (awj) is the sole (independent) Fulfiller of needs,
since the actions, planning, and fulfilment of people’s desires through
these personages are subordinate to Allah’s (awj) action, Lordship, and
His being the Fulfiller of needs. They are not independent of Him for it
to be considered polytheism.

Thus, the criterion of polytheism in seeking one’s needs from someone
other than Allah (awj) is the intention of the individual. If he
maintains the Divinity or Lordship of whoever he takes recourse to, or
views them as being free of need of Allah (awj), such recourse is
considered polytheism because of that belief. But if it is in order to
obey Allah (awj) and benefit from the honour and esteem those esteemed
people enjoy before Him, so that they implore Allah (awj) for that
person’s needs or fulfil them with Allah’s (awj) permission, such an
action is not only not polytheistic, but the person taking recourse is
also worthy of a reward for having acted in accordance with a Divine
command.

Detailed Answer
---------------

The human being’s existence has two aspects, meaning that he is a
combination of a celestial soul and a material body. His entire being
consists of poverty and need [towards Allah (awj)]. Since he has two
aspects, he must fulfil the needs of both aspects in a balanced manner
free of the two extremes of excess or negligence in order to remain
sound and preserve his existence, and in order to follow the path of
advancement and attain the peak of true salvation (the station of Divine
regency).

The Creator of the Universe, who in His infinite Wisdom had a specific
purpose in the creation of humanity and is aware of the needs of all its
existential dimensions, prepared the groundwork for the fulfilment of
humanity’s various needs either before their creation or simultaneous to
it.

Divine Will dictates that the human being ensures his physical and
spiritual soundness and salvation naturally and through free will;
otherwise, He could have created mankind in a perfect bodily form, so
that he would have no need of development to perfection, just as the
creation of the sky and the Earth is in that way.

And He could likewise have created him in a perfect spiritual form, so
that he would have no deficiencies in terms of worship, obedience, and
entering the sacred realm, just as He created the angels. But the
distinction of humanity over all other beings lies in becoming superior
to angels while possessing the physical and spiritual needs.

To attain one’s needs, the human being, possessed of free will, must
make the best use of the abundant array of Divine blessings in the
heavens and the Earth in order to be sound and remain alive. In order to
attain one’s spiritual needs, one must make use of the Divine laws in
order to connect one’s celestial soul with the *malakut* (celestial
realm).

There is no denying the role of creational and material factors in
fulfilling the physical needs of the human being or in the fact that he
makes constant use of these factors. Since humanity is familiar with
these factors from the moment of birth, or rather ever since humanity
was created, the objection does not arise in the mind of most believers
that benefiting from these means and effects in fulfilling one’s
physical needs may be polytheism or improper conduct in Allah’s (awj)
dominion.

For the fulfilment of humanity’s spiritual needs, Allah (awj), the Wise,
has placed another form of sustenance at people’s disposal in the form
of laws and religion, with sound nourishment in terms of belief,
worship, morals, and training, conveyed by the prophets (ع). This is why
they are called the “vessel of legislative grace.” This is while the
divine prophets, too, are required to observe those limits and duties
and to utilize them to meet their spiritual needs and become linked to
the spiritual and celestial realm, which is beyond their senses and
perception, and for at least some moments of every day they must connect
to the sacred realm (through the daily acts of worship).

There are some people who, in availing themselves of this Divine
legislative blessing, have excelled others and have linked themselves to
that realm both quicker and more strongly than them, so that it is as if
they have detached themselves from the natural world and have themselves
become celestial. Even amongst these people there are some who have
surpassed the rest and attained the station of Divine regent
*(khalifah)*, becoming the *“‘ummal Allah”* (workers of Allah). And in
this way, they also become vessels of creational grace; that is, they
become intermediaries between that realm and people who have fallen
behind the caravan. Thus, these individuals who have fallen behind have
no choice but to make use of these intermediaries to benefit from the
spiritual realm and meet their needs.

This is where the misconception arises that taking recourse to or
seeking one’s needs from these personages contradicts Unity of action or
Unity of Lordship.

But just as utilizing material resources and fulfilling physical needs
is not polytheism, since Allah (awj) Himself created these blessings,
subjected them to mankind[^1] and gave him permission (in the manner of
his creation) to use them in the correct way (which is explained by
religious law)—and anyone who is a monotheist knows that they are His
gifts, created by Him, and dependent on Him and does not consider them
independent or necessary existents—in the same way, taking recourse to,
respecting, and seeking one’s needs from those personages, too, presents
no contradiction to the Unity of Action or Unity of Lordship and to the
fact that only Allah (awj) is the (independent) Fulfiller of needs,
since in this recourse or attention to these personages, they are not
viewed as being parallel to or independent of Allah (awj).

Rather, those possessed with awareness view their efficacy and planning
as being an extension of Allah’s (awj) planning and action, and consider
their existence—like that of all other beings—to be nothing but their
very needfulness of the Divine Essence, since without Divine providence
and grace they have no being of their own, let alone for them to be able
to perform actions or fulfil needs. Thus, the belief in their efficacy
and their fulfilment of needs, since it is in extension of Allah’s (awj)
action and being the Fulfiller of needs, does not entail polytheism.

As for why Allah (awj) referred us to these noble people and why we are
in need of them to benefit from the spiritual and celestial realm, this
is for several reasons:

1. These individuals are the “vessels of Divine grace” to people and a
channel or conduit for the current of Divine mercy towards all beings of
the universe, to the extent that if not for these Noble beings, the
creation of the heavens and Earth and what is between them would not
have been worthy of note. This is why Allah (awj) says in the well-known
*hadith qudsi* [hadith in which both the words and the meaning belong to
Allah (awj), as opposed to the prophet explaining the meaning in his own
words]: “If not for you (the Prophet (ص)), I would not have created the
universe, and if not for ‘Ali I would not have created you, and if not
for Fatimah I would not have created the two of you [since the existence
of the three of you, who complement each other, is the reason for
creation].”[^2]

Thus, to attain the source of the grace of being, one must make use of
this channel so as not to be deprived of Divine providence. This is why
we say in *Du’a al-Nudbah*: “Where is that Godly threshold through which
they enter?”

2. Since these intimate personages in Allah’s (awj) court have adorned
themselves with Divine attributes, attention to them is like attention
to Allah (awj), since intimacy with them—even if in times of need—makes
one attentive to Allah (awj) and reminds one of the Divine signs. This
is why we recite in one of the supplications, “Where is that Godly
countenance to which the friends of Allah turn?”

3. Since they are intimate in Allah’s (awj) court and vessels of grace,
their prayers do not go unanswered and their intercession is accepted by
Allah (awj). Thus, in the continuation of our supplication *(an-Nudbah)*
we say, “Where is that distressed one whose prayers are always
answered?” Also, since they are noble, they do not refuse the request of
any supplicant. If it is in his best interest, they do not send him back
empty-handed, and this has been experienced many times by their
contemporaries and visitors to their shrines. This is why they are
addressed with the words, “Your habit is kindness and your disposition
is nobility. Your affair is truth, sincerity, and compassion.”[^3]

4. A direct link with the unseen realm is not possible for people who
have not attained the level of perfection, and thus they must make use
of these means and paths. This is why Allah (awj) has commanded,

***“O you who believe. Fear Allah and seek a means (of approach) to
Him.”***[^4]

There are also many traditions in which the Ahlul Bayt (ع) are called
the “means” and Divine “strong faith” that a believer must recognize and
take hold of.[^5] Again, we recite in *Du’a an-Nudbah*, “Where is the
one who is a means of connection between the earth and heavens?”

5. To know, refer, and take recourse to them produces familiarity with
them and the fulfilment of needs and thus brings about love and
intimacy. This love and intimacy with these noble personages becomes a
source of instruction and guidance for the individual, although they
themselves are free of need of people and their referral, since they
have attained their goal through Divine attention.

6. The referral of people to the friends *(awliya’)* of Allah (awj) is a
reward that they receive in return for their efforts, as Allah (awj)
says to the Prophet (ص):

***“And remain awake for a portion of the night, (involved in)
supplication; perhaps you will attain a praiseworthy station (that of
intercession in this world and the next).”***[^6]

7. People’s referring and taking recourse to these noble personages on
the one hand encourages others to follow their path, and on the other
hand it does away with the arrogance and pride of worshippers, ascetics,
“wayfarers,” and other claimants to a “journey to Allah” and to
self-purification, and it prevents ostentatious and pretentious
impostors from flourishing.

8. The station of the perfect human being is many degrees higher than
that of the angels, since:

1. In this world and the next, the angels are at the service of Allah’s
(awj) righteous servants;

2. The efficacy of the angels is predetermined and is therefore not
considered a distinction for them;

3. On the night of the Ascension *(mi’raj)*, the Prophet (ص) advanced
farther than the angel Jibra\`il (ع);

When the angels are entrusted with executing various affairs[^7] (in
extension of Allah’s (awj) efficacy), why should not these personages,
who have attained the greatest station of purity and nearness to Allah
(awj), be the same?

The conduct of great personalities and wise people, when they see their
subordinates are able to perform certain tasks, is to entrust those
tasks to them so they can supervise those subordinates in responding to
those who refer to them. In this way, those individuals can receive an
exclusive training and be given a recompense for their efforts, and in
addition others can get to know them and their station better and will
find it easier to become familiar and intimate with them.

Also, it is the conduct of rational people when they want to contact
some prominent personality to do so through intermediaries and people
close to him if they themselves are not close to him, making use of the
respect and honour in which those people are held to attain their needs.
Of course, they do this with the full realization that this need to use
intermediaries is because of their own inadequacy; the intermediaries
are in no way equal or parallel to that prominent person, and they
cannot do anything without his consent.

In short, to become connected to the unseen world, obey Divine commands,
train and elevate the self, and fulfil our needs in this world and the
next—both spiritual and physical—we are in need of recognizing,
referring to, imploring, and loving the friends *(awliya’)* of Allah
(awj). Taking recourse to them is to take recourse to (Divinely
sanctioned) means, “the firm rope of Allah” and the intermediaries in
Allah’s (awj) court — intermediaries who are dependent on Allah (awj)
for their existence and all their existential attributes, and whose
efficacy and fulfilment of people’s needs is in extension of that of
Allah (awj).

Taking recourse in this manner is not polytheism, since the independent
Fulfiller of needs is none but Allah (awj) alone.

[^1]: Surat al-Jathiyah (45), Verses 12-13:  اَللٌّهُ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ
لَكُمُ الْبَحْرَ لِتَجْرِيَ الْفُلْكُ فِيهِ بِأَمْرِهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا
مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ. وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي
السَّمٌوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا مِنْهُ إِنَّ فِي ذٌلِكَ لآياتٍ
لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ 

[^2]: Majma’ al-Nurayn, pg. 14: لَوْلاَکَ لَمَا خَلَقْتُ الأَفْلاَکَ، وَ
لَوْ لاَ عَلِيُّ لَمَا خَلَقْتُکَ، وَ لَوْ لاَ فَاطِمَةُ لَمَا
خَلَقْتُکُمَا.

[^3]: Mafatih al-Jinan - Ziyarat Jami’ah: عَادَتُكُمُ الإِحْسَانُ وَ
سَجِيَّتُكُمُ الْكَرَمُ وَ شَأْنُكُمُ الْحَقُّ وَ الصِّدْقُ وَ
الرِّفْقُ...

[^4]: Surat al-Ma\`idah (5), Verse 35:  يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
اتَّقُوا اللٌّهَ وَابْتَغُوا إِلَيْهِ الْوَسِيلَةَ وَجَاهِدُوا فِي
سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ 

[^5]: Some of these traditions can be found in al-Mizan fi Tafsir
al-Qur\`an, vol. 5 pg. 333.

[^6]: Surat al-Isra’ (17), Verse 79:  وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ
نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَى أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا

[^7]: Surat al-Nazi’at (79), Verse 5:  فَالْمُدَبِّرَاتِ أَمْراً 


