Question 10: The Light of Heavens and the Earth
===============================================

**Question:** What is the meaning of Allah (awj) being the light of the
heavens and of the earth? Is He light in the physical sense? If not,
what is intended?

Brief Answer
------------

Without doubt, the “light” mentioned in the verse of Light (Allah is the
light of the heavens and the earth...) is not a physical and sensible
light. For, sensible light pertains to the accidental characteristics
and qualities of material existents. Hence, the arguments that negate
Allah’s (awj) corporeality preclude perceiving Allah (awj) as sensible
and material light. Moreover, there are numerous Qur\`anic verses that
deny the possibility of a visual perception of Allah (awj), disaffirming
any similarity between Him and His creatures.

Therefore, when Allah (awj) is referred to as “the light of the heavens
and the earth” certainly sensible light is not meant.

Light by definition is that which is essentially manifest and makes
other things manifest and visible as well; it is clear and it makes
[other things] clear; it is apparent and it makes [other things]
apparent. This definition applies both to sensory light—such as the
light of the sun, the stars and of a lamp—and to super-sensory
light—such as knowledge and faith. Of course, what comes to mind on
hearing the word *light* initially is sensory light. But by analyzing
the definition of light (i.e. what is essentially manifest and makes
other things manifest), one finds it permissible to apply the word to
spiritual matters, for they illuminate the spirit, the inward, and such
application is also encountered in the Qur\`an where it refers to faith
as a light bestowed on the believer. In addition, gnostics employ the
word to signify “love.”

As the Divine Essence is bright and manifest and is also the cause that
brightens and makes other things manifest—for, He is the creator and
existence-granter — employing the word *light* to denote Allah (awj) is
correct. Rather, as the cause for a thing’s appearance to others is its
existence, it must be concluded that the most fundamental instance of
light is existence itself. Hence, Allah (awj), is the most perfect
instance of light. He is the sole real essentially manifest being who
makes other things manifest. Thus, it must be proclaimed that He is the
light who illuminates the heavens and the earth.

Furthermore, it must be noted that “the heavens and the earth” is an
allusion to the entirety of the world of being, to all the celestial and
terrestrial creatures, to the hidden and apparent worlds, not merely the
sky above us or the Earth we inhabit. Hence, the meaning of, “Allah is
the light of the heavens and the earth,” is that Allah (awj) is the
light of the whole universe.

The reason why the word *light* is employed in lieu of *creator* is to
point to the fact that just as light is manifest and as such does not
need anything else to shed light on it, Allah (awj) is also manifest and
obvious and there is no need for a mediating agent to illuminate Allah
(awj). Hence, gnostics following the teachings of the prophets and Imams
(ع), have expressed that all creatures must be understood in the light
of Allah (awj); we should not try to identify Allah (awj) through His
creatures and effects [taken on their own level]. For the friends of
Allah (awj), everything is manifest in the light of Allah (awj), and
other than His light, nothing is to be seen. If not for the Divine
light, everything would sink into the darkness of non-existence.

Therefore, the main point that is understood from this verse is that
Allah (awj) is known to all His creatures, for the appearance of all
things derives from His manifestness and illumination. Allah (awj) is
not absent so as to be revealed through His creatures. He is manifest in
all His Essence, and so His obscurity in the eyes of the intellectually
impaired is due to the intensity of His light; “O You Who are obscured
by the intensity of Your light, You Who are manifest but hidden in Your
manifestness.”

Another point that is derived from this verse is the fact that Allah
(awj) [in Islam] is referred to as “Light” not “the Greatest Light.” The
Manichaean belief that Allah (awj) is the “Greatest Light” (i.e. a
physical light similar to other lights but greater and more elevated) is
not a correct belief. According to the Qur\`an, Allah (awj) is “pure
light” and is super-sensory. He is the sole light of the world of
existence, and all else is “darkness.” In the words of some
supplications, He is “the Light of Lights.” That is, He is the real
light, and if there is any light at all, it is thanks to His existence
and light.

Regarding the exposition, the reality underlying this verse, and its
application there are numerous views and narrations that can be sought
by referring to books of exegesis and the corpus of narrations.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Without doubt, by referring to Allah (awj) as light,

***“Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth,”***[^1]

the Qur\`an does not intend to identify Him as a physical light. The
sensible light is a creature among the creatures of Allah (awj), as is
expressly stated in the first verse of Surat al-An’am,

***“All praise belongs to Allah who created the heavens and the earth
and made the darkness and the light.”***[^2]

Muslim philosophers, theologians, and Qur\`anic exegetes have all
provided strong proofs in negating a corporeal aspect for Allah
(awj).[^3] Hence, using the word *light* in reference to Allah (awj)
does not denote sensory light, which is either a physical substance or a
characteristic of matter.

Among the exegete-theologians, Fakhr Razi has probably treated this
topic more thoroughly than any other. In his exposition of the Verse of
Light, he has formulated six rational arguments why Allah (awj) cannot
have a body and so consequently the *light* mentioned in the verse
cannot be signifying sensible and material light.[^4]

More importantly, there are numerous verses in the Qur\`an that negate
the coming-into-being *(huduth)* and corporeality of Allah (awj).

Moreover, the verse, “There is nothing like Him,” that recurs several
times in the Qur\`an denies the possibility of any likeness and
resemblance of Allah (awj) to other existents. Hence, Allah’s (awj)
being light cannot be of the nature of the sensible light, for the
latter has many instances [while Allah (awj) in no way resembles
physical phenomena].

In analyzing the meaning of the word *light*, ’Allamah Tabataba\`i
explains: “The word *light* carries a popular meaning, and that is, the
thing that lightens dark bodies so that we can see them, and so *light*
is the thing by which all things become apparent and visible. Of course,
light itself is essentially manifest and visible; there is nothing else
that lightens it. Hence, light can be defined as that which is
essentially manifest and makes other things manifest as well. This is
the first meaning to which the word *light* was initially designated.
Subsequently, the word was employed, by way of allegory or secondary
designation *(waz’ thanawi)*, to indicate whatever made sensible things
visible. In a later stage, the word was also applied to super sensible
realities. It is in this sense that *intellect* is defined as a light
which reveals the intelligibles. All these various usages have stemmed
from analyzing the initial meaning of *light:* “that which is
essentially manifest and makes other things manifest as well.”[^5]

Thus, what is initially understood by *light* is the sensible light that
emanates from illuminant objects—such as, the sun, the stars, and
man-made lamps—without which the world would be shrouded in darkness. Of
course, the essence and definition of light from the standpoint of the
physicists is a whole different issue. They might consider the reality
of light as yet unravelled and they might have disagreements regarding
it, but what is for certain is that in the material world there does
exist something referred to as light that is radiated from illuminate
objects, technically referred to as “sources of light.” The application
of the word *light*, however, is not limited to sensible light. It can
be applied to whatever is “manifest and makes manifest” or, put
differently, to whatever is “apparent and makes apparent.” For instance,
we often refer to knowledge as light, for it is in its essence clear and
also sheds light on other realities.[^6]

Regarding the believer, the Qur\`an states,

***“He who was lifeless, then We gave him life and provided him with a
light by which he walks among the people…”***[^7]

So in the Qur\`anic terminology, faith is “light.” And as faith
illuminates the heart of the believer, shows him the destination, and
guides him to felicity, this application of light is correct. This is
similar to the gnostics’ reference to love as “light.” Rumi says:

*Love is victorious and I, conquered;*

*As the moon, I am illuminated with the light of Love*.[^8]

Using the word *light* in reference to Allah (awj) is correct, for such
usage has occurred in the Qur\`an and the narrations.[^9] But we must be
careful to note in saying “Allah is light” that we do not intend
material and sensible light; rather, that the Divine Essence is manifest
and manifestant[^10]. The manifestness and clearness of everything is
due to the emanation of His Essence. However, nothing illuminates Him.
Thus, we can correctly say, Allah is light.

’Allamah Tabataba\`i writes: “Since it is the existence of everything
that is the cause of its manifestness to others, therefore the highest
form of light is existence itself. Moreover, since the existence of
contingent beings depends on the bestowal of existence by the Truth, the
Supreme, He is the most complete instance of light. It is He Who is
essentially manifest and also makes manifest all-other-than-him. All
other existents become manifest and existent by virtue of Him. And this
is the meaning of the verse, ‘Allah is the light of the heavens and the
earth.’”[^11]

From the aforesaid explanations the meaning of the Verse of Light
becomes clear that: Allah (awj) is the creator and the illuminator of
the heavens and the earth. By the expression “the heavens and the earth”
what is intended is the entirety of the world of existence; all the
celestial and the terrestrial existents; the apparent and the hidden
worlds.[^12] “The heavens and the earth” does not merely signify the sky
above and the Earth that we inhabit. Therefore, the meaning of the verse
is that Allah (awj) is the light of the entire universe. The reason why
the verse has employed this word in lieu of *creator* is to point to the
fact that just as light is itself visible and does not need anything
else to make it visible, rather it is light itself that illuminates all
other things, Allah (awj), likewise has no creator and there is no other
agent that could shed light on Him. He is a manifest, clear, and
self-evident existent. There is no need for formulating reasoning to
prove His existence. He is the creator of all the other existents of the
world of being. In the words of Haji Sabzwari, “O You Who are obscured
by the intensity of Your light.”[^13]

Thus, as propounded by the gnostics in following the mystical teachings
of the prophets and the Imams (ع), Allah (awj) is manifest to the
highest degree; He is absolutely clear, and hence there is no need for
the mediation of His creatures to reveal Him. In other words, in order
to reason for the existence of Allah (awj), one should utilize the
argument from cause rather than the argument from effect. We must first
comprehend Allah (awj) and then through Him His creatures, not
conversely.

It is to this truth that the following line from the ‘Arafah
Supplication (related from Imam al-Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع)) refers: “O Allah!
Being distracted by [Your] effects and creatures prevents me from seeing
You.”

In Du’a Kumayl, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib
(ع) expresses, “By the light of Your face from which all things are
alight.” If not for the light of the Divine Visage and Essence,
everything would be dark. That is, nothing will exist, and all things
would recede back into the darkness of non-existence.

Without the light of the Divine Essence the shadow of non-existence
would envelope all things; the resulting darkness would not be like that
of the night [rather it would be the darkness of non-existence].

Hence, it must be said that Allah (awj), is absolute light. In
comparison to Him, there is no other light. All other lights in
comparison to Him are darkness. For, the only existent Who is by His
essence manifest and manifesting is Allah (awj). All other things that
are manifest and that illuminate other creatures are by their essences
dark. It is Allah (awj) Who has bestowed on them that feature.

It is in this light that ‘Allamah Tabataba\`i has made the following
inference from that verse: “Hence, it can be inferred that Allah (awj),
is not obscure for any existent, for the disclosure of all things, to
themselves and to other things, derives from Allah’s (awj) illuminating.
If Allah (awj) had not illuminated or brought into existence anything,
nothing would have existed. Thus prior to all other things, Allah (awj)
is the essential manifest being … Hence it can be concluded that *light*
in the verse, ‘Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth,’ refers
to that all-embracing Divine light which is the source of the universe,
the light to which all things owe their manifestness, the light which is
identical with the existence of everything. This is that all-embracing
Divine mercy.”[^14]

Thus, according to the Qur\`an, Allah (awj), the Supreme, is not an
absent or essentially obscure God that is revealed by His creatures.
Such conception is defected and elementary. Real knowledge is to
comprehend the world through Allah (awj), not conversely. And this verse
asserts that Allah (awj) is at the height of conspicuousness, clarity,
and obviousness.

Another point that can be inferred from this verse is that we refer to
Allah as *light*, not as “the greatest light”, which implies that there
are other lights as well, some more bright and others less bright, and
that Allah (awj)is the greatest. According to the Qur\`an, there is only
one light and that is Allah, and everything else is dark and
non-existent. It is true, however, that in comparing the creatures
together, some are light and some are not—for instance, knowledge,
faith, intellect, etc., are light. But the latter have derived their
light from Allah (awj).

Thus, in comparison to Allah (awj), there is no other light, or in other
words, He is “the Light of Lights.”[^15] That is, He is the light of all
lights rather than being the greatest light. Therefore, the belief that
Allah (awj) is the greatest light, that He is of the sensory lights but
the brightest and the most intense—reputedly attributed to the
Manicheans—is false.

In the end, we find it suitable to relate Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Rida’s
(ع) reply to ‘Abbas ibn Hilal who had asked the Imam regarding the
meaning of the Verse of Light: “He is the guide for the inhabitants of
the heaven and the inhabitants of the earth.”[^16]

[^1]: Surat Nur (24), Verse 35:  اَللٌّهُ نُورُ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَ
الأَرْضِ

[^2]: Surat al-An’am (6), Verse 1:  وَ جَعَلَ الظُّلُمٌتِ وَ النُّورَ

[^3]: These proofs can be found in Kashf al-Murad fi Sharh Tajrid
al-I’tiqad pg. 287 and Nihayat al-Hikmah, pg. 275.

[^4]: al-Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. 22, pg. 224

[^5]: al-Mizan, vol. 15, pg. 122

[^6]: Tafsir Surat al-Nur, by Murtada Muhahhari, pg. 101

[^7]: Surat al-An’am (6), Verse 122: أَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتاً
فَأَحْـيَينٌهُ وَ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُوراً يَمْشِي بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ... 

[^8]: Mathnawi, Sixth Notebook

[^9]: Nur (Light) is one of Allah’s (awj) names. Other than the Noble
Qur\`an, Allah (awj) has been addressed by this name in a number of
traditions. Some examples are Kitab al-Tawhid ch. 29, pg. 194, no. 8 and
pg. 195, no. 9 and pg. 219, no. 11; al-Khisal. In a number of
supplications such as Du’a\` al-Kumail and Du’a\` Jawshan Kabir this
name of Allah (awj) has been mentioned. It is considered one of Allah’s
(awj) 99 names. Gnostics have prolonged discussions about these names
which we cannot discuss here.

[^10]: I did not find this word in the dictionary in the sense intended
here. However, I think it is appropriate to use it since the suffix
­–ant­ denotes fa’iliyyah. (Tr.)

[^11]: al-Mizan, vol. 15, pg. 122

[^12]: Tafsir Surat Nur, by Murtada Muhahhari, pg. 98

[^13]: Manzumah, Chapter Hikmah

[^14]: al-Mizan, vol. 15, pg. 123

[^15]: In Mafatih al-Jinan there is a supplication called “Nur” (light).
In it we read: “يا نور النور” (O light of light)

[^16]: al-Tawhid, ch. 14, no. 1


