Question 12: Allah’s Will in Human Guidance
===========================================

**Question:** Considering the verse of the Qur\`an in Surah 32, verse 13
which reads, “Had We wished We would have given every soul its
guidance,” - can it not be concluded that Allah (awj) has not desired
the guidance of all humanity? If Allah (awj) had desired the guidance of
all humanity He would have willed such, but obviously He has not. Why?

Brief Answer
------------

Allah (awj) has willed the guidance of all His creatures. For, after
taking all the [relevant] Qur\`anic verses into consideration, the
following points can be deduced:

1. Divine guidance is divided into existential (*takwini*) and
legislative (*tashri’i*) guidance. Existential guidance is the
all-encompassing guidance that embraces the entire creation. Allah (awj)
has put all creatures in motion by ingraining in their nature their
inclination for seeking perfection and reaching their ultimate goal.

The legislative guidance, which is more specific, is exclusive to the
bearers of intellect and thought and pertains to religious issues, such
as rightful doctrines and the Divine *oughts* and *ought-nots*. The
prophets and their infallible successors serve as the conduit for this
latter guidance. It is this guidance that is an extra favour bestowed
upon mankind, and hence they enjoy both types of guidance.

2. There are many verses in the Qur\`an which confirm the free will of
the human being, such as, “Indeed We have guided him to the way, be he
grateful or ungrateful.” This ability to choose is a measure of
existential guidance from Allah (awj), for the human being cannot
himself be the source of his free will as it would entail the problem of
circularity or infinite regress.

3. The entire creation is founded on a framework of causality, and the
Divine norm (*sunnat Allah*) requires that all affairs be guided through
the causal matrix. In this vein, He has provided the means of guidance
for all human beings, by which they can attain the ultimate goal of
their existence. So although the human being has been blessed by
existential guidance, at the same time he is a free being and can choose
to take the path of Divine guidance—thereby preparing in himself the
grounds for further guidance—or he could choose to take the opposite
direction, which leads to disbelief and oppression.

What the verse in question intends is that if Allah (awj) had wished, He
could have created the human being without free will. But Allah (awj)
chose to mould the human being as a volitional creature by the means of
His existential and legislative guidance so that he would be responsible
for his actions and distinguish truth from falsehood. It is in line with
the same Divine norm that if the human being embarks on the path of
oppression and disbelief, consequently he would be deprived of Divine
guidance. But on the other hand, by choosing to follow the path of
truth, the human being earns the blessing of further guidance.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Before answering the question, it is necessary to mention some
preparatory points.

1. It would be helpful to reflect on the entire verse in question: “Had
We wished We would have given every soul its guidance, but My word
became due [against the defiant]:

***‘Surely I will fill hell with all the [guilty] jinn and
humans.’”***[^1]

2. The definition of *hidayah*: It signifies enlightening and showing
the way, out of kindness and goodwill.

3. The Qur\`aan recognizes two general types of Divine guidance:
existential (*takwini*) and legislative (*tashri’i*). The existential is
that all-inclusive guidance that benefits the entire creation. Allah
(awj) guides all creatures to their ultimate perfection and goal by
means of that which He has imparted in their nature. In this regard the
Qur\`an explains, “He said

***‘Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation and then guided
it”***[^2].

This point is reiterated in the following verse:

***“[He] who created and proportioned, [He] who determined and
guided.”***[^3]

The legislative guidance, which is the one specific to the bearers of
intellect and thought, pertains to religious matters such as the true
doctrines and the Divine law. This guidance has been delivered to
humankind through the channels of Divine prophets and their infallible
successors. Allah (awj) says,

***“A part [of mankind] He has guided and a part has deserved [to be
consigned to] error”***[^4];

also,

***“and Allah guides whomever He wishes to a straight path.”***[^5]

As these verses allude to a limited guidance, it can be inferred that
the guidance in question is the legislative. Nevertheless, this guidance
in the context of the human community is an all-inclusive one [meant for
all human beings].

4. The human being, as a creation of Allah (awj) who is subservient to
Him, is the only creature moulded a free being. There are numerous
verses in the Qur\`an that emphasize the volitional nature of the human
being, such as:

***“And say, ‘[This is] the truth from your Lord: let anyone who wishes
believe it, and let anyone who wishes disbelieve it.”***[^6]

In addition:

***“Indeed We have guided him to the way, be he grateful or
ungrateful.”***[^7]

Hence it is the individual himself who is responsible for what he does.

This freewill is part and parcel of human existence and is by no means
separable from it. Thus the human being is predestined in possessing
freewill. There is no human being who could decide not to be free. From
this it can be deduced that the source of human volition cannot be the
human being himself, for then we would have the problem of circularity
or infinite regress. But in the context of his deeds and actions, he is
free by nature, and this is one instance of that existential guidance.

5. The existential system is founded on the system of causality. The
Divine norm (*sunnat Allah*) has established that all events come about
by means of their natural causes. The same norm applies to the question
of guidance in which case He provides the means of guidance so that
truth would be clear for those who seek it and so that they could attain
the ultimate goal by recognizing those means.

Based on the aforementioned points and according to the explicit
connotations of various verses of the Qur\`an, the existential guidance
encompasses all creatures. In addition, the human being has been blessed
by the Divine legislative guidance as well. Due to the fact that
freewill has been existentially inscribed in his nature, he has the
option of following the exclusive Divine guidance, thereby preparing the
grounds for further elevation. But he could also choose to abandon the
way of truth, plunging into disbelief and darkness. The verse in
question indicates that had Allah (awj) wished, He could have created
the human being without freewill. But He chose to favour humankind by
both the existential and the legislative guidance, by which He could
hold the human being accountable for his actions, and by which He
intended to distinguish truth from falsehood.

Conclusion
----------

It has been clarified that understanding the verse in question to mean
that God does not wish the guidance of all human beings is a
misconception. Rather, the contrary holds true. For He has wished the
guidance not only of all human beings but of all creatures. The
difference lies in that Allah (awj) has ordained by His Divine norm that
if the human being decided to walk on to the path of disbelief and
oppression, he would be naturally deprived of Divine guidance. But if he
chose to traverse the path of truth, he would be blessed by that Divine
guidance.

***“As for those who strive in Us, We shall surely guide them in Our
ways, and Allah is indeed with the virtuous.”***[^8]

[^1]: Surat al-Sajdah (32), Verse 13:  وَلَوْ شِئْنَا لأتَيْنَا كُــلَّ
نَفْسٍ هُدَاهَا وَلٌكِنْ حَقَّ الْقَوْلُ مِنِّي لَأملأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ
مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ 

[^2]: Surat Taha (20), Verse 50:  قَالَ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ
شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى 

[^3]: Surat al-A’la (87), Verses 2-3:  الَّذِي خَلَقَ فَسَوَّى.
وَالَّذِي قَدَّرَ فَهَدَى 

[^4]: Surat al-A’raf (7), Verse 30:  فَرِيقًا هَدَى وَفَرِيقًا حَقَّ
عَلَيْهِمُ الضَّلاَلَةُ... 

[^5]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 213:  وَاللٌّهُ يَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَآءُ
إِلـى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ... 

[^6]: Surat al-Kahf (18), Verse 29:  وَقُلِ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ
فَمَنْ شَآءَ فَلْيُؤْمِنْ وَ مَنْ شَآءَ فَلْيَكْفُرْ... 

[^7]: Surat al-Insan (76), Verse 3:  إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ
إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا 

[^8]: Surat al-’Ankabut (29), Verse 69:  وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا
لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ 


