Question 13: Non-muslims and Hell
=================================

**Question:** We know of many people around the world who are not
Muslims or Shi\`a but are nevertheless individuals of good conduct; for
example, non-Muslims are responsible for many inventions. Is it right
that they all deserve to be punished in Hell because they are not
Muslims?

Brief Answer
------------

Those who do not believe in Islam can be classified into two groups:

1. Those who are termed ‘*Jahil-e-Muqassir*’ (lit. ‘*culpable
ignorant*’). These are non-believers to whom the message of Islam has
reached and who have understood its truthfulness. However, they are not
prepared to accept the truth due to their obstinacy and stubbornness.
This group deserves to be punished in Hell.

2. Those who are termed ‘*Jahil-e-Qasir*’ (lit. ‘*inculpable
ignorant*’). These are non-believers to whom the message of Islam has
not reached, or it has been presented to them in a very incomplete and
untruthful manner. Such people will attain salvation if they are
truthful to their own religion.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Islam is a simple and accessible religion and it is easy to find out its
truthfulness by means of the two guiding authorities that have been
given to mankind: the ‘*outer*’ guiding authority, that is, Allah’s
prophets and saints, and the ‘*inner*’ one, that is, the intellect.[^1]

Islam is in complete opposition to the concept of religious pluralism
because this concept is based on the principle that different beliefs
are equal and that Muslims, Hindus, Christians, Jews etc. all have the
same rank and status. According to religious pluralism, no proof exists
for the invalidity of any belief because the truth is unattainable and
religion is a relative and completely personal affair. Not only are its
truths and real substance unattainable and every person takes from it
whatever he or she personally understands, but furthermore, there are
numerous truths and many correct paths to salvation and deliverance.

Such views are inconsistent with the religion of Islam, which is
comprised of a set of fundamental beliefs and practical, legal and
ethical laws and principles. Islam does however give concessions to
those who are far from its reality. This can be better understood when
we consider that there are two groups of people who do not believe in
Islam:

1. Those who are termed ‘*Jahil-e-Muqassir*’ (lit. ‘*culpable
ignorant*’) and who are obstinate non-believers. That is, Islam has
reached them and they have understood its truthfulness; however, they
are not prepared to accept the truth due to their obstinacy and
stubbornness. This group of non-believers deserves to be punished in
Hell because despite having known the truth, they have chosen with their
own free will to reject Islam. These non-believers, even though they may
be of good conduct, could have attained salvation but instead have
closed the path to salvation themselves as they have covered the truth
and are rebellious and obstinate in relation to it. As a result, they
have chosen their own predicament.

2. Those who are termed ‘*Jahil-e-Qasir*’ (lit. ‘*inculpable
ignorant*’). These are non-believers to whom the message of Islam has
not reached, or it has been presented to them in a very incomplete and
untruthful manner; so for example, they think that Islam has the same
status and rank as the religions of India and China and at the most,
Judaism and Christianity. This group of non-believers, whether they live
in the most remote parts of the world or in the most civilized, will not
be subject to the punishments of Hell because they are not blameworthy
for their lack of belief, and punishment is only for blameworthy
sinners.

Unfortunately, there is so much propaganda against Islam that free
thinking and seeking the truth has been taken away from many people in a
way that they cannot distinguish truth from falsehood. The fact is that
despite making significant material progress, contemporary man has
regressed spiritually. The main cause of this is the ‘*World
Arrogance*’—the superpower enemies of Islam—with its propagandist and
deceptive media system that in full force tries to change and distort
the truth. Therefore, many people, even in the most civilized of places,
have remained unaware of the true message of Islam and of the enlivening
Ahlul Bayt (ع) school of thought. Worse still, incorrect and unrealistic
information about Islam is given to them in a way that a religion of
mercy, love and justice is portrayed as a religion of violence,
oppression and injustice.

In conclusion, from the point of view of Islam, those who have not heard
about the true message of Islam and are not blameworthy with regard to
this will attain salvation if they are truthful to their own religion.
This religion must be based on the *‘fitrah’*[^2]—man’s primordial,
innate nature—and so the followers of such a religion, for example,
abstain from lying and committing crimes against humanity. This rule is
also applicable to the Ahlus Sunnah to whom the truthfulness of Shi’aism
has not been explained correctly.

[^1]: al-Kafi, v.1, p.25, no. 22

[^2]: Fitrah: Allah says in the Qur\`an, “The divine nature by which
Allah has created mankind” (30:30). Therefore, the fitrah in every
person is the root of all spiritual matters and goodness. Imam Rida (ع)
has said, “And it is by means of the fitrah that His proof is
substantiated” (al-Saduq, al-Tawhid, pg. 35. That is, whatever Allah has
as argumentation is of no use without the fitrah. By this explanation,
it becomes evident why in the terminology of Islamic philosophers and
theologians the fitrah is referred to as the origin of all spiritual
matters and goodness, in contrast to tabi’ah (nature), which is referred
to as the origin of all material and instinctive matters. Man is a being
of free will that continuously chooses the path of the fitrah or the way
of tabi’ah, and it is with this free will that he determines his life in
the Hereafter, as indicated in the famous hadith: “The World is a
plantation for the Hereafter.”


