Question 14: Self-Confidence and Trust in Allah
===============================================

**Question:** On the one hand, in the sciences of education and
psychology a great deal of emphasis is placed on self-confidence, but in
Islamic teachings, ethics, and gnosticism (‘irfan) on the other hand, it
is stressed that one must trust only in Allah (awj) and not in oneself.
Is their a contradiction between the two perspectives?

Brief Answer
------------

To apprehend whether there is a conflict or not, one must first have a
clear definition of the two terms. There are two ways of understanding
self-confidence:

1. Comprehending ones’ abilities, potentials, and building on the
existing capabilities in the attempt to satisfy one’s desires and attain
to the true human identity. This version is in no way in conflict with
the spirit of trust in Allah (awj). The advantage of this version is its
compatibility with two key religious terms: self-knowledge and knowledge
of Allah’s (awj) blessings and the right way of employing them.

2. Egocentrism. That is, to rely solely on one’s personal capabilities
and knowledge to the extent of considering one’s ambitions and desires
as the source of ultimate well-being and success. This understanding is
not only in disharmony with religious teachings; it is a mirage, a mere
figment of the imagination. This objectionable self-confidence is
actually self-centeredness and being over-confident of oneself. It is in
allusion to this type of self-confidence that the Commander of the
Faithful says, “Whosoever trusts in his self will be betrayed many
times.”

**The Definition of** ***Tawakkul***

*Tawakkul* comes from the root *wikalah* and so by derivation means
“appointing someone as one’s trustee (*wakil*)”. What is meant by the
self-confidence that is in harmony with *tawakkul* is maintaining one’s
composition in the face of great predicaments by relying on the endless
power of Allah (awj), thereby considering oneself triumphant. It means
to struggle resolutely in the face of all the troubles and tribulations
that befall one, trusting in Allah (awj) where one feels powerless and
not ceasing to try. Rather, even where one feels capable, one should
know that the real power is Allah (awj). For, in the eyes of the true
monotheist, He is the fountainhead of all existing powers, so that
viewing the natural phenomena in separation from the Divine will is a
kind of polytheism. All natural causes derive their potency from Him and
exist due to His will.

But the second interpretation of self-confidence is in no way compatible
with *tawakkul*, for in this sense self-confidence would be to regard
one’s strengths and capabilities independent of Divine will. And
self-reliance and relying on other creatures are in opposition to the
spirit of trust in Allah (awj).

The Prophet (ص) has been related as having said, “I asked Jibra\`il (ع),
‘What is *tawakkul*?’ He replied, ‘Recognizing the truth that a creature
can neither harm nor benefit, and not to have your eyes on the wealth of
others. When a servant of Allah acquires these traits, he will act only
for Allah and will not have any hope in other than Him. This is the
truth and boundary of *tawakkul*.’”

Detailed Answer
---------------

In order to properly examine the question of the contradiction of
self-confidence—in the context of psychology—with the concept of
trusting in God and not trusting in oneself—in the context of religious
teachings—one must first analyze the meanings of the two concepts.

### Analyzing the definition of self-confidence

Self-confidence is acknowledging one’s strengths and capabilities,
therefore relying on what one has for achieving what one desires and for
attaining to the true essence of humanity. This conception of
self-confidence is not in conflict with religious teachings. Rather it
is exactly in line with the will of Allah (awj) and acceptable by the
godly people. We are duty bound to attempt to acquire this trait and the
failure thereof might result in being deprived of many advantageous
things, the least of which might be the lack of success and the
inability to achieve Divine satisfaction. Hence, we refer to this
conception of self-confidence as the laudable self-confidence.

There are several qualifications that contribute to the positive
conception of self-confidence. The first is comprehending oneself, one’s
capabilities, strengths and weaknesses, duties, and material and
spiritual assets. What is the most effective plan for utilizing these
assets? These are all points and questions that stem from the two key
religious concepts: self-knowledge and recognizing one’s God-given
blessings and appropriately exploiting them.

This conception of self-confidence is in essence to be aware of the
supra-human entity and the lofty aspects of the human being by means of
knowing the blessings of Allah (awj). And this is based on the fact that
Allah (awj) has bestowed certain blessings on the human being and thus
holds him responsible vis-à-vis those blessings and at the end will hold
him accountable, asking as to how he employed those blessings. Hence,
taking the responsibility of these blessings on one’s shoulders is not
possible without taking advantage of one’s personal assets, without
self-confidence, without benefiting from those blessings, or feeling
positive. So to reward [unclear] the positive definition of
self-confidence: It is the belief that “I” am one of Allah’s (awj)
creatures that has been given blessings by a Being who has control over
these blessings and who would not be harmed were He to deprive me of all
of them. We would be ungrateful if we did not think of the scheme of our
existence in this manner.

We accept the first definition of self-confidence because it reinforces
our independence and self-esteem and thus prevents us from being
dependent on other creatures as well as underestimating ourselves. In
other words, self-confidence is the conscious and beneficial acceptance
of our values, assets, and symbols, such that with this lofty
human/Islamic self-confidence we can stand up against all instances of
timidity, [cultural] disorientation, thereby preventing our
subordination to those who only wear the disguise of humanity.

Through self-confidence we will be able to regulate our mind, thereby
gaining access to all the golden keys to success. Is it not true that
when imperialists decide to enslave a people, their first tactic is to
convince the people that they have nothing, that their mentality is
backward and that they have fallen behind from modernism and that they
are too immature to stand up on their own feet? By such intimidations a
nation might fall from the heights of self-confidence to the pits of
self-abasement, and seeing itself as inferior it will try to emulate the
predator culture. Such emulation is in itself a manifestation of the
cultural deficiency of the nation in question and is the beginning of
its self-alienation, both culturally and religiously.

A good number of those who get caught in psychological voids—and as a
result get involved in crime—are those who underestimate themselves. The
analysis provided by ‘Ali Mirzabiygee states that, “Self-esteem plays a
major role in one’s logical and normal behaviour or on the other hand
one’s abnormal, unfriendly, and criminal behaviour. Based on the
conducted research in this field, self-esteem can prevent, ameliorate,
or worsen some types of modes of human behaviour. As narrated in a
tradition, “He who is self-abased will become such that there will be no
security against his mischief.”[^1] Therefore, the positive
self-confidence results in self-esteem and is itself the fruit of
self-assurance, determination, and capability. “The determination of men
of eminence can uproot mountains.”[^2] (*The Role of Psychological
Needs,* pg. 33)

Another positive quality of this definition of self-confidence is its
harmony with the spirit of *tawakkul* in Islamic culture. We will
explain this point in more detail later on.

The second possible definition for self-confidence is egocentrism—i.e.,
the absence of any concerns other than one’s desires. This could end in
such extremes that one might solely depend on his faculties and
knowledge, considering his needs and aspirations as the source of
absolute good and ultimate success. This illusion is not only in
opposition to Islamic teachings; it is also a figment of the
imagination. It would be more accurate to refer to this negative
definition of self-confidence as *egocentrism*. It is the latter
psychological state that has been the cause of many failures and by
which the human being has been betrayed: “Whosoever trusts his ego will
be betrayed by it.”[^3]

Why is this definition of self-confidence deplorable? The following
factors all play a role in the negative nature of this state of mind.
This conception of self-confidence creates a false self-image in the
mind of the human being and thus entails disequilibrium. When one
thinks, “What I want should be…Truth is that which corresponds to my
opinion and so my opinion should be done…There are no obstacles in my
way…I am strong enough so that others are nothing in comparison to
me…”—such thoughts can only lead to “personal overestimation”. The
solidification of this notion would cause “extreme conceit” which will
open the way for an unrealistic overestimation of oneself. And without
doubt such mental waves and whirlpools will entail “instability” and the
distortion of one’s true personality.

At any rate, the limits of one’s capabilities should be recognized. One
should take into consideration all the other factors and realities too.
With such awkward self-confidence there will be no possibility of a
realistic assessment of one’s capabilities. The Commander of the
Faithful, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) says, “If you seek Allah’s grace,
determine the aspects of your capabilities and the limits of your
inabilities. Otherwise you would exceed your scope thereby undermining
the possibility of progress and Divine grace.”[^4]

It is for this reason that Islam prohibits such overestimation of
oneself and has warned that if a human being does not abandon this state
of mind, he would be seized by two entailments: conceit and self-love.

In addition to the detriments you heard regarding *‘ujb*—viewing oneself
beyond the range of fallibility and being satisfied with one’s deeds—it
is an evil tree whose fruit is a range of greater sins… The veil of
*‘ujb* and the heavy curtain of self-satisfaction blocks one from seeing
one’s own weaknesses. And this is a great affliction that prevents the
human being from all perfections… And another detriment of *‘ujb* is
being overconfident of oneself and one’s deeds. This causes the ignorant
and unfortunate human being to consider himself free of need of the
Truth, exalted is He, therefore neglecting His grace.[^5]

The second feature of the negative self-confidence which renders it a
deplorable trait is that it implies a notion of independence from Allah
(awj), which is practically denying the principle of Divine unity in
actions. In the science of theology it has been demonstrated that all
existents, motions, and actions in the cosmos derive from the Pure
Essence of Allah (awj). He is the cause of causes, the head of the chain
of causality. Even our actions are, from one aspect, from Him. He has
bestowed upon us strength, choice, and free will, but this Diving agency
does not reject the role of the human being. He has bestowed strength
and choice, but at the same time we are the doers of our own actions and
as such are responsible for them. But this fact does not contradict the
agency of Allah (awj), for all that we possess is from Him and will
return to Him: “There is no active agent in existence but for Him.”[^6]
Attributing the main role to oneself is tantamount to assuming absolute
agency for oneself in opposition to Allah’s (awj) absolute will and His
boundless rule.

**Analyzing the definition of** ***Tawakkul***

*Tawakkul* is derived from the root *wikalah* and means the appointment
of a trustee (*wakil*). It should go without saying that appointing a
trustee is necessary where one is incapable of personally handling the
situation, in which case the strength of some one else is employed. It
should also be noted that the right trustee should at least have the
following four traits: well informed, trustworthy, having the power to
undertake the task in question, and concerned for the welfare of the
client.

The first interpretation of self-confidence—i.e., self-knowledge and
self-assurance along with utilizing all personal capabilities and
assets—has no contradiction with *tawakkul*. For, in addition to the
purely religious concepts that are embedded in this interpretation of
self-confidence—such as self-knowledge, knowledge, and utilizing the
blessings of Allah (awj)—essentially the realistic *tawakkul* stems from
this positive interpretation of self-confidence. For, what is intended
by the concept of *tawakkul* is that the human being, when confronted
with tribulations in life, must not feel abased or weak.

Rather, relying on the limitless power of Allah (awj), he must see
himself triumphant and victorious. In this light, it becomes clear that
*tawakkul* possesses an inspiring, revitalizing, and regenerating
meaning that increases one’s endurance and resilience.

Hence, relying on Allah (awj) should not be construed in any other way
but that the human being, when faced with the troubles and vicissitudes
of life, when exposed to the animosity of enemies and the stubbornness
of detractors, or in running into difficulties or seeming impasses, must
endeavour to open the doors of success and when incapable, rely on Allah
(awj) thereby continuing to struggle. More accurately, even where one is
capable of undertaking a task, Allah (awj) should still be recognized as
the principal agent in the world, for from the perspective of a
monotheist, the fountainhead of power and strength is Allah (awj)

Those who assume that being cognizant of the world of causes and natural
elements is in opposition to the spirit of *tawakkul* are in deep error.
For dissociating the natural elements from the will of God is itself a
type of polytheism. Is it not true that even natural elements owe their
efficacy to Him and exist due to His will? Of course, if such elements
and causes are considered independent entities in contrast to His
will—then such a view is in opposition to the spirit of *tawakkul*.

The main point is that self-assurance, taking advantage of Allah’s (awj)
blessings, utilizing one’s capabilities, and hopefulness are not in
contrast to *tawakkul*. The Prophet of Islam (ص), the crown of those who
rely on God, never failed to seize any opportunity, plan, or positive
tactic, nor did he neglect any natural element, and he used to warn the
believers, “You can… You are superior.” Why should we not consider “You
are superior” as the rightful interpretation and the true scheme for the
conformity of *tawakkul* and self-confidence.

The second interpretation of self-confidence is in contradiction with
*tawakkul* because relying on other people is in diametrical opposition
to relying on God. That is, living as a liability for others and being
dependent on them means a lack of independence. For relying on God frees
the human being from dependence (which is the cause of human disgrace
and bondage) and bestows on him freedom and self-confidence.

The Prophet of Islam (ص) has been narrated as having said, “I inquired
from the Messenger of Revelation, Jibra\`il (ع), ‘What is *tawakkul*?’
He said, ‘Being aware that a creature can neither harm nor provide nor
block [others’ sustenance] from being provided; that you take your eyes
off of the possession of other people. When a servant of Allah has thus
transformed himself, he will act only for Allah and will have hope only
in Him. This is the truth and definition of *tawakkul*.’”[^7]

[^1]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul, pg. 483: مَنْ هَانَتْ عَلَيْهِ نَفْسُهُ فَلاَ
تَأْمَنْ شَرَُّهُ.

[^2]: Musnad al-Shahab, vol. 1, pg. 378

[^3]: Ghurar al-Hikam, vol. 5, pg. 161 مَنْ وَثَقَ نَفْسَهُ خَانَتْهُ.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, pg. 79

[^5]: Ayatullah Khomeini, Forty Hadith, under the explanation of the
third hadith

[^6]: Ayatullah Nasir Makarim Shirazi, Payam Qur\`an, vol. 3, pg. 274

[^7]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar, pg. 261: فَقُلْتُ: وَمَا التَّوَكُّلُ عَلى
اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ؟ فَقَالَ: اَلْعِلْمُ بِأَنَّ الْمَخْلُوقَ لاَ
يَضُرُّ وَلاَ يَنْفَعُ وَلاَ يُعْطِي وَلاَ يَمْنَعُ، وَاسْتِعْمَالُ
الْيَأْسَ مِنَ الْخَلْقِ، فَإِذَا كَانَ الْعَبْدُ كَذٌلِكَ لَمْ يَعْمَلْ
لِأَحَدٍ سِوى اللٌّهَ وَلَمْ يَرْجُ وَلَمْ يَخَفْ سِوَى اللٌّهَ وَلَمْ
يَطْمَعْ فِي أَحَدٍ سِوى اللٌّهَ فَهٌذَا هُوَ التَّوَكُّلُ.


