Question 15: Attaining Perfection
=================================

**Question:** How can perfection be attained?

Brief Answer
------------

This topic needs to be discussed in three parts.

### 1. Definition of Kamal (Perfection) and How It Differs from Tamam (Completion) and Progress

Completion applies when speaking about the parts of a thing, as in the
case where a thing is composed of several parts and all the parts are
put together, it is said that that thing is complete. In other words,
completion pertains to the parts that are necessary to bring something
into existence. But perfection pertains to the levels and stages of
something. When something reaches completion, there still might be more
perfect states for it. Thus a thing could be complete but not perfect.
Also, the term progress could apply to a movement that is merely
horizontal. However, elevation is embedded in the meaning of perfection.
For, perfection is meaningful only in the context of an ascending and
vertical movement. Hence, it is possible to achieve progress without
attaining to perfection.

### 2. Human Perfection from the Point of View of Islam

a. Perfection is in vision and acquisition. One must fully comprehend
the Divine sciences and act accordingly.

b. Perfection is dependent on sensing, for the human being is compelled
to action when feeling threatened and realizing one’s own imperfection.

### 3. Different Views on Perfection

#### a. Ideology of Power

According to this ideology, the perfect human being is synonymous with
the powerful human being. The more powerful one is, the higher the level
of perfection he has attained to. Even if knowledge is of value, it is
due to the fact that it enables the human being to strengthen himself
and to subjugate the surrounding environment.

This view has two problems. First, knowledge in this ideology has no
intrinsic value and sanctity. It is power alone that is considered
perfection. Second, not only is knowledge not perfection and a means to
transcendence, it serves as grounds for war and the exploitation of the
weak.

From the point of view of Islam, power is not intrinsically negative.
There are instances where it has been promoted, but with the condition
that it be employed in the way of advocating moral values and social
reformation.

#### b. The View of the Philosophers

From the perspective of the philosophers, perfection can be sought in
two things: wisdom (which is the comprehension of the universal truths
of the cosmos) and justice (which is the tempering of the instincts and
the human faculties by the intellect, or in other words, the intellect
dominating the human faculties)

Islam also considers wisdom a virtue. The Qur\`an refers to wisdom as
“***abundant good***” (2:269) and recognizes it as a means of
perfection. Justice is also emphasized by Islam. However, in Islam the
intellect’s domination over the sensual and psychic faculties is
considered effective only when it is reinforced by Revelation.

#### c. The Mystic Ideology

Mystics are of the opinion that reality is nondual. Reality is God and
all else is the radiance of His existence. Thus, the human being attains
to perfection when he comes to view only Him and nothing else, when he
reaches annihilation in the Truth. The closer one ascends to the Truth,
the more perfect he becomes. And the path of this journey is the heart,
and one must combat one’s ego and overcome it and belittle it so as to
erase any trace of egoism.

Although Islam approves of the path of the heart and vision, it also
supports the intellect and has referred to the latter as the “inward
prophet”. In contrast to mysticism, both the personal and the social
aspects of life have been recognized, and so the perfect human being is
he who perfects himself in both aspects.

Another defect of the mystical perspective is that it undermines
self-esteem and self-worth to the extent of demeaning the individual.
Islam does not allow such excessive self-humiliation. From the view
point of Islam, at the same time that the believer must combat his ego
and tame it, he must avoid ignoble and unbecoming acts.

Detailed Answer
---------------

### Definition of Perfection

First, we must define perfection. *Tamam* (completion) is contrasted
with *naqs* (deficiency) and so is *kamal* (perfection). In the Noble
Qur\`an we read:

***Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I have completed My
blessing upon you***[^1].

That is, the Qur\`an considers *tamam* and *kamal* different in meaning:
it employs *tamam* in the context of deficiency in blessing and *kamal*
in the context of deficiency in religion.

At this point it is necessary to explain how *kamal* (perfection)
differs in meaning from *tamam* (completion) and *pishraft* (progress).
If an object is composed of several parts, such as a building, until all
the parts are put together, it is said that the object is deficient and
incomplete and when all the parts have been assembled, it is said that
the object is complete.

However, perfection applies to levels and stages. For instance, a new
born child, although healthy and complete with all the natural parts and
organs, is in one respect deficient and must pass through the various
levels of perfection by means of training and education in order to
attain to perfection.

In other words, *tamam* is used where all the necessary parts for
composing a whole are present, otherwise that whole is deficient in its
essence. On the other hand, *kamal* is used when an object has reached
completion but has the capacity to improve and acquire higher degrees.
Thus, an object could be complete but not perfect.

But as to the difference of *kamal* (perfection) from *pishraft*
(progress), it can be said that the idea of elevation is embedded in the
meaning of perfection. Perfection is a movement but a vertical one, from
lower degrees to higher and loftier degrees, unlike progress which can
also apply to a horizontal movement.

For instance, if an army is at war and is conquering enemy territory and
moving ahead, it is said that the army is progressing, not perfecting.
Therefore, social perfection denotes human elevation in the social
context not merely progress, for there are many changes that might be
considered as progress for the human being or the society but might not
necessarily indicate perfection or elevation.

### Human Perfection from the Point of View of Islam

#### 1. Perfection Dependent on Vision and Acquisition

One must endeavour to fully understand the Divine sciences and conduct
himself accordingly. That is, he must put his knowledge into action.
Just as virtues are interrelated with perfect and complete acts of
worship, vices are interrelated with deficient and ineffective acts of
worship.

#### 2. Perfection Contingent on Sensing Danger

He who knows that something dangerous is threatening him and might
result in his being left hungry and thirsty in the middle of nowhere
will embark on solving the dangerous situation. The person who
constantly reminds himself of the hardships of the hereafter and the
chastisement of hell, realizing the danger, will struggle to attain to
perfection and avoid all deficiencies. For unless one feels the
deficiency and insufficiency of his state, he will not advance toward
perfection. By the same token, deficiency and backwardness are the
results of ignorance and the complacent and self-deceiving notions of
being perfect.

But in what does human perfection lie? What is the path to attaining to
perfection? There are divergent views regarding this question. We will
limit ourselves to three views in addition to Islam’s assessment of each
of them.

### The Ideology of Power

According to this view, the perfect human is the strong human. The
stronger the human being is and the more firmly he controls his
surroundings, the closer he is to perfection. Darwin’s theory of
evolution—known as “competition to survive”—is based on this notion. For
the exponents of this view, knowledge is valuable only in so far as it
enables the human being to strengthen his grip on his environment, thus
they exploit knowledge for the sake of power. In their view, truth and
justice have no reality or meaning other than power.

Two criticisms come to mind regarding this viewpoint. First, knowledge
enjoys no sacred place in this ideology, rather it is only a means for
acquiring power, and it is power alone that can be considered perfection
for the human being. Second, not only is knowledge not conducive to
perfection or moral elevation, it prepares the grounds for conflict. It
serves as a tool in the hands of the aggressors and oppressors.
Therefore, humanity does not advance by employing knowledge as it
should, for the imperialist powers utilize it to exploit the weaker
nations.

Islam advocates the use of power, but the sort of power that is in
harmony with lofty human values, with compassion and kindness. There are
numerous verses in the Qur\`an that encourage the Muslim community to
strengthen itself, but the power intended in such verses is that which
would be utilized in the way of fighting oppression and defending the
rights of the oppressed, the sort of power that would pave the way for
upholding justice and moral values.

### Philosophers’ Perspective on Human Perfection

According to philosophers, human perfection lies in two things. The
first is wisdom, which is comprehending the reality of things as they
are in themselves and the general order of the cosmos. To corroborate
this point, they cite the following verse,

***He gives wisdom to whomever He wishes, and he who is given wisdom, is
certainly given an abundant good***[^2].

Thus they consider wisdom a Divine gift and a means to perfection.

The second truth which constitutes perfection in the view of the
philosophers is justice. By that they intend moral justice, i.e.,
creating a balance among the human instincts and faculties, bringing
them under the supervision of the intellect.

From the Islamic point of view wisdom is also seen as a means to
perfection and, as was explained, more than just being beneficial to
humanity, wisdom is a good in itself; meaning that it should be sought
as an end in itself and not as a means for something else. Moreover,
justice is also something which Islam underscores. It also stresses the
importance of balancing the faculties and instincts and the intellect’s
management of them. However, Islam does not consider this sufficient.
According to Islam, the intellect must be complemented by faith, for
reason alone is not potent enough. It is the intellect monitored by
Revelation and faith that is desirable in the Islamic context.

### Mystics’ Perspective on Human Perfection

Mystics are of the opinion that reality is nondual, i.e., God. All else
is His radiance and a form of the reality. Whatever seems to be real as
such is due to Him. The human being can reach perfection only after
realizing the truth and attaining to it, to which they refer as
“attaining to the Truth,” indicating annihilation in the Truth. He must
be comprehended before anything else, even prior to comprehending
oneself. Although the unity expounded by the mystics should not be
understood as indicating incarnation or God becoming identical with the
creation. Rather, what is meant is to see Him alongside everything,
within everything, and prior to everything. And if the human being fails
to attain to the truth, he is imperfect and veiled from the truth. The
path leading to the truth is that of the heart, not reason, syllogism,
nor philosophy:

*Syllogists have legs of wood,*

*But legs of wood are dangerously unsteady.*

The mount for this journey is love and intimacy. And the ego must be
exterminated in this way.

In the mystical worldview, some issues have been disparaged with which
Islam disagrees. Islam approves of love and spiritual wayfaring but at
the same time supports the intellect, calling it the “inward prophet”
and counting it as one of the Divine blessings. In mysticism esotericism
has been overemphasized, thus undermining the outward aspects of
spirituality and emphasizing seclusion and withdrawal from social life.
Islam on the other hand, while stressing the importance of personal
aspects, spiritual purification, and spiritual retreat in God,
encourages the social aspects as well. Islam advocates worship but along
with involvement in the society, hailing those who are worshippers by
night and warriors by day.

According to Islam, the Universal Man is he who is a man of worship, of
kneeling and prostration before the Lord, but also one who is dutiful
vis-à-vis his social responsibilities—i.e., social reformation and
enjoining good and forbidding evil.[^3]

In the mystical worldview, attaining to the Truth and Unveiling and
liberation from egoism requires the annihilation of the ego, belittling
it to the very extreme without being disturbed by such practices. Rather
one should consider them as the way to perfection. Islam, however, does
not approve of such measures. For, it views the believer with respect
and commands him to defend his dignity. Islam encourages combating one’s
ego and self-esteem concurrently. That is, it approves of combating
one’s ego so long as it does not lead to being disgraced and belittled.
The value of the believer is very high in the Islamic value system, so
much so that it has been considered equal to that of the Kaaba.

[^1]: Surat al-Ma\`idah (5), Verse 3: } اَلْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ
دِينَكُمْ وَ أَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَتِي... {

[^2]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), verse 269: } يُؤْتِي الْحِكْمَةَ مَنْ
يَشَآءُ وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ أُوتِيَ خَيْراً كَثِيراً وَمَا
يَذَّكَّرُ إِلاَّ أُولُوْا الأَلْبَابِ {

[^3]: These traits can be found in the Noble Qur\`an: Surat al-Tawbah
(9), verse 112 and Surat al-Fath (49), veresse 29 are two examples.


