Question 16:  The Angels and free-will
======================================

**Question:** We know that some angels do nothing but worship Allah
(awj). Is this worship of theirs performed of their own freewill? If
not, does Allah (awj) have need of such worship?

Brief Answer
------------

No benefit from any creature’s worship—whether it has freewill or
not—reaches Allah (awj). Rather worship that is offered out of freewill
is the cause for the spiritual advancement of the worshipper. However,
for creatures that worship Allah (awj) without freewill, such as the
angels, their worship is simply an intrinsic part of their existence.
Their subservience to Allah (awj) stems from their perception of His
greatness, and does not benefit Allah (awj) in the least.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Angels are supernatural beings. We can only know of their existence by
way of revelation or through individual supernatural experience. Angels
are immaterial and can therefore not be described quantitatively or
qualitatively. However, they can *appear* in human form. The Qur\`an
speaks of Mariam’s  encounter with the Noble Spirit when she saw it in
human form.[^1] It also tells us of the angels who visited Ibrahim (ع)
and Lut (ع) in the form of men.[^2] Additionally, it is narrated that
Jibra\`il would appear before the Prophet Muhammad (ص) in the form of
Dahyah al-Kalbi, the Prophet’s milk-brother.

We know that angels are limited beings that vary from individual to
individual. Some are consigned with the responsibility of meting out
punishment in this world, some in Purgatory *(al-Barzakh)*, and some in
the Hereafter. Some are entrusted with the task of writing the deeds of
men, and some write the decrees of Allah (awj).

Some manage the day-to-day affairs of the cosmos, and some are
messengers who carry divine revelation. Some inspire the hearts of men
and some are protectors and helpers of the believers. Some have higher
rank and give orders to others. Some are responsible for sustenance,
some for rain, and some take the souls of people when they die. In the
same vein, some angels are perpetually in a state of prostration, some
continually bow, and some forever glorify Allah (awj).

Some eternally circumambulate the Ka’bah and pay tribute to the graves
of the Friends of Allah (awj). Some seek forgiveness and intercession
for the believers. Others curse the disbelievers, pagans, hypocrites and
staunch opponents of the Prophet’s household. In all cases, each angel
is assigned a specific task. He neither has power to perform more than
what he has been commanded nor to fall short of his task.

The essence of worship *(‘ibadah)* is to display servitude
*(‘ubudiyyah)* to one’s master. One’s display of servitude is directly
proportional to his perception of Allah’s (awj) greatness. Such a
display, therefore, is an indication of the spiritual perfection of the
creature, not a deficiency in the Creator. It is not necessary that any
benefit from a creature’s worship reach Allah (awj) in order for Allah
(awj) to be able to say that His purpose in creating man and jinn was
that they worship him. Rather, the fact that their creation is an
awesome display of Allah’s (awj) infinite power and endless beneficence
is enough.

If a creature has freewill, his worship will result in a purification of
his soul and his gradual advancement through the ranks of servitude.
Therefore, the benefit of his worship returns to himself not to Allah
(awj) in such a way that were he not to worship Allah (awj), he would
not harm Allah (awj) in the least. Rather, if he fails to worship Allah
(awj), it is himself will be harmed!

Apparently, some of the angels also questioned whether Allah (awj) needs
worship done out of freewill. When Allah (awj) informed them that that
He would create a regent on earth, they said,

***“We already sing your praises. Why would you create someone on earth
who will cause corruption and spill blood?” So Allah bestowed on Adam***
***His special knowledge—a knowledge that the angels were incapable of
learning. The angels proclaimed, “We possess no knowledge except that
which you have taught us.” They thereby conceded their own inferiority
to Adam (ع) and fell down in prostration before him.***[^3]

It is obvious that the worship that issues from freewill is more
valuable than worship to which one is compelled. The former is the
actualization of one’s potential while the latter is simply a result of
one’s stagnant and constant present state in which there is no room for
future development and from which the slightest slip means a fall to
perdition.

Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) describes the angels in the following way:
“You have created the angels and placed them in the heavens. They do not
feel fatigue nor are they oblivious nor do they sin. Among all Your
creatures, they know the most about You, are most fearful of You, are
the nearest to You, and the most obedient … Their intellect does not
err. Their bodies do not tire. Neither did they issue from loins nor
were they concealed by wombs.

They were not created from filthy semen. You created them in a special
way and placed them in the heavens. Through their nearness to You is an
honour for them. With Your revelation You entrusted them. From sickness
and tribulations You protected them. From sin You purified them. If You
had not empowered them, they would have no power. If You had not made
them constant, they would have no constancy. If it were not for Your
mercy, they would not obey You. And if it were not for You, they would
not exist.

However, despite their station, obedience, nearness to You, and
unwavering attention to You and Your commands, if You were to reveal a
glimmer of Your reality—a reality that You have kept hidden from them,
their actions would seem insignificant, they would be ashamed of
themselves, and they would know that they have not worshipped You as You
deserve to be worshipped. Glorified are You who are the Creator, the
Object of Worship, and the One who tests his servants.”[^4]

A reflection of Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib’s (ع) words make three issues
clear:

1. The secret behind their worship: The angels’ worship of Allah (awj)
is a natural consequence of their experiential knowledge of Allah (awj).
However, because their existential capacity is limited, their knowledge
of Allah (awj) is also limited.

2. The secret behind the aforementioned objection of the angels when
Adam (ع) was created: The root of this objection was their limited
knowledge.

3. The secret behind their admission and prostration before Adam (ع):
When it became clear to them that they were incapable of understanding
the reasons behind Allah’s (awj) actions, they admitted to this
shortcoming and prostrated before Adam.

To recap, because the freewill of angels is not like that of man, their
worship does nothing to raise their station. However, if they were to
abandon their worship, they would fall. Their worship stems from their
knowledge of Allah’s (awj) greatness on one hand and their own
insignificance on the other. No benefit from their worship reaches Allah
(awj). Rather their worship is a manifestation of Allah’s (awj)
omnipotence.

[^1]: Surat Maryam (19), Verses 16-19: } وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ
مَرْيَمَ إِذْ اِنْتَبَذَتْ مِنْ أَهْلِهَا مَكَانًا شَرْقِيًّا.
فَاتَّخَذَتْ مِنْ دُونِهِمْ حِجَابًا فَأَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهَا رُوحَنَا
فَتَمَثَّلَ لَهَا بَشَرًا سَوِيًّا. قَالَتْ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِالرَّحْمٌنِ
مِنْكَ إِنْ كُنتَ تَقِيًّا. قَالَ إِنَّمَا أَنَا رَسُولُ رَبِّكِ
ِلأَهَبَ لَكِ غُلاَمًا زَكِيًّا {

[^2]: Surat Hud (11), Verses 69-81: } وَلَقَدْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا
إِبْرَاهِيمَ بِالْبُشْرَى قَالُوا سَلاَمًا قَالَ سَلاَمٌ فَمَا لَبِثَ
أَنْ جَاءَ بِعِجْلٍ حَنِيذٍ. فَلَمَّا رَأَى أَيْدِيَهُمْ لاَ تَصِلُ
إِلَيْهِ نَكِرَهُمْ وَأَوْجَسَ مِنْهُمْ خِيفَةً قَالُوا لاَ تَخَفْ
إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَى قَوْمِ لُوطٍ. وَامْرَأَتُهُ قَائِمَةٌ
فَضَحِكَتْ فَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِنْ وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ
يَعْقُوبَ. قَالَتْ يَا وَيْلَتَا أَأَلِدُ وَأَنَا عَجُوزٌ وَهَذَا
بَعْلِي شَيْخًا إِنَّ هٌذَا لَشَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ. قَالُوا أَتَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ
أَمْرِ اللٌّهِ رَحْمَةُ اللٌّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ. فَلَمَّا ذَهَبَ عَنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
الرَّوْعُ وَجَاءَتْهُ الْبُشْرَى يُجَادِلُنَا فِي قَوْمِ لُوطٍ. إِنَّ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَحَلِيمٌ أَوَّاهٌ مُنِيبٌ. يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ أَعْرِضْ عَنْ
هٌذَا إِنَّهُ قَدْ جَاءَ أَمْرُ رَبِّكَ وَإِنَّهُمْ آتِيهِمْ عَذَابٌ
غَيْرُ مَرْدُودٍ. وَلَمَّا جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا لُوطًا سِيءَ بِهِمْ وَضَاقَ
بِهِمْ ذَرْعًا وَقَالَ هٌذَا يَوْمٌ عَصِيبٌ. وَجَاءَهُ قَوْمُهُ
يُهْرَعُونَ إِلَيْهِ وَمِنْ قَبْلُ كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ هَؤُلاَءِ بَنَاتِي هُنَّ أَطْهَرُ لَكُمْ فَاتَّقُوا
اللٌّهَ وَلاَ تُخْزُونِي فِي ضَيْفِي أَلَيْسَ مِنْكُمْ رَجُلٌ رَشِيدٌ.
قَالُوا لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا لَنَا فِي بَنَاتِكَ مِنْ حَقٍّ وَإِنَّكَ
لَتَعْلَمُ مَا نُرِيدُ. قَالَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي بِكُمْ قُوَّةً أَوْ آوِي
إِلَى رُكْنٍ شَدِيدٍ. قَالُوا يَا لُوطُ إِنَّا رُسُلُ رَبِّكَ لَنْ
يَصِلُوا إِلَيْكَ فَأَسْرِ بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مِنْ اللَّيْلِ وَلاَ
يَلْتَفِتْ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَكَ إِنَّهُ مُصِيبُهَا مَا
أَصَابَهُمْ إِنَّ مَوْعِدَهُمُ الصُّبْحُ أَلَيْسَ الصُّبْحُ بِقَرِيبٍ {

[^3]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verses 30-33: } وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ
لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً قَالُوا أَتَجْعَلُ
فِيهَا مَنْ يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ الدِّمَاءَ وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ
بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ قَالَ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ.
وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمَاءَ كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَضَهُمْ عَلَى
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ فَقَالَ أَنْبِئُونِي بِأَسْمَاءِ هَؤُلاَء إِنْ كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ. قَالُوا سُبْحَانَكَ لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَا إِلاَّ مَا عَلَّمْتَنَا
إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ. قَالَ يَا آدَمُ أَنْبِئْهُمْ
بِأَسْمَائِهِمْ فَلَمَّا أَنْبَأَهُمْ بِأَسْمَائِهِمْ قَالَ أَلَمْ
أَقُلْ لَكُمْ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَأَعْلَمُ
مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا كُنتُمْ تَكْتُمُونَ{

[^4]: Tafsir al-Qummi, vol. 2, pg. 207: وَ قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنينَ (
ع) فِي خِلْقَةِ الْمَلاَئِکَةِ: وَالْمََلاَئِكَةُ خَلَقْتَهُمْ
وَأَسْكَنْتَهُمْ سَمٌوَاتِكَ فَلَيْسَ فِيهِمْ فَتْرَةٌ وَلاَ عِنْدَهُمْ
غَفْلَةٌُ وَلاَ فِيهِمْ مَعْصِيَةٌ، هُمْ أَعْلَمُ خَلْقِكَ بِكَ،
وَأَخْوَفُ خَلْقِكَ مِنْكَ، وَأَقْرَبُ خَلْقِكَ إِلَيْكَ وَأَعْمَلُهُمْ
بِطَاعَتِكَ، لاَ يَغْشَاهُمْ نَوْمُ الْعُيُوْنِ وَلاَ سَهْوُ الْعُقُوْلِ
وَلاَ فَتَرَةُ الأَبْدَانِ، لَمْ يَسْكُنُوْا الأَصْلابَ وَلَمْ
تَتْضَمَّهُمُ الأَرْحَامُ وَلَمْ تَخْلُقْهُمْ مِنْ مَآءٍ مَهِيْنٍ ،
أنْشَأْتَهُمْ إنْشَاءًا فَأَسْكَنْتَهُمْ سَمَاوَاتِكَ وَأَكْرَمْتَهُمْ
بِجِوَارِكَ وَائْتَمَنْتَهُمْ عَلى وَحْيِكَ وَجَنَّبْتَهُمْ الآفَاتِ
وَوَقَيْتَهُمْ الْبَلِيَّاتِ وَطَهَّرْتَهُمْ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ وَلَوْلاَ
قُوَّتُكَ لَمْ يَقْوُوْا وَلَوْلاَ تَثْبِيْتُكَ لَمْ يَثْبُتُوْا
وَلَوْلاَ رَحْمَتُكَ لَمْ يُطِيْعُوا وَلَوْلاَ أَنْتَ لَمْ يَكُوْنُوْا ،
أمّا إنّهُمْ عَلى مَكَانَتِهِمْ مِنْكَ وَطَوْعِيَّتِهِمْ إيَّاكَ
وَمَنْزِلَتِهِمْ عِنْدَكَ وَقِلَّةِ غَفْلَتِهِمْ عَنْ أَمْرِكَ لَوْ
عَايَنُوْا مَا خَفِيَ عَنْهُمْ مِنْكَ لَاحْتَقَرُوا أَعْمَالَهُمْ
وَلَأزَرُوا عَلى أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَلَعَلِمُوا أَنَّهُمْ لَمْ يَعْبُدُوْكَ
حَقَّ عِبَادَتِكَ سُبْحَانَكَ خَالِقاً وَمَعْبُوداً مَا أَحْسَنَ
بَلاَءُكَ عِنْدَ خَلْقِكَ.


