Biography of Ayatullah Mahdi Hadavi Tehrani
===========================================

Ayatullah Mahdi Hadavi Tehrani was born in 1961 in the city of Tehran.
After finishing elementary and middle school, he proceeded to high
school. He graduated from Kharazmi High School, which was a well-known
and accredited high school at that time, in mathematics and physics as
an honor roll student. In the SAT’s, he scored a high rank and was
accepted at Sharif University of Technology where he studied Electrical
Engineering.

He first started his Howza studies unofficially and in 1980, he started
his official Howza studies in the Holy City of Qom. He went back to
Tehran where he studied ‘Arabic literature and logic under Ayatollah
Khoshvaqt. After his return to Qom, he finished the Sath (intermediate
level studies) in five years, during which he was many times ranked top
student in the Howza exams. He then started his advanced studies under
great scholars such as Ayatullah al-’Uzma Shaykh Jawad Tabrizi,
Ayatullah al-’Uzma Sayyid Wahid Khorasani, Ayatullah al-’Uzma Shaykh
Muhammad Taqi Bahjat, Ayatullah al-’Uzma Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi,
Ayatullah Mirza Hashim ‘Amuli and Ayatullah Shaykh Ja’far Subhani.
Moreover, he mostly studied under Ayatullah Sayyid Kadim Ha’eri, and
benefited from his classes.

In philosophy, he studied under eminent figures such as Ayatullah Ansari
Shirazi, Ayatullah Hasan Zadeh Amoli, and Ayatullah Misbah Yazdi and for
many years he picked off the branches of Ayatullah Jawadi Amoli’s
wisdom. In addition, since the early days of his stay in Qom, he started
his relationship with Ayatullah Baha’o Dini, the great ‘Arif.
Eventually, he gained a closer relationship which he maintained until
Ayatullah Baha’o Dini’s demise. Not only did he practice ‘Irfan and
Akhlaq under Ayatullah Baha’o Dini, but he also studied Fiqh, Tafsir and
Hadith under this great ‘Arif and Faqih.

Ayatullah Hadavi has had the chance to teach all the beginner and
intermediate level courses in the Howza. He has been teaching advanced
level courses of Fiqh and Usul since 1990. His method of teaching, a new
method in which he compares the topics and discussions in Islamic
jurisprudence with that of modern law, has attracted much attention from
numerous scholars and researchers. In addition, he has been and still is
teaching different issues of Logic, Philosophy and Theology. Some of his
written works are a product of the research which is in your hands.

Other than teaching in the Howza, Ayatullah Hadavi has kept up an
academic relation with the different universities and institutions of
higher education. He is a member of the Council for Revising Humanities
Text Books in the Ministry of Sciences, Research and Technology. He is
the chairman of the Jurisprudence and Law Group in this council. In the
Sharif University of Technology, he is a member of the Postgraduate
Scholarly Council of the Philosophy of Knowledge.

Ayatullah Hadavi has done extensive studies and research on modern
sciences such as economics, modern theology, philosophy of knowledge and
philosophy of art. Some of his studies and research has been published
in the form of books and articles.

The Ayatullah is fluent in English and Arabic and knows French and
German to a great extent. His knowledge of English and computers has
enabled him to be the first scholar in Iran to answer questions on
Islamic issues on the InterNet.

Ayatullah Hadavi has been in contact with and visited Islamic centers
all over Asia, Europe and Africa. In addition, he has participated in
the founding of Islamic Organizations such as the Ahlul Bayt Association
in Switzerland, the Mohammadia Association in Thailand, and the Islamic
Center of Holland. He has also participated in the establishment of the
World Council of Religious Leaders (WCRL).

He is a member of the Supreme Council of the Ahlul Bayt World Assembly,
the Islamic Banking and Finance Consulting Committee, the WCRL’s Board
of Directors, and the head of the Academic Staff of Ayatullah Khamenei’s
delegation to hajj.

Ayatullah Ayatollah Hadavi currently has 10 books published in the
fields of Logic, Rijal[^1], Modern Theology, Qur\`anic Sciences,
Economics, Islamic Political Thought, Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence, Ethics and Education. These books are:

1) The Chest of Wisdom (two volumes)

2) Tahrirul Maqal Fi Kulliat ‘ilmul Rijal (‘Arabic)

3) Wilayatul Faqih (principles, proofs and jurisdiction)

4) The Theological Bases of Ijtihad (Recognized as book of the year in
1999 by the Howza in Qom)

5) Islam’s Economic Doctrine and System

6) Governance and Religion: Essays on the Islamic Political Thought

7) Beliefs and Questions

8) The History of the Principles of Jurisprudence

9) To the Heavens with the Youth

10) The Green Tryst

He also has a number of works that have not yet been published and are
in the process, such as Hermeneutics and Religious Scripts, New Horizons
in the Howza, Al-Hidayah: A Commentary on Bidayat-ol-Hikmah, The Laws of
Property and Ownership, The Laws of Contracts, Art and Religion. These
books have been written on topics in the fields of Theology, Philosophy,
Principles of Jurisprudence and its history, The History of Hadith,
Jurisprudence and Law.

The scholar can be contacted at <m_hadavi@yahoo.com> or
<ravaq_hekmat@yahoo.com>. For more information on Ayatullah Hadavi, you
can refer to his website at [www.hadavi.info](http://www.hadavi.info)

[^1]: The study of transmitters who have narrated the sayings of the
Noble Prophet ( ص) and the Imams ( ع).


