Question 18: Power of Satan and Jinn
====================================

**Question:** To what extent do Satan and the other jinn have power over
human beings?

Brief Answer
------------

The words “satan” and “jinn” are repeatedly mentioned in the Qur\`an.
There is also a chapter in the Qur\`an named “al-Jinn”. “Satan” is a
common noun that denotes any creature that is mischievous, misleading,
and delinquent, whether it be human or not. “Iblis” is a proper noun and
is the ‘Arabic name of the particular satan who deceived Adam and Eve
(ع) and even now lays in wait for any opportunity to deceive the sons of
Adam.

The word “jinn” is etymologically derived from a word meaning “to hide”
or “to be hidden.” It denotes a creature made of fire that possesses
both a body and a soul. The jinn are held legally accountable before
Allah (awj) and can choose to believe or disbelieve.

Some people’s understanding of the jinn is full of hyperbole and
fantastic stories, while others reject their existence all
together—repudiating even true accounts of jinn. The Qur\`an and ahadith
describe jinn as powerful creatures. For example, in Surat al-Naml (27),
Verse 39, the Qur\`an recounts the story of an ‘*ifrit* (one kind of
jinn) who claimed to be able to bring the throne of Bilqis to Sulayman
(ع) “quicker than you can stand up.”

It should be noted that Sulayman (ع) did not repudiate this jinn’s
claim, thus indicating that he truly possessed the power. However, one
must be careful not to exaggerate such information out of proportion,
thereby claiming that jinn have infinite power. Such a belief is
tantamount to *shirk* (the attribution of partners to Allah (awj)).

No creature, no matter how powerful, can act without Allah’s (awj)
sanction. For this reason, Satan has power to misguide only those people
who have relinquished their belief in one Allah (awj) and have
surrendered to the temptations of Satan. Accordingly, Satan himself
admits that he has no power over Allah’s (awj) sincere servants when he
swears,

***“I shall misguide them all except Your sincere servants.”***[^1]

Satan’s sole influence over man is by way of whispering temptations. He
can never strip man of his free will. In philosophical terms, Satan’s
non-materiality is not complete, therefore he cannot reach the lofty
station that the spirit of the righteous enjoys. Giving into the
temptation of the carnal soul (*al-nafs al-’ammarah*) opens the way for
satanic influence thereby pulling man into Satan’s traps. The sole
respite from his grasp is to turn one’s attention to Allah (awj) and
seek his protection. Allah (awj) says,

***“You (Satan) have no power over my servants.”***[^2]

Detailed Answer
---------------

### The Etymology of Satan and Jinn

We begin our discussion by analyzing the words “satan” and “jinn,” and
then investigate the limits of Satan’s power.

“Satan” means “banished” or “mischievous”. In its singular form, “satan”
has been used 71 times in the Qur\`an and in its plural form, 18 times.
Both the Qur\`an and ahadith indicate that Satan is one of the jinn.

“Satan” is a common noun that denotes any creature that is mischievous,
misleading, and delinquent, whether it be human or not. “Iblis” is a
proper noun and is the ‘Arabic name of the particular satan who deceived
Adam and Eve (ع) and even now lays in wait for any opportunity to
deceive the sons of Adam.

### The Etymology of Jinn

The word “jinn” has been used 22 times in the Qur\`an. “Jinn” is derived
from a word denoting “to hide” or “to be hidden.” Jinn are created from
fire or from an amalgam of fire. In the language of the Qur\`an, jinn
are conscious beings with free will that are hidden from human
perception under normal circumstances. Like mankind, jinn are legally
accountable to Allah (awj) and can choose to believe or disbelieve. They
will be raised on the Day of Judgment.

Mulla Sadra describes the jinn in the following terms: “Jinn have
substantial existence both in this corporeal realm and in the unseen or
imaginal world. Now, as for their existence in this world, it is as we
explained before—there is no substance that has any type of subtlety and
composure whatsoever but that it contains a spirit and a soul which has
been infused into it from the source of Pure Activity. Perhaps the
reason why jinn can manifest and hide themselves at different times lies
in the subtlety of their bodies. They can disperse the components of
their bodies and then collate them. When they collate their bodily
components, they can be seen. And when they disperse themselves, they
become invisible like water vapour which appears like clouds when
condensed and disappears when heated.”

Just like human beings, jinn possess a body and spirit and are conscious
and have free will. Some are male and others female. They reproduce and
are legally accountable to Allah (awj). They are born and they die. They
can choose to believe or disbelieve.

### The Relationship between Jinn and Satan

The Arabic word “*shaytan*” conveys the adjectival meaning
“mischievous.” The term has been used in the Qur\`an in this very
meaning. However, it is also used alternatively for *Iblis* and for any
being for whom mischief has become a deep-rooted character trait. In
fact the Qur\`an explicitly states that a “satan” can be from the ranks
of jinn or man.

### The Limits of Satan’s Power

In the dualistic religion of pre-Islamic Iran, *Ahriman* was thought to
be the creator of all evil. Some may think Satan in the Qur\`an is the
counterpart of *Ahriman* of ancient Iran. This is a mistaken belief
since Satan had no role to play in creation whatsoever. Allah (awj)
created everything, and no other being besides Allah (awj) can create
independently. In the Qur\`an, Allah (awj) derogates such beliefs when
he says,

***“They make the jinn partners of Allah (awj), when He has created
them, and they carve sons and daughters for Him without any
knowledge.”***[^3]

Satan has power to incite man with tempting thoughts, to call him toward
evil, and to make evil seem beautiful to him. He has no power to force
anyone to do anything.

It is true that both angels and jinn have the power to descend upon
people. The descent of angels is not limited to the moment of death. For
example, if someone says, “Allah” with full attention, angels descend
upon him. Jinn also have certain such powers. For instance, they can
perform feats with incredible speed. Though their power of intellect is
weak, they are able to move heavy objects with great speed. Some verses
of the Qur\`an indicate that jinn—like humans—are physical beings.

In the story of Sulayman (ع), one jinn claims to be able to bring
Bilqis’s throne to Sulayman’s (ع) court quicker than he can stand up.
Though he does not actually perform this feat, Sulayman (ع) does not
repudiate his claim, indicating that he did possess such an ability. In
other verses, jinn are able to listen to the Qur\`an being recited (a
feat requiring that they have the physical faculty of hearing).

### Satan’s Influence

Satan launches his assaults on mankind from every direction. As the
Qur\`an says:

***“I shall approach them head on and from behind and from the right and
from the left.”***[^4]

Satan’s exerts his influence on man’s thoughts. He launches his assaults
from various fronts, of which we mention a few:

1. He tries to deter man from worshipping Allah (awj) according to the
requirements of revelation by tempting him to act according to his own
desires.

2. He influences man’s ability to think rationally so that instead of
reaching conclusions based on solid reasoning, he accepts fallacies that
only seem to be rational.

3. He influences man’s ability to understand reality as it is. He skews
man’s understanding or convinces him to reject the possibility of
understanding such reality. In this way, Satan first corrupts one’s
perception of reality, then his ability to comprehend reality, and
finally his actions.

The Qur\`an and ahadith indicate that Satan and his cohorts only have
influence over people who have surrendered their devotion to Allah (awj)
and who—in a fit of heedlessness—have fallen into a stupor of
self-conceit. Of his own admission, he has no influence over Allah’s
(awj) true servants.

***“I shall misguide them all except Your sincere servants.”***[^5]

In philosophical terms, Satan’s immateriality is not complete, therefore
he cannot reach the lofty station that the spirits of the righteous
enjoy. However, this does not stop him from trying to mislead such
people.

People have invented a myriad of myths about jinn that do not make
logical sense. If however, we strip away the myths, the basic belief in
their existence is totally logical. In particular, we have no reason to
believe that living beings are limited to those things we can perceive.
Rather, the ahadith indicate that imperceptible beings are more in
number than perceptible ones: “Allah created the jinn of five types: a
type like airborne odours and fragrances, a snake-like type, a type like
scorpions, a type like insects of the earth, and a type like mankind who
will have to give accounts and will receive retribution.”[^6]

As history attests, it is in large part because of the myths that people
have created around the jinn that many otherwise rational scholars have
come to deny their existence altogether. In reality, each group has lost
the truth by going to extremes. Islam affirms the existence of the jinn
but rejects the fantastic tales surrounding them. It is for this reason
that one chapter of the Qur\`an specifically addresses the topic of the
jinn.

It is essential to remember that in the Islamic worldview, all that
exists—whether they be angels, jinn, or human beings, and whether they
are material or immaterial—are creations of Allah (awj), and can only
act according to Allah’s (awj) will. Allah (awj) constantly reminds us
in the Qur\`an that no cause, whether material or immaterial, can act
independently. Life and death, benefit and loss, are all subservient to
His power. Therefore, one must always remember Him and trust in Him and
seek sanctuary in Him. It is by establishing such a relationship with
Allah (awj) that one can inoculate himself against all harm. As the
Qur\`an says,

***“Nothing can harm them except by Allah’s leave.”***[^7]

We are also warned about human beings and jinn who are evil (literally,
who are “satans”), as one author states: “Never incline towards them.
Satan is the sworn enemy of Allah and man. He has taken a solemn oath to
misguide you. However, his power over you is limited to whispered
temptation and he can never negate your free will. The source of evil
thoughts is in the human soul itself (*al-nafs al-’ammarah*). This
aspect of the soul is the Achilles’ heel of the human being through
which Satan acts. Allah (awj) has said,

***“We created man and we know the temptations of his soul; we are
closer to him than his jugular vein.***[^8]

He also said,

***“Indeed as for My servants you do not have any authority over them,
except the perverse who follow you.”***[^9]

[^1]: Surat al-Hijr (15), Verse 39-40:  وَلَأَغْوِيَنَّهُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ. إِلاَّ عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ 

[^2]: Ibid., Verse 42:  إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ
سُلْطَانٌ...

[^3]: Surat al-An’am (6), Verse 100:  وَجَعَلُوا لِلٌّهِ شُرَكَاءَ
الْجِنَّ وَخَلَقَهُمْ وَخَرَقُوا لَهُ بَنِينَ وَبَنَاتٍ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ 

[^4]: Surat al-A’raf (7), Verse 17:  ثُمَّ لَأَتِيَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَيْنِ
أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ وَعَنْ أَيْمَانِهِمْ وَعَنْ
شَمَائِلِهِمْ... 

[^5]: Surat al-Hijr (15), Verses 39-40:  وَلَأَغْوِيَنَّهُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ. إِلاَّ عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ 

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, pg. 267: خَلَقَ اللٌّهُ الْجِنَّ خَمْسَةَ
أَصْنَافٍ: صِنْفٌ كَالرِّيحِ فِي الْهَوَاءِ، وَصِنْفٌ حَيَّاتٌ، وَصِنْفٌ
عَقَارِبٌ، وَصِنْفٌ حَشَرَاتُ الأَرْضِ، وَصِنْفٌ كَبَنِي آدَمَ
عَلَيْهِمُ الْحِسَابِ وَالْعِقَابَ.

[^7]: Surat al-Mujadalah (58), Verse 10:  ...وَلَيْسَ بِضَارِّهِمْ
شَيْئًا إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِ اللٌّهِ...

[^8]: Surat Qaf (50), Verse 16:  وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ
وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ
حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ 

[^9]: Surat al-Hijr (15), Verse 42:  إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلاَّ مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ 


