Question 21: The infallibility of the Prophets in the Qur’an
============================================================

**Question:** Explain the infallibility of the prophets. Why is it that
some verses of the Qur\`an contradict their infallibility?

Brief Answer
------------

The answer to these questions can be summarized in the following points:

1. Infallibility is a state of the soul that makes an infallible person
shun sins or any unpalatable acts and protects him from mistakes and
forgetfulness without negating his free will.

2. The secret behind the infallibility of the prophets lies in their
direct vision and intuition of reality, their perfect faith and
certainty, and their deep love for Allah (awj); along with their
profound awareness of Allah’s (awj) majesty and the realization of His
attributes. In addition, through infallibility, Allah (awj) strengthens
the prophets against the deceptions of Satan and the desires of the
carnal soul.

3. Numerous rational proofs confirm the necessity of the infallibility
of the prophets. The clearest of these proofs is the fact that Allah’s
(awj) purpose in creating man can only be fulfilled through their
infallibility.

4. If some verses of the Qur\`an seem at first glance to contradict
these rational proofs, we must examine those verses more carefully,
reflect deeper on their apparent meaning, and uncover their true
meaning.

5. Numerous verses affirm the existence and even the necessity of
infallibility, although the term “infallibility” has not been used. We
cite below some examples:

a. Some verses describe a number of the prophets as *mukhlasin* (those
who have been purified). For example, see 38:45-48. In these verses, one
who is *mukhlas* is one who has not been and cannot be misguided by
Satan.

b. Numerous verses explain that the prophets have been guided by Allah
(awj). For example, see 6:84-90. It is inconceivable that someone who
has been guided by Allah (awj) could be misguided or make a mistake.

c. In many verses Allah (awj) has unconditionally commanded people to
obey the prophets. See 3:31-32 and 4:80 and 24:52. It is clear that such
an unconditional command from Allah (awj) requires that they be
infallible.

d. The verses 72:26-28 indicate that Allah (awj) protects his prophets
from all perspectives.

e. The Verse of Purification (*ayah al-tathir*) found in 33:33 clearly
indicates the infallibility of Prophet Muhammad (ص).

1. Those verses that seem to contradict the prophets’ infallibility are
either conditional propositions that do not indicate that they have
sinned or they pertain to the believers, not the prophets.

2. With respect to the prophet Adam (ع), in whose infallibility many
have doubted, the following can be said. First, the proscriptions in the
verses related to this discussion are *irshadi* (advisory) in nature,
not *mawlawi* (a command issued by a superior to an inferior with the
hopes that the command will be obeyed).

Second, even if they were *mawlawi* imperatives, they do not indicate
that a failure to fulfil the commands is tantamount to a sin, but rather
that Adam chose a lesser of two permissible paths.

Third, the world in which Adam was living at the time was not a world
entailing legal responsibility toward Allah (awj).

In such a world, disregarding a command cannot be considered a true sin.
If we see occasionally that Allah (awj) addresses the prophets with a
sharp tone, this is because they are, after all, men with the faculties
of anger and lust and the needs of animals. Therefore, they also require
constant admonishment and guidance in such a way that if they were left
to themselves for an instant they would be destroyed.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Let us begin answering this question by defining the term infallibility
(*‘ismah*). ’Allamah Tabataba\`i defines infallibility as “the presence
of a quality in a person that prevents him from committing any
impermissible act such as a sin.”

Al-Fadil al-Miqdad, a ranking Shi’i theologian, presents a more thorough
definition, when he says, “Infallibility is a trait bestowed by Allah to
a legally accountable individual *(mukallaf)* in such a way that the
presence of this trait negates in this individual any motive to disobey
or commit a sin while he remains capable of doing so. This bestowal is a
consequence of the person’s acquisition of a moral habit *(malakah)* of
refraining from sin. In addition, this person is aware of the reward
earned through obedience and the punishment incurred through
disobedience and is apprehensive of forgetfulness and failing to perform
the better of two praiseworthy acts.”

It is essential to note that infallibility never compels a person to
obey nor prevents him from disobeying. Rather, his faith, knowledge, and
perception of Allah’s greatness has reached a level where they do not
allow him to commit a sin or disobey Allah (awj). According to several
ahadith, Allah (awj) strengthens the prophets and Imams through the Pure
Spirit, the Spirit of Faith, the Spirit of Strength, the Spirit of Lust,
and the Lofty Spirit.

Now that we have defined infallibility, we turn to an analysis of the
intellectual and textual proofs for the existence of this trait in
certain individuals. As a preliminary note, when examining the verses of
the Qur\`an concerning the infallibility of the prophets, it is
important to keep in mind that Divine revelation can never contradict
human reason. Therefore, we must read these verses in light of reason,
so that no contradictions occur.

With respect to the infallibility of the prophets, we will mention only
one rational proof. Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, in a very terse statement, says,
“Infallibility is necessary for a prophet so that surety in him is
attained, and as a result, the purpose of creation is fulfilled.” In
other words, a prophet must be infallible so that mankind can trust the
revelation that he brings.

Some scholars have expressed this proof in the following way: “Once the
intellect independently accepts the existence of Allah and the logical
possibility of revelation and prophethood (in a general sense, not as
pertains to any specific prophet), the intellect then affirms the
necessity of the infallibility of the prophets in receiving and
conveying divine revelation. The evidence for this is that since Allah
has sent his prophets to guide mankind, he must send a person who is
neither careless nor forgetful, much less sinful. If not, He will
contradict His own purpose in sending prophets, revelation, and in
essence, the purpose of creation itself. If the prophets were capable of
carelessness, forgetfulness, or sin, people would never fully trust that
what they say is from Allah. They would always entertain the possibility
that the prophets have lied to them or made a mistake or misunderstood
Allah’s intent.”

This theological principle is firmly based on the attributes of Allah
(awj) himself. In particular it is based on His omniscience *(‘ilm)*,
omnipotence *(qudrah)*, the purposefulness of His actions *(hikmah)* —
both in creation and legislation — and in essence, on the fact that He
is free from impropriety, injustice, and purposelessness. If a prophet
were to make a mistake in receiving or conveying revelation, this
mistake would demonstrate either ignorance, weakness, or incompetence in
Allah’s (awj) actions.

In reality, if the prophet were not infallible, either he would
accidentally or intentionally make mistakes in guiding people or, at the
very least, his people would not trust him sufficiently, either in terms
of his claims to prophethood or in terms of the message and duties that
he brings. In the first case, the prophethood would become a cause for
the misguidance of people. In the second case, the prophethood would be
utterly without purpose. Far be it from Allah (awj) to either misguide
or act without purpose.

Until now, we have defined infallibility and presented one intellectual
proof for the necessity of this quality in the prophets. We now turn to
an examination of the Qur\`anic verses that deal with infallibility. We
shall discuss these verses in two sections. The first section comprises
verses that support the infallibility of the prophets. The second
section examines verses that seem to contradict their infallibility.
Finally, we shall present our answer to the initial question.

### Qur\`anic evidence in support of infallibility

Many verses in the Qur\`an speak of the quality of infallibility in the
prophets, though they do not necessarily use the word *‘ismah*. We can
divide and discuss these verses in the following manner:

1. Some verses refer to the prophets as *mukhlasin* (those who are
especially chosen). One who is *mukhlas* cannot be misguided by Satan,
and is therefore, infallible. The following verses serve as an example:

***“And remember our servants: Ibrahim, Ishaq, and Ya’qub, men of
strength and insight. We purified them through a special trait: the
remembrance of the abode of the Hereafter. They are, in our estimation,
amongst the elect, the righteous. And remember Isma\`il, Ilyas, and Dhu
al-Kifl, each of whom was among the righteous.”***[^1]

In these verses, prophets who were among the *mukhlasin* are mentioned.

In conjunction with other verses that quote Satan as saying,

***“By your might, I shall surely pervert them except your chosen
(mukhlas) servants among them”***[^2]

or

***“Without a doubt, I shall misguide them except those who are chosen
(mukhlas) from amongst them,”***[^3]

it becomes clear that the *mukhlasin* are those who are out of Satan’s
reach and are therefore infallible.

2. Another group of verses mention the presence of “divine guidance” in
the prophets. For example:

***“We granted Ibrahim, Ishaq*** ***and Ya’qub*** ***and we guided them
both. And we had guided Nuh*** ***before them. And from his progeny, we
guided Dawud, Sulayman, Ayyub, Yusuf, Musa, and Harun. In this way do we
reward the righteous. Similarly Zakariyya, Yahya, ‘Isa, and Ilyas***
***were all amongst the righteous. We chose men from amongst their
fathers, children, and brothers, and guided them to the straight path.
This is Allah’s guidance … These are people whom Allah has guided, so
follow their guidance (O Muhammad). I do not ask you any remuneration
for this message. This message is simply a reminder for all people.”***
[^4]

These verses indicate that the prophets have been guided by Allah (awj).
In conjunction with the verse where Allah (awj) says,

***“There can be no one to misguide him whom Allah (awj) guides,”***[^5]

it becomes clear that no one can misguide the aforementioned prophets
since they have been guided by Allah (awj). And since committing a sin
is a form of misguidance, we can conclude that these prophets are free
from sin—that is, they are infallible.

The fact that these verses mention these particular prophets as chosen
prophets can serve as corroborating evidence for their infallibility.
They have, after all been chosen to guide other people, thus they
themselves must have already been guided. In addition, the last verse
quoted above commands Muhammad (ص) to follow the guidance of these
prophets. Clearly, for the final prophet—with his high status—to be
commanded to follow his predecessors indicates their infallibility.
Otherwise, following one who is not himself infallible will eventually
lead to misguidance.

3. A third group of verses calls on all Muslims to obey the Prophet
Muhammad (ص). For example, one verse says,

***“Say: if you love Allah, then follow me so that Allah should love you
and forgive you your sins. Allah is forgiving, merciful. Say: obey Allah
and his messenger. If you turn away, Allah does not love the
disbelievers.”***[^6]

A verse in Surat al-Nisa\` says:

***“Whoever obeys the Prophet has obeyed Allah.”***[^7]

Other verses also speak of unconditional obedience of the Prophet and
such unconditional obedience necessitates his infallibility, otherwise,
the result would be misguidance rather than guidance!

Besides the three groups of verses we have mentioned, there are other
individual verses that could be mentioned to support the infallibility
of all prophets in general or of the Prophet Muhammad (ص) in particular.
One verse says:

***“He is the Knower of the unseen. He apprises no one of*** ***His
secrets except chosen prophets whom*** ***He has surrounded with
protectors so that*** ***He may be assured that they have conveyed
their*** ***Sustainer’s message. He has complete knowledge of what is
with them. He has encompassed all things.”***[^8]

Another verse reads,

***“Allah*** ***wishes only to repel all impurity from you—O people of
the Household—and purify you thoroughly.”***[^9]

It should be noted that Allah’s (awj) “wish” in this verse denotes his
existential will and not his legislative will. Furthermore, because his
existential will cannot be negated (i.e. whatever he wills must
necessarily occur), the “people of the household” have necessarily been
purified of all defilement—foremost of which is sin. This verse thereby
establishes the infallibility of these “people of the household.” Who
exactly is included in the “people of the household” is outside the
parameters of our discussion, but undoubtedly, the Prophet Muhammad (ص)
himself is included.

Therefore, the verse explicitly indicates his infallibility. This
assertion, in conjunction with the following logical proposition leads
us to the conclusion that all prophets are infallible. This proposition
says that all scholars are divided between two views concerning the
infallibility of the Prophets: either they are all infallible, or they
are all fallible. No one claims that some prophets are fallible while
others are not. Therefore, by establishing the infallibility of the
final prophet through the aforementioned verse, we can conclude that all
prophets are infallible.

### Qur\`anic verses that seem to contradict the infallibility of the prophets

Once we have logically established the necessity of the prophets’
infallibility, if we encounter verses that seem to contradict our
reason, we must look more carefully at the verses to understand their
true intent. An examination of all such verses would require an entire
book, however, in order to answer the question at hand, we shall examine
a sampling of these verses.

1. One verse reads like this:

***“It has been revealed to you (O Muhammad) and to all the prophets
that if you ascribe partners to Allah, all your actions will come to
naught and you will be amongst the losers. Instead, worship Allah alone
and be amongst the grateful.”***[^10]

From this verse, it appears that associating partners with Allah (awj)
is possible even for the prophets. Otherwise, it would make no sense to
warn them of such a possibility. The argument against this
misinterpretation is that the prophets are free to choose disbelief
because, as we stated earlier, infallibility does not negate a person’s
free will.

However, the prophets will never actually become disbelievers because
their deep understanding of Allah (awj) and their direct relationship
with Him prevents them from considering sin, if even for a second.

Rather, this verse indicates two meanings. First, it is a conditional
statement that indicates that “your actions will come to naught” if the
condition of ascribing partners to Allah (awj) occurs, not that
“ascribing partners” is going to occur. Second, the verse indicates the
danger of ascribing partners to Allah (awj), and informs us that such a
sin will not be tolerated from even the prophets.

In reality this verse clarifies the duty of all people with respect to
this sin by making an example of the prophets. Such an analysis of these
verses has been narrated from Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Rida (ع) when he
says, “Such verses are speaking to all believers, although they may be
addressed to the Prophet (ص).”[^11]

Another similar verse reads:

***“The Jews and the Christians will never be satisfied with you until
you accept their religion. Say: The sole guidance is the guidance that
comes from Allah. If you (Muhammad) give in to their whims and desires
despite the knowledge that has reached you, you will have no protector
or helper against Allah.”***[^12]

One might ask, is it possible for the Prophet (ص) to give in to the
whims and desires of the Jews and Christians? First of all this verse
like the one before it is a conditional statement and therefore does not
indicate that vthe condition will occur. Second, as we clarified before,
the Prophet’s (ص) infallibility does not make it impossible for him to
sin. Rather, it is his understanding, fear of Allah (awj), and faith
that makes him shun sin. Third, this statement may be speaking to all
believers, although it is addressed to the Prophet (ص).

2. A second group of verses is represented by the following verse:

***“We have not sent a prophet or a messenger before you except that
whenever he wished (for something), Satan*** ***cast (something) into
his wishes. Then Allah*** ***nullifies what Satan had cast and then
Allah confirms his signs. Allah is All-Knowing, Wise ... (He does this
so) that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the
truth from your Sustainer, and so they may have faith in it, and that
their hearts may be humbled before Him.”***[^13]

These verses are among the strongest arguments of those who deny
infallibility. In order to cast doubt in the authenticity of the
Qur\`an, Orientalists have also discussed these verses. They interpret
the “casting” of Satan into the wishes of the prophets as a sort of
interference in revelation. In this way, they seek to reject the
infallibility of the prophets in both the reception and conveyance of
revelation. Another interpretation that they present is that Satan
whispers to the prophets, thereby weakening their resolve to guide their
people.

Certainly these verses mean nothing of the sort. Allah (awj) explicitly
negates the existence of such whispers and interference from the
prophets. The correct interpretation of these verses is as follows. In
every age, when prophets were sent to guide people, Satanic forces from
among men and *jinn* attempted to interfere with the divine mission by
corrupting the message in order to misguide people. The Qur\`an refers
to this phenomenon when it says: “he promises them and gives them hope;
but Satan promises them nothing but misguidance.”[^14] In the verses
from Surat al-Hajj, Allah (awj) states that He does not sit idle in the
face of these satanic plots, but rather rushes to aid His prophets and
deliver them victory.

3. Other verses that require close attention are those that describe the
story of the prophet Adam (ع).[^15] These verses seem to indicate that
Adam (ع) was deceived and misguided by Satan, and is therefore fallible.

We can address these doubts in several ways:

First, the negative imperative in these verses (i.e. “do not approach
this tree”) is *irshadi* (advisory) in nature, not *mawlawi* (a command
issued by a superior to an inferior with the hopes that the command will
be obeyed). In particular, these verses are spoken with the tone of one
who is sympathetically advising another because he knows the outcome of
his actions. Acting against such an advisory imperative does not
contradict Adam’s (ع) infallibility.

Second, for argument’s sake, if the imperative was of a *mawlawi*
nature, it was not one that was compulsory for Adam (ع) to follow.
Rather, it was showing him the better of two permissible paths. When he
acted against this imperative, he was not committing a true sin (that
deserves punishment), but rather what might be considered a “sin” with
respect to his high station. This is what is commonly referred to by the
phrase, “the good deeds of the righteous are like sins for those closest
to Allah.”

Third, that which contradicts infallibility is for a legally accountable
person *(mukallaf)* to commit a sin. On the other hand, Adam (ع) was at
that time, in a place where no laws existed. It was only after the fall,
when he began his life on Earth, and laws were decreed that legal
accountably to Allah (awj) began. Therefore, any failure to follow
Allah’s (awj) instruction before this time does not contradict his
infallibility. Furthermore, the verse also says that the station of
prophethood was granted to him after his repentance. Therefore, if
someone believes that prophets are only infallible during their
prophethood, this action of Adam’s (ع) would not contradict his
infallibility. However, if one believes that a prophet is infallible
from birth (as Shi’i scholars believe), such an argument would not
suffice.

4. Other verses suggest that some of the other prophets committed sins
or admitted to committing mistakes that contradict their infallibility.
These verses mention the prophets Nuh, Ibrahim, Yusuf, Musa, Dawud,
Sulayman, Ayyub, and Yunus (ع). A thorough examination of these verses
would require an extensive discussion and therefore, we refer the reader
to exegeses of the Qur\`an that deal with this topic more extensively.

5. Some verses refer to the Prophet Muhammad (ص) himself, and have been
key points of argument for those who deny his infallibility. One such
verse reads,

***“We granted you a clear victory that Allah*** ***may forgive you your
past sins and those to come and complete his blessing upon you and guide
you on a straight path.”***[^16]

These verses apparently indicate that the Prophet (ص) has committed and
will commit sins, and that Allah (awj) has forgiven him for all of these
by means of the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah.

The correct interpretation of these verses is quite different. First,
the words *dhanb* (sin) and *ghufran* (forgiveness) have been used here
to indicate their literal meanings, not the meanings they have come to
connote in Islamic nomenclature. In particular, the denotation of
*dhanb* is an unsavoury consequence of an action. *Ghufran* means to
cover or hide. Consequently, the meaning of the verse is: “we have
granted you this victory in order to hide the consequences of your
mission.”

Before and after the *hijrah* (the Prophet’s (ص) emigration from Mecca
to Medinah), the pagans of Mecca held many misconceptions about Islam
and the Prophet that were corrected by his subsequent victories. In
addition, the initial upheaval that the Islamic mission had caused in
the pagan way of life was quickly forgotten because of the victory he
was granted.

Since the terms *dhanb* and *ghufran* have not been used in their
conventional meaning (i.e. sin and forgiveness), this verse in no way
contradicts the Prophet’s infallibility. Second, even if one insists
that these terms have been used in their conventional meanings, the
“sins” that are referred to are those actions of his that the pagans of
Mecca considered sins, not sins against Allah (awj).

Another similar verse reads,

***“May Allah*** ***forgive you. Why did you grant them permission to
stay back? (You should not have done so) so that it would become clear
to you who are the truthful, and so that you would know the
liars.”***[^17]

Some have taken the word ‘*afa* (he forgave) to indicate that the
Prophet (ص) had committed sins and is therefore fallible.

We can answer this attack by saying that the sentence ‘*afa Allahu
‘anka* is an indicative sentence that has been used here as a prayer
*(du’a\`)* to honor the Prophet (ص) just as the statements *‘ayyadaka
Allahu* (may Allah empower you) and *rahimaka Allahu* (may Allah have
mercy on you) are used. Consequently, these phrases do not contradict
the Prophet’s (ص) infallibility at all. In the words of ’Allamah
Tabataba’i, “Those who misinterpret these verses are in fact playing
with the words of Allah and do not understand the Qur\`an at all. They
do not even know the ABC’s of the Qur\`an.”

We conclude our discussion of the verses that seem to contradict the
infallibility of the prophets hoping that what we have presented is
sufficient for the reader to correctly interpret the remaining verses.

It remains to be explained why such verses exist in the Qur\`an and why
Allah (awj) addresses his prophets with such a sharp tone at times.

Despite the lofty station of the prophets, they are human beings like
us. Like all human beings, they are invested with the faculties of lust,
anger, and human desires. Therefore, they require constant guidance from
Allah (awj). If they are left to their own devices for even an instant
they would be destroyed. For such people who have been vested with the
responsibility of the guidance of all mankind, even a momentary lapse in
their resolve is therefore considered a tremendous sin. It is for this
reason that Allah (awj) sometimes addresses them in a strict tone and it
is for this reason that they are in constant need of prayers and
forgiveness.

To recapitulate, in the face of conclusive logical proofs, we must forgo
the apparent meaning of verses that seem to contradict these proofs.
With this methodology, no verses in the Qur\`an contradict the
infallibility of the prophets. Additionally, there are a myriad of
verses that explicitly indicate that the prophets are infallible, of
which we have mentioned a few.

[^1]: Surat Sad (38), Verses 45-48:  وَاذْكُرْ عِبَادَنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ
وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ أُولِي الأَيْدِي وَالأَبْصَارِ. إِنَّا
أَخْلَصْنَاهُمْ بِخَالِصَةٍ ذِكْرَى الدَّارِ. وَإِنَّهُمْ عِنْدَنَا
لَمِنَ الْمُصْطَفَيْنَ الأَخْـيَارِ. وَاذْكُرْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَالْيَسَعَ
وَذَا الْكِفْلِ وَكُلٌّ مِنَ الأَخْيَارِ 

[^2]: Surat Sad (38),Verse 82:  قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأَغْوِيَنَّهُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ... 

[^3]: Surat al-Hijr (15), Verse 39-40:  وَلَأَغْوِيَنَّهُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ. إِلاَّ عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ 

[^4]: Surat al-An’am (6), Verses 84-90:  وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ
وَيَعْقُوبَ كُلاًّ هَدَيْنَا وَنُوحًا هَدَيْنَا مِنْ قَبْلُ وَمِنْ
ذُرِّيَّتِهِ دَاوُودَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ وَأَيُّوبَ وَيُوسُفَ وَمُوسَى
وَهَارُونَ وَكَذٌلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ. وَزَكَرِيَّا وَيَحْيَى
وَعِيسَى وَإِلْيَاسَ كُلٌّ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ. وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ
وَالْيَسَعَ وَيُونُسَ وَلُوطًا وَكُلاًّ فَضَّلْنَا عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ.
وَمِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ وَإِخْوَانِهِمْ وَاجْتَبَيْنَاهُمْ
وَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ إِلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ. ذٌلِكَ هُدَى اللٌّهِ يَهْدِي
بِهِ مَنْ يَشَآءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَلَوْ أَشْرَكُوا لَحَبِطَ عَنْهُمْ مَا
كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ. أُوْلٌئِكَ الَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحُكْمَ وَالنُّبُوَّةَ فَإِنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهَا هٌؤُلاَءِ فَقَدْ
وَكَّلْنَا بِهَا قَوْمًا لَيْسُوا بِهَا بِكَافِرِينَ. أُوْلٌئِكَ
الَّذِينَ هَدَى اللٌّهُ فَبِهُدَاهُمُ اقْتَدِهِ قُلْ لاَ أَسْأَلُكُمْ
عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ ذِكْرَى لِلْعَالَمِينَ 

[^5]: Surat al-Zumar (39), Verse 37:  وَمَنْ يَهْدِ اللٌّهُ فَمَا لَهُ
مِنْ مُضِلٍّ 

[^6]: Surat Ali-’Imran (3), Verses 31-32:  قُلْ إِنْ كُنْـتُمْ
تُحِبُّونَ اللٌّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْـبِبْكُمُ اللٌّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ
لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللٌّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ. قُلْ أَطِيعُوا اللٌّهَ
وَالرَّسُولَ فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ لاَ يُحِبُّ
الْكَافِرِينَ

[^7]: Surat al-Nisa’ (4), Verse 80:  مَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ
أَطَاعَ اللٌّهَ وَمَنْ تَوَلَّى فَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا


[^8]: Surat al-Jinn (72. Verses 26-28:  عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلاَ
يُظْهِرُ عَلَى غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا. إِلاَّ مَنِ ارْتَضَى مِنْ رَسُـولٍ
فَـإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا.
لِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالاَتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا
لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْـصَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا 

[^9]: Surat al-Ahzab (33), Verse 33:  ...إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللٌّهُ
لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
تَطْهِيرًا 

[^10]: Surat al-Zumar (39), Verse 65-66:  وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ
وَإِلـى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ
وَلَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ. بَلِ اللٌّهَ فَاعْـبُدْ وَكُنْ مِنَ
الشَّاكِرِينَ 

[^11]: Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 4 pg. 497: قَالَ الرِّضَا ( ع):
هٌذَا مِمَّا نَزَلَ بِإِيَّاكَ أعْنِي وَاسْمَعِي يَا جَارِهُ خَاطَبَ
اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى بِذٌلِكَ نَبِيَّهُ صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَأَرَادَ بِهِ أُمَّتَهُ، وَكَذٌلِكَ قَوْلُهُ عَزَّوَجَلَّ: لَئِنْ
أَشْرَكْتَ لَيُحْبِطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ وَلَتَكُوْنَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِيْنَ
وَقَوْلُهُ تَعَالى.

[^12]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 120:  وَلَنْ تَرْضَى عَنْكَ
الْيَهُودُ وَلاَ النَّصَارَى حَتَّى تَتَّبِعَ مِلَّتَهُمْ قُلْ إِنَّ
هُدَى اللٌّهِ هُوَ الْهُدَى وَلَئِنْ اتَّبَعْتَ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ بَعْدَ
الَّذِي جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَكَ مِنَ اللٌّهِ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ وَلاَ
نَصِيرٍ 

[^13]: Surat al-Hajj (22), Verses 52,54:  وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ
قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ وَلاَ نَبِيٍّ إِلاَّ إِذَا تَمَنَّى أَلْقَى
الشَّيْطَانُ فِي أُمْنِيَّتِهِ فَيَنْسَخُ اللٌّهُ مَا يُلْقِي
الشَّيْطَانُ ثُمَّ يُحْكِمُ اللٌّهُ آيَاتِهِ وَاللٌّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
... وَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ
رَبِّكَ فَيُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ ... 

[^14]: Surat al-Nisa\` (4), Verse 120:  يَعِدُهُمْ وَيُمَنِّيهِمْ وَمَا
يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ إِلاَّ غُرُورًا 

[^15]: Refer to Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verses 35-37, Surat al-A’raf (7),
Verses 19-24, and Surat Taha (20), Verses 115-123.

[^16]: Surat al-Fath (48), Verses 1-2:  إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا
مُبِينًا. لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللٌّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا
تَأَخَّرَ وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ وَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطًا
مُسْتَقِيمًا 

[^17]: Surat al-Tawbah (9), Verse 43:  عَفَا اللٌّهُ عَنْكَ لِمَ
أَذِنْتَ لَهُمْ حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكَ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَتَعْلَمَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ 


