Question 24: Purpose of Creation
================================

**Question:** What is the purpose of creation? Please state rational
proofs in this regards. If the purpose is to perfect ourselves, then why
did not Allah (awj) create humanity perfect to begin with?

Brief Answer
------------

Allah (awj) is an unlimited being who holds all perfections. Creating
(bringing to existence) is munificence *(jamal)* and Allah (awj) is
munificent. His munificence necessitates that He grant existence to
anything worthy of creation. Thus, Allah (awj) created because He is
munificent. In other words, the goal and reason behind creation is
Allah’s (awj) attribute of munificence. Since, Allah’s (awj) attributes
of essence are not extraneous to His essence, we can conclude that the
goal of creation is Allah’s (awj) essence.

Allah (awj) created man with dual inclinations—for good and evil—and
with two opposing poles in the external world that correspond to these
two, namely the prophets (who represent good) and the devils (who
represent evil). In so doing, Allah (awj) enabled man to reach the
highest level of perfection possible for creatures, and also allowed him
the freedom to fall into the lowest pits of depravity. If man, despite
his animalistic desires and the constant whispering of satanic beings,
follows the path of truth, he attains stations above even that of the
angels, precisely because the latter do not have such animalistic
desires and satanic whispers. However, if he chooses falsehood, he ends
up being lower than even the animals, for they lack the spiritual
capabilities and potential of man.

Had Allah (awj) given man every perfection that he could possibly
achieve at birth, those perfections would not have been volitional ones.
Besides, Allah (awj) had already created beings that had all the
perfections that they could achieve from the outset and that were
without any potential perfections. Thus, the purpose for which man was
created is only met if man achieves perfection through his freely chosen
actions.

Although the disbelievers and sinners who do not reach perfection
certainly do not achieve the true goal of their creation (i.e. acting
according to Allah’s (awj) decree and wishes) they nonetheless do not go
against the existential goal of man’s creation. This is because Allah
(awj) wanted with His existential will that man be able to choose
between truth and falsehood. Had Allah (awj) made it impossible for man
to choose falsehood, belief and obedience would not have been volitional
and man would not have free will.

Detailed Answer
---------------

In order to clarify the answer to this question we must pay attention to
the following points:

1. The aim and end of Allah’s (awj) actions: Allah (awj) is not limited
by any thing. This is because He is the necessary being and His
existence does not depend on another. He has, therefore, all
perfections.

2. One of His perfections is the fact that He is the giver of grace and
is generous. Allah (awj) has said in the Qur\`an,

***“The grace of Allah is not withheld.”***[^1]

3. On Allah’s (awj) part, there is nothing that prevents Him from
giving. Therefore, if in an instance He does not give, it is because of
the limitations of receiver; not the Giver. Everything that can be
given, is given. Every good thing, it can be said, is backed by
existence while every evil is “backed” by non-existence. For example,
knowledge is goodness and perfection while ignorance is evil and
imperfection. Also, power, in opposition to incapacity, is perfection
and good. When we pay attention to the third preliminary, we can infer
that the grace of Allah (awj) comes about by means of His creating.
Therefore, the giving-nature necessitates creation.

In other words, if we suppose something deserves to exist but Allah
(awj) does not create it, then this is preventing a good from occurring
and will be considered niggardliness (given that existence is good). We
know, however, that Allah (awj) cannot be miserly. We can conclude from
these preliminaries that if one were asked, “Why does Allah create,” we
can reply that “His being the giver of grace has caused Him to create.”

The attributes of Allah (awj) are not external to His Essence. The
attributes of Man and other bodies are additional to their essence. For
example the apple has an essence and redness and sweetness are its
external attributes. The apple can be sour or green and still be an
apple.

The unity of Allah (awj) and His attributes is a extensive theological
problem that one can follow further in theology under the discussion on
the unity of His attributes. What concerns us here is the fact that
Allah’s (awj) creativity, which is the purpose of creation, is one with
His essence and does not lie outside His essence. Therefore, if we are
asked, “Why does Allah create,” we will reply that, “because He is
Allah.” Therefore, the cause for His creating is Himself. This is what
our philosophers have said: the goal and the agent in Allah (awj) are
one. It is possible to derive this meaning from some of the verses of
the Qur\`an including 

***“All affairs return to Him.”***[^2]

What has been mentioned up to now was the goal of the agent in creation
in general. However, the goal of any particular agent, such as man,
requires a more specialized objective. This goal is none other than the
specific perfection that Allah (awj) intends from the creation of man.

In order to explain, we may say that the fact that Allah (awj) is
creative necessitates that He create every perfection possible. Before
creating man, He had created other beings called angels. From the start
of their creation they possessed all the perfections that were possible
for them. Therefore, they will in no way obtain new perfections. Their
level of existence will in no way evolve. Allah (awj) relates from the
tongue of the angels that

***“There is none of us except that he has a specific station; it is we
who are filled in ranks; it is we who glorify Allah.”***[^3]

Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said, “Then He created the openings
between high skies and filled them with all classes of angels. Some of
them are in prostration and do not raise their heads. Others are in a
kneeling position and do not stand up. Some of them are in array and do
not leave their position. Others are extolling Allah and do not get
tired.”[^4]

They worship Allah (awj). This is a perfection that Allah (awj) has
given to them. It is not possible for them to disobey Allah (awj). Allah
(awj) says,

***“The angels do not exceed Him in speech and they act only according
to His command.”***[^5] 

He also says,

***“Upon it were placed mean angels. They do not shrink from acting upon
what they were ordered to do."***[^6]

Because Allah (awj) is creative, He wanted to create a greater
perfection, aside from the perfection given to the angels. That is the
perfection of man’s free-will. In other words, He wanted to create a
being who would obtain all the aforementioned perfections (that belonged
to the angels) with his own freewill.

He therefore created man: a being who does not have all the possible
perfections from the start of his creation. But he is such that he can
reach these perfections. It is clear that the perfection that man
obtains with his own freewill is loftier than that given to the angels.
Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said, “Allah has created the angels from
the intellect, He did not place lust in them; and He created the animals
with lust, but did not place intellect in them. But He placed both
intellect and lust in the sons of Adam (ع). Therefore, he whose
intellect overcomes his lust is greater than the angels. And he whose
lust overcomes his intellect is lower than the animals.”[^7]

Therefore, the purpose behind the creation of man is Allah’s (awj)
creativity. Allah’s (awj) creativity requires Him to create this kind of
perfection: The greatest possible perfection.

When we ponder upon the above mentioned points we can conclude that the
purpose behind the creation of man will come into existence when man has
the capacity to reach perfection and strives to do so with his own
freewill. If he had this perfection from the start, it is clear that it
would not have come about from his own freewill and therefore the
purpose of his creation would not have been met.

We must not forget that for man, obtaining even one minor perfection is
accomplished by him exercising his freewill. And hence in doing this he
is fulfilling the purpose of creation.

Now if man does not climb even one rung in the ladder of perfection and
passes his whole life in sin and disbelief, though he may not have
actualized the special purpose of his creation, he nonetheless has not
escaped from the overriding reality that defines the purpose of creation
in general. This is because he has actualized something that was a
potential for him—for on the opposite pole of his potential to become
better than the angels, lay the potential to sink to the lowest of the
low. It is Allah (awj) who created him in such a way that he is able to
choose either perfection or failure. Therefore, even the disbeliever or
sinner does not move contrary to the existential will of Allah (awj).

Allah (awj) likes and wishes that man ascends the degrees of perfection
and does not like him falling into misguidance. In other words, in the
creation of man, Allah (awj) has an existential will and a conventional
will (or wish). His existential will is that man actualizes all his
potentials—whether good or bad. His conventional will or wish is that
man only actualizes his potential for good.

With this explanation it can be said that the believing man has
actualized both purposes of creation, existential and conventional, and
that he has acted according to both the will and wish of Allah (awj).
The unbelieving man or sinner on the other hand, although he does not
actualize the conventional purpose and is not in agreement with the wish
of Allah (awj), is nonetheless in line with the existential goal of
creation and never escapes the overriding will of the Almighty.

[^1]: Surat al-Isra\` (17), Verse 20:  وَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ
مَحْظُوراً 

[^2]: Surat Hud (11), Verse 123:  ... وَ إِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُ الأَمْرُ
كُلُّهُ ...  Also see: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 210; Surat
Ali-’Imran (3), Verse 109; Surat al-Anfal (8), Verse 44; Surat al-Fahir
(35), Verse 4; Surat al-Hadid (57), Verse 5

[^3]: Surat al-Saffat (37), Verses 164-166:  وَمَا مِنَّا إِلاَّ لَهُ
مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ. وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّافُّونَ. وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ
الْمُسَبِّحُونَ 

[^4]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 1: ...ثُمَّ فَتَقَ مَا بَيْنَ السَّمٌوَاتِ
الْعُلاَ. فَمَلَأَهُنَّ أَطْوَاراً مِنْ مَلاَئِكَتِهِ مِنْهُمْ سُجُوْدٌ
لاَ يَرْكَعُونَ، وَرُكُوْعٌ لاَ يَنْتَصِبُوْنَ، وَصَافُّونَ لاَ
يَتَزَايَلُونَ، وَمُسَبِّحُونَ لاَ يَسْأَمُونَ...

[^5]: Surat al-Anbiya\` (21), Verse 27:  لاَ يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ
وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ 

[^6]: Surat al-Tahrim (66), Verse 6: ..عَلَيْهَا مَلاَئِكَةٌ غِلاَظٌ
شِدَادٌ لاَ يَعْصُونَ اللٌّهَ مَا أَمَرَهُمْ وَيَفْعَلُونَ مَا
يُؤْمَرُونَ

[^7]: Wasa\`il al-Shi’ah, vol. 11, pg. 164: قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ ( ع): إِنَّ اللٌّهَ رَكَّبَ فِي
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ عَقْلاً بِلاَ شَهْوَةٍ، وَرَكَّبَ فِي الْبَهَائِمِ
شَهْوَةً بِلاَ عَقْلٍ، وَرَكَّبَ فِي بَنِي آدَمَ كِلْتَيْهِمَا، فَمَنْ
غَلَبَ عَقْلُهُ شَهْوَتَهُ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ، وَمَنْ
غَلَبَ شَهْوَتُهُ عَقْلَهُ فَهُوَ شَرٌّ مِنَ الْبَهَائِمِ.


