Question 25: Signs for the re-emergence of Imam al-Mahdi
========================================================

**Question:** What are the signs for the re-emergence of the Master of
the Age [i.e. the Twelfth Imam]?

Brief Answer
------------

The topic of the signs of the re-emergence is a complicated one and
calls for a thorough investigation of all the related narrations.
However, in brief, the signs fall under two categories. One group
consists of those signs which will certainly occur, foreshadowing the
re-emergence: the rebellion of Sufyani, the rebellion of Yamani, the
burst of a heavenly cry, the murder of an innocent soul, the sinking of
the army of Sufyani into the desert ground, the rebellion of Dajjal. The
remaining signs are not certain and as such might not occur.

But from another perspective, the signs can be categorized into four
groups:

1. The social signs: that is, to put it in a nutshell, those social
phenomena whose upshot would be the downfall of the then perverted human
civilization.

2. The religious and Ideological signs: which constitute the collapse
and distortion of the Divine religion.

3. The Natural Signs: changes such as alterations in the constellations.

4. The individual and miraculous signs: such as the burst of a heavenly
cry, and the murder of the Innocent Soul.

Detailed Answer
---------------

A discussion regarding the signs of the re-emergence is somewhat
complicated, for there are numerous narrations in the corpus of Shi’a
ahadith, and add to that the narrations found in the Sunni sources and
even the heavenly books of previous religions, such as Christianity,
Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and Indian creeds, and all these call for a
comprehensive investigation and analysis. Furthermore, the related
narrations must be weighed as to the authenticity of their lines of
transmission and also the soundness of their content.

Based on the Shi’a narrations, it can be inferred that the signs fall
under two categories. One group consists of those signs which will
undoubtedly occur prior to the re-emergence, without any qualification
or prerequisite; namely: the rebellion of Sufyani, the rebellion of
Yamani, the burst of a heavenly cry, the murder of the Innocent Soul,
the sinking of the army of Sufyani in the desert[^1], and the rebellion
of Dajjal. The second group consists of signs whose occurrence is
contingent on the materialization of certain conditions. There are many
such signs.

However, as mentioned before, the signs of the re-emergence can be
categorized into four general groups, which will be explained in brief.

### a. The Social Factors

To summarize, the appearance of these factors represent the downfall of
the then misguided human civilization. Some of these factors are as
follows:

1. The prevalence of injustice all over the world, or in other words,
the universality and globalization of injustice.

2. The perversion of rulers. It is imperative to note that what is meant
by universal injustice and perversion of rulers is that the political
regimes that will govern the world would be founded on social,
political, cultural, and economic injustice, and hence the rulers would
exercise their power based on a spirit of domination, imperialism, and
despotism. It should not be inferred that just individuals or regimes
would be nonexistent, but that the prevalent system of governance would
be that of injustice.

3. Inflation and economic instability which are the concomitants of an
unjust system.

4. The appearance of charlatans and Dajjal-like characters who will
claim to be social reformers. The advent of Dajjal is one of the
indisputable signs of the re-emergence to which all previous religions
have also alluded. Dajjal literally means one who covers truth with
falsehood and deceit. It is likely however, based on the signs mentioned
in the narrations, that Dajjal is not a proper name of a single person
rather it is a general title for all devious and deceitful individuals
and regimes who deceive the masses and bar the path of truth. Some
scholars have interpreted Dajjal as being a reference to contemporary
Western civilization.

5. Charlatan and debased individuals will become speakers of their
societies. Incompetent individuals will have authority in their
societies.

6. Righteous and honest people will be put aside and replaced by
dishonest and boastful characters.

7. The rebellion of Sufyani. However, regarding the question of whether
Sufyani refers to a specific individual or is a general title for all
deceitful individuals and regimes, there can be no definite answer. But
what is clear is that the name signifies an individual or individuals
and regimes that are capitalist, predatory, oppressive, backward, and
which (or who) propagate superstitions. Their distinctive trait is their
willingness to demoralize communities. The narrations prophesy that
Sufyani and his army will vanish into the ground in the desert of
Bayda’—an area between Mecca and Medina—and only one person will
survive, the one who will spread the news.[^2]

8. War, hypocrisy, and bloodshed will take over. In the narrations, it
is divined that [global] war will break out whose instigators will be a
people referred to in the ahadith as the Turk, which apparently
constitute the ethnic groups who trace their ancestry back to Turk b.
Yafith b. Nuh who today inhabit the regions of Mongolia, Punjab, Turkey,
Siberia, Afghanistan, India, and in its broad meaning also includes the
peoples of the Western hemisphere. The narrations also point to the
killing of 23 people, but this is regarded as being among the
unverifiable signs.

9. Revolutions will erupt in an effort to fight global oppression and
corruption, some of which will succeed in organizing new governments.
The rebellion and movement of Yamani, which is a symbol of the struggle
of truth against deviation at the End of Time, will be one such
uprising. The movement of a certain Sayyid Khurasani who will be of the
lineage of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع) and who will rise to uphold justice
is another of the factors involved. These two movements—one of which
will be in Yemen and the other in Iran—will be among the elements laying
the groundwork for the re-emergence of Imam al-Mahdi (ع). The narrations
augur that the regime that will be established in Iran will, firstly,
invite the people to Islam and the path of the Ahlul Bayt (ع) and will,
secondly, clear its territory—which will extend to Kufah—from injustice
and corruption and will join forces with and obey the Imam (ع) when he
re-emerges.

### b. Religious and ideological factors

That is, the collapse and perversion of religion. It has been narrated
from the Commander of the Believers, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) that at
the End of Time prayer will be abandoned; trusts will be dishonoured;
lying will be considered permissible; usury will become prevalent;
bribery will be all-encompassing; religion will be relinquished in
favour of the material life; women’s counsel will be sought; family
bonds will be severed; people will become licentious; murder will
acquire normalcy; patience will be counted as a weakness; injustice will
be prided on; the people of knowledge will be treacherous; the reciters
of the Qur\`an will be perverse; the mosques will be embellished and the
minarets built high [but without the spirituality that is their
substance]; promises will be broken; and desires will be ever diverse
[and conflicting].

To put it more generally, the precepts of Islam will be neglected.
However, this neglect will be relative; that is, it would be the
prevalent mood of human society at the time. This is to such an extent
that it has been related that when the Imam (ع) re-emerges he will bring
a new way, a new book, and a new religion; meaning that Islam will be so
contaminated with superstitions, the Qur\`an so assailed with conceptual
distortions [i.e. false interpretations] that their reality and inner
truth will have been forgotten.

### c. Natural factors

Also among the signs heralding the re-emergence of the Imam (ع) are the
natural disasters mentioned in the narrations; such as the [prodigious]
lightning of the End of Time; lunar and solar eclipses which will occur
outside their natural timeframe; changes in the constellations and the
atmospheric conditions (in water, air, sunrise, sunset, etc.). And of
course these narrations are capable of being understood in relation to
certain events that are taking place in this age, just as Ayatullah
Murtada Mutahhari interpreted the “rising of the sun from the west”
[which is counted among the signs] as the rise of Islam at the hands of
Imam Khomeini from Paris.

### d. The individual and miraculous signs

1. The Burst of a Heavenly Cry - According to the narrations, before or
during the event of re-emergence, an angel will cry out from the heaven
proclaiming the re-emergence of the Imam (ع). That angel will be the
Faithful Jibra\`il whose cry will be heard in all four corners of the
globe. Everyone will hear it in his own language without detecting the
direction from which the cry originates. But at the same time the Devil
will also call out, “‘Uthman was murdered while he was innocent” with
the intention to confuse the people.[^3]

2. The Murder of an Innocent Soul - The Innocent Soul will be the
nickname of a certain Hashimite youth with a high degree of spiritual
perfection. He will fight the Sufyani army and on being defeated will
take refuge in Medina. When the Sufyani army reaches Medina, he will
flee to Mecca. There he will invite people to the way of the Household
of Muhammad (ص) but will be slain between the Rukn and the Maqam while
innocent of any crime.[^4] His death will awaken the conscience of the
people all over the world, which will in turn prepare them to pledge
allegiance to the Imam (ع). Fifteen days after his death, the
re-emergence will take place.[^5] He is the Imam’s (ع) representative
and envoy among the people.

There are also other signs mentioned in the narrations which we have not
included here.

[^1]: Kitab al-Ghaybah, pg. 252

[^2]: Kitab al-Ghaybah, pp. 279-282

[^3]: Kitab al-Ghaybah, pp. 253-254

[^4]: Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mah, pg. 331

[^5]: Ibid., pg. 649


