Question 27: The qualities of human society after the re-appearance of Imam al-Mahdi – the state of Justice, oppression, poverty and sin
========================================================================================================================================

**Question:** After the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
reappearance), how long will it take before the rule of justice [becomes
universal]? Will any poor person or tyrant remain? If no, then does that
mean that no sin will ever be committed again? Is it correct that he
will be martyred at the hands of a bearded old woman? How does such a
crime take place despite the Imam’s uprooting of oppression?

What the narrations yield in this regard is that war will be waged for
over a period of eight months, after which time all the various
countries will fall under his reign, the rule of justice will be
established worldwide, and disbelief, polytheism, and hypocrisy will be
entirely uprooted. Hence, no tyrant will remain in power over any
society, and the main incentives of sin, particularly social misdeeds,
will be eradicated. The earth will yield its treasures of mineral
deposits and crops will flourish; the share of the poor will be exacted
from the oppressors and the rich and it will be distributed among the
poor to such an extent that there will be no need for charity and alms,
for all will be affluent and well off.

Brief Answer
------------

Detailed Answer
---------------

Belief in the reappearance of Imam Zaman (ع) is an instance of belief in
the unseen realities, those realities which cannot be accepted and whose
qualities cannot be apprehended by any other means but faith and through
a study of the corpus of authentic narrations. But since most of the
ahadith and narrations have through time undergone corrosion as the
result of various factors—such as, *taqiyyah* (dissimulation) on the
part of the Shi’ites, fabrication and distortion of narrations by the
enemies of the Shi’ites, neglect of or the lack of attention in
recording the narrations on the part of the transmitters, and absence of
adequate facilities for publication and preservation of the texts—a
detailed understanding of the events prior to and following the
reappearance of Imam Zaman (ع), as desired by the truth-seeking Shi’ite,
is not feasible.

This becomes especially difficult when faced with some of the
contradictions in the related narrations that are not reconcilable.
Hence, the reply to the aforementioned question—particularly the first
part—is [to a great extent] conjectural. And in order to forward an
appropriate response, the question must be broken down into several
parts. The answer to each part will be discussed separately.

### After the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (ع), how long will it take for him to establish the rule of justice?

To this question, Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (ع) has replied, “For a
full eight months, he will have his sword unsheathed and will kill the
enemies of Allah until Allah is satisfied.”[^1]

Based on the narrations that are available to us, he will reappear in
Mecca. After the elite of his followers join him there, they will then
advance toward ‘Iraq, Sham (the present day Syria), and from there
toward Jerusalem.

Thereafter the lands of Europe, Turkey, China, Afghanistan, and of other
regions will be conquered by him, and so after eight consecutive months
of fighting, the rule of justice will be established and peace and
security will become prevalent. But about the duration of his rule,
there is inconsistency amongst the narrations. Some of the related
durations are as follows: 19 years and some months; seven years; 40
years; 10 years; 309 years, each year of which is equivalent to 20 or 40
normal years. And 40 days after his martyrdom or demise [depending on
the narration], the earth and the sky will be demolished in preparation
for the Day of Judgment.

### Will any needy individuals remain after his rule has been established?

After the Imam (ع) rises and establishes the rule of justice, the earth
will yield to him her treasures of mineral deposits and crops, the
shares that rightfully belong to the destitute and poor will be exacted
from the rich and the oppressors to be justly distributed, as the result
of which no poor person will remain, to the extent that there will be no
use for charities and zakat. Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) says,
“The world will be revitalized by the implementation of justice, the sky
will send down abundant rain, trees will reveal their fruit, and the
earth will deliver her plants, embellishing herself for her
inhabitants.”

People will be so well-off that it has been narrated that on one
occasion Imam Zaman (ع) will order the announcer to inform the people
that whoever is in need of financial aid should stand up. From among the
entire population only one person will stand up, proclaiming his need.
Imam Zaman (ع) will tell him, “Go to the treasurer and tell him that
Mahdi commands him to provide you with some money.”

At conveying the Imam’s message to the treasurer, the latter will tell
him, “Bring me your garment.” Then the treasurer will fill it full. When
the poor man turns away to leave, he will regret his request, saying to
himself, “Why should I be the greediest of the nation of Muhammad?” So
he will return it to the treasurer, but it will not be accepted, and
Mahdi will tell him, “What we have granted, we will not take back.”

In describing the time of Imam al-Mahdi’s (ع) rule, the Prophet (ص) has
said, “People will be searching for someone poor who would accept
charity or gifts from them, to no avail; they will put aside the zakat
of their wealth, but they will not find anyone to give it to, for all
will be made well-off by Allah grace.”

### After Imam al-Mahdi (ع) establishes his rule, will there be any oppressors remaining in power?

The character trait of the universal rule of Imam al-Mahdi (ع) will be
the worldwide maintenance of peace, security, justice, and the
annihilation of the foundations of corruption, decadence, oppression,
and crime; just as this has been the main purpose of all the prophets,
but with the difference that the success of the latter and their
successors following them was not as decisive, but nevertheless,
establishing worldwide peace and security has always constituted one of
their promises.

And so the unpolluted souls of mankind at large, ever since the
beginning of human history, have been waiting for the time when those
promises would be realized. Now since Allah (awj), His messengers, and
their infallible successors do not breach their promises, they would not
raise the hopes of people without a good reason. This means that this
promise will certainly be realized and that a just government will be
established, consisting of the aforementioned characteristics.

This promise is so vital and real that its realization can be considered
the rationale behind the creation of humankind; a promise that once
realized will lead to the unity of the whole of humankind under the
banner of *tawhid* and, by Allah’s (awj) mercy, the uprooting of
disbelief, polytheism, and hypocrisy[^2] from amongst them. The
narrations that express this are numerous.

For instance, it has been recorded that Imam Hasan b. ‘Ali al-’Askari
(ع) told his son, [Mahdi] (ع): “It is as though I see you when Allah’s
(awj) support has been sent upon you, relief *(faraj)* has been
achieved, your magnificence and greatness has risen … it is at this
moment that the rule of truth will dawn and the darkness of evil will
vanish from the scene of existence. Through your hands, Allah will break
the oppressors’ backs, will reinstate the religious sacraments, will
enlighten the horizons of the world, and will establish calm and peace
throughout the world. Your enemies will be disgraced and your friends
esteemed and victorious. Not even a single oppressor, criminal,
rebellious denier, encroaching enemy, spiteful opponent will remain on
the face of earth, for whoever trusts in Allah, He will provide him
sufficient support. Verily, Allah fulfils His wish and executes His
definitive promise and will. Verily Allah has set a plan for
everything.”[^3]

### Will sin be totally annihilated after Imam Zaman’s (ع) rule has been established?

The most important motives for the human being’s sinning are, on the one
hand, his avarice in hoarding material wealth and, on the other hand,
his sense of need for the goods of this world. If the human being
possesses a sufficient amount of wealth, a good social reputation; if
his mentality becomes Divine-permeated, if the world and her goods are
belittled in his eyes, and he thus reaches the certainty that all Divine
promises are true and as such will certainly be fulfilled, regardless of
the aversion of the enemies and their effort to obstruct their
realization; if he reaches the certainty that there will be a
resurrection, a reckoning, that paradise and what it holds are
incomparably superior to the life of this world—in such a case, there
will be no motive for sinning. This is especially true based on a few
narrations to the effect that at the commencement of the Imam’s
revolution, Satan will be slain by the Prophet (ص) in Jerusalem, hence
putting an end to his tempting and decoying[^4].

Moreover, during that time there will be innumerable obstacles in the
way of sinning—such as, the inescapable and universal rule of justice,
the healthy and secure environment, and the general rejection of
corruption and sin by society. Therefore, there will remain very little
motive for sin, and at the same time there will be obstacles in its way,
which means that sin will be at its lowest ebb.

There are also numerous narrations in this regard, such as: Imam Ja’far
b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) has thus described that era, “Illicit gender
relationships, alcoholic beverages, and usury will vanish. People will
turn their attention to worship and obedience; they will righteously
honour their trusts. The evil people will perish, and the virtuous will
remain.”

In another narration, the Prophet (ص) is recorded as having given the
following good tidings: “Allah will, through the Mahdi, relieve the
hardships of the nation of Islam. He will enamour their [i.e. people’s]
hearts with the love of worship and obedience, and will make His justice
universal. Allah will, through him, eradicate lies; He will destroy the
spirit of violence and animosity, and will free them of the disgrace of
bondage.”[^5]

Is it true that he will be martyred at the hands of a bearded old woman?
How does such a crime take place despite the Imam’s uprooting of
oppression?

There are various narrations about Imam Zaman’s (ع) martyrdom or demise;
and as this event is due in the future, obviously the only way of
unveiling the mysteries surrounding it is by studying the narrations
related from the Infallibles in this regard. Nevertheless, the narration
pertaining to the event of Imam Zaman (ع) being murdered by an old woman
is not accepted as authentic by most scholars. This story has only been
recorded in *Ilzam al-Nasib* and lacks authentic narration. However, if
we do accept this narration, it must be noted that what is for certain
is that the universal rule under Imam Zaman (ع) will be the rule of
justice and equity, and as such the rule of the oppressors will be
destroyed. However, this does not necessarily certify that there will be
no possibility of individuals sinning.

[^1]: al-Ghaybah, pp. 164-165: ...وَيَضَعُ السَّيْفَ عَلى عَاتِقِهِ
ثَمَانِيَةَ أَشْهُرٍ هَرَجاً هَرَجاً حَتَّى رَضِيَ اللٌّهُ...

[^2]: Surat Hud (11), Verses 118 & 123

[^3]: Surat al-Talaq (65), Verse 3:  قَدْ جَعَلَ اللٌّهُ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدْراً 

[^4]: Tafsir al-Qummi, vol. 2, pg. 245: عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ ( ع)
فِي قَوْلِ اللٌّهِ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالـى فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلـى يَوْمِ
يُبْعَثُونَ. قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنْظَرِينَ إِلـى يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ
الْمَعْلُومِ قَالَ يَوْمُ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ يَوْمُ يَذْبَحُهُ
رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ ( ص) الصَخْرَةَ الَّتِي فِي بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ.

[^5]: al-Ghaybah, pg. 185, no. 144: قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ ( ص) (في
حَدِيْثٍ طَوِيْلٍ): فَعِنْدَ ذٌلِكَ خُرُوجُ الْمَهْدِيِّ وَهُوَ رَجُلٌ
مِنْ وَلَدِ هٌذَا - وَأَشاَر َبِيَدِهِ إِلـى عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ
( ع) - بِهِ يَمْحَقُ اللٌّهُ الْكَذِبَ، وَيُذْهِبُ الزَّمَانَ الْكَلِبَ
، وَبِهِ يُخْرِجُ ذُلَّ الرَّقِّ مِنْ أَعْنَاقِكُمْ. قَالَ رَسُولُ
اللٌّهِ ( ص): يَمْلَأُ الأَرْضَ قِسْطاً وَعَدْلاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ ظُلْماً
وَجَوْراً، يَمْلَأُ قُلُوبَ عِبَادِهِ عِبَادَةً وَيَسَعَهُمْ عَدْلُهُ.
Tuhaf al-’Uqul, pg.115: عَنْ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ( ع): لَوْ قَدْ
قَامَ قَائِمُنَا...وَذَهَبَتْ الشَّحْنَاءُ مِنْ قُلُوبِ الْعِبَادِ.


