Question 1: Divine Will and Human Will
======================================

**Question:** What is the relationship between Divine will and human
will?

Short Answer
------------

The human being is a contingent existent who derives his existence and
existential qualities from Allah (awj). Allah (awj) has, by His
generative will *(irada takwini)*, created him as a volitional creature
and has thus distinguished him from all other creatures. Hence, the
human being is the highest being addressed by Allah’s (awj) legislative
will *(irada* *tashri’i)* and as such, has been given permission to
choose between obedience and disobedience, to determine his way of life,
and to mould his own fate.

The human being is the chosen creature who is able, by making the right
choice, to obey the injunctions of Allah (awj); to ascend the levels of
perfection by conforming to the legislative will of Allah (awj), and
submitting his desire to the generative will of Allah (awj) thereby
reaching the station of Divine regency - that level which in paradise,
entitles him to receive whatever he wishes. Because he has chosen Divine
satisfaction, Allah (awj) is satisfied with him and will provide for him
so profoundly that he will in return be pleased with Him and satisfied
with his own conduct.

But the human being can also make the wrong choice by taking up the path
of disobedience and aversion to Divine injunctions, descending to the
pits of *saqar*. This would be the result of not making his will conform
to the legislative will of Allah (awj). However, this disobedience does
not signify that he has overcome the Divine will, for the Divinity
Himself has willed that he should choose his path.

In other words, Divine will encompasses the entire world of existence -
including the human being and his actions - and as such, transcends the
human will, hierarchically. This is not the same as the concurrence of
two independent, complete, and parallel causes in generating a single
effect, which is impossible. Rather, in accordance with the principle of
“unity of Divine Acts”, the only independent agent in the cosmos is
Allah (awj), and thus all other existents are dependent on Allah (awj)
in their existence and their agency.

Thus, their will, which is an aspect of their agency, is not independent
or detached of the Divine will. Therefore, we [as *Shi’ites*] neither
approve of determinism as the *Ash’arites* do - who believe that the
only will at work is the Divine will, thus considering all other agents
sterile and merely tools for Allah (awj). Neither do we accept the
concept of delegation which is held by the *Mu’tazilites*, who assume
that Divine will should be abstracted from human will, thereby
considering the human being a sovereign agent in his volitional acts.

Rather, we, in following the teachings of the Qur\`an and the infallible
Imams (ع), consider the human being to be a willing and volitional
agent, but at the same time we know him to be under the dominion of
Divine will and governed by the authority of Allah (awj) - being
essentially in need of the will and power of Allah (awj).

Detailed Answer
---------------

Human will is vertically inferior to Divine will and as such is
dependent on Divine will and cannot exist independently and without need
of Allah (awj). This is confirmed by many Qur\`anic verses, among them
the following:

***“…but you do not wish unless it is wished by Allah, the Lord of all
the worlds.”*** [^1]

But this in no way contradicts the human being’s volition and his
accountability for his thoughts, intentions, and actions. For it is he
who is the direct agent of his will, choice, and conduct, but this is
possible only through the power and permission that Allah (awj) has
granted him in making his choices.

Thus, in many verses [seemingly contradicting the aforementioned verse
which reserves authority solely for Allah (awj)] the actions of natural
agents, including human beings, are attributed to themselves, thereby
considering the human being responsible for his own conduct. And it is
in this light that the Qur\`an establishes certain responsibilities for
him, giving him various encouragements and warnings. Two such verses
read:

***“…and that nothing belongs to man except what he strives for”***[^2];

***“Whoever acts righteously, it is for his own soul, and whoever does
evil, it is to its detriment, and your Lord is not tyrannical to the
servants.”***[^3]

Accordingly, on the one hand, the issue concerns the assumption that the
human being’s independence is in contrast to the principle of unity of
Divine Acts and also to the essential need of existents for Allah (awj).
On the other hand, there is the supposition that the human being is
totally predetermined and hence powerless, undermining the rationale for
all Divine injunctions, encouragements, warnings, and consequently
negating Divine justice and wisdom. Hence, the seemingly contradictory
verses of the Qur\`an must be reconciled by realising that some of those
verses merely clarify the meaning of the others (and do not contradict
them) so that we are able to avoid being entrapped by either determinism
or delegationism.

For a better understanding of this matter, attention must be paid to two
points:

1. The different ways in which various causes concur in creating an
effect;

2. The various ways in which the Divine will can be conceived of.

The concurrence of causes in generating an effect can transpire in two
ways:

1. One possibility is that in the occurrence of a phenomenon only one
cause is responsible; such as the Divine Act of creation in which Allah
(awj) produces directly and without the mediation of any other existent,
or like the dependency of human conceptions on the mind [in which case,
it is solely the mind that generates the mental concepts and images
without the mediation of any other agent].

2. The other possibility is that several causes are responsible in the
creation of a phenomenon. This possibility can itself be conceived in
several ways:

a. The various causes are responsible in a collective manner. In this
case, each cause is referred to in technical terms as an “incomplete
cause” and all of them considered collectively are referred to as the
“complete cause.” An example is the interaction of water, light, heat,
seed, soil, farmer’s work, etc. in the growth of a plant. In this case,
not only is the concurrence of multiple causes not impossible, it is a
necessary prerequisite for the production of the effect.

b. The various causes are responsible in an alternating manner. Such as
if a certain machine had three motors, but they had to operate one at a
time, hence one motor would come into operation only after the previous
one had stopped, thereby providing the machine with a constant and
uninterrupted movement. [Hence, the constant motion being the effect of
three alternating causes.] In this case also, the cooperation and
combination of all the causes is necessary for sustaining the effect.
However, in this case, there is no particular dependency between the
causes as there is in the third case.

c. Certain causes are dependent on other ones in efficacy but without
such a dependency in their existences such as the roles that human
volition, the motion of the hand, etc. play in producing writing [in
which case the will to write propels the hand into motion, which in turn
moves the pen, and which in turn makes ink marks on the paper that
constitute the writing] or such as the soldier’s obeying his superior
[in which case, the soldier’s will to perform a certain action depends
on the superior giving an order but the soldier’s existence itself does
not depend on the superior’s existence].

d. Two sets of causes are at work in generating one effect in the same
mode *(haythiyyah)* and from the same aspect *(jahah)*—which is
technically referred to as “the concurrence of two complete causes in
generating one effect.” An example of this would be a single piece of
writing on one specific corner of a sheet of paper, written by two
writers writing simultaneously.

Or if one particular plant were to grow by the work of two [distinct and
independent] groups of causes—e.g. soil, farmer, seed,
etc.—simultaneously. In this case, “mutual exclusion” would result, and
thus [the actualization of] this case is impossible.

For, the agency [i.e. the work, the acting] of each set would bar the
agency of the other set, resulting in either one rendering the other
ineffective (which would mean that two complete causes have not actually
concurred and only one has produced the effect unilaterally) or both
mutually hindering the agency of one another (which would mean that
neither of the complete causes has been actualized so as to take part in
creating an effect). Therefore, as this case is impossible, there is no
actual instance of it.

e. Several sets of causes, vertically associated, generate a single
effect, in such a manner that the inferior cause is dependent upon the
superior in its existence as well as in its agency [or efficacy]; such
as, the relation between the grandparents and the parents in the
procreation of the latter’s children.

Considering the above-mentioned classification, it must be clarified
under which of the aforementioned categories the concurrence of Divine
causation, agency, and will with those of His creatures—including human
beings—falls.

If this concurrence were of the first, second, or third types, the
result would be the existential independence of the human being and the
rest of the creatures from Allah (awj), which would contradict the unity
of the Divine Acts. Thus on careful examination, the possibility of such
instances would prove unacceptable. It cannot be of the fourth category
either, as this does not have any occurrence in reality. Furthermore, it
is erroneous to consider the concurrence of human will with Divine will
impossible as the human being would not even exist without his
connection to Allah (awj), and thus his complete agency as parallel to
Allah (awj) is not possible[^4] so to give rise to the potentiality of
parallel and simultaneous concurrence in generating one effect.[^5]

Thus the only category plausible is the last one; that is, the human
will and agency being vertically inferior to Divine will and agency.

However to understand how the concurrence of Divine and human will in
such a vertical manner does not contradict man’s free will, attention
must be paid to the different types of Divine will.

In a general classification, Divine will is understood in two ways:

1. The will of essence;

2. The will of action.

The latter is subdivided into the generative will and the legislative
will.

The Will of Essence: It is the Divine will that is assigned to Him
without the need to consider the creatures or Allah’s (awj) relation to
them. Hence, it is identical with the Divine Essence and is the
necessary requirement of Divine volition, of His not being restrained by
any other agent, of His not being overpowered by anything, and of His
needlessness in relation to all creatures. The human being and his
relation to Allah (awj) have no role in this sense of Divine will.

The Generative Will of Action: This is Allah’s (awj) will in
establishing the objective destiny and portion; that is, it pertains to
the systems governing the cosmos, how things come about and operate, and
their certain and definite ends This is manifested in the creation of
creatures in different shapes, different ways, and in different times.

In the world of being, the Divine generative will governs the entire
corpus of existents, including human beings, and as such, no creature
has the will or choice to violate it, as is pointed out in the following
verses:

***“Then He turned to the heaven, and it was smoke, and He said to it
and to the Earth, ‘Come! Willingly or unwillingly!’ They said, ‘We come
heartily.’”***[^6];

and,

***“There is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the
All-beneficent as a servant.”***[^7]

The human being has been created as a willing and volitional creature
based on the Divine generative will of action and thus cannot divest
himself of free choice and will. So whether he likes it or not, he must
act on his own accord, choose the path he desires to follow and
determine his own fate. He has no choice in being a volitional creature,
just as he has no say in choosing his parents, his gender, or his
appearance.

The Legislative Will of Action. This will is identical with Divine
legislation for the willing and volitional human being.[^8] In the very
act of lawmaking for humanity, no one can share the authority with Allah
(awj) and no one is capable of changing the laws before they reach the
people.

Therefore, the angels, prophets, and successors to the prophets are duty
bound to convey to the people the exact rules revealed to them without
the slightest change and to interpret and clarify them only in the
framework designated by Allah (awj). It is in the stage of implementing
these injunctions that the human being has been given the capacity to
obey or disobey [on his own accord].

Hence, by making the right decision, the human being can conform his
will to the will of Allah (awj), the Supreme, and being satisfied with
the Divine generative will, can decide to abide unconditionally by the
Divine legislative will thereby securing his final felicity and meriting
the leisure and serenity of Paradise—to such an extent that Allah (awj)
will satisfy his wishes, whatever they may be, very quickly;

***“…but those who have faith and do righteous deeds will be in the
gardens of paradise: they will have whatever they wish near their Lord.
This is the greatest grace.”***[^9]

As they preferred Divine satisfaction over their own, Allah (awj) will
in return be pleased with them and will reward them so abundantly that
they would be happy with what they have done and with their Lord.[^10]

Therefore, the human being can, on his own accord, will that which Allah
(awj) wills and be satisfied with Allah’s (awj) existential and
legislative satisfaction—refusing to want or to seek anything but that
which Allah (awj) wants from him and that which He pleases.[^11] In so
doing, the human being has willed in accordance to the Divine generative
and legislative wills, although the human will and potency themselves
have been bestowed to the human being by this same Divine generative
will, and as such his existence and will is an extension of the will and
existence of Allah (awj). This concurrence entails no contradiction and
thus is not impossible for it is not the concurrence of two complete
causes in the generation of one effect.

At the same time, the human will and volition has not been denied to
him. Rather, because Allah (awj) has given him the permission to will
and choose, he determines what path he wants to follow and in doing so
ends up willing what Allah (awj) has willed.

If the human being disobeys and violates the legislative will of Allah
(awj), doing what Allah (awj) dislikes, he has done so on his own accord
and as such, has headed towards an awful fate. But this disobedience is
not a violation of Allah’s (awj) generative will, for He has, through
His own generative will, created the human being willing and volitional,
and as such has given him the capacity to defy His legislative will.
Accordingly, this defiance does not signify the human being’s overcoming
the will and power of Allah (awj). He can deprive the hopeless human
being of his will and power whenever He desires and it is concerning
this that He says,

***“Do those who commit misdeeds suppose that they can out-manoeuvre Us?
Evil is the judgment that they make.”***[^12]

To sum up: In the realm of generative will and the act of Divine
legislation itself, the human will cannot exert any influence
whatsoever, and hence the question of the concurrence of Divine will and
human will does not arise at this stage.

When it comes to the level of abiding by the legislative will, the human
will is ontologically an extension of Divine will. If he obeys the
Divine injunctions, he has on his own accord aligned his desire to what
Allah (awj) desires and as such, is pleased with the Divine generative
will, and with this correct decision, has secured a felicitous end for
himself. If he disobeys, if he does not make Allah’s (awj) desire his
own desire, he has acted only to his own disadvantage, without in any
way damaging the creation or harming Allah (awj) for Allah (awj) has
through His generative will, granted him the capacity to defy and
disobey but has at the same time, through His legislative will, warned
him of the consequences.

Thus by making the wrong decision of disobeying Allah (awj), he has
incurred Allah’s (awj) wrath. Although, he might arrogantly think that
in doing so he has overcome Allah’s (awj) will, the reality of the
matter is that the creature can never, even while disobeying, escape the
Divine domain, power, and will. The creature is always in need of that
Most Sacred Essence.

It is to this that the following verse speaks:

***“Whatever good befalls you is from Allah; and whatever ill befalls
you is from yourself.”***[^13]

Although in essence, everything is from Allah (awj) for nothing can
occur without His consent, but the issue is that He does not deem
misdeeds and evil appropriate for the human being, and it is the human
being himself who, in misusing his free will, chooses evil.[^14]

However we do admit that to conceive and comprehend the relationship of
human volition to Divine will- i.e. the immutable cosmological system-
is difficult. It is precisely for this reason that those who are not in
touch with Divine revelation and the school of Ahlul Bayt (ع) have
strayed to antipodal extremes in this regard.

One group, the Mu’tazilites, concluded that the human being has been
granted absolute autonomy, and as such is the only agent involved in his
actions—and for this they have been termed *The Delegators*[^15];
another group, the Ash’arites, saw the human being as lacking any role
in conducting his actions, hence being compelled in his actions, without
free will and the right to choose- and for this they have been termed
*The Compelled Ones*. But the truth and the right path is the
intermediate path, that is, neither the theory of compulsion nor
delegation.

The generative will of Allah (awj) concurs with human will in a vertical
manner. If the human being obeys, the Divine legislative will and the
human will are in harmony, but if he disobeys, his will and action are
despised by Allah (awj). But the latter does not imply liberation from
Divine dominion and sovereignty or the overcoming of the will and power
of Allah (awj). Such disobedience only signifies being removed from
Divine mercy as a result of the individual’s own misuse of volition and
free will.

[^1]: Surat al-Takwir (81), Verse 29:  وَمَا تَشَآءُونَ إِلاَّ أَنْ
يَشَآءَ اللٌّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ  also see Surat al-Insan (76),
Verses 30-31:  وَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشَآءَ اللٌّهُ إِنَّ
اللٌّهَ كَانَ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً. يُدْخِلُ مَنْ يَشَآءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ
وَالظَّالِمِينَ أَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَاباً أَلِيماً 

[^2]: Surat al-Najm (53), Verse 39:  وَ أَنْ لَّيسَ لِلإِنْسَانِ إِلاَّ
مَا سَعـى

[^3]: Surat al-Fussilat (41), Verse 46:  مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً
فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَ مَنْ أَسَآءَ فَعَلَيْهَا وَ مَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلاَّمٍ
لِلْعَبِيدِ 

[^4]: For this would mean that the human being is independent of Allah
(awj) in his existence. (Tr.)

[^5]: The reason why this is being said here is that those who have
refuted the concurrence of Divine will with human will have first
assumed that the only manner in which two causes can concur is if they
were parallel in their agency and causation. And because this type of
concurrence is obviously impossible, they concluded that the human being
is independent in his will. While their mistake stems from their lack of
conceiving two or more causes related in a vertical and hierarchical
manner; i.e. cause B receiving its existence and efficacy from cause A;
and cause C in turn receiving its existence and efficacy from cause B,
and so on. (Tr.)

[^6]: Surat al-Fussilat (41), Verse 11:  ثُمَّ اسْـتَوَى إِلـى
السَّمَآءِ وَهِيَ دُخَانٌ فَقَالَ لَهَا وَلِلأَرْضِ اِئْـتِـيَا طَوْعاً
أَوْ كَرْهاً قَالَـتَا أَتَـيْـنَا طَائِعِينَ 

[^7]: Surat Maryam (19), Verse 93:  إِنْ كُلُّ مَنْ فِي السَّمٌوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ إِلاَّ آتِي الرَّحْمٌنِ عَبْداً 

[^8]: That is, this concept is abstracted from the act of legislation
itself and externally has no instance but the legislation itself.
However, the human mind abstracts it from the concept of legislation
itself and treats it as a different entity, although externally both
concepts refer to the same thing. (Tr.)

[^9]: Surat al-Shura (42), Verse 22:  وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ فِي رَوْضَاتِ الْجَنَّاتِ لَهُمْ مَا يَشَآءُونَ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِمْ ذٌلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ الكَبِيرُ  Also see: Surat Qaf (50),
Verse 35; Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 31; Surat al-Zumar (39), Verse 34;
Surat al-Furqan (25), Verse 16

[^10]: Surat al-Bayyinah (98), Verse 8:  جَزَاؤُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ
جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا
أَبَداً رَضِيَ اللٌّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ ذٌلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِيَ
رَبَّهُ  Also see: Surat al-Mujadalah (58), Verse 22; Surat al-Tawbah
(9), Verse 100; Surat al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 119

[^11]: Surat al-Insan (76), Verse 30; Surat al-Takwir (81), Verse 29: 
وَمَا تَشَآءُونَ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشَآءَ اللٌّهُ

[^12]: Surat al-’Ankabut (29), Verse 4:  أَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ
يَعْمَلُونَ السَّـيِِّـئَاتِ أَنْ يَسْبِقُونَا سَآءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ 
Also see: Surat al-Zumar (39), Verse 51:  فَأَصَابَهُمْ سَيِّـئَاتُ مَا
كَسَبُوا وَالَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْ هٌؤُلاَءِ سَيُصِيبُهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ
مَا كَسَبُوا وَمَا هُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ 

[^13]: Surat al-Nisa\` (4), Verse 79:  مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ
فَمِنَ اللٌّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ سَيِّـئَّةٍ فَمِنْ نَفْسِكَ... 

[^14]: Surat al-Nisa\` (4), Verses 78-79:  ...وَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ
حَسَنَةٌ يَقُولُوا هٌذِهِ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللٌّهِ وَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ
سَيِّـئَّةٌ يَقُولُوا هٌذِهِ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ قُلْ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ
اللٌّهِ ... مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنَ اللٌّهِ وَمَــا أَصَابَكَ
مِنْ سَيِّئَّةٍ فَمِنْ نَفْسِكَ... 

[^15]: The name arises from the fact that they assume that Allah (awj)
has delegated His authority to the human being in the realm of his
volitional actions and so He does not take part in human actions. (Tr.)


