Question 30: Possbility of Decline in Imam al-Mahdis government
===============================================================

**Question:** Historically, we see that every civilization eventually
declines. Is it not possible that the government of Imam al-Mahdi (ع)
will also decline? In particular, might not people eventually become
discontent with his government?

Such a decline in the government of Imam al-Mahdi (ع) is inconceivable.

Governments decline for one of two reasons: either corruption creeps
into the system and the government ceases to be just; or forces outside
the government act treacherously by turning the people against the
government. Since neither cause can exist in Imam al-Mahdi’s (ع)
government, it will not decline.

Governments fail for one of two reasons:

1. The foundations of the government break down due to injustice and
deviation from within. This leads either to a revolt of the people
against the government’s injustice or to the invasion of foreign powers.
Historically, many governments have fallen for this very reason. For
instance, in Islamic history, the Sasanian Empire fell in the wake of
the Muslim expansion; the Umayyad dynasty fell to the ‘Abbasids; and the
‘Abbasids, in turn, fell to the Mongols.

In each case, injustice had reached such a level that the people felt no
sense of loyalty to their rulers that they should defend their
government. Rather, they sought succour in the invading forces.
Similarly, the Islamic revolution in Iran stemmed from the injustices of
the Pahlavi government. In general, all unjust governments eventually
fall either because of internal revolt or at the hands of an invader who
finds little or no resistance from a people who are disenchanted with
their rulers.

2. The people are deceived and tricked into disenchantment with their
ruler. The government of Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) faced just such
difficulties. The propaganda with which his political enemies bombarded
his people and the wars that he was forced to fight prevented his people
from being able to think clearly about the issues at hand.

In addition, in the years leading up to his caliphate, corruption had
crept into the upper classes of society to such an extent that the Imam
(ع) was reluctant to accept the caliphate since he knew the
insurmountable difficulties that such corruption would cause. In
particular, he knew that the people, after seeing the decadence of high
society, and the discrepancy between Islamic teachings and what was
being practiced by the upper echelons, would not have the resolve to
defend his government. The inevitable result of these conditions was the
assassination of the Imam (ع) and the decline of his government.

In the government of Imam al-Mahdi (ع), the first factor is
inconceivable because like Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) government, his
government will be absolutely just. For several reasons the second
factor will also not come into play. For one thing, the people will have
an increased level of Islamic awareness. Secondly, his government will
have control over all forms of media and information technology; hence
his enemies will not be able to incite the people against him. Lastly,
at that time all aspects of Islamic law will have been put in place. In
particular, enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, will be
practiced in its full manifestation, so neither corruption will creep
into society, nor will the people become disenchanted with the rule of
Allah (awj).

It should be kept in mind however, that at that time Satan will be as
active as ever. He will be successful in deceiving some; however the
vast majority of people will follow the truth for the aforementioned
reasons.

Brief Answer
------------

Detailed Answer
---------------


