Question 31: Difference in blood money between man and a woman in Islamic Jurisprudence
=======================================================================================

**Question:** Why is the blood money of a woman half of that of a man?

All of the laws of Islam are based upon certain benefits. Every law has
wisdom. If something has been prohibited in Islam it is because it is
harmful. If something has been made obligatory it is because it has a
benefit. Of course perhaps it is not possible for us to find out all of
the benefits and harms of all the laws and prohibitions, but if we rely
on a sound intelligence and base ourselves on realities and of course on
the sayings of the Infallibles (ع) we can understand some of these
things.

In regards to the blood money of a woman being half of that of a man
there is definitely some wisdom behind such a law to which we will
briefly refer:

1. If Islam was purely a materialistic school of thought and if the
foundations of its laws were monetary and economic matters and, given
this, women’s blood money was half of that of men’s, then this objection
would be proper that why is the value of women half of that of men and
why have they valued women at half the price of men. But these are not
the foundations that are used and in Islam the value of human beings is
according to their Spirit and their spiritual qualities. In Islam that
which is valuable is piety. Human beings can be like Musa (ع) who spoke
with Allah (awj) or be like Maryam (ع) who used to receive heavenly
revelations. In regards to traversing the path of felicity and obtaining
spiritual positions, men and women are equal. There is no difference
between them in this regard in principle, and in fact, the matter
depends upon their personal ambition and effort. But blood money is an
economic matter. Blood money is a matter related to the physical aspect
of human beings, therefore in this regard there is no difference between
the blood money of a prominent member of the Islamic society and an
average labourer.

2. Generally speaking we can say that human beings, whether they be men
or women, have three dimensions to their existence:

a. The human or divine dimension: In this dimension there is no
difference between men and women. The path to human and divine
perfection is open to both of them and both of them can progress in
these regards as far as they want. In verse number 97 of Surat al-Nahl
(16), Allah (awj) says:

***“Whoever amongst you whether they be man or woman and they have faith
without a doubt we will give them pure life in this world and in the
hereafter we will give them a reward in recompense to their good
deeds.”***

In Surat al-Ahzab (33), the same matter has also been alluded to.

b. The intellectual dimension: According to the intellectual dimension
there is no difference between men and women. Islam does not believe
that there is a difference between men and women as regards the gaining
of knowledge. “Gaining knowledge is an obligation on both men and
women.” The Qur\`anic verses that have been revealed as regards
knowledge and learning have not discriminated between men and women and
these verses are almost 40 in number.

c. The economic dimension: In Islam men and women differ from each other
in the economic responsibilities that been placed on each of their
shoulders. These responsibilities have been divided according to the
bodily and psychological strengths and weaknesses of both. Principally
women are weaker than men in economic matters.

Even in this age and in societies that have apparently not discriminated
between men and women, the economic output of women is less than that of
men. The truth of the matter is that women must become pregnant and
after giving birth they must breastfeed their children. They
subsequently must take care of their children. The pregnancy and
breastfeeding takes quite a bit of time and energy from the women.

Even though this is a valuable matter in itself, it is not an economic
matter. There is no economic output produced by such work. From another
point of view the body of men and women differ drastically from one
another. Women have delicate bodies and they can be injured with the
slightest accident while the bodies of men are strong and generally
powerful and therefore more suited for difficult tasks. For this very
reason, many of the difficult jobs of society that require much power
have been placed in the hands of men. It is very obvious that without
men the family is more at an economic loss. It is therefore necessary
that men’s blood money be more than that of women.

3. The vacuum felt by a family with the loss of a man is far greater
than the loss felt at the absence of a woman. According to
jurisprudential and historical studies, blood money is an economical
matter. It has been legislated in order to compensate for the loss
incurred by the injured. From another point of view, in an ideal
society, which Islam attempts to create, most of the economic activity
is carried out by men.

When we look at the general economic responsibilities of men we find
that men have duties that women have been excused from. While the most
important responsibility of a woman, but not the only one, is to manage
the cornerstone of society, in other words the family, the most
important duty of man, but not the only one, is to provide for the
economic needs of the family. Aside from this, the daily expenses of the
children are upon the shoulders of the man not the woman. Therefore with
his departure some people who should be looked after find themselves at
a loss.

This vacuum must be filled by some means. It is only natural then that
the blood money of a man should be more than that of a woman. This
matter has no relation to the essence of men and women. Rather it
relates to the external accidents that are incurred by a family. When we
take into consideration all that has been just said, we can come the
conclusion that blood money is not a means by which we value men and
women. Their difference in this matter is not something to be objected
to. From another point of view the economic responsibilities of a man
necessitate that in some matters (like blood money) that are directly
related to economics a certain difference between men and women show up.
There is no difficulty in this matter.

Men are stronger than women and are capable of performing more difficult
tasks than women. Their existence provides peace and tranquillity to the
family. From another point of view, with their loss some people are left
without a helper and provider. It is therefore natural that their blood
money be more than that of women.

We conclude this answer by turning our attention to a point that is not
without subtlety and by answering two questions.

First of all, man’s blood money is double that of woman’s in the case
that the blood money should reach one third of the required portion. In
any other case, their blood money is equal. If her blood money’s being
half were a proof of her inferiority to that of man, then in all cases
it should be half. Secondly, just as men have more blood money than
women, they are also responsible to participate in the money paid to the
family of someone killed or injured by one of their family members. This
is while women are excused from such an obligation.

It is possible that someone may object by saying that in this era men
and women work side by side in the workforce. Therefore there is no
reason that in this age her blood money should be half of men’s.

In answer to this objection we can say that first of all, it is true
that women today participate in economic activities alongside men but in
no instance can they provide the security that men can provide for their
family. Secondly, there are many high paying jobs that do not suit the
fragile composition of women and are therefore exclusively for men. It
is natural that this would raise the economic status of men over women.
At the same time we can object by saying that if the economic output of
women were really equal to that of men as some of these countries that
are advocates of equality between the sexes claim, then why is it that
most of the dignitaries and managers and ministers are men?

Another objection that is likely to be raised is this: Is the fact that
the blood money of women is half of that of men a discrimination against
her in favour of men? The answer to this question is that Islam is a
religion of equality. To be male or female is no superiority in this
religion but in the matter of blood money there is a wisdom that
necessitates that men’s be more than that of women’s. There are laws in
Islam that are to the benefit of women based on a certain wisdom that
lies in such laws. For example if a man becomes an apostate, according
to the view of many jurisprudents he is to be killed even though he may
repent afterwards. But if a woman becomes an apostate and repents then
she is returned to her ordinary life. Or for instance if a man becomes
insane after getting married the wife has a right to end the marriage,
while if the same thing happens to a woman the man has no such right.

Brief Answer
------------

According to jurisprudential and historical studies, blood money is an
economical matter. It has been legislated in order to compensate for the
loss incurred by the injured. From another point of view, in an ideal
society, which Islam attempts to create, most of the economic activity
is carried out by men. When we look at the general economic
responsibilities of men we find that men have duties that women have
been excused from. While the most important responsibility of a woman,
but not the only one, is to manage the cornerstone of society, in other
words the family, the most important duty of man, but not the only one,
is to provide for the economic needs of the family.

When we pay attention to this matter we can easily conclude that Islam
must strengthen those matters that have financial consequences for men
and amongst these matters is blood money. Men play a pivotal role in the
economic life of the family. From another point of view, blood money is
related to the physical aspect of the human being. Hence, if someone’s
body were stronger his blood money would be more. Since men are more
productive economically than women, their blood money is more than that
of women. This does not mean of course that in Islam the position and
status of a woman is less than that of a man. If blood money was related
to the worth and position of individuals, then the blood money of a
scholar or the leader of society would not be equal to that of an
average worker.

Another important point pertains to the role a man plays in the security
of his household. It is very clear that it is the man that protects the
family. This would imply that the loss inflicted on a family if the man
was not present would be far greater than if the woman was not there. In
the end it is necessary to keep this in mind that in every case the laws
that have been presented by a religion or school of thought are always
in line with the principles that that religion or school of thought has
formed in regards to that matter. It is in accordance to the sum total
of those viewpoints that the law been passed. In regards to blood money
as well, Islam has formed its law while taking into consideration the
responsibilities and rights of both men and women and the general laws
that pertain to the family system. We cannot therefore look at them in a
separately and object.

Detailed Answer
---------------


