Question 32: Difference in inheritance of women and men in Islamic Jurisprudence
================================================================================

**Question:** Why is the inheritance of women half that of men?

Before answering this question, it is necessary to remember that the
rule that states that the portion of inheritance of a man is twice that
of a woman is not true across the board. In some cases we find that men
and women take an equal sum of inheritance, like for instance the father
and the mother of the deceased who take an equal amount of inheritance.
In this case there is no difference between man and woman.

Having said this, it is necessary to address the question of why the
share of a woman’s inheritance is half of that of a man’s? Is this not a
type of favouritism?

In a tradition, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) was asked as to why
women take one portion of inheritance when we see that they are weaker
than men and they are more in need of help than them? Why is it that a
man, who is stronger than a woman and whose body is more powerful than
hers should get a double share of inheritance? Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad
as-Sadiq (ع) replied that the reason for this is that a man has more
responsibilities and he must go to war, enduring many expenses in the
process. Aside from his own expenses, a man must also take upon himself
the expenses of his spouse and children. What’s more, he must give money
to the family of a person accidentally injured by one of his family
members.[^1]

In another tradition, Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) emphasized
the fact that it is the man which must give dowry to the woman—this
being a recompense to the loss incurred by her in her inheritance[^2].

Islam’s position on inheritance is in reality to the benefit of the
woman. In the Age of Ignorance, the daughters and wives of the deceased
were deprived of inheritance and all of the wealth of the deceased went
to his sons. Islam, however, came and annulled the laws of the ignorant
times and made women amongst the inheritors of the deceased. From its
inception, Islam gave women an independence in ownership and monetary
matters, this being a matter that has only but recently entered the laws
of European nations.

Even though apparently the inheritance of a man is double that of a
woman, when we probe into the matter more thoroughly, we find that the
inheritance of a woman is two times that of a man. The responsibilities
that have been placed on the shoulders of men necessitates that they
spend half of their income on women. Any given man is obligated to spend
money on his spouse’s home, clothes, food, and other expenses, while the
cost of living of himself and his children are on his shoulders.

This responsibility of upkeep is to such an extent that even if a
woman’s social position necessitates her having a servant and she
herself does not have the means to pay for such a person, the salary of
the aforementioned servant is upon her husband.

These responsibilities are on the shoulders of men, whereas we see that
women are exempted from paying any living expenses, including their
own–whether that be clothes or food. Therefore and in all practicality,
it is woman who has more of a portion of wealth than man.

In the commentary of the Qur\`an, *Tafsir-e-Namunah*, an example has
been given that is useful in clarifying what we are trying to say.
Consider, for example, that the sum total of all the wealth of the world
is 30 billion pounds. Say that this wealth was distributed by means of
inheritance between men and women. From this amount of money, 20 billion
pounds went to men and 10 billion went to women. Since women do not have
to spend on themselves, they can save that 10 billion and become
partners with the men in the remaining 20 billion (since the portion of
men is spent on women and children). So half of the portion of men,
which is 10 billion pounds, goes to women. When we add this amount to
the portion that the women saved from before, their sum total becomes 20
billion pounds.

By taking into consideration what was just said, we can say that the
reasons that women’s portion of inheritance is less than that of men’s
are three:

**1. Dowry:** At the time of getting married, man is responsible to take
into consideration a suitable dowry for the woman. Whenever the woman
asks for it, the man is responsible to give it to her. So from the
beginning, man is religiously responsible to allot an amount of money as
the dowry of his wife. This is one of the reasons that have been alluded
to in the sayings of our Noble Imams (ع).

**2. Allowance:** In family life, aside from the fact that a man must
look after his own expenses, he is responsible to take upon himself the
expenses of his wife and children. For amongst the responsibilities of a
man is the provision of food, clothes, and shelter for his wife that is
in line with her social status. Even if a woman were to have a large
amount of wealth, she has no responsibility in this regards. Not only
does a woman have no obligation in this regards, but if she wanted to,
she could ask of a wage for the work she does at home such as
breastfeeding her children, cooking, etc.

**3. Special responsibilities of man:** Some very heavy responsibilities
have been placed on men’s shoulders; responsibilities that women have
been excused from. A good example is warfare in the path of Allah (awj).
A man must wage war with his life and his wealth. In some of the verses
of the Noble Qur\`an war by means of wealth has even been placed ahead
of war by means of life. A man must spend from his own pocket the
expenses of his going to war. Or when someone is killed by another
person, the men of the family of the culprit must pay money to the
victim’s family, but women are freed form such an expense.

As can be seen, Islam did not intend to pass laws for the benefit of man
and to the detriment of woman, or vice versa. Islam is not an advocate
of “woman’s rights,” or that of men’s. More than anything, when passing
laws Islam, has taken into consideration the eternal felicity of men,
women, their children, and society as a whole.

In any case, in line with the monetary responsibilities that it has
relegated for men, Islam has in many instances divided wealth between
men and women—such an instance being inheritance. It is not possible for
us to claim that there is discrimination in this regards. Also, the
whole corpus of the laws of Islam regarding men and women necessitate
that the laws of inheritance be a certain way. This matter does not
allow us to object to the civil laws of Islam.

In the end, it is possible for us to say that if it is true that the
expenses of the woman are upon the shoulders of the man, then what use
does woman have in hoarding a large amount of wealth? We can answer by
saying that the dowry and inheritance of the woman is like a savings
that is for her future, in case she separates from her spouse or her
spouse dies. It is so she can lead a comfortable and respected life in
case such events happen. But the reason that the expenses of the woman
is upon the man is so that she can, without any sort of mental anxiety,
raise good and pious children. In this way the family, which is the
cornerstone of society, will be filled with warmth and love.

In the end we would like to point our reader’s attention to the
following: If it should arise that circumstances necessitate that the
owner of the wealth should help out the wife or the daughters more than
his sons, then this person can do this by following the procedures laid
out in Islamic Jurisprudence. For example, if the father thinks it
prudent to help his daughter more, he can, in his lifetime, give as a
gift, some of his wealth to her. Also he can give a larger portion than
her share of inheritance by writing a specific will in this regard.

Brief Answer
------------

The fact that a woman’s inheritance is half that of a man’s has enticed
many to delve into the rationale behind this rule. In the answers that
have reached us from the leaders of religion, the following point has
been stressed: The reason that the inheritance of man is more is because
the upkeep of women is upon the shoulders of men. In other words, aside
from the fact that a man must look after himself, he is also responsible
for the upkeep and expenses of his wife and children. From another point
of view, it is the man who gives the dowry to the woman and she is the
one who takes it from him.

In reality, it is possible to say that what the woman takes in the form
of inheritance and dowry is tantamount to her savings, whereas the
portion of the inheritance of the man is spent on the expenses of his
daily life and that of his wife and children. Aside from this, certain
other responsibilities have been placed on the shoulders of a man, which
necessitate his spending money in order to carry them out.

For example a man must spend money in the way of war, or if one of his
relatives accidentally kills someone or injures someone he must pay
certain monies to the family of the victim, whereas a woman has no
responsibility in this regard. So even though what is apparent is that
the share of a man in inheritance is two times that of a woman, in all
practicality his share in the sum total of personal wealth is far less
than hers. While on the other hand, in exchange for the “excess”
inheritance, man has heavier responsibilities to shoulder than a woman.
So in brief it can be said that the inheritance of men and women being
different is so as to implement a sort of balance between the rights and
responsibilities of each group.

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 7, pg. 85: مَا بَالُ الْمَرْأَةِ الْمِسْكِينَةِ
الضَّعِيفَةِ تَأْخُذُ سَهْماً وَاحِداً وَ يَأْخُذُ الرَّجُلُ سَهْمَيْنِ
قَالَ فَذَكَرَ بَعْضُ أَصْحَابِنَا لِأَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع فَقَالَ
إِنَّ الْمَرْأَةَ لَيْسَ عَلَيْهَا جِهَادٌ وَ لاَ نَفَقَةٌ وَ لاَ
مَعْقُلَةٌ وَ إِنَّمَا ذَلِكَ عَلَى الرِّجَالِ وَ لِذَلِكَ جَعَلَ
لِلْمَرْأَةِ سَهْماً وَاحِداً وَ لِلرَّجُلِ سَهْمَيْنِ.

[^2]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i, vol. 2, pg. 570: عَنْ عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ بْنِ
سَنَانِ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ ( ع) قَالَ: قُلْتُ لِأَيِّ عِلَّةٍ
صَارَ الْمِيرَاثُ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلَ حَظِّ الأُنْثَيَينِ؟ قَالَ : لِمَا
جَعَلَ لَهَا مِنَ الصِّدَاقِ.


