Question 33: The role a person plays in obtaining his sustenance
================================================================

**Question:** What is the relationship between man’s efforts and the
sustenance that has been measured out for him?

The answer to this question can be explained in the form of two
preliminaries and one conclusion:

First Premise: The sustenance that Allah (awj) has taken upon Himself is
the following: The allotment and portion that must reach the creatures
in order for them to continue existing. Of course the Divine pledge and
the giving out of sustenance that we attribute to Allah (awj) is
different from that of creatures. If it has come in the Qur\`an that:
“The sustenance of every creature is upon Allah.”[^1] then one must not
loose sight of the fact that the sustenance of the creatures is upon
Allah (awj) and not any of His creatures. Allah (awj) is that being who
has created the realm of existence and who is the Creator of all things.

For this reason, the promise of Allah (awj) differs from the promise of
the creature that is itself part of this realm of existence and that is
under the influence of the beings of this realm. To know the actions of
Allah (awj) and His sustenance one must know the world. We are ourselves
a part of this world and have responsibilities. Of course the
responsibilities that we have with regards to sustenance - those which
the laws of nature or laws of religion have laid upon us - are just so
many minor aspects and weak manifestations of the all -pervasive
sustenance of Allah (awj).

The power of digestion that is in plants, the desires that are in
animate beings and that guide them towards food all are manifestations
of Allah’s (awj) sustenance. Ultimately, it is Allah (awj) who has taken
control of each animal by means of the sum of its desires in order for
it to go after all that it is in need of and so that it struggles and
works to satisfy these desires. Thought, work, and effort are but
preliminaries to Allah’s (awj) sustenance. Allah (awj) has created an
attraction between the sustenance and the one that partakes of the
sustenance - sending one after the other. There is a special kind of
connection between the various parts of existence that connects them
with one another.

When a person is still an infant and does not have the power to find his
own nourishment, his sustenance is provided for him. As he gradually
gains more abilities and can find his sustenance by means of his
constant pursuits, his sustenance will not be obtained so easily. For
instance his sustenance may be situated in some far off place, requiring
him to set off and find it.

As a general principle, there is some form of reciprocity between the
accessibility of sustenance, the measure of strength and ability of the
sustained being, and the amount of guidance that has been given to that
being in order to reach the sustenance. For this very reason, man is
considered a higher and more subtle being than the plants and animals,
and that which is sufficient for the plants and animals is not
sufficient for him. The problem of his nourishment will differ from that
of the other beings. The distance between the sustenance and the one who
needs the sustenance in the human world is far greater.

Because of this, better means of survival have been put at his disposal
and his guidance has been increased. Reason, knowledge, and thought have
been given to him and revelation and prophethood have come to help him;
while certain responsibilities have been put upon him. All of these are
but dimensions of the sustenance of Allah (awj).

In a certain poem it is said that the very existence of teeth calls
forth the provision of bread for the teeth to chew on. Of course it does
not mean that having teeth is sufficient in order for the bread to be
cooked and made ready at the dinner table of a person. Rather it means
that if there were no bread, there would have been no teeth; and if
there had been no teeth, there would have been no bread.

In other words, there exists a relationship between sustenance, the one
who uses the sustenance, the means of obtaining the sustenance, the
digestive system, and the means of guidance. That Being who created man
in nature and gave him teeth, has also created bread in the realm of
nature. He has placed at his disposal thought, power, action and the
sense of responsibility. All of these are manifestations of the
sustenance of Allah (awj).

Second Premise: Sustenance and nourishment are of two kinds: That which
we seek and that which seeks us.[^2] The “sustenance that seeks” comes
after us even if we run away from it. It does not let us go, even as
escaping form the claws of death is impossible. It has been mentioned in
a hadith that: “If the son of Adam were to run from his sustenance as he
runs from his death, it would still find him, even as death will
eventually find him.”[^3] This kind of sustenance has roots in the
Providence of Allah (awj) and hence, no kind of change is possible in
it.

In connection with this matter the late sage, ’Allamah Tabataba\`i has
said, “Sustenance and the one who consumes the sustenance are necessary
corollaries of one another. It is meaningless to assume that the one who
needs sustenance is after his nourishment in his life, but there be no
sustenance for him. It is also impossible that there be sustenance, but
there be nobody to use that sustenance or that the sustenance be more
than his needs. For this reason sustenance is part of the predetermined
Providence of Allah.”

The “sought after sustenance” is the sustenance that has been measured
out for the seeker. If we seek it and fulfil all the necessary
conditions and actions that are necessary for obtaining it, we will
reach it. In reality the effort we make in order to reach this
sustenance is a partial cause. If it is put alongside the other causes
that lie in the unseen world, we will reach it for sure. In this
connection our Master, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (ع) has said, “Seek after sustenance, for certainly it is
guaranteed for the one who goes after it.”[^4]

Just as effort without a guarantee of its giving fruit is meaningless, a
guaranteed sustenance without any accompanying effort is also impossible
(in the “sought after sustenance”). For this very reason, from amongst
the two kinds of sustenance that Allah (awj) has allocated for His
servants, He has made one unconditional (the “sustenance that seeks”),
and one conditional (“the sought after sustenance”).

The unconditional sustenance seeks man in all conditions and until the
scales of man are not filled to their capacity with this kind of
sustenance, his death will not come. According to the saying of the
Noble Prophet (ص), “No one will die until his sustenance has been
completed.”[^5]

The surety of the “sought after sustenance”, however, is conditioned by
the performance of certain actions and by taking into account certain
matters. Without fulfilling these conditions and without putting them
into order, this sustenance does not come into being.

The “sustenance that seeks”, the one that is certain, is the sustenance
that determines our very existence, our lifespan, the possibilities open
to us, the environment we were put in, our family, and our predisposed
talents. This kind of sustenance gives rise to the power, energy, and
intelligence that we need in order to struggle and perform work; and it
is in the wake of these that the door for the second kind of
sustenance—the conditioned sustenance—opens up for us.

In order to obtain the “sought after sustenance,” everyone must not only
make their own efforts, but they must also raise his hands up towards
Allah (awj) in utter poverty as it were. The nursing infant whose effort
and struggle comes in the form of crying, pouting, and screaming will
reach the milk of his mother by means of these kinds of actions. Yet
when this child grows up and sets higher goals for himself, his effort
and struggle will transform. It will change into thinking, working, and
physical exertions. Moreover, the quality of his sustenance will also
change.

To summarize, we may say that it is after the unconditional, certain
“sustenance that seeks” that effort, struggle, work and action are
created, and following this effort and desire the “sought after
sustenance” comes into being. The certain sustenance is incapable of
change or increase and decrease but the “sought after sustenance” is
capable of being increased or decreased.

As to the latter, neither does the greediness of the greedy person make
it come about, nor does the sadness of the lazy one prevent it from
reaching us. However it can be increased or decreased given the right
conditions and if its prerequisites are met. A person asked the Noble
Prophet (ص), “I wish that my sustenance be increased.” The Noble Prophet
replied, “Keep yourself in the state of ablution so that your sustenance
be increased.”[^6]

Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said, “One whose intentions are pure, his
sustenance will be increased.”[^7]

Therefore it is necessary for us to make effort and to seek the best and
safest means for reaching our sustenance, to use our faculties, and to
trust in Allah (awj) who is the creator of this path. All this after
having understood the relationship between sustenance and the one who
needs it, and after having known that the means for obtaining sustenance
have also been created, and after having realized that the
responsibility for obtaining sustenance has been placed upon us.

Brief Answer
------------

There are two kinds of sustenance. There is a sustenance that we go
after and a sustenance that comes after us. In the traditions, the
sustenance that comes after us is called “the sustenance that seeks,”
and the sustenance that we seek has been named “the sought after
sustenance.” The first is certain and is the sustenance that determines
our very existence, our lifespan, the possibilities open to us, the
environment we were put in, our family, and our predisposed talents.
This kind of sustenance gives rise to the power, energy, and
intelligence that we need in order to struggle and perform work; and it
is in the wake of these that the door for the second kind of sustenance-
the conditioned sustenance- opens up for us.

In order to obtain the “sought after sustenance,” everyone must not only
make their own efforts, but they must also raise their hands up towards
Allah (awj) in utter poverty as it were. The nursing infant whose effort
and struggle comes in the form of crying, pouting, and screaming will
reach the milk of his mother by means of these kinds of actions. Yet
when this child grows up and sets higher goals for himself, his effort
and struggle will transform. It will change into thinking, working, and
physical exertions. Moreover, the quality of his sustenance will also
change.

In conclusion, we may say that it is only after the certain outcome of
the “sustenance that seeks”—which is certain and unconditional—and after
due efforts are made and the human will-power is engaged that the
“sought after sustenance” comes into being. The certain sustenance is
incapable of change or increase and decrease, but the “sought after
sustenance” is capable of being increased or decreased, depending upon
the order, quality, and composure of the actions that precede it- being
counted as amongst its prerequisites.

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: Surat Hud (11), Verse 6: } وَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الأَرْضِ إِلاَّ
عَلَى اللَّهِ رِزْقُهَا وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا
كُلٌّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ {

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter 31: وَاعْلَمْ يَا بُنَيَّ أَنَّ الرِّزْقَ
رِزْقَانِ: رِزْقٌ تَطْلُبُهُ، وَرِزْقٌ يَطْلُبُكَ فَإِنْ أَنْتَ لَمْ
تَأْتِهِ أَتَاكَ.

[^3]: Muntakhab Mizan al-Hikmah, no. 2564: لَوْ أََنَّ ابْنَ آدَمَ فَرَّ
مِنْ رِزْقِهِ كَمَا يَفِرُّ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ لَأَدْرَكَهُ كَمَا يُدْرِكُهُ
الْمَوْتُ.

[^4]: Muntakhab Mizan al-Hikmah, no. 2555: أُطْلُبُوا الرِّزْقَ
فَإِنَّهُ مَضْمُونٌ لِْطَالِبِهِ.

[^5]: Muntakhab Mizan al-Hikmah, no. 2561: عَنْ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ ( ص):
...أَنَّهُ لَنْ تَمُوتَ نَفْسٌ حَتَّى تَسْتَكْمِلَ رِزْقَهَا...

[^6]: Muntakhab Mizan al-Hikmah, no. 2574: عَنْ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ ( ص)
لَمَّا قِيلَ لَهُ: أُحِبُّ أَنْ يُوْسَعَ عَلَيَّ فِي رِزْقِي - يَدُمْ
عَلى الطَّهَارَةِ يُوْسَعَ عَلَيْکَ فِي الرِّزْقِ.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 100, pg. 21: قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ (
ع): مَنْ حَسُنَتْ نِيَّتُهُ زِيْدَ فِي رِزْقِهِ.


