Question 34: Treatment of Illness and Supplication
==================================================

**Question:** If a person falls ill, should he seek treatment a) with a
doctor, or b) by eating dust from near Imam al-Husayn’s grave, or c)
through supplication?

Brief Answer
------------

Each of the aforementioned actions could potentially cure his illness
independently or by combining with the other two. However, the best
course is to accompany all our actions—among which are medical and
supernatural treatments—with supplication (which entails establishing a
relationship with Allah (awj) and making a direct request from him). The
reason for this is that the efficacy of a doctor’s treatment or a given
medicine or, for that matter, the intercession of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali
(ع) and the dust from near his grave, is intrinsically tied to the will
of Allah (awj) himself.

It is also important to keep in mind that the intercession of the
Prophet (ص) and his family (ع) and supplications are not solutions
limited to circumstances where one’s hope in natural means is lost. At
the same time, making use of intercession and supplications does not
imply that one should neglect natural solutions altogether because the
divine plan for this world is that things occur as per their natural
causes. Therefore, one can make use of all three aforementioned
treatments. That is to say, along with supplicating to Allah (awj) and
seeking the blessings of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع), one should refer to a
doctor and seek medical treatment so that Allah (awj) accepts the Imam’s
(ع) intercession, and thereby allows the medical treatment to confer its
desired effect.

In short, under no circumstances should one lose hope in the favour of
Allah (awj) and the intercession of the Prophet’s family. Similarly, by
no means should one cease to take advantage of the natural means at his
disposal.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Medical treatment, the intercession of saints (especially by means of
the dust from near Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali’s (ع) grave), and supplicating to
Allah (awj), are all means of treating the sick, so long as the person’s
time of death has not arrived.

Just as it is possible for each of these three treatments to act
independently by the will of Allah (awj), thereby sufficing us of the
remaining two, it is also possible that all three cures combine in order
to cure the sick. In particular, supplication could cause the Imam’s (ع)
intercession to be accepted so that the dust from near his grave confers
its healing effects. This in turn could cause the medical treatment to
have its optimal effects so that the person progresses swiftly towards
well-being.

However, it should be noted that the efficacy of medical treatments, and
even the intercession of the Imam (ع) and the dust from his grave, is
intrinsically tied to the will of Allah (awj). Therefore, as a
precondition to these other treatments, supplication to Allah (awj)
holds a special place. Supplication establishes a direct connection with
Allah (awj) and reaffirms our belief that nothing other than him can act
independently (this is known as “Allah’s unity in action” or “*al-tawhid
fil af’al)*.

It is for this reason that we have been strongly advised to begin every
action—including seeking the intercession of saints—by supplicating to
Allah (awj) for His aid, special favour, and His acceptance of their
intercession. Such advice is especially well-spoken considering the
difficulties entailed in finding a skilled doctor, diagnosing an illness
accurately, prescribing effective medicines, followed by a strenuous
recovery—all of which make seeking Allah’s (awj) aid a vital necessity.

An additional difficulty in seeking a miraculous cure through the dust
of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع), is that the efficacy of this cure requires
the following prerequisites, the observance of which is difficult in
this day and age:

1. The dust must be from within the sanctuary[^1] of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali
(ع) and must be reddish in colour.

2. Once removed from the *haram* complex, the dust must be wrapped in a
cloth so as not to be touched by those *jinn* who hold an enmity toward
the Shi’a and lay in wait for an opportunity to touch the dust thereby
neutering its miraculous effects.

3. Only a minute amount of the dust must be used.

4. It must be used with a pure intention without an inkling of doubt in
its power to heal.

5. It must be accompanied by supplications to Allah (awj) for the
acceptance of the intercession of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع).[^2]

However, not to make things seem hopeless, seeking the intercession of
Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع), the rest of the Prophet’s family, or other
saints, and seeking the blessings of the dust from each of their
respective graves, when accompanied by a pure intention, is not without
its effects, as testified to by numerous people’s experiences. It should
be noted that for prayers to be answered and for the intercession of
saints to be accepted by the will of Allah (awj), the following
conditions must be fulfilled:

1. The suppliant must be sincere and focused and should accompany his
supplication with salutations and prayers *(salawat)* for the Prophet
and his family (ع) along with heartfelt repentance for past sins.

2. He must have performed all obligatory acts of worship and must have
paid all mandatory Islamic taxes *(khums and zakat)*.

3. He must not hold any belligerence to the way of life *(sunnah)* of
the Prophet and his household (ع).

4. He must act according to the teachings of the Qur\`an.

5. He must be thankful to Allah (awj) under all circumstances.

6. He must actively fulfil his duty to enjoin the good and forbid the
evil *(al-amr bi’l ma’ruf wa’l nahyu ‘ani’l munkar)*.

7. He must accompany his prayers with the appropriate natural and
supernatural means at his disposal (that is to say, his prayers should
not issue from laziness and farfetched hopes).

8. He should have no unfulfilled obligations to people.

9. He must be wont to fulfil all promises and pledges.

Occasionally, it occurs that despite the fact that none of the
aforementioned conditions is fulfilled, a prayer is answered or the
intercession of an Imam (ع) is accepted. The philosophy behind such an
apparently unwarranted acceptance might be one of several things:

1. It might be to soften the person’s heart by showing him divine grace.

2. Perhaps it is to fulfil the divine call *(itmam al-hujjah)* upon a
person. In the extreme circumstances surrounding sickness, when all
natural means seem to fade away, the favours of Allah (awj) and in turn
the Prophet’s family (ع), increase, thereby closing the doors of doubt
to even the greatest sophist. If this person, after experiencing divine
grace, returns to his past improprieties, he will be left with no excuse
on the Day of Judgment.

3. It is also possible that Allah’s (awj) acceptance of this person’s
supplications was a reward for a past act of goodness or an act of
devotion with respect to one of Allah’s (awj) saints in such a way as to
take the place of the person’s reward in the next life.

In conclusion, it is important to keep in mind that one must not look to
prayer and intercession as a last resort to be used only when all hope
in natural causes—and in particular medical treatment—fades, only to be
forgotten when treatment is successfully achieved. This kind of
misappropriation is treated with severity in the Qur\`an and
ahadith[^3]. If one were to make such an opportunistic use of
supplication, his prayers may be answered and full health might be
restored; however, in the afterlife, he would be severely punished,
since despite experiencing divine grace, he turned away from Allah after
being cured.

On the other hand, one must never lose hope. As Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad
as-Sadiq (ع) has said, “Allah refuses to make things happen except
through (their) causes.”[^4]

Allah (awj) is the Cause of all causes, however, just as He is the Cause
of all causes, He can also destroy all causes as evidenced by the knife
that did not cut Isma’il’s (ع) throat or the fire that did not burn
Ibrahim (ع). Other times, without any material cause, Allah (awj) acts
independently through unseen causes as is evidenced by the story of the
camel of Salih(ع) and the staff of Musa (ع). In short, while we make use
of all natural causes at our disposal, it is advisable to maintain an
active relationship with Allah (awj) through supplications, and with
Allah’s (awj) friends.

[^1]: Or “Ha’ir,” a radius of about 357 metres around the shrine of the
Noble Imam.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 98, pg. 132: فَإِذَا أَكَلْتَ مِنْ طِينِ
قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ ( ع) فَقُلْ: أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ بِحَقِّ
الْمَلَكِ الَّذِي قَبَضَهَا وَ بِحَقِّ النَّبِيِّ الَّذِي خَزَنَهَا وَ
بِحَقِّ الْوَصِيِّ الَّذِي هُوَ فِيهَا أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ
آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ أَنْ تَجْعَلَ لِي فِيهِ شِفَاءً مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ وَ
عَافِيَةً مِنْ كُلِّ بَلاَءٍ وَ أَمَاناً مِنْ كُلِّ خَوْفٍ بِرَحْمَتِكَ
يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ وَ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ وَ
سَلَّمَ. وَ تَقُولُ أَيْضاً: أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَشْهَدُ أَنَّ هَذِهِ
التُّرْبَةَ تُرْبَةُ وَلِيِّكَ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ أَشْهَدُ
أَنَّهَا شِفَاءٌ مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ وَ أَمَانٌ مِنْ كُلِّ خَوْفٍ لِمَنْ
شِئْتَ مِنْ خَلْقِكَ وَ لِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ.

[^3]: Surat Luqman (31), Verse 32: } وَإِذَا غَشِيَهُمْ مَوْجٌ
كَالظُّلَلِ دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ فَلَمَّا
نَجَّاهُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ فَمِنْهُمْ مُقْتَصِدٌ وَمَا يَجْحَدُ
بِآيَاتِنَا إِلاَّ كُلُّ خَتَّارٍ كَفُورٍ { See also: Surat al-’Ankabut
(29), Verse 65; Surat Yunus (10), Verses 12, 22 & 23

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, pg. 183: عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ ( ع) أَنَّهُ
قَالَ: أَبـى اللٌّهُ أَنْ يَجْرِيَ الأَشْيَاءَ إِلاَّ بِأَسْبَابٍ...


