Question 2: Free Choice & Divine Seal & Lock upon the hearts of the Perverse
============================================================================

**Question:** Isn’t there a discrepancy between Islam’s view of the
human being as a creature endowed with free choice and assertation of
the Qur\`an that Allah (awj) shuts the hearts, ears and eyes of some to
the truth?

At the outset, we will consider two Qur\`anic verses, thereafter
elucidating the answer to the above question.

In the first verse, we read:

 ***“As for the faithless, it is the same to them whether you warn them
or do not warn them, they will not have faith. Allah*** ***has set a
seal on their hearts and their hearing, and there is a blindfold on
their sight and there is a great punishment for them.”***[^1]

In the second verse we read:

***“Allah*** ***has set a seal on their hearts, so they do not
know.”***[^2]

The meanings of Khatm, Tab’, and Qalb

*Khatm* is contrasted to *fath* (to “begin” or “start”) and means “to
complete something” or “to reach the end”. The reason why *khatm* is
translated as “sealing” is that the seal in a letter indicates its end.
A letter is sealed when it is finished, barring the addition of new
material. [^3]

*Tab‘* also denotes the act of sealing (in which sense it is close in
meaning to *khatm*) as well as sketching, imprinting, and forging metals
into coins.[^4]

*Qalb* is employed in the Qur\`an in different senses, such as soul,
heart, self, intellect, knowledge, etc.[^5]

Nevertheless, it can generally be said that the human being possesses
two types of heart: the corporeal heat and the spiritual heart. The
corporeal heart is, in physiological terminology and in the vernacular,
a muscular organ with the peculiar shape, whose function is the
circulation and purification of blood, and in most human beings rests in
the left section of the chest.

The spiritual heart is one and the same with the spirit and the psyche
of the human being. However in the ethical and gnostic terminologies and
also in the vocabulary of the Qur\`an and the hadiths, *heart* is used
in the latter sense, and as such is the conduit for the conveyance of
Divine inspirations and Revelation and the means of achieving Divine
knowledge and witnessing the epiphanies of the Truth. It is the locus of
human emotions and the root of the exalted human intentions and
aspirations.

The point in common between the two usages of *qalb* (heart) has been
expounded as follows. *Qalb* literally means change and transformation.
The muscular heart derives its name from the responsibility to change
the blood and purify it. Similarly, as human emotions and intentions are
in constant flux and change, their locus has been termed *qalb*.

Brief Answer
------------

In many verses there is mention of the unbelievers’ and hypocrites’
hearts, eyes, and ears being sealed and of the sinful and perverse being
misled. *Khatm* and *tab’* [both meaning “seal”] denote ending, stamping
a seal, imprinting, printing, and rendering things in certain shapes.

Heart in some instances denotes the particular organ of the body—i.e.,
the corporeal heart—and in other instances it is used to denote the
human spirit, soul, etc.—the psychic and spiritual heart.

Allah’s (awj) sealing the spiritual and inward hearts of some human
beings indicates their inability to be guided, their hearts being shut
to the understanding and comprehension of Divine knowledge and their
failure to turn to good and virtue.

The sealing of their hearts, ears, and eyes by Allah (awj) is the result
of their own volitional conduct and their ignoring the repeated
admonitions of Allah (awj). In addition, although their hearts, ears,
and eyes are sealed—this seal encompasses various levels and degrees. If
it is such that the darkness of sin and malice has pervaded their hearts
completely, they will never return to virtue and guidance.

Of course this does not mean that it would be impossible for them to
return to the light of faith and guidance, for the possibility of change
and transformation exists till the very brink of death. Therefore, they
are not deprived of free choice. They can by their free choice either
remain on their same perverse ways, or they can choose with a firm and
resolute decision, though it be difficult, to change their ways, and by
finding the way of guidance and hearkening to the Divine instructions,
attain to ultimate felicity.

In other words, to the extent that one’s heart is stained by the dross
of sin, one is proportionately sealed off from the path of truth and
deprived of understanding the Divine Signs and benefiting from His light
and guidance. It should also be noted that perversion and the shutting
of the heart is not exclusive to the unbelievers and the hypocrites.

Detailed Answer
---------------

### Allah’s (awj) seal on the hearts

In the Qur\`an, various terms have been used to refer to the
incorrigibility of the hearts of the unbelievers, hypocrites, and the
spiteful; among them *khatm* (sealed), *tab‘* (sealed), *sarf* (turned
away), *qufl* (locked), *marad* (ill), *rayn* (tainted), etc. Of course,
the shutting of the heart and its corruption is not exclusive to the
unbelievers and hypocrites. The heart of the human being—including the
believer—is twisted and sealed and deprived of comprehending the Divine
Signs in proportion as it is contaminated with the dross of sin.

Thus, sealing the heart refers to the shutting of this conduit for
receiving Divine knowledge and inspiration, and the means of this
sealing can be inferred from the hadiths mentioned below.

Zurarah has narrated that Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (ع) as having
said: “There is not a servant but that his heart contains a white slate.
When he commits a sin, a black dot appears on it. Thereafter, if he
repents, that black dot will disappear, but if he continues the sin, the
blackness will expand, such that it will ultimately cover the entire
whiteness. After the white slate has been entirely covered, the
possessor of that heart will never return to good and virtue. And this
is the meaning of the word of God where He says,

***‘No indeed! Rather their hearts have been sullied by what they have
been earning.’***”[^6] and [^7]

There are certain factors that cause the accumulation of dross in the
heart. In the Noble Qur\`an the following issues are enumerated as
accounting for the sealing of the heart: disbelief[^8]; heedlessness and
continuous indifference[^9]; vow-breaking and brazen sinfulness[^10];
obstinacy and distorting the Divine Word[^11]; self-willedness and
acting against one’s knowledge[^12]: causing corruption, dishonouring
family ties[^13].

Thus, the veils that cover one’s heart and the obstacles that impede the
function of the spiritual heart, hearing, and sight are the results of
one’s own volitional conduct. The Divine seal is set by way of
punishment and not gratuitously. For, there exists a necessary and
definite link between one’s conduct, intentions, and thoughts and their
effects, which is inescapable.

The reason that this scheme is attributed to Allah (awj) is that the
causal relationship between human conduct, intentions, and thoughts and
their effects is a Divinely destined and decreed process which is
immutable, except in cases where other factors—such as repentance,
Divine alerts, tribulations, or the help of a Possessor of the Breath,
i.e., a friend of Allah (awj)—affect the human being, bringing about his
spiritual transformation, purging his heart of the dross of sin, and
once again rejuvenating him with the capacity to be guided.

In other words, Divine destiny and decree are but a part and parcel of
the regulations governing the cosmos and the necessity of an effect
following its complete cause. And in the case of the volitional acts of
the human being, will, decision, and intention are among the essential
components of the complete cause and hence are necessary to bring about
his volitional acts.

When the human being performs a certain action, its effects inescapably
leave their impression on the human soul and psyche. In this light, if
the human being himself prepares the grounds for Allah (awj) sealing his
heart, by the Law of the cosmos, its effects will haunt him.

In the light of what has been said the following points can be
highlighted:

1. Allah (awj) sealing of the heart is the direct outcome of the
volitional conduct of the human being.

2. As the sealing of the heart is part of the cosmic scheme of Divine
destiny and decree, it is attributed to Allah (awj).

3. The human being whose heart has been tainted by the dross of sin can
add to his spiritual contamination by repeating the past mistakes. It
should be noted that this perpetuation of sin is on his own accord.

4. Although it is very difficult for the sinful human being whose heart
is covered with the dross of sin to return to the path of righteousness
and is very unlikely, it is not impossible. He can choose with a firm
resolution to embark on purging his heart of the darkness of sin. In
other words, if the soul and heart of the unbeliever and hypocrite
become sealed and dark and debased such that no bright space remains, he
is, to employ the words of the Qur\`an, finished and there is no hope of
his redemption. He has intentionally removed himself from the path of
guidance and light and thus has shut the door of repentance on himself.

[^1]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verses 6-7:  إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
سَوَآءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَ أَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تُنْذِرْهُمْ لاَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ. خَتَمَ اللٌّهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ وَعَلَى سَمْعِهِمْ وَعَلَى
أَبْصَارِهِمْ غِشَاوَةٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ 

[^2]: Also see Surat al-An’am (6), Verse 46; Surat al-Shura (42), Verse
24; Surat al-Jathiiyah (450), Verse 23 Surat al-Tawbah (9), Verse 93: 
إِنَّمَا السَّبِيلُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَسْتَأْذِنُونَكَ وَهُمْ أَغْنِيَاءُ
رَضُوا بِأَنْ يَكُونُوا مَعَ الْخَوَالِفِ وَطَبَعَ اللٌّهُ عَلَى
قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ 

[^3]: Also see Surat al-Nisa\` (4), Verse 155; Surat al-A’raf (7), Verse
100; Surat al-Tawbah (9), Verse 87; Surat Yunus (10), Verse 74; Surat
al-Nahl (16), Verse 108; Surat Muhammad (47), Verse 16 Majma‘ al-Bayan,
vol. 1, pg. 129

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: al-Mizan, vol. 2, pg. 223-224

[^6]: Surat al-Mutaffifin (83), Verse 14: } كَلاَّ بَلْ رَانَ عَلَى
قُلُوبِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ {

[^7]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 273: عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ ( ع) قَالَ: مَا مِنْ
عَبْدِ إِلاَّ وَفِي قَلْبِهِ نُكْتَةٌ بَيْضَاءُ، فَإِذَا أَذْنَبَ
ذَنْباً خَرَجَ فِي النُّكْتَةِ نُكْتَةٌ سَوْدَاءُ، فَإِنْ تَابَ ذَهَبَ
ذٌلِكَ السَّوَادُ وَإِنْ تَمَادى فِي الذُّنُوبِ زَادَ ذٌلِكَ السَّوَادُ
حَتَّى يُغَطِّيَ الْبَيَاضَ لَمْ يَرْجِعْ صَاحِبُهُ إِلـى خَيْرٍ أَبَداً
وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: } كَلاَّ بَلْ رَانَ عَلى
قُلُوبِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ {

[^8]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 88: } وَقَالُوا قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌٌ
بَلْ لَعَنَهُمْ اللٌّهُ بِكُفْرِهِمْ فَقَلِيلاً مَا يُؤْمِنُونَ {

[^9]: Surat al-A‘raf (7), Verse 179: } وَلَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ
كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنسِ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لاَ يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا
وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لاَ يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ
بِهَا أُوْلٌئِكَ كَالأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ أُوْلٌئِكَ هُمُ
الْغَافِلُونَ {

[^10]: Surat al-Ma\`idah (5), Verse 13: } فَبِمَا نَقْضِهِمْ
مِيثَاقَهُمْ لَعَنَّاهُمْ وَجَعَلْنَا قُلُوبَهُمْ قَاسِيَةً يُحَرِّفُونَ
الْكَلِمَ عَنْ مَوَاضِعِهِ وَنَسُوا حَظًّا مِمَّا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ وَلاَ
تَزَالُ تَطَّلِعُ عَلَى خَائِنَةٍ مِنْهُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِنْهُمْ
فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاصْفَحْ إِنَّ اللٌّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ { also
Surat al-A‘raf (7), Verse 102: } وَمَا وَجَدْنَا ِلأَكْثَرِهِمْ مِنْ
عَهْدٍ وَإِنْ وَجَدْنَا أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَفَاسِقِينَ {

[^11]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verses 67 & 74: } وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَى
لِقَوْمِهِ إِنَّ اللٌّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَنْ تَذْبَحُوا بَقَرَةً قَالُوا
أَتَتَّخِذُنَا هُزُوًا قَالَ أَعُوذُ بِاللٌّهِ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنَ
الْجَاهِلِين { } ثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذٌلِكَ فَهِيَ
كَالْحِجَارَةِ أَوْ أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً وَإِنَّ مِنَ الْحِجَارَةِ لَمَا
يَتَفَجَّرُ مِنْهُ الأَنْهَارُ وَإِنَّ مِنْهَا لَمَا يَشَّقَّقُ
فَيَخْرُجُ مِنْهُ الْمَاءُ وَإِنَّ مِنْهَا لَمَا يَهْبِطُ مِنْ خَشْيَةِ
اللٌّهِ وَمَا اللٌّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ {

[^12]: Surat al-Jathiyah (45), Verse 23: } أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ
إِلٌهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللٌّهُ عَلَى عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَى
سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَى بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً فَمَنْ يَهْدِيهِ
مِنْ بَعْدِ اللٌّهِ أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ {

[^13]: Surat Muhammad (47), Verse 22: } فَهَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِنْ
تَوَلَّيْتُمْ أَنْ تُفْسِدُوا فِي الأَرْضِ وَتُقَطِّعُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ {


