Question 40: Kiramah (Magnanimity): Stations and Meanings
=========================================================

**Question:** What is magnanimity (kiramah)? How can we become
magnanimous? In Allah’s (awj) view, what stations do the magnanimous
hold?

Magnanimity means to be far away from lowliness. The soul of he who is
pure from every low attribute is called magnanimous. Magnanimity is
opposed to lowliness. To reach the highest peak of magnanimity, one must
be equipped with piety, which is staying away from anything that leads
to sin.

As the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said,
“He who is pious will achieve what he desires and Allah will make him to
dwell in the house of magnanimity; the house that is Allah’s alone. Its
ceiling is the Throne of The Lord; its brightness comes from Divine
Beauty; angels and the friends and companions of prophets frequent this
house.”

Brief Answer
------------

Detailed Answer
---------------

Magnanimity means to be far away from lowliness. The soul of he who is
pure from every low attribute is called magnanimous. Lowliness stands in
opposition to magnanimity.

### Magnanimity from the Infallibles’ Viewpoint

According to a saying of the Noble Prophet (ص), “The Almighty Allah is
magnanimous and he likes magnanimity.”[^1] 

As Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said:

1. “He who gives before he is asked to is magnanimous.”[^2] 

2. “The troubling times do not have an effect on the magnanimous
person’s soul.”[^3]

3. “The magnanimous person is he who stays away from what is forbidden
of him and is free from all faults.”[^4]

4. “The magnanimous person is disgusted with every thing that the low
person takes pride in.”[^5]

5. “The magnanimous person is he who uses his wealth to protect his
honour but the low person protects his wealth with his honour.”[^6]

6. “The person who fathoms the magnanimity and grandeur of the human
spirit comes to see the entire world and all that is in it as being of
little worth and consequence.”[^7]

The opposition between magnanimity and lowliness has been clearly
demonstrated by traditions of the noble Imams (ع). Magnanimity is an
ethical value. It is one of the names of Allah (awj). In contrast,
everything that distances man from Allah (awj) has its roots in
lowliness. As the Noble prophet (ص) has said, “The love of the world is
the root of every sin and the start of every transgression.”[^8]  The
world has been named dunya because it is lesser than everything.[^9] 

When we pay attention to the fact that lowliness is in opposition to
magnanimity and because the words dani, dina’at, and dunya are
etymologically from the same root (d-n-y, “to be low”), we cannot seek
magnanimity in the love of the world. This is because, as Imam ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib (ع) has said, “The world makes man abased,”[^10] and
magnanimity stands in opposition to abasement.

In order to reach the peaks of magnanimity we must arm ourselves with
the weapons of piety and stay away from every kind of worldliness. As
the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said,
“Magnanimity cannot come into existence without piety.”[^11] 

Allah (awj) says, “The most honourable amongst you with Allah is the
most pious.”[^12] 

Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) says, “Honour is piety.”[^13] He has also
stated, “Piety means to stay away from everything that causes one to
sin.”[^14] 

He has also said, “Certainly fear of Allah is the medicine for your
hearts; sight for the blindness of your spirits; the cure for the
ailments of your bodies; the rectifier of the evils of your breasts; the
purifier of the pollution of your minds; the light of the darkness of
your eyes; the consolation for the fear of your hearts and the
brightness for the gloom of your ignorance. Therefore, make obedience to
Allah the way of your life and not only your outside covering.

Make it your inner habit instead of only an outer routine, subtle enough
to enter your ribs through your heart; the guide for all your affairs;
the watering place (on the Day of Judgment); the intercessor for the
achievement of our aims; asylum for the day of your fears; the lamp of
the interior of your graves; the company of your loneliness and
deliverance from the troubles of your abodes.

Certainly, obedience to Allah is a protection against encircling
calamities, expected dangers and the flames of burning fires. Therefore,
whoever has fear of Allah, troubles remain away from him after having
been near, affairs become sweet after their bitterness, waves (of
trouble) recede from him after having crowded over him, difficulties
become easy for him after occurring, generosity rains fast over him
after there had been famine, mercy bends over him after it had been
loath, the favours of Allah spring forth on him after they been dried
and blessings descend over him in showers after being scarce.”[^15]

The Noble Qur\`an introduces man’s spirit as a noble being. If man
becomes noble, he has transcended his natural being and found his
original kernel. Because obedience to Allah (awj) is in accordance with
the kernel of man, disobedience and sin are secondary to him. Honour
however is not like this, because it is in the nature of man. Allah
(awj) says,

***“We honoured man.”***[^16]

If man was created just from dust, honour and magnanimity would not be
essential to him. Man however has both a principal and a secondary
nature. His secondary nature returns to dust and his essence is related
to Allah.

In the Noble Qur\`an, Allah (awj) attributes the spirit to himself and
the body to the earth.[^17] He doesn’t say I created man from dust and
an immaterial spirit. Rather He says, I created man from dust then blew
of My Spirit into him. Because man’s spirit pertains to the Allah the
all-Noble and the all-Honourable, it therefore has a portion of honour.
Thus the Spirit of Allah (awj) is no different from the spirit of
nobility.

As Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) has said, “Allah has enjoined you to
piety. He made it the extent of His happiness and His wish from His
servants. Therefore, fear Allah in whose presence you stand and in whose
hand is your will, and who sees all your actions and movements. If you
hide something, He knows it, and if you show it He will record it. He
uses honourable angels to record your actions. Neither do they forget to
record what deserves to be written nor do they record what does not
exist. You should remember that he who takes up piety, frees himself
from mischief, flees darkness by means of the light of guidance, Allah
places him in the way station of honour, the house that is reserved for
Allah. Its roof is the throne of Allah. Its light is the illumination of
Allah’s Greatness. Its pilgrims and friends are the angels and its
inhabitants are the Divine Prophets.”[^18]

[^1]: Muntakhab Mizan al-Hikmah, no. 5493: عَنْ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ ( ص):
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ کَرِيـمٌ يُحِبُّ الْکَرَمَ.

[^2]: Ghurar al-Hikam, no. 1389: عَنِ الإِمَامِ عَلِيٍّ ( ع):
أَلْکَرِيـمُ مَنْ سَبَقَ نَوَالُِهُ سُؤَالَهُ.

[^3]: Ibid., no. 1555: اَلنَّفْسُ الْکَرِيـمَةُ لاَ تُؤَثِِّرُ فِيهِ
الْنَکَبَاتُ.

[^4]: Ibid., no. 1565: اََلْکَرِيـمُ مَنْ تَجَنَّْبَ الْمَحَارِمَ وَ
تَنَـزََّهَ عَنِ الْعُيُوبِ.

[^5]: Ibid. no. 1771: أَلْکَرِيـمُ يزدجر عما يفتخر بِهِ الْلَئِيمُ.

[^6]: Ibid. no 2159: اَلْکَرِيـمُ مَنْ صَانَ عِرْضَهُ بِمَالِهِ، وَ
اللَّئِيمُ مَنْ صَانَ مَالَهُِ بِعِرْضِهِ.

[^7]: Ibid. no. 9130: مَنْ کَرُمَتْ نَفْسَهُ صَغُرَتِ الدُّنْيَا فَي
عَيْنِهِ.

[^8]: Ibid., no. 2194: حُبُّ الدُّنْيَا أَصْلُ کُلِّ مَعْصِيَةٍ وَ
أَوَّلُ کُلِّ ذَنْبٍ.

[^9]: Ibid., no. 2121: إِنَّمَا سُمِّيَتِ الدُّنْيَا دُنْياً لأَنَّهَا
أَدْنَـی مِنْ کُلْ شَيْءٍ...

[^10]: Ibid., no. 2192: الدُّنْيَا تَذِلُّ.

[^11]: Nahjul Balaghah, short saying no. 113: لاَ کَرَمَ کَالتَّقْوى.

[^12]: Surat al-Hujurat (49), Verse 13:

[^13]:  إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ. إِنَّ اللٌّهَ
عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ  Ghurar al-Hikam, no. 6664: لاَ عِزَّ کَالطَّاعَةِ.

[^14]: Ibid., no. 6683: التَّقْوَی أنْ يَتَّقِیْ الْمَرْءُ کُلّمَا
يُؤْثِمُهُ.

[^15]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 192: ...فَإِنَّ تَقْوَى اللَّهِ دَوَاءُ
دَاءِ قُلُوبِكُمْ وَ بَصَرُ عَمَى أَفْئِدَتِكُمْ وَ شِفَاءُ مَرَضِ
أَجْسَادِكُمْ وَ صَلاَحُ فَسَادِ صُدُورِكُمْ وَ طُهُورُ دَنَسِ
أَنْفُسِكُمْ وَ جِلاَءُ عَشَا أَبْصَارِكُمْ وَ أَمْنُ فَزَعِ جَأْشِكُمْ
وَ ضِيَاءُ سَوَادِ ظُلْمَتِكُمْ فَاجْعَلُوا طَاعَةَ اللَّهِ شِعَاراً
دُونَ دِثَارِكُمْ وَ دَخِيلًا دُونَ شِعَارِكُمْ وَ لَطِيفاً بَيْنَ
أَضْلاَعِكُمْ وَ أَمِيراً فَوْقَ أُمُورِكُمْ وَ مَنْهَلًا لِحِينِ
وُرُودِكُمْ وَ شَفِيعاً لِدَرَكِ طَلِبَتِكُمْ وَ جُنَّةً لِيَوْمِ
فَزَعِكُمْ وَ مَصَابِيحَ لِبُطُونِ قُبُورِكُمْ وَ سَكَناً لِطُولِ
وَحْشَتِكُمْ وَ نَفَساً لِكَرْبِ مَوَاطِنِكُمْ فَإِنَّ طَاعَةَ اللَّهِ
حِرْزٌ مِنْ مَتَالِفَ مُكْتَنِفَةٍ وَ مَخَاوِفَ مُتَوَقَّعَةٍ وَ أُوَارِ
نِيرَانٍ مُوقَدَةٍ فَمَنْ أَخَذَ بِالتَّقْوَى عَزَبَتْ عَنْهُ
الشَّدَائِدُ بَعْدَ دُنُوِّهَا وَ احْلَوْلَتْ لَهُ الْأُمُورُ بَعْدَ
مَرَارَتِهَا وَ انْفَرَجَتْ عَنْهُ الْأَمْوَاجُ بَعْدَ تَرَاكُمِهَا وَ
أَسْهَلَتْ لَهُ الصِّعَابُ بَعْدَ إِنْصَابِهَا وَ هَطَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ
الْكَرَامَةُ بَعْدَ قُحُوطِهَا. وَ تَحَدَّبَتْ عَلَيْهِ الرَّحْمَةُ
بَعْدَ نُفُورِهَا وَ تَفَجَّرَتْ عَلَيْهِ النِّعَمُ بَعْدَ نُضُوبِهَا وَ
وَبَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ الْبَرَكَةُ بَعْدَ إِرْذَاذِهَا...

[^16]: Surat al-Isra\` (17), Verse 70:  وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي
آدَمَ... 

[^17]: Surat Sad (38), Verses 71-72:  إِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ
لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ طِينٍ. فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ
وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي... 

[^18]: Nahjul Balaghah, sermon 183: ...وَ أَوْصَاكُمْ بِالتَّقْوَى وَ
جَعَلَهَا مُنْتَهَى رِضَاهُ وَ حَاجَتَهُ مِنْ خَلْقِهِ فَاتَّقُوا
اللَّهَ الَّذِي أَنْتُمْ بِعَيْنِهِ وَ نَوَاصِيكُمْ بِيَدِهِ وَ
تَقَلُّبُكُمْ فِي قَبْضَتِهِ إِنْ أَسْرَرْتُمْ عَلِمَهُ وَ إِنْ
أَعْلَنْتُمْ كَتَبَهُ قَدْ وَكَّلَ بِذَلِكَ حَفَظَةً كِرَاماً لاَ
يُسْقِطُونَ حَقّاً وَ لاَ يُثْبِتُونَ بَاطِلًا وَ اعْلَمُوا أَنَّهُ مَنْ
يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجاً مِنَ الْفِتَنِ وَ نُوراً مِنَ
الظُّلَمِ وَ يُخَلِّدْهُ فِيمَا اشْتَهَتْ نَفْسُهُ وَ يُنْزِلْهُ
مَنْزِلَ الْكَرَامَةِ عِنْدَهُ فِي دَارٍ اصْطَنَعَهَا لِنَفْسِهِ
ظِلُّهَا عَرْشُهُ وَ نُورُهَا بَهْجَتُهُ وَ زُوَّارُهَا مَلاَئِكَتُهُ وَ
رُفَقَاؤُهَا رُسُلُه...


