Question 41: Pure Wine in the Qur’an
====================================

**Question:** What is the “sharaban tahuran” mentioned in the Qur\`an
(sometimes translated as “pure wine”)?

“Sharab” means something which can be drunk. It has been used in the
Qur\`an with this meaning.

***“Many fruits and drinks are at their disposal.”***[^1]

Allah (awj) also says,

***“He sends down water from the sky from which you drink.”***[^2]

The word “Tahur” means that which is in itself pure and uncontaminated
and which also makes other things pure, just as He says in the Qur\`an,

***“We sent down purifying water from heaven.”***[^3]

We can gather from various verses that in heaven there are various kinds
of drinks that are pure[^4] and refreshing. The liquids that flow in the
riverbeds of heaven differ from the drinks of this world not only in
their substance but also in their qualities. This is because the rivers
of this world only flow with water and after a while their water becomes
rancid. But the rivers of heaven are special in both regards.

The Noble Qur\`an points to four kinds of liquid that flow in four
different riverbeds in heaven: the river of water that quenches thirst;
the river of milk that satiates hunger; the river of honey that gives
pleasure and strength; and the river of wine for happiness.[^5] These
liquids have been created in such a way that the passing of time does
not corrupt them. In other verses an indication is made to a drink
called *“Rahiq Makhtum”*[^6] or that which is mixed with camphor[^7] or
zanjabil[^8]. In one verse mention is made of a pure drink[^9] that the
Lord will give; the *saqi*, or cupbearer, being Allah (awj) himself.

We can summarize the viewpoints of Qur\`anic commentators regarding the
special “wine” of heaven into three basic views:

1. The meaning of “pure drink” is a type of drink which the people of
heaven drink after eating heavenly food. It cleans all inner wastes.
Only perspiration is excreted by the body which gives off a beautiful
fragrance. This is a materialistic interpretation of the blessings of
heaven with the difference that what is found there is better and more
long-lasting than what is found here. The traditions[^10] and verses of
the Qur\`an have described the drinks of heaven in the most beautiful of
ways with the most extraordinary cupbearers who revolve around the
people of heaven and give them an intensely white drink in which there
is no corruption of the mind and by which they do not become
inebriated.[^11]

2. The meaning behind the aforementioned drink is spiritual blessings.
In the Qur\`anic commentary, *al-Mizan*, there are indications that this
“pure drink” cleans one spiritually from forgetfulness of Allah (awj)
and removes the curtains and barriers between us and Him.

As narrated from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع), “When the
believer drinks the ‘pure drink’ he forgets everything other than Allah
and turns solely towards his Master.”[^12] In the Qur\`anic commentary,
*Ayab al-Bayan*, it is written that the “pure drink” cleans the hearts
of the good from evil attributes and bad ethical traits and from the
imaginary desires and from all sadness and misery.

In a narration from Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (ع), he mentions that
“When the believers drink from it Allah cleans their hearts from
envy.”[^13]

Some great personalities have said that since drawing ourselves in the
love of Allah (awj) and cutting off all ties from other than Allah (awj)
is the ultimate purity, everything which lacks that, lacks the quality
of purity. This is a general principle and is one of the pearls of
wisdom of the noble family of the Prophet (ع). Its message has been
communicated by Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) when he said: “This
drink cleans their bodies and their souls from other than that Pure
Essence. It is only That Noble Essence of Allah and His remembrance that
cleans man from impurities.”[^14]

3. It can be gathered from some Qur\`anic commentaries that they have
attempted to combine the above two viewpoints. They say that since man
is a combination of lowly mud and the Spirit of Allah (awj), he needs
not only material sustenance but also spiritual blessings.

Just as the spiritual wayfaring of people differs, so do the rewards
they receive in heaven. Some like the good taste of the refreshing drink
of *“Rahiq Makhtum”* and are satiated by it. It is a drink which has
been sealed with the musk of immaculateness from falsehood.

The drink of those drawn near *(muqarrabin*) is the water of *tasnim*.
In a tradition from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع), it has been
stated that “Tasnim is the most blessed of drinks in heaven, from which
Muhammad and his Noble Progeny drink. The rest of the people of heaven
drink from a mixture of that.”[^15] The cupbearer of that drink is Allah
(awj) Himself[^16] and the chalice will be the truth of knowledge and
love towards Him.[^17]

From what we have said, we can understand that just as in this world
people differ in their degrees of perfection; in heaven they also have
different degrees of perfection. Their share of the blessings of
paradise is equivalent to their spiritual capacity. That is why they
have been called by different names in the Noble Qur\`an. What is
certain is that the blessings of heaven are filled with pleasure and
happiness, but not exactly like the pleasures of this world.

Brief Answer
------------

*“Sharab”* means something which can be drunk and *“tahur”* means that
which is in itself pure and uncontaminated and also makes other things
pure. We can gather from various verses that in heaven there are various
kinds of drinks that are pure and refreshing. The term *“Sharaban
Tahuran”* has been mentioned in one of these verses:

***“Their Lord will serve them with the pure drink.***”[^18]

There are three views as to what this drink is:

1. Some have said this drink is what believers will drink in paradise
after having eaten heavenly foods. This drink will clear all internal
wastes. The only thing left will appear in the form of a fragrant
perspiration on the skin.

2. Others have taken this drink to be spiritual blessings for spiritual
progress. As narrated from Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع), “When
the believer drinks the ‘pure drink’ he forgets everything other than
Allah and turns solely towards his Master.”

A narration from Imam Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (ع) says “When the
believers drink from it Allah cleans their hearts from envy.”

3. A third group has combined the previous two opinions. They have said
that since man is a beautiful combination of the dark soil and a divine
soul, he needs not only material sustenance but also spiritual
blessings.

Just as the spiritual wayfaring of people differs so too does the
rewards they receive in heaven. In some verses of the Noble Qur\`an the
drinks in paradise have been mentioned in very beautiful phrases: the
most beautiful ­cup-bearers; tall with pretty faces and deep-set eyes,
going around with chalices of a pure drink amongst the believers in
heaven; a very clear drink that gives them an indescribable feeling.
This drink does not demolish the intellect, nor do they become
intoxicated and drunk with it.

Other verses relate that the *“abrar”* will drink from a refreshing
drink called *“rahiq makhtum.”* This drink has a scented seal on it
which keeps it from any type of contamination.

The *“muqarrabuun’s”* share will be from the spring called *“tasnim.”*
The cup-bearer will be the Lord himself and the chalice will be the
truth of knowledge and love towards Him.

There is a narration from the Noble Prophet (ص) that he said “Tasnim is
the noblest drink in paradise which Muhammad (ص) and his progeny will
drink and the *Ashab Yamin* and the rest will drink from a mixture that
contains some of it.”

Thus, as people are of different levels in this world, they will be in
different levels in paradise as well. What they enjoy from paradise will
be according to their spiritual capacity. This is why the Noble Qur\`an
mentions them with different terms calling a group “ashab yamin” others
*“*abrar” and some “muqarrabun.” Their rewards will also be according to
their ranks.

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: Surat Sad (38), Verse 51:  ... يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَاكِهَةٍ
كَثِيرَةٍ وَشَرَابٍ 

[^2]: Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 10:  هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ مِنَ
السَّمَآءِ مَآءً لَكُمْ مِنْهُ شَرَابٌ 

[^3]: Surat al-Furqan (25), Verse 48:  وَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَآءِ
مَآءً طَهُوراً 

[^4]: This apparently does not refer to the legal sense of purity {i.e.
haharah opposite to nijasah}, because there cannot be filth or nijasah
in paradise. There are only different levels of perfection.

[^5]: Surat Muhammad (47), Verse 15:  مَثَلُ الْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي وُعِدَ
الْمُتَّقُونَ فِيهَا أَنْهَارٌ مِنْ مَآءٍ غَيْرِ آسِنٍ وَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ
لَبَنٍ لَمْ يَتَغَيَّرْ طَعْمُهُ وَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ خَمْرٍ لَذَّةٍ
لِلشَّارِبِـينَ وَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ عَسَلٍ مُصَفًّى ... 

[^6]: Surat al-Mutaffifin (83), Verse 25:  يُسْقَوْنَ مِنْ رَحِيقٍ
مَخْـتُومٍ 

[^7]: Surat al-Insan (76), Verse 5:  إِنَّ الأَبْرَارَ يَشْرَبُونَ مِنْ
كَأْسٍ كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا كَافُورًا 

[^8]: Surat al-Insan (76), Verse 17:  وَيُسْقَوْنَ فِيهَا كَأْسًا كَانَ
مِزَاجُهَا زَنْجَبِيلاً 

[^9]: Ibid., Verse 21:  وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ شَرَابًا طَهُورًا 

[^10]: One example is hadith no. 30 in Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, pp.
32-33.

[^11]: Surat al-Saffat (37), Verses 45-47:  يُطَــافُ عَلَيْهِمْ
بِكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ. بَيْضَاءَ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ. لاَ فِيهَا
غَوْلٌ وَلاَ هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنْـزَفُونَ  Also see Surat al-Zukhruf (43),
Verse 7

[^12]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 223: يُطَهِّرُهُمْ مِنْ کُلِّ
شَيْءٍ سِوَی اللٌّهَ.

[^13]: al-Kafi, vol. 8, pg. 96: ...وَ عَنْ يَمِينِ الشَّجَرَةِ عَيْنٌ
مُطَهِّرَةٌ مُزَكِّيَةٌ قَالَ فَيُسْقَوْنَ مِنْهَا شَرْبَةً فَيُطَهِّرُ
اللَّهُ بِهَا قُلُوبَهُمْ مِنَ الْحَسَدِ...

[^14]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 223: يُطَهِّرُهُمْ عَنْ كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ سِوَى اللٌّهَ، إذْ لاَ طاَهِرَ مِنْ تَدَنُّسٍ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ
الأَكْوَانِ، إلاَّ الله.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 8, pg. 150: اَلتَّسْنِيمُ أَشْرَفُ شَرَابٍ
فِي الْجَنَّةِ يَشْرَبُهُ مُحَمَّدٌ وَآلُ مُحَمَّدٍ صَرْفاً، وَيُمْزَجُ
لِأَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ وَسَائِرِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ.

[^16]: Surat al-Insan (76), Verse 21:  ... وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ
شَرَابًا طَهُورًا 

[^17]: Surat al-Mutaffifin (83), Verses 27-28:  وَمِزَاجُهُ مِنْ
تَسْنِيمٍ. عَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا الْمُقَرَّبُونَ 

[^18]: Surat al-Insan (71), Verse 21:  ...وَسَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ
شَرَابًا طَهُورًا... 


