Question 43: al-Khidr’s actions in the Qur’an
=============================================

**Question:** Regarding verse 80 of Surah al-Kahf, where Khidr (ع)
explains his reason for killing the young boy- in view of the Divine
principle of not recording evil deeds or punishing people for them
before they have taken place, some questions arise…

1. Although Allah (awj) knew that this youth would commit evil deeds in
the future, why wasn’t he granted respite (in accordance with the Divine
method) until he could witness his own evil deeds in the future? Is this
not predeterminism?

2. Was that youth favored with Divine grace because of his believing
parents, and since he died before performing those evil deeds, will he
no longer be punished?

3. Or since Allah (awj) knew that he would disobey Him in the future,
will he be punished in the hereafter?

In view of the explanations that emerge from Qur\`anic commentaries,
traditions, and the context of the verses, the incident of killing that
teenage boy (ghulam) was not a chance event or as a result of a
conflict; rather, Khidr (ع) proceeded to kill him without any
preliminary exchange of words. So there is no possibility of there being
any mental inclination or anger involved in this event, and the
questioner’s mind comes to accept the fact that though there were no
provoking or inciting factors involved, without doubt the killing had
wisdom and special reason behind it. It did not follow from base
desires. The action was undertaken by someone about whom the Qur\`an
says,

***“One of Our servants whom We granted mercy from Ourselves and whom we
granted knowledge from Ourselves***”[^1]

one of Our servants whose hearts’ vessel We filled with Our exclusive
mercy and whom We taught from Our select knowledge.

So we can be certain that personal desire was not involved. But in terms
of its emotional wisdom and how it can be believed that such a person
would undertake to kill a young man, an answer is required, which is
presented as follows.

It is understood from some traditions that when Prophet Musa (ع) saw
this scene, he was profoundly shocked, and because he saw the killing as
unjustified based on its outward appearance, he turned to Khidr (ع) and
said, “Did you kill an innocent person who wasn’t worthy of death? What
you have done is unacceptable and abhorrent.”

At this point, Khidr (ع) briefly explains his reason for what he did
“The Divine will and wisdom are superior to all things, and the
unsophisticated intellect of human beings cannot comprehend the finer
points of Allah’s (awj) affairs and His will. Thus, human intellects
have no authority over His will; rather, His will holds sway over human
intellects. So don’t just rely on your reasoning and its superficial
understanding, and for now patiently bear whatever I do...”[^2]

Looking carefully into this tradition, we conclude that:

1. Every thing has an outer aspect and an inner reality. If something
has a good and innocent-looking outer form but underneath is evil and
sinful, it is not possible to simply rely on laws pertaining to the
outer aspect.

2. Sometimes Allah (awj) decides, on the basis of some overriding good,
to act beyond the limits of apparent recompense and desires to apply the
[laws of the] inner dimension, along with its reward or punishment.

3. The killing of the young man was entirely dependent on Allah’s (awj)
command; Khidr (ع) did not perform this deed without a Divine command,
but was merely executing His will.[^3]

Here the question presents itself as to whether by killing that youth,
Allah (awj) has punished him before any crime has been committed on his
part. The points below can help us answer this question.

1. If a person is born to Muslim parents and then denies his or her
faith after attaining maturity, the rules of an “apostate from nature”
*(murtadd fitri)* will apply to him or her. If that person is a man, he
will be worthy of death. It has come in several traditions: “[Though the
Qur\`an clearly states that] the parents of that young man were
believers, their son was an disbeliever, to the extent that there was no
hope of his heart opening up to the truth, and the seal of obstinacy and
rejection of faith had been placed on it.”[^4]

So while it is true that his apparent conduct in playing with his
friends did not reveal his disbelief (just as Musa (ع), relying on this
outward state, thought him innocent), the reality of his heart and
beliefs proved his disbelief (as demonstrated in the Divine knowledge
and its revelation to Khidr (ع)). As a result, his being killed was
merely a result of his choosing to be an apostate, which carries the
consequence in this world of termination of physical life.

2. Allah (awj) knew that the continuation of the young man’s life would
lead to nothing but more spiritual and material loss for him because he
would mislead his believing parents, break apart family ties, and
deprive them of the worldly and otherworldly blessings of faith for the
family and for society. Thus, since the good in his life up until that
point had come to an end, Allah (awj) determined to terminate his life
and put in place the means of taking his life—just as a person takes
care of things as long as their good outweighs their harm, but then no
longer takes an interest in them when that is not the case.

In this instance, though the soul was seized by the angel Jibra\`il and
his servants, Allah (awj) wished for the apparent executor of His will
(ending the life of that young man) to be one of His chosen and merciful
servants who had knowledge of His special sciences, namely Khidr (ع).

In other words, his action was based on Allah’s (awj) creational and
legislative will with respect to the death of that young man, and in
this respect his death was like all other deaths that are caused by
accidents or other causes (with the difference that an accidental
killing is not in accordance with Allah’s (awj) legislative will and He
has not commanded it to take place; but the killing under discussion and
all natural deaths take place in accordance with Allah’s (awj)
permission and indication both legislatively and creationally [i.e.
natural causality].

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) solving this problem, says,
“…Khidr’s concern was for events not to take such a turn that he would
be prevented from carrying out what he was commanded, such that he would
remain deprived of the reward of carrying out Allah’s will, that is,
ending the life of that young man (the beginning and end of which are
both in accordance with Divine grace and the greater good, not in
accordance with what the human being deserves)—especially since carrying
out this command was a source of mercy for the parents of that youth
(since as the Qur\`an clearly says, Khidr (ع) knew that in place of that
son Allah would give them a child who would be pure and a source of
unity for the family. In addition, the coming to pass of this Divine
will allowed Khidr (ع) to be able to reveal Divine secrets and explain
hidden truths to Musa (ع).”

It is worthy of note that “When Khidr (ع) began explaining his reasons,
he said, ‘In any case, we feared that the young man would later become
rebellious and lead his parents towards disbelief.’” That is, in
explaining the process of performing this action, he doesn’t make
mention of his own will at all and instead uses the plural verb “we
feared” to show that as executor of Divine will he did not act alone,
but Divine assistance and the intermediaries of His court were with
him—with the difference that fear cannot be attributed to Allah (awj),
but Khidr (ع) and others are subject to fear.[^5] (The issuance and
execution of the command is shared, while the fear of failure in fully
executing the Divine command is exclusive to Khidr (ع)).

Why is it that though Allah (awj) knew that the young man would fall
into disobedience in the future, He gave him no respite (in accordance
with the Divine Way) and did not allow him to witness his own evil deeds
in the future? Isn’t this predeterminism?

It is clear from the preceding explanation that:

1. Life itself is a Divine blessing; no one has an entitlement to it.
From this perspective the issue of demanding a continuation of life
doesn’t arise, let alone for one to ask for a reason for its
non-continuation.

2. Allah (awj) had willed for that young man’s life to be ended in
accordance with His wisdom and the greater good.

But in answer to this question it is possible to bring up other aspects
of this issue as well:

1. The youth was culpable in two respects: he was an “apostate from
nature”; and he had the ability to destroy the foundation of his
parents’ faith. Allah (awj) observed that he didn’t use the respite He
had given to reform himself and make amends or abandon unbelief and
apostasy. Therefore, He carried out the command of killing him.[^6]

2. If the young man were to remain alive, he would put into practice his
intention (of leading others to disbelief), and in this case greater
harm and damage would result. Thus, to prevent those future
consequences, the command to end the life of such a being was issued. In
addition, it can be gleaned from the apparent sense of the verse that
this son was not as obedient and beneficial as he ought to be and in
that short time after attaining maturity had already committed sins and
misdeeds. In this way, he worked to lead his parents astray.

3. As verse 81 of Surah al-Kahf indicates, Allah (awj) had decreed to
reward the parents of that young man for their faith by granting them a
model child. From this it can be understood that not only would his
remaining alive result in his parents’ going astray and him not
receiving the punishment of his apostasy, it would also prevent another
good from reaching them. This point is clearly explained in the
traditions: “Allah had willed to give them in place of that son a
daughter who would bear a son in whose line would be numerous prophets,
one after the other, such that seventy prophets would descend from that
one daughter.”[^7]

Thus, another result of not granting respite to that young man was for
that line of prophets to come into being.

It goes without saying that it is the Divine Way (sunnah) for the
parents of prophets to be believers. So if the son remained alive and
pulled his parents towards unbelief, it would contradict this Divine
principle. This is why the question doesn’t arise as to why it wasn’t
possible for both the son to live and the line of prophets to come into
being.

Was the young man availed of Divine grace on account of his parents and,
since he died before committing those evil deeds, was he no longer
subject to punishment? Or, since Allah (awj) knew that he would disobey
Him in the future, will he be punished?

In view of the preceding explanation and following points, it can be
deduced that this putting to death was a source of mercy for all
involved: the young man who was killed, Khidr (ع) who killed him, and
the parents of the young man.

a. The good that came to young man as a result of being put to death:

1. He received punishment in this world for his apostasy, which may
lessen his punishment in the hereafter.

2. If he remained alive, he would make his parents unbelievers and would
be responsible for the sin of their apostasy and unbelief.

3. Creedal disbelief leads to decadence and sinful behavior. Thus, his
death in youth forever sealed his scroll of evil deeds, and on the Day
of Judgment he will not be punished for all the sins he would have
committed had he lived longer.

4. He wasn’t capable of fulfilling his duties towards his parents, and
the pain he would thus cause his parents itself would increase his
burden of sins and his parents’ aversion to him.

b. The good that came to his parents:

1. Their faith remained unharmed.

2. To resist such a son wouldn’t lead anywhere, and their parental love
and emotions would soften their hearts towards him and weaken their
faith. Thus, they were also saved from the tension and unease that would
result from his remaining alive.

3. Their patience and contentment with Allah’s (awj) will were tested,
and they were able to be successful in this test.

4. In place of an immoral and rebellious son, they were granted a pure,
devoted, and blessed daughter.

5. They were blessed with becoming the progenitors of seventy prophets,
whose reward and forgiveness they benefited from.

6. Their memory was eternally recorded in the everlasting revelation of
the Qur\`an, and they became an example for others.

c. The benefit that came to his killer:

1. He was granted the ability to carry out a Divine decree (Divine
will).

2. He was the cause of blessings for a Muslim family.

3. He was able to teach some of the secrets of revelation and unseen
realities to Musa (ع).

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) describes these blessings in these
words: “Allah knew that if he stayed alive, the young man would lead his
parents to disbelief and he would become a source of corruption and
hardship for all. Thus Khidr (ع) was commanded to finish his life so
that as a result all of them (the killer, the killed, and his parents)
would attain honor and Divine grace.”[^8]

Answer
------

[^1]: Surat al-Kahf (18), Verse 65:  فَوَجَدَا عَبْدًا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا
آتَيْنَاهُ رَحْمَةً مِنْ عِنْدِنَا وَعَلَّمْنَاهُ مِنْ لَدُنَّا عِلْمًا


[^2]: ‘Ilal al-Sharayi’, vol. 1, pg. 60-61: فَانْطَلَقَا حَتَّى إذَا
لَقِيَا غُلاَمًا فَقَتَلَهُ الْخِضْرُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَغَضِبَ
مُوْسى وَأَخَذَ بِتَلاَبِيْبِهِ وَقَالَ لَهُ : أَقَتَلْتَ نَفْسًا
زَكِيَّةً بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ لَقَدْ جِئْتَ شَيْئًا نُكْرًا ، قَالَ لَهُ
الْخِضْرُ إنَّ الْعُقُوْلَ لاَ تَحْكُمُ عَلى أَمْرِ اللهِ تَعَالى
ذِكْرُهُ بَلْ أَمْرُ اللهِ يَحْكُمُ عَلَيْهَا ، فَسَلِّمْ لِمَا ترى
مِنِّيْ وَاصْبِرْ عَلَيْهِ

[^3]: Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, pg. 283-284

[^4]: ‘Ilal al-Sharayi’, vol. 1, pg. 61: ...وَ أَمَّا الْغُلاَمُ،
فَکَانَ أَبَوَاهُ مُؤْمِنَينِ وَ طُبِعَ کَافِراً...

[^5]: ‘Ilal al-Sharayi’, vol. 1, pg. 61: فَاشْتَرَكَ بِالأَنَانِيَّةِ
بِقَوْلِهِ :  فَخَشِيْنَا أَنْ يَرْهَقَهُمَا طُغْيَاناً وَكُفْراً
فَأَرَدْنَا أَنْ يُبْدِلَهُمَا رَبُّهُمَا خَيْراً مِنْهُ زَكَاةً
وَأَقْرَبُ رُحْماً  وَإِنَّمَا اشْتَرَكَ فِي الأَنَانِيَّةِ لِأَنَّهُ
خَشِيَ وَاللهُ لاَ يَخْشى لِأَنَّهُ لاَ يَفُوْتُهُ شَيْءٌ وَلاَ
يَمْتَنِعُ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ أَرَادَهُ ، وَإنَّمَا خَشِيَ الْخِضْرُ ، مِنْ
أَنْ يُحَالَ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ مَا أُمِرَ فِيْهِ فَلاَ يَدْرِكُ ثَوَابَ
الْإِمْضَاءَ فِيْهِ ، وَوَقَعَ فِي نَفْسِهِ أَنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى
ذِكْرُهُ جَعَلَهُ سَبَبًا لَرَحْمَةِ أَبَوَيِ الْغُلاَمِ فَعَمِلَ فِيْهِ
وَسَطَ الْأَمْرِ مِنَ الْبَشَرِيَّة.

[^6]: This has only been put forth as a possibility by some analysts and
it is not necessarily the correct.

[^7]: Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, pg. 286, no. 170-173:
أَبْدَلَهُمَا اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَکَانَ الإِبْنِ إِبْنَةً، فَوُلِدَ
مِنْهَا سَبْعُونَ نَبِيًا.

[^8]: Tafsir Safi, vol. 3, pg. 256: فِي الْعِلَلِ عَنِ الصَّادِقِ ( ع):
عَلِمَ اللٌّهُ أَنَّهُ إِنْ بَقى كَفَرَ أَبَوَاهُ وَافْتُتِنَا بِهِ
وَضَلاَّ بِإِضْلاَلِهِ فَأَمَرَنِيَ اللهُ بِقَتْلِهِ وَأَرَادَ بِذَلِكَ
نَقْلِهِمْ إِلَى مَحَلِّ كَرَامَتِهِ فِي الْعَاقِبَةِ.


