Question 45: Limiting the Ahlul Bayt to a few individuals
=========================================================

**Question:** Why do you limit the *Ahlul Bayt* (ع) to a few people?

To prove that the Ahlul Bayt (ع) in the Verse of Purification are
limited to the five “people of the cloak” (*ahl al-kisa’*: the Prophet,
‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn, upon whom be peace), various textual
and traditional proofs that are accepted by Sunnis and Shi’as can be
forwarded. We will look at each of these proofs separately.

Brief Answer
------------

The limiting of the *Ahlul Bayt* (ع) to the fourteen infallibles is not
a human decision; it is an exclusivity understood from the Divine words
in the Verse of Purification and the traditions of the noble Prophet
(ص).

There are numerous discursive and traditional proofs than can be relied
on to prove this claim.

### Discursive and textual proofs

a. The Qur\`an consists of the words of Allah (awj) that He revealed to
His Prophet in the Arabic language. And Allah’s (awj) words, like His
actions, are free of any sort of defect; it is not possible for them to
contain any type of grammatical mistake.

Now, if the term Ahlul Bayt in the Verse of Purification were to refer
to all relatives of the Prophet (ص), it would be in violation of the
rules of Arabic grammar and detrimental to the eloquence and perfection
of the Divine word. This is because the Prophet (ص) had more than
fifteen wives and for a masculine pronoun to be used in the Verse of
Purification to refer to a group, the majority of which were women,
would be contrary to proper ‘Arabic speech. Thus, the pronouns in the
verse refer to the descendents and trustees of the Prophet (ص) in the
house of Fatima (ع).

b. To determine the meaning of a word, it is necessary to look at the
context in which it originated in order to understand its true exact
sense. In the Verse of Purification, the word *ahl* (family or people)
is under discussion. This word must always be in a possessive phrase, at
least in meaning if not in words. That is, its meaning is incomplete
unless it is attributed or related to something else.

In this verse as well it has been attributed to *al-bayt*, or the house
of prophecy; and we know that this can apply to no house aside from that
of Fatima (ع). If *al-bayt* referred to an inhabited house, for the
other wives of the Prophet (ص) to be included in this phrase, Umm
Salamah—in whose house the verse was revealed—should be the first person
to be included in the phrase. But the opposite is true, since the
Prophet (ص)—with Umm Salamah’s agreement—did not consider her to be
among the Ahlul Bayt.

### Traditional proofs

a. There are a group of traditions in which the Prophet (ص) aimed to
clarify and delimit the Ahlul Bayt (ع) in the Verse of Purification.
Thus, the Prophet (ص) said that this verse was revealed about five
people: himself, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husayn (ع).

b. Another group of traditions that mention the Prophet’s actions in
this regard, since practical teachings are more lasting than oral
teachings. Thus, it has been narrated that for six months the Prophet
(ص) would come to the door of Fatima’s (ع) house at prayer times and
say, “Prayers, O People of the House!” and he would recite the Verse of
Purification.

c. A third group are the accounts that indicate that it was well-known
to the people that the Ahlul Bayt are limited to these people, the
details of which have been mentioned in books of Qur\`anic exegesis.

Detailed Answer
---------------

### Discursive or Textual Proofs

a. The Qur\`an is the word of Allah (awj) and is a miracle from more
than just a single aspect. The most accessible and easily grasped of
those aspects is the Qur\`an’s eloquence.

That is, there exists no literary mistake in the matter, style, or
choice of wording of the Noble Book. We know that in ‘Arabic there are
separate feminine pronouns used in the second and third persons. In
using a pronoun, numerous aspects are taken into account. For example,
when there are significantly more women in a group than men, a feminine
pronoun is used.

Now, if a masculine pronoun were to be used in addressing a group
consisting primarily of women, it would be considered a grammatical
mistake. If a person uses masculine pronouns in place of feminine ones
or vice versa, it would be an amusing mistake. Far be it from the
Qur\`an, the Word of Allah and the Prophet’s (ص) eternal miracle, to
make such a mistake.

The Verse of Purification has the words *‘ankum* and *yutahhirakum*, in
which the pronouns are masculine, though Allah (awj) is well aware that
there were more women in the Prophet’s household than men. So if we were
to hold that this verse refers to all of his household and family, we
would have to say that we have found a grammatical mistake in the
Qur\`an, that is, the use of two masculine pronouns in place of feminine
ones—a mistake that is clear and undeniable.

It is obvious that this is inconsistent with the Muslim belief in the
Qur\`an’s miraculousness and Allah’s (awj) Knowledge and Wisdom, and is
thus unacceptable. Thus, the two pronouns must refer to a group that
would permit masculine pronouns to be used. And this is only the case if
we take the pronouns in the verse to refer to the Prophet’s household in
the house of Fatimah, that is, the Prophet, Fatimah, ‘Ali, Hasan, and
Husayn (ع).

b. The word *ahl* (family) in Arabic must always be part of a possessive
phrase in meaning. That is, it must be related or attributed to
something else for its own meaning to become clear, as in *ahl al-kitab*
(people of the book), *ahl al-iman* (people of faith, or believers), and
*ahl al-nifaq* (people of hypocrisy, or hypocrites).

Thus part of the meaning of the word *ahl* is denoted by the word to
which it is attributed. So, if we wish to know what *ahl* means in the
Verse of Purification we must first determine the meaning of the word
*bayt* (house).

The word *bayt* means “house” or “abode” and denotes a place. Now what
is meant by this word in different usages is something that is explained
by contextual clues, both internal (verbal) and external (nonverbal).

The same holds true for the topic under discussion, that is, the
expression “Ahlul Bayt.” So if there are no contextual clues to limit,
expand, or clarify what Allah intended with this expression, if we were
to ignore the literary objection that would result, it would be possible
to take “Ahlul Bayt” to refer to everyone related to the Prophet (ص) in
his houses. In this case, the word *bayt* would mean “home” or
“residence”.

But with a little attention to some external contextual clues, such as
the situation in which the verse was revealed, we will realize that such
a meaning is untrue, because although the verse was revealed in the very
house of Umm Salamah, the Prophet (ص) clearly said she was not one of
the Ahlul Bayt (ع). If *bayt* were to refer to a residence, Umm
Salamah—in whose home the verse was revealed—should be its first
addressee and more worthy of this title than anyone else.

But it has already been shown that this is contrary to reality. In this
regard, it would be good to refer to a tradition that Wahidi Nishapuri
has narrated:

“Umm Salamah relates that the Prophet (ص) was in [my] house and food was
before him when Fatimah (ع) entered. The Prophet (ص) said, ‘[Fatimah,]
call your husband and sons to come to me.’ ‘Ali, Hasan, and Husayn (ع)
came and sat down. While they were eating, the Prophet (ص) fell asleep.

“There was a Khaybari cloak under the Prophet (ص) during this time, and
I was in the [adjoining] room praying. Then Allah revealed the Verse of
Purification.

“After this, the Prophet (ص) covered them [‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and
Husayn] with his cloak as well. Then he took out his hands and, facing
the sky, said: ‘O Allah! These are my Ahlul Bayt and the closest ones to
me. Remove from them all uncleanliness and purify them.’

“At that time I came to their room and asked, ‘Am I too with you O
Messenger of Allah?’ He replied, ‘You are on the right [path]. You are
on the right [path].’”[^1]

In this way, the Prophet (ص) praised Umm Salamah without considering her
to be one of the Ahlul Bayt.

There are numerous traditions with the above purport in Sunni hadith
collections[^2]. This is the same tradition that is well-known among
Shi’as as the tradition of the cloak (hadith al-Kisa) and which is found
in most books of hadith and supplications.

### Traditional Proofs

There are numerous traditions that clarify what Allah (awj) meant by
Ahlul Bayt in the verse of Purification. In view of the various details
and aspects explained in these traditions, we have divided them into
three groups and will mention one example from each group. It is worthy
of mentioning that only Sunni sources have been used for the following
traditions, though comparable traditions are abundant in Shi’a sources
as well.

a. The first group consists of traditions that explain the Prophet’s (ص)
words regarding the purport of the expression Ahlul Bayt in the verse of
Purification.

Muhammad ibn al-Muthanna, with a chain reaching Abu Sa’id al-Khidri,
narrates that the Prophet (ص) said, “This verse was revealed regarding
five people—me, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn:

***‘Verily, Allah*** ***only wishes to remove all uncleanliness from
you, O people of the house, and purify you thoroughly.’***”[^3]

b. The second group consists of traditions that came after the meaning
of Ahlul Bayt had been explained verbally and that clarify its meaning
in actions through the conduct of the Prophet (ص).

Ibn Waki\`, in a chain leading to Anas, relates that he would say, “For
six months after the Verse of Purification was revealed, whenever the
Prophet (ص) would go for prayers, he would stand outside the door of
Fatimah’s house and say, ‘[It is time for] the prayers, O people of the
house!’ and then he would recite this verse.”[^4]

Does this prophetic action, which continued for 180 days, five times a
day, in explaining the meaning of Ahlul Bayt leave any room for doubt?

c. The third group consists of traditions that are historical in nature
and explain the thoughts and actions of the people of that era with
respect to the Verse of Purification and who it addresses. In view of
these traditions, it can be said that this issue—the limitation of the
Verse of Purification to the five people of the cloak (ع)—was so
well-known among the Muslims that whenever they would see one of them,
they would say, “I saw so-and-so, who is of the Ahlul Bayt.” Or they
would indicate them and say, “So-and-so is of the *ahl al-bayt*.” As an
example, one can refer to the story of Abu Mijlaz, the details of which
have been mentioned in Sunni books of tafsir[^5] (Qur\`anic commentary).

[^1]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, pg. 287

[^2]: Sunan Tirmizhi, vol.5, pg. 30 is only one example

[^3]: Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 22, pg. 9

[^4]: Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 22, pg. 9

[^5]: Jami’ al-Bayan, vol. 25, pg. 70


