Question 46: Compatibility of Religion and Politics
===================================================

**Question:** Is religion compatible with politics?

Brief Answer
------------

A religion that has come in order to explain the path to felicity from
now until the end of time cannot remain indifferent to a matter that all
societies need, that is, government. In other words, the rules and
regulations of Islam are such that they depend on a government and
without which Islam cannot remain alive.

Detailed Answer
---------------

Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Rida (ع) has said the following in one of his
statements regarding the necessity of an Islamic government: “We have
not found any nation that has survived without a leader. This is because
the regulation and management of their religious and worldly needs
depends upon a responsible leader. It is far from the wisdom of Allah to
leave His servants without a leader while He well knows that they need a
ruler who would give the society structure and stability. A leader that
would lead the people in war against the enemies, distribute the wealth
amongst them, lead the Friday prayers, and protect the oppressed against
the tyrants.” [^1]

From another point of view the rules and regulations of Islam are such
that they depend on a government and without which, Islam cannot remain
alive. Because of this Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Rida (ع) has referred to the
Friday and congregational prayers being conducted by the leader.

In another statement he says: “If Allah had not placed a reliable and
trustworthy leader amongst the people, the religion of Allah would
surely have finished, the laws of Allah would have changed, innovations
would have arisen in religion, irreligious people would have changed the
faith of Allah and added and subtracted things from it, and doubts would
have arisen about Islam amongst the Muslims.”

For this very reason it was well known amongst the Muslims, and even
amongst the non-Muslims, that Islam has a specific system of government
and that the government of the Noble Prophet (ص) in Medina was a clear
example of such a system.

In the year 1343 ah, ‘Ali ‘Abd al-Razzaq, in his book *Islam and the
Principles of Government,* denied the Prophetic government and claimed
that the Prophet Muhammad (ص) was simply a prophet sent by Allah (awj)
to the scholars of the world and that he in no way took steps towards
the formation of a government. He did this at a time when Kamal Ataturk
rejected the government of the Ottomans and laid the foundations of his
secular government.

At the same time in Egypt, the followers of the caliphate chose Sultan
Fuad as the leader of the Muslims and placed him in the seat of power.
The fact that these events occurred concurrently shows that ‘Abd
al-Razzaq was influenced by the secular thoughts of the West and wrote
these matters by taking inspiration from the writings of secular
philosophers and political scientists.

‘Abd al-Razzaq claimed two things:

1. What the Noble Prophet (ص) established in Medina was not a
government.

2. What was set up in Medina was not religious.

In order to prove the first point he places emphasis on the fact that
what the Noble Prophet (ص) created in Medina did not have any of the
qualities of a government.

In order to prove the second point he says that the degree and stature
of Prophethood spurns politics and government.

In order to answer the first point we must pay attention to the fact
that the consequence of holding that a specific form of government
should be the standard by which we judge if something is a government or
not would be that none of the nations of the past have ever had any
governments.

Therefore a more general definition of government must be given so that
it can be true for various forms of government. Such a definition can be
put in the following way: Government is a collection of organized powers
that has as its duty the management of the affairs of society. In this
definition, government is comprised of various governmental structures
like the legislative, judicial, and executive branches of government.

According to this definition of government then, that which the Noble
Prophet (ص) created in Medina was a government in the real sense of the
word since he created an organized power structure that had as its
responsibility the management of the affairs of society. From the time
of the Prophet until now, many books have been written regarding the
management system of his government.

Now when we pay attention to the following points, the religious nature
of the Prophet’s government will become clear:

1. The rules and regulations of Islam are such that without a
government, they cannot be implemented; for example rulings pertaining
to the executive, judicial, or monetary systems of Islam.

2. We have proofs to show that the rule and running of the affairs of
society are the prerogative of the Noble Prophet (ص).

3. If Prophethood were really at odds with government then why would the
Noble Prophet (ص) take steps towards the creation of a government? Why
would he waste his time and energy in this regard? If it were asked that
does this “misappropriation” of effort not show irresponsibility, it
would be answered that the Noble Prophet (ص) started this work for the
propagation of religion and in order to fulfil his apostleship.

This answer shows the interrelationship of religion and politics from
one point of view. Of course it does not answer the question as to why
he himself took the establishment of religion into his own hands, while
he could easily have placed the responsibility in the hands of some
other reliable friend like Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع).

In any case, we can really only understand and criticize what ‘Abd
al-Razzaq wrote over 70 years ago—something existing in its various
forms in the Muslim world today—when we examine the context and culture
in which this thought took shape, viz. the West. In order to understand
the philosophy and culture of the West, we must have a look–though
cursory–at the history of Christian thought that forms the cultural
matrix of the Western world.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, pp. 60-61 فَإِنْ قَالَ فَلِمَ جَعَلَ
أُولِي الْأَمْرِ وَ أَمَرَ بِطَاعَتِهِمْ قِيلَ لِعِلَلٍ كَثِيرَةٍ
مِنْهَا أَنَّ الْخَلْقَ لَمَّا وَقَعُوا عَلَى حَدٍّ مَحْدُودٍ وَ
أُمِرُوا أَنْ لاَ يَتَعَدَّوْا ذَلِكَ الْحَدَّ (تِلْكَ الْحُدُودَ) لِمَا
فِيهِ مِنْ فَسَادِهِمْ لَمْ يَكُنْ يَثْبُتُ ذَلِكَ وَ لاَ يَقُومُ إِلاَّ
بِأَنْ يَجْعَلَ عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهِ أَمِيناً يَمْنَعُهُمْ مِنَ التَّعَدِّي
وَ الدُّخُولِ فِيمَا حُظِرَ عَلَيْهِمْ لِأَنَّهُ لَوْ لَمْ يَكُنْ ذَلِكَ
كَذَلِكَ لَكَانَ أَحَدٌ لاَ يَتْرُكُ لَذَّتَهُ وَ مَنْفَعَتَهُ لِفَسَادِ
غَيْرِهِ فَجَعَلَ عَلَيْهِمْ قَيِّماً يَمْنَعُهُمْ مِنَ الْفَسَادِ وَ
يُقِيمُ فِيهِمُ الْحُدُودَ وَ الْأَحْكَامَ وَ مِنْهَا أَنَّا لاَ نَجِدُ
فِرْقَةً مِنَ الْفِرَقِ وَ لاَ مِلَّةً مِنَ الْمِلَلِ بَقُوا وَ عَاشُوا
إِلاَ بِقَيِّمٍ وَ رَئِيسٍ لِمَا لاَ بُدَّ لَهُمْ مِنْهُ فِي أَمْرِ
الدِّينِ وَ الدُّنْيَا فَلَمْ يَجُزْ فِي حِكْمَةِ الْحَكِيمِ أَنْ
يَتْرُكَ الْخَلْقَ مِمَّا يَعْلَمُ أَنَّهُ لاَ بُدَّ لَهُمْ مِنْهُ وَ
لاَ قِوَامَ لَهُمْ إِلاَّ بِهِ فَيُقَاتِلُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّهُمْ وَ
يَقْسِمُونَ بِهِ فَيْئَهُمْ وَ يُقِيمُ لَهُمْ جُمُعَتَهُمْ وَ
جَمَاعَتَهُمْ وَ يَمْنَعُ ظَالِمَهُمْ مِنْ مَظْلُومِهِمْ وَ مِنْهَا
أَنَّهُ لَوْ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ لَهُمْ إِمَاماً قَيِّماً أَمِيناً حَافِظاً
مُسْتَوْدَعاً لَدَرَسَتِ الْمِلَّةُ وَ ذَهَبَ الدِّينُ وَ غُيِّرَتِ
السُّنَّةُ وَ الْأَحْكَامُ وَ لَزَادَ فِيهِ الْمُبْتَدِعُونَ وَ نَقَصَ
مِنْهُ الْمُلْحِدُونَ وَ شَبَّهُوا ذَلِكَ عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِينَ لِأَنَّا
قَدْ وَجَدْنَا الْخَلْقَ مَنْقُوصِينَ مُحْتَاجِينَ غَيْرَ كَامِلِينَ
مَعَ اخْتِلاَفِهِمْ وَ اخْتِلاَفِ أَهْوَائِهِمْ وَ تَشَتُّتِ
أَنْحَائِهِمْ فَلَوْ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ لَهُمْ قَيِّماً حَافِظاً لِمَا جَاءَ
بِهِ الرَّسُولُ ص لَفَسَدُوا عَلَى نَحْوِ مَا بَيَّنَّا وَ غُيِّرَتِ
الشَّرَائِعُ وَ السُّنَنُ وَ الْأَحْكَامُ وَ الْإِيمَانُ وَ كَانَ فِي
ذَلِكَ فَسَادُ الْخَلْقِ أَجْمَعِين


