Question 47: Relationship between governance of a jurist and the authority of a jurist
======================================================================================

**Question:** What is the relationship between governance of a jurist
(wilayat al-faqih) and authority in jurisprudence (marja’iyat)?

Brief Answer
------------

*Wilayat* is a part of marja’iyat in the culture of the Shi’as. The
great *maraji’* not only guided people with respect to the divine Law,
but they also led people in the particular problems of society—even
judging between people in particular matters and domestic disputes. But
if we separate the two matters and associate the former with
*marja’iyyat* then a number of questions arise:

1. Is it permissible to separate *marja’iyyat* and *wilayat*?

2. If we suppose that it is permissible, then is it possible to have
multiple *mara’ji* and leaders?

3. If it be possible to separate the *marji’* and the leader, is it
possible to follow other than the leader in rules relating to society
and the individual?

The answers to the aforementioned questions are as follows: The reason
that the jurisprudent is an authority in matters of the law is because
of his specialization in jurisprudence and his power to derive the rules
of Allah (awj) from their sources. While the reason that a leader is
what he is, is because aside from the above mentioned qualities, he has
the ability to manage society according to the principles and values of
Islam. It is because of this that it becomes possible for a person to be
chosen as a leader due not so much to his aptitude in jurisprudence as
much as to his better management skills.

In lieu of this reality, the separation of the offices of the *marji’*
and the leader becomes a reasonable, and in some instances, a necessary
expedient.

In principle, leadership is confined to a single person, whereas the
*marja’iyyat* is applicable to numerous individuals. But the possibility
for the reverse situation also holds; just as does the possibility that
the two offices should be combined in a single individual. Since
following the orders of the leader is obligatory upon all
people—including other jurisprudents—and it is forbidden to disobey his
orders, hence it is not possible for people to follow other than the
leader in matters related to the social order and the running of
society.

What was said above regarding the authority of the jurisprudent was in
reference to the individual order and to matters of a personal nature;
it is in these matters that people can follow other than the leader.

Detailed Answer
---------------

The Noble Prophet (ص) of Islam had three mandates:

1. To propagate Allah’s (awj) message; teaching the laws of religion and
guiding the people;

2. To judge between people when they differed;

3. To lead and manage society.

All of these qualities and functions exist for the jurisprudents in the
time of the occultation of the Imam. They too have three functions:

1. Acting as judges and resolving disputes that arise between people;

2. Giving edicts in law and expounding the general rules of the Divine
law for the people. This can be considered a type of guidance of the
people;

3. Leadership.

*Wilayat* is a part of marja’iyat in the culture of the Shi’as. The
great *maraji’* not only guided people with respect to the divine Law,
but they also led people in the particular problems of society—even
judging between people in particular matters and domestic disputes. But
if we separate the two matters and associate the former with
*marja’iyyat* then a number of questions arise:

1. Is it permissible to separate *marja’iyyat* and *wilayat*? In other
words is it possible that one individual is the one people refer to in
the general matters of the law while another person is the leader of the
Islamic nation?

2. If we suppose that it is permissible, then is it possible to have
multiple *maraji’* and leaders? Is there a difference between them in
this regard?

3. If it be possible to separate the *marji’* and the leader, is it
possible to follow other than the leader in rules relating to society
and the individual?

Before we answer the aforementioned questions it is necessary for us to
give a brief explanation of the “edict” that the leader issues.

When the jurisprudent refers to the religious sources in order to obtain
the general rule of Allah (awj) regarding a certain problem and uses the
special techniques that exist for obtaining the rules of the Law, it is
called giving an edict or *“fatwa”.*

When the leader pays attention to the general rules of Allah (awj), the
various systems in Islam, and the conditions of the time, and according
to these delineates a person’s or a specific group’s responsibility with
regards to a certain matter, this is called giving an order or a
*“hukm”.* In doing this, he not only pays attention to the general rules
of Islam and the lofty aspirations of the religion, but also to the
specific conditions that exist in that time.

As long as those conditions exist, the order issued by him or his
representative is binding. Of course from the point of view of the Law,
the rules of Allah (awj) and the edicts of the jurisprudent who has all
the necessary qualifications are also binding, just like the rulings of
the leader, but with this difference that the jurisprudent’s rulings are
binding on him and his followers only, while everyone must follow the
orders of the leader.

With this in mind we will now answer the first question, in other words
the separation of the *marja’iyyat* and the leader. According to the
logic of the “leadership of the jurisprudent” and its proofs, the
jurisprudent takes upon himself the management of society and in
accordance with the values of Islam, he takes on the responsibility of
leadership. But *marja’iyyat* means simply to issue an edict and is a
completely different matter. In order to understand *marja’iyyat* it is
necessary to explain *taqlid* first.

In the Persian language, taqlid means to follow someone without a proof.
Taqlid in the parlance of jurisprudence means that someone follows a
specialist in a specific matter that is in line with his specialty. The
first meaning is considered bad in the eyes of all sane people, but the
second is totally sound and accepted by them. The most important proof
as to the permissibility of taqlid lies in the fact that the person who
is not a specialist in a particular field must refer to the specialist
of that field. All of the proofs that are contained in the traditions
and verses of the Qur\`an regarding taqlid point to this very fact. Like
for example the verse that says,

***“We did not send [any apostles] before you except as men to whom We
revealed—ask the People of the Reminder if you do not know.”***[^1]

With this explanation it becomes clear that the reason that the
jurisprudent is an authority in matters of the law is because of his
specialization in jurisprudence and his power to derive the rules of
Allah (awj) from their sources while the reason that a leader is what he
is, is because aside from the aforementioned qualities, he has the
ability to manage society according to the principles and values of
Islam.

It is because of this that it becomes possible for a person to be chosen
as a leader due not so much to his aptitude in jurisprudence as much as
to his better management skills.

In lieu of this reality, the separation of the offices of the *marji’*
and the leader becomes a reasonable, and in some instances, necessary
expedient.

With regards to the second question (i.e. whether the leadership and the
*marja’iyyat* is confined to one person or is open to more than one
person) and assuming that a separation of the two is possible, we must
remember that when someone refers to the *marji’* he does so because the
*marji’* is a specialist in the field of law and the one who refers, is
not. This being the case, it is possible that there be numerous
specialists in society. Moreover, this is something that is to be sought
after so that everyone can refer to them with ease and obtain their
rulings.

But the leadership of society, because it is tied up with the order of
society and because the multiplicity of centres of decision making would
cause a disturbance–since it is necessary for everyone to follow the
leader in his rulings–dictate that the leader be one. This is especially
true because according to Islam there is only one nation of Islam. Of
course it is possible that specific conditions dictate that specific
areas have their own leaders, but all of these leaders should cooperate
with one another. But it is not necessary that various jurisprudents
issue one edict in order that society not be disturbed. Rather, every
jurisprudent issues his edict according to his judgment and the general
rules of deriving the laws from their sources.

In principle, leadership is confined to a single person, whereas the
*marja’iyyat* is applicable to numerous individuals. But the possibility
for the reverse situation also holds true.

As to the third question (i.e. the possibility of following someone
other that the leader in all matters) we must not lose sight of the fact
that when the leader issues an order or a ruling he looks at all aspects
of the situation from the perspective of the various systems and realms
within Islam, and after such an appraisal and due to his position it is
his opinion which has the final say.

If it were permissible for people to follow other than the leader in all
matters, while the orders of the leader remain binding upon them, then
in certain cases this would lead to a serious problem. In other words,
it is possible that in a specific matter of social order the leader
could issue an edict and say that if my ruling was other than this I
would have said so, while on the other hand the *marji’* of the people
could issue a ruling other than his. In this situation how can we expect
the people to follow the edict of the ruler?

It is with regards to this problem that it seems necessary that people
do not follow other than the leader in social and state matters, since
to disobey his order is forbidden according to all the jurisprudents.
Therefore what was said above regarding the authority of the
jurisprudent and *marji’* was in reference to the individual order and
to matters of a personal nature; it is in these matters that people can
follow other than the leader.

[^1]: Surat al-Nahl, (16), verse 43:  وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ
إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ 


