Question 3: Possibility of knowledge of Allah
=============================================

**Question:** Is it possible for humankind to know Allah (awj)? If yes,
to what degree and what is the value of such knowledge?

The human being can attain knowledge of Allah (awj) through various
ways. This knowledge can come about through the medium of the intellect
or of the heart. At times he—as in the case of the sage and the
philosopher—reasons and understands through conceptual knowledge and
with recourse to sense perception and the intellect, whilst at other
times he—as in the case of the gnostic—through immediate intuition,
gazes at the Beloved, witnessing Him directly.

Knowledge of Allah (awj) is analogous to knowledge of a fire. An
individual at times realizes the existence of a fire by witnessing its
smoke from afar. At other times, he might realize its existence by
seeing the fire itself. Yet at other times, he might comprehend and feel
the fire as if a part of his body is burned by it.

In any case, in both ways—i.e. conceptual knowledge and immediate
knowledge—sometimes the path, the traveller, and the goal are one and
the same, as when one concludes the existence of Allah (awj) by
reflecting on Divine signs and the existing order pervading them. In
other instances, only the traveller and the path might be identical, as
when one comprehends Allah (awj) through understanding his own soul. The
path and the goal can also be the same, as where one comprehends Allah
(awj) by contemplating on the Divine Names and Attributes.

Of these types, the case where the path and the goal are identical,
where one spiritually experiences what he has conceptually realized is
of great value, for the goal is to see and to taste.

In the Qur\`anic verses and the corpus of narrations these three ways
have been articulated. It has especially been emphasized that nothing is
more evident than Divine existence and manifestation and hence He must
be reached through Himself. He is the Light, the apprehension of which
is needless of anything else. If we are deprived of seeing Him, it is
because of the veil of our negligence that covers our conceptual and
immediate knowledge - we lack awareness of our knowledge.

In order to attain this complex knowledge *(‘ilm-e murakkab* [i.e.
awareness of knowledge]*)* we must remove the veils of darkness and of
light from our souls. It is for this reason that it has been said that
knowing Allah (awj) is innate and inherent to the human being, and as
such, the arguments provided in proving the existence of Allah (awj) and
the knowledge of Him serve only as reminders, not proofs. Nevertheless,
it must be noted that the core of Divine Essence and Attributes are
neither comprehensible to the philosopher nor to the gnostic. However,
other aspects of the Divine are accessible to both the intellect of the
philosopher and the spiritual experience of the gnostic.

In responding to this question, first the media of understanding must be
introduced. The media of understanding are the physical senses, the
intellect, and the heart. The external senses merely deal with the
appearances and the accidents of things without being able to delve any
deeper, and despite the variety and abundance of knowledge they provide
to the human being, they are limited by time and space.

The intellect is a special faculty, the major role of which is the
comprehension of universal concepts and in this sense possesses many
aspects - among them reasoning. But the media of understanding are not
restricted to these two. The human being can reach great degrees of
knowledge through the medium of the heart. By this way, the human being
can spiritually witness [the reality of] what others understand [only
theoretically] through reasoning. The gnostics’ endeavour is to
comprehend Allah (awj) in this way.[^1]

From another perspective, knowledge can be divided into two general
categories: conceptual knowledge and presential or immediate knowledge.
Conceptual knowledge is obtained through mental concepts and the
implementation of rational and philosophic reasoning. Presential
knowledge is the knowledge arrived at without the mediation of concepts
and mental pictures; that is, the reality of the known object is present
within the knower. Presential knowledge is a type of gnostic and
intuitive knowledge, in which the external reality [and not the mental
concept] of an object is witnessed.

Of course, in the obtainment of rational conceptual knowledge, sensory
and empirical premises can be employed. For instance, by reflecting on
the signs of Allah (awj) and the existing order in the cosmos, one can
achieve an understanding of Allah (awj) that is rendered by a simple
reasoning. But in cases where one desires to achieve a greater
understanding, purely rational premises are required.

In any case, it must be borne in mind that firstly, Allah (awj) cannot
be proven nor refuted by exclusive recourse to laboratory experiments or
scientific, empirical principles for the grasp of sensory
experimentation is far shorter than to be able to pierce into the
supernatural.

Therefore, sensory knowledge alone cannot solve the problem, it must be
employed in the premises of rational reasoning [if it is to be useful].
Secondly, despite the fact that in Islamic texts, studying the
extroversive *(afaqi)*[^2] signs of Allah (awj) has been encouraged,[^3]
which is in a sense considered a rational method since it involves
reasoning, it must not be overlooked that studying the creatures, the
signs of Divine creativity and wisdom, only reveals that there is an
omnipotent and omniscient being governing the world; but other than
that, this method fails to render the attributes of that being; for
instance, whether it is self-sufficient.

As for intuitive and immediate comprehension, it can be conceived in
three ways: a cause’s immediate knowledge of its effect, an immaterial
existent’s immediate knowledge of its own essence, [and finally] an
effect’s immediate knowledge of its cause. The creatures’ awareness of
Allah (awj) is of the third type. And the human being’s weakness in
comprehending Allah (awj) is in proportion to his [existential]
weakness. Thus, although that Sacred Essence is proximate to everything,
but their proximity to Him depends on their existential degree and
limit.

Muhaqqiq Tusi provides a good analogy regarding the degrees of knowledge
of Allah (awj). He says one’s knowledge of Allah (awj) resembles one’s
knowledge of fire, the most limited form of which is being told the
qualities of fire by somebody else who has seen it. A more advanced
awareness of fire is when one observes its smoke. The third degree is
feeling the heat and witnessing the light it radiates. The final degree
of knowledge of fire is being inflamed and burned to ashes.

A point necessary to mention at this stage is that in speaking of
knowledge of Allah (awj), we might either be referring to proving His
existence or to contemplating His attributes. In both cases we can have
recourse to the intellect to employ conceptual knowledge in order to
understand intellectually, or we can go through the path of the heart,
to embark on immediate intuitive knowledge in order to behold. The
former is termed *burhan*, the latter, *‘irfan*. Without question, the
method prevalent in philosophic reasoning is not as valuable as gnostic
revelations.

In any case, regardless of whether we traverse the path of the intellect
or the heart, there are three ways for acquiring knowledge of Allah
(awj). In other words, the intellectual or gnostic journey of the
philosopher or the spiritual wayfarer [respectively] could fall under
one of three categories:

1. The traveller *(salik)*, the path *(maslak)*, and the goal *(maslk
‘ilayh)* are distinct; such as if one reaches the conclusion [that Allah
(awj) exists] by observing and contemplating the order and harmony of
the universe, by realizing that all things are needy and so there must
be something needless they depend on, hence the Originator. Some
Qur\`anic verses encourage people to take up this method.[^4]

2. The traveller and the path are one and the same; such as if one
contemplates the world within himself, addressing questions such as,
“Who am I?”; “Where am I from?”; “Why aren’t my inclinations, my
allegiances under my control?”; “Why can I not tame my wild mind so as
to control what memories it recalls?”

Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) alludes to this method in the following
words: “I came to know Allah by observing the strong wills that
trembled, the difficult entanglements that were disentangled, and the
decisions that were crushed.”[^5] In another instance he says, “Whoever
comprehends himself has indeed comprehended his Lord.”[^6]

3. The path and the goal are one and the same. That is, the
traveller—the philosopher or the spiritual wayfarer—by contemplating the
destination discovers the object of his desire *(maqsud)*. This is the
most profound way of understanding, for it transcends the levels of
extroversive and introversive journeys, thereby realizing, through
contemplating the Absolute Witness, that Allah (awj) is the Absolute
Witness.

The Qur\`an states:

***“Is it not sufficient that your Lord is witness to all
things?”***[^7]

First, He is witnessed and comprehended, and then [in His light] all
other things, for He is the Light of the Heavens and the Earth. The
Essence of Unicity [i.e. Allah (awj)] is the clearest witness to and
proof of Himself and as such, renders unnecessary any intermediary for
comprehension of Him.[^8]

So it is that in addressing His messenger He says,

***“You were certainly oblivious of this. We have removed your veil from
you, and so your sight is acute today.”***[^9]

The veil is removed from the individual, not from the reality or from
Allah (awj).

In the Supplication of ‘Arafah, Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع) deals with this
third method. He says, “O Allah! Do others possess a light that You lack
so that they must shed light upon You? When have You been absent so as
to be needy of proof? When have You ever been distant so that Your
effects and creatures should move us close to You?”[^10]

The same theme resonates in the following couplet: “You have never
distanced Yourself so that I should seek Your presence. You have never
been hidden so that I should make You manifest.”

And again in the words of Imam Husayn b. ‘Ali (ع), “Blind be the eye
that does not behold You … It is You whom I beseech in seeking union
with You, and it is Your own existence that I seek as proof for Your
existence.” In this phrase, it is expressed that for the spiritual
wayfarer, Allah (awj) is more manifest than the sky, the earth, the
leaves of trees, etc.

Imam Ja’far b. Muhammad as-Sadiq (ع) alludes to this point in the
following words: “When someone is present and manifest, we first know
him through his self, then we get to know his attributes. But in the
case of something absent, knowledge of its attributes precedes knowledge
of its essence … Just as in the case of Yusuf’s brother, they studied
Yusuf himself and recognized it was him. They asked him, ‘Are you really
Yusuf?’ They did not formulate their question the other way around[^11];
meaning, they reflected on the qualities of the person whom they were
confronted with and realized that he was Yusuf. They did not ask others
to identify Yusuf for them.”[^12]

Based on the aforementioned explanations, it has been concluded that
contingent existents are realities whose existence is nothing but their
relation to the Necessary Existent. Otherwise, they would be needless in
their essences which would in turn mean that they would be necessary by
their essences, which is obviously false.

Thus, they are in their entire existence dependent on the Necessary
Essence and it is impossible to view the *relation* [i.e. the creature,
for as previously mentioned the contingent existent is nothing but that
relation] without the object to which it is related *(marbut ‘ilayh)*.
That is, comprehending the effect independent of its cause is
impossible. Thus, the comprehension of every thing, even purely material
existents, is concomitant with comprehending the Necessary Existent.

Although knowledge is of two types: simple knowledge and compound
knowledge, even as ignorance is of both types. Simple knowledge is one’s
knowledge of an issue without being aware of the existence of that
knowledge. Compound knowledge is when one’s knowledge is realized; that
is, when one knows that he knows. We are of the opinion that a knowledge
of Allah (awj) exists in all human beings; it could be conceptual or
presential and the object of that knowledge could be anything. That is,
when one comprehends something, whether through conceptual knowledge or
presential knowledge, he has comprehended Allah (awj) along with
it.[^13]

The Qur\`an states,

“***He is known to every one ignorant of Him***.”[^14]

Even the person in doubt comprehends Allah (awj) prior to comprehending
his doubt for Allah (awj) is the cause of his doubt and so the doubt is
nothing but a relation to Allah (awj). So yes it is true; some are
unaware of their knowledge of Allah (awj) and as such are oblivious to
this necessary comprehension.

Therefore, when Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) said, “I do not see anything
but that I see Allah prior to it” or “I do not worship a Lord I do not
see”[^15] he was aware of his knowledge. He had grasped the truth of the
verse,

***“…so whichever way you turn, there is the face of Allah.”***[^16]

The face cannot be beheld without beholding the possessor of the face.
He was a gnostic who through voluntary extinguishment witnessed, in this
world that other-than-Him is hidden and it is He, the Creator, Who is
manifest, and it was because of this that he said, “If the veils were to
be lifted, my certainty would not increase.”[^17]

Whatever serves as an obstacle to sight or understanding is referred to
as a veil. A veil is either of darkness or of light. Regarding the veil
of darkness which is the veil of materiality, there are three elements:
the subject from whom the matter in question is hidden, the veil, and
the veiled [i.e. the object that is hidden]. But regarding the veil of
light there are only two elements: the veiled and the subject from whom
the matter in question is hidden.

Obscurity in the latter case is the result of the intensity of the
brightness of the veiled, or more accurately as the result of the
weakness of perception on the part of the subject. As an analogy, one is
incapable of seeing the sun in some cases, because of an obstacle, such
as a wall or dust, or at other times because of the intense brightness
of the sun, which is actually the result of the weakness of one’s
vision.

A poet has said: “The veil that conceals Your face is Your face, at all
times; You are hidden from the world as You are so manifest.”

Between Allah (awj) and His creatures, there are no obstacles except His
creatures.[^18] If the human being succeeds in removing the veils of
darkness, of egocentrism, and of desire, only then can he turn to
removing the veils of light.

It is for this that in the *Sha’baniyyah Supplication*, one pleads to
Allah (awj) for the rending of the veils of light.[^19] Other than the
Prophet (ص) and the Ahlul Bayt (ع) no one is capable of rending all the
veils of light. Of course, the core of the Divine Essence and Attributes
is impregnable even to them.[^20] Therefore, they are themselves veils
of light for viewing the Divine Essence and since a contingent being
cannot escape being limited, they also gaze at Allah (awj) from the
outlook of their own [limited] existences; “‘Unqa[^21] is not the game
to be ensnared, so remove your net.”

Hence, the knowledge of every knowing being is limited to the framework
of its existence and to the extent that it lacerates the veils. Imam
‘Ali b. Abi Talib (ع) in this regard says, “The intellects will never
have the capacity to reach to the core and circle of His Attributes.
Nevertheless, there is no veil to obstruct anyone in comprehending the
necessary level [of knowledge of Allah].”[^22]

That is, on the one hand, all the existents of the world of contingency
are Divine signs and as such serve as mirrors[^23] reflecting a true
image [of the Divine] but at the same time, they are not separable from
the Divine. Basically, they have no other role but to reflect the beauty
of the Divine, although “children” [i.e. intellectually and spiritually
immature persons] might perceive them as separate entities.

On the other hand, “[those standing at] the apices of [intellectual]
resolve cannot comprehend Him, and [those who have] dived in [the depths
of] acuity cannot reach Him.”[^24] His Essence neither yields to the
intellection of the sage[^25], neither to the spiritual experience of
the gnostic[^26], thus they both admit their incapability. This
incapability arises because comparing what a contingent being can
comprehend of Allah (awj) with what it cannot comprehend is to compare
finitude with infinity.

At the end, the point that must be mentioned is that in the Islamic
corpus of narrations there is mention of an innate knowledge of Allah
(awj). Innate knowledge is of the intuitive, presential knowledge, which
was explicated previously.

There are two types of innate qualities in the human being: innate
understandings (which every human being possesses prior to any
education) and innate inclinations (which are part and parcel of the
nature of every human being). The former are referred to as “innate
knowledge of Allah (awj)” and the latter as “innate worship of Allah.”

But, as mentioned previously, they are not present at a conscious level
of the human mind so as to render a rational endeavour [to understand
Allah (awj)] unnecessary. Nevertheless, since knowledge of Allah (awj)
is innate, the arguments presented in favour of Allah (awj) serve
actually as reminders and not real proofs. In the process of proving
something, one realizes that he has acquired a knowledge which he
formerly lacked. But being reminded is to become aware that one has had
something all along, albeit unknowingly. Thus it is that in Qur\`anic
verses and in narrations, what is always mentioned is the removal of the
veils of obliviousness. And what rids one of a state of obliviousness is
a reminder not a proof.

Brief Answer
------------

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: Though it is possible to reach understanding and certainty based
on traditions and authority as well; but in this case it is necessary to
have previously proved both the fact that the traditions in question
were in fact quoted correctly from the holders of authority, such as the
Immaculates, and the fact that such traditions have cognitive value. It
is only then that they can be used as the standards by which to judge
the findings of either the intellect or the heart.

[^2]: Or macrocosmic signs. That is, the signs outside of the human mind
and body.

[^3]: Surat al-Fussilat (41), Verse 53:  سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِـنَا فِي
الآفََاقِ وَفِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ

[^4]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 164:  إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمٌوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي
تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ وَمَا أَنْزَلَ اللٌّهُ
مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مِنْ مَاءٍ فَأَحْـيَا بِهِ الأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا
وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ دَآبَّةٍ وَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ وَالسَّحَابِ
الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَآءِ وَالأَرْضِ لآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُون

[^5]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Short Saying 250: عَرَفْتُ اللٌّهَ سُبْحَانَهُ
بِفَسَخِ الْعَزَائِمِ وَحِلِّ الْعُقُودِ.

[^6]: Jawahir al-Saniyyah, pg. 116: مَنْ عَرَفَ نَفْسَهُ فَقَدْ عَرَفَ
رَبَّهُ.

[^7]: Surat al-Fussilat (41), Verse 53:  أَوَلَـمْ يَكْفِ بِرَبِّكَ
أَنَّهُ عَلـى كُلِّ شَيءٍ شَهِيدٌ 

[^8]: Surat Ibrahim (14), Verse 10:  قَالَتْ رُسُلُهُمْ أَفِي اللٌّهِ
شَكٌّ فَاطِرِ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ 

[^9]: Surat Qaf (50), Verse 22:  لَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هٌذَا
فَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ 

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 95 pg. 226; also Mafatih al-Jinan: أَيَكُونُ
لِغَيْرِكَ مِنَ الظُّهُورِ مَا لَيسَ لَكَ حَتَّى يَكُونَ هُوَ
الْمُظْهِرَ لَكَ؟ مَتَى غِبْتَ حَـتَّى تَحْتَاجَ إِلـى دَلِيلٍ يدُلُّ
عَلَيْكَ؟ وَمَتَى بَعُدْتَ حَتَّى تَكُونَ الآثَارَ هِيَ الَّتِي تُوصِلُ
إِلَيكَ؟

[^11]: It must be pointed out that in Farsi and ‘Arabic in asking if the
person being addressed is the same one the former had heard about or
known previously, he can put the question forth in two ways. He can say,
in the case of ‘Arabic, a anta fuln (lit. Are you ...?) or a fuln ant
(lit. Is... you?). The latter case is not used in English. Therefore,
the reasoning forwarded in the text should be understood in the context
of the ‘Arabic language. (Tr.)

[^12]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul, pg. 327: إِنَّ مَعْرِفَةَ عَيْنِ الشَّاهِدِ
قَبْلَ صِفَتِهِ وَمَعْرِفَةَ صِفَةِ الْغَائِبِ قَبْلَ عَيْنِهِ. قِيلَ:
وَكَيْفَ نَعْرِفُ عَيْنَ الشَّاهِدِ قَبْلَ صِفَتِهِ؟ قَالَ (ع):
تَعْرِفُهُ وَتَعْلَمُ عِلْمَهُ وَتَعْرِفُ نَفْسَكَ بِهِ وَلاَ تَعْرِفُ
نَفْسَكَ بِنَفْسِكَ مِنْ نَفْسِكَ. وَتَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مَا فِيهِ لَهُ
وَبِهِ كَمَا قَالُوا لِيُوْسُفَ: إِنَّكَ لأَنْتَ يُوسُفَ قَالَ أَنَا
يُوسُفُ وَهٌذَا أَخِي فَعَرَفُوهُ بِهِ وَلَمْ يَعْرِفُوهُ بِغَيرِهِ.

[^13]: al-Tawhid by Shaykh Saduq, pg. 143: لاَ يُدْرِكُ مَخْلُوقٌ شَيئاً
إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ وَلاَ تُدْرَكُ مَعْرِفَةُ اللٌّهِ إِلاَّ بِاللٌّهِ.

[^14]: al-Tawhid by Shaykh Saduq, pg. 58: ...مَعْرُوفٌ عِنْدَ کُلِّ
جَاهِلٍ...

[^15]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, pg. 98 مَا کُنْتُ أَعْـبُدُ رَبًّا لَمْ أَرَهُ.

[^16]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 115:  فَأَيْـنَمَا تَوَلُّو فَثَمَّ
وَجْهُ اللٌّهِ 

[^17]: Sharh Mi’ah Kalimah, pg. 52; Matlub Kulli Talib, pg. 3; ‘Uyun
al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’izh, pg. 415: لَوْ کُشِفَ الْغِطَاءُ مَا ازْدَدْتُ
يَقِيناً.

[^18]: al-Tawhid by Shaykh Saduq, pg. 170: لَيْسَ بَينَهُ وَ بَينَ
خَلْقِهِ حِجَابٌ غَيرَ خَلْقِهِ...

[^19]: Mafatih al-Jinan: وَ أَنِرْ أَبْصَارَ قُلُوبِنَا بِضَيآءِ
نَظَرِهَا إِلَيكَ حَتَّى تَخْرِقَ أَبْصَارُ الْقُلُوبِ حُجَبَ النُّورِ
فَتَصِلَ إِلـى مَعْدِنِ الْعَظَمَةِ وَ...

[^20]: Surat Ali-’Imran (3), Verse 30:  وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللٌّهُ
نَفْسَـهُ 

[^21]: A giant but beautiful bird in Persian mythology, also called
Simurgh. In this line of poetry however, it is a metaphor for
comprehending the core of Divine Essence. (Tr.)

[^22]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 49: ... لَمْ يَطَّلِعِ الْعُقُولَ عَلى
تَحْدِيدِ صِفَتِهِ. وَلَمْ يَحْجُبْهَا عَنْ وَاجِبِ مَعْرِفَتِهِ...

[^23]: In his debate with ‘Imran al-Abi’i, Imam al-Rida ( ع) says:
“Neither He is in the creation nor is the creation in Him. Just like the
mirror: neither you are in it nor it in you. And the mirror is not like
a mirage that portrays a deceptive view. At the same time, it has no
truth in it other than the image of the person standing in front of it.”
Al-Tawhid of Shaykh as-Sadiq, pp., 434-435

[^24]: Nahj al-Balaghah, First Sermon: ...لاَيُدْرِكُهُ بُعْدُ الْهِمَمِ
وَ لاَيَنَالُهُ غَوْصَ الْفِطَنِ...

[^25]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71 pg. 21, no. 1: مَا عَرَّفْنَاكَ حَقَّ
مَعْرِِفَتِكَ.

[^26]: Mir’at al-’Uqul, vol. 8 pg. 146: مَا عَبَدْنَاكَ حَقَّ
عِبَادَتِكَ.


