Question 48: Legal imitation of a Jurist (mujtahid)
===================================================

**Question:** What do the terms “marja’iyyah” and “taqlid” mean?

Brief Answer
------------

*Marja’iyyah* is a legal term that means “the issuance of a legal ruling
*(fatwa)*.” Conceptually, it is coupled with the term taqlid (legal
imitation) which denotes “the referral of one who holds no specialty in
jurisprudence to a specialized jurist to seek his opinion in legal
matters.” Keeping in mind that a non-specialist must always refer to a
specialist in issues requiring expertise, such legal imitation is indeed
logical.

Detailed Answer
---------------

*Marja’iyyah* literally means “to be a source of reference *(ruju’)*.”
In Islamic jurisprudential jargon, it is a legal term that means “the
issuance of a legal ruling (fatwa),” since one who issues a legal ruling
serves as a source of reference for lay people in legal matters. It is
coupled with the term taqlid (legal imitation), in such a way that if
one person is a *marja’* (one who issues legal rulings), others are
considered *muqallidin* (those who imitate his legal rulings). For this
reason, in order to explain the term marja’iyyah, we must begin by
explaining the term taqlid.

In Islamic jurisprudence, taqlid is “the referral of one who holds no
specialty in jurisprudence to a specialized jurist to seek his opinion
in legal matters.” Referring to experts in such a way is a logical
course of action. In fact, the strongest argument supporting the
legality of taqlid is the conventional wisdom that non-specialists must
always refer to specialists in matters concerning their field of
specialty. Any textual evidence that can be cited from the Qur\`an (such
as the verse that says: ***“Ask the experts if you do not know”***[^1])
or from the ahadith simply reinforce this logical principle.

A qualified jurisprudent *(faqih)* therefore is considered a *marji’*
because of his expertise in deriving legal rulings from the sources of
Islamic law.

[^1]: Surat al-Nahl (16), Verse 47:  أَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ عَلى تَخَوُّفٍ
فَإِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ 


