Question 49: Difference between hukm and fatwa
==============================================

**Question:** What do the terms “Hukm” and “*Fatwa*” signify? What is
the difference between the two?

When a mujtahid derives a legal ruling concerning a given issue by
referring to the sources of Islamic law (the Qur\`an, the sunnah, ijma’
(consensus), and ‘aql (the intellect)) using the methodology of ijtihad
(juristic interpretation), the ruling which he ascertains is called a
fatwa. Thus, a fatwa is a universally applicable religious law
concerning a particular issue.[^1]

However, when the mujtahid takes into account the general principles of
divine law, the specific system in place in his country, and prevailing
conditions, and issues a legal ruling for all people, a specific
contingency, or an individual, such a ruling is called a hukm. In this
way, a hukm, while taking into account general Islamic principles,
values, and goals, also looks to the specific conditions of a people.
Therefore, such a ruling remains in place as long as those conditions
prevail.

From the divine perspective, obedience of both a fatwa and a hukm is
obligatory.[^2] The only difference in this regard is that a fatwa is
only legally binding on the mujtahid who issues it and his muqallid (one
who imitates his rulings), while the hukm is binding on all groups or
individuals enumerated in the hukm.

Brief Answer
------------

A fatwa is a universally applicable religious law concerning a
particular issue that is derived from the four sources of Islamic law
(the Qur\`an, the sunnah, *ijma’* (consensus), and *‘aql* (the
intellect)) using the methodology of *ijtihad* (juristic
interpretation).

A hukm on the other hand, is a law issued by a qualified mujtahid
(jurist) who is the head of an Islamic government. Such a leader, by
keeping in mind the general principles of divine law, the Islamic
systems[^3], and prevailing conditions, issues a hukm (legal ruling) for
all people, a specific contingency, or an individual.

From the divine perspective, obedience of both a fatwa and a hukm is
obligatory. The only difference in this regard is that a fatwa is only
legally binding on the mujtahid who issues it and his muqallid (one who
imitates his rulings), while the hukm is binding on all groups or
individuals enumerated in the hukm.

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: Imam Khumayni referred to these methods as the “traditional
jurisprudence.”

[^2]: Islamic laws are, thus, divided into two categories: “divine
laws,” which refer to practical religious laws or “fatwa,” and
“authoritative laws,” which pertain to the orders or “hukm” issued by
the leader.

[^3]: For every aspect of human life, Islam has put forth a set of
universal institutions. Taken together, these institutions, in all their
aspects, form a structure or “system,” which works towards the
objectives that are based on Islamic principles. Thus, the “Islamic
economic system” is the set of universal institutions applying to the
aspects of economics.


