Question 50: Religious Pluralism and different Interpretations of Religion
==========================================================================

**Question:** Please explain what religious pluralism is and the
difference between it and the interpretations of religion.

Pluralism is multiplicity. It has different meanings in the philosophy
of religion, ethics, law, political science, etc. The common factor that
holds true for all of these is to acknowledge multiplicity or plurality
in contrast to unity or exclusivism. Religious pluralism means that
felicity is not exclusively reserved for a particular religion or
religious sect. Truth and felicity not being limited to a specific
religion in its turn means that all religions have a certain amount of
truth to them. As a result, following the laws of any of them can be a
means for man to reach felicity and to gain salvation. The Acceptance of
this viewpoint means that the battle of truth and falsehood that exists
between religions ceases to exist. The enmity and war that we find
between religions gives way to peace and solidarity.

Brief Answer
------------

1. Pluralism is multiplicity. It has different meanings in the
philosophy of religion, ethics, law, political science, etc. The common
factor that is true for all of these is to acknowledge multiplicity and
plurality as opposed to unity or exclusivism. Religious pluralism means
that felicity is not exclusively reserved for a particular religion or
religious sect.

2. Pluralism can conceivably be applied between various religions or
between different sects of one religion.

3. From the point of view of Islam, religious pluralism is incorrect
because we have clear proofs that Islam is the true religion and that
the other religions cannot be on par with it. Also, the fact that the
Noble Qur\`an has not been tampered with and that Islam is the final and
conclusive religion effectively amounts to the abrogation of the
religions predating Islam.

4. The various interpretations of religion or “religious hermeneutics”
is another branch of religious research. The followers of this school
believe in the validity and effectiveness of all the presuppositions of
every interpreter of religion when he attempts to understand a sacred
text. In the various modern interpretations of religion there are
numerous perspectives, the most important of which are held by Friedrich
Schleiermacher, Wilhelm Dilthey, Martin Heidegger, and Hans-Georg
Gadamer.

5. Even though the discussion of religious hermeneutics is a modern
discussion in the philosophy of religion and was taken from the West,
the fact remains that in depth discussions on the interpretation of
sacred texts has a long history in the Islamic sciences, especially in
the field of *Usul*.

6. In the aforementioned schools and areas of research, not enough
importance has been placed on the principles by which we can truthfully
judge the validity of the different interpretations of religion. In
reality, this leads to a form of relativism in understanding.

7. Religious hermeneutics and religious pluralism are properly two
separate categories, but hermeneutics can be seen to be one of the
instances of religious pluralism and hence the bridge which links the
two topics. In other words, we can explain the multiplicity of religions
because it is possible that we can understand one thing in many
different ways

8. The objection that can be levied against this view is that one cannot
judge every interpretation to be correct. It cannot be denied that the
understanding of human beings follows the rules of speech and
conversation. While attempting to understand a text there are principles
that are to be used such as: paying attention to the meaning of the
speaker or writer, the system of words he is using, the language that he
speaks, his attitude while speaking, his seriousness or his joviality,
and the fact that he has definitely intended certain meanings from his
text.

Detailed Answer
---------------

### A Brief History of Religious Pluralism

Religious Pluralism was first born in the Christian world and in the
last ten years was presented and propagated by John Hick (1992).

Religious pluralism can be considered between various religions in the
sense that we consider them all to be true, or at least to all contain
some element of truth. Or within any particular religion, various sects
can be considered to be valid. For example, the Shi’ite and Sunni sects
are two sects within the fold of Islam—each claiming to be the pure
Islam. But from the point of view of religious pluralism, both of these
groups can be valid, or it can be said that both sects contain some
truth to them. In other words religious pluralism can be divided into
inter-religious and intra-religious pluralism.

The intellectual foundations of religious pluralism can be delineated as
follows:

1. The differentiation between the kernel and the shell of
religion—giving prominence to the kernel of religion, to the detriment
of the shell. In this regards, the teachings, especially the mannerisms
and the exoteric rituals, are usually considered to be the shell of
religion.

2. This interpretation lays great emphasis on “revelatory” and religious
experiences and, in principle, sums up religion as religious experience.
Religious experience is naturally always different when it is being
formally related or interpreted. This is because on the level of forms,
various factors such as culture and intellectual perspectives come into
play. In the end, the multiplicity of religions becomes a reflection of
some common type of religious experience as it is seen through the
mirror of various cultures.

3. This interpretation is a humanistic one. It holds that religions
should stick to down to earth realities that are common instead of
laying stress on matters of sublime doctrine; they should keep the
latter for themselves.

4. All religions have one message and with a little analysis, the
differences between them disappear. In reality, the differences between
religions arise from the differences of interpretations and languages,
and are not real.

5. This phenomenon is based on the difference between the “truth in
itself” and the “truth as it appears to us.” In reality, there is an
objective truth, but we do not have a perfect understanding of it. Yet
the “truth as it appears to us” is a manifestation of this objective
reality. The coming into contact of this [non-delimited] divine reality
with [limited] man has meant that it has taken on different forms
depending upon the differing conditions of man through the ages and in
various cultures.

Aside from this, Allah (awj) has, in order to create an effective
relationship, made his message to conform to the inner workings of every
culture and era. It should not be forgotten that many serious objections
could be levied against the aforementioned view, even though some of
them (like the first) can be interpreted in such a way as to make it
correct. For a more in depth and fuller explanation of the above, we
suggest referring to the relevant books.

6. This explanation is a hermeneutical one. It is based on the belief
that the presuppositions of every interpreter have a pivotal effect on
his attempts to understand a sacred text. According to this viewpoint,
the writer and the speaker are just like the interpreter–after the
writer finishes the composition of a text he gives up his status as
writer.

This view says that the text in itself does not have any meaning; rather
it is the interpreter that gives meaning to the text by means of his
presuppositions and his knowledge. To put it differently, the meaning
that resides in any text is much like wax from which the mind of the
interpreter forms different shapes according to his predisposition and
mental acumen. So, the texts are not pregnant with meanings, rather they
are, so to speak, hungry for meaning. It is the interpreters and the
listeners that give meaning to texts.

The sixth viewpoint is the common denominator between religious
pluralism and the hermeneutics of religious texts. It has some valid
objections that we will now refer to.

The system of man’s understanding follows the laws of discourse and
conversation. All sane people of the world follow those principles when
conversing with one another. The following are principles of
conversation: paying attention to the meaning of the speaker or writer,
the system of words he is using, the language that he is speaking, his
attitude while speaking, his seriousness or his joviality, and the fact
that he has definitely intended certain meanings from his text. They are
all principles that rational people use when speaking.

Even people who hold to the “interpretation” hypothesis outlined above
cannot deny using these principles themselves. Of course when a text
gives news of something, one must, according to the clues and the
meanings of the words, strive to understand it. Also, because religious
texts have abrogated laws, general and particular statements,
unconditional and conditional sentences, etc. we must carefully examine
the beginnings and the ends of each and every text before coming to a
conclusion.

Therefore, in attempting to understand a text, certain presuppositions
exist, like knowing the language of the speaker and the context, but
there are also some presuppositions that prevent the listener from
understanding it and one must stay away from those if one wants to
understand the text.

### A Review of Religious Pluralism

Aside from all the objections that can be raised against religious
pluralism, one must not forget that according to us Muslims there are
various sound proofs for the validity and truthfulness of Islam. With
these proofs one cannot claim that all religions are equal. Some of
these proofs are as follows: the reasonable nature of the teachings of
Islam, the fact that Islamic texts are backed up by references, the
un-tampered nature of the Noble Book of Muslims, the miraculous nature
of the Qur\`an, the comprehensiveness of the laws and their positive and
practical nature.

Aside from these proofs a point that must not be lost sight of is the
fact that Islam conclusively follows all previous religions. This is
tantamount to the abrogation of the preceding religions.

### The Various Interpretations of Religion

The various interpretations of religion or “religious hermeneutics” is
another branch of religious research. The followers of this school
believe in the validity and effectiveness of all the presuppositions of
every interpreter of religion when he attempts to understand a sacred
text. In the various modern interpretations of religion there are
numerous perspectives, the most important of which will be briefly
outlined below:

1. The view of Friedrich Schleiermacher: Hermeneutics is a method for
interpreting religious texts and helps avoiding misunderstandings that
may arise from the time separating the interpreter and the text itself.

2. The view of Wilhelm Dilthey: Hermeneutics is a theory used in the
human sciences in contrast to the natural sciences. He believes that
history interferes in the interpretation of an interpreter.

3. The view of Martin Heidegger: Hermeneutics makes clear the essence
and nature of understanding and its conditions. He changed hermeneutics
from a method to a philosophy (or the knowledge of being). Based on a
theory relating to existence, he took hermeneutics to be the exposition
of the quiddity and essence of understanding and its conditions.

4. The view of Hans-Georg Gadamer: Hermeneutics is the [study of the]
confluence of different levels and perspectives. He presented the
ontology of Heidegger as an epistemology and thereby established an
“ontology of understanding.” The hermeneutics of Gadamer is for the most
part an exposition of the process of the realization of understanding
and has no concern with the correctness or incorrectness of
understanding.

According to him, the mind of the interpreter is filled with beliefs and
information that define his perspective. This perspective always moves
along with the interpreter and changes or reaches an equilibrium as he
continues to refer to the world and the things in it. The act of
interpretation is the confluence of various perspectives and horizons of
knowledge within the interpreter; it is the connection of these
“horizons” and perspectives with one another.

The job of hermeneutics is to unite these perspectives and horizons and
to create a dialogue between the interpreter and the text. What causes
differences between various interpretations is the emphasis that is put
upon certain presuppositions and horizons of thought over others.
According to Gadamer, there is no one absolute viewpoint that could
comprehend and embrace all possible perspectives.

Rather every act of interpretation is a specific perspective in itself.
Therefore an unbiased and objective interpretation is not possible and
an all-inclusive, definitive interpretation just does not exist. In
reality, according to Gadamer, it is not important to discover the
“real” intentions of the writer, because in the end, we cannot know the
text to be a true representation of the mind of the writer.

### A Review of Gadamer

We will now briefly allude to some objections that can be raised against
Gadamer, seeing as his views have had more of an effect and have been
used in theological and philosophical discussions quite often in recent
years, and are therefore more important.

1. Why should we not pay attention to the intent of the writer? Should
not the interpreter strive to differentiate between the predispositions
of his own understanding and that of the writer?

2. Gadamer’s perspective leads to a sort of relativism, blurring or
removing the distinction between correct and incorrect understanding.
This is a kind of relativism that resembles that of Kant.

3. We can question the universality of Gadamer’s view and we can go on
to hold that it is possible to avoid the effects of certain
presuppositions and prejudgments.

4. If every understanding needs certain presuppositions, then in their
turn those presuppositions are not exceptions to this rule; and this
leads logically to an infinite or circular regress of presuppositions.

### Some Points Worth Mentioning Regarding The Different Interpretations Of Religion

Until now we have explained hermeneutics and the different
interpretations of religion, and we have also touched upon the different
views regarding it. We have especially covered the viewpoints of
Gadamer, mainly due to the fact that they had a far-reaching effect on
his contemporaries. In order to complete the discussion we will remind
our readers of certain important points:

First, although the subject of different interpretations of religion has
largely been taken from modern philosophical hermeneutics, it should be
noted that the discussion on the interpretation and understanding of
religion has a long history in the Islamic sciences. This is especially
the case in the fields of *usul*, Qur\`anic commentary, and theoretical
mysticism. Hence, the different kinds of intellectual, textual,
symbolic, and mystical commentaries of the Qur\`an, the commentary of
the Qur\`an by the Qur\`an, the commentary by one’s own opinion,
semantics, and the method of obtaining the apparent meaning of the words
of a text, all serve to show the presence of this perspective in
traditional Islamic scholarship.

Secondly, since the religious texts played an important part in shaping
the culture of Muslims and in the formation of the different Islamic
sciences, it is possible to say that investigations into the method of
interpreting religious texts play a pivotal role in theological
discussions. It is largely due to this that the arguments surrounding
the different interpretations of religion have provoked much debate in
this area.

Most of the views that have been put forward by Arab and non-Arab
intellectuals in recent years have been for the most part borrowed from
the hermeneutic philosophy of Gadamer. These intellectuals have tried to
use the hermeneutic philosophy and methodology in the interpretation of
the Noble Qur\`an and the traditions, and in trying to understand
religion in general. Some of their views in this regard can be summed up
as follows:

1. Religion and the religious texts are quiet and do not speak to us.

2. The presuppositions of interpreters have an effect in their
interpretations of the texts.

3. No interpreter can grasp the essence of any religion.

4. There is no one pure perspective. Rather we all use interpretations
that are mixtures of truth and falsehood.

The third point is this: In the view of many of the thinkers mentioned
above, no importance should be given to principles by which we can judge
the various interpretations of religion. No effort is exerted towards
separating the incorrect readings from the correct ones. In other words,
according to this stance, all the different understandings are equal.

On the contrary and in line with the religious principles and viewpoints
that are still prevalent in the traditional world, any interpreter must
strive to separate the predispositions of his thought from that of the
author of the text. He must strive to correct his line of thought and
achieve a concordance with the intentions of the writer by using certain
principles. If he does not do this, his views will lead not only to the
relativity of the understanding of religion but also to the relativity
of the methodology of understanding.

According to the views of Islamic scholars, the different understandings
of religious statements are an unavoidable phenomena but this difference
of understanding is a matter that is regulated by certain principles and
laws, many of which have been clearly enunciated by the religious
tradition itself.

The fourth and final point: According to what we have just said, the
thought of the followers of religious hermeneutic philosophy and the
different interpretations of religion revolves around the interpreter
and sees him to be central. While on the other hand, the view of Islamic
scholars revolves around the author and they attempt to find his
original intentions (in the case of religion, the author is either Allah
or one whom He sends). In this approach, the interpreter looks through
the text—the Qur\`an or the traditions—to the intentions of the author,
allowing it to be called a “text centred” approach. It aims at revealing
the intentions of the author or speaker as correctly as possible and
uses all the means that can possibly assist him in this regard.


