Question 4: Misguidance from Allah
==================================

**Question:** What is the meaning of Allah’s (awj) misguidance in the
Qur\`an?

Misguidance is a non-existent entity. Since guidance means to lead
someone to a goal, then misguidance is the absence of guidance. In the
parlance of the logicians, the relation between guidance and misguidance
is privatives and positives *(‘Adam wa malakah)*. In other words, if
guidance were to exist in a certain place, then it is impossible for
misguidance to exist there (from the same aspect); but if guidance were
not there then the absence of guidance is misguidance.

Because of this it is not possible to attribute misguidance to Allah
(awj) since it is not possible to give or take something that does not
exist. Unlike guidance, which relates both to existence and the law,
misguidance relates only to existence and has no relation with the law.
This is because Allah (awj) is essentially the Guide, since if this were
not the case then the evildoers would bring an excuse before Allah (awj)
saying, “We wanted your guidance but you lead us astray.”

Therefore, at the outset, Allah (awj) leads everyone towards felicity,
happiness and the right path and in this stage there can be no
misguidance. But if someone wilfully does not accept this call and turns
his back towards it, then in this case he incurs Allah’s (awj)
existential misguidance. Therefore Allah’s (awj) misguiding someone
simply means that He cuts off His guidance from him and leaves him to
fend for himself, the result of which is that man becomes lost on the
path of guidance. Man’s being lost then, is caused by not having Allah’s
(awj) guidance - and this is the meaning of existential misguidance.

When we pay attention to the verses of the Noble Book, we find that
there are two kinds of Divine guidance: one that is related to the law
and the second that is related to existence. Man has both kinds of
guidance. This is in contrast to misguidance, which is only existential
and does not exist with relation to the Law. This is because Allah (awj)
is essentially the Guide, since it is impossible that He be essentially
the Lord, the Worshipped, and the Refuge, but not be the Essential
Guide. If this were not the case then the evildoers would bring forth an
excuse, saying to Allah (awj), “We wanted your guidance but you lead us
astray.”

It is impossible for Allah (awj) to lead someone astray initially since
this goes against His wisdom and since nothing comes from Allah (awj)
except goodness and mercy, He does not lead anyone on an incorrect path
from the outset. Rather, His misguidance is a type of punishment. In
other words the bad people have gone astray and have been afflicted with
misguidance by there own choice. Therefore in reality, initial
misguidance is ascribed to the creatures, and the misguidance that is a
punishment pertains to the Creator.

In conclusion we can say that Allah’s (awj) misguidance means that He
cuts off His mercy and blessings from a person and leaves him to fend
for himself; and it is this that results in man becoming lost on the
Path. If someone does not accept the guidance of the Law, Allah (awj)
will exclude him from His existential guidance. In other words, it is
the actions of a disbeliever or an oppressor which cause him not to have
Divine guidance. This is in line with the order of creation, which is
based on cause and effect. Consequently Allah (awj) has said that He
will not guide the unbeliever[^1], oppressor[^2], or the sinner.[^3]

Brief Answer
------------

Detailed Answer
---------------

[^1]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 264:  ...وَاللٌّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ  See also: Surat al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 67;
Surat al-Tawbah (9), Verse 37

[^2]: Surat al-Baqarah (2), Verse 258:  ...وَاللٌّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ  See also: Surat Ali-‘Imran (3), Verse 86;
Surat al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 51

[^3]: Surat Ali- ‘Imran (3), Verse 86:  ...وَاللٌّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ  See also: Surat al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 108;
Surat al-Tawbah (9), Verse 80


