[Introduction]
==============

In many societies, it is believed that one of these very days is
occasioned by the birth of Christ (AS). The birth date of His Excellency
is in an atmosphere of uncertainty. It is not obvious exactly when he
was born; hence there is a lot of doubt and confusion about it.

Today’s world has become the world of doubtfulness, hesitancy,
meticulosity and fuss. It does not mean that it particularly belongs to
the modern era and it did not exist in the ancient times, but these
features has been boosted and reinforced increasingly in our time, for
example, some have recently doubted over the writers of some books
published in the past. For a couple of times I have happened to hear
that one of Attar’s (of Nishapur) books is not his work and belongs to a
different writer. Another example is about the dates. The birth date of
our Prophet is on Rabi' al-awwal 12, according to what is mentioned in
Usūl al-Kāfī (Kitab al-Kafi)2 . The Sunnites also believe the same, but
there are other versions saying it is on Rabi' al-awwal 17. Fortunately
the deviation is not that much and it is only 5 days and has been
celebrated in 5 consecutive days in the recent years, called “the week
of unity” and it is a very good work. Although this does not have
anything to do with being a Sunnite or a Shiite, it has been prevalent
that if someone says that the birth date of the Prophet is on Rabi'
alawwal 12, he is believed to be a Sunnite, and if a Sunnite says that
the Prophet’s birth date is on Rabi' al-awwal 17, he is thought to be
converted to Shi’ism.

There are also, at the moment, controversies over the birth date of
Jesus Christ (AS). Now, I do not want to thoroughly go into details, but
in Iran, for example, Armenians celebrate the birth of Christ on one
certain day and Assyrians do it on another. But it is customary to
celebrate it in these very days3 and almost a majority of the Christians
celebrate it these days; it makes no difference in essence for us, as
unfortunately we do not follow his (Christ’s) and our Prophet’s
spiritual instructions. In effect, we; the Muslims, are also Christians,
we are Christian Muslims; because we follow the one whose advent Jesus
Christ (AS) had annunciated, but as a Muslim Christian, (unfortunately)
the kindness and affection that Christ talked about are not there in our
personalities, the forgiveness and mercy that he talked about are not
there in us; he said that if your cloak has been taken away from you,
give your cassock away too, if someone slaps you in the face, turn the
other cheek4 . We have such. order in Islam too, but we consider
different levels; as such orders cannot be expected from all people. At
first and at the beginning stage it is stipulated in the Quran for
public:***“In the law of equality (qisas) there is (saving of) life to
you, o ye men of understanding”*** 5 , but in upper levels it
states:***“and those who restrain anger, and pardon (all) men, for Allah
loves those who do good”*** 6 , that are four levels in total.


