[The Manin Debate]
==================

In any way, whether the birth of Christ (AS) were 2000 years ago,
whether 1780 years ago or a few years ago, it would not make a
difference for us at the moment since we pay more attention to the
spiritual aspect of events than to the historical details. We consider
this date as our criterion too, because the majority believes that the
birth of Christ happened in these very days, in other words, consensus
and agreement of many people, so to speak- that it happened on such a
day- this consensus and agreement stress the importance of this very
day.

Allah states:***“and remind them of the days of Allah”*** 7 . Every day
belongs to God, they are***“days of Allah”*** , but the days He has
bestowed on us a godsend, we pay respect and tribute to them in the name
of Allah’s days and we hope that the inner Messiah will be born inside
us.

This mentality of doubtfulness and fuss that I mentioned in the
beginning has been developed so greatly that some say the existence of
Jesus Christ is just an imagination, a myth, there was not any Christ at
all. We definitely reject such statement. This is not the question of
the birth date as it makes no difference for us what date it was; we
reject it because aside from all the historical records, there is a more
convincing evidence and that is the Creator of Jesus who has directly
said:***“to Allah, the example of Jesus is as that of Adam; He created
him from dust, then said to him: "be". And he was there.”*** 8 So let
the historians say whatever they think. We say there really was some
Jesus- as there was some Adam too- and words have been left as
inheritance from Christ (AS) which have mostly been recited in the
Gospels. Therefore, we are rest assured up to this point that there was
some Christ who is respected by us, Muslims, too, because his name is
cited in the Quran which is of the greatest validity to us. Moreover,
some teachings attributed to His Excellency have been passed on to us.

In Islam, the Quran is the afflatus; the very words and sentences of
which Allah has spoken. There are also some traditions (hadiths) that
are the conversation or direct relation between Allah and the Prophet;
which Allah speaks to the Prophet, but the Prophet was not allowed to
announce them as some part of the Quran. Such traditions (hadiths) are
called the “Hadith-e-Qodsi”. Aside from these, there are other
narrations and hadiths attributed to the Prophet as well. Whereas, there
is no such categorization in both the Old and the New Testament- in
other words, Jesus Christ’s words, the stories, teachings and the divine
words have all come together and they are not distinguishable. Anyhow,
it is a sacred book and reading it is useful for us.

The four Gospels existing at the moment are as narratives. Four accounts
of Christ’s (AS) life, which of course in all of them, Christ’s words
have not been brought cohesively, mostly in story-telling style, though.
The Quran has stories too, every word of which is a lesson and a
reminder. For example, in the story of Joseph (AS), it states:***“We
tell you stories in a highly desirable fashion”*** 9 . What does***“a
highly desirable fashion”*** of storytelling mean? Does it
mean***“We”*** are story tellers? No, it does not. “Highly desirable
fashion” here means that “We” tell you stories every word of which can
be a lesson for you.

Here, the word “story” does not own the literal meaning. In other
places, the Quran states that there were many other prophets whose
stories “We” never read to you, meaning it was not necessary.

Christ (AS) has a particular place from the historical point of view,
too. The Jews also had been awaiting the Messiah. The Messiah; as they
say Mashiah10 , which is the term for their belief of The Promised. God
had promised them that a Jewish king would come and gain mastery over
the world. Due to their ethnicity, breed and genetic heritage, the
Sons-of-Israel tribe interprets everything based on its materialistic
and worldly meaning, they thought that this king or sultan would be the
same as David (AS) or Solomon (AS) who would also have the worldly
kingdom and would rise via invasion and force, as they sometimes abuse
this idea politically. In effect, the word Sultan had to be interpreted
as the divine one, meaning someone who has a divine kingship. Just like
when we name the Holy Imams such as Imam Reza: Al-Sultan Ali, son of
Musa (father of) Reza.

Of course, if they (the Jews) had rallied to the Christ’s flag all
together, they would have achieved that kingdom and superiority, in
effect, the followers of Jesus Christ have been promised to have
dominance over the others. By followers, we Muslims also are certainly
included, because we are following the one whose emergence had been
annunciated by Jesus (AS) and His Excellency also had ordered us to
follow him. Due to this, in general, the spiritual power worldwide
belongs to the Muslims and Christians, even though the materialistic and
worldly powers are in the Jews’ hands. Yet they still need help from the
Muslims and Christians. Apparently, such annunciation is almost similar
to the annunciation told about Mahdi’s reign (AFTS) and we are awaiting
his emergence.

By the time, Prophet John who was Jesus’s cousin emerged with all his
special miraculous acts and grandeur and some people thought that John
might be the Messiah. They asked John and he answered: “I am his
annunciator, I have come to annunciate his emergence and the Messiah
will come soon.” After that Jesus Christ raised.

At the same time, the Jews had conglomerated in Jerusalem and Bethlehem.
Perhaps, because they were awaiting a prophet to emerge, they had
gathered together there. Just like after the time of our Prophet, the
Jews were still awaiting a prophet, they had speculated about emerging a
prophet, and this way they were awaiting the emergence of a prophet in
that area by the time. That was why they had come to that place. Why did
they come to Mecca and Medina; an arid desert area with little
population, while they had basically had that materialistic point of
view? If it were not for the above-mentioned reason, even no single
person would come there.

Also, by the time of Jesus, the Jews were awaiting the emergence of the
Messiah. Those days, there were two powerful empires: Iranian and Roman.
The Roman Empire had dominance over that area and had assigned a
governor. In spite of that governor, the rabbis exerted the public will.
Jewish religious men’s attention was drawn to worldly affairs just like
any other Jews. The mentality of Jesus (AS) was right against such
things; that is, it was suitable for the good of those days. All of the
prophets emerged for the good of their own times, except our Prophet who
is suitable for all times and

places. Moses’s (AS) general mission was to save the Sons of Israel and
because of that, he also handled the worldly affairs. Jesus (AS) totally
ignored the worldly world. It was like someone put an ice cube in a cup
of hot tea, so hot that it burnt the hands. When the ice is completely
melted, the tea will be less hot, so the temperature extremes of these
two (the ice and the hot tea) will become moderate. As though, God
wanted to put ice in the Jews’ heat. The attitude of Jesus was in direct
contrast to that of the Jews. As an obvious example, it is said that
some people were going to give a coin to the Caesar as jizyah (poll
tax), they asked Jesus about it: What do we do with it? He said to them:
Give back to Caesar what is his and to God what is God's. Give the coin
whose inscription is in the name of Caesar back to Caesar, and give back
the heart which is God’s to God11 . He paid no attention to financial
affairs. Succeeding Christians also developed this attitude so that it
ended in monasticism. The Quran states:***“the monasticism which they
invented on their own, We (Allah) did not prescribe for them but the
seeking for the pleasure of Allah”.*** 12 As you can see, God somehow
verifies this monasticism.

When the world and the prevailing mankind’s way of thinking became
conducive to introducing the Islam, the Islam adjusted this condition.
The Islam is between these two (religions), and it is the balance,
between and betwixt. In the Islam, we have two mottos, so to speak. One
says: To whom there is no sustenance; there is no attention to the Last
Judgment either.13 As the proverb says, the hungry mouth cannot maintain
its faith.14 There must be attention to worldly pursuits in order to
protect the hereafter. Does it mean we have to provide just a living?
No, it does not. Because, on the other hand, The Quran states:***“if
humankind finds themselves super independent, they will run riot”*** 15
Being independent can be in any kind, but the most important of all is
the independence in worldly and financial affairs. Therefore, the Islam
presses both dishes of the balance to even them up.

The Prophet of Islam brought the life and the afterlife together and
according to God’s order, he said:***“Our Lord! Give us good in this
life and good in the afterlife, and defend us from the torment of the
fire”.*** 16 My deduction from the surah of Tin’s first verses which
say:***(I swear) to the fig, to the olive, to the Mount Sinai and to
this secure land*** ,17 is that the fig and the olive symbolize Jesus
(AS), then He (Allah) swears to the Mount Sinai which represents Moses’s
place and then He swears to this clean and safe land, the land where
there is our Prophet. In this order, the Quran brings together these
three standings.

Anyhow, Jesus (AS) had played a fundamental role in adjusting this
balance that later on appeared in Islam. Jesus’s faithful followers’
dedications, too, finally caused Constantine; the great Roman emperor
who deliberately harassed and tormented the Christians, converted to
Christianity in the 4th century AD, and after that the Christianity
flourished and found worldly power. Here, God Almighty displayed His
power that a sworn enemy of Christianity became a supporter of it. But
instead, the Christians’ faith started to dwindle. Christianity might
have suffered losses to some extent but Christians benefited from it
because they achieved security. The

basis of Christianity was the very teachings of Jesus (AS), which of
course became permanent. All of Jesus’s teachings elaborated this
sentence by Imam Sadiq (AS):***Is religion anything but love?*** 18 The
whole basis of religion is affection (love). This is the truth that was
brought more precisely in this saying that Islam has been founded on
five bases:

prayers, zakat (that which purifies), fasting, hajj (pilgrimage to
Mecca) and wilayat (guardianship) and the first four are of lesser
importance to wilayat.19 God grants tolerance and indulgence for the
first four but for wilayat He does not. In case of wilayat, God’s
verdict is definitely clear. Wilayat is love, the love of God. Imam
Ja'far al-Sadiq has generally spoken in the above saying in order to
make us understand that wilayat is of higher position.

Jesus’s words are mostly around the love of God, affection and passion
for all the creatures of God. As Jesus (AS), in response to a Jewish
jurisprudent who asked him which command in religion is of the greatest
importance, said: that is showing love to your Lord, to your God, with
all your heart, soul and thought, and secondly, which is the same, that
is to treat your neighbor kindly as if you are treating yourself.20

Any time prophets spread any new religion, they were assigned to preach
that religion, it means they had to announce the directives and
commandments of their religion to make people understand and be
submitted. But wilayat (guardianship) has no propagation because if any
person tends toward wilayat, wilayat will absorb him; such as when you
want to separate iron bits from dust, you cannot separate the
conglomerate dust bit by bit because the iron bits are so small that
they cannot be seen. Instead, you move a powerful magnet in the dust and
then you can see that all the iron bits have been attached to the
magnet. Wilayat acts the same as this magnet. Anyone with the same
material as the magnet will be stuck to it and the magnet will find it.
That is why wilayat has no propagation.

Jesus (AS) had both the prophetical and wilayat aspects. From the
prophetical aspect He said: I have not come to terminate my brother’s
(Moses AS) religion but to improve it. Because he said “my brother’s
religion”, it means “I am in the same rank as Moses was”.

Before he said that, people had been saying that Jesus was only a
preacher like other Jewish preachers. But Jesus clarified that “I am in
the same rank as Moses was”. Our Prophet, too, said the same words and
he put them into practice. In effect, the basis of all divine religions
includes three: monotheism, prophecy and the afterlife. All of them say
there is only one God to whom we will return: “Surely we are Allah's and
to him we shall surely return”.21 And all the religions are believed to
have sent prophets by God to guide the mankind. Based on these three
bases, addressing the People of the Book, the Quran says: “***Say: O’
People of the Book! Let us come to a word in common between us and you,
that we shall worship none except Allah, that we shall associate none
with Him”.*** 22 It is because of maintaining principles of monotheism
and prophecy that the Shi’ism believes in the two principles of justice
and imamate, but the common ground of all religions are these three
(monotheism, prophecy and the afterlife). Later on, when the Prophet was
ordered to announce wilayat, God

said:***“This day I have perfected your religion for you, have completed
my favor on you and have chosen Islam for you as a religion”.*** 23 Had
their religion been imperfect beforehand? In fact, “I have perfected”
means that it is improved more as wilayat had never been talked about
clearly and that is to start showing attention and consideration towards
it.

Jesus Christ (AS) was the prophet of mercy, in other words, he resolved
all issues by his mercy. Our Prophet, too, was the manifestation of
mercy and also the divine retribution, at the same time he was both. In
the Quran, God says:***“Allah is mighty; the lord of retribution”.*** 24
But in another part He says:***“Surely Allah forgives the sins
altogether”.*** 25

Or:***“My kindness exceeds my anger”*** 26 . Our Prophet had both
aspects; hence, he was perfect.

One of the stories told about Jesus Christ’s kindness and mercy is: one
day, Jesus Christ (AS) was with his apostles somewhere, people caught a
sinful woman sentenced by the Jewish jurisprudents to stoning and
brought her to Jesus in order to ask for his opinion. Jesus asked what
had happened. They answered: This woman is sentenced to stoning and we
are going to do it. His Excellency paused for a moment and said: the
first stone should be thrown at her by anyone among you who has never
committed a sin. They admitted they were not like that and they went
away one by one.27 This woman is said to be Mary Magdalene who later on
was canonized as a saint and just as we (Sufis) think of Rābiʻa
al-ʻAdawiyya,

Christians think of Mary Magdalene as well. This story is an example of
Jesus’s mercy.

Noah (AS) was angry with unbelievers and said to God:***“My Lord! Leave
not upon the land anyone from among the unbelievers”.*** 28 Although
some say this verse means that God might lead all people to believing in
Him, until no unbeliever would remain, apparently it is a curse, as God
did what everyone knows about. Abraham (AS) fought in many all-out wars
and then he asked God to guide the family (and fellow men) of Lot (AS)
but he could not save all of them except only a few. Moses (AS)
slaughtered many of Israelis (sons of Israel) many times. But in case of
Jesus (AS), it is different. When some people said that Jesus and his
Mother were God, according to the Quran, God asked Jesus- surely God
knew the answer because He caused it Himself- but He asked:***“Did you
tell people to worship you and your mother other than God? Jesus
answered: Hallelujah, I never say anything unless I have the right to
say it. I said what you ordered me to. While I lived among them, I said
your (God’s) words and called their attention to monotheism, and also
after my ascension, you know about and take care of everything, and you
are aware of everything. All these are your servants and I intercede for
them, you have the authority whether to punish them, you are the
merciful if you forgive them”.*** 29

Jesus Christ (AS) has interceded for the entire human race to the time
of Resurrection, and God never said to him not to do so, but He said to
Abraham (AS) not to mediate and intercede for his father who was a
polytheist- since Abraham had promised his father to ask God to forgive
him. And Abraham actually did it, hoping that God would accept it but in

the end, He detested his father.30 In a nutshell, the fundamental basis
of Jesus Christ’s teachings was kindness and affection. Not only did
Jesus have mercy for men but also for Satan. It is in the New Testament
that after Jesus finished a 40-day austerity in the mountains on John’s
order, as his master, he was tested for three times. Satan intended to
deceive Jesus for three times but every time he failed,31 just like when
he wanted to seduce Abraham (AS). In his mind, Satan thought that he had
grabbed flavorful bites to eat but when he found out that he cannot gulp
down such bites, he left them. However, Jesus asked God to forgive this
Satan who wanted to upset him, and if God did, we would be in comfort
forever.

Let us go back to the emergence of Jesus Christ (AS). As it was
mentioned earlier, the governors from the Roman Empire who ruled
Jerusalem knew that the Jews as they said were awaiting a king and in
the Jewish narratives, it had been told that this king would dominate
the whole world. Roman governors thought that if that king came, he
would overthrow them, therefore, they were worried lest this Messiah
would emerge. For this reason, they cooperated with the rabbis. Jesus
(AS) mostly spoke on top of the hills in the countryside like a preacher
and everyone listened. God has awarded all prophets miracles because
they have to invite people. When you want to invite guests to your
party, you should set a table for them, even a small one. Jesus (AS),
too, had to invite people. God had granted him to perform such miracles
that worked above all by the time. For unknown reasons, maladies such as
vitiligo and leprosy had been widely pandemic and anyway, his miracles
cured these illnesses, he touched the sick and they were cured. On the
other hand, God had allowed Jesus Christ (AS)

to perform those miracles in his own name. Certainly, every prophet did
miracles. Our Prophet’s miracles were also the splitting of the moon32 ,
the ascension (al Mi'raj) and the most important; the Quran. Jesus
Christ (AS) also had such a power and God had allowed him to announce it
like that. In Christianity, of course, Jesus Christ (AS); himself, was
the great miracle to be born to a virgin mother, just like in Islam
where the Quran which is the main miracle was brought by an illiterate
prophet.

*"My writer (Muhammad) who went to no school and did no writing Glance
throwing, lesson teacher of hundreds of teachers, he became"* 33

It is said that Jesus is the mystic of prophets or the prophet of
mystics. It neither means that the other prophets were not mystics nor
does it mean that only mystics embrace him and the rest of the people do
not. But it means Jesus was the epitome of that mentality of mysticism
which exists in Islam in a very high level, just like Ali (AS) who was
the example of this mentality of mysticism inside the Islam. In order to
prevent this mentality from causing confusion, no one asked Ali (AS) for
miracles, since miracles are peculiar to the prophets. But many
awe-inspiring acts have been told about him. Ali (AS) kept saying all
the time: I am the caliph of Allah, a caliph who God has designated, but
the two caliphs (Abu Bakr and Umar) and Othman said: we are the
Prophet’s caliphs, the Prophet’s successors.

This caused Umar to make a mistake and said: Ali is strongly craving for
the caliphate. He thought that this Ali’s saying comes from his
enthusiasm for the caliphate, whereas Ali said to Ibn-Abbas: This
caliphate of yours

(generally speaking), to me, is not worth as much as these shabby shoes
of mine. But Ali who knew himself as the caliph of God, had a sword (Dhu
al-Fiqar/Zulfiqar) granted to him by God, chanting:***There is no
righteous man like Ali, there is no sword like Zulfiqar,*** 34 had
physical strength, and also knowledge, stayed at home and cooperated
with them. The two caliphs and Othman even consulted with him.

Because wilayat (guardianship) can neither be advertised nor challenged.
Ali (AS) did not want the reign either. Even when Othman was killed, Ali
was said to: You are the caliph now. But Ali did not accept. After
Othman was killed, the world of Islam had no caliph for three or eight
days. Ali stated: Should I be the caliph and the head of your
government, everyone is expected to do bayat (initiation) with me. The
reason is if I am expected to be the head of your government, all the
people must be satisfied. Anyhow, Ali (AS) had been the Allah’s caliph
and no one could take away this position from him whether or not he
became the governmental caliph. Our Imams (AS) were like that, too.

In any case, Jesus (AS) did not pay attention to governmental affairs at
all whose attitude defines Ali’s words and manner for us. Gradually
after a while, people realized that he is the Messiah, the Messiah they
had been awaiting. Jesus (AS) did not belong to the class of Jewish
scholars and from the very beginning; he opposed them, ignored them,
disagreed with them and raised serious discussions, relying on his
spiritual strength. For this reason, the rabbis became desperately
worried and began looking for an excuse to execute Jesus. The Jews have
a rule not to work on Saturdays. We; Muslims, too, have such a rule not
to work on Friday mornings, but we are not very strict about it. But the
Jews’ law of working on Saturdays is so tough that sometimes if it is
violated, death penalty will be applied in some cases. The Jewish
scholars who were looking for an excuse once saw Jesus (AS) healing a
man on a Saturday. They used it as an excuse and arrested him to put him
on trial in order to sentence him to death on charge of working on
Saturday. Here, the Islamic version is different from the Christian one.
The Christians say: Jesus (AS) was crucified and then passed. But he had
said: After my burial, I will be resuscitated and risen. They put the
dead body in a big tomb and rolled a heavy stone over it which could not
be moved by a hundred people so as to keep Jesus in. They did not bother
thinking that Jesus; who revives the dead and also his own dead body can
be revived, can flatten the whole world. He had no trouble  with
removing a stone. They also posted guards outside the tomb in order to
keep people out.

They came back after three days and saw the stone had been aside and
Jesus was not there, although there were plenty of guards and that huge
stone.35


