Background
==========

**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent The Merciful**

Muhammad Ibn Sanan relates that Mufaddhal Ibn Umar narrated to him thus:

"One day after the Asr prayers, I sat between the pulpit and the
sepulchre of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), contemplating on the exalted
excellences with which Allah (swt) had endowed our Lord Sayyed Muhammad
Mustafa (saw) of which the generality of the Ummah had no apperception,
nor that of his supreme eminence, perfect merit, and his outstanding
grandeur.

While I was absorbed in such thoughts, there arrived Ibn Abi Al Auja, an
atheistic pagan and took his seat within my hearing distance. A comrade
of his followed him and sat attentive to him.

Ibn Ali Auja started the conversation with the remark, "The occupant of
this sepulchre has attained unique eminence to the entirety of elevated
honour in all his accomplishments." His comrade, adding an affirmation
said: "He was a philosopher and made a mighty claim supported by
miracles that confounded common sense. The wiseacres dived deep in
mind's depths to penetrate the mysteries thereof, but all in vain. When
his mission got accepted by the cultured, the erudite and the learned,
the people in general entered the fold of his faith host upon host.

The places of worship and the mosques of all the places wherever the
call to his prophethood reached, began to ring loud and clear with his
name side by side with that of the Almighty Allah, without any
distinction of sea and land, mountain or plain, not once but five times
a day during the Adhan and Iqamah. He got his name attached to that of
Allah (swt) with the express object of perpetuating his memory and to
keep his mission dynamic."

Ibn Ali Auja remarked, "Leave aside the mention of Muhammad (saw) about
whom my reason is astounded and my thoughts are bewildered. Let us talk
about the reality at the basis of the people's acceptance of the faith
of Muhammad (saw) - the Sustainer of the universe. Is there such a Being
or not?"

Then he referred to the genesis and creation of the vast assortment of
the universe. He made the preposterous claim that no one had created
them and there exists no Creator, nor Designer, nor Renovator. The
universe had been by itself in existence and will continue to exist as
such ad infinitum.

I was outraged to hear this and said to him, "O disbeliever! Do you
disbelieve in the faith of Allah (swt) by totally denying the existence
of Him, who created you in such comeliness, transforming you from one
state to another, till you arrived at your present form? Had you just
considered about your own self and had your fine percipience helped you
truthfully, you would have recognised in your own soul such obvious
proofs of the existence of the Almighty Allah, the signs of His All
comprehending sustenance and the evidence of His boundless workmanship."

He said: "We would discuss this issue if you can marshal well founded
cogent arguments, which we will admit, otherwise you have no right to
interpolate without a ken for polemics. If you are of the company of
Ja'far Ibn Muhammad (a.s.), it does not behove you to talk in the strain
that you do, for his is not this mode of address, nor does he argue with
us in such impropriety. He has heard more of our words than you have
done, but he has never used any impropriety, nor has he ever retorted
aggressively.

He is very forbearing, dignified, reasonable and of mature intellect. He
is never harsh nor touchy. He listens to our talk very attentively. He
invites our arguments, so much so that when we have exhausted our
armoury and we think to have silenced him, he, with a brief resume,
stultifies all our reasoning and dumfounds us, so that we are left
without a plank to answer the arguments of the revered personage. If you
are of his company, then talk to us in the same strain."

At this, I came out dejected and thoughtful because of their disbelief
in Allah (swt) and the consequent tribulation of Islam and its votaries,
because of their disbelief and a presumption of the meaninglesness of
this universe.

I betook myself to my master, Imam Ja'far Al Sadiq (a.s.). On seeing me
dejected, he asked me the reason thereof. I related to him the
conversation of those atheists and the way I had tried to rebut their
arguments.

He told me to come the next day when he would disclose to me the immense
ingenuity of the Almighty Artificer manifested in this entire universe
comprising the animals, the birds, the insects, all living beings
whether of the animal or the vegetable kingdom, trees bearing fruits or
trite and fruitless ones, the edible and non-edible vegetables - such
description of ingenuity as would be an eye-opener for those who would
welcome instruction, a solace for the believers and confounding for the
heretics.


