First Session: The Human Being
==============================

At dawn I presented myself, and after duly getting admittance,
respectfully stood before his august presence, and took my seat upon
being offered. Then he (as)moved to the closet whereto he often repaired
in solitude. I also rose up and on being ordered, followed him. He
entered the closet and so did I. He took a seat and I got down before
him.

He said, "Mufaddhal! I feel that you have had a lengthy night because of
your anxiety for the morrow." I affirmed his remark respectfully.

He began, "Allah (swt) existed before there was anything and He will
exist eternally beyond eternity. May He be glorified in that He has made
His revelation to us. To Him is due our deep gratitude because of His
gift to us. He granted us eminence with exalted knowledge and
distinguished us with brilliant status as the progeny of Hazrat Ali
(a.s.), to surpass all creations with His knowledge, as a sacred trust
with us of the subtleties of the Universe."

I requested permission to put in black and white all that poured down
from his lips, as I had the necessary writing material with me, to which
he graciously assented.

He said, "O Mufaddhal! The waverers failed to grasp the mysteries and
causes underlying the genesis of the creatures, and their intellects
remain unaware of the faultless ingenuity subsisting underneath the
creation of the varied species of the sea and the land, the level and
the rough.

They became disbelievers, and because of a deficiency of their knowledge
and puerility of intellect, began quibbling inimically with Truth, so
much so that they denied creativeness and claimed that all this universe
was meaningless and vain, without any ingenious design on the part of a
Designer or Creator - a purposeless non-entity without balance or poise.

Allah (swt) is far above what they attribute to Him. May they perish!
flow misguided they are! In their misguided blindness and bewilderment
they are like the blind people groping right and left in a
well-furnished, well-built house with fine carpets, luscious articles of
food and drink, various kinds of clothing and other necessities of
essential use, all adequately supplied in proper quantity and placed
with perfect decorum and ingenious design.

In their blindness they fail to see the building and its furnishing.
They move about from one room to ,another, advancing and retreating. If
by chance, any one of them finds anything in its place to supply a need,
and not knowing the purpose for which it is set there and unaware of the
underlying ingenuity, he might begin to reprimand the architect of the
building in his offensive rage, whereas, as a matter of fact, the fault
lies with his own inability to see.

This analogy holds good in the case of the sect who deny the creative
factor and the argument in favour of Divine Design. Failing to
appreciate the merit of their provision, the perfection of creation and
the beauty of design, they start wandering in the wide world, bewildered
by their inability to grasp with their brains the underlying causes and
principles.

It so happens sometimes that someone among them is aware of a thing but
in his ignorance of its reality, purpose and need, begins at once to
find fault with it saying, "it is untenably wrong."

The followers of Mani (the man who founded the Zoroastrianism sect in
the time of King Shapur son of Urdsher, who believed in the prophethood
of Isa (a.s.), but denied that of Musa (a.s.), and who believed in the
duality of divinity as the creators of all good and evil in the
universe - one light as the creator of all good things, the other
darkness, as that of beasts and harmful creatures) who, as the heretical
bigots of devilry, have begun openly to propound their heresies. Besides
these, some other misguided persons have also gone astray from the
Divine favours, by merely declaring as untenable or impossible, certain
facts.

It behoves the person, whom Allah (swt) has endowed with the gnosis of
reality and whom He has guided to His faith, and who has been granted
insight to ponder over the beauty of design underlying creation, and who
is gifted with the expression of the merits of such things, on the basis
of cogent reasoning and fine distinction. It behoves such a person to
glorify the Almighty Allah consummately as his Lord for such celestial
favours, and to pray to Him for an increase in gnosis and a
steadfastedness therein, with lofty powers of expression thereof.

He (swt) says, "I shall increase My favours, if you are grateful and My
chastisement is severe if you are ungrateful."

The structure of the universe is the foremost directive and argument for
the existence of Almighty Allah - how the parts thereof have been set
together and been possessed of elegant workmanship and design. An
appropriate mood of contemplation with reason focused on individual
parts will disclose that this universe is comparable to a house
furnished with all articles necessary for human beings.

The sky is like a canopy; the earth is spread like a carpet, while the
stars set in stratum upon stratum, appear as lamps alight in their
places. The gems are treasured as if the house has lots of collections.
Besides these, everything is readily available to meet individual needs.
Man, in this world, is like the masterful owner of the house, having in
his possession everything therein.

And there exist the different plant species available for meeting;
individual needs - some as fodder for the animals, others as drugs for
human beings; some merely for ornaments, some to supply fragrance to man
for his recreation; some as drugs for animals, some as nutriment for
man; some for birds only and others for the quadrupeds alone and so on.
Different species of animals have been allotted functions for particular
exigencies and interest.

Creation of Man
---------------

We now start with a description of the creation of Man before you to
learn a lesson there from. The first step in the creation of Man refers
to the state when the embryo in the womb is adjusted, though it is
confined within three distinct kinds of coverings and three kinds of
darkness. The first being that of the outer wall, the second of the womb
and the third of the placenta. This is a time when the embryo can
neither manage its nutrition nor ward off any harm from itself.

The menstrual flow is diverted to serve him as nutriment, just as water
carries nutriment to the plants. So this process goes on until such time
as his constitution is perfected, the skin over his body gets tough
enough to withstand the atmosphere -so that it does not receive any harm
from the air - and his eyes get capacity to withstand light. When all
this is accomplished, its mother gets labour pangs, which severely shake
her to uneasiness, culminating in the birth of the infant.

With the birth of the infant, the menstrual flow which served as
nutrition in the womb is diverted to the mother's breasts. Its taste is
altered, as well as its colour, and it becomes a nutriment of quite a
different kind, which exactly suits the temperament of the infant, as
and when it needs the same, compared with the flow of blood.

Simultaneously with its birth, it starts moving and licking its lips
with its tongue to indicate its desire for milk. It finds its mothers
pair of breasts as luscious reservoirs hanging to provide nutrition for
it. He gets its nutrition from milk in this way until such time as his
body remains delicate, his organs and bowels soft and weak.

Teeth and Beard
---------------

As he begins to move about and needs harder food to build up a stronger
body, his molars appear to masticate food materials to facilitate
digestion. He carries on with such nutriment till puberty.

The male grows hair on the face as a sign of manliness to gain honour as
a man, thus over-stepping the stage of adolescence and likeness to
females. A female keeps her face clean, lovely and hairless, to preserve
her freshness and comeliness, as an attraction for the males in the
service of the survival of the race.

Can you imagine the manner in which man, through these different stages,
is led and perfected, can take place without a Designer and a Creator?
Do you think if the menstrual flow had not been diverted to it while an
embryo in the womb, would it not have been dried up just like the plants
deprived of water?

And had it not been motivated by labour pangs after it had been matured
for birth, would it not have been buried in the womb just as living
infants used to be buried in the earth? Had it not been supplied with
the suitable kind of milk, would it not have starved to death? If it had
not been fed with nutriment suited to his temperament capable of
perfecting his body, and it' his teeth had not been cut at the proper
time, would it not have been difficult for him to feed, masticate and
digest his food? And if he had not passed through the milk-infancy,
would not his body have suffered in strength and been incapacitated for
any kind of work resulting in a permanent charge on his mother to keep
her busy with only his nature and upbringing, without time to look to a
second child?

Had not his face grown hair at the proper time would he not have stayed
in the form of adolescents and the figures of females, without any
dignity or prestige like the eunuchs who have a repulsive look in the
absence of a beard?

Who else then is it, Who created man from nothingness, and Who became
the Architect of His Worth, Who is Ever-vigilant to supply his needs
from time to time?

Absurdity of Atheism
--------------------

If abiogenesis (spontaneous creation without specific design) can be
admitted under such conditions of regularity, then purposeful generation
and definitely balanced creation can be the result of error ad
perplexity, since these two are opposed to abiogenesis.

Such a statement is highly absurd that order and rectitude should come
about without a Creator, and disorder and impropriety of design and fate
should suppose a Creator. He is an ignoramus who says this, because
anything produced without design will never be exact and proportioned,
while disorder and contrariness cannot co-exist with orderly design.
Allah (swt) is far above what the heretics say.

And in case an infant was born with mature intellect, he would have been
bewildered in this world so strange to his, in an unrecognisable
environment abounding with animals and birds of varied forms all around,
which would be focussed to his vision every moment of the day.

Consider it in the manner of a man migrating to another country from the
prison of one country. If he has a perfect intellect, you will see him
perplexed and astounded. he can neither learn the foreign language soon
enough, nor acquire the etiquette and decorum of the place. On the other
hand, one who is taken as a prisoner to a strange land in his early days
when his intellect is immature, will soon learn the language, etiquette
and manners of the place.

Similarly, if a child had been born with mature intellect, he would have
been astounded on opening his eyes and seeing such varied assortment,
different kinds of forms, and distinctive imagery of unity and disunity.
For a long time, he would not have understood as to whence he had come
and where he had arrived and whether all that he was seeing was a dream.

Then, if he had been born of mature intellect, he would have felt
disgusted and degraded on finding himself being carried about in the
lap, being fed with milk, being wrapped up in bandages(the manner of the
Arabs) and being laid in the cradle - all these proceedings being
necessary for the infants because of their soft and delicate bodies.

There would not have been, if they had been born with a mature
intellect, this sweetness, nor that sweetness, nor the considerations
for the infants in the minds of the adults which springs generally from
fondling the untutored children because of' their artlessness creating a
particular attention for them. As such he is born in this world without
an understanding for anything, quite unaware of the world and what lies
therein. He views all these things with his underdeveloped brain and
inadequate understanding, and so does not feel perplexed.

His intellect and understandings by degrees, slowly from time to time,
little by little develop, so as to introduce him gradually to the things
around and to accustom his brain accordingly in order to habituate him
thereto without further need for curiosity and wonderment, thus enabling
him to seek his sustenance serenely with understanding and planning, to
bend his efforts thereto and to learn the lessons of obedience, error
and disobedience.

And behold! There are other aspects of the matter. If the infant had
been born mature intellect with an understanding of his functions, there
would have been few occasions for the sweetness felt in the nature of
the offspring, and the exigency, under which the parents find a full
time pre-occupation with the affairs of the young ones, would not have
arisen.

Love and affection, felt for ordinary children, following the
inconvenience undergone for their sake, would not subsist between the
parents and their offspring. Because of their mature intellect, the
children would not have needed parental care. A separation would have
taken place just after birth of the infant from its parents. Even a
mother or a sister would have been strangers to him and as such within
wedlock limits.

Don't you see that everything big or small has been created on a
flawless plan without fault or error?

Tears
-----

Just see the advantage that accrues to the children from weeping. There
is a fluid in the child's brain which, if not i drained off, may cause
trouble or illness, even the loss of an eye. The discharge of the fluid
from its brain leaves it healthy and the eyes brighter. The child is
benefited by weeping, while his parents in their ignorance, try to
prevent his weeping by catering for his wishes, not knowing the benefits
thereof.

There are similar other advantages which the atheists fail to grasp and
if they could have grasped them, they would not have denied the
existence of such benefits therein. The gnostics understand what is
unintelligible to such deniers. It so happens sometimes that the
creatures know not the wisdom thereof, though it is within the knowledge
of the Creator.

Saliva
------

The saliva dripping from the mouths of children may cause serious
derangements if not allowed to flow. This can be seen in the case of
those with an excess of saliva, who sink down to the level of idiots,
imbeciles and fools, and succumb to other diseases like paralysis -
general and facial. Almighty Allah has ordained that this fluid should
be discharged by way of the mouth to keep him healthy in later age.

Providence has granted this boon, of the profundity of which they are
ignorant. They are allowed this respite to acquire a knowledge of the
wisdom underlying therein, so as to become gnostic, and had these people
appreciated all these boons, they would not have stayed in sin for so
long. So all ('raise and Glory is due to Him. How Grand is His
Beneficence. His blessings are for all whether deserving or undeserving.
He is far exalted above what these misguided persons say.

Sexual Organs
-------------

Just consider the male and female organs of copulation. The male organ
is capable of stimulation and increases in order to spawn the uterus
with sperm - that beings its function, being itself incapable of
developing the foetus and as such requiring the transfer of the sperm to
the uterus of the female - a deep receptacle fit to preserve efficiently
the two seminal fluids, to develop the foetus by expanding
proportionately with the increase in its sire, to prevent any pressure
on it, to preserve it till it is strengthened and is toughened. Is it
not so designed by a Deep-seeing Designer?

Have all these works of ingenuity, or these elegant proportions come
about by themselves? Allah Almighty is far exalted above the heresy of
the polytheists.

General Organs
--------------

Just consider the various organs of the body, the functions each one is
required to perform and the perfection of design that underlines each of
them.

Both hands are meant to handle business, both feet are meant for
locomotion, the eyes are to see with, the mouth is to take in food, the
stomach is to digest it, the liver is to extract its nutrition for
distribution to the various parts of the body after manufacturing the
same into blood, bile, lymph and phlegm, the orifices of the body are
meant to eliminate waste products, d you shall find that every organ,
exactly fitted to perform and you its specific functions, is constituted
with perfect design." I said, "Master! Some people believe that all this
is the outcome of the function of nature - each organ coming into
existence as and when required by nature."

He (as)said: "Just ask them whether the nature which functions in such a
well-planned and well-ordered fashion possesses knowledge and power or
is it devoid of also of intelligence and reason, without power and
without knowledge?

If they admit that it possesses knowledge and power, then what obstructs
them from a belief in the Creator? What we say 's that all things are
created by One Who is Master of Knowledge and Power. They say that there
is no Creator and yet admit that nature had done this with ingenuity and
plan. As such nature is the cause of their creation, while they deny the
Creator.

If they say that nature produces such things without knowledge and
power - not knowing what it is doing nor the power to do it - in
connection with the type and having design and ingenuity that subsists
in all phenomena, it is inconceivable that something may be performed
without the corresponding power to do it and without a knowledge
thereof. As such it is obvious that the action emanates from an
Omniscient Creator, Who has laid down as only a method among His
creation through his Omniscience, which these people call nature. In
other words, Almighty Allah has ordained a method to produce everything
according to its definite cause and principle.

As for instance, a seed needs water to sprout - no rain no corn; a child
is born by the union of man and woman, and without this procedure of
union and insemination, no child can be born: water evaporates to cause
a cloud, the cloud is moved about by air to give rain; there can be no
rain without such a process.

These atheists took at these causes and nature as the real Creator,
denying the existence of the Creator above all these. This is manifest
error, seeing that water is lifeless, and unless it is enlivened by the
Life-giver, how can it produce corn? And how can the sperm which is
without intelligence, develop into an infant, unless energised by the
Omnipotent to create a head out of one part, hands and feet from other
parts, bones from yet another part and heart and liver from another?
Other forms of creation can be considered accordingly.

Nutrition
---------

Just consider the nutrition supplied to the body, and the ingenuous plan
underlying it. just note that on the arrival in the stomach, the food is
processed into chime of the physicians and the extract is transferred to
the liver by fine capillaries forming a network in that organ. The
stomach is constituted as a rectifier for transfer of material to the
liver in rectified form, to prevent injury to that delicate structure.

The liver then takes up the extract of the nutriment taken in, and by an
inscrutable ingenuity, changes it into blood to be pumped by the heart
to all parts of the body by means of blood vessels, in the manner of
irrigation channels seen in gardens and fields supplying water to any
place required to be irrigated. All waste products and toxic wastes are
carried off to organs designed to eliminate them, e.g. the gall bladder,
the intestines, sweat glands of the armpits and thighs etc. The bile
matter goes to the gall bladder, some matter goes to the spleen and the
moisture goes to the bladder.

Just consider the ingenuity that has gone into the building up of the
body! How well are these organs co-ordinated! How the vessels, the
intestines and the bladder etc. are organised to collect the waste
products of the body so as to prevent them from being scattered all over
the body to cause disease and decrepitude.

Glory be then to Him Who created these organs according to a remarkable
plan and design. All Praise is due to Him, Who is worthy of it".

General Development of the Human Body
-------------------------------------

I said: "Please master! Explain to me the gradual development of the
body stage by stage till its perfection."

He (as)said, "The first stage of this development is the embryo in the
womb - invisible to the eye and inaccessible to the hand. Its
development proceeds apace, till he is perfected in body with all organs
and parts complete in every detail, the heart, the liver, the intestines
and all working parts, the bones, muscles, fat, the brain tendons,
blood-vessels, the cartillages etc. are all fully developed.

He enters this world, and you see how he develops on together with all
his organs in proportion, preserving at the same time all his features
without any addition or diminution. There is no disjunction of the part
to accredit any insertion of flesh or elimination of any redundant
matter. The body progresses on while retaining its well-knit form, till
its maturation, whether his life span is lengthened or shortened
earlier.

Is not his profound planning and ingenuity elegantly designed by the
Omniscient designer?

Excellence of Man over Animals
------------------------------

Just consider the excellence of man's creation over the animals. He
stands erect and sits squarely to enable him to hold things in his
hands, to acquire them with his organs, to work to plan. If man had been
hunched like animals, he could not have performed the tasks he does now.

The Five Senses
---------------

The five senses are specifically superior to those of animals in point
of constitution and efficiency so as to endow him special merit thereby.

The eyes are set in the head as if a lamp set on a lamp post to enable
him to see everything. They are not set in the lower parts of the feet
to safeguard against injuries or accidents during work or movement,
which would have ailed them and impaired their efficiency. Had they been
set in the middle part of the body like the belly, the back or the
breast etc., it would have been difficult to revolve them or to see
things by sudden turning. The head is the cynosure the best place for
these senses in suitability compared with any other organ.

The senses are five in number to respond to all kinds of stimuli and to
leave no stimulus undetected.  
 The eyes are so constituted as to distinguish between colours. The
colours would have been meaningless without such ocular proficiency,
since these colours exist as a means whereby things may be distinguished
from one another, or the eyes may get recreation there from.

The ears are set in the head to detect sounds, which would have been
meaningless without such auricular proficiency. Similar is the case with
other senses - without proficiency of the sense of taste, all tasteful
foods would have been dull; without the sense of touch the sensation of
heat, cold, softness, hardness, would just as well have been
non-existent; and without the sense of smell, all scents would have been
inert.

And vice versa, if there be no colours, the eyes would be ineffective.
Without sound, the ears may as well be nonexistent. So just consider how
it has been ordained that there is a definite correspondence between the
sense organ and the sensation-stimulus inter-acting mutually. We cannot
hear with our eyes, nor distinguish colours with our ears, nor smell
except our nose, and so on.

Then there are media interpolated between the sense organ and the
sensation stimulus, without which the link cannot be established. As for
example, in the absence of light to reflect colour, the eyes fail to
recognise colour, and without air to set up sound waves, the ears would
not be able to detect any sound.

Can it be then hidden, from one who has been endowed with sound reason
and one who utilises his intellect correctly, after all the details I
have given about the inter-connection between the sense organs, the
sensation stimulus, and the media linking them to complete the process,
that all this has been planned and executed by the Omniscient Almighty
Allah.

Can such propriety, such ingenuity come about spontaneously? How can
nature by itself perceive how the eye or the ear is to be constructed,
and what functions each is to perform and what medium is to suit each as
a means for correct apperception in order to create each? Is it
conceivable in the insensate nature, unless the Almighty Designer plans
them on the basis of perfect Omniscience?

Just consider the case of a person who has lost his eyesight and the
loss he suffers in his day-to-day working. He cannot perceive his
foothold, whether his feet fall in a depression or on an elevation, nor
can he see ahead, nor can he recognise colours, nor can he appreciate a
pleasing or a forbidden face. He will not be able to know hollow ground,
nor know an enemy with a drawn sword, nor can he undertake any of the
handicrafts like writing, business or trinket-making. His brain does
suggest certain ways to enable him to move about or take his food,
without which he would be little better than a stone at rest.

Similar is the case of a man deficient in hearing. He suffers loss on
many counts. He has no relish for conversational talk nor a sense for
pleasant or unpleasant sounds. People have difficulty in conversing with
him, he gets annoyed with self. Though alive, he is like a dead man in
respect of talking. Though present, yet he is like a man far away
unaware of any news about.

The person devoid of intelligence is worse that cattle, for even the
cattle do recognise many a phenomena unintelligible to him. Don't you
perceive that these organs, systems, intellect and everything else
required for his adjustment and without which he is at a serious
disadvantage in point of perfection of his build, are duly provided?
Have all these been produced without balance, power and knowledge?
Certainly not! They are necessarily the outcome of definite Design and
Planning of the Almighty Designer".

I asked, "Master! How is it that some people are lacking in those organs
and systems, and undergo the losses that you have described?"

He (as)said, "It is for the admonition of the person lacking them and
other people as well. The monarch admonishes his subjects in such ways
and such admonition is hardly resented, rather it is appreciated as a
stratagem and eulogised.

The people who are thus afflicted will be recompensed after death,
provided they are grateful to Allah (swt) and turn to Him, so
munificently that all the troubles undergone by them due to lack of such
organs, will appear trivial in comparison. So much so that if after
death they are allowed the choice to return to those troubled, they
would welcome the opportunity to earn higher recompense.

Systems in Pairs and Single Units
---------------------------------

Just consider the ingenuity and balanced design underlying the
production of organs and systems in pairs or as single units. just
consider the head which is created a single unit and it is but just
appropriate not to have created it in more than one unit. A second head
would have been only an additional weight, quite unnecessary, seeing
that one piece comprises all the senses needed for man. Two heads would
have meant two parts for men. So, if he used only one for talk, the
other would have been redundant. To have used both simultaneously for
the same talk would have been meaningless as no further purpose is
served thereby.

A person would have been much handicapped in his business he has to
transact, if he had been created with one, instead of a pair of hands.
Don't you see that a carpenter or a mason would be unable to carry on
his profession if one of his hands gets paralysed? And in case he tries
to do his work with a single hand, he cannot perform it as dexterously
and efficiently as with the help of both hands.

Voice
-----

Just consider a man's voice and conversation, and the constitution of
the organs concerned therewith. The larynx, which produces the sound, is
like a tube while the tongue, the lips and the teeth mould the sound
into letters and words.

Don't you see that a person who loses his teeth cannot reproduce the
sound of the letter 's'; he who gets his lips cut cannot pronounce 'f',
while a thick tongue cannot give the sound of\* 'r'?. A bagpipe
resembles it a great deal. The larynx is comparable to the pipe and the
bag into which air is blown, corresponds to the lungs containing air.

The muscles controlling the lungs to produce sounds resemble the fingers
pressing; the air of the bag into the pipe. The lips and the teeth which
mould the sounds into letters and words correspond to the fingers on the
orifices of the pipe giving rise to music and song. The larynx here has
been regarded as an analogue to the bagpipe by way of explanation,
whereas in reality the bagpipe is the instrument constructed on the
pattern of the natural organ, the larynx.

The organs of speech portrayed here, suffice for a correct reproduction
of the letters. These are, however, other functions accosted to these.
The larynx, for instance, is so fashioned as to admit fresh air into the
lungs for supply to the blood and heart, which if it fails even for a
moment, would result in death.

Tongue and Lips
---------------

The tongue is forged as to distinguish between the varied tastes of
foods one from the other, the sweet from the sour, the purely sour from
the sweetish sour, the saltish from the sweet. The tongue also helps to
feel the pleasantness of water and food. The teeth masticate the food to
make is soft enough for easy digestion.

They also hinder the lips from being sucked into the mouth. A person who
has lost his teeth is seen to have loosely moving lips, The lips help to
suck in water, so as to allow only calculated quantity of water to enter
the stomach as required, not gorging down of its own accord and
producing suffocation in the throat, or leaving to some sort of internal
inflammation by virtue of its forceful flow. Moreover, the two lips
serve as a door to keep the mouth shut at will.

We have explained to you the multifarious functions performed by them
and the befits accruing from them, just as the same tool may serve
different purposes. For instance, the axe which a carpenter can use and
which may be used for digging the earth and for other purposes.

Protective System
-----------------

If you look at the brain, you will find it wrapped up in membranes one
upon the other to protect it from injuries and movement. The skull
protects it as a helmet against being shattered to pieces by a knock or
percussion on the head. The skull is covered with hair like a fleecy
covering, safeguarding it against heat and cold.

Who, then, except Almighty Allah endowed the brain with such security
and protection, and Who made it the fountainhead of sense perception,
and Who made the arrangements for its extra-ordinary protection in
comparison with all other parts of the body because of its important
status in the body economy?

Just consider the eye-lid, how it is fashioned as a screen for the eye
with the eye-lashes like the strings, for raising and lowering the
screen. ,Just notice how the eye-ball is set in a cavity shaded by the
screen and hair.

Who has concealed the heart within the breast and covered it with a
screen which you call the membrane? Who has arranged for its protection
by means of the ribs, the muscles rind flesh interwoven in such a way as
to prevent anything getting to it to cause an abrasion? Who has shaped
the two holes in the throat - one for its production of the sound
situated in proximity with the lungs and the other called the gullet
leading to the stomach for entry of the food. And who has placed a flap,
the epiglottis, over the hole leading to the larynx, to prevent food
entering the lungs, which would cause death if" not thus managed? Who
has caused the lungs to fan air to the heart indefatigably without rest
to remove the toxins that would destroy it otherwise?

Who has shaped the sphincters, controlling the outlets of urine and
stool, like the strings of a purse, to be opened or shut at will and not
be dripping all the time, automatically resulting in a persistent
nuisance in life?

Similarly there are matters which a computer may compute, but others
which men have no knowledge of, are beyond computation.

Who has given such resilience to the muscles of the stomach that it has
been commissioned to digest coarse foods? And who has made the liver
soft and tender to accept nutriment in purified and rectified form and
function more finely than the stomach? Can all these tasks be completed
by anyone except the Omnipotent Almighty? Can you imagine that all this
can be performed by inert nature? Certainly not! All this is the
planning of the Almighty Omnipotent Designer, Who has the fullest
knowledge and has the perfect Omnipotence in advance of creation. He is
Allah, the All-knowing, Almighty.

Just consider why the tender marrow is kept protected inside bone
tubes - just for the sake of protecting it against waste under the
influence of the sun's heat which might melt it, or that of cold which
might solidify it, which would blast life - the bone marrow being an
essential ingredient supplying; the body's needs for energy.

And why is this circulation of blood confined in the blood vessels,
except that it should function in the body and not flow off? Why are
these nails fixed on fingers, except that they afford protection against
damage and help in better efficiency, for without them the presence of
flesh alone would not have enabled man to pick up things with a pinch,
to use a pen for writing or to thread a needle?

Why is the ear patterned intricately as a prison-house, except that the
sounds may be carried to the membrane for detection without damage
thereto by the violence of air impact?

Why is this flesh woven over man's thighs and buttocks, except that he
may not be inconvenienced by the hardness of the floor in sitting, as is
the case of a person of thin and emaciated constitution, unless
something intervenes between him and the floor to tone down in hardness,
like a cushion or a sofa?

Who has created the human race as man and woman? It is he Who ordained
the race to flourish by the method of the union of the two sexes or at
least to maintain its numerical strength, through the differentiation of
the two sexes.

And who made him the progenitor of a generation? Surely it was He Who
implanted hope in him. Had not this desire surged in his breast, why
should there have been an urge to mutual union. Look at the living
beings reproduction among whom it is not conditioned by union and
sexuality, but is effected by a certain stage of development of the
female. They have no differentiations of male and female at all. Can
anyone, for instance, tell between the female and male of a wasp?

And who gave him organs for action? Surely He Who made him a worker. And
who made him a worker? Sure He Who created him needy, for man would not
have worked if he had no need to fulfill. If he did not need to satisfy
his hunger, why should He have laboured, why should he have taken to
business and industry?

Had he no need to safeguard his body against heat and cold, why should
he have learnt sewing, needle manufacture, spinning, weaving, cotton
growing etc. And in the absence of all this, of what use would have been
the organs of action and the fingers? And who created him needy? Surely
he Who has created for him the factors of neediness. And who created for
him the factors of neediness? Surely He Who took upon Himself the
responsibility for supplying the needs.

Who endowed him with intellect? Surely He Who made reward and
chastisement as essential for him. He would not need intellect if he
were not responsible for reward and punishment. The Almighty Creator
endowed him with intellect to distinguish between good and evil, having
decided upon reward and punishment as essential to him - to get the
reward for goodness and chastisement for evil.

The animate beings which are not subject to reward and punishment have
no sense of good and evil, nor do they know the distinction between the
forbidden and the lawful, the condemned and the approved types of
action. They recognise, however, the factors needed by them for survival
of their species or individuality. As for instance, the bird has the
necessary recognition of an eagle as a bird of prey, and so at its very
sight takes to speedy flight; car a deer knows well that the lion would
tear him up, so at its mere sight, it flees for life.

Who has endowed him with strategy and percipience,' Surely He Who has
gifted him with energy. And who has gifted him with energy? Surely He
Who has ordained justification of conduct on him. Who helps him in all
these undertakings, in which his plans fail? Surely He Who deserves our
highest gratitude.

Just consider what I have explained to you. Can there be such
orderliness and method in the absence of planning? Certainly not! Allah
Almighty is far exalted above what these people say.

Supposing you found one shutter of a door having a latch fixed to it.
Can you imagine it to have been fixed without any purpose? Surely you
will conclude that it is there to be joined to the other shutter for a
definite advantage. Similarly you will find a male creature as one
individual of a pair created for the female individual for union to
preserve the race.

May Allah (swt) destroy those who claim to be philosophers, but are so
purblind in their approach to such wonders of creation and constitution
that they deny in the creation of the universe the design of the
Almighty Designer and the Will of the Master Planner.

Just look with respective eyes at the great boon of Allah, the Almighty,
in the relief of trouble after taking in food and drink. Is it not *an*
elegance of plan in the construction of a house that the lavatory should
be in a secluded part thereof? In the same way, Allah the Almighty has
made the orifice for the excreta of man *in* a secret place. It is not
in the open nor has it prominence, but is so situated as to be perfectly
hidden by the junction of the thighs and the buttocks with their flashy
matter. When a man needs to answer the call of' nature and assumes the
requisite posture of sitting, the orifice allows the excreta to escape.

Just consider the teeth set in the mouth of man. Some are sharp, which
incise and sunder the food. Others are flat which chew and pulverise.
Since both types are required, he is supplied accordingly.

Hairs and Nails
---------------

Just consider and appreciate the ingenuity underlying why it is proper
to have the hair cut and the nails pared. They grow and increase and so
need to be clipped. As such they are devoid of sensation to avoid pain
to man. In case the clipping thereof had resulted in pain, they would
ether have been left to grow inordinately and become burdensome, or pain
would have been inflicted in clipping."

I asked, "Master! Why were they not so designed as not to thrive to an
extent that their clipping would be necessary?"

He (as)said, "There are, indeed, numberless boons of Allah the Almighty
to His creatures known to them, and which if they knew, they would be
grateful for.

Know that the troubles and ailments of the body are relieved through
these hairs coming out of the pores. The fingers get relief of their
ailments through the nails. That is why a weekly clipping of nails,
shaving of head and removing of redundant hair must be effected, so that
the nails and hairs should grow fast and relieve ailments and troubles.
Ailments remain confided in the body otherwise with consequent pains and
diseases.

No hair growth is allowed on parts of the body where they would harm
man. If hair had grown inside the eyes, he would have been blinded. If
they had grown inside the mouth, would not water and food have been
hindered? If they had grown on the palms of hands, would not the sense
of touch have been impaired and would not the same have interfered in
the proper discharge of many a task, and the recognition by proper
touch.

There is great ingenuity underlying keeping certain spots of the body
hairless. Could nature have the percipience of such subtleties or can
such well-designed plans be attributed to it? Woe betide these atheists
and their dullness. This affair of creation, and see how error and harm
of the beasts and other animals, whose procreation depends upon
copulation, are similarly instanced.

You see that their entire bodies are covered with hair, with the
exception of the particular parts for the same reasons. So consider this
affair of creation and see how error and harm of methods have been
avoided while rectitude and benefit have been secured.

When these followers of Mani and those of their ilk tried to impugn the
belief in purposeful creation, they found fault with the growth of hair
on the pubis and armpits. They failed to grasp that such growth was due
to the moisture flowing to those parts. The hair grows there just as
grass grows at a place where water collects. Don't you see how spots are
prepared to collect waste products and hold them?

Yet another strategy underlying it, is that, it affords one more
discomfort a man has to undertake, relating to his body, and he is, so
far as he is kept busy with the cleanliness of his body and the removal
of his hair, prevented from perpetrating acts of greed, cruelty, conceit
and impudence, for which he may not get the opportunity.

Saliva
------

Just consider the saliva in the mouth and see the wisdom underlying it.
It is so composed as to ensure constant flow to keep the throat and the
palate moist, not to allow dryness therein that they may lead to death.
Without it the food would not he chewed nor would it flow down. All this
is obvious and supported by observation. And know that this fluid is
derived from food and getting down aids the action of the gall-bladder.

Covering of the Stomach
-----------------------

Some ignorant debaters and half-witted claimants to philosophy have,
because of their deficient understanding and faulty knowledge, said, "It
would have been better if the belly of man had been like a cloak to
enable the physician to open it at will, observe its contents and poke
his hand inside for medical treatment, and not as it is walled in,
mysteriously hidden from the reach of eyes and hands. The internal
disorders can now only be gauged by delicate symptoms of the examination
of the urine, pulse etc., which are not above error ant doubt to the
extent that such error in pulse and urine examination may lead to
death."

Would that these ignorant claimants to philosophy and polemics had
known, that it would have removed all apprehension of disease and death.
Man would have been then infatuated with his immortality and
healthfulness, which would have rendered him wilful and conceited. The
open belly would have allowed the constant trickling of moisture, thus
spoiling his seat, bed and nice dresses; in short, his whole living
under the circumstances.

The stomach, the liver and the heart function properly because of vital
heat, which would have been disturbed by the influence of the outside
air acting through the belly under treatment, open to the reach of the
eye and the hand. This would have resulted in death.

Don't you see that all hypothesis of the real nature of creation and
constitution are far-fetched and preposterous?

Urges
-----

Just consider the matter of feeding, resting and sex, which are ordained
for him and the expediencies underlying them. Each of them is propelled
by an urge, which give rise to a desire and an excitation therefore.
Hunger demands food which supplies life and energy to the body and its
substance. Sleep demands rest for the recuperation of the body to remove
the fatigue.

If man were to take food just for the needs of his body without an urge
from within forcing him to feed, it is possible that he might have given
way to indolence because of lassitude or pressure, his body would have
been emaciated leading to death, just as a man puts off taking medicine
which he only needs to improve his tone. And this may have caused his
death.

Similarly he may put off sleep in indolence and thereby emaciate his
body, if he aimed only thereby the rest for his body and the removal of
fatigue of his organs. If procreation were the sole aim of sexual union,
it would not have been improbable on his part to slacken, with resulting
decrease in population and final extinction, for there are people who
have no desire for progeny nor any need therefore.

Behold, then, that very act concerning man's health and improvement has
been reinforced by an insistent urge embedded in his nature prompting
him thereto.

Physical Faculties
------------------

And know that the physical body has four faculties :

(1). The affinitive faculty - This accepts the food and pushes it into
the stomach.

(2). The retentive faculty - This retains food for the natural processes
to act thereon.

(3). The assimilative faculty - This processes food to take out its
extract for distribution to the body.

(4). The eliminative faculty - This eliminates the waste products after
the assimilative faculty has completed its function.

Just consider the adjustment made in the body among these our
facilities. These have been organised to meet the bodily seeds as part
of the Omniscient Design.

Without the affinitive faculty, how would he have exerted after cod,
which is necessary for the upkeep and maintenance of its body?

Without the retentive faculty, how could the food have been retained in
the stomach to be digested?  
 Without the assimilative faculty, how could the food have been
processed to get the extract for supply to the body without disturbance?

And without the eliminative faculty, how could the waste products, given
off by the stomach, have been eliminated regularly?

Don't you see how the Glorious Almighty Allah as ordained and appointed
the faculties for the functions conditioning the Health of the body by
His Consummate Skill and Supreme Will?

Let us illustrate it by an example. just imagine the body to be a royal
palace, with his servants and dependents residing herein. 'there are
employees engaged in its management. One of' them is entrusted with the
task of supplying the provisions to the dependents. The second is
charged with the task of' treasuring the same, so that it may be kept
for conversion into nutrition. The third has to process it and
distribute it. The fourth sweeps the waste products left over.

The monarch of the palace is the Omniscient Creator Almighty, the Lord
of the entire universe. The palace is man's body, the dependents are the
organs of the body, while the four facilities are employees.

You may, perhaps, consider the explanation given by me concerning the
four faculties and their functions as redundant and unnecessary. Yet my
explanation does not follow the pattern of the books given by
physicians, nor does the tenor of my talk follow theirs.

Those people have made mention of the four faculties on the ground that
it is needed in the medical art for healing. We mention it from the
viewpoint of its need for invigorating the faith and reformation of the
recusant minds, just like my comprehensive explanation and
exemplification illustrating the Omniscient Design.

Psychological Faculties
-----------------------

Reflect over the faculties embedded in the human psyche and the way they
are organised to wit, deliberation, superstition, reason, memory etc.
What would be a man's plight if he were deprived of the faculty of
memory, and how much his life's affairs would be disturbed - his
economic affairs, and his business. He would not have remembered what
other people owe him and what he owes to others, what bargains he made,
what he heard and what he said.

He would not have remembered who did him a good turn and who an evil
one, what profited him and what harmed him. He would not have remembered
the path traversed by him a numberless times. He would not have
remembered anything even if he continued to learn a science all his
life, nor would he have determined upon a belief or faith, nor could he
have compared one thing with another by analogy. In fact, he would have
been outside the pare of humanity altogether. Just see how profitable to
man are these faculties. Leaving others, just deliberate on one and the
place it occupies in our lives.

Even a greater boon that memory is forgetfulness, without which man
would not found solace in any affliction, nor would ever have got clear
of frustration, nor could have got rid of malice. he would have failed
to relish anything of the world's goods because of insistent memories of
affliction, nor could he ever have entertained any hope of weakening of
his sovereigns attention of the envy of the envious. Don't you see how
the contrary faculties of memory and forgetfulness have been created in
man, each ordained with a definite purpose?

And those people, for instance the followers of Mani, who believe in two
opposite creators of all the universe cannot in any case be expected to
regard those two opposite entities as the creators of these two opposite
faculties, for these two faculties possess the benefits which you see
accruing from them.

Just consider the quality with which man alone is endowed and no other
creature shares it with him - modesty. Without it, no cane would have
shown hospitality to a guest, nor anyone would have implemented his
promise, nor anyone's need would have been fulfiled, nor any goodness
would have been achieved.

There are many obligations which are performed merely through modesty.
He who gives up modesty, does not concede the rights of' his parents,
nor the obligations of consanguinity, nor honour his trust, nor avoid
impudence. Don't you see how all these have been endowed in man so fully
as to benefit him and accomplish his affairs?

Speech and Writing
------------------

Consider the blessing of speech, with which he is endowed by Allah, the
Almighty, which is the medium for the expression of his inner thought
and his cordial feelings springing from his cogitation and with which
also he understands the inner points of others. Without this faculty he
would have been like quadrupeds, neither able to convey his own inner
thought to others, nor to understand the words of the speaker.

So is the case with the art of writing which is a means for knowing the
histories of the bygone people and for transmitting those of the
existing people for the generations to come. Through the same,
achievements of science and literature are preserved in books for ages.
Through the same, are preserved the discussions and account between one
man and another. Without this art, one age would have been cut off
completely from another; nor would any news have been received from
those who are away from their native lands.

Sciences too would have been extinct. Information on morality and
etiquette would have been lost and a serious damage in the affairs of
mankind would have ensued as also in the religious teachings and the
traditions, which people need to know, and the knowledge thereof would
have been impossible.

You may, perhaps, think that this need has been fulfiled by man with the
help of his own design and intelligence. It is not inherent in the
nature of man. The same is the case of speech and language, for this too
is a matter of terminology and resolution, determined by the people
according to their mutual understanding of talk. That is why different
groups have different languages and scripts, for instance, the Arabic,
the Syrian, the Hebrew, the Roman etc., each of which is different from
the other, each having decided upon its own terminology of language and
words.

He who makes such a claim, the answer will be that though in both these
matters man's planning and action have played a role, yet the means
whereby his planning and action achieve the goal, is a gift from the
bounty of Allah Almighty, underlying therein. Supposing he had not been
gifted with the tonnage for speech, or the intellect had not been
bestowed on him to guide him to such activity, he could never have been
able to talk, and if he had not been blessed with the palm and the
fingers, it would never have been possible for him to write.

You should learn a lesson from the animals in this behalf, who lave
neither the power to speak nor the power to write. As such it is the
principle laid down by the Almighty Creator for man's fundamental nature
as a special boon, for which whoever is grateful shall get the heavenly
rewards, while whoever denies will be ignored, for Allah Almighty is
independent of the whole universe.

Restriction of Knowledge
------------------------

Consider the matters of which knowledge has been vouchsafed to man and
those of which he has not been given the knowledge. fie has been
vouchsafed the knowledge of all these matters that lead to his good in
respect of faith as well as his earthly life.

The gnosis of Allah Almighty Creator is attainable by means of the
arguments and evidence available in the existence of creation. So is the
knowledge of matters obligatory on him, for instance, justice towards
all human beings, kindness to parents, honouring trust, sympathy towards
the down-trodden etc.; the knowledge and admission of which all nations
possess naturally as a matter of fact, whether in agreement with us or
against us.

Similarly he has been given the knowledge of those things which are
beneficial to his worldly life, for example agriculture, horticulture
colonisation, cattle farming, drawing water from the wells and the
springs, herbal research for medical purposes, mining for different
kinds of precious stones, diving in the sea, the different kinds of
planning for hunting animals and birds, fishing, industry, trade and
business methods and many other things which need it long detail,
wherein lies the fulfilment of the affairs of man's worldly life, the
betterment of his religious and mundane affairs. Such knowledge is made
available to him as is best in his interests.

Matters, knowledge whereof is out of his reach, nor does his position
demand it, are not made known to him, for example, the knowledge of the
unseen, of matters that have to happen in future or some of the affairs
that happened in the past, those pertaining to what lies in the oceans
and in the vast expanse of the universe, or within the minds of people,
the contents of the uterus etc. People who have claimed knowledge
thereof had their claims stultified by the events following them contra
wise.

So just see, that the knowledge of things given to man is essential for
his worldly and religious affairs. he has been prevented from knowing
unnecessary things to impress him with his worth and his deficiency in
both these, lies his good. Just consider why man has not been given the
knowledge of his life span.

If he knew the period of his life on earth to be short his whole life
would have been embittered, for knowing this he would have awaited the
moment of death. His condition would have been like a man whose assets
have all been lost or are very soon to he lost. And he might be feeling
his poverty and neediness. How afraid would he be at the expectation of
the destruction of his assets and the resultant indigence, the sorrow
and chagrin he would feel at the prospect of death would be far greater
than that at the prospect of destruction of his property, for he who
loses his property ever entertains the hope that he might get more in
return and that will provide him solace to his mind.

On the contrary, he who is convinced of the end of his life will much
more be frustrated. In case he had a long life span to live, this
confidence in his survival would have given him undue confidence. He
might be overwhelmed by pleasures and debaucheries under the impression
that he would offer penitence in the last days of life remaining for the
present in his pleasure pursuits. This is a matter which Allah Almighty
does not want from nor like in His creatures.

Supposing you have a servant who continues to offend you throughout the
year and hopes to be pardoned against a day's or a month's services.
Surely you would not like it and this servant will not rank with a
righteous servant who is ever ready to do your bidding.

You may raise an objection to this by saying whether it does not happen
that a man treads the path of disobedience, then he is penitent and his
penitence is accepted. Our reply to this is that this happens only when
a man is overpowered by his libido to an irresistible extent, but all
the time he is not determined on his obedience under the impression to
express penitence later on while indulging in passions for the moment.
Allah Almighty does not forgive him out of His Infinite Mercy.

But in the case of one who is determined on disobedience as long as he
will, expecting forgiveness at a later stage, he is trying thereby to
deceive Him, Who cannot be deceived, thinking of getting the most of the
pleasures of the moment while expecting to be forgiven because of his
later penitence. There is this aspect of the matter, too, that because
of a certain pattern of life of indulgence in pleasures which might not
allow him even the occasions for penitence particularly in old age, when
the physical body has undergone a good deal of weakness preventing him
from working up to his expectations.

And he who seeks pretexts in submitting his penitence, it may not be
possible for him under a sudden onslaught of death and so he may leave
the world impenitent. He may be like a debtor who is competent to pay
his debts but puts off from time to time till death overtakes him, his
assets get destroyed and his debts will stand against him. as such it is
in the fitness of things that the knowledge of man's life span be kept a
secret from him so that he may expect death to come at any moment and
under that suspense, to evade transgression and adopt righteous action.

You may raise another objection that now that his life span is a secret
from him and he is ever in suspense about his death, he commits evil
deeds and unlawful acts. Our reply to this is that the Planning is in
accordance with the situation prevailing now. If in spite of all this a
man does not refrain from evil, it is a sign of his temperamental
perversion and his hard heartedness. There is no error in the planning
if a patient after being fully apprised of the benefits of certain
medicines and the de-merits of certain malevolent matters, does not
avail of the information by disregarding the physician's directions. The
physician is not to be blamed but the patient who declined to follow the
physician's direction.

In spite of the suspense about death which he has because of his
ignorance about his life span, he does not desist from transgressions.
Fie would be steeped in evil and heinous unreasonable sins, in case he
gets a full knowledge of his life span and survival. As such the
suspense about death in any case is better for him than his confidence
in a long life.

If there is a category of people who, despite their suspense about
death, are indolent and do not profit by advice, there is another
category who profit by the advice, abstain from sinfulness and act
righteously. They give to the needy and the indigent in charity of their
nice possessions. It would not have been justice to deprive this
category from getting the benefit thereof.

Dreams
------

Just consider the dreams and the ingenuity underlying them. There are
dreams that come true and dreams that do not come true, all mixed up.

If all dreams are true all men would have been prophets. If all dreams
were untrue they would have been useless, rather redundant and
meaningless.

The dreams are sometimes true which benefit a person in his life's
business, under their guidance, or to avoid, the loss of which he has
been informed thereby. They are mostly untrue lest man may come to
depend on them.

Catering for Human Needs
------------------------

Just consider those things which you see present in the world supplied
to meet human needs.

The earth to build houses, iron for industry, wood for building boats
etc. Stone for use as grindstone, copper for utensils, gold and silver
for business transaction, gems for treasure, corn for food, fragrant
articles for pleasure, medicines to heal the sick, the quadrupeds as
beasts of burden, dry wood as fuel, ashes for chemicals, sand for the
benefit of the earth and can one count all these things which are
numberless?

Do you think that if a man enters a house and sees it supplied with all
human needs, the whole house full of treasure and everything placed with
a definite purpose, can he imagine all those things have been arranged
by themselves without anyone to plan it? Then how can any rational being
suggest that this world and all this contents have come by themselves?

Learn a lessons from the things that have been created to meet human
needs and the great ingenuity underlying them. Corn has been produced
for him but he has been entrusted with the duty of grinding, kneading
and cooking. Wool has been produced for him which he must gin, spin and
weave. The tree is made for him but he must sow the seed, irrigate and
supervise it. The herbs have been created as medicines for him but he
must find them, mix them and compound them.

Similarly you will find all things made by the creator to meet human
needs in a way that no plan of man could work sufficiently their action
and use thereof. The need and the situation for it has been left to him
in his own interest. If Almighty Allah had got performed all these items
and he has nothing to do by way of his activity, he would have begun to
move on the earth on all fours and the earth would not have been able to
bear his burden. Man would not have had a happy life if all his needs
had been fulfiled without effort and, nor would he have enjoyed such a
thing.

Don't you see that a guest staying for a time with ail his needs being
fulfiled by the host steadily, without any effort on his part to secure
eatables, drink, bedding or seating, gets tired of leis idleness and
inactivity. he seeks some engagement, what would have been his condition
if his inactivity were lifelong? This then is ordained for man to occupy
his limits to transact his business in his own interests, lest idleness
and inactivity cause him ennui.

Moreover he should be prevented from such undertakings as are outside
his capacity, and which have no advantage for him even if' completed.

Know that a man's basic need is food and water. See the planning that
has gone therein.

Man needs water more than bread, because he can bear hunger longer than
thirst. fie needs water for drinking, ablutions, washing clothes,
watering quadrupeds, irrigation of crops. Water, therefore, is provided
in abundance without need to purchases it to save man the need for
search. Bread must be obtained with effort and planning to keep man busy
with his occupation and to hinder him from pride and conceit and useless
undertakings.

Don't you see that a child in his early age is sent to a teacher for
instruction to keep him away from playing away all his time, which may
lead him or his kin to trouble. Similarly if man were left unoccupied,
he would have taken to pride and conceit and would have indulged in
actions likely to harm him grievously.

That a man born and nurtured in the lap of luxury under conditions of
opulence and plenty of his kinfolk, is likely to fall into such conduct,
illustrates the point.

Distinctive Features
--------------------

Know why one man does not resemble another, like the birds and animals
etc., having likened one with the other. You see a herd of deer and a
swarm of partridges each resembling the other without much difference
among them, whereas men, as you see, have distinctive features and
constitutions, so much so, that no two men correspond to the same
pattern.

The reason is the need each individual has to be recognised personally
by his particular build and physiognomy, as they have to conduct
business among themselves which does not concern animals. Don't you see
that the mutual resemblance among animals and birds does them no harm?
Not so in man, for if by chance a pair of twins become alike in shape,
people feel a great deal of confusion in dealing with them. What must be
given to one is handed to the other by mistake. One is held up in place
of the other in retribution.

It so happens in other matters as well through resemblance. Human
resemblance can be even more harmful. Who then, has provided such
niceties and perfections, which stagger imagination? Surely He Who
created all these, Whose Grace extends to all things.

Will you believe a person who says that a picture on the wall, which you
see, has come into being of itself without the aid of an artist?
Certainly not! You will laugh at him. How then can you believe that a
living man with faculties of speech and movement can come into being of
himself, while you are not prepared to entertain such belief in regard
to a lifeless picture?

Limited Growth
--------------

Why does it so happen that the bodies of men do not grow beyond a
certain limit despite the fact they continue living and to feed? What is
this due to if not to Deep Percipience?

The Almighty Allah has so ordained that each species of living beings
should have a definite limit of growth - no bigger nor smaller. They
continue to increase up to that limit and then stop growing, even though
feeding continues without. If it were not so ordained they would have
continued to grow till their bodies would have grown out of recognisable
limits

Fatigue and Pain
----------------

Why is it in the case of human beings in particular that movement and
activity create fatigue in them and they avoid fine industries just
because his needs like clothing etc., require more exertion? If man did
not suffer hardness and pain, how could he have evaded evil deeds,
prostrated before Allah (swt) or sympathised with the people?

Don't you see that no sooner a man is inflicted with pain, than he turns
in perfect humility towards Allah (s.w.t.), supplicating for restoration
of his health before his Creator and opens his hands in munificence? If
man had felt no pain in being beaten, how could the governments have
reformed the recusants? How could have children been taught sciences and
arts? how could the slaves have been made to submit to their masters
willingly?

Is there no admonition in all this for Ibn Abi Al Auja and his
companions who deny Purpose, and the followers of Mani who deny the
ingenuity underlying labour and pain?

Supposing only males or only females had been created in living beings,
would not their species have become extinct? It is thus to preserve
their species, that a mixture of males and females is brought into being
in the right proportion.

Why is it that when men and women reach puberty, the man alone grows a
beard? Is it not in accordance with set Design? This is because the man
is created as the lord and the woman as house keeper. The woman is the
supervisor of man's interests and his sweetheart. Man, as such, is
bestowed with a beard to give him prestige and honourable lordly
appearance. The woman is allowed beauty and freshness instead as
attractions for union.

Don't you see the flawless merits that this creation acquires by the
Design of the Almighty Allah? Everything is according to a definite
measure. Nothing is given which is not needed."  
 It was now afternoon, my master rose for prayers telling me to come to
him the next day, God willing.

Overjoyed with the information received, I returned with a grateful
heart for Allah (swt) for the boon bestowed on me.

I had a very pleasant night due to the valuable instructions bestowed on
me by my master.


