Third Session - The Environment
===============================

I presented myself early on the morning of the third day, and on
admittance, I entered, and being ordered to sit, sat down.

He (as)began, "O Mufaddhal! I have explained to you in detail about the
creation of man and the subtle design of the Almighty Allah that has
gone into his perfection and the lessons to be learnt from the
modifications of his circumstances. I have also dealt with an account of
the animal world.  
 I now take up an account of the atmosphere, the sun, the moon, the
stars, the sky, day and night, summer and winter, the winds, the four
fundamentals, rain, the rocks, the mountains, the plant kingdom, the
date tree, and the common trees, pointing out the signs therein and the
lessons to be learnt therefrom.

The Sky
-------

Look at the colour of the sky and see how appropriate is the design!
This particular colour is the most appropriate tonic compared with all
the other colours. Even the physicians direct a man to gaze on the green
hue or on some other darker hue in case of some ailment of the eye.
Efficient physicians direct a person with a weakened eyesight to gaze on
in a basin of green colour, filled with water.

Just see how the Almighty Allah has created the sky with a green colour
inclined to be dark, so as not to cause, by repeated looks, some
imperfection.  
 This same characteristic which people have found out as a result of
thinking and experimentation is a self-existent characteristic, so that
those who would, learn a lesson therefrom, and the heretics - may Allah
(swt) destroy them, go astray.

Sunrise and Sunset
------------------

Consider the rising and the setting of the sun in the production of the
day and night. Without sunrise, all businesses of the world would come
to a stop. The world would be sunk in darkness with no possibility for
work or livelihood. There would be no relish in life without the
pleasant effects of sunlight.

The benefits of sunrise are obvious indeed and need not be expatiated.
Just consider the sunset. If it did not set, men would have no~ comfort
nor any rest. Men inevitably need to rest and comfort to recuperate the
faculties of digestion and assimilation, and to soothe and relax the
nerves of the body.

Their greed, by persistent work, would have caused serious bodily
disturbances, for many are so constituted that unless the night becloud
them, they would enjoy no comfort and rest, in the pursuit of livelihood
and the accumulation of wealth.

Perpetual sunshine would have heated the earth with repercussions on the
lives of the animals and plants. The Almighty Allah has, therefore,
ordained that there shall be periods of sunshine and darkness, like the
lamp which is lit up as the household needs and it is put out when not
needed, to give them comfort and rest. Light and darkness are opposed to
each other and yet both are made subservient to the interests of the
world's betterment and amelioration.

The Four Seasons
----------------

Then consider the four seasons of the year, as a result of the elevation
and inclination of the sun and the benefits and planning thereof.

The trees and plants get an upsurge of vital two periods of the sun's
movement.

The condensation of vapour in the air causes clouds and rain. The
animals get their bodies re-invigorated in this season. There is an
upsurge of vital heat in the summer as well with the production of the
material which matures in winter. The plants get flowers and fruit in
this season. The animals get excitement to sexuality.

The air is heated in summer which leads to the ripening of fruit. The
waste products of the body get accentuated. The earth gets dried up and
becomes fit for building and other performance.

Air is purified in winter, ailments are negotiated. Physical bodies
become healthful. Night gets longer and thus aids in the performance of
certain tasks because of the longer periods.  
 The air in this season suits other performance as well, which will take
a lot of time to expatiate.

The Sun
-------

Now consider the motion of the sun through the twelve Zodiac belts to
complete a year and the skill underlying it. This the period that
comprises the four seasons - Winter, Summer, Autumn and Spring, in their
completeness. Grains and fruits ripen during this annual movement of the
sun to meet human needs. The cycle of development goes on repeating.

Don't you know that the sweep of this sun across the heavenly belt.,
from the Pisces belt back to it, constitutes one year? The year, etc.,
have continued as the calculating measures of time since the beginning
of the world in all past ages. People calculate thereby the periods of
life-spans, loans, contracts and other business matters. It is with the
movement of the sun that :t year is complete and a correct estimate of
time is established.

Just see how the sun sheds its light on the world and with what
ingenuity has this been ordained for it. If it shone only at one spot of
the Zodiac constantly, without changing its place, the benefits of its
rays would not penetrate in all direction due to the interpolation of
mountains and walls.

It has, therefore, been so patterned that it rises from the East in the
forenoon, shedding its light on objects opposite in the West, to move on
constantly, extending its light from side to side till it goes on to the
West to shed its light on objects which failed to received it in the
forenoon, so as not to allow any corner to remain without the benefit
and purpose, it is meant to serve.

If for a whole or a part of the year the situation changed to the
contrary, you can imagine the plight of human beings. In fact what
chance would they have to survive at all?

Does not man observe such magnificent planning, wherein his own schemes
would utterly fail? They function automatically without negligence, nor
do they lag behind the time regulated for the management of the world's
organisation and maintenance.

The Moon
--------

There is a sign revealed by the Almighty Allah in the creation of the
moon - a fine indication. People in general calculate months on its
basis, but the year is not correctly established by it. Its motion does
not comprehend the changes of season nor the times of the blossoming and
the ripening of the crops. That is why lunar months and years differ
from solar months and years.

The lunar months change, so that sometimes the same month has reference
to the summer and sometimes to winter. So is the case with other months.
For example, the month of Muharram may occupy a period in summer
sometimes, in the rainy season at other times and in winter at yet
another time. This shows that the lunar and solar months continue to
change and do not correspond to each other.

Consider why the moon shines at night and the ingenuity underlying it.
The living beings need coolness born of darkness in order to get rest
and comfort. Complete absence of light and pitch darkness would not have
any merit, anyhow, without the possibility for work of any kind. Men
need to undertake some work for want of leisure during the day. It may
be that due to extremes of heat, he may work in the glimmer of the moon,
for example, agriculture, milking. wood cutting etc. The moonlight helps
men to work for their livelihood whenever they are so disposed.

The wayfarers find fascination in their travels. Moonrise is ordained
for different parts of the night, which it is made less luminous than
the sun at the same time, lest people start working in the same way as
they do during the day without resting even unto death.

In the different phases of the moon, its appearance as a crescent, its
disappearance during the nights at the end, its waxing and waning and
its eclipses, there are particular indications that all these changes
are ordained for the benefit of the universe by the Almighty Creator
Allah, which can serve as instruction for any man disposed to avail such
instruction.

The Stars
---------

Just consider the stars and their distinctive velocities. There are some
among them *which do* not budge from the positions appointed for them.
There are others which move from zone to zone and have their distinctive
velocities. Each one of them has two velocities - one due to the cosmic
motion in the direction of the west, the other its intrinsic velocity in
the direction of the east.

This is comparable to the two velocities of an ant on the upper piece of
the grindstone. The grindstone moves to the right and the ant in the
opposite direction. In such a case the ant will have two velocities -
one its own direction, the front direction and the other unintended,
along with the grindstone.

Now just inquire from these people who claim that these stars have come
into being by themselves without the Design of' the Almighty Designer,
as to what was the hindrance in their all becoming stationary or moving
bodies?

Creation without Creator presumes a single pattern, why should there
occur two different movements on a definite pattern and quantum? All
this clearly demonstrates that the movement of the two categories of
stars as it subsists at present, is the result of a definite Purpose,
Design and Ingenuity, not something meaningless as these materialist
atheists claim.

If an objection is raised as to why some stars are stationary while
others possess motion, our answer shall be that in case all were
stationary, the distinctive signs that are now revealed by their
movements from zone to zone would be out of place. Many a secret is
known by a knowledge of the events connected with the sun and other
stars because of their movements in their respective orbits. The
advantage now gained in the matter of crop season and even predictions
etc., through the movements of a few stars at present, would be out of
reach.

If all of them were to possess motion, their destination would have no
outposts to be recognised. The movement of the moving planets in their
appointed zones, affords the necessary information, just as the rate of
motion of a wayfarer as gauged by the measure of distances. In the
absence of the measures of miles, or stage, an estimate of the rate of
motion would be difficult.

Similarly, if all these stars were to possess motion and motions of
different quantums at that, an estimate of the rate of their motion
would have been impossible, because in the first place they are
numberless beyond the computation of any computer or astronomer, and
secondly because of their location - some in the east, others in the
west, still others in the north and yet others in the middle or on the
extremities or here, there and everywhere. Their zones would be equally
impossible to fix, and thirdly because of the difficulty of all of them
passing; through the twelve belts. It would then have been impossible to
draw any distinctions, thereby the whole purpose of their motion and
existence would have been nullified.

If they all moved with a uniform rate of motion, the objective
underlying would have been stultified by a confounding of their
constellations.

An objection in that case from a critic would have been in place to the
effect that a uniformity of motion on a single pattern indicates the
absence of a Designer - a Creator, as we have deduced in proof of the
Being of the Almighty Allah. It is thus quite obvious that their
distinctive velocities, the changes and their movements being
purposeful, are the working of Design and Discrimination.

Consider the stars that appear in certain parts of the year and
disappear during the other parts of a year, for example, the Pleides,
the Orion, the pair of stars of the Sirius and the Canopus. It' all of'
them appeared simultaneously, none could stand as a distinct symbol for
men to recognise, to know and receive guidance, just as men deduce from
the appearance and disappearance of the Orion and the Taurus. This
appearance and disappearance of each at appropriate occasions was
ordained for the benefit of men.

Just as the Pleides were ordained to appear and disappear at different
times for particular benefits of men, similarly the constellation of the
Bear has been ordained for perpetual view, never to disappear, as it has
another objective to serve, as a sign-post for men to seek their way
through the unknown paths amidst forest and oceans. As the stars of'
this constellation are ever in view, men look to them immediately when
they need to know the path for any direction. Both these opposite
phenomena serve human interests.

Besides, therein is the indication of time, for agriculture,
horticulture, travel through land and sea. There is also intelligibility
of other phenomena that have reference to different times, for example
the rainfall, blowing; of winds, the summer and the winter seasons.

Moreover, men find their way with their aid in travels through dreadful
plains and fearful oceans during hours of dark nights. There are
besides, a great many lessons to be learnt from these stars which now
move forwards, some backwards in the direction of the Last or the West.

The heavenly bodies, the moon and the sun move very fast, and if they
were nearer to us and their velocity was to be felt exactly as it is, do
you not think the eyes would have been dazzled by their brilliance and
radiation, just as they are dazzled by the radiation of the lightning
when it begins scintillating continuously, kindling the space between
the earth and the sky like fire?

Another illustration of this is a house with its ceiling studded with
many live candles revolving round the head with terrific speeds. The
eyes will necessarily be putrefied throwing; the beholders prostate on
their faces. ,Just see how it has been ordained that they would move
with their existing speeds at huge distances from us to protect our
eyesight against damage and disease, while retaining their tremendous
speed for the purpose they have to serve.

The stars are just bright enough to give light in the absence of the
moon and to enable us to move about in their glimmer. Man sometimes
needs to journey at night, and in the absence of :heir glow, he would
have found it difficult to budge on his way.

Just consider the kindness and ingenuity ordained in this creation.
Darkness was also needed and a period is allocated therefore, with the
addition of the glimmer, to serve the objectives we have dealt with.

The Universe
------------

Consider the universe together with its sun, moon, stars and Zodiac,
which revolve perpetually in accordance with a definite decree and
judgement to bring about numerous benefits to the denizens of the earth,
variegated animal and vegetable kingdoms through the changes in the four
seasons, the days and nights, which have been expatiated to you. Can any
man with a discerning mind think that such regulated plan and design on
which depend the order and organisation of the universe, can come about
without the Omniscient Designer?

If someone says that mere chance has brought this about, why does he not
say that same thing in connection with the Persian-wheel which he sees
revolving, irrigating a garden planted with trees and vegetation? He
sees all its component parts manufactured according to a definite plan,
each part coupled with the other on a pattern to serve the needs of the
garden and its contents.

And if' he makes the same remarks about the Persian-wheel, then what
opinion about him will people entertain on hearing his remarks? Surely
this is a brainless stupid fellow with an asinine mind. Does he not see
how the matter and the nature of the Persian-wheel, which is itself
inert and devoid of intellect, would by itself come into being with
perfect appropriateness to the requirements of the garden? Can any
reasonable man admit it?

Will he deny it in the case of' a wooden Persian-wheel comprising a
little planning and ingenuity, that it is not a piece of workmanship
planned and designed, and yet will be able to say that this stupendous
universe which is full of projects beyond human ken, functioning for the
entire earth's surface and its contents, has come into being by mere
chance without Skill, Design or Measure? Has man the means to see right
if anything goes wrong with the sky, just as the wooden parts of
machinery get out of order?

The Days and Nights
-------------------

Just consider the relative hours of the day and night. flow they are
adjusted for the benefit of creation. The days or the nights do not
exceed fifteen hours.

Do you know that if days were extended to a hundred or two hundred
hours, the animal and plant life would have perished? Such a long
interval without rest and comfort would have killed the animals, while
quadrupeds would have continued grazing on. Men, too, would have
continued to work on without stopping with consequent peril to life. The
plant life would have withered away under the prolonged effect of heat
of the daytime.

Similarly, if the night had been prolonged equally, all species of
living beings would have been prevented from moving about and finding
nutriment with consequent starvation. The plants would have lost their
vital heat, delayed and perished, just as you see those plants which are
so placed as to receive little sunshine.

Heat and Cold
-------------

Consider the heat and cold cycle of increase, decrease and quableness,
and the resultant four seasons following one another in the world and
functioning for our benefit.

Moreover, the physical bodies get improved and renovated hereby. This
leads to their health and longevity, for in the absence of the effects
of heat and cold alternatively on the physical frames, they would have
suffered decadence, disintegration and emaciation.

The two (heat and cold) replace each other gradually and slowly. You
will notice that the decreases giving place gradually to the
corresponding increase of the other. If the one had suddenly erupted on
the other, it would lead to serious damage, to an illness of the
physical frames, just as man may receive damage and illness, if he
suddenly issues from a hot bath into a cold place. The Almighty Allah
has ordained the gradual change of heat and cold to protect man from
damage of suddenness of change.

If anyone claims that this gradualness and lag, in the advent of heat
and cold results form the movement of the sun and its inclination
affecting the duration of the day, he may be questioned as to the reason
of the movement of the sun and its gradual inclination affecting the lag
and gradualness. It' he answers that it is due to the space of the Last
and the West, he may be queried as to why it is so disposed. The
questions on this line will continue to be repeated till he is obliged
to admit the necessity of Omnipotence, Purpose and Design.

Without heat, the hard bitter fruits would not have matured into
succulent sweetness, used for relish, fresh or dry. Without cold, the
stalks would not bear corn ears in such abundant produce to suffice for
nutriment and seeding.

Don't you realise the benefits of heat and cold which, with all their
merits are sources of trouble to the bodies as well? There is
instruction for those who would ponder over this, and a proof that all
this procedure is for the good of the universe and, the individuals
thereof through the Design of the Almighty Omniscient.

Let me inform you of the blessings of air. Don't you see when it stops
blowing, there is distress bordering on strangulation? Healthy persons
begin ailing, the ailing get emaciated, the fruits get spoiled,
vegetables get decayed, physical bodies get infected and corn gets
tainted? This demonstrates that the blowing of air is for the good of
creation by a Plan of the Almighty Omniscient.

Another characteristic of the air is here mentioned. Sound is produced
by the impact of two bodies, one upon the other. It is wafted to the
ears by air. All men continue to speak part of the night or day in
connection with the needs of daily business. If this speech left its
impression in the air as a writing leaves an impression on paper, the
whole atmosphere would have been filled with same, with consequent
uneasiness and perplexity.

They would have needed a change in atmospheric air. The need "or this
would be greater than that for the change of paper, in is much as oral
speech is much more indulged in that written expression.

The Almighty Creator, Glory be to Him, has created such a mysterious
medium, which retains the impression just for enough time to serve the
needs of the people of the world and makes a clean state to get
renovated for fresh impressions to be received by it, which may cause an
impact thereon.

To get instruction from the blessings of the cool breeze called it is
enough for you. This air is the foundation of the life of physical
bodies. It supports life when we draw it in from without and allow it to
contact the spirit within. This same air s the medium, for the
transmission as sound waves to distant places. The same air carries
fragrance from place to place. Just see how air wafts different kinds of
scents to your nose.

And also the sounds. This same air is the carrier of heat and cold,
which alternate regularly for the benefit of the world. The air in
motion is wind which removes many a physical ailment. It transfers
clouds form place to place for the general good by way of condensation
and rain. It then accentuates them and they fritter away. It causes the
plants to bring forth blossoms and fruits. It makes the nutrients soft
and succulent. It cools water. It inflames the fires and it dries up
dampness. In short, it supports and enlivens all things of the earth.
Without this blowing air, vegetation would dry up, animal life would
become extinct and every thing would perish.

**The Earth**

Consider the four fundamental components created by the Almighty Allah
to fulfil the purpose of their creation adequately. Among them is the
earth and its expanse. How could it have sufficed for the human needs of
housing, agriculture, meadows, forests, jungles, precious herbs and
valuable minerals, if it were not so vast?

A person may dislike and condemn such treeless prairies and fearful
desolateness and question their utility. This is the abode of the
beasts, their dwelling and feeding field. Men have a vast expanse to
migrate if they are so disposed. Many a desolate plain has been
converted into blossoming gardens and palatial buildings by permanent
human settlement. If the earth were not so vast, men would have found
themselves, as if walled in by narrow fortresses, for they would have
been unable to leave their homes even if pressed by circumstances.

Next, consider the disposition granted to the earth, in that it is so
finely balanced as to serve as a fit habitat for all creation. Man is
enabled thereby to move about, get rest and comfort, engage in
agriculture and business with perfect firmness. If it were to tilt and
incline it would have been impossible to rear up structures and to carry
on trade and industry etc.

Under such circumstances of constant quaking, their lives would have
been far from peasant. Just realise this from the earthquakes which last
only a while and yet people affected by them fly from their homes. How
could they, then, have got rest and comfort, in case the earth were to
quake all the time?

If a critic questions as to why an earthquake occurs, he shall be
replied that an earthquake and similar other calamities are in the
nature of admonition and warnings for men to take heed against
evil-doings. Similarly the calamitous troubles that befall their
physical bodies and their properties have the same purpose in view, to
wit, their amelioration and betterment. If they become virtuous, the
reward they would get *in* the Hereafter would exceed all earthly
possessions in value, It sometimes happens that there is an immediate
award *in* this world, if such award is in the interests of the
generality of people.

The earth in its essence is cool and dry, and so are the stones. Can you
visualise that if the earth had been given a little more dry nature to
harden like a stone, could it have produced any vegetation on which
depends animal life? Could any agriculture have been possible or any
kind of building been feasible? Don't you see that it possesses less
cohesion than a stone? Pliability and softness from its essence are for
the sake of reliability.

Another feature of the earth's constitution as ordained by Almighty
Allah; Glorious is His Omnipotence, is its gradual slope from the north
to the south. Why has Almighty Allah, Glory be to Him, Ordained it?
Surely to allow the surplus water after irrigating the land, to flow to
the sea, just as roof is made sloping from one side to other to prevent
water collecting and to allow its easy passage. The land is made to
slope for that reason. If it were not so, the whole earth might have
been swamped with stagnant water with resultant hindrance in business
and road communications.

Air
---

Similarly, if' the air had not been provided in such abundance, men
would have been suffocated because of the smoke and vapours congesting
it. If the atmosphere had not been so vast, it could not have served as
medium for light and heavy clouds, which now gradually gather up by
absorption of water. An account of the same has already been given,
which should suffice.

Fire
----

So is the case of fire. Had it been as abundant as water and air, it
would have consumed everything in the world, without leaving any means
for a controlled promotion of the same, for, it is of benefit in man as
an undertaking.

As such it is enshrined in wood. It can be used when the need arises. It
is preserved by means of wood. It is not allowed to be extinguished
altogether, but some of it is preserved. As such it is not required to
be kept perpetually burning for that would have been very inconvenient.
Nor is it so widespread as to consume all things in its vicinity. It is
created in just the right measure to avoid de-merits.

It has another characteristic, to will, it is meant only for the benefit
of human beings. The animals have no need for it. Human economy would
have suffered a lot in the absence of fire. As for the quadrupeds, they
have no use for it.

As the Almighty Allah has ordained its use for human beings alone, man
has been endowed with palms and fingers so as to be able to light it up
and make use of it, while the animals are not gifted with the
corresponding parts. They are, however, enabled patiently to put up with
the troublesome tyranny of the stomach to save them from the
disadvantages which man has to *suffer in* the absence of the fire.

Let me tell you a minor merit of fire, which is very valuable and
worthwhile, to wit, this lamp which people light up to meet certain
needs of the night as they want. Without it human life would have been
comparable to burial in a grave. flow could one read, write, weave, sew,
or stitch in the darkness of the night? What would have been the plight
of a man suffering from a painful ailment with the need for applying an
ambrocation or a powder as a remedy relief?

Water
-----

If this water had not been in such abundance flowing through springs,
valleys and canals, it would have caused a great deal of inconvenience
to the men, who need it for themselves, the watering of their quadrupeds
and animals, their agriculture, the plants and corn fields. At the same
time the beasts, the birds an animals or the fishes and aquatic living
creatures dwelling in water would suffer a great deal.

Besides, it has other benefits which you are aware of, but the immense
value and merit whereof you are ignorant. See then, besides the grand
and valuable benefits underlying therein, to wit, the whole animal and
plant life of the entire earth's surface is subsistent on water, it is
used in other forms of beverages to soften them for a pleasant relish.

It serves to clean the dirt from the body as well as clothing. Earth is
moistened with it to make it fit for moulding utensils etc. It is used
in extinguishing fire in case it flares up to cause damage. Man gets
refreshed after exhaustion and exertion. Similarly there are other
objectives served by water, the great worth and value thereof can be
known only in time of need.

If even with all this about, you doubt the value of such abundance of
water flowing in rivers and seas, know then that this same water is the
abode of many species of aquatic animal life and fishes. This is the
treasure-house of pearls, rubies, ambergris and various types of
precious materials which are extracted from the rivers and seas. Round
about the water stores are to be met with the fragrant aloes, wood along
with other variegated scents and herbs.

Furthermore, it is a means of transport. It is a means of trade exchange
between lands distant from each other, for example, from Iraq to China
and vice versa and with Iraq itself. Trade would have suffered in the
absence of such means besides conveyance on animal and human backs and
commercial commodities would have remained in the producing countries in
the hands of the local consumers. Their transport would have cost more
than their production costs. No one would have ventured to transport
them.

This would have led to two handicaps. Many articles of necessity would
not have been available. Supposing the ingredients of a medical
prescription to require henna or aloes or plums or some medical or
nutrient drug from the cities of Asia or Europe, if they had to be
transported on backs only without the means of boats through the
intervening seas, how could they have reached India, and how could the
Indians have availed of them. In the second place the people who now
earn their livelihood by the profits gained trough their transport,
would have lost their economic support.

The other benefits in cooking, warming the body, burying the moist
substances and dissolving hard materials etc., are so numberless that
they cannot be recounted. They are so obvious that they need not be
detailed.

Rain
----

Consider the sky when it is clear and when it rains. They alternate in
the interest of the world. Persistence of any one state would have
caused disorder. Don't you see that when it starts raining continually,
the vegetables and plants begin to rot. The bodies of animals get
convulsions. The atmosphere is surcharges with cold with consequent
ailment, roads and paths get disrupted. When the sky remains clear for a
long time, the earth is dried up, the vegetation withers up. Man is
affected deleteriously thereby. The air gets dryness with consequent
diseases.

When they alternate thus regularly, the climate is equable. Each in turn
compensates the demerit of the other. Everything goes right.

A critic may question as to why it was not ordained that there were no
deleterious effects. The answer will be that this is so in order that
man may be occasionally inconvenienced to keep him from evil-doing. A
sick person, for instance, is administered bitter and unpalatable
medicine to cure him.

Similarly when man betakes himself to pride and conceit, he needs to be
administered something that would inconvenience him to prevent him from
mischief and to set him upon beneficence and amelioration. If a monarch
bestows upon his people, will not his munificence impress their minds
with his reverence and admiration? Whereas what comparison have those
millions with the rain which is the source of nourishment and the
flourishing state of all parts of the globe through its irrigation of
corn fields?

Don't you see what a grand blessing is this little rain for mankind? Yet
the people are heedless thereof. Often times when some little need of a
man is frustrated, he begins grumbling and blustering. He prefers his
petty need to the worth-while grand benefits possessing an excellent
result. This is because he is unable to fully appreciate the merits of
this lofty boon. Consider the ingenuity underlying the rain, pouring
down on high to irrigate the inclement highland as well. It' it were to
come from a corner, it would have left the highlands irrigated without
provision for agriculture. The lands of artificial irrigation are less
extensive.

Rain water comprehends the whole of the earth. Often times the
agriculture can be carried on in the vastness of deserts and mountainous
regions with consequent abundance of grain.

People are saved trouble of carrying water from one place to another.
Many an aggressive feud springs from the possession by one over-bearing
person of the sources of water, depriving a weaker party. Such
contingencies are also obviated.

Then since it was ordained, it is so disposed as to act as a sprinkling
on the earth to allow it to soak in and to irrigate it. It' it had come
with sudden swiftness like a flood, it would not have soaked in. It
would, in the form of a flood, have uprooted standing crops. It is,
therefore, ordained to rain in mild showers, as to enable seed to
sprout, the land to be irrigated and the standing crops to be refreshed.

There are other blessings in this downpour. It tempers the bodies,
purifies the atmosphere to clear it of taint produced by stagnation.
Garden plants are cured of the disease of jaundice and so on.

If a critic says, whether the rain does not sometimes cause heavy damage
by its intensity or in the form of hailstorms, causing the crops to
perish and the atmosphere to get unwholesome vapour with resultant
diseases and troubles.

The answer will be that this damage too is sometimes intended for the
betterment of' man to prevent him from indulging in transgressions. The
benefit that shall accrue to him in the amelioration of his faith will
outweigh the loss suffered in his worldly possessions.

Mountains
---------

Look at these mountains formed of earth and stone, which the ignorant
consider as useless and unnecessary. They embody remarkable advantages.
Among them is the snow that falls and stays on their heights. Anyone can
avail of it, when it melts and gives rise to springs of gushing water
and marvellous canals.

They produce herbs and plants which cannot grow in plains and lowlands.
They have dens and caves for the horrible beasts of prey. They serve for
the superstructure of fortresses as defence posts. They can be hewn into
dwellings. They are chiselled into grindstones. They contain mines of
precious stones of variegated types.

Besides these, they have other merits, which He alone Who created them
in definite measure, knows by His Pristine Knowledge of all eternity.

Consider the different kinds of animals which are obtained from the
mines for example, mortar, lime, gypsum, sulphurate of arsenicum, lead
oxide, mercury, copper, tin, silver, gold, beryl, ruby, garnet and
various kinds of rocks and so on giving rise to tar, vaseline, sulphur,
kerosene, etc., which are used by the people.

Is it then any mystery for a rational being that all these treasures
have been laid for use by man, which he may mine as and when he needs
them?

Men, however, are greedy and want to transmute base materials into gold
and silver. They spend efforts in that direction but mostly in vain.
Their plans do not fructify. If these people had succeeded in their
search of knowledge, it would have become general knowledge. Gold and
silver would have been produced in such abundance that they would have
lost their worth in men's eyes. The advantages gained through the mine
business and commerce would have been lost, and neither the monarchs nor
anyone else would have set any stores by wealth.

Nevertheless, men were given the knowledge to change copper into brass,
and into glass, tin into silver and silver into gold, which does not do
much harm. Just see that knowledge was given where there was not much
harm, whereas that which was harmful has been withheld.

And when a man enters a mine he may find inside it unfathomable streams
of flowing water and silvery rocks.

Consider the underlying design in this of the Almighty Omniscient. He
(swt) wants to give men an idea of the vastness of His treasures and
Omnipotence, so that they may know that if He (swt) Wills, He (swt) can
bestow on us silver in the amounts equal to mountains. He (swt) can do
it, however, there would be little gain because the abundance of gems
would reduce their worth, as stated before. Few would avail of it.

To illustrate it, suppose a man invents something new, for example,
utensils or other commodities. They are worth-while, grand and precious,
so long as they are in short supply and rare. And when the same exceed
the demand and reaches every pocket, it is lowered in value and becomes
worthless. Everything is considered fine so long as it is rare.

Vegetation
----------

Consider the plants and the varied needs they fulfil. Fruit is used in
nutrition, dried hay as fodder for the animals, wood as fuel, the boards
are used for carpentry of every kind. There are varied benefits accruing
from their bark, leaves, large and small roots and gum.

Consider the fruits we use for our nutrition. It' they were to be found
in one place instead of being suspended by branches which bear them,
what a disruption would have been cause in our lives! Nutrition would
have been available no doubt, but what about the valuable benefits we
derive from wooden boards, dried hay and other parts we have mentioned.

Moreover, the joy that is afforded by the scenic beauty and freshness of
vegetation is incomparably superior to the pleasures and merriment of
the whole world.

Grains
------

Consider how agriculture is ordained to thrive. A hundred or so grains
spring from a single seed. A single grain from a single seed would have
been logical. Why then such multiplication? Surely to amplify the grain
so that the same may serve as food to last till the next crop besides
provision as seed for the farmers.

Consider a monarch intending to populate a town. lie plans to provide
such quantities of grain as would suffice the residents to serve as food
till the next crop besides provision for seed. See how this plan is
adumbrated in the scheme of the Almighty Allah, Glory be to Him, that
agriculture should lead to such multiplication as to serve both the need
for nutrition as well as that for seeding.

Similar is the case with the trees, vegetation and the date-tree. They
generate abundant fruit. You see that there is a single root, but there
are many off-shoots. Why? Surely for the purpose of propagating the
progeny from the seeds, after people have put them to their use. If
there had been a single root without the branches shooting off in such
abundance, it would not have been feasible to take off anything from it
for sowing or any other business. In the case of a sudden calamity the
original would have perished with no chance for another plant to replace
it.

Consider the grains of pulses and bean. They all grow in pods as a
protection against harm, till they mature to hardness, just as the
placenta. The grains of wheat and other similar grains are arranged
layer by layer in hard shells, pointed sharply at their ends like spears
to keep off the birds and to increase the yield to the farmers.

If, a critic asks whether the birds do not get at the grains of wheat,
etc, the reply to him will be that they do get the grains no doubt and
it is so ordained for them, since the birds are also the creation of the
Almighty Allah. He (swt) has ordained for them a portion of the produce
of the earth. These grains are protected in these coverings, lest the
birds should get complete possession of them leading to evident loss
through wanton waste. In the absence of such protection the birds would
have pounced upon the grains and made short work of them all They would
have suffered indigestion in consequence, to their evident detriment.
The farmers too, would have been loser These protective coverings have,
therefore been provided

The grain, that the birds may have just enough for their need of
subsistence, leaving the major portion for the use o mankind. They have
a greater right thereto because of the labour put in by them, and their
need is greater for the gram than that of the birds.

Propagation Of Plants
---------------------

Consider the propagation of plants and various species o vegetation.
They need nutrition as much as animals. The) have, however, no mouths to
feed themselves, nor can they move about to work for acquiring their
food. They have therefore, been gifted with about under the earth, to
receive their nutriment for transmission to their branches, leaves and
fruit. The earth serves to them as mother from which the) suck their
nutriment through their roots which serve them as mouths to obtain their
food, just as the young ones of animal fed on the milk from their
mother's breasts.

Don't you see the pegs propping up straight without fear of fall or
bending the tents and shouldaries, by means of rope tied tightly?
Similarly, you will find every plant reared in the earth by the roots
spreading in all direction to support it. How could the massive trees
and all date-palms stand steady against the storms?

Behold! The ingenuity of creation has preceded the skill of industry.
The skill employed in setting up tents and shouldaries by artisans, has
before gone into the designing; plan of rearing up trees which precedes
the propping up of tents with pegs and poles all acquired from trees. It
is obvious that this skill has been copied from the ingenuity employed
in propping up trees.

Leaves
------

Consider the production of the leaves of the plants carefully and you
will see intertwined in its texture something comparable to the root
system extending all along its length and breadth. Some of them have
fine capillaries joined with thicker ones, all very stout and fine. If
they were to be prepared by hand, man would not: have been able to do
the job on a single tree in a year's time. He would have needed
implements, motion, design and instruction into the bargain.

In a few days of the spring season such abundant foliage comes into
being that the mountains and lowland regions of the earth get filled
with them without a word being spoken or a movement being made, just as
the result of flat permeating all things - a single inviolable
dispensation.

Know, by the way, the principle underlying these fine capillaries. They
are interwoven in the texture of the leaves to irrigate them, just as
the network of the capillaries in the body carries nutriment to all
parts.

There is yet another ingenuity in the thick veins of the leaves. Because
of their resilience and strength, they hold fast the leaf texture to
prevent them from being torn. These leaves are similar to the artificial
foliage manufactured from cloth and *which* are supported lengthwise and
breadth wise and held fast against crumbling. As such the artificial
manufacturing by hand follows the natural, though it can never imbibe
the true spirit.

Seeds
-----

Consider the seed-stone embedded inside the fruit, that it may serve to
propagate a substitute in case a tree perishes due to some calamity.
just a nice commodity of constant utility, is preserved at odd places to
be available at some other place if the same suffers an accident at one
place. Then because of their resilience and hardness they hinder the
fruit getting too soft and succulent. But for these seed-stone, the
fruits would have split up and given way to instability.

Some seed-stones are edible and oil is extracted from others for use in
different jobs. And since you have learnt the purpose served by the
seed-stone, you should consider the pulp enclosed in the date seed and
that enclosing the grape stone, the merits thereof and the wherefore of
its shape, whereas it was possible to produce a substitute which may not
have been edible, just like the cypress and the poplar trees. Surely it
is so that man may come by palatable nutriment, to enjoy.

Consider the other merits of plants. You will notice that they are
affected by the autumn season, so that their vital heat gets enshrined
in their twigs, and material for fruit production is engineered. The
spring season clothes them with leaves and you get all kids of fruit,
just as you arrange different kind of delicacies before you which have
been cooked in turn. Just behold the twigs presenting their fruit to you
with their own hands.

And you gloat on the flowers which come before you on their twigs as if
they present themselves to you? Who has planned all this? Surely He Who
Is the Omniscient Ordainer. And what purpose is served thereby? Surely,
that man may enjoy the fruits and flowers. How strange, that instead of
gratefulness for such boons, men would deny the Donor altogether.

The Pomegranate
---------------

Just consider the pomegranate and the skill and ingenuity that has gone
into its production. You will notice, inside it is all round and
elaborate with grains laid layer upon layer, as if arranged by hand. The
grains are divided into different parts and each part is wrapped up in a
strap, fabricated in a uniquely exquisite manner. All these are enclosed
in an outer rind.

The artistic ingenuity therein is that since the grains cannot help each
other's growth of pulp, a membrane has been provided inside the
pomegranate as a nutritive medium, in which, you see, are embedded both
the grain and the pulp. These membranes help to keep them immovably
fixed. Over all these, a stout covering is laid to keep them safe from
external harm.

These are a few points concerning the pomegranate, to which any one who
wants a lengthy account, can add a lot more. The account given here is,
however, sufficient for the purpose of argument and instruction.

Creeper Plants
--------------

Just behold this weak creeper. These creepers bring forth such massive
gourds, cucumbers and melons. What ingenuity has gone into its design!
Since is was ordained that it will bear such large products, the plant
is designed to spread on the earth. Had it been like other plants
straight-standing, it would not have borne imposing yield. It would have
broken down before they ripened.

See how it sprawls on the ground to put the burden of its products on
the earth. You might have noticed that the roots of the gourd and the
melon creepers spread in the earth with the products lying on the earth
all round, just like a cat lying down lactating its young ones - the
products.

Consider the fact that these creepers grow only in set seasons suited to
them in the fiery heat of summer, for example, when people welcome them
joyfully. If they had flourished in winter, men would not like to bear
their sight. In addition they may cause ailments in winter.

It sometimes happens that cucumbers are produced in winter. The people
avoid them generally, except the gluttons within a sense for harm and
illness.

The Date Palm
-------------

Consider the date palms. There are female trees among; them, for whose
fertilisation male plants are also generated, which fertilise without
planned horticulture. The males, like those animals, fertilise, but are
themselves sterile.

Consider carefully the trunk of a date palm. You will find that it is
woven like a web, though there are no long threads. It is as it' a piece
of cloth is woven with the hand to keep it stout and straight capable of
withstanding strong winds and of carrying massive bunches of fruit, on
maturity, and then subsequently of being used for roofing and bridging.
You will find therein threads interwoven lengthwise and breadth wise. It
is strong enough to be used in tool making. If it had been hard as
stone, it could not have been used in buildings as wood, for example,
doors, lattice work, wooden boards and boxes etc.

Wood
----

There is one great merit in wood. It floats on water. Every one knows
this but does not realise its full worth. In the absence of this
characteristic, how could boats have been built, which carry mountains
of merchandise from city to city with much labour? What hardships would
have had to be borne in transporting merchandise? Many articles of use
would have disappeared from the market or would have been available at
great cost.

Herbs
-----

Consider these herbs and the characteristics each has been endowed with
as drugs. They penetrate down into the joints, eliminate waste products
and toxic matters therefrom, for example, *Shahtra,* some others relieve
hypochondria for example *ateemoon,* some others remove flatulence, for
example vinegar, some others absorb inflammation, for example wild
grapes and so on their efficiency.

Who then has endowed them with such properties? Surely He Who created
them with a Purpose. Who gave men knowledge thereof? Surely He Who
endowed these drugs with such properties. How could these matters have
come to men's ken through mere chance and spontaneity, as the believers
of chance claim?

Well, let us admit that man learnt all this through his intellect and
reason, contemplation and experimentation. But who taught the animals?
Some beasts, when they get injured, make use of herbs to get well, and
some birds when suffering from constipation get well by purgation with
sea water and so on?

You may, perhaps, doubt the utility of plant life and of the waste lands
and plains, where no human life exists, and think it to be altogether
meaningless and useless. It is not so. The wild animals feed thereon and
their grain is used by the birds as food. Their twigs and wood is used
as fuel by men.

There are other points a well worth noting. They serve as medicinal
drugs. Hides are tanned therewith. Cloth is dyed and so on. They possess
other merits as well.

Worthless Things
----------------

Don't you know that the most lowly and despised plant is the *Khairya
Baradi?* They too, possess varied merits. Paper is manufactured
therefrom for use by the kings and populace. They are manufactured into
mats for use by all and sundry. They are used in making lids to cover
utensils made of' glass etc., which are stuffed with them to prevent
breakage. They r have many other merits in addition to these.

Then learn a lesson from the varied and benefits which are derived from
beings mall and big, as also from those things which have no worth and
those that are valuable. The most worthless of all these are the cow
dung and excreta which are worthless pollution, and consider the
benefits which accrue from them to agriculture and vegetables. They are
such benefits which have no parallel. No vegetable can be worthwhile
unless it is provided with manure which is so obnoxious that one abhors
to go near it.

Know this too, that the worth of a commodity does not depend upon its
monetary value alone. It possesses two different values in two different
markets. It sometimes happens that a commodity is worthless in the
economic market and yet the same is valuable in the market of knowledge.

It may be that you may consider a thing as worthless because of' its low
monetary value. Just notice of what high value human excreta would have
been if its properties were known to the alchemist. It is a fact that
certain experiments of alchemy cannot be conducted without human
excreta."

It was now time for the afternoon prayers, and the Imam (as)told me to
come the next day, God Willing.

I returned quite happy because of the information I had obtained from
Imam (a.s.). I thanked Allah (swt) for the valuable information I
received. I spent the night in perfect peace.


