INTRODUCTION
============

The Arabic language developed through the early centuries in the Arabian
Peninsula in the era immediately preceding the appearance of Islam, when
it acquired the form in which it is known today. Arab poets of the
pre-Islamic period had developed a language of amazing richness and
flexibility. For the most part, their poetry was transmitted and
preserved orally. The Arabic language was then, as it is now, easily
capable of creating new words and terminology in order to adapt to the
demand of new scientific and artistic discoveries. As the new believers
in the seventh century spread out from the Peninsula to create a vast
empire, first with its capital in Damascus and later in Baghdad, Arabic
became the administrative language of vast section of the Mediterranean
world. It drew upon Byzantine and Persian terms and its own immense
inner resources of vocabulary and grammatical flexibility.

During the ninth and tenth centuries, a great intellectual movement was
underway in Baghdad, in which many ancient scientific and philosophical
tracts were transposed from ancient languages, especially Greek, into
Arabic. Many were augmented by the new wisdom suggested by Arabic
thinkers; other text were simply preserved, until Europe  reawakened by
the explosion of learning taking place in Arab Spain, saw its rebirth in
the Renaissance. That is how Arabic became by the eleventh century the
principal reservoir of human knowledge, including the repository for the
accumulated wisdom of past ages, supplanting previous cultural languages
such as Greek and Latin.

And it was the Arabic language alone which united many peoples in the
Arab Empire and the civilization which flourished under it. For when we
speak of the Arab civilization and its achievements we do not
necessarily mean that all its representative were Arab, or that all were
Muslims. It was the peculiar genius of Arab civilization that it
attracted and encompassed people of many races and creeds. Citizens of
the Arab Empire, they identified themselves with this civilization and
it was the Arabic language, with its great flexibility, that made them
exponents of that civilization.. Between the eighth and twelfth
centuries, Arabic was as much the universal language of culture,
diplomacy, the sciences and philosophy as Latin was to become in the
later Middle Ages. Those who wanted to read Aristotle, use medical
terms, solve mathematical problems, or embark on any intellectual
discourse, had to know Arabic.

The first rules of Arabic language, including its poetry metrical
theory, and its syntax, morphology and phonology, were written in Iraq.
This task was conducted both in Al-Basrah under Al-Khalil Ibn Ahmed
Al-Farahidy and in Al-Kuufah under Abu al-Hasan Al-Kisaa'i. During the
Middle Ages Al-Khalil in his book** کتاب العين** and, his student,
Siibawayh in**الکتاب** concluded that task. The first complete
dictionary of the Arabic language was composed by Al-Khalil, who had
also been involved in the reform of the Arabic script and who is
generally acclaimed as the inventor of the Arabic metrical theory. The
professed aim of**کتاب العين** , which goes under

his name, was the inclusion of all Arabic roots. In the introduction, a
sketch is given of the phonetic structure of Arabic, and the dictionary
fully uses available corpora of Arabic by including quotations from the
Qur'an and from the numerous pre-Islamic poems, which had both undergone
a process of codification and written transmission by the hands of the
grammarians.

The early attempt to write the Arabic grammar began as early as the time
of the fourth Well-Guided Caliphs, Ali Ibn Abi Taalib, when he
commissioned a man named Abu Al-Aswad Al-Du'ali for the task. In his
book**(** **نزهة الالبا في طبقات الادبا** **)** Al-Anbari,** الانباري**
reports the following anecdote

<p dir="rtl">
دخلت علی امير المومنين علي بن ابي طالب ( عليه السلام) فوجدت في يده
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
رقعة، فقلت ما هذه يا أمير المؤمنين؟ فقال: إنِّي تأملت کلام العرب فوجدته
قد
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فسُد بمخالطة هذه الحمراء –يعني الاعاجم- فأردت أن اضع شيئا يرجعون إليه،
ويعتمدون عليه. ثمَّ القی إليَّ الرقعة وفيها مکتوب: ألکلام کله إسم وفعل
وحرف. فالاسم ما أنبأ عن المُسمَّی، والفعل ما أُنبیءَ به، والحرف ما افاد
معنی. وقال لي:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إنحَ هذا النحو، واضف إليه ما وقع إليك.
</p>

I came to The Leader of the Believers, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and found that
he was holding a note in his hand. I asked, "What is this, Oh Leader of
the Faithful?" He said, "I have been thinking of the language of the
Arabs, and I came to find out that it has been corrupted through
contacts with these foreigners.Therefore, I have decided to put
something that they (the Arabs) refer to and rely on." Then he gave me
the note and on it he wrote: Speech is made of nouns, verbs and
particles. Nouns are names of things, verbs provide information, and
particles complete the meaning." Then he said to me, "Follow this
approach and add to it what comes to your mind."

Al-Du'ali continued to say,

<p dir="rtl">
وضعت بابي العطف والنعت ثم بابي التعجب والاستفهام، إلی ان وصلت الی
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
باب إنَّ واخواتها، ما خلا لکنَّ. فلما عرضتها علی عليٍّ (عليه السلام)
أمرني
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بضم لکنَّ إليها. وکنت کلما وضعت بابا من ابواب النحو عرضتها عليه (رضي
الله عنه) إلی ان حصلت ما فيه الکفاية. قال ما أحسنَ هذا النحو الذي نحوته!
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فلذلك سُميَّ النحو.
</p>

I wrote two chapters on conjunctions and attributes then two chapters on
exclamation and interrogatives. Then I wrote about**إنَّ واخواتها** and
I skipped**لکنَّ** . When I showed that to him (Peace be upon him), he
ordered me to add**لکنَّ** . Therefore, every time I finish a chapter I
showed it to him

(May God be satisfied with him), until I covered what I thought to be
enough. He said, "How beautiful is the approach you have taken!" From
there the concept of grammar**النحو** came to exist.

Following Abu Al-Aswad Al-Du'ali came a group of grammarians that we
know most of by their names, not their works. The list includes:

Ibn ‘AaSim**‚** **نصر بن عاصم** ** ,** Al-Mahry**عنبسة بن معدان المهري**
** ,** Al-Aqran **ميمون الاقرن** **,** Al-‘Adwaany**يحيی بن يعمر
العدواني** **,** Al-Akhfash**الاخفش الاکبر** **,** Al-‘Araj ** ** **,**
Al-Hadhramy**عبد الله بن ابي اسحق الحضرمي** **,** Ibn Al-‘Alaa'**أبو
عمرو بن العلاء** **,** Al-Thaqafy**عيسی بن عمر الثقفي** **,** who wrote
two famous books, **الإکمال** and **الجامع**

Waafi credited Al-Thaqafy**الثقفي** for transferring the interest from
Basrah to Kuufa, because he began his work there, and Al-Khalil was his
student. Among the other Kuufic grammarians were Al-Tamiimy ** أبو
معاوية شيبان بن عبد الرحمن التميمي** and Al-Harraa'**أبو مسلم معاذ
الهراء** and Al-Ru'aasy **أبو جعفر الرؤاسي** who wrote **الفيصل)** **)**
**.** If Siibawayh was considered the 'Imaam of grammar in Basrah, the
Kuufic version was Al-Kisaa'y** أبو الحسن علي بن حمزة بن فيروز الکسائي**
** ** who studied under Al-Harraa'** الهرَّاء** and Al-Ru'aasy **.
الرؤاسي** Unfortunately, Al-Kisaa'y did not author any major work in
Arabic grammar. However, he became one of the best seven readers of the
Quran.

The framework of the Arab grammarians served exclusively for the
analysis of Arabic and, therefore, has a special relevance for the study
of the language. From the period between 750 and 1500 we know the names
of more than 4000 grammarians who developed a truly comprehensive body
of knowledge on their own language.

Siibawayh was the first grammarian to give an account of the entire
language in what was probably the first publication in book form in
Arabic prose. In his book, **زهر الآداب وثمر الألباب** , Al-Husary
reported that Siibawayh used to have his work reviewed by another
grammarian of his time named Al-Akhfash Al-Saghiir who said that, "
Siibawayh showed me the grammar rules he came up with thinking that I
knew better than him. In fact, he has better knowledge than me."
Siibawayh's example set the trend for all subsequent generations of
grammarians, who believed that their main task was to provide an
explanation for every single phenomenon in Arabic. Consequently, they
distinguished between what was transmitted and what was theoretically
possible in language. In principle, they accepted everything from
reliable resources, which included the language of the Qur'an,
pre-Islamic poetry, and testimonies from trustworthy Bedouin

informants. After the period of the Islamic conquests, the sedentary
population of Mekka and Medina began to regard the free-roaming Bedouin,
whose language preserved the purity of the pre-Islamic times, as the
ideal type of Arab, and the term** کلام العرب** 'Language of the Arabs'
came to denote the pure, unaffected language of the Bedouins.

Versteegh  stated that the early beginnings of grammar and lexicography
began at a time when Bedouin informants were still around and could be
consulted. There can be no doubt that the grammarians and lexicographers
regarded the Bedouin as the true speakers of the Arabic FuSHa, and
continued to do so after the conquests. In the words of Ibn Khalduun,
the Bedouin spoke according to their linguistic intuitions and did not
need any grammarian to tell them how to use the declensional endings.
There are reports that it was fashionable among notable families to send
their sons into the desert, not only learn how to shoot and hunt, but
also to practice speaking pure Arabic. The Prophet Mohammed was one of
those when he was a small boy. Other reports come from professional
grammarians who stayed for some time with a Bedouin tribe and studied
their speech because it was considered to be more correct than that of
the towns and cities.

The Arabic linguistic references tell us that the need for some
"linguistic authority" came to exist long before the time of Al-Khalil
and Siibawayh. There is a vast amount of anecdotes concerning the
linguistic mistakes made by the non-Arabs who converted to Islam. It is
commonly believed that these anecdotes document a state of confusion and
corruption of the Classical language. According to many resources, the
Well-guided fourth Caliph, Ali Ibn 'Abi Taalib, the cousin and
son-in-law of the Prophet Mohammed, was the first to insist that
something to be done. One anecdote mentioned that Ali came to perform
his pre-dawn prayer at the Mosque of A-Kuufah. As he went in, he heard a
non-Arab Muslim reading the Quran and that man was assigning the
end-words voweling incorrectly. The verse in question was from FaaTir
(Chapter \#35. Verse \# 28):

<p dir="rtl">
**إنما يخشی اللهَ من عبادهِ العلماءُ**
</p>

***Those truly fear Allah, Among His Servants Who have knowledge***

Apparently, that man had the nominative case assigned to what supposed
to be the direct object**اللهَ** , and the accusative case was assigned
to the subject**العلماءُ** . Because the end-word voweling is the
manifestation of Arabic language grammar, the meaning of that verse was
completely messed up. That same day Ali handed a note to Abu Al-'Aswad
Al-Du'ali which said that, "Speech is made of three elements; nouns,
verbs, and particles." Ali asked Al-Du'ali to expand on that definition
and write the first grammar rules for

Arabic. In other words, Ali was asking for a "linguistic authority"
whose rules should be enforced.

According to some historians, Al-Du'ali at first hesitated but was later
persuaded when his own daughter made a terrible mistake in the use of
the declensional endings, by confusing the expressions:

<p dir="rtl">
**ما أَحسنُ السماءِ؟ / ما أحسنَ السماءَ!**
</p>

How beautiful is the sky!/What is the most beautiful thing in the sky?

She was reported to have said:

<p dir="rtl">
**ما أحسنُ السماءَ؟ / ما أحسنَ السماءِ!**
</p>

The origin of the "dot," notation of the three short vowels, and the
Nunation is ascribed to 'Abu Al-'Aswad, and the names of the vowels
(FatHa, Dhamma, Kasra) are connected to their articulations. From that
we have the common expression,**ضعِ النقاط علی الحروف!** , literally
meaning "put the dots on the letters!, i.e., to "be more
clear/specific."Two other innovations attributed to 'Abu Al-'Aswad
concern the notation for hamza (glottal stop) and Shadda (consonant
gemination). Both signs are absent from the Nabataean script.

The framework of the Arab grammarians served exclusively for the
analysis of Arabic and therefore has a special relevance for the study
of the language. From the period between 750 and 1500 we know the names
of more than 4000 grammarians who elaborated a comprehensive body of
knowledge on their own language.

Most Arabic grammars follow the order established by Siibawayh and start
with syntax**ألنحو** , followed by morphology**التصريف** , with
phonology added as an appendix. Phonology did not count as an
independent discipline and was therefore relegated to a position at the
end of the treatise, although a considerable body of phonetic knowledge
was transmitted in introductions to dictionaries and in treaties on
recitation of the Qur'an,**تجويد**

The grammarians' main preoccupation was the explanation of the case
endings of the words in the sentence, called **إعراب** , a term
originally meant the correct use of Arabic according to the language of
the Bedouins but came to mean declension.

Kees believes that the works which appeared after Al-Khalil and
Siibawayh only contributed either by offering commentaries or further
explanations. In this context, this publication is nothing more than an
account of the most common rules non-speakers of Arabic will need to
refer to in their quest for learning the language. Yet, our additional
aim is to offer some suggestions and ideas on how to present these
commonly used rules.

These suggestions and ideas are based on recent research in language
proficiency learning and pedagogy.

Many researchers agree that formal classroom instruction of certain
grammatical structures -that is, morphological inflections, function
words, and syntactic word order- can be beneficial to students. The
rationale for teaching grammar is multifaceted. First students are
expected to be already literate and therefore have established
expectation concerning language instruction. Grammar instruction can be
beneficial because of the fact that it raises learners' consciousness
concerning the differences and similarities of L1 and L2. In this
respect, grammar instruction can be used as a "linguistic

map," with reference points of "rules of thumbs" to assist students as
they explore the "topography" of the new language.

However, we need to remember that grammatical structures by themselves
are rather useless. Like road signs, grammatical structures take on
meaning only if they are situated in a context and in connected
discourse. Furthermore, Krashen (1982) reminds us that grammatical
structures will become internalized only if the learners are placed in a
situation in which they need to use the structures for communicative
purposes. Consequently, an important role of the teacher is to create

learning situations in which the students feel a need to master the
grammar in order to comprehend and communicate in the target language. A
detailed pedagogy scheme on how to teach and learn grammar is provided
in a section that follows the presentation of the rules.


