The Pedagogy Section
====================

The Explicit/Implicit Controversy
---------------------------------

Although many professionals agree on the benefits of some grammar
instruction, the question of how to teach grammar has met with little
agreement. The controversy has become particularly acute with the advent
of the communicative language teaching revolution, which has
consistently underscored the importance of stressing meaning over form.
For years, our profession has been grappling with polarized views
concerning the teaching of grammar within a communicative framework.
Some scholars (Higgs and Clifford 1982) advocate an explicit method of
grammar instruction, with direct teacher explanations followed by
related manipulative exercises. Many of us have probably experienced
this method of grammar instruction, since most textbooks tend to present
grammar in this fashion.

Unfortunately, many of the textbooks' manipulative drills are grounded
in shallow and artificial contexts, so these drills become rather
meaningless to students. Another problem with explicit grammar
instruction is that it advocates a direct and overt role on the part of
the teacher. Consequently, this practice designates a rather passive
role on the part of the students. Interaction for them is supposed to
take place after the explanation and after a plenty of structural
manipulation of the grammatical elements. In Rivers' (1983) terms,
"skill-getting" should be stressed before "skill-using."

On the other side of the spectrum, implicit grammar explanation as
espoused by Krashen (1985), Terrel (1977), and Dulay and Burt (1973)
reject the need for formal grammar analysis. These researchers argue
that students can acquire language naturally if they are provided with
sufficient comprehensible input from the teacher. In other words, if
students are exposed to a sufficient amount of comprehensible input,
they will eventually be able to hypothesize and determine the functions
as well as the meanings of linguistic forms. Theoretically, the learners
should be able to do the hypothesizing on their own.

However, Herron and Tomasello (1992) advise that the inductive method
cannot guarantee that the learner will discover the underlying concepts
or that the induced concepts will actually be correct. Furthermore, the
inductive approach can be frustrating to adult learners, many of whom
have already become analytical with regard to the rules that govern
their native languages. The learners intuitively yearn to speed up the
learning process by consciously comparing and contrasting their own
native rules to the rules that govern the new target language.

Reformulating Grammar Instruction
---------------------------------

Although explicit and implicit teaching are clearly opposites, they
share some notable deficiencies. Neither approach acknowledges the
critical role of the teacher in negotiating classroom explanations, and
neither approach acknowledges the contributions and backgrounds that the
learners bring to the instructional setting (Tharp and Gallimore

1988). Moreover, neither approach recognizes the natural learning
tendencies that occur between human beings outside the classroom.

Learning is a dynamic, reciprocal, and interactive process. However, our
profession has been grappling with two established methods, neither of
which recognizes the mutually responsive interactions that are
fundamental to learning as it occurs naturally between humans in
everyday life.

Therefore, we believe it is time for the profession to begin a serious
reappraisal regarding teaching of grammar. We are advocating a whole
language and guided participatory approach that contrasts with
traditional explicit or implicit teaching. In many ways, this
alternative approach may serve as a viable compromise between
explicit/implicit polarized views. For a number of reasons that will be
discussed later, we believe that a whole language and guided
participatory approach might hold the key to dramatic improvement in the
teaching of grammar.

Basic Principles of Whole Language Teaching
-------------------------------------------

Before discussing some practical applications of this approach, we
should discuss some basic principles of whole language and guided
participatory teaching. Many specialists in first language development
have been exploring the implications of whole language teaching for the
past decade. Likewise, researchers in cognitive psychology have been
investigating guided participation in the areas of science, math, and
social studies. Unfortunately, foreign language education has been
lagging behind these other disciplines. First we will discuss some basic
principles of a whole language approach to grammar instruction, and then
we will discuss how to use guided and joint problem solving to enhance
grammar explanations.

As early as 1976, psychologist Ken Goodman stated that "language is
language only when it is whole" (quoted in Fountas and Hannigans 1989,
p. 134). According to Goodman, the whole is always viewed as being
greater than the sum of its parts, and it is the whole that gives
meaning to the parts. In terms of grammar instruction, words, phrases,
or sentences are not linguistic islands unto themselves; on the
contrary, these linguistic elements only gain meaning when they are
placed in context, and when used in conjunction with the whole.
According to Goodman, once students experience the whole, they are then
better prepared to deal with the analyses of the parts.

We should acknowledge that Goodman is primarily addressing the needs of
first language learners. However, research in first language development
has oftentimes acted as a catalyst for theoretical advancement in second
language development. Furthermore, many second language specialists are
currently emphasizing the importance of content-based instruction,
authentic texts for listening and reading comprehension, and the need
for connected discourse in grammar instruction, all of which emphasize
the importance of whole language rather than fragmented speech in
second/foreign language classroom.

Conceptually, then, we need to reappraise our orientation to grammar
instruction if we have too often focused on fragmented discourse and
artificial exercises. Many language programs stress a bottom-up approach
by emphasizing the "bits and pieces' of language (sound, vocabulary
lists, verb drills, etc.). This classroom practice usually results in
non-language

that can be characterized as being unnatural, cognitively undemanding,
and dull (Cummins 1984). On the other hand, a whole language approach
stresses natural discourse and encourages students to comprehend
meaningful and long samples of discourse from the very beginning of the
lesson.

By introducing the lesson with a whole text (for example, a story, poem,
song, taped listening selection or cartoon), the teacher is
foreshadowing the grammar explanation through the use of integrated
discourse that will highlight the critical grammar to be taught.
Galloway and Labarca (1990) explain that foreshadowing of new language
elements is beneficial, for it provides "learners with a 'feel' for what
is to come and can help students cast forward a familiarity net by which
aspects of language prompt initial recognitions and later, gradually,
are pulled into the learner's productive repertoire." In this way, the
lesson highlights the functional significance of the grammar structure
before the learners' attention is focused on form. In a way, this is
like using advance organizers to assist the students by providing an
"anchoring framework" for the new concepts to be learned. Unlike many
classroom textbooks, which may offer a group of disconnected sentences
or a "contextualized" drill, a whole language and guided participatory
approach invites the learner to use language functionally and
purposefully through integrated course.

This practice is in agreement with Krashen's (1982) Input Hypothesis,
which stresses the importance of comprehensible input that "contains
structures a little beyond our level of competence." As a result, from
the very beginning of the lesson the teacher and learners are engaged in
authentic use of language through joint problem-solving activities and
interactions. By using pictures, mime, and gestures, the teacher
scaffolds and guides the learners to eventually comprehend the story or
other sample of connected discourse. Once comprehension is achieved, the
teacher can then turn the students' attention to various linguistic
elements.

Unlike bottom-up processing, which is traditionally linear in approach,
grammar instruction using a whole language approach is cyclical. During
the first stage of the cycle, the teacher foreshadows the grammar
structure with an appropriate text. At this point, the meaning or
comprehension of the text is of prime importance. The second stage is
actually an extension of the first stage, since once again the emphasis
is on meaning.

However, the second stage differs due to an increased level of learner
participation. Now the learners have a general idea of the significance
of the text; consequently, they can become more participatory through
various activities, mime, role playing, etc. All of these activities
serve to deepen comprehension for the learners. Once comprehension is
achieved and meaning is understood, the teacher moves into the third
stage and turns the learners' attention to focus on form, or the various
linguistic elements of the grammatical structures.

After this stage, the teacher completes the cycle by encouraging
learners to interact with integrated discourse through expansion
activities such as rewriting or recreating similar stories, paired
activities, or group activities. Through these extension activities, the
learners become more aware of the

function of the grammatical structure. That is, they learn that they can
carry out a particular task or function by exploiting or using the
appropriate grammatical structure. This approach is in agreement with
Larsen-Freeman's (1991) suggestion that meaning, form, and function need
to be "interacting dimensions" of grammar instruction.

A Model for Integrating Form in a Whole Language Approach
---------------------------------------------------------

Focus on form has recently become the topic of intense research and has
been shown to be an important design feature of language teaching (Long
1991). The theory of learning and development has emphasized the
importance of creating a zone of proximal development with the learner
so that what the learner requires help on today will emerge as
independent, automatic performance at a later time. Grammar teaching can
also be viewed in this way. It is no less an interactive process between
expert and novice than any other aspect of developing communicative
ability in learners. Learners need to be guided to reflect on language
they use to create their own meanings.

No language teaching should be driven by grammar instruction alone, nor
should grammar instruction be literally interpreted to mean instruction
on morphology (e.g., adjective or subject-verb agreement, rules for
pluralization, etc.) or meaningless manipulation of forms. When the
teacher focuses on form, attention is drawn to the formal properties of
the language, which includes its sound system, word formation, syntax,
discourse markers, and devised for relating one sentence to another, to
name a few. Our colleagues who teach reading in the elementary schools
call this form of instruction "language Arts." Classes that focus on
language form for the purpose of increasing comprehension and meaning
have been shown to result in greater language gains than classes where
no focus on form is available or where forms are learned as meaningless
structures (Lightbown and Spada 1990). Therefore, the issue is not
whether a teacher should focus on form; rather, answering the question
of how and when and in what context will ultimately clarify this
important design feature of foreign language instruction. The following
is a four step model for contextualizing interactions with students
about the forms in a whole language lesson.

### 1. Presentation of Meaningful Language

###

This step represents the "whole" language you are presenting in a
thematic way. It can be an interesting story (folktales and legends work
well), a TPR lesson, a recorded authentic listening or video segment, an
authentic document, or a demonstration of a real-life situation.
Materials from the textbook (narratives, dialogues, stories) may even be
used if they are found to be interesting and episodically organized. The
presentation does not consist of isolated, disconnected sentences
illustrating the target form in question. Rather, it is thematic,
contextualized whole language intended to capture student interest and

provide opportunities for the teacher to create comprehension through
the negotiation of meaning. The structure should appear often enough
during the presentation to be salient to the student without making the
language

sound unnatural or stilted. Authentic stories, documents, or listening
segments can guarantee naturalness and often contain naturally occurring
repetitions.

The presentation should also be interactive. By scaffolding
participation in the activity, teachers can guide students through the
new elements of the language to be learned. This guided participation
may take the form of student repetition of key phrases cued by the
teacher during a storytelling session, student-teacher role reversal in
a TPR activity, cloze exercise based on listening segments, or
discussions that anticipate the content of a reading. The goal here is
to enable students to stretch their language abilities by using the new
elements of the target language in meaningful ways through the help and
mediation of the teacher. This step may last either part of or the
entire class session. For example, a storytelling lesson may contain
pre-storytelling activities, dramatization, pair-work comprehension
checks, or story-telling exercises. The length of time required depends
on the nature of the activity and the amount of negotiation work
required to charge the language with meaning.

### 2. Attention

###

This step focuses learner attention on some aspect of the language used
during the presentation activity. In this step, the teacher highlights
some regularity of the language. This can be achieved in several ways.
Teachers can ask questions about patterns found in a written text or
about words and phrases repeated in a story. Overhead transparencies of
example sentences from the presentation can be prepared, with important
words and phrases circled or underlined. The point to this step is to
get learners to focus attention on the target form without needless
elaboration or wasted time.

### 3. Co-construct an Explanation

###

Learners and teachers should be co-constructors of grammatical
explanation. After learners focus attention on the target form, the
teacher assists them in raising their awareness about the target
structure. During this step, students are guided to hypothesize, guess,
make predictions, or come to generalizations about the target form.

Co-constructing an explanation requires teacher questions that are well
chosen, clear, and direct. Questions are powerful tools in the hands of
teachers who can adjust their questioning "in flight" to meet the
emergent understandings of their students. For example, asking students
questions such as "what words do you hear or see repeated in the text,
and what could they mean?," "What pattern do you see in this group of
words?," and "How do certain words change as their meanings change?" is
a way to help students to draw insights from the language they hear and
understand. These cognitive "probes" help learners discover regular
grammatical patterns, sound systems, word order, unique cultural
meanings of words, or language functions.

As students hypothesize and generalize about the target form, teachers
build upon and extend students' knowledge without overwhelming them with
superfluous grammatical details. Hypothesis testing can also be
conducted, with teachers leading learners in trying out their new
knowledge

by applying their generalizations to new situations. Teachers are also
aware that the help they provide is graduated and may range from brief
hints about the target form to explicit instruction if needed (Aljaafreh
1992).

It is important to note that, unlike guided induction techniques, which
primarily rely on teacher questioning, a co-constructed explanation is
not inquisition. Rather, co-constructed explanations recognize that
students may not be able to perceive the formal properties of language
on the basis of the teacher's questions alone. What is obvious to an
expert language user is often a mystery to the novice. A co-constructed
explanation is as participatory for the teacher as it is for students.
That is, teachers need to assess the abilities of their students and
assist them by providing as well as eliciting information when
necessary. As Tharp and Gillimore (1988) point out, teaching is
responsive assistance and cannot be reduced to series of actions to be
performed in the same order in every instructional circumstance. By
listening closely to learner contributions during this step, teachers
can assess how much help is needed to attain the concept. In time, some
learners may be able to work in small groups on their own grammar
problems and report back to the class about their discoveries (Fotos and
Ellis 1991).

### 4. Extension Activity

###

Focus on form is only useful if this knowledge can be pressed into
service by the learners in a new way at a later time. In whole language
teaching, the teacher never loses sight of the "whole." Therefore, the
extension activity provides learners with the opportunity to use their
new skill in creative and interesting ways while at the same time
integrating it into existing knowledge. The extension activity should be
interesting, be related to the theme of the lesson in some way, and,
most importantly, allow for creative self-expression. Extension
activities are not work sheets on which learners use the target form to
fill in the blanks of disconnected sentences. Rather, they can be
information-gap activities, role play situations, dramatizations, games,
authentic writing projects, paired interviewed, class surveys, or
simulations of real life situations. The possibilities are endless, as
long as the learners have the chance to try to use the target form in
ways that they see are useful and meaningful. The extension activity
closes the circle and puts the "whole" back into whole language
teaching.

The discussion above should lead to the conclusion that language
learning is a thinking process, or from the learner's viewpoint, a
guessing game. Teachers need to design cognitively demanding activities
that will encourage learners to hypothesize, predict, take risks, make
errors, and self correct (Fountas and Hannigan 1989). By doing so, the
learners become active participants in the learning process. All the
whole language and guided participatory activities should encourage the
learners to be active thinkers and hypothesizers as they collaborate in
language learning activities with the teacher or with their peers.

Whether listening to a storytelling activity, co-constructing a grammar
explanation, or collaborating with peers during an extension activity,
the learners are actively discovering and hypothesizing about the target

language. This approach concurs with Bruner's (1986) advice that
students need to be cognitively challenged through the use of discovery
methods. Moreover, all he classroom activities should encourage
interaction and the functional use of language by giving learners
opportunities to share information, ask questions, and solve problems
collaboratively.

Finally, a distinguishing theme of whole language and a guided
participatory approach to grammar instruction is that learning needs to
be integrated, contextualized, and meaning-centered activities (Pearson
1989). Such activities facilitate comprehension and retention on the
part of the learners. Furthermore, the extension activities encourage
learners to integrate meaning, form, and function while experiencing
language in context. It should be mentioned that creating integrated and
meaning-centered activities is probably one of the most difficult
aspects of whole language teaching, since, many textbooks still stress
context-reduced practice and fragmented materials.

Creating contextualized activities is the only way to implement,
encourage and succeed at whole language teaching. Through whole language
learning students are able to converse with more confidence, and their
listening, reading, and writing skills improve. As they use Arabic in
real communication, it becomes less "foreign" and more natural ,
integral part of their experience. We know the best way to learn a
foreign language is to live with those who speak it, and our students
should be encouraged to take this step and go to the Arab World for a
semester or a year program. In preparation for that event, and also for
those students who will not venture beyond the classroom, there is much
practice to be done with peers and with teacher, whose responsibility is
to find or create meaningful practice.


