1. The Arabic Alphabet.
=======================

The Arabic sources, as long as they do not attribute the invention of
the Arabic script to Adam or Ishmael, tell us that the script had been
introduced either from South Arabia region or from Mesopotamia (Iraq).
Ibn Al-Nadim, for example, said that the people of Al-Hira, the capital
of the Lakhmid dynasty in the Euphrates valley, used a form of Syriac
cursive script which had developed into the Arabic alphabet.

Versteegh claims that the theory of Syriac origin has now been abandoned
by most scholars. It seems much more likely to him that the Arabic
alphabet is derived from a type of cursive Nabataean in Petra, Jordan.
In the Aramaic script, from which Nabataean writing ultimately derived,
there are no ligatures between letters. But in the cursive forms of the
Nabataean script most of the features that characterize the Arabic
script already appear. Versteegh adds that the elaboration of an Arabic
script for texts in Arabic took place as early as the second century CE.
This would mean that the development of the Arabic script as it is used
in pre-Islamic inscriptions occurred largely independently from the
later developments in Nabataean epigraphic script. The most important
internal development in Arabic script is the systematic elaboration of
connections between letters within the word, and the system of different
forms of the letters according to their position within the word.

According to Siibawayh, the Arabic Alphabet is made of 29 letters,
including 3 long vowels. He put them in the following order starting
with the laryngeal and ending with labial, representing the place of
articulation along the vocal tract.

<p dir="rtl">
**ء، ا، هـ ، ع ، ح ، غ ، خ ، ك ، ق ، ض،**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**ج ، ش ، ي ، ل ، ر ، ن ، ط ، د ، ت ، ص ،**
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
**ز ، س ، ظ ، ذ ، ث ، ف ، ب ، م ، و**
</p>

Though Siibawayh listed 29 letters he concluded that in reality there
were 35 sounds which are represented by those 29 letters. He explained
that the recitation of the Quran and reading of poetry had necessitated
the existance of those 6 additional sounds. The list included the 'light
Nuun'** النون الخفيفة** , the 'medial Hamza'**الهمزة التي بين  بين** ,
'Alif al-'Imaala**الالف التي تُمال إمالة شديدة**  ,'the J-sounded
Shiin**الشين التي کالجيم** , the Z-sounded emphatic S'** الصاد التي تکون
کالزاي** , 'the velarized 'Alif'**ألف التفخيم**   in the language of
Hijaaz in words like, **الحياة والصلاة والزکاة** .

Siibawayh went on to say that he could trace 42 sounds but the
additional 7 sounds were not favorable in the recitation of the Quran
and reading of poetry. Therefore, they were of less significance since
their use is only limited to oral communication.

Al-Khalil Ibn Ahmed, who died in 791, grouped and put them in the
following order:

<p dir="rtl">
**ع ح هـ خ غ ، ق ك ، ج ش ض ، ص س ز ، ط د ت ، ظ ث ذ ، ر د ن ، ف ب م ، و ا
ي ء**
</p>

The codification of the Qur'an was a crucial moment in the development
of a written standard for the Arabic language. On a practical level, the
writing-down of the holy text involved all kinds of decisions concerning
the orthography of the Arabic script and elaboration of a number of
conventions to make writing less ambiguous and more manageable than it
had been in pre-Islamic Arabia.

Writing was not unknown in the peninsula in that period. But, for
religious reasons, early Islamic sources emphasized the illiteracy of
the Prophet Mohammed. The Prophet was**أُميّ** , someone who could not
read nor write, and this was what made the revelation of the Qur'an and
his recitation of the text a miracle.

There are clear indications that as early as the sixth century writing
was fairly common in the urban centers of the peninsula, in Mekka and to
a lesser degree in Medina. In the commercial society that was Mekka,
businessmen must have had at their disposal various means of recording
their transactions. There are references to treaties being written down
and preserved in the Ka'ba in Mekka. Even the **الرواة** , the
transmitters of poetry, sometimes relied on written notes, although they
recited the poems entrusted to them orally. In the Qur'an, we find
reflection of a society in which writing for commercial purposes was
well established. In the second sura we find, for instance, detailed
stipulations on the settlement of debts that include the exact
writing-down of the terms.

In the biography of the Prophet, there are many references to his using
scribes for his correspondence with Arab tribes and of writing treaties.
In the accounts preserved by the historians, scribes and witnesses were
mentioned and the Prophet signed those documents with his fingernail.
Tradition has preserved the names of several scribes to whom Mohammed
dictated messages, chief among them being Zayd Ibn Thabit.

Just as Christian monks of the Middle Ages spent lifetimes writing and
illuminating religious manuscripts, their Arab and Muslim forebears
contemporaries devoted their lives to producing elegantly handwritten
copies of the Quran. In lieu of pictorial representation, which was
frowned upon, calligraphy became not only practical, but decorative,
replacing design, painting and sculpture over a period of centuries.
Later every caliph's court employed these artists to draw up official
documents, design official signatures and write out diplomatic
correspondence.

The Arabs and Muslims of that time used interlaced geometric lines
derivations from the Kufic style to adorn the walls of palaces and
mosques, and the name of this style, arabesque, is a reminder of its
cultural origins. Arabic calligraphy forms a primary ornamentation of
the Moorish palace of Alhambra in Granada, other citadels and mosques of
Moorish Spain speak eloquently of the golden ages of arabesque design
and calligraphy.

The tracery and flowing patterns of the arabesque style, of calligraphy
itself, imply a deeper, symbolic meaning stemming from ancient mystic
beliefs. The designs endlessly reproducing themselves in apparently
confused entanglements, but in reality flowing an ingenious system, are
interpreted as symbolic of the order of nature which in perpetual change
always repeats its cycles. The meanders are said to represent the
continuity of life, the circle is held to stand for eternity and the
rosettes and palmettos of design for birth and maturity.

Calligraphers today play an integral role in the Arab and Muslim Worlds.
They not only copy Quranic verses and design phrases to be incorporated
into building tiles and mosques , but they write nearly all newspaper
and magazine headlines. Modern Arabic lends itself to the art, with its
fluid design and diacritical markings.


