Refusal of the Holy Prophet From the Umar's Leading
===================================================

In Sunan Abu Dawood - Chapter about the successorship of Abu Bakr,
Musnad Ahmad, Sirah Ibn Hisham, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad, and Ansabul Ashrâf of
Balazari it is narrated (We quote Sunan Abu Dawood from Abdullah Ibn
Zam?) that when the illness of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) got severe,
he was with a group of Muslims near the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).
Bilal informed the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) about the time of Prayer. He said:
"Tell someone to lead the people in Prayer."

When he got out of the group, Umar was among the group but Abu Bakr was
absent. I (Abdullah Ibn Zam?) said: Umar get up and lead the people in
Prayer. "Umar got up and said the Takbiratul Ihram of the Prayer." When
the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) heard his voice, which was very loud, he
said: "Then where is Abu Bakr? Allah and Muslims do not accept this!"

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) repeated this; then sent someone to Abu Bakr. He
came after the Prayer led by Umar was over and prayed again with the
people!1 Anxiousness of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) over the Imamat of Abu
Bakr In another tradition it has come, "When the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
heard the voice of Umar, he brought his holy head out of the room and
said:

No! No! No! Son of Abu Qahafa (Abu Bakr) should lead the people in
Prayer. The holy Prophet said these words in anger."

In Musnad Ahmad, it has come that Abdullah Ibn Zam? said that Umar told
him: "Woe upon you, O son of Zam?, what are you doing with me, by the
promise of Allah?" When you gave me orders to pray, I was thinking
nothing but that the holy Prophet had ordered so, and if it was other
than this, I would not have prayed with the people.

He told Umar; "By the promise of Allah, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) has not told me that you should pray with the people, but
when I did not see Abu Bakr, I saw you more eligible from Sunan Abu
Dawood Vol. 2, P. 115, Kitab-us-Sunnah, Musnad Ahmad Vol. 4, P. 322,
330, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol.

2, P. 222, 223, Ansabul Ashrâf Vol. 1, P. 554, Tarikh Ibn Kathir Vol.
5, P. 232 with many narrators in the tradition of Ibn Sa'ad and Balazari
has come like this: (Then the rows for Prayer got ready and Umar
returned, after sometime we saw that Ibn Abi Qahafa came forward and led
the Prayer for the people.) amongst those who were present for leading
the Prayer."

In Sunan Ibn Majah it is narrated from Sâlim Ibn Abid that, When the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was in his deathbed, his condition was acute.
Then he got somewhat better and said: "Is it time for Prayer?"

We said: "Yes."

He said: "Ask Bilal to inform the people that it is time for Prayer."

Again the condition of the Prophet got severe. When his condition got
better he said, "Is it time for Prayer?"

We replied affirmatively.

He said: "Call Bilal so that he can make people aware of the time of
Prayer and call Abu Bakr, that he lead the people in Prayer."

Aysha said: "My father is mild and soft hearted. When he stands in your
place, he would weep and would not have the capability to pray. So it
would be better if you order someone other than him."

After that again the condition of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) got bad. After
sometime his condition got better.

Again he said: "Ask Bilal to make people aware of the time of Prayer.
You are like the woman around Joseph." Sâlim Ibn Abid says: "Bilal gave
Adhan. Then Abu Bakr prayed with the people."1 Sunan Ibn Majah, Vol. 1,
P. 390 H. no. 1234 Another tradition quoted by Anas says; "When the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) got ill and in that illness he died; Bilal came to
the Prophet and told him about Prayer time.

He said: "Bilal I became aware (of Prayer time). Then whoever wants he
may pray, and whoever wants he may leave."

Bilal returned to the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and said: "O Messenger of
Allah, my parents be sacrificed for you, who will lead the people in
Prayer?" He replied: Give order to Abu Bakr, that he may lead the people
in Prayer. While Abu Bakr was ahead, the illness of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) went away…1
Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 3, P. 202

**Pray of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) behind Abu Bakr**

In Musnad Ahmad it is narrated from Aysha that the Messenger of Allah
in his deathbed said, "Give order to Abu Bakr to he lead the people in
Prayer."

Then Abu Bakr prayed and the holy Prophet sat behind Abu Bakr and
prayed.1 In Musnad Ahmad and Ansabul Ashrâf it is narrated (We quote the
tradition from Musnad Ahmad by Aysha): "When the Messenger of Allah was
on the deathbed he sat behind Abu Bakr and prayed."2

Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 6, P. 159

Musnad Ahmad, Ansabul Ashrâf, Vol. 1, P. 555, Tarikhul Islam Zahabi,
Vol. 1, P. 312, Ibn Kathir Vol. 5, P. 234. Ibn Kathir in his Tarikh Vol.
5, P. 234 from Baihaqi narrated from Anas that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
sat behind Abu Bakr with the people prayed in one dress. Ibn Kathir
says: And this is a good certificate, on the basis that is right and
this rule that the last Prayer of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) prayed with the
people is a good legislation.

Balazari in Ansabul Ashrâf Vol. 1, P. 555 has narrated four traditions
in this context and Tarikh Ibn Kathir Vol. 5, P. 234 two traditions and
in Tarikhul Islam Zahabi Vol. 1, P. 313 one tradition and in Tabaqat Ibn
Sa'ad Vol. 2, P. 220, Happiness of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) by the
leading of Abu Bakr Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Moslem, and Musnad Abu Avana
narrate (We relate the tradition from Sahih Bukhari from Zohari, who
said):

"Anas Ibn Malik Ansari, who was from the companions of the holy Prophet
informed us that Abu Bakr used to pray during the illness of the
Prophet. At the time of his death, people were in rows for Prayer and
the holy Prophet pulled aside the curtain of the room (which was between
his room and the mosque) and looked at us. After that the Prophet
smiled.

I could not understand the reason of his happiness at that moment. Then
Abu Bakr wanted to come back so that he could take place in the rows of
the congregation. He thought that the holy Prophet had come out to lead
the Prayer. Then the holy Prophet gestured him to finish the prayers and
put down the curtains and died on the same day.1

223 and European Edition Part 2, Vol. 2, P. 20, 22-23 from Umme Salma
and Abu Saeed Khudri, narrated by them that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in
the morning prayers prayed behind Abu Bakr. He prayed one rakat (units)
with him, at the time when Abu Bakr said the Salaams of the Prayer. The
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) prayed the last rakat on his own and then changed.
Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1, P. 87, Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2, P.

118. 119, Fathul Bari, Vol. 2, P. 305, Sahih Moslem, Vol. 2, P. 24,
Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 2, P. 217, European Edition Part 2, Vol. 2, P.
18, Ibn Kathir Vol. 5, P. 235,

Bukhari, Abu Avana, and Balazari have narrated from Anas Ibn Malik (we
are quoting from Sahih Bukhari) that the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) did not
come out of his house for leading us in prayers for three days. When it
was time for Prayer he pulled aside the curtain and said…till the end of
the tradition.1

In another tradition Anas says: The Muslims had gathered on the morning
of Monday to pray when Abu Bakr was leading the prayers.2 All the
traditions mentioned so far were according to Sahih Bukhari. But five
were from Sunan Abu Dawood, one from Sunan Ibn Majah, two from Musnad
Ahmad and they are used to prove the caliphate of Abu Bakr. (Very soon
these traditions will be analyzed).

Hasan Basri says that the holy Prophet was ill; Abu Bakr was ordered to
lead the people in Prayer. He (Hasan Basri) explains the reason of Abu
Bakr's Imamate in this way: People come to know, by Ansabul Ashrâf
Balazari, Vol. 1, P. 561, Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 3, P. 110 and 163

1 Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1, P. 87, Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2, P. 119, Musnad
Ahmad, Vol. 3, P. 211 and in Ansabul Ashrâf two traditions from Anas Ibn
Malik and Fathul Bari, Vol. 2, P. 306

2 Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1, Pg. 145, Vol. 3, P. 64 Musnad Ahmad Vol. 3, Pg.
196-197, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 2, P. 217, European Edition, Vol. 2,
Part 2, Pg. 19, Fathul Bari, Vol. 9, P. 209

Allah, that he is the master and leader after the holy Prophet.1 Umar
Ibn Abdul Aziz sent a person to Hasan Basri to ask if the holy Prophet
had appointed Abu Bakr as his successor?

Hasan Basri replied: Does your Master and friend have any doubt? By
Allah he chose him for his successorship. Because he ordered only him,
and not others, to lead the Prayer and Abu Bakr was afraid of Allah,
that he should sit on that seat.2 Balazari, Ansabul Ashrâf, Vol. 1 P.
560
Balazari, Ansabul Ashrâf, Vol. 1, P. 561


**Imamat of Abu Bakr is the proof of his Caliphate**

Abu Avana (d. 316) after narrating some traditions in his Musnad which
were quoted earlier, has said: "This tradition makes apparent the
caliphate and successorship of Abu Bakr after the demise of the holy
Prophet." It is because the Prophet said: "The most aware about the
recitation of Qur'an should lead the prayers; and from the companions of
the holy Prophet were some persons, who were more learned than Abu Bakr
and more aware than him.

Even from the companions were some persons whose voices were louder in
reciting the Qur'an. The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had told many times,
"Tell someone, other than Abu Bakr, to lead the people in Prayer. Abu
Bakr is not capable for this job, and he is a mild and soft hearted
person and he cries in his Prayer."

After all these discussions the Prophet didn't order anyone other than
Abu Bakr, and was not happy in this matter with anyone except Abu Bakr.
On this basis, according to the narration of Abu Masood, the holy
Prophet said: "A man in his period of power and kingship should not pray
behind another person."1 This proves that he is the caliph and successor
after the Prophet.

Ibn Kathir2 after bringing many sections of the traditions, and after
finding solution for the contradiction of those traditions said, "the
holy Prophet gave preference to Abu Bakr for leading the Prayer over all
the companions. Prayer, which is one of the greatest pillars of
practical Islam."

Shaykh Abul Hasan Ashari said: "The holy Prophet preferred Abu Bakr for
leading the Prayer, which in Islam is a clear and illuminated matter."
He says: Giving preference to Abu Bakr for leading the Prayer is the
proof that he was the most knowledgeable and most aware about the
recitation of Qur'an amongst the companions!!3 The Conditions of Imamat
of Prayer in the school of Caliphate There is a tradition that all the
scholars unanimously have accepted as "correct", in which the holy
Prophet said: One who is most knowledgeable about the recitation of
Quran will lead the prayer.

Then if two are similar in recitation of Qur'an, the more knowledgeable
about the traditions of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) will lead. If they
are similar in sunnat also, then that person who brought Islam earlier
will lead the Prayer. Ibn Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2, P. 120 Ibn Kathir,
Vol. 5, P. 236

3. Al Bedayat wal Neh?yat, Vol. 5, P. 236.

Kathir says: It would have been better if this statement of Ashari was
written with gold. Anyhow, all the conditions were gathered in Abu
Bakr!!!1

Imamat of Abu Bakr in the traditions of the Caliphs The Sunni scholars
bring a tradition from Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.), which could not be true.
Hasan Basri has narrated from Ali that the demise of the holy Prophet
was not sudden.

He died due to illness. During the illness Bilal came to him and told
him about the Prayer time. Then he said: "Call Abu Bakr, so that he
could lead the people in Prayer." The Prophet said it while he saw
me."

When the holy Prophet passed away, the Muslims saw that the holy
Prophet gave Wilayat (mastership) to Abu Bakr in the matter of religion.
They gave Wilayat to Abu Bakr in the worldly matters too.2

In another tradition it is stated that Hazrat Ali (p.b.u.h.) said: At
the time when the soul of the holy Prophet departed, he gave preference
to Abu Bakr in Prayer. We also, in the worldly matters, gave preference
to the one who was given preference by the holy Prophet in the matter of
religion, we preferred him!! Then we gave . Ibid.

Ansabul Ashrâf, Vol. 1. P. 558

preference to Abu Bakr for the Imamat of Prayer in congregation!!!1
Anas has narrated from Ali, "The holy Prophet was ill; looking at us, he
ordered Abu Bakr to lead the Prayers. When the Messenger passed away,
the Muslims, in worldly matters chose that person, with whom the holy
Prophet was happy in the matter of religion. So the Muslims accepted the
leadership of Abu Bakr and by the promise of Allah, Abu Bakr was fit for
leadership (Wilayat).

What factors could undermine the position given by the holy Prophet to
Abu Bakr?
Ansabul Ashrâf, Vol. 1, P. 560


