The Discussions of the Earlier Muslims of Medina (ans?r) After the Demise of the Holy Prophet
=============================================================================================

After this, what comes is not surprising. Zar Ibn Hobaish has narrated
from Abdullah, that when the holy Prophet passed away, the Ansars said,
"there should be an Amir (chief) from us, and an Amir from you." Zar Ibn
Hobaish added that Umar came to the people and said: "O people of Ansar!
Are you not aware that the holy Prophet ordered Abu Bakr to lead the
people in Prayer?"

They replied: "Yes."

Umar said, "Who, amongst you all, wants to exceed the position of Abu
Bakr?" Ansar said: "We take refuge in Allah that we go ahead of Abu
Bakr."1

Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad, Vol. 2, P. 224, European Edition Vol. 2 Part 2, P.
23, Balazari in Ansabul Ashr창f Vol. 1, P. 580 from the chain of
narrators from Zar Ibn Hobaish it has been quoted from Abdullah bin
Masood.

Imamat of S창lim and Ibn Umme Maktum in place of the holy Prophet The
elders of the school of Caliphate claim that such traditions prove the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr. Now the question is: Whether praying in place of
the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) is the proof for being his successor and
Caliph?

I don't know how the scholars overlooked what Bukhari has stated in his
Sahih?

S창lim, the freed slave of Abu Huzaifa, used to lead the Prayer for
Muhajireen and companions in Quba mosque, and amongst the companions
were Abu Bakr and Umar.1

It is worth saying that Abu Bakr was there a Mamoom (praying behind),
and following someone else, who was from Mawali (a freed slave).

Abu Dawood in his Sunan, and Ahmad in his Musnad narrate that the holy
Prophet chose the son of Umme Maktum as the Caliph of Medina.2 In Musnad
Ahmad there is a tradition, which indicates: Ibn Umme Maktum used to
pray with the people although he was blind.3

In Magh?zi Waqidi (died in 207 A.H), Tabaq?t Ibn Sa'ad, and Sirah Ibn
Hisham it is narrated that Ibn Umme Maktum took part in the battles of
Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 4, P. 160

Sunan Abu Dawood, Vol. 2 P. 43, Musnad Ahmad Vol. 3, P.

132, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 4, P 209

Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 3, P. 192

Badr,1 Uhud,2 Bani Nuzayr,3 Ahzab,4 Bani Qurayza,5 Fat'h6 and other
battles.7 Waqidi and Ibn Masood narrate, "Ibn Maktum used to be present
in Friday prayers with the people, and recite the sermon near the pulpit
and the pulpit was on his left."8

I don't know how the learned scholars forget that Bukhari has mentioned
in his book in the chapter of Prayer:

(i)Chapter of Imamat of the slave and the free ones;

(ii) Chapter of the tradition, which says Zakwan (the slave of Aysha)
use to lead for Aysha from the aspect of Quran.

(iii) Chapter of the Imamat of illegitimate children and Bedouins.

1 Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad, Vol. 2, P. 27, European Edition Vol. 2, Part 1 P.
18, Maghazi of Waqidi P. 199-277

2 Ibid. Vol. 2 P. 31, European Edition Vol. 2, Part 1 P. 27, Maghazi
Waqidi, P. 119-277

3 Ibid. Vol. 2, P. 58, European Edition Part 1, P. 47, Sirah Ibn Hisham
Vol. 3, P. 192

4Maghazi Waqidi P. 441, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad European Edition Vol. 2, Part
1 P. 47, Sirah Ibn Hisham Vol. 3, P.

5Waqidi P. 496, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 2 P. 74, European Edition Vol.
2, Part 1 P. 53, Sirah Ibn Hisham Vol. 3 P. 235

6Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 2 P. 139, European Edition Vol. 2, Part 1 P.
97

7 Sirah Ibn Hisham Vol. 2 P. 425, Vol. 3, P. 53, 321, 327, Maghazi
Waqidi P. 197, 537, 547, 573, Ansabul Ashr창f Vol. 1, P. 311 can be
referred.

8Maghazi Waqidi P. 184, Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 4, P. 209

**Chapter of Imamate of the young boy (who has not reached the age of
puberty).1**

Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 1, P. 90 **Imamate of a young boy who had not
reached the age of puberty**

It is narrated from Amr Ibn Salma, in the chapter of the Victory of
Mecca, that his community used to prefer him in leading the Prayer,
because he knew to recite the Quran much more than others.

Amr Ibn Salma says: "I was asked to lead the Prayer although I was six
or seven years old, and there was a dress on my body while going in
prostration it moved on one side."

Then a woman said: "Wouldn't you cover your back and buttocks from your
followers?" "Then clothes were purchased for me, and nothing like those
clothes has made me happy."1 A similar version of this tradition in
Sunan Abi Dawood has appeared from Ibn Salma: "I was continuously
leading my tribe (in prayers). My dress was torn from behind. When I
used to prostrate my buttocks were visible." In other tradition he says;
"The condition in which I was leading my tribe there was a small coat on
my body and it was yellow. When I used to go into prostration my body
was visible."

A woman from the tribe said; "Cover the private parts of your body from
us."

Sahih Bukhari Vol. 3, P. 44, Fathul Bari Vol. 9, P. 84 "Then a Yemeni
dress was purchased for me."1 Justice is not the condition in Imamat!
Bukhari has narrated, about a person who was misguided, from Hasan Basri
that, "Read Prayer behind a person who is misguided and brings wicked
ideas! His ideas harms him only, and are not related to us!"2

He has also narrated from Zuhari that, "We don't believe that a
"Mukhannas" (Gay) should become Imam-e-Jamat, except in an emergency.3
Companions have narrated from Abu Huraira that the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said; "Daily Prayers can be performed behind any Muslim.
Whether he is of a good or bad character; even if he has committed
"great sins".4

Examining and Analyzing the traditions I don't know how the Sunni
scholars have forgotten these words and concluded Abu Bakr's Caliphate
and successorship from the leading of a congregation pray during the
last illness of the Prophet? How did the clear and apparent
contradictions between the traditions that have come in the "Sahih
books" remain hidden from the scholars?

Sunan Abu Dawood Vol. 1, P. 159-160, Nasai Vol. 1 P. 127 Sahih Bukhari,
Vol. 1, P. 9

3 Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 1, P. 9

4 Sunan Abu Dawood, Vol. 1, P. 80

Did the holy Prophet take permission from his wives to pass the days of
his illness in Aysha's house?

Or he observed the turns of his wives and used to say, "Where am I
tomorrow?"

Was he interested that Aysha's turn come and when Aysha's turn came,
the Prophet got comfort in her house? Or perhaps when it was not Aysha's
turn the Prophet did not go to her house? Actually what did happen in
Aysha's house on that day? What was the holy Prophet asking for? Did he
ask for Ali? So when the names of Abu Bakr, Umar and Abbas were
mentioned did he agree to it? When Abu Bakr came to the Prophet, did he
tell him to lead the Prayer?

Or the Prophet's condition was constantly deteriorating. When his
condition found little improve, he used to take ablution and when he
wanted to get up, his condition become bad. Then he said, "Call Abu Bakr
so that he may lead the Pray or other answers that are mentioned in the
traditions or other occasions?

Did Bilal come to the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) to inform him of the time
of the Pray? Did the Prophet said: "Bilal I became aware of the time of
Prayer, whoever wants can pray, and whoever wants can go?" Did the holy
Prophet order Bilal to make him aware about the time of Prayer? Or
rather he said, "Ask someone to lead the people in Prayer."

Then Ibn Zam? went to Umar and told him that he should lead the people
in Prayer. When the holy Prophet heard his voice he said: Allah will not
accept this.

Did the holy Prophet order Abu Bakr to lead the people in Prayer, then
Aysha went so many times to the holy Prophet so that he may appoint Umar
to lead the Prayer, but the holy Prophet did not accept it and said "you
are like the women around Joseph"?

Who, in fact, addressed these words to the Prophet? Aysha or Hafsa? Who
invited Umar to lead the Prayer? Did Abu Bakr invite Umar to lead the
Prayer? Then he didn't accept it and said, "You are more eligible to
lead the Prayer?" Or Ibn Zam?, invited Umar to lead the prayer? Then he
accepted it and prayed and the Prophet got angry with him? When, for the
last time, people saw the holy Prophet, was he praying in a sitting
position behind Abu Bakr? Or it was when he turned the curtain aside, in
Aysha's house, and people were standing in rows behind Abu Bakr?


