The Reality of Imamate of Abu Bakr in the School of Caliphate
=============================================================

Let us study the traditions that are recorded in the books "Sahih" and
"Musnads" again, in order to clarify the reality.

In Sahih Bukhari, the chapter of Prayer, about a person who follows the
Imam, and people follow him, it is narrated from the Prophet that he
said, "Follow me in this way. Those who are after you, can follow
you."

In Sahih Moslem, Sunan Ibn Majah, Musnad Abu Avana, Musnad Ahmad,
Tabaq?t Ibn Sa'ad, and Ansabul Ashraaf of Balazari it is narrated that
when the illness of the holy Prophet become severe, Bilal came and
informed the Prophet about the time of Prayer. He said: "Call Abu Bakr
so that he may lead the people in prayer:

Aysha said: "When Abu Bakr entered the mosque, the holy Prophet felt
better. Then he stood up, and due to weakness, had taken the support of
two men and his holy feet were dragged on the ground, till they entered
the mosque. When Abu Bakr perceived the movement of the holy Prophet,
without turning his face, he came back. The holy Prophet gestured to Abu
Bakr to remain in the same position and the Messenger sat on the left of
Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr prayed standing and the holy Prophet prayed sitting.
Abu Bakr followed the Prayer of the holy Prophet, and people followed
Abu Bakr.1

Abu Bakr made the voice of Takbir of the Prophet reach the people!

In the chapter that the voice of Takbir of Imam must reach the people,
from the book of Prayer (in Sahih Bukhari and Musnad Abu Avana) it is
said that:2

"Abu Bakr, without turning his face, returned and the holy Prophet sat
next to Abu Bakr. He repeated the Takbir of the holy Prophet to the
people, in a louder voice.

In the chapter (Condition when a sick person can join the
congregation), there is a tradition in the book of Adh?n. Aysha said:
"When the holy Prophet was ill, and when it was time for Prayer, the
Prophet got aware about the time of Prayer and said: "Call Abu Bakr so
that he can lead people in Prayer.

" Abu Bakr came out and prayed. At that time the Messenger (s.a.w.a.)
felt somewhat better and came out of the house. He was so weak that he
walked with the support of two persons, as if I was seeing that both the
feet of the Messenger were Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1 P. 92, Sahih Moslem Vol.
2 P. 23, Sunan Ibn Majah similarly in Musnad Ahmad Vol. 6 P. 210, 224,
Tabaqat Ibn Sa'ad Vol. 3 P. 179, Ansabul Ashrâf Vol. 1 P. 557

Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1. P. 92, Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2. P. being dragged
due to pain. …then the Prophet came and sat next to Abu Bakr.1

It is narrated in Musnad Abu Avana, and Musnad Ahmad from Aysha, and in
Ansabul Ashrâf from Ibn Abbas and Aysha, that the holy Prophet in his
deathbed ordered Abu Bakr, "To lead the people in Prayer." Then the holy
Prophet was ahead of Abu Bakr and prayed with the people while sitting,
then Abu Bakr followed the Prayer of the holy Prophet, and people
followed Abu Bakr.2 In the books Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Moslem, Sunan Ibn
Majah, Musnad Abu Avana and Muwatta Malik it is quoted that the holy
Prophet sat next to Abu Bakr. Then Abu Bakr followed the Prayer of the
holy Prophet and people followed Abu Bakr.3

From all the available records we conclude that in the last hours of
the illness of the holy Prophet, Bilal came to the house of the holy
Prophet to inform him about the time for prayer. Then the Prophet came
to know about the time of the prayer.

1 Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1 P. 85-86, Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2 P. 115

2 Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2 P. 113, Musnad Ahmad Vol. 6 P. 249, Ansabul
Ashrâf Vol. 1 P. 557

3 Sahih Bukhari Vol. 1, P. 88, Sahih Moslem Vol. 2 P. 23-24, Sunan Ibn
Majah, fifth book, Chapter 142 Tradition 1233, Muwatta Malik Vol. 1 P.
156, Musnad Abu Avana Vol. 2 P. 117

Aysha has related that the Messenger said: "Inform Abu Bakr! He should
lead the people in prayer." When Abu Bakr stood for Prayer, the holy
Prophet felt better. Therefore, he came out of the room, supported by
two persons from beneath his armpits, and they carryied him; and the
feet of the Messenger were dragged on the ground due to pain and
weakness. He was absolutely unable to lift his holy feet from the
ground. They took him the near of Mehrab (Prayer niche), and the Prophet
sat down in front of Abu Bakr.

Sh?fei says: In the beginning Abu Bakr was the Imam (Leader of Pray).
Then he became a Mamoom (follower), and caused the voice of Takbir of
the holy Prophet reach to the people!1 Sirah Ibn Hisham Vol. 4 P. 332,
Tabari European Edition Vol. 1 P. 1813

**Questions and Objections about the Traditions**

Some basic and important questions may arise. One way ask:

1. How is it possible that the holy Prophet once ordered Abu Bakr to
pray, and after he had started, the prophet came out of the house in a
bad condition and severe illness, to stop him from continuing the
Prayer? Yet he was not able to stand up, so he sat down and prayed with
the people?

2. Does not the situation show that the people stopped their previous
pray, and started a new pray behind the holy Prophet?

3. Similarly we ask:

a. How was the condition of the holy Prophet when he ordered Abu Bakr
to pray instead of him?

b. In other traditions, Aysha and all the narrators have said that when
the Messenger was taken to the mosque he was unable to stand on his feet
and his holy feet were been dragged due to weakness and severe pain.

c. How much heavy and acute has been his illness?

d. If we accept this stage of inability, pain, and difficulty, as the
lightness of his condition, then certainly the acute and hard condition
had been like coma or unconsciousness.

e. In that condition how it has been possible that the holy Prophet in
the state of coma, (after hearing the voice of Bilal to lead the Prayer)
call Aysha and say: "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in Prayer?"

4. When the holy Prophet was in the special room of Aysha, resting on
the bed in a state of coma, who said to Bilal that the holy Prophet had
said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in Prayer?" The true Imamate in
the two Schools [The School of Ahle-Bayt (Shia) and the School of the
Caliphate (Sunnite)]

The answers to these questions can be found from the tradition of Ibne
Abil Hadid, from his Shaikh (teacher). Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.)stated that: Aysha ordered Bilal to inform Abu Bakr to lead the
people in Prayer. The holy Prophet said: "You are like those women
around Joseph." The Prophet said those sentences in order to reject that
programme. He got angry on them because, both Aysha and Hafsa wished
their fathers be appointed. The holy Prophet came out and put aside Abu
Bakr from the Mehrab (Prayer niche).Then the holy Prophet cursed Aysha
in seclusion and complained to Allah about the injustice of Aysha.

Ibn Abil Hadid says that he asked his Shaikh (teacher), "Do you say
that Aysha appointed her father to pray and the Prophet did not appoint
him?"

He replied: "I do not say that. It is Hazrat Ali who had said this, and
my duty is other than him. Ali was present there and I was not. So I
have no choice but to submit to these traditions and quotations, which
have reached me."1

Hazrat Ali (p.b.u.h.) was present on that scene, and he himself knew
what had happened and what was happening. The historical facts and
traditions in the school of Ahle Bayt (Shia) match with what has been
narrated by Amirul Mo-mineen Ali (p.b.u.h.).

In "Irshad" of Shaikh Mufeed and A'al?mul Wara of Tabarsi, there are
traditions which says: "The holy Prophet in the days of his illness was
in the house of Umme Salma. He had stayed a day or two in the house of
Umme Salma that Aysha came to Umme Salma and requested that the Prophet
be shifted to her house, so that she could nurse him; and in this matter
she took the permission of all the The same tradition that we analyzed
earlier and in the exegesis of the sermons of Nahjul Balagha titled: Wa
men kalama lahu... The exegesis of Abduh P. 156; and in Sharh Abil Hadid
Vol. 2 P. 458, Egypt Edition wives. The permission was given and the
holy Prophet was transferred to Aysha's house. The illness of the
Prophet continued in Aysha's house. Day by day, his condition worsened.
Then at the time of Morning Prayer, although the whole body of the
Prophet was feverish, Bilal came and said: "Prayer! May the Mercy of
Allah be upon you."1 In Khasaisul Aimma there is a tradition: "When the
illness of the Messenger increased, he called Ali. Then the Prophet put
his head on the lap of Hazrat Ali and his condition got bad till he got
aware about the time of prayer…"2

Shaikh Mufeed has stated: …..Then Aysha said: 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead
the people in Prayer'. And Hafsa said: 'Tell Umar to lead the people in
Prayer.'

When the holy Prophet heard the conversation of Ayesha and Hafsa, and
saw their deep interest for the Imamate of their fathers and their
delusion in that matter (while the Prophet was still alive), he said:
"Stop it! You are like those women around Joseph." Then the Messenger
got up due to the fear that one of them may perform the pray. Although
he had ordered both of them to go out of the city with Usamah, yet they
were near the Prophet. So there was no doubt that those two persons had
disobeyed. When the holy Prophet heard the Shaikh Mufeed, Irsh?d, P.
86.

On the basis of the tradition of Allamah Majlisi in Bihar Vol. 22 P.
485 conversation of Aysha and Hafsa, he understood that Abu Bakr and
Umar had disobeyed his orders.

To stop the mischief and remove the doubts, the Prophet tried to stand
up, although due to severe weakness, he was unable to walk. Then Ali Ibn
Abi Talib and Ibn Abbas took the hands of the Prophet and he took the
support of them. His feet, due to weakness and inability, were dragged
on the ground. When the holy Prophet came to the mosque he saw Abu Bakr,
who had stepped towards the Mehrab. The Prophet showed Abu Bakr, with
his hands, to go behind the Mehrab, and the holy Prophet stood in front
place, and said the Takbiratul Ihram of the prayer. The Prayer, which
was started by Abu Bakr, was discontinued, and the Prophet started a new
prayer. When the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) finished the Prayer, he told Abu
Bakr, Umar, and a group from the Muslims who were present in the mosque:
"Did I not order you to join the army of Usamah?"

They said: "Yes, O Prophet of Allah."

The Prophet said: "Then why did you disobey my orders?" Abu Bakr said:
"I went out, but I returned so that I may renew my allegiance to you!"
Umar said: "O Prophet of Allah, I did not go out of Medina because I
didn't like to ask about your condition from others."

Then the holy Prophet said: "Join the army of Usamah", and repeated it
thrice. After that, due to pain, tiredness, and sadness, which inflicted
the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), his condition deteriorated.1 Conclusions and
Analyses of traditions The contents of tradition about the Imamate of
Abu Bakr during the illness and demise of the holy Prophet are very
contradictory.

In spite of the contradictions, the scholars consider these traditions
as a proof of the correctness of Abu Bakr's successorship of the
Prophet.

Indeed the scholars have forgotten what is recorded in Sahih Bukhari
regarding Abu Bakr, Umar, and other elder muslims who followed and
prayed behind Sâlim (the freed slave of Abu Huzaifa). And the holy
Prophet put Ibn Umme Maktum (who was blind) to lead the perform of the
public prayers in his absence in Medina. Ibn Umme Maktum used to lead
the Friday Prayers with the people.

Scholars have forgotten that Bukhari, in his Sahih, has kept a special
chapter about the Imamate of slaves, the freed ones, illegitimate
children, the Arab gypsies, the Bedouins, and young boys who had not
reached puberty, etc.

The scholars have forgotten what the traditionist companion, Abu
Huraira, has narrated: "Prayer which has become obligatory, can be
performed behind every Muslim, whether he has a Irshad of Mufeed P.
86-87

good character or bad; even though he may be indulging in major
sins!"

The conclusion and evaluation of the Sunni scholar from the traditions
consisting of strange and astonishing stories, is not correct. Since,
the holy Prophet had sent Abu Bakr, Umar, and many other muslims for the
expedition to Rome, under the command of Usamah bin Zaid. He had
repeated his order many times, and had cursed those who disobeyed
Usamah. Then how the story of appointing Abu Bakr as Imam of Prayer
could be true?

When we study the traditions mentioned in the Sahih books, we find
narrations which specify when Abu Bakr stood up and started praying, the
holy Prophet came in the mosque. He was very weak, and movement was not
possible for him.

Two people (Hazrat Ali and Fazl Ibn Abbas) supported him. The feet of
the Prophet were dragged on the ground. In that condition the holy
Prophet was brought to the mosque. He sat in the Mehrab and in a sitting
position, led the people in Prayer. Abu Bakr who was the Imam, became a
Mamoom (follower) and just repeated the takbirs of the holy Prophet
loudly.

It means that he was reciting the takbir for Prayer, and suddenly the
holy Prophet came out to stop him.The holy Prophet removed him from
Imamate.

Now it is necessary to pose a question. How Abu Bakr was present in the
mosque, whereas, he was ordered to join the army of Usamah? In that case
it is not correct that the holy Prophet ordered him to lead the Prayer,
when he had previously ordered him to join Usamah.

We find the answer from what Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated from Imam Ali.
"Aysha was the one who asked Bilal (freed by her father) to tell Abu
Bakr to lead the people in Prayer." Then the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
told Aysha and other women: "You are like the women around Joseph!" It
was due to the way that they behaved. Also he came to the mosque,
carried by two people, to halt the congregational prayer led by Abu
Bakr.

Traditions in the school of Ahlul Bayt emphasize and specify that the
holy Prophet came out and stopped Abu Bakr from leading the Prayer, and
started the Prayer again. And when he (s.a.w.a.) finished the Prayer he
returned to his house. Then Umar and Abu Bakr were called and
interrogated for disobeying the command to join the army of Usamah. One
of them said: "I went out of Medina, but I returned so that I could see
you again!"

The other said: "I didn't like to go out of Medina and ask about your
condition from others!" Then the holy Prophet said: Go and join the army
of Usamah. He repeated it three times, till his condition became
worse.

After all, one more question remains. If these were the facts, how all
those traditions in the Sahih, Sunan, Musnads, books of traditions,
history, and biographies are regarded correct, and how they have been
spread in the School of Caliphate? Answer: The political intrigue
employed by the Caliphs to befool the people required that such
traditions be fabricated and distributed.

After the time of the Caliphate, the validity of the rule of the
Umayyad, Abbaside and Ottoman Caliphs all depended on such traditions.
The political rulers spread those traditions during the fourteen
centuries and people transferred them, copied them, and gave their
support. The books having such traditions were considered authentic. The
people were misguided about their authenticity; and generation after
generation, people accepted it and did not pay heed to scrutinize them
or do research.

There is no power and strength except from Allah, the High and the
Mighty


