The Amazing Qur'an - Part 1
===========================

Calling the Qur'an amazing is not something done only by Muslims, who
have an appreciation for the book and who are pleased with it; it has
been labelled amazing by non-Muslims as well. In fact, even people who
hate Islam very much have still called it amazing.

**Introduction**

One thing which surprises non-Muslims who are examining the book very
closely is that the Qur'an does not appear to them to be what they
expected. What they assume is that they have an old book which came
fourteen centuries ago from the Arabian desert; and they expect that the
book should look something like that - an old book from the desert. And
then they find out that it does not resemble what they expected at all.
Additionally, one of the first things that some people assume is that
because it is an old book which comes from the desert, it should talk
about the desert. Well the Qur'an does talk about the desert - some of
its imagery describes the desert; but it also talks about the sea - what
it's like to be in a storm on the sea.

**Merchant Marine**

Some years ago, the story came to us in Toronto about a man who was in
the merchant marine and made his living on the sea. A Muslim gave him a
translation of the Qur'an to read. The merchant marine knew nothing
about the history of Islam but was interested in reading the Qur'an.
When he finished reading it, he brought it back to the Muslim and asked,
"This Mohammed, was he a sailor?" He was impressed at how accurately the
Qur'an describes a storm on a sea. When he was told, "No as a matter of
fact, Mohammed lived in the desert," that was enough for him. He
embraced Islam on the spot.

He was so impressed with the Qur'ans description because he had been in
a storm on the sea, and he knew that whoever had written that
description had also been in a storm on the sea. The description of "a
wave, over it a wave, over it clouds" (Surah Nur, 24:40) was not what
someone imagining a storm on a sea to be like would have written;
rather, it was written by someone who knew what a storm on the sea was
like. This is one example of how the Qur'an is not tied to certain place
and time. Certainly, the scientific ideas expressed in it also do not
seem to originate from the desert fourteen centuries ago.

**The Smallest Thing**

Many centuries before the onset of Mohammed's Prophethood, there was a
well-known theory of atomism advanced by the Greek philosopher,
Democritus. He and the people who came after him assumed that matter
consists of tiny, indestructible, indivisible particles called atoms.
The Arabs too, used to deal in the same concept; in fact, the Arabic
word dharrah commonly referred to the smallest particle known to man.
Now, modern science has discovered that this smallest unit of matter
(i.e., the atom, which has all of the same properties as its element)
can be split into its component parts. This is a new idea, a development
of the last century; yet; interestingly enough, this information had
already been documented in the Qur'an (Surah Saba', 34:3) which states:
"He [Allah] is aware of an atom's weight in the heavens and on the earth
and even anything smaller than that..."

Undoubtedly, fourteen centuries ago that statement would have looked
unusual even to an Arab. For him, the dharrah was the smallest thing
there was. Indeed, this is proof, that the Qur'an is not outdated.

**Honey**

Another example of what one might expect to find in an "old book" that
touches upon the subject of health or medicine is outdated remedies or
cures. Various historical sources state that the Prophet (pbuh&hf) gave
some advice about health and hygiene, yet most of these pieces of advice
are not contained in the Qur'an. At first glance, to the non-Muslims
this appears to be a negligent omission. They cannot understand why
Allah would not "include" such helpful information in the Qur'an. Some
Muslims attempt to explain this absence with the following argument:
"Although the Prophet's advice was sound and applicable to the time in
which he lived.

Allah, in His infinite wisdom, knew that there would come later medical
and scientific advances which would make the Prophet's advice appear
outdated. When later discoveries occurred, people might say that such
information contradicted that which the Prophet (pbuh&hf) had given.
Thus, since Allah would never allow any opportunity for the non-Muslims
to claim that the Qur'an contradicts itself or the teachings of the
Prophet (pbuh&hf), He only included in the Qur'an information and
examples which could stand the test of time." However, when one examines
the true realities of the Qur'an in terms of its existence as a divine
revelation, the entire matter is quickly brought into its proper
perspective, and the error in such argumentation becomes clear and
understandable.

It must be understood that the Qur'an is a divine revelation, and as
such, all information in it is of divine origin. Allah revealed the
Qur'an from Himself. It is the words of Allah, which existed before
creation, and thus nothing can be added, subtracted or altered. In
essence, the Qur'an existed and was complete before the creation of
Prophet Mohammed (pbuh&hf), so it could not possibly contain any of the
Prophet's own words or advice. An inclusion of such information would
clearly contradict the purpose for which the Qur'an exists, compromise
its authority and render it inauthentic as a divine revelation.

Consequently, there was no "home remedies" in the Qur'an which one
could claim to be outdated; nor does it contain any man's view about
what is beneficial to health, what food is best to eat, or what will
cure this or that disease. In fact, the Qur'an only mentions one item
dealing with medical treatment, and it is not in dispute by anyone. It
states that in honey there is healing. And certainly, I do not think
that there is anyone who will argue with that!

**Prophet Mohammed (pbuh&hf)) and the Qur'an**

If one assumes that the Qur'an is the product of a man's mind, then one
would expect it to reflect some of what was going on in the mind of the
man who "composed" it. In fact, certain encyclopaedias and various books
claim that the Qur'an was the product of hallucinations that Mohammed
underwent. If these claims are true - if it indeed originated from some
psychological problems in Mohammed's mind - then evidence of this would
be apparent in the Qur'an. Is there such evidence? In order to determine
whether or not there is, one must first identify what things would have
been going on in his mind at that time and then search for these
thoughts and reflections in the Qur'an.

It is common knowledge that Mohammed (pbuh&hf) had a very difficult
life. All of his daughters died before him except one, and he had a wife
of several years who was very dear and important to him, who not only
proceeded him in death but died at a very critical period of his life.
As a matter of fact, she must have been quite a woman because when the
first revelation came to him, he ran home to her, afraid. Certainly,
even today one would have a hard time trying to find an Arab who would
tell you, "I was so afraid that I ran home to my wife." They just aren't
that way. Yet Mohammed (pbuh&hf) felt comfortable enough with his wife
to be able to do that. That's how influential and strong woman she was.
Although these examples are only a few of the subjects that would have
been on Mohammed's mind, they are sufficient in intensity to prove my
point.

The Qur'an does not mention any of these things - not the death of his
children, not the death of his beloved companion and wife, not his fear
of the initial revelations, which he so beautifully shared with his
wife - nothing; yet these topics must have hurt him, bothered him, and
caused him pain and grief during periods of his life. Indeed, if the
Qur'an was a product of his psychological reflections, then these
subjects, as well as others, would be prevalent or at least mentioned
throughout.

**Scientific Approach to the Qur'an**

A truly scientific approach to the Qur'an is possible because the
Qur'an offers something that is not offered by other religious
scriptures, in particular, and other religions, in general. It is what
scientists demand. Today there are many people who have ideas and
theories about how the universe works. These people are all over the
place, but the scientific community does not even bother to listen to
them. This is because within the last century the scientific community
has demanded a test of falsification. They say, "If you have theory, do
not bother us with it unless you bring with that theory a way for us to
prove whether you are wrong or not."

Such a test was exactly why the scientific community listened to
Einstein towards the beginning of the century. He came with a new theory
and said, "I believe the universe works like this; and here are three
ways to prove whether I am wrong!" So the scientific community subjected
his theory to the tests, and within six years it passed all three. Of
course, this does not prove that he was great, but it proves that he
deserved to be listened to because he said, "This is my idea; and if you
want to try to prove me wrong, do this or try that."

This is exactly what the Qur'an has - falsification tests. Some are old
(in that they have already been proven true), and some still exist
today. Basically it states, "If this book is not what it claims to be,
then all you have to do is this or this or this to prove that it is
false." Of course, in 1400 years no one has been able to do "This or
this or this," and thus it is still considered true and authentic.


