Falsification Test
==================

I suggest to you that the next time you get into dispute with someone
about Islam and he claims that he has the truth and that you are in
darkness, you leave all other arguments at first and make this
suggestion. Ask him, "Is there any falsification test in your religion?
Is there anything in your religion that would prove you are wrong if I
could prove to you that it exists - anything?" Well, I can promise right
now that people will not have anything - no test, no proof, nothing!
This is because they do not carry around the idea that they should not
only present what they believe but should also offer others a chance to
prove they're wrong. However, Islam does that.

A perfect example of how Islam provides man with a chance to verify it
authenticity and "prove it wrong" occurs in the 4th chapter. And quiet
honestly, I was very surprised when I first discovered this challenge.
It states (Surah An-Nisa, 4:82): "Do they not consider the Qur'an? Had
it been from any other than Allah, they would surely have found therein
much discrepancy."

This is a clear challenge to the non-Muslim. Basically, it invites him
to find a mistake. As a matter of fact, the seriousness and difficulty
of the challenge aside, the actual presentation of such a challenge in
the first place is not even in human nature and is inconsistent with
man's personality. One doesn't take an exam in school and after
finishing the exam, write a note to the instructor at the end saying,
"This exam is perfect. There are no mistakes in it. Find one if you
can!" One just doesn't do that. The teacher would not sleep until he
found a mistake! And yet this is the way the Qur'an approaches people.

**Ask Those Who Have Knowledge**

Another interesting attitude that exists in the Qur'an repeatedly deals
with its advice to the reader. The Qur'an informs the reader about
different facts and then gives the advice: "If you want to know more
about this or that, or if you doubt what is said, then you should ask
those who have knowledge." This too is a surprising attitude. It is not
usual to have a book that comes from someone without training in
geography, botany, biology, etc., who discusses these subjects and then
advises the reader to ask men of knowledge if he doubts anything. Yet in
every age there have been Muslims who have followed the advice of the
Qur'an and made surprising discoveries.

If one looks to the works of Muslim scientists of many centuries ago,
one will find them full of quotations from the Qur'an. These works state
that they did research in such a place, looking for something. And they
affirm that the reason they looked in such and such a place was that the
Qur'an pointed them in that direction.

For example, the Qur'an mentions man's origin and then tells the
reader, "Research it!" It gives the reader a hint where to look and then
states that one should find out more about it. This is the kind of thing
that Muslims today largely seem to overlook - but not always, as
illustrated in the following example.


