The Amazing Qur'an - Part 2
===========================

**Embryology**

A few years ago, a group of men collected all of the verses in the
Qur'an which discuss embryology - the growth of the human being in the
womb. They said, "Here is what the Qur'an says. Is it the truth?" In
essence, they took the advice of the Qur'an: "Ask the men who know."
They chose, as it happened, a non-Muslim who is a professor of
embryology at the University of Toronto. His name is Keith Moore, and he
is the author of textbooks on embryology - a world expert on the
subject. They invited him to Riyadh and said, "This is what the Qur'an
says about your subject. Is it true? What can you tell us?"

While he was in Riyadh, they gave him all the help that he needed in
translation and all of the co-operation for which he asked. And he was
so surprised at what he found that he changed his textbooks. In fact, in
the second edition of one of his books, called Before We Are Born... in
the section about the history of embryology, he included some material
that was not in the first edition because of what he found in the Qur'an
was ahead of its time and that those who believe in the Qur'an know what
other people do not know.

I had the pleasure of interviewing Dr. Keith Moore for a television
presentation, and we talked a great deal about this - it was illustrated
by slides and so on. He mentioned that some of the things that the
Qur'an states about the growth of the human being were not known until
thirty years ago. In fact, he said that one item in particular - the
Qur'an's description of the human being as a "leech-like clot" ('alaqah)
at one stage (Surahs al-Hajj 22:5; al-Mu'minun 23:14; and Ghafir
40:67) - was new to him; but when he checked on it, he found that it was
true, and so he added it to his book. He said, "I never thought of that
before," and he went to the zoology department and asked for a picture
of a leech. When he found that it looked just like the human embryo, he
decided to include both pictures in one of his textbooks.

Although the aforementioned example of man researching information
contained in the Qur'an deals with a non-Muslim, it is still valid
because he is one of those who is knowledgeable in the subject being
researched. Had some layman claimed that what the Qur'an says about
embryology is true, then one would not necessarily have to accept his
word. However, because of the high position, respect, and esteem man
gives scholars, one naturally assumes that if they research a subject
and arrive at a conclusion based on that research, then the conclusion
is valid.

**Skeptic's Reaction**

Dr. Moore also wrote a book on clinical embryology, and when he
presented this information in Toronto, it caused quite a stir throughout
Canada. It was on the front pages of some of the newspapers across
Canada, and some of the headlines were quite funny. For instance, one
headline read: "SURPRISING THING FOUND IN ANCIENT PRAYER BOOK!" It seems
obvious from this example that people do not clearly understand what it
is all about. As a matter of fact, one newspaper reporter asked
Professor Moore, "Don't you think that maybe the Arabs might have known
about these things - the description of the embryo, its appearance and
how it changes and grows? Maybe they were not scientists, maybe they did
some crude dissections on their own - carved up people and examined
these things." The professor immediately pointed out to him that he
[i.e., the reporter] had missed a very important point - all of the
slides of the embryo that had been shown and that had been projected in
the film had come from pictures taken through a microscope. He said, "It
does not matter if someone had tried to discover embryology fourteen
centuries ago. They could not have seen it!"

All of the descriptions in the Qur'an of the appearance of the embryo
are of the item when it is still too small to see with the eye;
therefore, one needs a microscope to see it. Since such a device had
only been around for little more than two hundred years, Dr. Moore
taunted, "Maybe fourteen centuries ago someone secretly had a microscope
and did this research, making no mistakes anywhere. Then he somehow
taught Mohammed (pbuh&hf) and convinced him to put this information in
his book. Then he destroyed his equipment and kept it a secret forever.
Do you believe that? You really should not unless you bring some proof
because it is such a ridiculous theory." In fact, when he was asked,
"How do you explain this information in the Qur'an?" Dr. Moore's reply
was, "It could only have been divinely revealed!"

**Geology**

One of Professor Moore's colleagues, Marshall Johnson, deals
extensively with geology at the University of Toronto. He became very
interested in the fact that the Qur'an's statements about embryology are
accurate, and so he asked Muslims to collect everything contained in the
Qur'an which deals with his speciality. Again people were very surprised
at the findings. Since there are a vast number subjects discussed in the
Qur'an, it would certainly require a large amount of time to exhaust
each subject. It suffices for the purpose of this discussion to state
that the Qur'an makes very clear and concise statements about various
subjects while simultaneously advising the reader to verify the
authenticity of these statements with research by scholars in those
subjects. And as illustrated by the previous examples of embryology and
geology, the Qur'an has clearly emerged authentic.

**You Did Not Know This Before!**

Undoubtedly, there is an attitude in the Qur'an which is not found
anywhere else. It is interesting how when the Qur'an provides
information, it often tells the reader, "You did not know this before."
Indeed, there is no scripture that exists which makes that claim. All of
the other ancient writings and scriptures that people have do give a lot
of information, but they always state where the information came from.

For example, when the Bible discusses ancient history, it states that
this king lived here, this one fought in a certain battle, another one
had so may sons, etc. Yet it always stipulates that if you want more
information, then you should read the book of so and so because that is
where the information came from. In contrast to this concept, the Qur'an
provides the reader with information and states that this information is
something new. Of course, there always exists the advice to research the
information provided and verify its authenticity. It is interesting that
such a concept was never challenged by non-Muslims fourteen centuries
ago. Indeed, the Makkans who hated the Muslims, and time and time again
they heard such revelations claiming to bring new information; yet, they
never spoke up and said, "This is not new. We know where Mohammed got
this information. We learned this at school." They could never challenge
its authenticity because it really was new!


