Proof of Authenticity: an Approach
==================================

It must be stressed here that the Qur'an is accurate about many, many
things, but accuracy does not necessarily mean that a book is a divine
revelation. In fact, accuracy is only one of the criteria for divine
revelations. For instance, the telephone book is accurate, but that does
not mean that it is divinely revealed. The real problem lies in that one
must establish some proof of the source the Qur'an's information. The
emphasis is in the other direction, in that the burden of proof is on
the reader. One cannot simply deny the Qur'an's authenticity without
sufficient proof. If, indeed, one finds a mistake, then he has the right
to disqualify it. This is exactly what the Qur'an encourages.

Once a man came up to me after a lecture I delivered in South Africa.
He was very angry about what I had said, and so he claimed, "I am going
to go home tonight and find a mistake in the Qur'an." Of course, I said,
"Congratulations. That is the most intelligent thing that you have
said." Certainly, this is the approach Muslims need to take with those
who doubt the Qur'an's authenticity, because the Qur'an itself offers
the same challenge. And inevitably, after accepting it's challenge and
discovering that it is true, these people will come to believe it
because they could not disqualify it. In essence, the Qur'an earns their
respect because they themselves have had to verify its authenticity.

An essential fact that cannot be reiterated enough concerning the
authenticity of the Qur'an is that one's inability to explain a
phenomenon himself does not require his acceptance of the phenomenon's
existence or another person's explanation of it. Specifically, just
because one cannot explain something does not mean that one has to
accept someone else's explanation. However, the person's refusal of
other explanations reverts the burden of proof back on himself to find a
feasible answer. This general theory applies to numerous concepts in
life, but fits most wonderfully with the Qur'anic challenge, for it
creates a difficulty for one who says, "I do not believe it." At the
onset of refusal one immediately has an obligation to find an
explanation himself if he feels others' answers are inadequate.

In fact, in one particular Qur'anic verse which I have always seen
mistranslated into English, Allah mentions a man who heard the truth
explained to him. It states that he was derelict in his duty because
after he heard the information, he left without checking the verity of
what he had heard. In other words, one is guilty if he hears something
and does not research it and check to see whether it is true. One is
supposed to process all information and decide what is garbage to be
thrown out and what is worthwhile information to be kept and benefited
from immediately or even at a later date.

One cannot just let it rattle around in his head. It must be put in the
proper categories and approached from that point of view. For example,
if the information is still speculatory, then one must discern whether
it's closer to being true or false. But if all the facts have been
presented, then one must decide absolutely between these two options.
And even if one is not positive about the authenticity of the
information, he is still required to process all the information and
make the admission that he just does not know for sure. Although this
last point appears to be futile, in actuality, it is beneficial to the
arrival at a positive conclusion at a later time in that it forces the
person to at least recognise, research and review the facts.

This familiarity with the information will give the person "the edge"
when future discoveries are made and additional information is
presented. The important thing is that one deals with the facts and does
not simply discard them out of empathy and disinterest.

**Exhausting the Alternatives**

The real certainty about the truthfulness of the Qur'an is evident in
the confidence which is prevalent throughout it; and this confidence
comes from a different approach - "Exhausting the alternatives." In
essence, the Qur'an states, "This book is a divine revelation; if you do
not believe that, then what is it?" In other words, the reader is
challenged to come up with some other explanation. Here is a book made
of paper and ink. Where did it come from? It says it is a divine
revelation; if it is not, then what is its source? The interesting fact
is that no one has yet come up with an explanation that works. In fact,
all alternatives have bee exhausted. As has been well established by
non-Muslims, these alternatives basically are reduced to two mutually
exclusive schools of thought, insisting on one or the other.

On one hand, there exists a large group of people who have researched
the Qur'an for hundreds of years and who claim, "One thing we know for
sure - that man, Mohammed (pbuh&hf), thought he was a prophet. He was
crazy!" They are convinced that Mohammed (pbuh&hf) was fooled somehow.
Then on the other hand, there is a group which alleges, "Because of this
evidence, one thing we know for sure is that that man, Mohammed
(pbuh&hf) was a liar!" Ironically, these two groups never seem to get
together without contradicting.

In fact, many references to Islam usually claim both theories. They
start out by stating that Mohammed (pbuh&hf) was crazy and then end by
saying he was a liar. They never seem to realise that he could not have
been both! For example, if one is deluded and really thinks that he is a
prophet, then he does not sit up late at night planning, "How will I
fool the people tomorrow so that they think I am a prophet?" He truly
believes that he is a prophet, and he trusts that the answer will be
given to him by revelation.

**The Critic's Trail**

As a matter of fact, a great deal of the Qur'an came in answer to
questions. Someone would ask Mohammed (pbuh&hf) a question, and the
revelation would come with the answer to it. Certainly, if one is crazy
and believes that an angel put words in his ear, then when someone asks
him a question, he thinks that the angel will give him the answer.
Because he is crazy, he really thinks that. He does not tell someone to
wait a short while and then run to his friends and ask them, "Does
anyone know the answer?" This type of behaviour is characteristic of one
who does not believe that he is a prophet. What the non-Muslims refuse
to accept is that you cannot have it both ways. One can be deluded, or
he can be a liar. He can be either one or neither one, but he certainly
cannot be both! The emphasis is on the fact that they are unquestionably
mutually exclusive personality traits.

The following scenario is a good example of the kind of circle that
non-Muslims go around in constantly. If you ask one of them, "What is
the origin of the Qur'an?" He tells you that it originated from the mind
of a man who was crazy. Then you ask him, "If it came from his head,
then where did he get the information contained in it? Certainly the
Qur'an mentions many things with which the Arabs were not familiar." So
in order to explain the fact which you bring him, he changes his
position and says, "Well, maybe he was not crazy. Maybe some foreigner
brought him the information. So he lied and told people that he was a
prophet." At this point then you have to ask him, "If Mohammed was a
liar, then where did he get his confidence? Why did he behave as though
he really thought he was a prophet?" Finally backed into a corner, like
a cat he quickly lashes out with the first response that comes to his
mind. Forgetting that he has already exhausted that possibility, he
claims, "Well, maybe he wasn't a liar. He was probably crazy and really
thought that he was a prophet." And thus he begins the futile cycle
again.

As has already been mentioned, there is much information contained in
the Qur'an whose source cannot be attributed to anyone other than Allah.
For example, who told Mohammed (pbuh&hf) about the wall of
Dhul-Qarnayn - a place hundreds of miles to the north? Who told him
about embryology? When people assemble facts such as these, if they are
not willing to attribute their existence to a divine source, they
automatically resort to the assumption someone brought Mohammed
(pbuh&hf) the information and that he used it to fool the people.
However, this theory can easily be disproved with one simple question:
"If Mohammed (pbuh&hf) was a liar, where did he get his confidence? Why
did he tell some people out right to their face what others could never
say?" Such confidence depends completely upon being convinced that one
has a true divine revelation.


