The Amazing Qur'an - Part 3
===========================

**A Revelation - Abu Lahab**

Prophet Mohammed (pbuh&hf) had an uncle by the name of Abu Lahab. This
man hated Islam to such an extent that he used to follow the Prophet
around in order to discredit him. If Abu Lahab saw the Prophet (pbuh&hf)
speaking to a stranger, he would wait until they parted and the would go
to the stranger and ask him, "What did he tell you? Did he say, 'Black'?
Well, it's white. Did he say 'morning'? Well, it's night." He faithfully
said the exact opposite of whatever he heard Mohammed (pbuh&hf) and the
Muslims say.

However, about ten years before Abu Lahab died, a little chapter in the
Qur'an (Surah al-Lahab, 111) was revealed about him. It distinctly
stated that he would go to the fire (i.e., Hell). In other words, it
affirmed that he would never become a Muslim and would therefore be
condemned forever. For ten years all Abu Lahab had to do was say, "I
heard that it has been revealed to Mohammed that I will never change -
that I will never become a Muslim and will enter the Hellfire. Well, I
want to become Muslim now. How do you like that? What do you think of
your divine revelation now?" But he never did that. And yet, that is
exactly the kind of behaviour one would have expected from him since he
always sought to contradict Islam.

In essence, Mohammed (pbuh&hf) said, "You hate me and you want to
finish me? Here, say these words, and I am finished. Come on, say them!"
But Abu Lahab never said them. Ten years! And in all that time he never
accepted Islam or even became sympathetic to the Islamic cause.

How could Mohammed (pbuh&hf) possibly have known for sure that Abu
Lahab would fulfil the Qur'anic revelation if he (i.e., Mohammed) was
not truly the messenger of Allah? How could he possibly have been so
confident as to give someone 10 years to discredit his claim of
Prophethood? The only answer is that he was Allah's messenger; for in
order to put forth such a risky challenge, one has to be entirely
convinced that he has a divine revelation.

**The Flight**

Another example of the confidence which Mohammed (pbuh&hf) had in his
own Prophethood and consequently in the divine protection of himself and
his message is when he left Mecca and hid in a cave with Abu Bakr during
their emigration to Medina. The two clearly saw people coming to kill
them, and Abu Bakr was afraid. Certainly, if Mohammed (pbuh&hf) was a
liar, a forger and one who was trying to fool the people into believing
that he was a prophet, one would have expected him to say in such a
circumstance to his friend, "Hey, Abu Bakr, see if you can find a back
way out of this cave." Or "Squat down in that corner over there and keep
quiet." Yet, in fact, what he said to Abu Bakr clearly illustrated his
confidence. He told him, "Relax! Allah is with us, and Allah will save
us!" Now, if one knows that he is fooling the people, where does one get
this kind of attitude? In fact, such a frame of mind is not
characteristic of a liar or a forger at all.

So, as has been previously mentioned, the non-Muslims go around and
around in a circle, searching for a way out - some way to explain the
findings in the Qur'an without attributing them to their proper source.
On one hand, they tell you on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, "The man was
a liar," and on the other hand, on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday they
tell you, "He was crazy." What they refuse to accept is that one cannot
have it both ways; yet they need both theories, both excuses to explain
the information in the Qur'an.

**An Encounter with a Minister**

About seven years ago, I had a minister over to my home. In the
particular room which we were sitting there was a Qur'an on the table,
face down, and so the minister was not aware of which book it was. In
the midst of a discussion, I pointed to the Qur'an and said, "I have
confidence in that book." Looking at the Qur'an but not knowing which
book it was, he replied, "Well, I tell you, if that book is not the
Bible, it was written by a man!" In response to his statement, I said,
"Let me tell you something about what is in that book." And in just
three to four minutes, I related to him a few things contained in the
Qur'an. After just those three or four minutes, he completely changed
his position and declared, "You are right. A man did not write that
book. The Devil wrote it!" Indeed, possessing such an attitude is very
unfortunate - for many reasons. For one thing, it is a very quick and
cheap excuse. It is an instant exit out of an uncomfortable situation.

As a matter of fact, there is a famous story in the Bible that mentions
how one day some of the Jews were witnesses when Jesus (pbuh) raised a
man from the dead. The man had been dead for four days, and when Jesus
arrived, he simply said, "Get up!" and the man arose and walked away. At
such a sight, some of the Jews who were watching said disbelievingly,
"This is the Devil. The Devil helped him!" Now this story is rehearsed
very often in churches all over the world, and people cry big tears over
it, saying, "Oh, if I had been there, I would not have been as stupid as
the Jews!" Yet, ironically, these people do exactly what the Jews did
when in just three minutes you show them only a small part of the Qur'an
and all they can say is, "Oh, the Devil did it. The devil wrote that
book!" Because they are truly backed into a corner and have no other
viable answer, they resort to the quickest and cheapest excuse
available,

**The Source of the Qur'an**

Another example of people's use of this weak stance can be found in the
Meccan's explanation of the source of Mohammed's message. They used to
say, "The devils bring Mohammed that Qur'an!" But just as with every
suggestion made, the Qur'an gives the answer. One verse (Surah Al-Qalam
68: 51-52) in particular states: "And they say, 'Surely he is possessed
[by jinn],' but it [i.e., the Qur'an] is not except a reminder to the
worlds."

Thus it gives an argument in reply to such a theory. In fact, there are
many arguments in the Qur'an in reply to the suggestion that devils
brought Mohammed (pbuh&hf) his message. For example, in the 26th chapter
Allah (SWT) clearly affirms: "No evil ones have brought it [i.e., this
revelation] down. It would neither be fitting for them, nor would they
be able. Indeed they have been removed far from hearing." (Surah
ash-Shu'ara 26:210-212)

And in another place (Surah an-Nahl 16:98) in the Qur'an, Allah (SWT)
instructs us: "So when you recite the Qur'an seek refuge in Allah from
Shaytan, the rejected."

Now is this how Satan writes a book? He tells one, "Before you read my
book, ask God to save you from me?" This is very, very tricky. Indeed, a
man could write something like this, but would Satan do this? Many
people clearly illustrate that they cannot come to one conclusion on
this subject. On one hand, they claim that Satan would not do such a
thing and that even if he could, God would not allow him to; yet, on the
other hand, they also believe that Satan is only that much less than
God. In essence they allege that the Devil can probably do whatever God
can do. And as a result, when they look at the Qur'an, even as surprised
as they are as to how amazing it is, they still insist, "The Devil did
this!"

Thanks be to Allah (SWT), Muslims do not have that attitude. Although
Satan may have some abilities, they are a long way separated from the
abilities of Allah. And no Muslim is a Muslim unless he believes that.
It is common knowledge even among non-Muslims that the Devil can easily
make mistakes, and it would be expected that he would contradict himself
if and when he wrote a book. For indeed, the Qur'an states (Surah
an-Nisa 4:82): "Do they not consider the Qur'an? Had it been from other
than Allah, they would surely have found therein much discrepancy."


