Mythomania
==========

In conjunction with the excuses that non-Muslims advance in futile
attempts to justify unexplainable verses in the Qur'an, there is another
attack often rendered which seems to be a combination of the theories
that Mohammed (pbuh&hf) was crazy and a liar. Basically, these people
propose that Mohammed was insane, and as a result of his delusion, he
lied to and misled people. There is a name for this in psychology. It is
referred to as mythomania. It means simply that one tells lies and then
believes them. This is what the non-Muslims say Mohammed (pbuh&hf)
suffered from. But the only problem with this proposal is that one
suffering from mythomania absolutely cannot deal with any facts, and yet
the whole Qur'an is based entirely upon facts. Everything contained in
it can be researched and established as true. Since facts are such a
problem for a mythomaniac, when a psychologist tries to treat one
suffering from that condition, he continually confronts him with
facts.

For example, if one is mentally ill and claims, "I am the king of
England," a psychologist does not say to him "No you aren't. You are
crazy!" He just does not do that. Rather, he confronts him with facts
and says, "OK, you say you are the king of England. So tell me where the
queen is today. And where is your prime minister? And where are your
guards?" Now, when the man has trouble trying to deal with these
questions, he tries to make excuses, saying "Uh... the queen... she has
gone to her mother's. Uh... the prime minister... well he died." And
eventually he is cured because he cannot deal with the facts. If the
psychologist continues confronting him with enough facts, finally he
faces the reality and says, "I guess I am not the king of England."

The Qur'an approaches everyone who reads it in very much the same way a
psychologist treats his mythomania patient. There is a verse in the
Qur'an (Surah Yunus 10:57) which states: "O mankind, there has come to
you an admonition [i.e., the Qur'an] from your Lord and a healing for
what is in the hearts - and guidance and mercy for the believers."

At first glance, this statement appears vague, but the meaning of this
verse is clear when one views it in light of the aforementioned example.
Basically, one is healed of his delusions by reading the Qur'an. In
essence, it is therapy. It literally cures deluded people by confronting
them with facts. A prevalent attitude throughout the Qur'an is one which
says, "O mankind, you say such and such about this; but what about such
and such? How can you say this when you know that?" And so forth. It
forces one to consider what is relevant and what matters while
simultaneously healing one of the delusions that facts presented to
mankind by Allah can easily be explained away with flimsy theories and
excuses.

**New Catholic Encyclopaedia**

It is this very sort of thing - confronting people with facts - that
had captured the attention of many non-Muslims. In fact, there exists a
very interesting reference concerning this subject in the New Catholic
Encyclopaedia. In an article under the subject of the Qur'an, the
Catholic Church states: "Over the centuries, many theories have been
offered as to the origin of the Qur'an... Today no sensible man accepts
any of these theories!!"

Now here is the age-old Catholic Church, which has been around for so
many centuries, denying these futile attempts to explain away the
Qur'an. Indeed, the Qur'an is a problem for the Catholic Church. It
states that it is revelation, so they study it. Certainly, they would
love to find proof that it is not, but they cannot. They cannot find a
viable explanation. But at least they are honest in their research and
do not accept the first unsubstantiated interpretation which comes
along. The Church states that in fourteen centuries it has not yet been
presented a sensible explanation. At least it admits that the Qur'an is
not an easy subject to dismiss. Certainly, other people are much less
honest. They quickly say, "Oh, the Qur'an came from here. The Qur'an
came from there." And they do not even examine the credibility of what
they are stating most of the time.

Of course, such a statement by the Catholic Church leaves the everyday
Christian in some difficulty. It just may be that he has his own ideas
as to the origin of the Qur'an, but as a single member of the Church, he
cannot really act upon his own theory. Such an action would be contrary
to the obedience, allegiance and loyalty which the Church demands. By
virtue of his membership, he must accept what the Catholic Church
declares without question and establish its teachings as part of his
everyday routine. So, in essence, if the Catholic Church as a whole is
saying, "Do not listen to these unconfirmed reports about the Qur'an,"
then what can be said about the Islamic point of view? If even
non-Muslims are admitting that there is something to the Qur'an -
something that has to be acknowledged - then why are people so stubborn
and defensive and hostile when Muslims advance the very same theory?
This is certainly something for those with a mind to contemplate -
something to ponder for those of understanding!

**Testimony of an Intellectual**

Recently, the leading intellectual in the Catholic Church - a man by
the name of Hans - studied the Qur'an and gave his opinion of what he
had read. This man has been around for some time, and he is highly
respected in the Catholic Church, and after careful scrutiny, he
reported his findings, concluding, "God has spoken to man through the
man, Mohammed." Again this is a conclusion arrived at by a non-Muslim
source - the very leading intellectual of the Catholic Church himself!

I do not think that the Pope agrees with him, but nonetheless, the
opinion of such a noted, reputed public figure must carry some weight in
defence of the Muslim position. He must be applauded for facing the
reality that the Qur'an is not something which can be easily pushed
aside and that, in fact God is the source of these words.

As is evident from the aforementioned information, all of the
possibilities have been exhausted, so the chance of finding another
possibility of dismissing the Qur'an is non-existent.


