The Amazing Qur'an - Part 4
===========================

**Burden of Proof on the Critic**

If the book is not a revelation, then it is a deception; and if it is a
deception, one must ask, "What is its origin? And where does it deceive
us?" Indeed, the true answers to these questions shed light on the
Qur'an's authenticity and silence the bitter unsubstantiated claims of
the unbelievers.

Certainly, if people are going to insist that the Qur'an is a
deception, then they must bring forth evidence to support such a claim.
The burden of proof is on them, not us! One is never supposed to advance
a theory without sufficient corroborating facts; so I say to them, "Show
me one deception! Show me where the Qur'an deceives me! Show me,
otherwise don't say that it is a deception!"

**Origin of the Universe and Life**

An interesting characteristic of the Qur'an is how it deals with
surprising phenomena which relate not only to the past but to modern
times as well. In essence, the Qur'an is not and old problem. It is
still a problem even today - a problem to the non-Muslims that is. For
everyday, every week, every year brings more and more evidence that the
Qur'an is a force to be contended with - that its authenticity is no
longer to be challenged! For example, one verse in the Qur'an (Surah
al-Anbiya 21:30) reads: "Do not the unbelievers see that the heavens and
the earth were joined together, then We clove them asunder, and made
from water every living thing? Will they not then believe?"

Ironically, this very information is exactly what they awarded the 1973
Noble Prize for - to a couple of unbelievers. The Qur'an reveals the
origin of the universe - how it began from one piece - and mankind
continues to verify this revelation, even up to now. Additionally, the
fact that all life originated from water would not have been an easy
thing to convince people of fourteen centuries ago. Indeed, if 1400
years ago you had stood in the desert and told someone, "All of this,
you see (pointing to yourself), is made up of mostly water," no one
would have believed you. Proof of that was not available until the
invention of the microscope. They had to wait to find out that
cytoplasm, the basic substance of the cell, is made-up of 80% water.
Nonetheless, the evidence did come, and once again the Qur'an stood the
test of time.

**More on Falsification Test**

In reference to the falsification tests mentioned earlier, it is
interesting to note that they, too, relate to both the past and the
present. Some of them were used as illustrations of Allah's omnipotence
and knowledge, while others continue to stand as challenges to the
present day. An example of the former is the statement made in the
Qur'an about Abu Lahab. It clearly illustrates that Allah, the Knower of
the Unseen, knew that Abu Lahab would never change his ways and accept
Islam. Thus Allah dictated that he would be condemned to the Hellfire
forever. Such a chapter was both an illustration of Allah's divine
wisdom and a warning to those who were like Abu Lahab.

**People of the Book**

An interesting example of the latter type of falsification tests
contained in the Qur'an is the verse which mentions the relationship
between the Muslims and the Jews. The verse is careful not to narrow its
scope to the relationship between individual members of each religion,
but rather, it summarises the relationship between the two groups of
people as a whole. In essence, the Qur'an states that the Christians
will always treat the Muslims better than the Jews will treat the
Muslims.

Indeed, the full impact of such a statement can only be felt after
careful consideration of the real meaning of such a verse. It is true
that many Christians and many Jews have become Muslims, but as a whole,
the Jewish community is to be viewed as an avid enemy of Islam.
Additionally, very few people realise what such an open declaration in
the Qur'an invites. In essence, it is an easy chance for the Jews to
prove that the Qur'an is false - that it is not a divine revelation. All
they have to do is organise themselves, treat the Muslims nicely for a
few years and then say, "Now what does your holy book say about who are
your best friends in the world - the Jews or the Christians? Look what
we Jews have done for you!" That is all they have to do to disprove the
Qur'an's authenticity, yet they have not done it in 1400 years. But, as
always, the offer still stands open!

**A Mathematical Approach**

All of the examples so far given concerning the various angles from
which one can approach the Qur'an have undoubtedly been subjective in
nature; however, there does exist another angle, among others, which is
objective and whose basis is mathematical.

It is surprising how authentic the Qur'an becomes when one assembles
what might be referred to as a list of good guesses. Mathematically, it
can be explained using guessing and prediction examples. For instance,
if a person has two choices (i.e., one is right, and one is wrong), and
he closes his eyes and makes a choice, then half of the time (i.e., one
time out of two) he will be right. Basically, he has a one in two
chance, for he could pick the wrong choice, or he could pick the right
choice.

Now if the same person has two situations like that (i.e., he could be
right or wrong about situation number one, and he could be right or
wrong about situation number two), and he closes his eyes and guesses,
then he will only be right one-fourth of the time (i.e., one time out of
four). He now has a one in four chance because now there are three ways
for him to be wrong and only one way for him to be right. In simple
terms, he could make the wrong choice in situation number one and then
make the wrong choice in situation number two; or he could make the
wrong choice in situation number one and then make the right choice in
situation number two; or he could make the right choice in situation
number one and then make the wrong choice in situation number two; or he
could make the right choice in situation number one and then make the
right choice in situation number two.

Of course, the (only instance in which he could be totally right is the
last scenario where he could guess correctly in both situations. The
odds of his guessing completely correctly have become greater because
the number of situations for him to guess in have increased; and the
mathematical equation representing such a scenario is ½ x ½ (i.e., one
time out of two for the first situation multiplied by one time out of
two for the second situation).

Continuing on with the example, if the same person now has three
situations in which to make blind guesses, then he will only be right
one-eighth of the time (i.e., one time out of eight or ½ x ½ x ½ ).
Again, the odds of choosing the correct choice in all three situations
have decreased his chances of being completely correct to only one time
in eight. It must be understood that as the number of situations
increase, the chances of being right decrease, for the two phenomena are
inversely proportional.

Now applying this example to the situations in the Qur'an, if one draws
up a list of all of the subjects about which the Qur'an has made correct
statements, it becomes very clear that it is highly unlikely that they
were all just correct blind guesses. Indeed, the subjects discussed in
the Qur'an are numerous [some of them are listed in the Qur'an and
scientific knowledge, and thus the odds of someone just making lucky
guesses about all of them become practically nil. If there are a million
ways for the Qur'an to be wrong, yet each time it is right, then it is
unlikely that someone was guessing.

The following three examples of subjects about which the Qur'an has
made correct statements collectively illustrate how the Qur'an continues
to beat the odds.

**1. The Female Bee**

In the 16th chapter (Surah an-Nahl 16:68-69) the Qur'an mentions that
the female bee leaves its home to gather food. Now, a person might guess
on that, saying, "The bee that you see flying around - it could be male,
or it could be female. I think I will guess female." Certainly, he has a
one in two chance of being right. So it happens that the Qur'an is
right. But it also happens that that was not what most people believed
at the time when the Qur'an was revealed. Can you tell the difference
between a male and a female bee? Well, it takes a specialist to do that,
but it has been discovered that the male bee never leaves his home to
gather food.

However, in Shakespeare's play, Henry the Fourth, some of the
characters discuss bees and mention that the bees are soldiers and have
a king. That is what people thought in Shakespeare's time - that the
bees that one sees flying around are male bees and that they go home and
answer to a king. However, that is not true at all. The fact is that
they are females, and they answer to a queen. Yet it took modern
scientific investigations in the last 300 years to discover that this is
the case.

So, back to the list of good guesses, concerning the topic of bees, the
Qur'an had a 50/50 chance of being right, and the odds were one in
two.

**2. The Sun**

In addition to the subject of bees, the Qur'an also discusses the sun
and the manner in which it travels through space. Again, a person can
guess on that subject. When the sun moves through space, there are two
options: it can travel just as a stone would travel if one threw it, or
it can move of its own accord. The Qur'an states the latter - that it
moves as a result of its own motion (Surah al-Anbiya 21:33). To do such,
the Qur'an uses a form of the word sabaha to describe the sun's movement
through space. In order to properly provide the reader with a
comprehensive understanding of the implications of this Arabic verb, the
following example is given.

If a man is in water and the verb sabaha is applied in reference to his
movement, it can be understood that he is swimming, moving of his own
accord and not as a result of a direct force applied to him. Thus when
this verb is used in reference to the sun's movement through space, it
in no way implies that the sun is flying uncontrollably through space as
a result of being hurled or the like. It simply means that the sun is
turning and rotating as it travels.

Now, this is what the Qur'an affirms, but was it an easy thing to
discover? Can any common man tell that the sun is turning? Only in
modern times was the equipment made available to project the image of
the sun onto a tabletop so that one could look at it without being
blinded. And through this process it was discovered that not only are
there spots on the sun but that these spots move once every 25 days.
This movement is referred to as the rotation of the sun around its axis
and conclusively proves that, as the Qur'an stated 1400 years ago, the
sun does, indeed, turn as it travels through space.

And returning once again to the subject of good guesses, the odds of
guessing correctly about both subjects - the sex of bees and the
movement of the sun - are one in four!

**3. Time Zones**

Seeing as back fourteen centuries ago people probably did not
understand much about time zones, the Qur'an's statements about this
subject are considerably surprising. The concept that one family is
having breakfast as the sun comes up while another family is enjoying
the brisk night air is truly something to be marvelled at, even in
modern time. Indeed, fourteen centuries ago, a man could not travel more
than thirty miles in one day, and thus it took him literally months to
travel from India to Morocco, for example.

And probably, when he was having supper in Morocco, he thought to
himself, "Back home in India they are having supper right now." This is
because he did not realise that, in the process of travelling, he moved
across a time zone. Yet, because it is the words of Allah, the
All-Knowing, the Qur'an recognises and acknowledges such a phenomenon.

In an interesting verse it states that when history comes to an end and
the Day of Judgement arrives, it will all occur in an instant; and this
very instant will catch some people in the daytime and some people at
night. This clearly illustrates Allah's divine wisdom and His previous
knowledge of the existence of time zones, even though such a discovery
was non-existent back fourteen centuries ago. Certainly, this phenomenon
is not something which is obvious to one's eyes or a result of one's
experience, and this fact, in itself, suffices as proof of the Qur'an's
authenticity.


