Conclusions
===========

Returning one final time to the subject of good guesses for the purpose
of the present example, the odds that someone guessed correctly about
all three of the aforementioned subjects - the sex of bees, the movement
of the sun and the existence of time zones - are one in eight!

Certainly, one could continue on and on with this example, drawing up
longer and longer list of good guesses; and of course, the odds would
become higher and higher with each increase of subjects about which one
could guess. But what no one can deny is the following: the odds that
Mohammed (pbuh&hf), an illiterate, guessed correctly about thousands and
thousands of subjects, never once making a mistake, are so high that any
theory of his authorship of the Qur'an must be completely dismissed -
even by the most hostile enemies of Islam!

Indeed, the Qur'an expects this kind of challenge. Undoubtedly, if one
said to someone upon entering a foreign land, "I know your father. I
have met him," probably the man from that land would doubt the
newcomer's word, saying, "You have just come here. How could you know my
father?" As a result, he would question him, "Tell me, is my father
tall, short, dark, fair? What is he like?" Of course, if the visitor
continued answering all of the questions correctly, the sceptic would
have no choice but to say, "I guess you do know my father. I don't know
how you know him, but I guess you do!"

The situation is the same with the Qur'an. It states that it originates
from the One who created everything. So everyone has the right to say,
"Convince me! If the author of this book really originated life and
everything in the heavens and on the earth, then He should know about
this, about that, and so on." And inevitably, after researching the
Qur'an, everyone will discover the same truths. Additionally, we all
know something for sure: we do not all have to be experts to verify what
the Qur'an affirms. One's iman (faith) grows as one continues to check
and confirm the truths contained in the Qur'an. And one is supposed to
do so all of his life. May God (Allah) guide everyone close to the
truth.

**Addendum 1**

An engineer at the University of Toronto who was interested in
psychology and who had read something on it, conducted research and
wrote a thesis on Efficiency of Group Discussions. The purpose of his
research was to find out how much people accomplish when they get
together to talk in groups of two, three, ten, etc. The graph of his
findings goes up and down at places, but it reaches the highest point at
the variable of two. The findings: people accomplish most when they talk
in groups of two. Of course, this discovery was entirely beyond his
expectations, but it is very old advice given in the Qur'an (Surah Saba
34:46): "Say, 'I exhort you to one thing - that you stand for Allah,
[assessing the truth] by twos and singly, and then reflect..."

**Addendum 2: 'Iram**

Additionally, the 89th chapter of the Qur'an (Surah al-Fajr 89:7)
mentions a certain city by the name of 'Iram (a city of pillars), which
was not known in ancient history and which was non-existent as far as
historians were concerned. However, the December 1978 edition of
National Geographic introduced interesting information which mentioned
that in 1973, the city of Elba was excavated in Syria. The city was
discovered to be 43 centuries old, but that is not the most amazing
part. Researchers found in the library of Elba a record of all of the
cities with which Elba had done business. Believe it or not, there on
the list was the name of the city of 'Iram. The people of Elba had done
business with the people of 'Iram!

In conclusion I ask you to consider with care the following (Surah
29:50-51): "And they say, 'Why are not signs sent down to him from his
Lord?' Say, 'Indeed, the signs are with Allah, and I am but a clear
warner.' But it is sufficient for them that We have sent down to you the
Book [i.e., Qur'an] which is rehearsed to them? Verily, in that is mercy
and a reminder to people who believe."

"The Holy Qur'an," Text, Translation and Commentary by Abdullah Yusuf
Ali, 1934. (Latest Publisher: Amana Publications, Beltsville, MD, USA;
Title: "The Meaning of the Holy Qur'an," 1992). Includes subject
index.

"The Meaning of the Glorious Koran," An Explanatory Translation by
Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall, a Mentor Book Publication. (Also available
as: "The Meaning of the Glorious Koran," by Marmaduke Pickthall, Dorset
Press, N.Y.; Published by several publishers since 1930).

"The Bible, The Qur'an and Science (Le Bible, le Coran et la Science),"
The Holy Scriptures Examined in the Light of Modern Knowledge, by
Maurice Bucaille, English version published by North American Trust
Publication, 1978.


