Preface
=======

Man by nature has a driving desire to achieve success and happiness in
this life. All his efforts and struggles in the day to day life is
basically aimed at acquiring these two things. However, inspite of
accumulating treasures of wealth and fame, man continues to find himself
deprived of true success and happiness in this world. Why is this so?
The reason is simple.

Man searches for success and happiness in material gains when it
actually can only be found in his own soul. If the soul is contented, it
supplies ease and comfort to the mind hence bringing for man true
success and happiness.

Just like the physical body, Man's soul too has its own sickness. So
long as he is free and secure from the sickness of his soul, he is
successful and happy. The moment he falls victim to one of them, hid
decline begins. He eventually loses both. Pride (Kibr), being one of the
major sickness of the soul, is not only an obstacle on Man's path to
success and happiness but is also destructive to his nature.

In other words, when Pride develops in Man, there is a risk that he may
cross the boundary of his own nature to prove his supremacy. Unless
controlled and prevented, he can harm himself as well as cause extensive
harm to those around him and to society in general. History is full of
such skeletons.

In this booklet, I have humbly attempted to discuss Pride as the cause
of grief and not supremacy as many would consider. In the light of the
Qur'anic verses and Hadith, I have briefly tried to explain the meaning
of Pride, its reason in Man, its consequences and eventually remedies
for getting rid of this dangerous sickness. I sincerely hope that it
would be of benefit to all especially the youth who are my intended
audience.

I also wish to extend my sincere gratitude to all the brothers who have
encouraged and extended moral support to me in the undertaking of this
task. I am especially indebted to Mulla Mohamed Kassamali, Brother
Murtaza A.M. Jaffer and Brother Zaffer Datoo for their time and support
in ensuring the success of this booklet. May Almighty Allah reward them
all in both the worlds and accept whatever little we manage to do in His
right path. Amin.


Wallahu Waliyyut Tawfeeque.
Mujahidali A.R. Sheriff
Ramadhan 1411 A.H.
Nairobi.


