Tawadhu Towards the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.)
==============================================================

Showing humbleness towards the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and; (a s.) is as
good as showing humbleness and humility towards Allah (s.w.t.). This is
because the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.) are the greatest
signs of Allah (s.w.t.) and His representatives to us on this earth. We
have show humbleness towards them by :

- undermining their status and position amongst us.
- Not touching their respected names without Taharat.
- Mentioning their names with great respect and sending praises and
greetings over them whenever we remember them.

It is said that some great people had the habit of mentioning the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.), and the Imams (a.s.) only in the state of Taharat. It
is also reported that whenever Imam Jafar as Sadiq (a.s.) used to
mention the name of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), he used to bow down in
respect and send praises and salaams. And amongst the other ways of
showing humbleness towards Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.) is to
show humbleness towards the Ulema (religious scholars and authorities)
and the sadaat (children of the Holy Prophet's progeny).


**Tawadhu to the People**

It is important to note that man is the best of all creatures. After
his creation, Allah (s.w.t.) gave him the honour and respect which He
did not give to any other creature. And in order to preserve and secure
man's dignity, Allah (s.w.t.) sent His Sharia (the divine law) to which
He bound the entire mankind.

People who deviated from these laws lost their honour and dignity. The
following verse discusses the honour and dignity bestowed upon man :
"And surely we have honoured the children of Adam, And We carry them in
land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things, and We have
made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over the most of those
whom We have created." (Bani Israel/70)

Once Imam Jaffer as-Sadiq (a.s.) along with his companions was
performing a mustahab Tawaf of the Holy Kaaba when an outsider came and
called for one of the companions. Since they were all in Tawaf, the
companion who had been called ignored the caller and continued with
Tawaf. Imam (a.s.) had observed the situation, and he went and asked his
companion why he was ignoring the caller?

The companion asked : "Should I break my Tawaf and respond to him."

The Imam (a.s.) said : "Yes ! Verily, the respect of a believer is more
dear to Allah than the sanctity of the Kaaba."

Therefore, man who is so much exalted and bestowed with such great
honour and dignity deserves to be respected and not to be disregarded or
considered inferior. Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) once came near the
Holy Kaaba and said : "By Allah, the sanctity of a believer is greater
yours.'

There are various narration through which the experts in the science to
ethics "IImul Akhlaq" prove that pride is a kind oppression "Dhulm ".
The proud one is a snatcher of rights from others as he demands their
humiliation before himself.

**10) People who do not deserve to be shown Humility**

Humility cannot be shown to all the people. Here are some categories of
people who do not deserve to be shown humility. Most of us fail to
distinguish these people and many a time we honour them while on the
other hand forget the deserving ones.

This category of people are the following :


**i. Non Believers and Sinners**

There is no doubt that a believer irrespective of his colour, caste or
status is better than a disbeliever or a sinful person.

Allah (s.w.t.) says : "Is he then who is a believer like him who is a
transgressor? They at not equal." (Sajdah/18) In another place the
Almighty Allah says : "And do not marry the idolatrous until they
believe, and certainly a believing maid is better than an idolatous
woman even though she may allure you." (Al-Baqarah/221)

So one cannot compare a believer with any disbeliever or even with a
transgressor. A believer has an exceptional dignity bestowed upon him by
Allah (s.w.t.). He achieved this dignity because of his belief in Allah
(s.w.t.) and therefore showing humbleness and humility to a disbeliever
is belittling Imaan (Belief) before Kufr (Disbelief) thus disgracing the
Imaan.

**ii. The Rich for their Wealth**

The Holy Qur'an and the narration have both strongly protested against
showing humility towards rich people their wealth. Almighty Allah says :
"And do not stretch your eyes after that with which we have provided
different classes of them (of) the splendour of this world's life that
we may therefore try them." (Taha/131)

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said : "Whoever comes to a rich person and
expresses humility for his wealth, Allah snatches two thirds of his
religion."

Ayatlullah Dasti Ghayb explains the above hadith beautifully in his
book 'Adh-Dhunooh al Kabeera' (The major Sins). He writes that Imaam is
made up of three things.

a) Conviction at heart;
b) Admission by tongue: and
c) Action by parts of the body.

Since showing humility to the rich for their wealth is expressed by the
first two i.e. the heart and tongue, therefore two thirds of one's faith
goes away.

**iii. To the Proud Ones**

Avoid showing humility and being humble before the proud ones. This is
because showing humility to such kind of people firstly, brings
self-humiliation and disgrace and secondly, it will encourage the proud
ones to continue with pride and disregard the rights of others.
Moreover, by not showing humility to a proud one, there are chances that
he might acknowledge his grave mistake.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has said : "If you notice the humble ones in
my nation, then show humility towards them and if you see the proud
ones, then show (your) pride over them for verily for them in that is
humiliation and lowliness." (Jami'us saadaat)

Finally, we pray to the Almighty Allah (s.w.t.) to guide us and save us
from Kibr of all kinds.

Aamina Rabbal 'Aalameen.

Walahu Waliyyut Tawfeeque.


