Discourse Eight: Short Term Marriage
====================================

In Bahman of 1342 (January/February, 1964), following the opinion of Dr.
Russell Lee that humans are part of the group of creatures that
naturally cannot content themselves with a single wife, the Keyhān
Newspaper devoted a column for free debate regarding the issue. It also
proclaimed that it would print both favorable and conflicting views.

Naturally, the discussion led to the issue of short-term marriage
[mut‘ah]. Following this, in issue 6169 dated Bahman 24, 1342 AHS,
Keyhān printed an article written by Mr. Mardūkh—who is a Kurdish Sunnī
scholar. In a section of this article the Shī‘ah creed was attacked for
permitting mut‘ah marriage. The present article was written in answer to
Mardūkh’s article but for various reasons it was not printed in the
newspaper.

Mr. Mardūkh has cast his words in the form of dialectic. However,
unfortunately in a controversy that has continued among scholars of the
two great creeds of Shī‘ah and Sunnī for approximately fourteen
centuries, he has based his reasoning on material that Sunnī scholars
posited at the start of the controversy which have been proved wrong
hundreds of times—the proceedings of which have been inscribed in the
jurisprudential and dialectic books of both creeds.

The only way I found to justify this performance is to say that this
respectable scholar did not adequately research this extensive debate
and due to religious zeal he wanted to bestow a gift upon the honorable
readers of the newspaper with the few words that he had heard and
accepted on this topic, thinking that Shī‘ah scholars are ignorant of
these matters.

The witness to this is a laughable narration that he cited at the start
of his discussion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان، کانتا علی عهد رسول الله حلالاً، وانا احرمهما وأعاقب عليهما،
المتعة، ولحم الحمر الانسية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He took the first part of the narration from an oration by ‘Umar, the
second caliph, and the second part from a narration by Amīr al-Mu’minīn
‘Alī (‘a) regarding the prohibition of mut‘ah cited in “Sahīh Bukhārī”
and several other books and attributed the comical mixture to Shī‘ah
scholars!

Translation of the original piece from the second caliph’s oration is as
follows: “There are two types of mut‘ah that were permissible [halāl] at
the time of the Prophet of Allah and I make them forbidden [harām] and
will punish their perpetrators. These two mut‘ahs are the mut‘ah of hajj
(hajj-e tamattu‘) and the mut‘ah of women.”

Translation of the original piece that is attributed to Imām ‘Alī (‘a)
states: “The Prophet of Allah forbade mut‘ah of women and the meat of
domestic donkeys on the day of Khaybar.”

Translation of the oration cited by Mr. Mardūkh—the Arabic recorded
above—is: the second caliph stated, “There are two types of mut‘ah that
were halāl at the time of the Prophet of Allah and I make them harām and
will punish their perpetrators. These two mut‘ahs are mut‘ah and the
meat of domestic donkeys.”

The end result of entering into discussion with a person with such logic
is quite clear. For the information of those who have not adequately
studied this topic, I will succinctly point out several issues in regard
to the statements of His Eminence. If anyone has anything to say in this
regard or any objections I will welcome their statements with open arms
and I am ready for debate and expatiation.

Mr. Mardūkh maintains, “If the act of mut‘ah were not prohibited, the
community of Muslims would act in accordance with it and it would not be
specific to the Shī‘ah branch.”

Indeed, before the interdiction of the Second Caliph, the community of
Muslims including the sahābah—i.e. Companions of the Prophet—observed
mut‘ah. For example, the first caliph gave his daughter Asmā’ in short
term marriage to Zubayr who was a sahābah and ‘Abd Allāh ibn Zubayr who
was also a sahābah was the product of this mut‘ah.

However, after the prohibition of the Second Caliph, his partisans
renounced mut‘ah while the Shī‘ahs did not accept the ban.

All the same, after ‘Umar’s prohibition some sahābahs such as Imām ‘Alī
(‘a); Ibn ‘Abbās, Ibn Mas‘ūd, Jābir, and ‘Amr ibn Harith, and also some
Tābi‘īn[^1] scholars such as Mujāhid; Suddī; Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr; and Ibn
Jurayh regarded mut‘ah permissible.

Mr. Mardūkh asserts, “It seems that this is also one of the influences
of the Jew, ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’…”

It must be noted that this ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’ is an imaginary person
that the Umayyads and their contemporary scholars created to explain
away the discord [fitnah] at the dawn of Islam which led to the death of
the third caliph, ‘Uthmān. They made this fictional person the hero of
these tales and the founder of the Shī‘ah creed.

However, recently some scholars—even Sunnī scholars such as the late
lamented renowned scholar Tāhā Husayn—have historically proved the
fictitiousness of the character of Ibn Saba’.[^2]

Mr. Mardūkh asks, “How could ‘Umar make a halāl, harām or a harām, halāl
without license?”

As various recent scholars admit, the Second Caliph had changed
religious precepts where he saw fit—even against the clear wording of
Allah and the Prophet, as maintained by Ahmad Amīn, author of “Fajr
al-Islām”, and author of “Tafsīr al-Manār”, and as is demonstrated in
many historical cases.

The context of the Second Caliph’s oration, which Shī‘ah scholars cite
from the books of Sunnī scholars, clearly shows that the interdiction of
mut‘ah was not an enjoinment against wickedness, but a decision that he
made by himself in accordance with situational politics.

In his oration, the Second Caliph states, “There are two types of mut‘ah
that were halāl at the time of the Prophet of Allah and I [my emphasis]
make them harāmand will punish their perpetrators. These two mut‘ahs are
the mut‘ah of hajj and mut‘ah of women.”

Any person who understands Arabic realizes that this means: these acts
were legitimate [mashrū‘] at the time of the Prophet and I now ban them.
It does not mean, they were harām and the people performed these acts in
spite of this while the Prophet and sahābah stood by and watched and
now, in the name of enjoinment against evil, I announce their
illegitimacy.

In addition to this, in many citations by the Sunnīs, the Second Caliph
established stoning to death [rajm] as the penalty for offence[^3] (in
the case of mut‘ah) and he swore to execute this penalty, even though
there were no grounds for the penalty of rajm. Even Sunnī scholars have
not dared to proclaim stoning as the penalty for mut‘ah. They say, “The
Second Caliph said this as a superficial threat, not in earnest.”

Also, that Mr. Mardūkh wrote, “At the pulpit the Second Caliph said: I
will feel grateful to anyone who notifies me of my slips and errors”,
does nothing in proving his speculations because the Caliph never
claimed that he would accept what others say.

Mr. Mardūkh says, “In ‘Sahīh Bukhārī’, which is no less than a book of
history, it is written that the narrator of the hadīth banning mut‘ah is
‘Alī himself.” First, “Sahīh Bukhārī” is a book of hadīth and in order
to use hadīth, one must first determine whether they are authentic or
not. One cannot cursorily and unquestionably accept hadīths.

This same “Sahīh Bukhārī” asserts, “The Temple of Jerusalem [Bayt
al-Muqaddas] was built four years after the Ka‘bah.” whereas it is known
that Abraham was the builder of the Ka‘bah and David and Solomon were
the builders of Bayt al-Muqaddas and there are thousands of years
difference between them.

He cites that ‘Ā’īshah said, “On the Night of the Ascension [laylah
al-mi‘rāj] the Prophet slept in bed next to me the whole night.” whereas
it is irrefutable that the mi‘rāj occurred before the hijrah and
‘Ā’īshah came into the Prophet’s house after the hijrah. In contrast to
what is written in “Sahīh Bukhārī”, “Sahīh Muslim” cites this famous
saying from ‘Alī (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لولا ان عمر نهی عن المتعة ما زنی الاّ شقي.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If ‘Umar had not banned mut‘ah, no one would commit adultery except the
wretched.”

Mr. Mardūkh says, “According to the Shī‘ahs, the verse “… and those of
whom ye seek content…”[^4] does not address mut‘ah of women, rather it
means that if the marriage was consummated, her marriage portion [mihr]
must be paid in full.”

This matter is related to Arabic syntax and morphology. I have fully
vindicated the matter in the fourth volume of “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” under
Sūrat al-Nisā’. I will refrain from a detailed account of the issue. For
more details refer to the book.

In short, exegetes from the advent of Islam, such as Ibn ‘Abbās, Ibn
Mas‘ūd, and Ubay who were sahābah, and Mujāhid, Qatādah, Suddī, and Ibn
Jubayr who were tābi‘īn all of whom lived at the time of the Prophet and
revelation of the Qur’an, were Arab, and they knew Arabic much better
than Mr. Mardūkh who was Kurdish and was born fourteen centuries later.
The former personalities understood this verse as referring to normal
mut‘ah not intercourse.

This is why contemporary advocates of the Second Caliph never claim that
the verse does not refer to mut‘ah; rather, they allege that it has been
abrogated.

In addition, Mr. Mardūkh holds, “Istimtā‘ and tamattu‘[^5] mean taking
pleasure and they signify sexual intercourse.” which is an incorrect
definition. These two words have different formations and thus two
different meanings. Istimtā‘ means seeking pleasure and tamattu‘ means
taking pleasure. Therefore, istimtā‘ would never be used to refer to
intercourse, which is taking pleasure.

Mr. Mardūkh claims, “In Islam, marriage has specific effects, none of
which exist in mut‘ah, such as inheritance, nafaqah[^6], ‘iddah[^7], the
four wife restriction, etc.

Therefore, mut‘ah is not marriage and because it is not and is also not
‘property of the right hand’, according to the holy verse “Save from
their wives or (slaves) that their right hands possess, for then they
are not blameworthy.”[^8] which limits legitimate sexual intercourse to
marriage and property of the right hand, it is unlawful and an act of
adultery.”

This rationale is one of their oldest sophistries. It was concocted
around fourteen centuries ago and has probably been answered by the
Shī‘ahs fourteen hundred times but these gentleman still do not relent
and keep on repeating it.

First of all, according to the religious law [shar‘], the effects Mr.
Mardūkh enumerates for marriage are for lifelong marriage not marriage
itself. He himself accedes that, in the time of the Prophet, before the
Prophet banned mut‘ah—so Mr. Mardūkh says—and it was permitted, it did
not have these effects and the citations of the Sunnīs testify also to
this fact.

Secondly, the verse that he makes use of indicates that the act of
mut‘ah is a type of marriage; thus, if mut‘ah were indeed forbidden in
Islam, it surely happened after the hijrah.

Their own varying accounts from the battles of Khaybar, ‘Umrah al-Qadā’,
and Awtās, the conquest of Mecca and the Farewell Hajj [hajjat al-widā‘]
testify to this. Also, because Sūrat al-Mu’minūn was revealed in Mecca
before the hijrah, when mut‘ah was permissible, it was definitely
considered a type of marriage.

Mr. Mardūkh maintains, “The act of mut‘ah was adultery and due to the
force of circumstance the Holy Prophet temporarily gave permission for
it and after the need was obviated he proclaimed it harām.”

They brazenly accuse the Prophet of such an act to correct the mistake
the Sunnīs made on day one! However, from the first days of the advent
of Islam, in Meccan sūrahs such as al-Mu’minūn, al-Isrā’, al-Furqān, and
al-Ma‘ārij, God, the Almighty, introduces adultery as an obscene act and
has strictly prohibited it.

Furthermore, in some parts of the Qur’an such as Sūrat Isrā’īl and
al-Mā’idah, God sharply forbids the Prophet (S) from even the least bit
of alteration in Qur’anic precepts. No Muslim should dare to say that
the Prophet issued permission for adultery and that the Prophet’s own
sahābah including Abū Bakr, Zubayr, Jābir, and Ibn Mas‘ūd were ahead of
everyone else in performing this evil deed! One sahābah gave a daughter,
one took the daughter, and one came into being by the taking!

For instance, the sahābah, ‘Abd Allāh ibn Zubayr was born of Asmā’
daughter of Abū Bakr in her mut‘ah with Zubayr. Certainly, no Shī‘ah
would ever cause such disgrace by attributing such law-breaking and
disobedience to the Holy Prophet (S).

Apart from what I mentioned until now, if we look at the human world in
a general perspective, we will precisely see that sexual relations
cannot be restricted to permanent marriage, considering all other
relations unlawful. Permanent marriage can never fully satisfy the
carnal instinct.

Even though permanent marriage is prevalent all over the world and
public opinion condemns adultery and fornication, official governments
of civilized and semi-civilized worlds have not been able to prevent the
outbreak of short-term sexual relations and in all cities of the world,
great and small, there are public or concealed centers for obscene acts.

In this situation, a religion such as Islam, which is global and eternal
and wants to restrict intercourse to legitimate marriage and completely
prevent fornication and adultery, must incorporate short-term marriage
with specific conditions that obviate the evil of fornication—for
instance, the woman must not be mahram[^9] to the person she intends to
marry, she must not be married, and the duration and mihr must be
determined prior to the union—in order to adequately answer the needs of
this universal human instinct.

In the “Tafsīr Tabarī” and Shī‘ah narrations, it is quoted from ‘Alī
(‘a) that, “If the Second Caliph had not prohibited short-term marriage,
the only persons who committed adultery and fornication would be those
who were on the verge of destruction due to the extent they had gone
astray.”

In conclusion, in answer to Mr. Mardūkh’s mandatory decree that Shī‘ah
scholars must reconsider their opinion on this and other controversial
issues, we say that, contrary to Sunnī scholars, the Shī‘ahs consider
ijtihād legitimate and without waiting for their mandate, we continually
reconsider our opinions. However, unfortunately, we cannot change our
opinion regarding an issue that is as clear as day.

Reciprocally, we entreat Mr. Mardūkh to observe decency and politeness
in his writings. In a very short article, he accuses the Shī‘ahs of
unbelief, corrupt lineage, and illegitimacy. He has extended his foul
language to the daughters, sisters, and family of Shī‘ah authorities and
in no way restrained himself in his adventurism.

If he truly supports the cause of unifying Muslims and resolving
internal conflict, he must refrain from such profane and unjust language
because, firstly, such unjust statements are aspersions cast upon the
holy character of the Prophet of Allah and his eminent sahābah who were
the initial legislators and executers of this matter and, secondly, such
words are the main cause of all this rancor and spite between these two
creeds.

When the public learns of them, such words overturn worlds; otherwise, a
difference of opinion in a few minor issues would not start such uproar.

A few days after writing the foregoing article, I received a postal
package from one of my friends containing a short booklet by Mr.
Mardūkh. This booklet was written regarding the interdiction of mut‘ah
and to some extent to accentuate and reaffirm the article he published
in the Keyhān Newspaper.

This booklet—as is clear to those who read both article and
booklet—contains no significant addition to the published article which
would require investigation and debate.

However, due to the fact that said author wanted to take the issue from
the temporary form of a newspaper article to the permanent form of a
book, he altered the appearance of the debate.

Even so, he reused the same groundless logic he had used at the
beginning of his article and in no way did he refrain from his bullying,
perjury, and calumniation of religious authorities—even Sunnī ‘ulamā’
and sahābah. Therefore, I deemed it necessary to indicate several parts
of this booklet which are the products of said individual’s
characteristic logic. I will leave the final judgment to my respected
readers.

In this booklet, Mr. Mardūkh says, “All precepts may be abrogated when
necessary.”

If he had reviewed books of jurisprudence or the discussions of exegetes
regarding abrogated verses, he would realize that abrogation of a
precept means removal of a precept in accordance with the time not in
accordance with conditions.

A precept’s persistence in normal circumstances and its lapse in special
circumstances have both been taken into consideration in the sharī‘ah
and this has nothing to do with abrogation. For example, in one verse
God, the Almighty, states that eating the dead meat of an animal is
harām; however, in times of need the unlawfulness of this act is
removed—the latter part of the verse does not abrogate the former part.

In the first years of Islam, the marriage of an adulteress with a
believing non-adulterer and the marriage of an adulterer with a believer
who was not an adulteress was unlawful. After a while, this precept was
eternally abrogated and this was not due to necessity or abnormal
circumstances. All abrogated precepts in Islam are thus.

Mr. Mardūkh says, “In the terminology of jurists, mut‘ah has two
meanings: short-term marriage and mut‘ah of divorce.”

It seems that he has purposefully forgotten that there is also a third
meaning and that is mut‘ah al-hajj—the same hajj that, according to the
Qur’an, had been legislated into the sharī‘ah near the end of the Holy
Prophet’s life.

The Muslims performed it until the reign of the Second Caliph. Halfway
into his caliphate, he banned the mut‘ah of hajj and mut‘ah of marriage
at the same time.

Mr. Mardūkh holds, “None of the Sunnī or Shī‘ah books consider a mut‘ah
woman a wife.” This is an accusation against the Shī‘ahs. In the view of
the Shī‘ah and jurisprudence of the Ahl al-Bayt, there are two types of
wives: First, there is lifelong marriage, which has specific effects.
Second, there is temporary marriage, which also has specific effects.

These effects consist of the fact that a wife may only have a single
husband, must observe ‘iddah after separation, and the offspring
resulting from the marriage are attributed to both parents. By way of
illustration, at the time of the Prophet of Allah, ‘Abd Allāh ibn
Zubayr, who was brought into the world as a result of the mut‘ah between
the daughter of the First Caliph and Zubayr, was attributed to Zubayr
and was not introduced as fatherless.

Mr. Mardūkh contends, “In Sūrat al-Ahzāb, which was revealed in Medina,
God, the Almighty, says to His Prophet, ‘We have made halāl for you,
your wife and the property of your right hand.’ If mut‘ah was halāl at
that time, it was necessary that He enumerate that also.”

As I have mentioned, wifehood encompasses both permanent and temporary
marriages. In addition, according to the general consensus of all Muslim
creeds, understanding and specifying Qur’anic precepts through sunnah is
permissible and effectuated.

For example in the Qur’an, the Exalted God only names pigs as
essentially unclean [najis al-‘ayn] and through sunnah dogs have also
been annexed to pigs. No one has ever said that if it is true that dogs
are essentially unclean God must mention it! Besides this example, there
are many similar cases.

Mr. Mardūkh says, “In the eighth year of the hijrah, when the army of
Islam was stationed in Mecca, young women and widows adorned themselves
and exhibited themselves before the solders of Islam. The fires of their
lusts flared due to the length of their stay and their extended
celibacy. Therefore, by force of circumstance and in line with the rule
of eating dead meat, the Holy Prophet issued permission for temporary
marriage.”

One must ask him: Had Zubayr temporarily married the daughter of the
Caliph in that period? And was ‘Abd Allāh ibn Zubayr, who was born from
this marriage and considered one of the sahābah of the Prophet of Allah,
supposedly one year old when the Holy Prophet passed away in the tenth
year of the hijrah?

Apart from this, was the answer to removing the mentioned danger that
the Holy Prophet should give permission for [in Mr. Mardūkh’s words]
adultery and fornication or should he have prevented the ostentation of
adorned woman and their unrestrained socialization, which the Qur’an
clearly states to be forbidden, and in this way carry out a mandatory
precept of the Qur’an?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Women must not reveal their adornments to men, except their husbands
and mahārīm…”***[^10]

Even besides this, how many years did the conquest of Mecca take that
the army of Islam was faced with such arduous celibacy and were thus
bound by necessity? Whereas, considering other troubles of the Prophet
of Islam (S) on this journey, such as the battle of Hunayn, the numerous
sieges of Tā’if, and additional reformations around Tihāmah, the army of
Islam was not in Mecca for more than a few days!

If indeed this short stay brought about necessity and, according to Mr.
Mardūkh, sanctioned the permissibility of fornication, must not mut‘ah,
fornication, adultery with married women and mahārīm—such as mothers and
sisters—and even homosexuality be permissible in the modern world which
is—in his words—enveloped in bewitching and aphrodisiacal sights, where
hundreds of fully adorned women and throngs of half bare girls are seen
in the vista of every street and corner and where various strata of
impecunious youths, workers or students, exist who are not able to marry
and afford the costs of a family?

Could such Islamic precepts as said author maintains still subsist and
not be obsolete in such asphyxiating conditions? Also, what is the
difference (according to said author who believes that mut‘ah is a form
of adultery or fornication) between mut‘ah and non-mut‘ah whereby one is
permissible and the other remains forbidden?

Mr. Mardūkh says, “When honorable ‘Umar saw that there is no longer any
need for the act of mut‘ah and uninformed persons still practiced it, he
notified the people that the meat of domestic donkeys and mut‘ah are
harām, and what is the difference whether the Prophet announced them
harām or his Caliph?”

First of all, why would an Islamic precept that was legislated so
clearly in several Qur’anic sūrahs, such as al-Mu’minūn and al-Ahzāb, at
the start of the Prophet’s appointment and after the hijrah—according to
the said author—and continually read by Muslims throughout time remain
obscure in the twenty-three years of the Prophet’s life when he engaged
in extraordinary promotional activity of religious precepts and after
his passing throughout the caliphate of the First Caliph and half that
of the second until it was clarified by the announcement of the Second
Caliph?

Secondly, the Second Caliph’s statement that said author holds to be an
announcement of God’s and the Prophet’s decree is, “There are two types
of mut‘ah that were halāl at the time of the Prophet of Allah and I make
them harām[^11] and will punish their perpetrators. These two mut‘ahs
are the mut‘ah of hajj and mut‘ah of women.” Dear readers, you judge
whether this statement is the announcement of God and the Prophet’s
decree or an original interdiction by the Second Caliph himself.

Thirdly, those ‘uninformed’ persons that he is talking about are
incidentally the sahābah themselves; especially the most prominent of
them such as ‘Alī (‘a), Ibn Mas‘ūd, Ibn ‘Abbās, Zubayr, and the First
Caliph whose daughter was the mut‘ah of Zubayr.

Fourthly, the two mut‘ahs that the Second Caliph named are “mut‘ah of
women and mut‘ah of hajj” not “mut‘ah of women and the meat of domestic
donkeys”. The Second Caliph’s dignity is much higher than not knowing
his own Arabic language and naming donkey meat mut‘ah. Of course, this
from Mr. Mardūkh is probably a subtle and intentional mistake!

Mr. Mardūkh states, “None of the precepts regarding marriage, such as
lineage and ‘iddah, pertains to mut‘ah.”

This is a blatant misrepresentation of the Shī‘ahs. Regardless, he must
be asked whose son ‘Abd Allāh ibn Zubayr was.

Mr. Mardūkh declares, “The meaning of the verse of mut‘ah[^12] is that
if ‘you take pleasure of your wife and enter her’, you must pay her mihr
in full, and this holy verse has nothing to do with the meaning Shī‘ah
‘ulamā’ interpret from it.”

I must advise him to refer to narrations in books of hadīth and exegesis
from eminent sahābah regarding this verse so that he realizes that
before Shī‘ah ‘ulamā’, the sahābah themselves, who were Arabs and spoke
the language of the Qur’an, interpreted this verse the same.

When Mr. Mardūkh makes snide remarks, they are actually directed at
them. Also, he should refrain from giving Shī‘ah ‘ulamā’ lessons in
Arabic, saying in contradiction to Arabs and Arabic lexis that “Istimtā‘
and tamattu‘—i.e. the Arabic verbal mode of istif‘āl and tafa‘‘ul—mean
the same thing in Arabic lexicology.” For more information it would be
good if my dear readers referred to “Tafsīr Tabarī”, “Durr al-Manthūr”,
and various books of hadīth.

Mr. Mardūkh notes, “Some Shī‘ah leaders say: even though the word
istimtā‘ means enjoyment and taking pleasure, in the terminology of
religious law it refers to the mut‘ah marriage contract.” I say that
even though in books of jurisprudence or lexis the word istimtā‘ is not
defined as the mut‘ah marriage contract, even so, if istimtā‘ meant
that, then the following verse means that, “Whoever does not marry pure
and good things and mut‘ahs them instead will be an inhabitant of Hell!”

> ﴿ وَيَوْمَ يُعْرَضُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَلَى النَّارِ أَذْهَبْتُمْ
> طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهَا
> فَالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ ... ﴾150

Bravo to this miraculous logic and reasoning that eliminates all
relationship between rationale and conclusion! Apparently, in his logic
if a word means one thing in a certain place, it should mean the same
everywhere. For instance, if the word ajr means mihr in the verse of
mut‘ah, then in the following verse it should mean the same thing and so
the meaning of the verse would be, “To the patient, mihr will be given
without reckoning!”

> ﴿ ... إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُم بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ ﴾151

Also, zawj and zawjān sometimes mean wife and husband. If zawjān in the
following verse means husband and wife, it would mean that even angels
have males and females and wives and husbands!

> ﴿ وَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
> ﴾152

Apart from this, no one has said that istimtā‘ means mut‘ah marriage
contract; rather, it means temporary marriage and there is a great
difference between the two.

Mr. Mardūkh holds, “It is even more strange that the Shī‘ahs believe in
performing mut‘ah; however, they eschew letting the women of their
family take part in mut‘ah.”

I must say that this is for the same reason that you believe in
permanent marriage but would never give your daughter’s hand to a person
who you know wants her only for a night’s pleasure and will then divorce
her or for the same reason that you would not marry your young daughter
to an old man who has only a short time to live.

Essentially, what does liking or disliking a precept have to do with its
ordainment or lack thereof? God, the Almighty, declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَعَسَى أَنْ تَكْرَهُوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن
تُحِبُّوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَكُمْ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And how oft you hate something which is good for you and how oft you
love something that is bad for you…”***[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِتَالُ وَهُوَ كُرْهٌ لَكُمْ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You have been commanded to jihād which is loathsome to you…”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ
وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَن فِيهِنَّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if Truth had followed their caprices, the heavens and the earth
and all in them would surely have been thrown into confusion and
corruption…”***[^15]

Even a person who cursorily consults the Holy Qur’an would have no doubt
that the basis of Islamic precepts is observance of genuine interests
and adherence to truth, whether or not this is in accordance with the
desires of the people.

Mr. Mardūkh states, “The majority of Muslims believe that mut‘ah is
harām and opposing the opinion of the religious and legal majority is
forbidden.”

One must ask him: which religion that considers the opinion of the
majority to be proof is rightful? In His divine book, God, the Exalted,
considers obedience to the truth, exclusively, to be sine qua non and
berates the majority’s opposition to it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَقَدْ جِئْنَاكُم بِالْحَقِّ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَكُمْ لِلْحَقِّ
كَارِهُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily We have brought you the truth; however, most of you are
adverse to the truth.”***[^16]

If it is required to follow the inclinations of the majority, then the
Muslim minority should have accepted idolatry and also the pious who
consist of a very small minority in relation to the wicked and
wrongdoers should through aside their piety.

Besides, what does a religious discussion have to do with state law?
Also, what influence do the legislated laws of a country have in the
enactment or annulment of religious issues? It seems that Mr. Mardūkh
thinks that the domain of theology and religious law is that of the
senate or parliament!

Mr. Mardūkh says, “Because the authorization of mut‘ah is against the
Qur’an, it necessitates unbelief and heresy. Therefore, those who
believe in it are unbelievers.” (!)

It is extremely unfortunate for a person to spend his life in religious
debates and still not understand that there is no cause for unbelief in
the issue of the permissibility or illicitness of mut‘ah where one side
of the controversy, Shī‘ah or Sunnī, is surely wrong, or that he does
not understand the two things that necessitate unbelief and apostasy
which are renunciation of one of the three principles of religion [usūl
al-dīn]: tawhīd (monotheism), prophethood, and resurrection; or basic
repudiation of one of the requisites of religion [darūriyāt-e dīn] such
as prayer, fasting, and that the Ka‘bah must be faced in prayer because
denying these necessitates denial of God and the Prophet.

On top of that, the issues in dispute among the Sunnīs and Shī‘ahs, one
of which is mut‘ah, are not among the principles or the requisites of
religion, rather they are religious ancillaries [furū‘āt-e dīn] and are
as such theoretical not axiomatic and necessary. Even so, it is highly
unlikely that he never heard that a Muslim that refutes a theoretical
religious issue is not considered an unbeliever.

However, it is evident from his present work that he has no motive but
to provoke naïve persons and inflame the fires of fitnah which have been
burning for centuries—fires which were being extinguished through the
cooperation of a number of scholars. For instance, in his very short
treatise he repeatedly claims that in this matter the Shī‘ahs have no
purpose but enmity towards ‘Umar.

Mr. Mardūkh heaps up ten so-called “evils entailed by mut‘ah” including
assertions that the Qur’an explicitly prohibits mut‘ah, the
permissibility of mut‘ah was caused by necessity, mut‘ah is against the
rules of lineage, honorable women would never submit to mut‘ah, a woman
who is made a mut‘ah becomes hated, and so on.

Dear readers, put the title “evils entailed by mut‘ah” side by side with
professed evils and enmity towards ‘Umar and judge yourselves.

Mr. Mardūkh says, “If you do not intend to oppose ‘Umar, for the sake of
precaution, why do you not instead pronounce the formula of marriage and
whenever you decide to separate, do so by divorce?”

It would be well if one asked him, “Keeping in mind the evils you
enumerated as results of the temporariness of the marriage, where the
marriage might last for no longer than an hour, a night, or a week, what
is the difference between the two forms of marriage by which you
authorize one and forbid the other? Is not such prohibition of mut‘ah in
truth a mockery of the law of divorce?”

At the conclusion of his treatise, Mr. Mardūkh attacks a scholar who has
recently written a book on mut‘ah, saying that he has altered the
quotation cited from ‘Umar in “Tafsīr Kabīr”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«متعتان، کانتا علی عهد رسول الله حلالاً، وانا احرمهما، وأُعاقب
عليهما.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he has reproduced it thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان، محللتان علی عهد رسول الله، وانا احرمهما، وأعاقب عليهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It would be well if he had taken note of the said hadīth which he cited
in his article in the Keyhān Newspaper:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان، کانتا علی عهد رسول الله حلالاً، وانا احرمهما، وأعاقب عليهما
لحم الحمر الانسية، ومتعة النساء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He did not even suffice with this and he repeated his mistake in his
treatise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَاللّهُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And Allah is He whose help is sought…”***[^17]

[^1]: Those who did not meet with the Prophet but met with Sahābah and
cited narrations through them. [trans.]

[^2]: Refer to Tāhā Husayn, “Al-Fitnah al-Kubrā”; Dr. Wardī, “Wu‘‘āz
al-Salātīn”; Askarī, “‘Abd Allāh Saba’”; and the yearbook of “Maktab-e
Tashayyu‘”, issue 3—later republished as “Shī‘ah”.

[^3]: For more information, refer to “Tafsīr Al-Mīzān”, vol. 4.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:24. ﴿ ... فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ...
﴾

[^5]: These words are derived from the same root as the infinitive,
mut‘ah. [trans.]

[^6]: Nafaqah is the financial support of a wife as necessitated by
Islam. [trans.]

[^7]: ‘Iddah is the minimum interval a woman is required to observe
between the end of her previous marriage (e.g. death of husband,
divorce) and remarriage to another man. [trans.]

[^8]: ← Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:6. ← ﴿ إِلاَّ عَلَى أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أوْ مَا
مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ ... ﴾

[^9]: Persons who are mahram (plural mahārim) to you are those who are
close family such that you may not marry them (e.g. one’s parents and
siblings). [trans.]

[^10]: Sūrat al-Nūr 24:31. As previously mentioned, mahārīm are
predetermined close family members such as parents, siblings, and
siblings of one’s parents who one may not marry one another. [trans.]

[^11]: Emphasis added.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:24. ﴿ ... فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ
فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ... ﴾

[^13]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:216.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:216.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:71.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:78.

[^17]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:18. This article was reproduced from the yearbook,
“Maktab-e Tashayyu‘”.


