Discourse Nine: The General Framework of Ownership
==================================================

Beings that we see upon the earth—comprising plants, animals, and
humans—are generally engaged in activity and effort. They each endeavor
outside the spheres of their selves to preserve their lives and obtain
useful and beneficial things.

No inactive, silent creation may be found in the wide expanse of
existence. Among all these efforts, no activity is performed without the
intention to gain something.

The actions observed in various types of plants are intended to preserve
them from harm, induce growth, and help them to propagate. The actions
of the varieties of animals and humans are motivated by the aim to
acquire benefits—even if these benefits are internal or imagined—and
this subject is not open to doubt.

The grounds for struggles and endeavors
---------------------------------------

Active beings, animals, and humans naturally understand that using
available materials for self-preservation and resolving natural needs is
not possible unless the materials are allotted to them and they are not
in use by others. In other words, a single action cannot have two
agents. This is the basis for all these struggles and endeavors.

For this reason, humans and other active beings, whose basis for action
we understand, prevent others from appropriating and intruding into that
which they earmark as their own. This clear and indisputable principle
is ownership; something that no human doubts. This is what the
possessive “lām” [ل] means in Arabic in word groups such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا لي، هذا لك؛ لي ان افعل کذا؛ لك ان تفعل کذا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Confirmation of this obvious principle is the conflict seen among
animals. They fight with their enemies to protect their nests or lairs
and their food or prey and if their mates or offspring are faced with
danger they enter into battle.[^1]

Another proof is that children fight to preserve their food and other
possessions. It is even seen among infants that they battle with their
peers over their mothers’ breasts.

Is ownership instinctive [fitrī]?
---------------------------------

In accordance with their fitrah and instincts, humans live communally.
However, the pillars of human social life, which is born of the faculty
of fitrah, cannot be established and stay firm without this faculty. The
only thing the society can do is to amend those fitrī principles and
arrange them in the form of social norms.

Thus, the fitrī principle of ownership attains various types and
designations. For instance, private possessions are called property and
non-monetary features are called rights.

People may have differences of opinion regarding various aspects of the
realization of ownership. For instance, there is variation in the means
whereby one may or may not gain ownership (e.g. inheritance,
transactions, misappropriation) and there may be differences in the
attributes of the owners (e.g. minors or adults, dull-witted or
rational, individual or community).

Even though various contrasting views consider some owners and others
not, in short, the essence of ownership is something that humans must
necessarily accept. For this reason, schools that oppose ownership, such
as communism, take possessions away from the individual and transfer
them to the society or government—they cannot and will never be able to
completely eradicate people’s ownership.

Thus, the essence of ownership is the fitrah and nature of humans and
eradication of fitrah is the eradication of humanity.

Ownership of work
-----------------

Humans continually work in order to preserve their lives. For this
reason they appropriate things in the external world in various manners
and use everything to their advantage. This is an undeniable truth for
humans need external materials in order to live and evolve. They must
resolve this need by possessing and using these materials.

This is why humans consider themselves owners of their own work, the
results thereof, and that which they appropriate. Of course, it must be
noted that the general meaning of work is meant, inclusive of all
actions and reactions. It is a relationship which sociologists consider
to have specific effects in the society.

In short, humans regard the materials they use and exert energy upon and
the results and products of this use as their own specific property and
consider any kind of use thereof completely legitimate.

This principle has value in human societies and it is regarded as an
unchallengeable right. In fact, it could be said that this principle is
one of the stable pillars of social life.

Moreover, we know that humans cannot singly resolve all their needs
through their own work and actions. The domain of human life is so vast
that one person cannot carry out all its tasks. For this reason, humans
feel the need for society and social cooperation; in order to compensate
for this deficit, they collaborate with others.

The result of this cooperation is that every person makes use of the
results of the efforts of other people and they procure that which they
cannot obtain by themselves through trade. This indispensable need
entails an essential requisite for trade and barter. Thus, each person
takes on a certain aspect of the necessities of life and advances upon
that path.

They take what they need from the products of their own work and trade
the rest to satisfy other needs. This is the basis of barter which has
been built upon a social need and has been born of the principle of
social cooperation.

Money, indicator of ownership
-----------------------------

A truth that must be noted here is that the goods and chattels which are
products of people’s work are not of equal worth. Some are greatly
needed, some are plentiful, some rare. The effort required to obtain
every commodity is not the same. There are also other differences
between commodities.

These differences caused complications in trade, and in order to resolve
this problem, the principle of value was developed. However, evaluation
of commodities requires a standard by which the value may be judged. As
a result, money appeared. In other words, to evaluate the worth of
items, the concept of money was devised.

This was the only means by which the value of items could be determined,
resolving the basic problem of trade. To this end, various valuable and
rare items, such as gold, were established as the basis for value,
measuring other commodities according to this criterion. For various
commodities, units of weight and volume were assigned and the units of
goods were valued by the unit of money, basing trade on this standard.

This is considered the mainspring for the invention of money after which
various types of money were introduced such as silver, copper, bronze,
notes, and so on. These issues are discussed in detail in books on the
history of economics. After the spread of buying and selling, the
merchant profession appeared. That is, a group of people specialized in
trade and barter to gain profit.

These are activities that humans engaged in to resolve their living
needs. In this manner money also became considered as a human need and
was substituted for all commodities and necessities since people can
gain everything—all desiderata and life pleasures—through money.

Therefore, trade and commerce was based upon the exchange of all goods
for a certain type of commodity. The need to exchange goods or gain
profit induces humans to trade and the difference of goods being
exchanged is the basis for human social life.

Usury or negation of ownership
------------------------------

The reciprocal exchange of two similar goods where the value and object
of sale are equal is considered valid in many human societies. Such an
exchange may be performed for various reasons bringing about
cheerfulness and friendship in the society and resolving the needs of
the disadvantaged.

This entails no evil. However, in the exchange of two similar goods if
an additional amount is received from one party under the pretext of
interest, the exchange would be usurious and the additional interest
would be usury.

Therefore, usury is the exchange of two similar goods where one side of
the deal contains an addition in the form of interest. The sale of ten
kilograms of wheat for twelve kilograms of wheat or selling a commodity
for ten dollars and buying it back at a later date for twelve are
instances of usury.

Of course, it is evident that such an exchange occurs only when the
customer is in urgent need and has no other alternative. In order to
show you the negative consequences of such transactions, I will
elucidate the matter in the form of an example:

A man whose daily income is 100 dollars and daily expenditure is 200
dollars is forced to compensate for this shortage through loan and
obtain the rest by paying usurious interest. Let us assume that he gains
the remaining 100 dollars by paying a 20 dollar interest rate; that is,
he borrows 100 dollars for 120 dollars.

Therefore, the next day he will have 80 dollars and be 120 dollars
short. Again he is forced to resolve this deficit by paying usurious
interest. This will go on until he is forced to give all his daily
income for interest. The matter, however, does not end here. Continuance
of this situation leads to where his daily income no longer suffices to
pay the interest on his debts.

On the other hand, the entire principal and interest belongs to the
owner of the capital. One of the parties has nothing and the other has
everything. The whole yield of the endeavors of one person is amassed in
the hands of another creating two disparate classes in the society: the
wealthy who lend money in the form of usury and the poor who must work
so that they might earn enough money to pay the interest on their loans.

Many of the poor are not even successful in procuring the interest for
their loans unless they disregard all their necessities so that they may
pay a measure of it.

The main reason that wealth is amassed on one side is that exchanges
occur without monetary requital and, in addition, money—which is a means
for simplifying the exchange of goods—is traded as a commodity with
supplemental value as opposed to its exchange for the value of work or a
commodity.

Thus, consequences of usury are the ruination of various helpless
individuals and the focus of wealth in the hands of another class of
people who are sufficiently privileged with the benefits of wealth.

Everyday, the burdens of the lower class increase and the scope of the
usurer class’s wealth expands until they are able to do what they will
with the people’s property and even labor, engaging the creativity and
toils of people to fulfill their insatiable appetites. Eventually, they
use the strength and stamina of the doomed poor for defense, revenge,
and battling against other classes leading to great chaos and disorder.
Ultimately, the aftermath of this chaos is destruction of civilization
and breakup of the social system and communal life.

In addition, it should be noted that the original capital given in usury
may be lost due to poverty more often than not since everyone does not
have the means to pay high interest and settle such debts.

Usury, the root of class differences
------------------------------------

Those who are familiar with economic matters know that the only cause
for the rise of communism and spread of misleading communist thoughts
was the blatant accumulation of wealth in a handful of people. This
amassing gives them precedence in livelihood and life privileges and
deepens social gaps among people of the society while the other classes
are deprived of the necessities of life. They have everything and the
others have nothing.

This privation breeds deep resentment and suffuses the hearts of people
in spite and enmity. As a result, the deprived follow any call that
rises—even falsely—in the name of the welfare of the afflicted classes
in the hope that it may assuage their pains and problems.

Communists greatly utilize such privations. Essentially, the communist
bacterium cannot flourish and multiply in any environment except that of
poverty. It is in the climate of class differences that they can use the
seductive and beguiling words of civilization, freedom, social justice,
and equality as an excuse to inject their thoughts into the minds of the
afflicted.

Even so, the truth is contradictory to what they say. They use
attractive words; however, their only relationship with them and their
meanings is propagandistic exploitation.

After hearing this call from the maw of communism, they imagine that a
doorway to salvation has been opened. However, before long they will
realize that this call was a lullaby which was intended to put them—with
their eroded nerves—into a deep sleep to use the power of their
aggregate numbers. When these wretched people awaken, the chains of
slavery will have already been shackled to their hands and feet
preventing them from any kind of free movement.

Indeed, the Lord of the universe is aware of all the secrets of
existence. He knows how the life-ruining effects of usury and improper
distribution of capital involve accumulation of untold wealth in the
hands of a minority. By circulating this wealth in banks they idly
recline upon their comfortable thrones and live extravagantly while
others are bereft of everything including their legitimate right to make
use of the results of their work—something that the human fitrah
considers an apparent principle.

In opposition to fitrah, due to great concentration of wealth, some
people live without working and others are not able to support
themselves even though they work. This is why the Holy Qur’an adamantly
opposes usury, attacking the basis of this oppressive exchange and
considering it war against God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللّهَ وَذَرُوا مَا بَقِيَ
مِنَ الرِّبَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ \* فَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلُوا
فَأْذَنُوا بِحَرْبٍ مِنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَإِنْ تُبْتُمْ فَلَكُمْ
رُؤُوسُ أَمْوَالِكُمْ لاَ تَظْلِمُونَ وَلاَ تُظْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O believers! Fear Allah and give up the extra money gained through
usury if you are indeed believers. If you do not do this, know that you
have declared war upon Allah and His Messenger. If you repent your
principal is your own; you neither deal unjustly nor are you dealt with
unjustly.”***[^2]

[^1]: Consider ants and bees. These creatures build themselves nests and
through their nature, they regard it as their own. They store their
foodstuff in their nest. This shows that these creatures consider
themselves the owners of the nests they build and the food they gather.
This feature is also clearly seen in other animals. This patent truth
can also be perceived in the lives of early humans and nomads—whose
lifestyle is similar to that of early humans. Even though nomads live
communally and in tribes, they respect and sanctify private ownership
and they prioritize the ownership of specific items. In “The History of
Ownership”, Felician Shanet writes, “Among nomadic tribes the collective
ownership of property does not prevent individuals from owning what is
theirs. These private properties are comprised of things that the nomad
individuals produced or manufactured themselves.” Loy Brovel writes that
these belongings are part of the existence of nomadic individuals and
can never be separated from them. He maintains that there is an
unbreakable connection between each nomadic individual and their
property, and the results of their personal endeavors such that these
effects are not only part of their private possessions, but they are
also part of their identity. He says, in other words, that nomadic
individuals elevate their identity by having these possessions.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:278-279. Journal, “Maktab-e Anbiyā’”, issues 1
and 2.


