Discourse Ten: Alcoholic Beverages, Cause of Humanity’s Decline
===============================================================

As opposed to other religions—the teachings of which are either based
upon withdrawal from the society such as Christianity, Brahmanism, and
Buddhism, or fix upon the development of a specific tribe or race such
as Judaism—Islam has elected its system of enlightenment as a global
social system.

It ensures human happiness in the setting of civilization—something that
humans can never do without—by inspiring complete harmony among people.
Islam intends to set up an organization whose elements consist of
superior and pure humans who attain perfect human beatitude by
developing and evolving themselves.

On this base, in order to form its intended society, Islam elects the
fitrī human or the natural human; that is, the human originated by the
system of creation, equipped with the blessing of sound reason by which
it is differentiated from other animals, and free of the taint of
delusions, superstitions, and other futile imitative thoughts. This has
been made very clear throughout the Noble Qur’an.

Islam is aware that the human created by the system of creation and
equipped with sound reason understands through its healthy mind,
perceptions, and God-given fitrah that even though it and all other
creations desire and seek their own happiness in the course of their
lives, they are in no way independent in their origination or
subsistence, in attaining happiness or resolving their own needs—they
are in need of other persons in all aspects.

Moreover, no being in the world of creation has created itself or has
sovereignty in managing its existence or maintaining it. The whole of
creation, which incorporates humanity and all other phenomena in the
cosmos, is dependent upon a point above and beyond nature. An
indomitable and unseen will governs and sustains existence in accordance
with the general laws of causality.

Intellectual development, the most important type of worship
------------------------------------------------------------

This understanding guides us to the conclusion that we must surrender to
the One God—the supernatural Life, Knowledge, and Power—and advance
toward the destination anticipated in our existential make-up which has
been entrusted to reason.

The Noble Qur’an stresses that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed, Religion is surrender to Allah…”***[^1]

It also underscores that religion is a series of teachings that are
harmonious with the special make-up of humans and provides for their
existential needs in an absolutely balanced manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set thy face toward the pure religion; it is in accordance with
the nature [fitrah] of God upon which He has formed the nature of
humankind. There is no alteration in the creation of God. This is the
enduring (and true) religion; however, most humans do not know.”***[^2]

After little thought, a person who understands the general and decisive
view of Islam—that humans must live collectively in a way harmonious
with the human make-up—will conclude that Islam considers preservation
of a sound mind the most important of duties and does not give
permission for its defilement even for a moment. This is a correct
assumption.

Islam entrusts management of the individual and social affairs of humans
to sound reason and does not sanction the interference of false
sentiments except to the extent that is reasonably acceptable.

Hence, with all its might it prevents anything that unbalances the
natural activity of this God-given blessing or neutralizes the efforts
of the intellect. Consequently, it forbids gambling (which is based upon
blind luck), lying, calumny, dissimulation, fraud, and things of this
sort that unbalance social reason and neutralize thought and judgment.

Included in this range of forbidden acts is consuming alcoholic
beverages, which is strictly forbidden in Islam such that for drinking
even one drop of intoxicant a penalty of eighty lashes has been
determined.

The corrupting effects of freedom of the use of alcoholic beverages
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Among acts that cause interference with reason and contemplation,
drinking alcoholic beverages is the only one that works directly on the
mind and rationality and is solely performed to kill thought and fortify
emotions that deny an overseer.

Accordingly, the evil moral, mental, religious, and health-related
effects it spreads in individuals and the society are undeniably clear.
Due to this act, for every year that passes in the history of humanity,
millions are hospitalized with various diseases related to the gullet,
lungs, liver, mind, and so on.

No year passes without multitudes of the alcoholic insane being
transferred to psychiatric hospitals or millions of people losing their
moral control and becoming afflicted with mental deviations and
intellectual disorders.

Nor does a year pass that this deadly poison does not lead humanity to
innumerable instances of murder, suicide, crime, theft, treachery,
pimping, scandal, defamation, betrayal of secrets, vilification, use of
indecent language, and harassment. A moment does not pass that it does
not enslave noble human individuals such that they are no longer bound
by any rules and regulations.

The pure reason that is lost from society everyday due to the
consumption of millions of liters of alcoholic beverages is a deplorable
and irredeemable waste. In addition, from the intellectual aspect, one
cannot have much hope of general goodness and happiness from a human
society that leaves behind the greater part of its identifier as human
beings—i.e. correct and pure reason.

The first time the Noble Qur’an prohibits alcohol consumption, it
briefly indicates its individual and social evils and names this act
ithm (sin), an evil act that entails undesirable consequences and
various deprivations.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ رَبِّيَ الْفَوَاحِشَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا
بَطَنَ وَالإِثْمَ وَالْبَغْيَ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: My Lord has forbidden all indecencies in public and private and
sin [ithm] and unjust persecution…”***[^3]

Then, the last time it forbids this act—with utmost stress—it
specifically indicates two of its iniquities, the diffusion of which
weakens the pillars of society and ultimately collapses the structure of
public happiness.

Elsewhere, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ
اللّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلاَةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Satan seeks to precipitate enmity and hatred among you through
intoxicants and gambling, and to debar you from remembrance of Allah and
from prayer. Will you then forbear?”***[^4]

It is quite clear that the only aim of Islamic teachings is to create an
upright society where friendship and conciliation reign. A society where
all its members consider themselves responsible before God to carry out
the human laws that guaranty their happiness and never forget God or
disregard responsibilities.

This is what is briefly mentioned as law in the Noble Qur’an and that
which is cited from the Prophet in this area is extensive and explicates
all the physical and spiritual detriments of intoxicants.

Islam’s crusade against alcohol
-------------------------------

The day Islam banned alcoholic beverages the entire human world,
excluding a small number of Jews, was afflicted with this deadly poison.
It was common in all advanced and primitive societies of the time and
drinking liquor had no legal prohibition. In those days, generation
after generation, the people grew and multiplied with this unsavory way
of thinking and practice.

To be sure, uprooting this practice by Islam was as hard as eradicating
the belief of idolatry—if not harder.

This is why in order to carry out the interdiction of alcohol, Islam
undertook a lenient and piecemeal method and implemented its aim over
the course of several years—the span between revelation of the verse in
Sūrat al-A‘rāf and the verse in Sūrat al-Mā’idah. At first, the Qur’an
vaguely proscribed use of alcohol in Sūrat al-A‘rāf introducing it as
ithm and then relatively clearer in Sūrat al-Baqarah and finally plainly
forbid it in Sūrat al-Mā’idah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ
كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَإِثْمُهُمَآ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ
نَفْعِهِمَا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They ask you regarding intoxicants and gambling. Say: In both are
great sin and some benefits for people; however, the sin of these two is
greater than their usefulness…”***[^5]

At the start of the Prophet’s appointment, it was proscribed in a simple
manner but ultimately it was severely forbidden with “punishment by the
lash”.

Even though at first Islam had problems in imposing the ban and clearing
the atmosphere of the love for alcohol, it was extremely successful in
accomplishing this onerous decree and realizing its general acceptance,
which is truly astounding.

The final verse banning alcohol, which is in Sūrat al-Mā’idah, shows
that even several years after the interdiction, people still had not
completely given up their ancient practice. However, as historical
evidence shows, after the definite prohibition of alcohol, the people
promptly drove the desire of consuming alcohol out of their minds and
broke all casks and decanters in the streets and poured their contents
onto the earth.

There is no mention of the execution of the punishment for drinking
alcohol at the time of the Prophet (S), i.e., from the time it was
banned and its punishment was determined until the passing of the
Prophet (S), even though many instances for the execution of punishments
for murder, fornication, and similar sins have been cited.

In the fourteen century long history of Islam, it can be said about the
Islamic society that hundreds of millions of Muslims have come and gone
without tasting a drop of this deadly poison. In Islamic nations, where
countless Muslims live, except for great cities that enjoy so-called
modern civilization, where this poison proliferates in line with
civilization, it is certain that millions of Muslims have never even
seen the color of wine throughout their lives.[^6]

[^1]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:19.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^3]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:33.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:91.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:219.

[^6]: Extracted from the yearbook, “Maktab-e Tashayyu‘”.


