Discourse Eleven: Why Must the Hand of a Thief be Severed?!
===========================================================

The principle of severing the hand of a thief, which is a punishment in
accordance with the Islamic sharī‘ah, may be broken down and analyzed
according to two basic propositions:

First: thieves must be punished for the wrong acts they commit;

Second: the befitting punishment is severance of the hand.

Respecting the rights of others
-------------------------------

The first issue, i.e. punishment of a thief, is not specific to the holy
religion of Islam. According to the known history of humankind, various
human societies—including primitive familial communities, tribal
societies, feudal societies, and also great and small dictatorships,
democracies, and theocracies—assigned punishments for thieves, which
were and still are carried out.

It is evident that this decision in the human world is based upon the
principle that according to realism, the most important and valuable
thing understood by humans is life, and they know no duty more necessary
than attaining happiness in life.

They collectively toil and struggle in the society to earn their basic
needs—i.e. various types of possessions and wealth—and use them. In
truth, as per sociology, humans spend half of their life pool, for which
no finite value may be maintained, to procure living capital for the
other half.

It is also evident that the value of preservation and protection of an
article is equal to that of the article itself. An object that has no
protection against termination is considered to be worthless.
Consequently, we must conclude that perseveration of the products of
human efforts generally has an equal value to half of a person’s life,
just as the value of mortal safety is equal to that of a person’s entire
life.

Moreover, breaking or ruining the fence erected around the products of a
society is equal to destroying half the life of that society; just as
taking away the mortal security of a society is equal to massacring all
the people of that society. For this reason, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... مَنْ قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الأَرْضِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever kills a person unless to retaliate for a murder or for
corruption done in the land, it shall be as if that person has killed
all people…”***[^1]

Of course, in view of this a thief that strips the society of its
property and security must experience severe punishment, the
visualization of which will prevent them from encroaching upon the
sanctity of the society’s property.

Must mercy be shown with regard to punishment of a thief?
---------------------------------------------------------

The second issue is Islam’s decree that the hand of a thief must be
severed. That which is understood from Islamic decrees regarding
retaliation or retribution in kind [qisās] is that, regarding
punishment, the harm inflicted by an offender upon the offended is
appraised and inflicted upon the offender, in order that it be a penance
for their act and a lesson for others.

Surely, a felony, the essence of which is ruination of half the life of
the victims (the effort put in to secure one’s livelihood), cannot be
resolved with a fine—great or small—or a few months in prison. The best
testimony to this fact is that execution of such punishments has not had
the least effect in preventing this corruption.

In Islam—as per the real value—one hand of a thief, which is
approximately equivalent to half their life efforts, is severed.

This shows the baselessness of a series of criticisms by our own alleged
intellectuals. Unfortunately, just as theft has completely ruined
economic security in our country like a contagious disease, this blight
has deeply rooted itself into our intellectual environment and correct
intellectual concepts are being stolen from us!

These highbrows ask, “Why should a human individual who must struggle
for their own welfare using their God-given hands until the final moment
of their life and must solve their problems by their own able hands, be
rendered helpless to the end of their life by losing their hand because
of a mistake necessitated by economic need?”

The essence of this criticism is acquiescence to the offence and solving
the problem by arousing pity and human sympathy. In other words, “It is
true that the thief has committed a felony; however, seeing that
economic pressure usually forces this offence upon noble humans, pity
and compassion prevents us from making them wretched forever by cutting
off their hand.”

The mistake in this logic is abundantly clear. It is true that there is
no problem in abiding by one’s emotions regarding personal rights. As
per various Qur’anic verses, Islam encourages people to overlook their
individual rights in matters such as qisās (retribution in kind) and
financial rights, and refrain from causing their brothers pain and
hardship.

However, in regard to social rights, compassion regarding a felon and
overlooking their punishment is, in truth, a transgression against an
entire society in absolute cruelty. Freeing a thief and preserving the
honor of a criminal is equivalent to entangling millions of innocent
people and shredding their honor.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ترحم بر پلنگ تيزدندان ستمکاري بود بر گوسفندان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mercy upon the sharp-toothed tiger,

becomes oppression upon the sheep.

Must the society be sacrificed for the individual or vice versa?
----------------------------------------------------------------

In any event, the problem is that the legal decree legislated for
punishing an offender must consider the society and a salve must be
applied to the wound inflicted upon the body of the society rather than
merely training thieves and victims.

Here, the response to another criticism is made clear. The criticism is
this: there is an obvious difference between a person who is in
desperate need of food, privation and misery forcing them to steal a
ewer for instance, and a person whose profession is theft and crime—who
abases and cripples a society, everyday afflicting another innocent
family with poverty and wretchedness.

Of course, these two have a striking difference whereas Islam considers
the two identical and does not differentiate in the manner of their
punishment!

The reply to this criticism is made clear by the previous discussion in
addition to a short reminder: in Islam, punishment is carried out only
for the most extreme instance of acts that are recognized as offences
and crimes and necessitate punishment.

For instance, a person who is guilty of fornication is dealt one hundred
lashes as punishment. If a person repeats this act several times without
the punishment being dealt and is later proven to be guilty, they will
only be dealt one penance—i.e. one hundred lashes.

In view of this introduction and the preceding discussion, it is clear
that the penance for theft is for the last theft proven by the Islamic
executive branch. There is no difference between the greatness or
smallness of the theft and the factors and conditions causing the theft
are irrelevant. There is no difference between the theft of a veteran
thief and the act of a chicken-thief or a ewer-thief in that they have
both harmed a pillar of the society.

Does severing the hand of a thief slow the wheels of the economy?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Critics say, “Upon what rational base is burdening the society by
cutting off the hand of a person and harming the production factor of
the country?”

These persons must be told that severing the hand of a thief means
cutting off four of the fingers except the thumb. In a country naturally
containing various healthy and handicapped people and involving
thousands of diverse needs, there will be no shortage of work for a
person who is only missing four fingers of one of his hands.

The burden of the society will not grow heavier and the production
factor of the society will not slow down. For this reason, the
punishment for the second instance of theft is not severance of the
other hand. After the first time and cutting off the right hand of a
thief, the left foot of a thief is severed.

Moreover, even if we consider that dissevering the hand of a few persons
will truly lead to increasing the load on the society and slowing down
the wheels of economy, is not protecting the economic security of a
country by a minuscule addition to the social load a thousand times more
important than killing half the life force of the society by
exterminating the foundation of financial security?!

Indeed, it is an amusing logic that, “If the hands of thieves are
severed, they become burdens upon the society; however, if no one
protests against them and they are allowed to continue their profession
or are put in jail and provided for, they are not burdens”!!

In our own country in its current palpable condition, are not thieves
and pickpockets burdens of the society? Apart from the innumerable
individuals who take part in great and small thefts by happenstance, the
number of professional thieves and pickpockets is in the thousands!

Among these numbers, those who are free and fearlessly continue their
professions obtain their livelihood from the produce of other people’s
endeavors. Over and above this, in newspapers we read of other
deplorable and abominable events that occur every day in the course of
thefts such as mortal and sexual assault.

Prison, the college of thieves
------------------------------

In addition to the enormous expenses taken out of the pockets of the
helpless for building and maintaining the institutes related to these
crimes and looking after offenders that fall into the hands of the
government, the criminals live easily off the products of the nation and
even finish courses on techniques of theft as a result of new
acquaintances among prisoners!

Detractors say, “If such things are supposed to serve as examples, in
America psychologists made and broadcast detective movies in order to
provide examples so that people learn their lesson. However, not only
did these not serve as deterrents, people learned crime and delinquency
from them. Crimes similar to the movies occurred in the cities where the
films were broadcast the same night. Additionally, up to now, public
executions have not served as lessons.”

There is no doubt that theaters and publishing houses with their romance
in detective movies and novels are factors for propagating corruption.
They embellish matters such that one supports the antagonist and
imagines happiness in life to be dependent upon love affairs and
unrestraint.

Even so, the intellect of an intellectual and the conscience of a
conscionable person cannot accept that if implemented correctly,
education and edification will not have any effect or that public
punishments will not serve as examples causing many to conform to the
correct path. Of course, like natural causes and factors, social ones
also do not always entail the ideal effect—not continuously.

The intended result of an effective legal punishment is for it to
mitigate corruption, and make it into an exception rather than
completely eradicating it so it never occurs again.[^2]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:32.

[^2]: Extracted from the yearbook, “Maktab-e Tashayyu‘”.


