Discourse Thirteen: About the Knowledge of Imams
================================================

Did Sayyid al-Shuhadā’[^1] (‘a) know that he would be martyred on his
journey from Mecca to Kūfah? In other words, did he depart for Iraq with
the intention to be martyred or to form a just and totally Islamic
government?

Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a)—in the belief of the Shī‘ah—is a sacrosanct
Imām, the Prophet’s (S) third successor, and bearer of complete
trusteeship. According to narrated confirmation and intellectual
rationales, the knowledge of Imāms regarding external events is of two
types.

First type of their knowledge
-----------------------------

By God’s will, the Imāms are aware of the truths of the world of
existence in all conditions including that which can be perceived by the
senses and that which is beyond them such as heavenly beings and past
and future events.

Rationale: there are widely transmitted [mutawātir] narrations that are
cited in Shī‘ah compendiums of hadīth including, “Al-Kāfī”, “Basā’ir”,
“Bihār al-Anwār”, Sadūq’s books, etc. These innumerable hadīths indicate
that Imāms (‘a) are aware of everything due to divine blessing not
personal acquisition. Whatever they want to know, by the leave of God
they realize with the slightest attention.

Of course, there are verses in the Holy Qur’an that determine knowledge
of the unseen [‘ilm al-ghayb] to be specific to God, the Exalted.
However, the exception in the following verse shows that the
exclusiveness of knowledge of the unseen for God signifies that no one
possesses such knowledge independently in and of itself, save God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلاَ يُظْهِرُ عَلَى غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا \* إِلاَّ
مَنِ ارْتَضَى مِنْ رَسُولٍ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is knower of the Invisible and He reveals His knowledge of the
unseen unto no one, save those messengers He has preferred…”***[^2]

Therefore, it is possible for preferred messengers to know about the
unseen through divine instruction and for other elect to know through
the prophets’ instruction, as many narrations state regarding the
Prophet and all the Imāms that they passed their knowledge to the next
before their deaths.

There are also intellectual rationales expressing that the Imāms (‘a),
who because of their brilliant status, are the most complete humans of
their times, perfect manifestations of divine Names and Attributes, and
know everything in the world and every personal incident.

Due to their fundamental nature, whatever the regard, its knowledge is
made clear to them. In view of the fact that these rationales are
dependent upon a series of complex intellectual matters that are beyond
the scope of this article, I will leave them to be examined in their own
special place.

Practical effects of Imamate knowledge and its relationship with obligation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A point that must be especially regarded is that such benedictory
knowledge, as per the logical and cited reasons proving its existence,
is completely inviolable, inalterable, and irreproachable. In other
words, it is knowledge of that which is recorded in the Lawh-i
Mahfūz[^3] and awareness of the certain providence [qadā’] of God.

This necessitates that the possessor of such knowledge per se has no
duty regarding it because it is inevitable. Also, the person may hold no
intention or desire in regard to acting on such knowledge since duty
rises from the possibility of action and, where volition is concerned,
action and avoidance of action are both facets of responsibility—either
action or inaction may be intended.

However, in view of the fact that such knowledge is ineluctable and
predetermined, there is no way that responsibility can apply to it.

For instance, it would be correct for God to tell His servant to perform
a certain task that is possible to either do or not do. However, it is
impossible for Him to command a person to or proscribe them from doing
something that will certainly happen due to God’s genetic providence
since such a demand would be null and void.

Also, a person can intend to do something that is possible, set it as
their purpose, and endeavor to achieve it. However, never can a person
intend to do something that will assuredly and providentially happen and
endeavor to carry it out since the willingness or unwillingness of a
person has no effect on that which will assuredly happen because it will
assuredly happen (regard carefully).

This shows that:

1. This benedictory knowledge of the Imāms (‘a) has no effect on their
actions and no relationship with their specific duties. Essentially, any
sure event, because it is linked to certain providence and is
inevitable, cannot pertain to commandments or injunctions, or human
intention. Indeed, what the certain fate and providence of Truth, the
Almighty, does necessitate is contentment with fate. Thus, Sayyid
al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) said amid blood and dust at the final hour of his life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رضاً بقضاءك وتسليماً لامرك لا معبود سواك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“With contentment for Your providence and in surrender to Your command.
There is no object of worship besides You.”

Furthermore, in an oration before he left Mecca he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رضا الله رضانا أهل البيت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The satisfaction of Allah is in our satisfaction; that of the Ahl
al-Bayt.”[^4]

2. In regard to divine providence, the certainness of a person’s action
does not negate the fact that it is voluntary because divine providence
regarding an act pertains to all its possible circumstances not the act
in and of itself. For example, if God wants a person to perform a
specific volitional action by his own free will, the external
realization of this volitional act will be certain and unavoidable
because the will of God has applied to it. Simultaneously, for the human
in question it is voluntary and possesses the quality of possibility—as
opposed to inevitability (regard carefully).

3. The appearance of the Imāms’ (‘a) actions should not be considered a
reason for their ignorance of the unseen and to debunk the existence of
this benedictory knowledge. This is like asking: if Sayyid al-Shuhadā’
(‘a) knew what was going to happen, why did he send Muslim to Kūfah as
his representative? Why did he write a letter to the people of Kūfah
through Saydāwī? Why did he get himself killed when God states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلاَ تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And cast not yourselves by your own hands into destruction…”[^5]

Why, why, why? The answer to all these questions has already been made
clear from the foregoing discussion and there is no need for
reiteration.

Second type of Imamate knowledge: normal knowledge
--------------------------------------------------

According to the Qur’an, the Prophet (S) and the Imāms (‘a) of his pure
lineage are humans like the rest of us and the actions they perform in
the course of their lives are similar to those of other
humans–volitional and in accordance to normal knowledge. Like other
people, the Imāms (‘a) determine the goodness and evil, and advantages
and disadvantages of things through normal knowledge intending to do
what is worthy of being done and endeavoring accordingly.

If external causes, factors, and conditions are favorable, their
endeavors are successful and if causes and conditions are adverse, they
fail. The fact that the Imāms (‘a) know the details of all past and
future events has no effect on voluntary acts—as we have stated.

The Imāms (‘a) are like other human servants of God and are obligated to
perform religious duties. Also, according to the leadership they have
been given by God, which they must carry out by the normal laws
governing humanity, they must perform their utmost in revitalizing truth
and upholding the religion.

The movement of Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) and its objective
---------------------------------------------------------

With a short study of the general conditions of that time, the reasons
behind Sayyid al-Shuhadā’s (‘a) decisions and measures become clear. The
darkest period in the history of Islam for the family of the Prophet (S)
and their Shī‘ahs was the twenty years of Mu‘āwīyah’s reign.

After Mu‘āwiyah took over the Islamic caliphate through trickery and
became the unconditional monarch of the vast Islamic country, he used
all his great power to consolidate his rule and destroy the Ahl al-Bayt
of the Prophet (S). Not only did he strive to destroy them, he wanted to
completely eradicate them from the minds and tongues of the people.

He made a group of the Prophet’s (S) sahābah who were respected and
trusted by the people his followers and used them to fabricate hadīths
advantageous to the sahābah and harmful to the Ahl al-Bayt. Also, at his
order preachers cursed Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a)—as a ‘religious duty’—upon
pulpits throughout the Islamic nation.

With agents such as Ziyad ibn Abiyah, Samrah ibn Jundab, and Busr ibn
Artāh he killed the friends of the Ahl al-Bayt wherever he found them.
In order to do this, he used gold, coercion, bribes, persuasion, and
intimidation to the utmost extent possible.

Naturally, persistence of this environment would cause the masses to
begin to hate the name of ‘Alī and his family and those who had any love
of the Ahl al-Bayt in their hearts to sever all their ties to them in
fear of their lives, property, and family security.

The truth of this can be understood by reviewing the Imamate of Sayyid
al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) that lasted around ten years which—except the final few
months—was contemporary with Mu‘āwiyah. In this entire period, even one
jurisprudential hadīth was not cited from him, although he was the Imām
of the Time and clarifier of religious teachings and decrees.

(By hadīth I mean a narration that the people cited from him, showing
that the people consulted him, not a narration cited from within his
family such as by the next Imām.) This shows that in those days, the
doors to the house of the Ahl al-Bayt were closed and the people’s
referrals to and consultations with Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) had reached
zero.

The escalating pressure that had beset the Islamic society prevented
Imām al-Hasan (‘a) from continuing his fight or revolt against Mu‘āwiyah
because, firstly, Mu‘āwiyah had gotten the fealty of the people and in
light of this fealty, no one would follow the Imām. Secondly, Mu‘āwiyah
had made himself known as one of the great sahābah of the Prophet (S), a
Qur’anic scribe, and confidant and right-hand man of three of the first
four caliphs.

He had even given himself the title of “Khāl al-Mu’minīn” (literally,
Uncle of the Faithful) as a holy appellation. Thirdly, through his
singular intrigue, he easily provoked the killing of Imām al-Hasan (‘a)
by his own relatives then rose in vengeance to kill the Imām’s
murderers. Then, he was able to hold mourning gatherings for the Imām
and grieve for him!

Mu‘āwiyah had made living conditions for Imām al-Hasan (‘a) so bad that
the Imām (‘a) did not even have the least bit of security in his own
home. Then, when Mu‘āwiyah wanted to obtain the fealty of the people for
Yazīd, he poisoned the Imām (‘a) using the Imām’s own wife, martyring
him.

This same Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a), who rebelled against Yazīd without
delay after the death of Mu‘āwiyah and even sacrificed his own infant
child on this path, could not make this sacrifice when Mu‘āwiyah was
alive because against Mu‘āwiyah’s deceptive self-righteousness and the
allegiance he had extracted from the Imām, his martyrdom would have
absolutely no effect.

This was a summary of the woeful conditions Mu‘āwiyah had created in
this Islamic society in which he had completely closed the doors to the
Holy Prophet’s (S) house taking away from the Ahl al-Bayt all effect and
function.

The death of Mu‘āwiyah and caliphate of Yazīd
---------------------------------------------

The final blow Mu‘āwiyah struck against Islam and Muslims was to turn
the Islamic caliphate into a hereditary despotism installing his son
Yazīd as his successor though his son did not possess any kind of
religious character even in the form of hypocrisy.

He blatantly spent his days in song, wining and dining, lovemaking, and
making monkeys dance. He had no respect for religious laws. All this
beside, he had no religious belief to the extent that as his soldiers
were bringing the Ahl al-Bayt prisoners and the heads of the martyrs of
Karbalā into Damascus, he came out to watch and, after having heard a
crow squawk (which is held in some places to be a bad omen), he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نعب الغراب فقلت صح اولا تصح فقد اقتضيت من الرسول ديوني
  </p>
</blockquote>

The crow squawked and I said shriek or not,

I have surely taken my dues from the Prophet.[^6]

Also, when they brought the Ahl al-Bayt captives and the holy head of
Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) before him, he sang some verses one of which
was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعبت هاشم بالملك فلا خبرٌ جاء ولا وحيٌّ نزل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hāshim[^7] played with the Land; for no

report has come nor divine revelation.

The rule of Yazīd, which was the continuance of Mu‘āwiyah’s policy, made
the duty of Muslims clear. It also made obvious the status of the Ahl
al-Bayt’s relationship with Muslims in general and the Shī‘ahs—who were
doomed to be completely forgotten.

Under these conditions, the most effective and decisive factor in
instigating the downfall of the Ahl al-Bayt and destroying the
foundations of truth was for Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) to swear fealty to
Yazīd, declaring him the inviolable caliph and successor to the Prophet
(S).

Because of Sayyid al-Shuhadā’s (‘a) own true leadership, he could not
swear fealty to Yazīd in effect taking a potent step in obliterating the
religion. His duty was to refrain from pledging allegiance and God
expected nothing less from him.

On the other hand, refusal of fealty held a tragic consequence. That
terrible unassailable power of the time demanded allegiance with its
entire being—it either wanted fealty or a head—and it was not content
with anything else. Therefore, the death of the Imām (‘a) was guaranteed
if he did not give his allegiance.

In view of the interests of Islam and Muslims, Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a)
resolutely chose not to pledge fealty and thus be killed. He dauntlessly
preferred death over life and his divine duty was to refrain from giving
allegiance and be martyred. This is why some narrations state that the
Prophet of Allah said to him in a dream that God wanted to see him dead.

Also, he said to some of the people who advised him against this
movement that God wanted to see him dead. In any event, this regards the
mandate [tashrī‘ī] will of God, not His genetic [takwīnī] will because
as we have previously stated, volition has no effect in His genetic
will.

Refusal of a life in disgrace, consent to the Red Death (the death of a martyr)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Indeed, Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) chose to reject fealty and thus he chose
death. He preferred death over life and the course of events proved that
he made the correct choice since the heart-rending circumstances of his
martyrdom, affirmed the persecution and righteousness of the Ahl
al-Bayt. After his martyrdom, similar movements and bloodshed continued
for twelve years.

After that, with the slight calm that transpired at the time of the
fifth Imām (‘a), the Shī‘ahs came in torrents from all around to that
same Household that no one paid attention to at the time of Sayyid
al-Shuhadā’ (‘a).

Thus, day by day, the numbers of the Shī‘ahs of the Ahl al-Bayt
increased and their rightfulness and brilliance began shining and
glistering throughout the world. The basis for this was the Ahl
al-Bayt’s legitimacy in tandem with their persecution, and the pioneer
upon this field was Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a).

Now we wish to present a comparison of the conditions of the Prophet’s
Household and their reception by the people in the Prophet’s day and the
situation—which becomes more revitalized and more deep-rooted with every
passing year—after Sayyid al-Shuhadā’s (‘a) martyrdom during these last
fourteen centuries, making the verity of Sayyid al-Shuhadā’s (‘a) choice
clearer than day. A poem recited by Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a)—according to
some narrations—is an indicator of this same truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما ان طبنا جبن ولکن منايانا ودولة آخرينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is not for us to feel fear, because

our desires will be realized in the final government.

This is why in his last will and testament, Mu‘āwiyah greatly emphasized
that if Husayn ibn ‘Alī refrained from swearing allegiance to Yazīd,
Yazīd should leave him alone and not object.

Mu‘āwiyah did not make this final testament as a result of sincerity and
love, rather he knew that Husayn ibn ‘Alī would not give his fealty and
if he was killed by Yazīd, the Ahl al-Bayt would be marked by
persecution which would be dangerous for the Umayyad dynasty and the
best method of promotion and advancement for the Ahl al-Bayt.

The Imām indicates his duty
---------------------------

Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) was aware of his divine duty which was refusal
to swear fealty and knew better than anyone the limitless and
unassailable power of Banī Umayyah and the character of Yazīd. He
realized that an integral necessity of refraining to give fealty was his
death and his divine duty necessitated martyrdom.

He explained this matter in various places with differing words. In the
gathering of the governor of Medina who asked Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a)
for his fealty to Yazīd, he said: “One such as me does not give fealty
to a person like Yazīd.” During his nightly exit from Medina, he quoted
his grandfather, the Holy Prophet (S), who said to him in a dream that
God wanted—as a duty—that he dies. In an oration before he departed from
Mecca, in answer to those who wanted to dissuade him from going towards
Iraq, he repeated this.

On the way, in reply to an Arab personage who insisted that he desists
from going to Kūfah or else he would surely die, the Imām declared:
“This is not unknown to me. However, they will not leave me alone and
will kill me regardless of where I am.”

Even though some of these narrations have contradictors or are weakly
documented, regard and analysis of the prevailing conditions of the day
completely substantiates them.

Variance of the Imām’s method throughout the rebellion
------------------------------------------------------

Of course, when we say the purpose of the Imām’s (‘a) rebellion was
martyrdom and that God had asked for his martyrdom, we do not mean that
God had asked him to first refrain from giving allegiance to Yazīd and
then sit and notify the agents of Yazīd that they should kill him; thus,
performing his duty in a nonsensical and irrational manner, naming it
rebellion.

Rather, the Imām’s (‘a) duty was to rise up against the evil caliphate
of Yazīd, deny him fealty, and carry out his dissent, which would end in
his martyrdom, by any possible means.

This is why the Imām’s (‘a) method varied in line with prevailing
conditions throughout his rebellion. First, when he was pressured by the
governor of Medina, he began his nocturnal journey from Medina and
sought refuge in Mecca—which was God’s sanctum and a religious haven—and
stayed there for a few months.

In Mecca he was under the covert surveillance of the caliph’s
intelligence officers until it was decided that he be killed or captured
at the time of hajj and be sent to Shām. On the other hand, a deluge of
letters was coming in from Iraq for the Imām (‘a). Thousands of letters
promised him support and aid, inviting him to Iraq.

In the final letter from the people of Kūfah, which—according to some
historians—was clearly sent to finalize their vows, the Imām decided to
initiate his blood-filled campaign and rebellion. First, though, he sent
Muslim ibn ‘Aqīl as his representative to guarantee the truth of their
pledge. After a while, Muslim sent a letter explaining the favorable
conditions for the Imām’s uprising.

In view of these two factors, i.e. preserving the sanctity of the House
of God from the secret officers of Shām who had come with the intent of
either killing or capturing the Imām (‘a) and the apparent readiness of
Iraq for rebellion, he set out for Kūfah.

Then, in the middle of the way, when he received news of the horrible
assassination of Muslim ibn ‘Aqīl and Hānī, he altered his method from
an offensive uprising and war to a defensive rebellion. He filtered and
purified his assembly, keeping only those who would aid him to their
last drop of blood, and proceeded towards the site of his martyrdom.

Question: What is the nature and extent of the knowledge of Imām (‘a)?
Does the Imām have knowledge of the details of his death, even the exact
time?

Answer: According to many narrations, the Imāms (‘a) have attained such
proximity to God that they can know by the will of God whatever they
wish to know. This includes thoroughly detailed knowledge of their
deaths and martyrdoms. There are no rational grounds to repudiate this
matter and there are also narrations saying that each Imām holds a
‘Tablet from God’ in which their specific duties are recorded. Still,
they are obligated to preserve the appearance of normal life.

Here an answer to a certain criticism is made clear, that advancing
towards certain danger is not logical. Reason demands that a person
never does something that they know entails definite danger, especially
mortal danger.

Hence, how can one believe that the Imāms (‘a), who are the wisest among
the wise, will do something that they know will end in their deaths?
Essentially, no person willfully does something that he definitely knows
is dangerous. In addition, how can an Imām satisfy himself to
voluntarily cause his own death whereby divesting the human world of the
blessings of his existence?

Answer: The unreasonableness of performing a voluntary act entailing
certain danger is because usually people do everything for their own
good and therefore, they do not do something that would entail their
extermination. However, if one determines that the deed is more
important than preserving their own life, they will surely carry it out
without fearing their own death. In substantiation, hundreds of examples
may be found in various movements and revolutions. A living proof of
this is the incident of Karbalā; the Husaynī movement.

Suppose for a minute that the martyrdom of Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) was
not voluntary. What about the actions of each of the martyrs of Karbalā
which would surely entail death? There is no doubt that they preferred
that the Imām (‘a) live a few hours more over their own life. Hence,
each of them threw themselves into the maws of death to extend the
Imām’s life.

This makes it clear that this criticism—that basically no person will
voluntarily perform an action that they know is definitely dangerous—is
unfounded.

In description of the Pharaoh and his people, God, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنفُسُهُمْ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they denied the miracles and invitation of Moses (‘a) even
though they were certain of their truth…”***[^8]

According to the Qur’an, the people of Pharaoh knew of their certain
demise in the case that they continue to deny certainty and disbelieve.
Even so, they still did what they did and were drowned.

Here also, it is obvious that the criticism asking how the Imām (‘a) can
content himself with voluntarily surrendering himself to death depriving
the human world of the blessings of his existence is completely
baseless.

Because, as we have indicated, knowing of the importance of his
martyrdom in relation to continuing his life, the Imām (‘a) preferred
martyrdom. No Shī‘ah, rather no Muslim, and more precisely no reasonable
human being should be ignorant of the awe-inspiring effects of the
Husaynī martyrdom in the Muslim World, especially in the Shī‘ah World,
throughout these nearly fourteen centuries.

Throughout the vast treasury of Islamic jurisprudence, the teachers of
which are the lineage of the Prophet (S) as per the widely transmitted
Hadīth al-Thaqalayn, there is no hadīth related from Sayyid al-Shuhadā’
(‘a).[^9] Indeed, some scholars are quoted to have said that only one
hadīth has been found from him.

This is the product of ten years of Sayyid al-Shuhadā’s (‘a) Imamate!
This clearly indicates that the incrimination ignited during the twenty
year reign of Mu‘āwiyah, generated such a woeful situation for the Holy
Prophet’s (S) family to the extent that the people turned away from
Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a).

Now compare the benefits of the Imām’s (‘a) short life against the
astonishing and enduring effects manifested in the Muslim World
throughout the thirteen hundred years subsequent to his martyrdom, in
order to understand the truth or untruth of the following disputation:
why would the Imām (‘a) divest the Muslim World of his existential
blessings with his martyrdom?

In addition to what has already been said regarding this issue, if there
must be a criticism, it cannot relate to Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) but to
divine decree and pose the question: why should God, the Exalted, from
whom the world must take benefit, decree martyrdom causing his servant’s
blood to spill upon the earth?

Does this criticism—assuming that one does not understand or feel
partial to the previous reply—have any response but to say that God, the
Almighty, is absolutely Wise and performs nothing unwisely and without
benefit?

Like His other decrees, the decree of the Imām’s (‘a) martyrdom is not
without wisdom even assuming the case that we do not understand it and,
even if we do direct this criticism towards the Imām (‘a), this same
answer is relevant because the Imāms (‘a) are manifestations of God’s
Wisdom and they will never perform an unwise or useless deed.

[^1]: It literally means liege of the martyrs and refers to the third
Imām, Husayn ibn ‘Alī. [trans.]

[^2]: Sūrat al-Jinn 72:26-27.

[^3]: This literally means the Guarded Tablet, which is a repository of
all knowledge. [trans.]

[^4]: This means that whatever the Ahl al-Bayt are satisfied with, God
is satisfied with, because their will and satisfaction has faded into
the will and satisfaction of God. [trans.]

[^5]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:195.

[^6]: Cited by Ālūsī in the 26th section of “Tafsīr-i Rūh al-Ma‘ānī”, p.
66, from “Tārīkh-i Ibn al-Wardī” and “Wāfī al-Wafiyyāt”.

[^7]: In full Banī Hāshim, literally Children of Hāshim; he was an
ancestor of the Prophet (S). Specifically, in this verse it refers to
the Prophet and the Imāms. [trans.]

[^8]: Sūrat al-Naml 27:14.

[^9]: The Shī‘ahs cite narrations from Sayyid al-Shuhadā’ (‘a) in
jurisprudential issues. However, they are narrations through other Imāms
such as Imām al-Sādiq, Imām Mūsā ibn Ja‘far, and Imām al-Ridā (‘a). For
instance: عن الصادق عن ابيه عن آبائهم عن علي (ع) وعن النبي (ص). That
which I refuted were narrations that people other than the Imāms cited,
showing consultation of the people.


