Discourse Fourteen: The Purpose of Covenants
============================================

In nonreligious societies, especially so-called advanced civilized ones,
society and social laws have no aim other than to further and better the
enjoyment of material life. Therefore, there is no reason for them to
bind themselves to anything save rules and regulations that can secure
material aims. It is evident that in such environs, spirituality has no
value except to the extent that it is in agreement with the
materialistic values of the people.

For instance, truthfulness, humaneness, kindness, beneficence, valor,
and other moral virtues are only considered useful and necessary when
they further the realization of personal material interests. However, if
moral virtues are not compatible with material benefits, not only are
they considered unnecessary, but it is believed to be necessary to act
in opposition with those virtues.

Authenticity of matter
----------------------

It is for this reason that governments, ruling parties, and official
congresses consider no duty for themselves other than protecting the
interests of the society’s material life. The covenants and treaties
they make are in accordance to prevailing interests and instant
benefits. Their value is determined by the international weight of the
obligor and their power and dominance. Naturally, their continuation
depends on the balance of powers.

However, if one side becomes more powerful, they invalidate the covenant
using fabricated excuses and accusations. They resort to excuses to
preserve the semblance of global laws, the annulment of which would
jeopardize the life of the society or a portion of its vital interests;
otherwise, there would be no problem with repudiation of any treaty
without the least excuse.

Furthermore, lies, betrayal, and transgression against the rights of
others are not an obstacle in measures taken to attain material gain.
Such people do not consider morals and spirituality to have any
authenticity; rather, they are tools they use to realize the aims of the
society, i.e. enjoyment of material life.

With some study of global events, especially international events over
the past century, the value of treaties and covenants, and the reason
for their invalidation becomes clear, giving us substantial evidence for
this claim.

Authenticity of matter and spirit
---------------------------------

On the other hand, Islam neither considers material life to be the true
life of humankind, nor does it consider enjoyment of its benefits to be
true prosperity. It instead considers the true and authentic life of
humans to be the sum of matter and spirit, and true happiness to be in
things that entail the prosperity of both worlds.

An inevitable result of this view is that the laws of life should be
based upon fitrah and genetic make-up and not upon going along with what
people consider to be in their own interests. Another result is that
Islam founds its invitation on adherence to Truth not following the
desires and caprices of the majority, which are based upon inner
feelings and emotions. The Glorious Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set thy face toward the pure religion; it is in accordance with
the nature [fitrah] of God upon which He has formed the nature of
humankind. There is no alteration in the creation of God. This is the
enduring (and true) religion; however, most humans do not know.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the True Religion
to make it supreme over all religions, though idolaters be
averse.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ بَلْ أَتَيْنَاهُم بِالْحَقِّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have sent them Truth…”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ
وَالأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if Truth had followed their caprices, the heavens and the earth
and all in them would surely have been thrown into confusion and
corruption…”***[^4]

This religion necessitates that true beliefs are observed and virtuous
morals and actions are heeded. Also, its teachings must neglect neither
matter nor spirit. It should continually observe human virtues whether
they are to the people’s benefit or their apparent detriment, though it
is certain that except for those who have deviated from the path of
truth and righteousness no harm will come to the society.

It can be seen that the reason God, the Exalted, negated the treaties of
idolaters was that they violated their vows. Even so, by His mercy He
gave them four months reprieve. However, He commands those who kept to
their covenant to persevere and be steadfast in their commitments.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ بَرَاءَةٌ مِنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدتُّم مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ \* فَسِيحُوا فِي الأَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّكُمْ غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللّهِ وَأَنَّ اللّهَ مُخْزِي
الْكَافِرِينَ \*...\* إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ عَاهَدتُّم مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
ثُمَّ لَمْ يَنقُصُوكُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَمْ يُظَاهِرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَحَدًا
فَأَتِمُّوا إِلَيْهِمْ عَهْدَهُمْ إِلَى مُدَّتِهِمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ
يُحِبُّ الْمُتَّقِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(These verses are a declaration of) estrangement from Allah and his
Messenger toward those of the idolaters with whom you made covenant.
Journey freely in the land for four months but know that you cannot
disable Allah. Know that Allah debases the unbelievers… except those of
the idolaters with whom you made covenant who then did not fail you in
anything nor aided anyone against you. Fulfill your treaty with them to
the end of their term. Verily Allah loves the righteous.”***[^5]

At the time, events had demeaned the idolaters and they had become
humble before the magnificence of Islam. Even so, the Prophet asked them
to cancel the covenant if they feared betrayal; however, he commanded
them to publicly announce their choice. When asked why he commanded
thus, he stated: God does not like betrayal.[^6]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:33.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:90.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:71.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:1-2, 4.

[^6]: Extracted from the journal, “Kitāb-e Fasl”.


