Discourse Fifteen: Ijtihad and Taqlid according to the Shi‘ah
=============================================================

**Discourse Fifteen: Juristic Authority [Ijtihād] and Following [Taqlīd]
according to the Shī‘ah**

The words ijtihād and taqlīd, with their opposite meanings (which we
superficially know), are used extensively among Muslims. Of course, in
view of the well-known Shī‘ah law that one cannot initially follow a
deceased authority—which is a Shī‘ah juristic dogma whereby after the
death of a mujtahid (an expounder of Islamic laws) his followers
[muqallidīn] are obliged to follow a living one—these two words are used
by Shī‘ah Muslims more than by other Islamic sects.

In short, nowadays ijtihād and taqlīd are used to mean the qualities of
having jurisprudential authority and of following a person with such
authority, respectively. However, by referring to the history of the
advent of Islam, we see that after the death of the Prophet (S) in the
parlance of the sahābah and tābi‘īn the word ijtihād was used to mean
things other than the common meaning used today.

However, in light of the fact that in this paper I intend to talk about
the currently established meanings of ijtihād and taqlīd and their
religious roots, and due to the fact that determining their other
meanings is historical in nature, I will refrain from discussing the
latter.

The religious origins of ijtihād and taqlīd
-------------------------------------------

In order to understand the comprehensive meaning of ijtihād and taqlīd
and their religious origins, I must note several points:

First of all, in the opinion of the Shī‘ahs, in addition to the fact
that the pure religion of Islam consists of a series of primary
teachings regarding the Origin [mabda’] and Resurrection [ma‘ād] and
other teachings regarding moral principles, it also possesses a string
of rules and regulations regarding human actions that completely cover
all aspects of human life in the society.

These laws obligate all responsible [mukallaf] persons—including the
black, white, Arabs, non-Arabs, men, and women in all possible
environments and conditions—to conform their personal and social
behavior to said laws and to adhere to them, the entirety of which is
called the sharī‘ah.

Of course, no action can be collated to its respective law before the
law is scientifically analyzed and understood. This is why acquiring
knowledge of the scientific laws and secondary decrees of Islam is one
of the duties of Muslims. This is both proven by intellectual reasoning
and verified by statements from the Book [kitāb] and Tradition
[sunnah].[^1]

Secondly, in view of the fact that religious statements in the Book and
Tradition are general and limited, and that there are an unlimited
number of actions and events that make up problematic areas, in order to
realize the details of religious decrees there is no way but
ratiocination [istidlāl]. It is clear to us that no other way has been
shown in religious statements.

Here it becomes evident that in order to discern religious
responsibilities, we must tread the path followed by intellectuals of
the society in extracting personal and social responsibilities from
general, specific, and normal commandments. Stated concisely, a series
of specific rules must be utilized in order to deduce canonical duties
and precepts from religious statements.

One who researches narrations of the Imāms will observe many cases where
they engage in debate with sahābah, other followers, or their opposers
whereby they deduce canonical precepts from the Book of Allah and
Traditions of the Prophet (S) in the standard way. This is the meaning
of ijtihād used in modern speech.

Therefore, ijtihād can be defined as gathering precepts of the sharī‘ah
from religious statements through logical reasoning and a specific set
of techniques—the formulae of religious jurisprudence.

Hence, one of the duties Islam charges upon the Muslim society is
scientific determination of religious precepts through ijtihād. Clearly,
not all Muslims are able to take up this duty and only a select number
can become specialists and carry out this charge—obtainment of Islamic
precepts through study of religious statements utilizing logical
reasoning and rules of inference.

The facts that not all people can employ ijtihād to discern precepts and
that all people are obliged to learn religious precepts necessitate that
Islam gives those who are not able to perform ijtihād another duty. That
is, they receive religious precepts required by their circumstances from
individuals proficient in ijtihād and deduction. This is the meaning of
the frequently used term taqlīd.

The best reason justifying the precept of taqlīd regarding the
uninformed is the ongoing practice among Muslims that has existed from
the advent of Islam until today. Those who did not have the ability of
ijtihād and were unable to directly use the deductive sciences to attain
canonical precepts always referred to jurists and reliable scholars to
learn religious issues relevant to their state of affairs.

Besides, there are proofs in the Book and Tradition that attest to the
necessity of taqlīd by the uninformed such as Qur’anic verses that
enjoin the unlearned to follow the knowledgeable and narrations that
discuss taqlīd or encourage some disciples to proclaim religious decrees
[fatwā] and similar statements that explicitly or implicitly speak about
the issue of taqlīd.

Taqlīd due to inability or lack of opportunity to specialize in deduction
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The foregoing discussion made clear the meaning of ijtihād and taqlīd
and their religious origins. However, after a more circumspect and deep
consideration, one will realize that these concepts possess roots even
deeper. Following the path of ijtihād or taqlīd is in fact one of the
most basic elements of life, so where a person knows he is unable to
perform ijtihād, he has recourse to taqlīd.

Therefore, the dictates of ijtihād and taqlīd in Islam are guidance for
the people towards the course demonstrated in the human fitrah.

In explanation, like other general types that exist in the world of
creation, humankind has a purpose in accordance to its existential
make-up and in line with this objective it is equipped with a specific
set of abilities and mechanisms. Using these faculties, they endeavor to
maintain their lives and attain their perfectionistic purpose.

The human struggle to achieve life aims is a voluntary activity
emanating from human-specific thought. Humans understand the situation
of the world, events they encounter, and the matter upon which they
work. They weigh the good and evil, the benefit and harm, the dos and
don’ts of the actions and endeavors from which they expect facility.
After they discover an endeavor corresponding to their life aims and
mark it “this must be done”, they begin the act.

Through our God-given nature, humans grasp that until we understand the
causes and factors or the prerequisites and effects of something, we
will not judge it as real and also, until we reckon the factors and
means or the effects and benefits of an act, we will not engage in that
act.

We directly perceive within ourselves that every phenomenon and event in
existence manifests in one of our senses.

We even seek the causes of the smallest sound we might hear. Whatever we
intend to do, we first consider—at times comprehensively at others
briefly—the reason behind our action, even if we are ignorant of the
reason, we at least bear in mind the benefits of the act. Finally, as
regards this intellectual discernment, we carry out a cognitive activity
on causes and benefits. This mental activity or investigation is what is
scientifically called deduction [istidlāl].

Hence, through our God-given nature and genetic actuality humans are
deductive beings and naturally make use of deduction both in scientific
theories and in practical applications.

It is a fact that the theoretical knowledge and scientific needs of
humans are without bounds and no normal human individual can ever
enumerate them all much less give them a comprehensive deductive
treatment and independently reason about the truth or falseness and the
good or evil in them.

Of course, this is one of the things that naturally draw human
individuals to form civilized communities and distribute vital
activities among members.

Appreciation of this truth (imperatively) compels each human to take up
deduction and scientific discernment—i.e. ijtihād—in areas of life in
which they possess a certain extent of skill and proficiency.

On the other hand, with regard to other aspects in which they are not
skilled, they must follow trustworthy specialists in whom they have
confidence and thus deem the expert’s scientific determination as their
own. In other words, they must conform their actions to the expert’s
view and in effect imitate them [taqlīd].

If we want to do something and do not know how, we consult an authority
in that discipline. If we want to enter a profession, we ask how to do
so from a professional in that field. If we want to learn a craft we
become an apprentice of an experienced master craftsman. We seek cures
from doctors and expect house plans from an architect. In essence, the
structure of public education and instruction in human societies is
based upon this fundamental principle.

It is concluded from the foregoing discussion that:

First, the issues of ijtihād and taqlīd constitute the most general,
basic and vital issues of humankind. Every human entering the society
has no alternative but to accept the approach of ijtihād and taqlīd.

Second, individuals perform ijtihād in only a small portion of their
lives and progress in other spheres of existence—which cover the greater
proportion of life—by means of taqlīd. Indeed, those who think they have
never been subjected to taqlīd and never will are deluding themselves
with a false and amusing notion.

Third, according to fitrah and common sense, taqlīd is necessary only in
cases where a person is ignorant and is not able to judge and
intellectually research the matter and where a competent authority—i.e.
an expert that can be trusted—exists; otherwise, taqlīd is reproachable.

In further explanation of the first conclusion—that ijtihād and taqlīd
are fitrī—I should say:

As the clear and frequent statements of the Book and Tradition show,
Islam is the religion of fitrah (nature) that invites humanity towards a
series of vital issues that are indeed also pointed out by the God-given
human make-up and fitrah. In His heavenly book, the Exalted God
declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So with moderation and resolve welcome and accept the religion that
is congruous with the special human genesis. Because genesis is
invariable—and stabilizes the religion based upon it. This is the
religion that can govern the people and lead them to prosperity…”***[^2]

Considering that ijtihād and taqlīd are fundamental fitrī issues, the
holy religion of Islam, which invites towards primeval fitrah, also
invites towards these concepts.

The opposition to blind imitation
---------------------------------

In the end, I must point out that the taqlīd I am talking about is
different from the taqlīd that implies blind imitation and mindless
following, something that Islam opposes with all its might.

The Holy Qur’an describes this type of taqlīd as one of the basest and
most censurable of human qualities and regards those who unconditionally
and illogically employ taqlīd and follow their ancestors, great
personages, or capricious persons to be like animals because they do not
utilize their cogitative minds. In this case, their human quality, the
fitrah of reason and curiosity, is ravaged.[^3] The following holy
verses accentuate this point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى مَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ وَإِلَى
الرَّسُولِ قَالُوا حَسْبُنَا مَا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءنَا أَوَلَوْ
كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ شَيْئًا وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when it is said to them, ‘Come towards what Allah has revealed
and towards the Prophet.’ They reply, ‘Suffices us that which we
discovered from our fathers.’ Do they follow their fathers even though
they knew naught and were not guided?”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... قَالُوا بَلْ نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءنَا
أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ \*
وَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لاَ
يَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ دُعَاء وَنِدَاء صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لاَ
يَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They reply, ‘No, we will follow that which we discovered from our
fathers.’ Do they follow their fathers even though they were void of
knowledge and guidance? A person who invites these disbelievers is like
a person who calls upon animals who perceive naught of the invitation
save its sound. They have become deaf, dumb, and blind and thus do not
understand nor think.”***[^5]

[^1]: The intellectual reason is that doubtless if a person does not
know about something, doing it is beyond their ability and logically
there is no duty in the absence of capacity. Hence, the commands and
injunctions that confirm our religious responsibilities also confirm the
necessity to learn about them. This matter is also substantiated by
Qur’anic verses that rescind obligation from those who are incapable of
performing them such as: ﴿ لاَ يُكَلِّفُ اللّهُ نَفْسًا إِلاَّ
وُسْعَهَا... ﴾ “Allah does not charge a soul more than it can bear…”
(Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:286) ﴿ إِلاَّ الْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ
وَالنِّسَاء وَالْوِلْدَانِ لاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ حِيلَةً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ
سَبِيلاً... ﴾ “Except for the weak among men, women, and children who
have been divested of their ability and cannot…” (Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:98) ﴿
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَظْلِمُ النَّاسَ شَيْئًا... ﴾ “Surely, Allah will not
wrong people in the slightest…” (Sūrat Yūnus 10:44) And verses
indicating that calling to account depends upon adequate notification of
the individual such as: ﴿ ... لِئَلاَّ يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَى اللّهِ
حُجَّةٌ... ﴾ “That the people might have no argument against Allah…”
(Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:165) There are also many narrations that acquit
uninformed wrongdoers exempt of blame. These verses and narrations
entail the requirement of learning one’s duties. A famous saying of the
Prophet (S) is that, “Seeking knowledge is an obligation for all
Muslims.” Furthermore, Shaykh Mufīd quotes the sixth Imām as saying,
“God, the Exalted, will ask His servants on the Day of Judgment, ‘Did
you know?’ If they answer, ‘Yes’, He will ask, ‘Why did you not act
according to what you knew?’ On the other hand, if they answer, ‘I did
not know.’ He will ask, ‘Why did you not learn so you could act
accordingly?’ Thus, He condemns His servant and this is the meaning of
‘hujjat al-bālighah’ in the following verse: ﴿ ... فَلِلّهِ الْحُجَّةُ
الْبَالِغَةُ... ﴾ “So for Allah is the conclusive argument…” (Sūrat
al-An‘ām 6:149)

[^2]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^3]: Extracted from a discussion regarding religious authority
[marja‘iyyah] and the clergy [rawhāniyyah].

[^4]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:104.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:170-171.


