Discourse Sixteen: A Short Study of Christ and the Gospel
=========================================================

Even though Jews attach great importance to their national history and
recording of events that occur throughout their lives, there is no
mention of Jesus Jesus, the conditions of his birth and appearance as a
prophet, his lifestyle, and the miracles God manifested through him. As
to what caused this chronicle to be hidden from them or what caused them
to hide it, is not clear.

Regarding the Jewish people, the Holy Qur’an declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَقَوْلِهِمْ عَلَى مَرْيَمَ بُهْتَانًا عَظِيمًا \* وَقَوْلِهِمْ
إِنَّا قَتَلْنَا الْمَسِيحَ عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ رَسُولَ اللّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that they uttered against Mary a tremendous calumny and that
they said, ‘We killed the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, the prophet of
Allah’…”***[^1]

Was the evidence for this claim a story they cited without support of
any historical book—just as other nations have many both true and
mythical stories that are not considered creditable without correct and
reliable evidence—or had they heard the name of Jesus and his birth and
appearance from Christians then slandered Mary and claimed to have
killed Jesus?

There is no way to arrive at a clear answer without resorting to the
fact that the Noble Qur’an only explicitly attributes the claim of
killing the Messiah to them. It also notes that they had doubts and
disagreements among themselves in this regard.

On the other hand, what Christians believe about the Messiah, the
Gospel, and the good news [bishārat] is based on the New Testament, that
is Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the Acts of Prophets, and other books such
as Paul, Peter, Jacob, and Judas. The authority of all of these is based
upon that of the Gospels therefore I will discuss the latter.

Writers of the Four Gospels
---------------------------

The gospel of Matthew is the oldest written; composed in 38 CE according
to some. Others, however, maintain that it dates between 50 to 60
CE.[^2] Even so, it was clearly written after the time of Jesus Jesus
(‘a). Researchers hold that it was originally written in Hebrew then
translated into Greek and other languages. The original Hebrew text is
not available and its translator and the quality of its translation are
unknown.[^3]

Mark, the author of another of the Gospels, was a student of Peter. He
was not one of the Apostles himself. It is said that he wrote his gospel
at the behest of his mentor.

He did not believe in the divinity of the Messiah. That is why some
Christians say that he wrote his gospel for nomads and peasants
introducing the Messiah as a prophet and conveyor of God’s precepts.[^4]
Regardless, Mark’s gospel was written in 61 CE.

Luke, who wrote yet another of the Gospels, was neither an apostle nor
had he met the Messiah. Paul had converted him to Christianity. Paul was
a zealous Jew who greatly harassed the followers of Jesus. One day he
suddenly claimed to have suffered an epileptic fit wherein he touched
Jesus Jesus, who prohibited him against persecuting his followers. He
converted to Jesus’ faith and started to proselytize the gospel in the
Messiah’s name.

It was Paul that established the prevailing foundations of Christianity
and based his teachings on the idea that faith in the Messiah alone
without any good deeds is enough for the deliverance of humanity.

He also permitted eating dead meat and the meat of pigs! He also
considered circumcision and many other precepts from the Torah to be
forbidden. The gospel of Luke was written after the gospel of Mark and
the death of Paul and Peter. Some emphasize that this gospel did not
come as divine revelation and the words at the beginning of this book
indicate this fact.

John, author of the fourth gospel, was according to some accounts the
son of a fisherman, one of the twelve Apostles of the Messiah, and
greatly loved by him.

It is said that because Sharintus, Ebisun, and their followers believed
that Jesus was a creation of God and his existence did not precede that
of his mother, the bishops of Asia and others went to John in 96 CE and
asked him to write that which others had not written in their gospels.
In other words, they asked him to explain the divinity of the Messiah
and he could not deny them their request.[^5]

There is disagreement as to the date John’s gospel was written; whether
it was in 65, 96, or 98 CE. However, some profess that its author was
not even John, the Apostle. Some of these believe it was written by a
student of the Alexandrian School.[^6]

Others however, believe that it and the other books of John were written
by a Christian in the second century of the Common Era who attributed
these books to John, the Apostle, to give them credibility. Still others
maintain that the gospel of John originally had twenty chapters and
after his death, the Church of Afās added the twenty-first chapter.

These are the conditions of the Four Gospels that go back to seven
persons (Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, Paul, and Judas) and their
ultimate credibility is based on the Four Gospels, ending in the gospel
of Matthew, the oldest of the Gospels. As we previously mentioned, the
original Gospels were originally written in Hebrew and are currently
unavailable. It is not clear who translated them or whether the
teachings of the original were based on the prophethood of Jesus or his
divinity?!

The current bible states that among the Children of Israel a man named
Jesus, son of Joseph the carpenter, appeared who invited the people to
God. He held that he was the son of God and was created without having a
human father and that his father had sent him to be crucified in
reciprocation for the sins of the people.

He brought back the dead, cured congenital blindness and leprosy, and
healed the mad by exorcizing the evil spirits within them. Jesus had
twelve students, one of which was Matthew. He gave them blessings and
sent them to invite the people and promote Christianity…

This is a summary of the Christianity that has enveloped the East and
West of the world. As you can see, its foundation is an isolated report
from someone (refers to the translator of Matthew) who neither his name
nor characteristics are known!

This astounding weakness in the origin of the story has caused some
European writers to say that the Messiah is basically a mythical
character created by religious revolutions in favor of or against the
government of the time!

This is confirmed by another myth that is similar to it in every way:
that of Krishna. The ancient idolaters of India considered him the son
of God who descended from the divine realm to be hanged in this world
and in this way sacrifice his life for the people and save them from
their sins.

It has also caused another series of critics to believe that there were
two people with the name Messiah with more than five centuries between
them and that the reputed Christian era conforms to neither. Rather, the
first Messiah was born over two hundred years before the starting point
of this era, lived around sixty years, and died without being crucified.
On the other hand, the second Messiah was born after 290 CE, lived for
nearly thirty-three years, and was crucified.

It should be noted that, in short, Christians do not deny that the
starting point of the Christian era does not conform to the birth of
Christ (refer to “Qāmūs-e Kitāb-e Muqaddas” (Dictionary of the Holy
Book)).

In addition to what has been said, there are other dubious issues. For
instance, in the first two centuries of the Common Era many gospels were
written; reputedly over one hundred. The Four Gospels are among these.
Later, the Church banned the other gospels and authorized only these
Four Gospels which were in line with its teachings.

One of these abandoned gospels is the Gospel of Barnabas. A suspected
copy of it was found several years ago and was translated to Arabic and
then Farsi. That which has been written in this account about the story
of Jesus (‘a) is congruous with the Noble Qur’an.[^7]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:156-157.

[^2]: Refer to “Qāmūs-e Kitāb-e Muqaddas” (Dictionary of the Holy Book).

[^3]: Refer to “Mīzān al-Haqq” (Criterion of Truth). “Qāmūs-e Kitāb-e
Muqaddas” (Dictionary of the Holy Book) also hesitantly confesses to
this.

[^4]: In “Qāmūs-e Kitāb-e Muqaddas” (Dictionary of the Holy Book), it
says (regard carefully): “It has been expressly cited of the ancients
that Mark wrote his gospel in Rome and it was published after the death
of Peter and Paul. However, this is not very credible because it appears
that it was written for tribals and villagers not for city-dwellers
especially inhabitants of Rome.”

[^5]: Cited in “Qisas al-Anbīyā’” (Stories of the Prophets) from the
book of Gorges Zadīn Futūhī Lubnānī.

[^6]: Cited from “Catholic Herald”; this is also indicated in “Qāmūs-e
Kitāb-e Muqaddas” (Dictionary of the Holy Book) under the heading
Yūhannā (John).

[^7]: Extracted from the yearbook, “Ma‘ārif-e Ja‘farī”.


