Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

The invaluable legacy of the Household [Ahl al-Bayt] of the Prophet (may
peace be upon them all), as preserved by their followers, is a
comprehensive school of thought that embraces all branches of Islamic
knowledge. This school has produced many brilliant scholars who have
drawn inspiration from this rich and pure resource.

It has given many scholars to the Muslim ummah who, following in the
footsteps of Imāms of the Prophet’s Household (‘a), have done their best
to clear up the doubts raised by various creeds and currents within and
without Muslim society and to answer their questions. Throughout the
past centuries, they have given well-reasoned answers and clarifications
concerning these questions and doubts.

To meet the responsibilities assigned to it, the Ahl al-Bayt World
Assembly (ABWA) has embarked on a defense of the sanctity of the Islamic
message and its verities, often obscured by the partisans of various
sects and creeds as well as by currents hostile to Islam. The Assembly
follows in the footsteps of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the disciples of
their school of thought in its readiness to confront these challenges
and tries to be on the frontline in consonance with the demands of every
age.

The arguments contained in the works of the scholars belonging to the
School of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are of unique significance. That is
because they are based on genuine scholarship and appeal to reason, and
avoid prejudice and bias. These arguments address scholars and thinkers
in a manner that appeals to healthy minds and wholesome human nature.

To assist the seekers of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly has
endeavored to present a new phase of these arguments contained in the
studies and translations of the works of contemporary Shī‘ah writers and
those who have embraced this sublime school of thought through divine
blessing.

The Assembly is also engaged in edition and publication of the valuable
works of leading Shī‘ah scholars of earlier ages to assist the seekers
of the truth in discovering the truths which the School of the Prophet’s
Household (‘a) has offered to the entire world.

The Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly looks forward to benefit from the
opinions of the readers and their suggestions and constructive criticism
in this area.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist us
in propagating the genuine Islamic teachings as preached by the Prophet
Muhammad (S).

We beseech God, the Most High, to accept our humble efforts and to
enable us to enhance them under the auspices of Imām al-Mahdī, His
vicegerent on the earth (may Allah expedite his advent).

We express our gratitude to ‘Allāmah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabātabā’ī
(may Allah’s mercy be upon him), the author of the present book, and Mr.
Abū Dharr Ahmadī, its translator. We also thank our colleagues who have
participated in producing this work, especially the staff of the
Translation Office.

Cultural Affairs Department

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly


