Discourse Seventeen: Adherence to Superstitions
===============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّبِعُوا مَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ قَالُوا بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءنَا أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ
لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ \* وَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لاَ يَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ دُعَاء
وَنِدَاء صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when it is said to them, ‘Follow that which Allah has sent
down.’ they reply, ‘We will follow that which we discovered from our
fathers.’ Do they follow their fathers even though they were void of
knowledge and guidance? The likeness of disbelievers (in hearing the
truth) is the likeness of a person who is called upon but perceives
naught save shouting and yelling. They are deaf, dumb, and blind and are
void of reason.”***[^1]

The beliefs of humans are of two types:

Theoretical views and beliefs which without an intermediary are
unrelated to action, such as mathematics and the supernatural.

Practical views and beliefs which are linked to action without the need
for intermediaries, such as principles regarding proper behavior.

The way to attain the first type is to follow knowledge and certainty
which lead to proof or ‘feeling’. Regarding the second, the means is to
adhere to things that lead to a goodness, which either entails human
prosperity or promotes it, and also to abstain from things that either
lead to adversity or harm prosperity.

Belief in the truth of something that one has no knowledge of (in the
first type) and also belief in something, the good or evil of which is
indeterminate (in the second type) are called superstitious beliefs.

Indeed, humans are lead by their fitrah. Fitrah examines the causes of
phenomena and encourages humans to follow the path leading to their true
perfection. In accordance with this principle, humans do not humble
themselves before a superstitious view that has been adopted through
blindness and ignorance. It is the case though that feelings and
emotions aroused by imagination are many and can cause a person to
believe in superstitions. The majority of these feelings consist of fear
and hope.

Imagination depicts mental forms linked with fear or hope. These
feelings preserve their related forms and do not let them become
concealed from the fearful or hopeful self.

For instance, if a person is stuck alone and friendless in the middle of
an eerie wasteland on a gloomy night, unable to see, devoid of any
refuge in which to calm their heart and become safe, bereft of a torch
with which to discern danger from safety, imagination will enter the
field and turn every shadow into a fearsome monster that intends to kill
them or a ghost that is in no way real!

The imagined shadow moves, it comes and goes, it flies into the air and
dives back down to the earth, metamorphosing into various shapes and
figures. Whenever the person is afraid, the fantasy of that mysterious
shadow is repeated. This state might be transferred to another person,
creating within them a mood similar to the previous person’s. It will
gradually spread even though it is a superstition entirely unfounded in
truth.

Is there anything beyond the senses and experience?
---------------------------------------------------

From the most ancient of times until today, humankind has been afflicted
by superstitious beliefs. Some believe that superstitions are a quality
of Easterners however this is not true. Even if Westerners are not more
superstitious than Easterners, at least, they also have superstitious
beliefs like the people of the East.

Scientists and scholars have continually used delicate stratagems to
erase the vestiges of these superstitions integrated deep in the souls
of the masses and awaken them and make them aware. However, this is a
sickness that has exhausted its doctor.

Humans are not free of imitation in theoretical views and pure knowledge
and also possess feelings and emotions. I am sorry to inform readers
that until today scientists have been unsuccessful in remedying this
illness.

Strangest of all is the view that modern civilized people and natural
scientists have regarding this matter. They say that modern knowledge is
based upon the senses and experience and refutes all else.

Civilization and advancement have based themselves upon evolution of the
society: the society must attain perfection to the utmost extent
possible and in every conceivable aspect. They have based their
education on this premise.

This is a very strange statement which is itself adhering to
superstitions! This is because natural sciences only speak of the
features of nature and prove the existence of these features within
natural fields. To state matters differently, materialistic sciences
only unveil the secrets of matter; however, they cannot deny the
supernatural.

Therefore, if someone comes to believe that something that cannot be
experienced and sensed does not exist, their belief is without basis and
the most obvious of superstitions. The same is true of civilization
since its structure is based upon attaining the aforesaid perfection.

This perfection and progress towards social prosperity sometimes
necessitates that some people be deprived of individual prosperity.

For example, in order to defend their country, law, or beliefs some
people endure death and sacrifice and are thus divested of individual
prosperity to preserve the society. No human endures these deprivations
save in order to attain perfection and on the basis that they believe
that these acts entail perfection. However, the truth is contrary to
this.

These are not perfection but divestment and loss. Even if there are
perfections here, they pertain to the society not the individual in the
sense that the society is a society (without regard to individuals
rather to the identity of the society which is an identity at variance
with individual identity) whereas humans want the society not for its
sake but for their own!

It is based on this premise that the leaders of these societies plan
schemes regarding their people and inculcate in them that humans leave a
lasting glorious name for themselves—in other words, they attain
everlasting life. This is a superstition. After annihilation what life
is there left? This is nothing but a designation. Do we have to unduly
name it life?! It is an empty designation that has nothing behind its
façade.

This statement is like saying that humans must endure the bitterness of
law and have patience regarding privations keeping them from their
heart’s desires so that the society may persevere and that it may attain
perfection in its perpetual life.

A person who says this believes that the perfection of the society is
his own perfection. This is a superstitious statement since the
perfection of the society is the perfection of individuals only when
they coincide (not when the individual is completely annihilated). If
this perfection does not concur with that of the individual and does not
convey him to perfection, it is not the perfection of the individual.

If through oppression and persecution a person or nation is able to
attain their every wish and desire without any power opposing them
dominating the entire world, will they believe that the perfection of
the society is their own preserving their glorious name?! Never!
Powerful nations aim at exploiting the people of weak nations!

You will find no place but that they saunter there! There is nothing
that they want that they will not strive to attain. There is no person
or nation that they do not make their slave. Is this approach anything
other than curing a chronic disease by destroying the patient?

The path set forth by the Glorious Qur’an in this matter is as follows:

In theoretical views it commands humans to follow that which God has
revealed. No one has the right to say even one word without knowledge.

In practical aspects it commands that people seek out actions that are
approved by God, the Exalted, and abide by Him. If the act conforms to
one’s heart’s desires, it will entail prosperity of both this world and
the next and if it necessitates privation from one’s desires, the
Almighty Lord will give a great reward:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“However, that which is with Allah is better and more
enduring…”***[^2]

Is following religion imitation?
--------------------------------

Materialists say that adhering to religion is imitation and science
prohibits imitation. They also say that religion is superstition
remaining from the second age of human life. They have divided human
life into four ages:

The Age of Myths

The Age of Religion

The Age of Philosophy

The Age of Science

This statement is not based on science and is itself a superstitious
view. The answer to the statement that following religion is imitation
is that: religion is a series of teachings pertaining to the Origin
[mabda’] and Resurrection [ma‘ād] and a string of social, devotional,
and behavioral laws that have all been received though divine revelation
and prophets.

The truth of revelation and prophethood has been proved with logical
rationales.

Reports imparted by a truthful person are true and following them is
following knowledge. This is because our premise is that we have
attained knowledge through logical rationale that the reporter is
truthful. It is strange that the people who say this have no life
standards or social methods of food, clothing, drink, marriage,
dwelling, etc. except imitation and adherence to desires and caprices;
blind imitation and following inconsistent standards.

It is interesting that they have created a different name for
‘imitation’—adherence to that which the advanced world approves.

In this manner, the name of imitation has been wiped away but its
practice has endured. The word imitation has become an alien and
unfamiliar term but its essence is well-known. The motto that ‘When in
Rome, do as the Romans do’ is considered a scientific one that has
brought about the advancement of civilization but the following slogan
is considered a religious imitation and a superstitious statement!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... لاَ تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَى فَيُضِلَّكَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not follow caprices and desires because they will debar you from
the path of Allah…”***[^3]

Hence, religion springs from the source of divine revelation and
knowledge and is completely scientific. However, the conduct of the
civilized world is exactly the opposite and entirely imitation. Their
classification of the course of human life into four ages is repudiated
by the history of religion and philosophy which has been available since
the advent of Abraham’s (‘a) religion, after the era of the philosophies
of India, Egypt, and Chaldea.

The religion of Jesus (‘a) came after the philosophy of Greece. The
religion of Muhammad (S), Islam, came after the philosophies of Greece
and Alexandria. In short, the final climax of philosophy occurred before
that of religion and I have mentioned before that the era of
monotheistic religion has precedence over that of all other religions.

The classification of the Holy Qur’an regarding human history is as
follows:

The age of naivety

The age of unification of nations

The age of senses [hiss] and matter [māddah][^4]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:170-171.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Qisas 28:60.

[^3]: Sūrat Sād 38:26.

[^4]: Extracted from the newspaper, “Wazīfah”, issue 127.


