Discourse Eighteen: Are Dreams True?
====================================

The natural scientists of Europe do not believe that dreams can be true
and do not consider their relationship with external events to have
scientific weight barring a few psychologists that have done research on
the matter and use dreams that uncover hidden truths or reports of
future events which cannot be considered accidental as rationales
against the opposition.

What does the Qur’an say?
-------------------------

In the Glorious Qur’an dreams of prophets and other people have been
cited and substantiated. Among these are the dreams of Prophet Abraham
(‘a) regarding the sacrifice of Ishmael, of Prophet Joseph (‘a) and his
fellow prisoners of Egypt’s sovereign, and of the Holy Prophet (S)
regarding the conquest of Mecca. There is also evidence in narrations
cited from the Holy Prophet (S) and Imāms (‘a).

We have all either had dreams that indicated hidden matters, resolved
scientific problems, or divulged future events ourselves or heard of
them from others. These dreams, especially clear dreams that do not
require interpretation, cannot be considered accidental and completely
unrelated to the situation to which they conform.

Of course, it cannot be denied that various internal factors such as
diseases, health conditions, fatigue, or a stuffed stomach, and also
external ones such as heat, cold, etc. can affect the imagination which
in turn affects dreams.

For instance, a person who was exposed to extreme heat or cold might
dream of blazing fires or ice and snow; or a person who has an engorged
stomach or indigestion might have disturbing or incoherent dreams.

A person’s inner qualities and principles of behavior also have
influences on dreams. As such, most dreams are the result of
imaginations caused by external and internal factors and in truth
indicate the effects of these factors. Natural scientists have mostly
researched these factors whereby they conclude that dreams have no
truth. However, just as we cannot deny the effect of these factors, we
also cannot deny the verity of some dreams and their relationship with
external affairs.

Is the soul linked to dreams?
-----------------------------

It is not possible to say that the soul of a person who dreams of the
occurrence of a specific event at a specific time has connected to an
event that has not yet come into being because existential association
between an existent and non-existent is impossible.

Moreover, we cannot say regarding a person who dreams that a certain
vessel is buried in a specific place containing a certain amount of gold
and silver coins and after waking up goes there and recovers it that
their soul has connected to that vessel because the contact of the soul
with material things occurs through the senses and a vessel that is
buried under the earth cannot be sensed. That is why it is said that the
connection of the soul to these events and phenomena is through their
causes.

By way of explanation, the world of existence incorporates three worlds:

The natural world [‘ālam-e tabī‘at] with which we are familiar;

The ideational world [‘ālam-e mithāl]: the existential status of this
world is above that of the natural world. Beings residing in this world
are forms devoid of matter and they are causational in relation to
material beings.

The intellectual world [‘ālam-e ‘aql]: This world is superior to the
ideational world. It is where the truth of all beings exist free of both
matter and form and are causational in relation to beings of the
ideational world.

Because of its abstraction, the human soul is in the same class with
supernatural phenomena. In sleep, a time when it is not engaged in
sensory perception, it naturally returns to the world to which it
belongs and apprehends truths from that world in accordance to its
abilities.

The perfect soul, which possesses the faculty to perceive intellectual
abstractions as such, apprehends causes as generalities. However, a soul
that has not attained that level of perfection perceives general truths
as discrete forms.

Just as we describe speed with a fast object and immensity with a
mountain, a soul that has yet to attain intellectual abstraction, thus
remaining in the ideational world, sometimes observes the causes of
phenomena in the ideational world in its real form without alteration.
These are the clear dreams that are usually seen by the people of truth
and purity.

They sometimes perceive ideational beings in forms that they are
familiar with, just as they see knowledge as light and ignorance as
darkness. The mind might even transfer from one meaning to a
contradicting one.

One such dream is cited as follows: a man went to Ibn Sīrīn, the famous
interpreter of dreams, and said, “I dreamed that I held a seal with
which I sealed the mouths and privates of the people.” Ibn Sīrīn said,
“You will become a caller of adhān [mu’adhdhin], the people will fast by
your adhān, abstaining from eating and marital relations.”

Clear and unclear dreams
------------------------

In accordance to what has been said, dreams are of either two types:
clear dreams which have not been altered by the dreaming soul and do not
require interpretation, and unclear dreams in which the soul alters what
it perceives and therefore require interpretation and restoration of the
mental form to its true and primary status, such as interpreting light
as knowledge and darkness as ignorance and bewilderment.

Non-vivid dreams are also divided into two categories: dreams with a
coherent story and transitions and can easily be interpreted, such as
the previous example, and dreams wherein the soul has made complex and
vague alterations. Understanding the original observation of the soul in
the latter case is difficult or even impossible for dream interpreters.
Such dreams are termed muddled dreams [adghāth ahlām] and considered
nonsensical and uninterpretable.

This was a summary of what scholars of the soul state about dreams that
is also supported by the Noble Qur’an. For instance, the return of the
soul to the supernatural realm in sleep can be understood from the
following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who takes your souls by night…”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الأَنْفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ
فِي مَنَامِهَا فَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَى عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ وَيُرْسِلُ
الأُخْرَى... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah takes the souls when they die and also those that have not
died He takes in their sleep; He keeps those whose deaths have been
decreed and sends back the rest…”***[^2]

The surface meaning of these verses is that the soul is taken from the
body when sleeping losing its attachment to the five senses, and it
returns to the Lord—a return similar to death.

There are also indications of the three types of dreams. For instance,
the dreams of Prophet Abraham (‘a) and the Holy Prophet (S) are of the
first type, the dreams of Joseph’s (S) fellow prisoners are of the
second type, and it also speaks of complex and vague dreams where the
Egyptian dream interpreters of considered the dream of the pharaoh as a
muddled dream [adghāth ahlām].[^3] 

[^1]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:60.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:42.

[^3]: Extracted from the journal, “Kitāb-e Fasl”.


