Discourse Twenty-One: Clarity, Ambiguity, and Interpretation in the Qur’an
==========================================================================

**Discourse Twenty-One: Clarity, Ambiguity, and Interpretation in the
Qur’an**[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِيَ أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُحْكَمَاتٌ
هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ في
قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاء
الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاء تَأْوِيلِهِ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلاَّ
اللّهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ يَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ
مِنْ عِندِ رَبِّنَا وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلاَّ أُوْلُوا الألْبَابِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who sent down upon thee the Book wherein are clear verses
that are the Mother of the Book and other verses that are ambiguous.
Those in whose hearts is doubt and divergence follow*** ***the
ambiguities in it seeking discord and to interpret them. However, no one
knows their*** ***interpretation save Allah and those who are steadfast
in gaining knowledge. They say we believe in it, all is from our Lord.
Yet none remember save those possessed of minds.”***[^2]

The meaning of these words
--------------------------

Morphologically, the word muhkam (clear) comes from the root hakama
which means an object that nothing can penetrate, take apart, and
destroy. Thus, words such as ahkām, tahkīm, hūkm (meaning judgment),
hikmah (meaning wisdom), and hikmah (meaning harnessing a horse) all
have the meaning of firmness and solidity.

Mutashābih (ambiguous) means things that are similar to each other in
some qualities and aspects.

Ta’wīl (interpretation) means the referral and return of one thing to
another.

The terms muhkam and mutashābih according to the Qur’an
-------------------------------------------------------

In some verses the whole Qur’an is identified as muhkam[^3] and in
others mutashābih[^4]. Also, in verse seven of Surat Āl ‘Imrān some of
the Qur’an is considered muhkam and the rest mutashābih. This same verse
describes muhkam verses as “umm al-kitāb” (Mother of the Book).

It must be noted that the muhkam-ness or solidity of the entire Qur’an
existed before the Book was revealed[^5] and the mutashābih-ness or
similarity of the entire Book means that all its verses have a single
style—they all possess a pleasant order and solid form, describe truths
in a uniform manner, and guide people towards Truth. Thus, here muhkam
and mutashābih possess meanings different from what is usual in the
whole of the Qur’an.

Considering that the prime meaning of umm is the source, referent, and
refuge of objects, the term umm al-kitāb means that the referent (to
understand) mutashābih verses are the muhkam ones. In this verse, muhkam
and mutashābih are opposites. Then, the verse speaks of people whose
hearts have been afflicted with doubt and deviation from Truth and
follow mutashābih verses because they seek discord and ‘interpretation’.

This shows that a mutashābih verse is one the meaning and intent of
which cannot be understood by just listening to it; rather, there is
doubt between various meanings until muhkam verses are referred to and
its meaning is made clear. Hence, a mutashābih verse becomes muhkam by
muhkam verses however a muhkam verse is muhkam in and of itself.

For instance, in verse five of Sūrat Tā Hā (20:5) it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الرَّحْمَنُ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Rahmān (Beneficent) is established upon the Throne.”***

A person who hears this verse will not understand it. However, if, for
instance, they refer to verse eleven of Sūrat al-Shawrā’ (42:11), they
will realize that the meaning of establishment upon the Throne is that
God is predominant over all of existence not that there is a place where
He rests which would necessitate that He be material—which is impossible
for God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is nothing like Him…”***

Another example can be found in Sūrat al-Qiyāmah (75:23):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِلَى رَبِّهَا نَاظِرَةٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Looking towards their Lord.”***

And Sūrat al-An‘ām (6:103):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لاَ تُدْرِكُهُ الأَبْصَارُ وَهُوَ يُدْرِكُ الأَبْصَارَ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Eyes do not perceive Him and He perceives the eyes.”***

By referring the first verse to the second, we understand that the
‘looking’ indicated in the first verse is not physical.

This is also correct for abrogative [nāsikh] and abrogated [mansūkh]
verses. When we refer the abrogated verse to the abrogative one we
realize that the abrogated verse comprised a precept that was only
applicable until the nāsikh was revealed.[^6]

Mutashābih verses indicate a specific intent
--------------------------------------------

A person who carefully studies the whole Qur’an will without doubt not
even find one verse lacking signification and explanation.

There is no verse that does not indicate its signification. This
signification may either be a single one that a person who is familiar
with the discourse will understand or several which may be mistaken with
each other. Even so, all these meanings together certainly cover a true
and real meaning and intent, otherwise there would be no signification.

This true meaning is not a stranger to the obvious principles of the
Qur’an such as existence of the Creator, monotheism, appointment of
prophets, canonization of precepts, and so on. It is harmonious with
these principles which necessitate and entail that specific meaning.
Among all the possible significations, it clarifies a truth. Some verses
elucidate others and some verses are the root and source of others.

An attentive person who examines the verse we are discussing (3:7) will
have no doubt that muhkamāt are verses that comprise clear and certain
Qur’anic principles and mutashābihāt are verses whose meanings are made
clear using those principles.

Why are some verses mutashābih?
-------------------------------

Some might say: true, subsidiaries must be applied to principles and
this is not specific to the Qur’an but this does not necessitate that
the Qur’an has mutashābih.

In answer I must say that the reason for mutashābih in the Qur’an is
twofold. There are two types of knowledge imparted in the Qur’an:

The first type consists of divine teachings that are beyond the domain
of matter and the senses. However, normal intellects halt here and are
in doubt as to whether the meaning is physical. For instance, in Sūrat
al-Fajr (89:14, 22) it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily your Lord lies in ambush.”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord came…”***

These statements are fashioned for a mind that is familiar with
tangibles, and the verses seem to signify physical properties. However,
when we refer to related principles which repudiate matter and
corporeality in such matters, the initial (physical) meaning is removed
from the mind.

This pertains to all non-material and transcendent knowledge and it is
not specific to the Holy Qur’an. This method is common in other divine
books in teachings that have not been altered or distorted and also in
theological discussions in philosophy. The Qur’an indicates this where
it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاءَ فَسَالَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِهَا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He sent down water from the sky that flowed in every channel to the
extent of its capacity…”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهُ قُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ \*
وَإِنَّهُ فِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ لَدَيْنَا لَعَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily We have made the Qur’an an Arabic book that you may
understand and it is with Us in the Mother of the Book, high in dignity
and correct in foundation.”***[^8]

As you can see these verses make it clear that the Qur’anic wisdom is
highly exalted. Even so, every individual understands it differently and
to a certain extent. Thus are the mutashābih verses of the Qur’an. The
fault comes from the reader not the words of God.

The second type is comprised of matters related to social norms and
subsidiary precepts. This type also encompasses abrogative [nāsikh] and
abrogated [mansūkh] verses. These verses are abrogated because the
reasons for their establishment were superseded. Also, the Qur’an has
been revealed gradually.

These two issues, i.e. nāsikh and mansūkh, in the Qur’an and gradualness
of the Qur’an’s revelation lead to tashābuh (i.e. the property of being
mutashābih) in the Qur’an. Nevertheless, this tashābuh is resolved by
referring mutashābih verses to muhkam ones and mansūkh to nāsikh.

Following mutashābih verses
---------------------------

God states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ في قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا
تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those in whose hearts is doubt and divergence follow the ambiguities
in it…”***[^9]

In explanation I must say that this verse divides the people into two
groups according to their attitude towards the Qur’an. The first
consists of deviants who seek sedition, to corrupt the people, to
(re)interpret (the Qur’an), and follow mutashābih verses. The other
group is composed of those with firm knowledge and steadfast hearts who
apply muhkamāt in order to employ mutashābihāt.

This explanation makes it clear that by ‘following mutashābih verses’
practical adherence is meant not belief. It does not mean that believing
in mutashābihāt is blameworthy, rather that it is wrong to exploit them
in practice, seeking sedition and reinterpretation of verses. Clearly
this culpability only arises if one follows mutashābih verses without
referring them to muhkam ones.

If we refer mutashābihāt to muhkamāt and understand and conform to the
signification of the mutashābih verses, we are in truth adhering to
muhkam not mutashābih.

What is ta’wīl (interpretation)?
--------------------------------

Basically, the word ta’wīl means referral. Therefore, the ta’wīl of
mutashābih is the reference of a mutashābih verse and the ta’wīl of the
Qur’an is the main source of Qur’anic wisdom. In order to clarify this
matter, we must first know that exegetes[^10] have defined many meanings
for the term ta’wīl, the most illustrious of which is: ta’wīl is a
meaning that is contrary to the superficial meaning of the words.

This definition has become so established among recent exegetes that,
even though the term ta’wīl primarily means referral, it has now come to
mean ‘that which is contrary to the appearance’. This meaning is not
acceptable for the following reasons:

First, the usage of ta’wīl as ‘against appearance’ is something that
emerged after the revelation of the Qur’an and there are no grounds for
defining ta’wīl, which has been mentioned in the Qur’an sixteen times,
as ‘against appearance’. In fact, if one seriously contemplates the
Qur’anic usage of this word, it will become clear that none of the
meanings that exegetes have mentioned are completely accurate although a
number of them are relatively correct.

Secondly, this definition of ta’wīl necessitates that there exist a
series of meanings in the Qur’an that are in opposition to the
appearance of the verses and because these appearances are against the
muhkamāt of the Qur’an, they bring about subversion and deviation of the
people. This would mean that there are contradictions among Qur’anic
verses that cannot be resolved without stripping some verses of their
formal meanings and restoring them to significations not understood by
the general public.

If we maintain such a discrepancy in the Qur’an, the following argument
would be invalid:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَفَلاَ يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِندِ غَيْرِ
اللّهِ لَوَجَدُوا فِيهِ اخْتِلاَفًا كَثِيرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Why do they not ponder upon the Qur’an? If it was from other than
Allah surely they would find within it much discrepancy.”***[^11]

In order to fully understand this it must be noted that if the
discrepancy between two verses is resolved by professedly ‘ta’wīl-ing’
one verse to another and saying that it has a meaning other than what it
appears to mean, something known by no one but God (and those firm in
knowledge), the verse with such a meaning will be completely invalid.

In explanation, we can also ta’wīl the statements of people in a similar
manner, even ones that are surely lies. We could say that the apparent
meaning is not meant rather the signification is the true meaning
intended by the speaker, which others cannot understand!

In short, if we want to resolve discrepancies in the Qur’an in this
manner, it is in opposition with what the previous verse (4:82) has
declared. This verse clearly expresses that the Qur’an can be understood
by the minds of the general public and they can discuss and contemplate
it and there is no verse in the entire Qur’an whose intent is something
contradictory to its Arabic wording or is some kind of riddle.

Even so, with our so-called ta’wīl we have forgotten these truths.
Essentially, we cannot say that words that we believe to be elevated
above normal statements and contradictory views, beyond reproach,
perfect in every way, are to be ‘ta’wīl-ed’ in the same manner that one
could ta’wīl lies and nonsense.

Now I will first define ta’wīl in my own view and then bring various
verses as proof in accordance with my exegetical style.

Ta’wīl is the real external truth upon which Qur’anic statements,
including precepts, exhortations, and wisdom, are based. This truth
exists in all Qur’anic verses whether muhkam or mutashābih. That verses
have ta’wīl has nothing to do with them being mutashābih and their
referral to muhkam.

Ta’wīl is not specific to mutashābih verses. The whole Qur’an has
ta’wīl, muhkam has ta’wīl, and mutashābih also has ta’wīl. Ta’wīl is
something apart from textual concepts and meanings; therefore, words
cannot impart it. It consists of exalted truths that words cannot
contain. God has moderated these lofty truths into words so that they
may become closer to something we are able to comprehend. These words
are analogies used to explain things in a way we may better understand.
The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ \* إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهُ قُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ \* وَإِنَّهُ فِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ لَدَيْنَا
لَعَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the Book that makes things clear, verily We have made the Qur’an
an Arabic book that you may understand and it is with Us in the Mother
of the Book, high in dignity and correct in foundation.”***[^12]

Bearing in mind the purport of this verse and similar verses that
implicitly or explicitly express this meaning, it becomes clear that the
Qur’an possesses a lofty status in the transcendent realm where it is
beyond the understanding of the people; however, in order to make it
more accessible to human understanding it has been presented this way.
That lofty reality that is beyond general understanding is called ta’wīl
and it pertains to the whole Qur’an, whether muhkam or mutashābih.

Several proofs from the Qur’an
------------------------------

1. Ta’wīl of the deeds of Khidr (‘a): In the story of Moses (‘a) and
Khidr (‘a) the word ta’wīl is used where Khidr tells Moses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... سَأُنَبِّئُكَ بِتَأْوِيلِ مَا لَمْ تَسْتَطِع عَلَيْهِ صَبْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I will soon inform you of the ta’wīl of that for which you could not
bear patience.”***[^13]

And at the end of the narration he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... ذَلِكَ تَأْوِيلُ مَا لَمْ تَسْطِعْ عَلَيْهِ صَبْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is the ta’wīl of that for which you could not bear
patience.”***[^14]

Now we will examine the account to understand the meaning of ta’wīl.
Khidr (‘a) did three things that according to Moses (‘a) did not seem
right and he protested:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... حَتَّى إِذَا رَكِبَا فِي السَّفِينَةِ خَرَقَهَا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they embarked upon the boat, he made a hole in it…”***[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... حَتَّى إِذَا لَقِيَا غُلامًا فَقَتَلَهُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they met a young man he slew him…”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... حَتَّى إِذَا أَتَيَا أَهْلَ قَرْيَةٍ اسْتَطْعَمَا أَهْلَهَا
فَأَبَوْا أَنْ يُضَيِّفُوهُمَا فَوَجَدَا فِيهَا جِدَارًا يُرِيدُ أَنْ
يَنقَضَّ فَأَقَامَهُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When they came to the people of a town, they asked them for food but
they refused them hospitality. They came to a wall that was close to
falling down and he repaired it…”[^17]

These were acts that Khidr (‘a) performed and Moses (‘a) protested each
of them. That is to say, the semblance that Moses perceived for these
deeds were as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَخَرَقْتَهَا لِتُغْرِقَ أَهْلَهَا لَقَدْ جِئْتَ شَيْئًا إِمْرًا
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you make a hole in the boat to drown its passengers? Thou has
indeed done a dreadful thing.”***[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَقَتَلْتَ نَفْسًا زَكِيَّةً بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ لَقَدْ جِئْتَ
شَيْئًا نُكْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you killed an innocent person and that not for retaliation
against a person slain? Thou has indeed done a horrible thing.”***[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... لَوْ شِئْتَ لاَتَّخَذْتَ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you wanted, you could have taken payment for it.”***[^20]

Clearly Moses (‘a) objects to the deeds of Khidr (‘a) because they do
not have appropriate outward appearances.

Now, let us examine the ta’wīl of Khidr (‘a), that is, the true and good
aspects and designations of these deeds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَمَّا السَّفِينَةُ فَكَانَتْ لِمَسَاكِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ فِي الْبَحْرِ
فَأَرَدتُّ أَنْ أَعِيبَهَا وَكَانَ وَرَاءهُم مَلِكٌ يَأْخُذُ كُلَّ
سَفِينَةٍ غَصْبًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the boat, it belonged to some poor people who worked upon the
sea. I intended to mar it because there was a king before them who
seized every ship by force.”***[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَأَمَّا الْغُلاَمُ فَكَانَ أَبَوَاهُ مُؤْمِنَيْنِ فَخَشِينَا أَن
يُرْهِقَهُمَا طُغْيَانًا وَكُفْرًا \* فَأَرَدْنَا أَن يُبْدِلَهُمَا
رَبُّهُمَا خَيْرًا مِنْهُ زَكَاةً وَأَقْرَبَ رُحْمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the young man, his parents were people of faith. I feared
that he would impose upon them rebellion and disbelief. Thus I intended
that their Lord give to them in exchange a son better than him in purity
and closer in affection.”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَأَمَّا الْجِدَارُ فَكَانَ لِغُلاَمَيْنِ يَتِيمَيْنِ فِي
الْمَدِينَةِ وَكَانَ تَحْتَهُ كَنزٌ لَهُمَا وَكَانَ أَبُوهُمَا
صَالِحًا فَأَرَادَ رَبُّكَ أَنْ يَبْلُغَا أَشُدَّهُمَا وَيَسْتَخْرِجَا
كَنزَهُمَا رَحْمَةً مِنْ رَبِّكَ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city. Beneath
the wall there was a treasure cache belonging to them and their father
had been a righteous man. So your Lord intended that they become full
adults and unearth their treasure as a blessing from your Lord.”***[^23]

After Khidr (‘a) gave his answers for each of his deeds, he gave another
comprehensive answer for all the criticisms of Moses (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَمَا فَعَلْتُهُ عَنْ أَمْرِي... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I did not do these things willfully…”***[^24]

As my dear readers see, the meaning of ta’wīl in these verses is for
everything to be referred to its own aspect and designation and to
realize its true significance. For instance the word ‘zadan’ in Farsi
designates chastisement however ‘rag zadan’ signifies the aspect of
medical treatment.

It is true that, lexically, the word ta’wīl means ‘referral’ and it
includes all kinds of return and reference.

For instance, when we say ‘John came’ the point of reference of this
sentence is that ‘John’ must have ‘come’ in the external world. However,
the word ta’wīl is not idiomatically used in such cases; rather, it
denotes the specific reference and return to true significance the like
of which we saw in the verses regarding Moses (‘a) and Khidr (‘a).

2. Ta’wīl in the story of Joseph (‘a): In the story of Joseph the word
ta’wīl is repeatedly used. For instance, it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَرَفَعَ أَبَوَيْهِ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَخَرُّوا لَهُ سُجَّدًا وَقَالَ
يَا أَبَتِ هَذَا تَأْوِيلُ رُؤْيَايَ مِن قَبْلُ قَدْ جَعَلَهَا رَبِّي
حَقًّا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he lifted his parents upon the throne and they fell down before
him in prostration. And he said O father! This is the ta’wīl of my dream
from before. Verily my Lord has made it true…”***[^25]

The earlier dream of Joseph (‘a) was as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... يَا أَبْتِ إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَحَدَ عَشَرَ كَوْكَبًا وَالشَّمْسَ
وَالْقَمَرَ رَأَيْتُهُمْ لِي سَاجِدِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O father! Verily I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon. I saw
them bowing down before me.”***[^26]

Also, it is used in the verses regarding the dream of the king where the
interpreters of dreams said that we do not know the ta’wīl of distorted
dreams. Finally, Joseph’s (‘a) friend from prison went to him and heard
the ta’wīl of the king’s dream from him.[^27] It is also used in the
case of the dreams of Joseph’s two prison companions who asked him to
tell them the ta’wīl of their dreams[^28] and also where the Qur’an
speaks of ta’wīl-i ahādīth which was taught to Joseph (‘a).[^29]

In all these cases the word ta’wīl is used regarding events that are the
reference and reality of the dream.

Dreams are aspects or examples of external truths and future events
which are seen by a person who is asleep. In fact, that external truth
is like the meaning, and the dream is like the form which clothes the
meaning. In effect, ta’wīl is related to that which is ‘ta’wīl-ed’ (e.g.
a dream that has an interpretation) in the same way that meaning is
related to form or truth is related to metaphor.

With careful consideration it is evident that in both this story and the
story of Moses (‘a) and Khidr (‘a) the meaning of ta’wīl is the same.

3. Ta’wīl in verses regarding the Resurrection: In some verses that
discuss the Day of Resurrection, the term ta’wīl is seen. For instance,
in the following verse and with reference to the next verse we know that
the nature of seeing things on the Day of Resurrection is not related to
the senses we use in this world; just as the occurrence of these
phenomena and the system governing that Day are different from what we
are used to in this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلاَّ تَأْوِيلَهُ يَوْمَ يَأْتِي تَأْوِيلُهُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do they look to anything save its ta’wīl? The Day its ta’wīl
comes…”***[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَقَدْ كُنتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطَاءكَ
فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily you were in ignorance of these (truths) but We took away the
veil from before you so today your eyes are sharp.”***[^31]

Of course this must be discussed in detail; however, here we merely
intend to say that the notifications of the Qur’an and the statements of
the prophets refer to significations that manifest on the Day of
Judgment. However, this reference is not the same as the reference of
prophesies of future events to that which will occur in the future.

To sum up the discussion, by preserving the lexical meaning of ta’wīl,
i.e. referral, and careful consideration of verses containing this word,
and also taking into account the truth that the Qur’an possesses a
status above and beyond mere words and lexis before God, the Almighty,
we clearly understand that ta’wīl of Qur’an is that lofty truth and
hidden reality that is far from the grasp of general understanding. It
is like a soul in regard to its body or the symbolized in relation to
the symbol.

It is what God terms “Kitāb-i Hakīm” (Solid Book), meaning something
that is the basis and reference of the wisdom and concepts in the Qur’an
that has been revealed and made available to us. It is that which is
neither from the class of words nor meanings; rather, it is something
objective, real and external.[^32]

[^1]: This is a translation of a Farsi translation of an original Arabic
text by ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī. The Farsi translation and original glosses
were done by Mr. Hujjatī Kirmānī.

[^2]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:7.

[^3]: Sūrat Hūd 11:1. ﴿ ... كِتَابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آيَاتُهُ ثُمَّ فُصِّلَتْ
مِنْ لَدُنْ حَكِيمٍ خَبِيرٍ ﴾ “This is a Book whose verses have been
established (for a specific intention) then when they are broken down
they become detailed verses. It is a Book from the Wise and Aware.”

[^4]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:23. ﴿ ... كِتَابًا مُتَشَابِهًا مَثَانِيَ
تَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ تَلِينُ
جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَى ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُدَى اللَّهِ
يَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ يَشَاء وَمَنْ يُضْلِلْ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ ﴾
“… a book whose verses are similar to each other and are repeated. By
these verses the skin of those who fear their Lord trembles, then their
skin and heart (their whole being) softens to the remembrance (and
praise) of Allah. That is the guidance of Allah with which He guides who
He will and whoever Allah leaves to stray will have no guidance.”

[^5]: This is understood from verse one of Sūrat Hūd. Thus, its
‘solidity’ was elaborated and revealed gradually.

[^6]: Tabātabā’ī explained the meaning of muhkam and mutashābih in
detail in his “Tafsīr al-Mīzān”. Refer to “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” for more
information.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Ra‘d 13:17.

[^8]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:3-4.

[^9]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:7.

[^10]: It must be noted that in the original Arabic text ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī wrote the various meanings of ta’wīl and its difference with
tafsīr (exegesis). However, for the sake of brevity, I (the original
Arabic-Farsi translator) only included the most common definition and
the ‘Allāmah’s discussion regarding it. I also altered the style to make
it more understandable for the respected readership.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:82.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:2-4.

[^13]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:78.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:82.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:71.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:74.

[^17]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:77.

[^18]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:71.

[^19]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:74.

[^20]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:77.

[^21]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:79.

[^22]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:80-81.

[^23]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:82.

[^24]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:82.

[^25]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:100.

[^26]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:4.

[^27]: Refer to verses 43-49 of Sūrat Yūsuf.

[^28]: Refer to verse 36 of Sūrat Yūsuf.

[^29]: Refer to verses 21 and 101 of Sūrat Yūsuf.

[^30]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:53.

[^31]: Sūrat Qāf 50:22.

[^32]: Extracted from the annual, “Ma‘ārif-e Ja‘farī”.


