Epilogue: A Message to the Conference held in Honor of Tustari
==============================================================

The following text is a message written for the conference held in
Lucknow, India, in honor of the martyr ‘Allāmah Qādī Nūr Allāh Tustarī
(a.k.a. Shūshtarī), author of the famous book, “Ihqāq al-Haqq”.

\*\*\*

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

God, the Almighty—glorious is He—addresses His Noble Prophet (S) in the
Holy Qur’an thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ إِلاَّ مَنْ شَاء أَن
يَتَّخِذَ إِلَى رَبِّهِ سَبِيلاً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(O Prophet!) Say (unto your nation), I do not ask of you a reward
for this (invitation) but that some people find a way to their
Lord.”***[^1]

In accordance to this miraculous statement, the reward for the Holy
Prophet’s (S) twenty-three years of invitation is the pure religion of
Islam that has opened a place for itself in the human society and has
become established. Elsewhere, in the Qur’an, He declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... قُلْ لاَّ أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلاَّ الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(O Prophet!) Say (unto your nation), I do not ask of you a reward
for this (invitation) save love for (my) Household (the Ahl
al-Bayt)…”***[^2]

By combining these two Qur’anic verses it is clear that the religion
that the Exalted Lord wants of us and determines as the reward for the
invaluable invitation of the Holy Prophet (S) is the religion that is
fused with affection for his Ahl al-Bayt—specific members of his family.

The Holy Prophet (S) has explained the meaning of this fusion of the Ahl
al-Bayt’s affection in the two widely-transmitted hadīths of safīnah
(ark) and thaqalayn (two precious things):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مثل أهل بيتي کمثل سفينة نوح من رکبها نجا ومن تخلف عنها غرق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The analogy of my Ahl al-Bayt is that of Noah’s ark. Whosoever embarks
upon it is saved and whosoever turns away from it is drowned.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إني تارك فيکم الثقلين، کتاب الله وعترتي أهل بيتي لن يفرقا حتی يردا
عليَّ الحوض، ما ان تمسکتم بها لن تضلوا بعدي ابداً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“After I leave, I will leave among you two precious things: the Book of
Allah and my Household, the Ahl al-Bayt. They will never be separated
until they come to me (on the Day of Judgment) at the Pool [hawd]. As
long as you cling fast to these two things you shall not be led astray.”

In a clear expression the Noble Prophet (S) teaches that Muslims must
set his Ahl al-Bayt as their leaders and acquire their religion from
them. This is the creed of Shī‘ah which today nearly one hundred million
people of the world’s population identify as their official religion.

The Shī‘ah creed is that same pure religion that God, the Almighty, has
made his Noble Prophet’s reward and the fruit of his prophethood.

The Shī‘ah creed is that same valuable religion whose continuity cost
the pure blood of eleven Imāms—of the twelve leaders of the Infallible
and Immaculate Ahl al-Bayt—foregoing which was the pure blood that
spilled to the earth from the forehead and mouth of the Prophet in the
battle of Uhud.

The Shī‘ah creed is that same tormented religion that has, in the
fourteen centuries ensuing the passing of the Holy Prophet (S), lost at
the hands of its opposers tens of thousands or rather hundreds of
thousands of its followers among which are many prodigies and scholars
such as the First Martyr, Muhammad ibn Makkī, the Second Martyr, Zayn
al-Dīn Ihsā’ī, and the martyr Qādī Nūr Allāh Tustarī who rests in this
radiant and glorious grave.

By observing these works, we must remember the endeavors and sacrifices
achieved by our forerunners in the way of God to preserve and vitalize
this religion of Truth.

Thus, we must strive to preserve, safeguard, and spread the religion
that embraces the Truth that came to us at the price of, first and
foremost, the pure blood of our leaders from the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), the blood of our great intellectuals and academics, and finally,
the blood of hundreds of thousands of martyrs who were our innocent
fellow Muslims—we must withhold nothing of our lives and wealth to
uphold this path.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تَهِنُوا وَلاَ تَحْزَنُوا وَأَنتُمْ الأَعْلَوْنَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ
مُؤْمِنِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Slack not, nor sorrow for you are superior if you are truly
believers.”[^3]

Muhammad Husayn Tabātabā’ī

Qum, Rajab 10, 1390 AH[^4]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Furqān 25:57.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Shawrā’ 42:23.

[^3]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:139.

[^4]: Extracted from the annual “Ma‘ārif-e Ja‘farī”.


