Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ \*
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ \* خَلَقَ الإِنسَانَ مِنْ
عَلَقٍ \*
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الأَكْرَمُ \* الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ \* عَلَّمَ
الإِنسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the All-compassionate, the All-merciful***

***Read in the name of thy Lord who created;***

***created humankind of congealed blood.***

***Read and thy Lord is the Most Magnanimous, who taught with the
pen;***

***taught humans that which they knew not.***[^1]

…and We gave him wisdom [hikmah] and resolving speech [fasl al-khitab]
----------------------------------------------------------------------

I start with the gift of salutations and peace [salām] from Hasan
Hasan-zādeh Āmolī, a humble gleaner of the brilliance of the great.

I was asked to write up a biography of the glory-suffused life of the
great exegete, divine philosopher, godly mystic, holy jurist, pride of
Islam, exemplary lecturer, Āyatullāh al-‘Uzmā[^2] ‘Allāmah[^3] Hāj[^4]
Mīrzā[^5] Sayyid[^6] Muhammad Husayn Tabātabā’ī.

Deserving accomplishment of such a serious matter is beyond the ability
of my humble person, who neither knows eloquent Farsi nor coherent
Arabic. What can a lowly person with a broken pen write of the eloquence
of the Glorious?!

This being said, I did not deem it humane to decline, and thus with my
poor resources I shall offer a slight notion of what is recorded in the
oeuvre of my memories of the many years I spent in the heavenly presence
of this holy saint and under the tuition of this godly instructor. Thus,
without formal and intricate penmanship I shall leave the stylus to its
simple comportment and proceed as the pen wills.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يک دهان خواهم به پهناي فلک تا بگويم وصف آن رشک ملک
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ور دهان يابم چنين و صد چنين تنگ آيد در بيان آن امين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين قدر هم گر نگويم اي سَنَد شيشه‌ي دل از ضعيفي بشکند
  </p>
</blockquote>

I need a mouth as great as the firmament,

to illustrate the details of this enviable king.

And, if I find such a mouth or even comportment greater,

it would fall short in illustrating this virtuous one.

O chronicle! If I say not this much,

the glass of my heart will break of fragility.

When speaking of great personages such as this, who exceed time and
space and are eternal prodigies, we can delineate several features. The
briefest of these is outlining the time, place, and method of their
livelihood, whereas talking of such mundane matters is far from the
dignity of these empyrean souls. Thus, in this area we shall suffice
with this elocution by sweet-tongued Hāfiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلک به مردم نادان دهد زمام مراد تو اهل دانش و فضلي همين گناهت بس
  </p>
</blockquote>

To ignorant people the cosmos gives reign to desire.

You are a person of learning and grace; this is your only vice.

When I was afflicted with insufferable travails on occasion of my
education, an erudite friend, with whom I had the previous privilege of
being roommates, visited me—God bless him—or rather heartened and healed
me, and he gave me good tidings that, “O friend! May you savor these
tribulations for, to the affidavit of biographies, receptive souls have
become illustrious personages and paragons of the age by tolerance of
suchlike hours of woe.” Indeed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نه در غنچه کامل شود پيکر گل نه در بوته ظاهر شود صورت زر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زأحداث چرخ است تهذيب مردم چو از زخم خايسک تيزي خنجر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Neither is the soma of a flower completed in the bud,

nor does the visage of a meddler manifest in a shrub.

Of the travails of fate comes cultivation of souls,

as of the blows of the hammer, sharpness of blade.

The works of every person are manifestations of his wealth
----------------------------------------------------------

The best depicters of this master are his mysticism, his scientific
works, and his lectures. The notables of the theological schools of Qum
who lecture in Shī‘ah Islamic principles were his students. The glorious
“Tafsīr al-Mīzān”, pride of the world of knowledge, is one of his fine
works and the masterpiece among his entire oeuvre.

In describing the Qur’an, the great Imām, Amīr al-Mu’minīn ‘Alī (‘a)[^7]
declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
کتاب الله ينطق بعضه ببعض، ويشهد بعضه علی بعض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***Parts of the Book of Allah explain other parts and some parts
substantiate other parts***.”[^8]

Also, the Glorious Qur’an describes itself thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***And We have sent down upon you the Book explaining all
things…***”[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُتَشَابِهًا
مَثَانِيَ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***Allah has revealed the finest account, a book whose verses are
similar to each other and repeated…***”[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعًا مِنَ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنَ الْعَظِيمَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***And certainly we have given you the seven oft-repeated
verses***[^11] ***and the grand Qur’an.***”[^12]

The meaning of mathānī (which is used in two of the preceding verses) is
that which Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a) referred to when he stated, “Parts of
the Book of Allah explain other parts and some parts substantiate other
parts.”

Mathānī is plural of mathniyyah, which is the participial adjective
object form of thiny which means doubling over; like a river that turns
and folds back on itself. Such places are called mathānī and due to such
folding the part of the river before the turn and the part after the
turn become parallel and ‘witness’ each other.

Qur’anic verses are also such; they bear witness to each other, i.e.
they explain and elucidate one another. In the “Muntahā al-Arb”
dictionary it defines thiny as the bend in a river, valley, or mountain
pass.

This is a summary of the fine research of this master in “Tafsīr
al-Mīzān” regarding mathānī. Accordingly, he has interpreted the
Glorious Qur’an using the Glorious Qur’an itself. At the beginning of
his exegesis he indicated this important point; summing-up he stated: it
could not be possible that the Qur’an be the light and illuminator of
all things but not illuminator of itself.

This exegesis is a utopian city of wisdom in which the best and greatest
human and religious discourses, in the areas of intellect, tradition,
mysticism, philosophy, divine wisdom, morality, society, economy, etc.,
are discussed.

Think not that this utterance of mine is in conflict with what this
master stated in his prologue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد اجتنبنا فيها عن أن نرکن إلی حجة نظرّية فلسفية، أو إلی فرضيّة
علميّة، او إلی مکاشفة عرفانيّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily I refrained from basing the rationales of this book upon
philosophical and scientific theories or mystical revelation.”

We both spoke true, just as the luminary himself declared at the close
of his prologue. Ponder upon it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم وضعنا ابحاثاً مختلفة، فلسفيّة وعلميّة وتاريخيّة واجتماعيّة
واخلاقيّة الخ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I shall, however, make use of various philosophical, scientific,
historical, social, ethical… discussions.”

From the blessed tongue of the master himself
---------------------------------------------

On a Tuesday morning, Sha‘bān 25, 1387 AH (November 28, 1967), I came
into the presence of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī. Discussion led to the
days of the ‘Allāmah’s education and scientific research. He said, “I
was looking forward to spring and summer because in these two seasons
the nights are short and I would study and write at night and sleep in
the day time.”

Then, about his exegesis he stated, “First, I performed much research
and enquiry regarding the hadīths in “Bihār al-Anwār”, so I could have a
publication regarding hadīth. Later, I endeavored much to synthesize
Qur’anic verses with hadīth until I concluded that I should write an
exegesis.

However, I thought because the Qur’an is an unending sea, if I attempted
to address the entirety I might not be successful. Therefore, I picked
out all the divine names and attributes and Qur’anic verses regarding
eschatology and similar issues and wrote seven independent books on
seven subjects.

Later I became occupied in interpreting the Qur’an and now fourteen
volumes of the exegesis have been completed and published.”

This is what the master said on that day, and later, praise be to Allah,
the Exalted, he was successful in completing “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” in twenty
volumes in the span of twenty years. At the end of his exegesis, he
recorded the completion date in the following utterance:

Completion date of “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” and recommendation to theology students [tullāb]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تم الکتاب والحمد لله، واتفق الفراغ من تأليفه في ليلة القدر المبارکة
الثالثة والعشرين من ليإلي شهر رمضان، من شهور سنة اثنتين وتسعين
وثلاثمائة بعد الألف من الهجرة، والحمد لله علی الدوام، والصلوة علی
سيدنا محمد وآله والسلام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The book has been completed and praise be to Allah for I was successful
in finishing this composition on the blessed Night of al-Qadr, the
twenty-third night of the month of Ramadān, of the year 1392 of the
hijrah and continuous praise and peace be upon our liege Muhammad and
his family.”

Our dear theology students [tullāb] must follow this example, that
‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī took vigil on the Night of al-Qadr [laylat
al-qadr][^13] by researching Qur’anic verses and thus his exegesis was
concluded on this felicitous night. Indeed, one must work in this way.
According to the expressive and eloquent poem of Shams al-Dīn Muhammad
ibn Mahmūd Āmolī, the author of “Nafā’is al-Funūn”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به هوس راست نيايد به تمنّي نشود کاندرين راه بسي خون جگر بايد خورد
  </p>
</blockquote>

It won’t be rectified with caprice, nor with desire.

For, on this path much dolor must be endured.

At the end of the book “Diyāt”, Shaykh al-Mashāyikh, the celebrated
author of “Jawāhir al-Kalām” wrote:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تمّ کتاب جواهر الکلام في شرح شرائع الاسلام، في مسائل الحلال والحرام،
في ليلة الثلاثاء ثلاث وعشرين من شهر رمضان المبارك، ليلة القدر التي کان
من تقدير الله تعالی فيها ان يتفضّل علينا باتمام الکتاب المزبور، من سنة
ألف ومائتين واربع وخمسين من الهجرة النبوية الخ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The book of “Jawāhir al-Kalām”, a commentary of “Sharāyi‘ al-Islām fī
Masā’il al-Halāl wa al-Harām” (The Laws of Islam Regarding Lawful and
Unlawful Issues) was finished in the 23rd night of the month of blessed
Ramadān, the Night of al-Qadr which was ordained by the Almighty Allah.
In this night I was blessed with finishing this book, 1254 years after
the hijrah of the Prophet.”

In “Mafātīh” of Muhaddith Qummī, regarding nightly vigil on the 21st and
23rd of the blessed month of Ramadān which are considered to be the most
probable nights of al-Qadr, Sadūq ibn Bābawayh (may God be pleased with
him) was quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال شيخنا الصدوق فيما أملي علی المشايخ في مجلس واحد من مذهب الإمامية:
«ومن أحيی هاتين الليلتين بمذاکرة العلم فهو أفضل».
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Our master Sadūq said in the book Amālī that if there are two groups in
a single gathering of vigil in the two nights of al-Qadr, one of which
are having scientific discussions, the other praying. Attending the
former has preference.”

In other words, the best of deeds when taking vigil during these al-Qadr
nights is acquiring knowledge.

A great master of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī: Sayyid Husayn Bādkūbeh’ī
---------------------------------------------------------------

During a lesson, I asked the ‘Allāmah regarding trusteeship [wilāyah]
and Imamate and talk led to the following holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ
قَالَ إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي
قَالَ لاَ يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (remember) when his Lord tested Abraham with certain words and
he fulfilled them. He said, ‘Verily, I shall make you an imām of the
people.’ He replied, ‘And of my offspring?’ He said, ‘My covenant shall
not include the evildoers’.”***[^14]

In the exegesis of this verse[^15], he had referred to a statement from
one of his masters and I asked him who it was. He replied, “The late
Sayyid Husayn Bādkūbeh’ī.”

Master Tabātabā’ī’s education in mathematics
--------------------------------------------

After a class session, on the 3rd of November 1977, on the way home talk
of mathematics came up. He said, “In Najaf, our master, Sayyid Husayn
Bādkūbeh’ī instructed us to study “Tahrīr-e Uqlīdus”.

Therefore, we studied the “Tahrīr-e Uqlīdus” and mathematics for over
two years under the instruction of Sayyid Abū al-Qāsim Khwānsārī.” Then,
he said, “The late Sayyid Abū al-Qāsim Khwānsārī was very skilled in
mathematics. They would send him questions from universities. He was a
most skilled person in algebra. Recently, he died in India.”

One day, Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī said to me, “At first, when I came
to Qum from Tabrīz, I taught “Sharh-e Chaghmaynī”.”

“Sharh-e Chaghmaynī” (Commentaries on the Book of Chaghmaynī) is a book
on astronomy authored by Mahmūd ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Umar Chaghmaynī who
also wrote “Qānūncheh” which is a book on medicine. The commentary on
the book was written by Qādī-zādeh Rūmī. The commentator was an
astrologer in the Samarqand Observatory and also had a great part in
compiling “zīj” (Astronomy) by Ulugh Baykī.

When I first went to Qum, students of the Qum Hujjatiyyah School told me
that ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī had installed a type of sundial for determining
the direction of the Qiblah and the exact time of noon in Qum for each
day. Unfortunately, however, it was not maintained properly and this
great scientific work was ruined.

A Turk from Tabrīz, living in Qum, istikhārah with the Qur’an
-------------------------------------------------------------

After his preliminary and conventional [sutūh] theological education in
Tabrīz, Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī relocated to Holy Najaf and studied
under great masters such as Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī Tabātabā’ī, Sayyid
Husayn Bādkūbeh’ī, Sayyid Abū al-Hasan Isfahānī, Muhammad Husayn
Kompānī, Mīrzā Husayn Nā’īnī, and Sayyid Abū al-Qāsim Khwānsārī.

Under the tutelage of these great masters he rose to exceptional heights
of theoretical and practical knowledge. After ten years in Najaf, he
returned to Tabrīz in 1935. There, he occupied himself with lecturing,
writing, and research. In 1946 he left Tabrīz and took up residence in
Qum where he instituted exegesis of the Holy Qur’an and education of
theoretical sciences and divine principles. Until today, June 28, 1981,
his blessed assemblies have been the seat of intellectuals and the
school of theology.

Even though many of the people of the theological seminaries of Qum
enjoyed his luminous presence, not many were blessed by meeting him.
Some of these were allotted with learning mere terminology, some rose to
lofty scientific levels, fewer still inclined toward practical
mysticism, and hardly any attained the arts of both knowledge and
action.

It is in fact as the divine sage Mīrzā Abū al-Hasan Jelveh (hallowed be
his grave) wrote in his memoirs, “Currently, most theology students from
various cities that desire knowledge have gathered around me. Each for a
reason: some just to learn the terminology, others to learn to beautify
gatherings, a meager few for their honesty, simplicity, and belief in
the spiritual realm. These last few have been described thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ثُلَّةٌ مِنَ الأَوَّلِينَ \* وَقَلِيلٌ مِنَ الآخِرِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A great many of the first (peoples), and few from the last
(peoples).”***[^16]

Anyway,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر کسي از ظن خود شد يار من وز درون من نجست اسرار من
  </p>
</blockquote>

Each person became my friend for their own presumption.

And he did not seek out the secrets I have within me.”

One day, Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī remarked, “When I decided to
resettle in Qum, I performed istikhārah with the Glorious Qur’an. This
holy verse came up:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُنَا لِكَ الْوَلايَةُ لِلَّهِ الْحَقِّ هُوَ خَيْرٌ ثَوَابًا
وَخَيْرٌ عُقْبًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There, support and protection belong solely to Allah, the True; He
is the best to reward and the best to accord favorable outcome.”***[^17]

‘Allāmah’s great master: Hāj Mīrzā Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī Tabātabā’ī
--------------------------------------------------------------

One of the great masters of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī in Najaf was the
elevated mystic, lofty jurist, possessor of virtues and gnosis, the late
lamented Āyatullāh al-‘Uzmā Hāj Sayyid Mīrzā ‘Alī Qādī Tabrīzī. This man
was a timeless prodigy.

‘Allāmah Shaykh Āqā Bozorg Tihrānī wrote about him thus, “He is Sayyid
‘Alī, son of Mīrzā Husayn, son of Mīrzā Ahmad, son of Mīrzā Rahīm
Tabātabā’ī Tabrīzī Qādī, a God-conscious scholar and self-disciplined
erudite moralist. For tens of years there was friendship and association
between us. During this time I found him to be unfaltering upon his
path, stalwart and humane in character, great in essence… He wrote an
exegesis of the Qur’an from the beginning up to this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... قُلِ اللّهُ ثُمَّ ذَرْهُمْ فِي خَوْضِهِمْ يَلْعَبُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Say, ‘Allah (has sent it down).’ Then leave them to amuse
themselves in their wrongful devotion.”***[^18]

His father also wrote an exegesis of the Qur’an. From long ago, their
house was a place of knowledge, virtue, and piety.”[^19]

One of his pleasant utterances was that if a person devotes half their
life to achieving perfection the time would not be wasted. What ‘Allāmah
Shaykh Āqā Bozorg Tihrānī said about him, “… I found him to be
unfaltering upon his path…” is a valuable attribute because the most
important thing in advancement toward Allah is perseverance, the shower
of divine blessings and favors are due to perseverance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا
تَتَنَزَّلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَلائِكَةُ أَلاَّ تَخَافُوا وَلاَ تَحْزَنُوا
وَأَبْشِرُوا بِالْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ \* نَحْنُ
أَوْلِيَاؤُكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الآخِرَةِ وَلَكُمْ
فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي أَنفُسُكُمْ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَدَّعُونَ \*
نُزُلاً مِنْ غَفُورٍ رَحِيمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily those who say, ‘Our Lord is Allah’ and then are steadfast,
the angels descend upon them (saying) that ‘Fear not nor sorrow rather
receive good tidings of the Paradise you are promised. We are your
supporters and friends in the worldly life and the hereafter; therein
you shall have all that your souls desire and all for which you ask as a
hospitable gift from the Forgiving, the Compassionate’.”***[^20]

Mīrzā-ye Shīrāzī and Mīrzā Husayn Qādī—hallowed be their graves
---------------------------------------------------------------

On a Thursday night, October 25, 1967, a few worthy friends and I were
in the blessed presence of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī. Amid his lecture
he spoke of his master, the late Qādī, and his teachers and students. He
said his deceased mentor had many teachers and named a few. Then he
stated, “His father, the late Hāj Mīrzā Husayn Qādī wrote an exegesis of
Sūrat al-Fātihah and Sūrat al-An‘ām. I read them but I do not know who
currently has them in their possession…

Hāj Mīrzā Husayn Qādī was a pupil of the late Mīrzā-ye Shīrāzī and when
he went to say farewell to the Mīrzā and go to Tabrīz, the late Mīrzā
said to him, ‘Now that you are going, put aside one hour every 24 hours
to meditate.’ After some time, the late Mīrzā asked about Hāj Mīrzā
Husayn Qādī. He was told, ‘He has increased that one hour to twenty-four
in which he is constantly in meditation, self-consciousness, and
seclusion.’ However, seclusion of the following kind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هرگز ميان حاضر و غايب شنيده‌اي من در ميان جمع و دلم جاي ديگر است
  </p>
</blockquote>

Have you heard of being at once among others and absent?

I am among the crowd but my heart is elsewhere.

On a Thursday morning, November 23, 1967, I had the honor of visiting
the late Āyatullāh Hāj Sayyid Husayn Qādī Tabātabā’ī, the cousin of
Āyatullāh Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī (hallowed be his grave).

I kept notes of what he said, among which was the matter of the constant
meditation and self-awareness of Hāj Sayyid Husayn Qādī and his talk
with Mīrzā-ye Shīrāzī just as I quoted from Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī.

On Wednesday night, 27th of Dhū al-Hijjah 1968 CE, I had the honor of
visiting with Master Āyatullāh ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī. Amid his discussions
he said, ‘All that I have of such real (i.e. mystic) matters I have of
the late Mr. Qādī—both that which I learned from him when he was alive
and was in his presence and that which I received from the late Qādī by
my own means.’ Contemplate upon this.”

Telling of a dream and the resulting statement of the late Āyatullāh Āmolī regarding ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The next day I left Qum for Tehran and had the honor of visiting
Āyatullāh Hāj Shaykh Muhammad Taqī Āmolī (may God be pleased with him)
and I related a dream I saw of him, wherein he had said to me, “Tawhīd
is to forget all but Allah”. When he heard this monotheistic utterance
from me in explanation he recited for me the following verse from
“Golshān-e Rāz” by ‘Ārif Shabestarī:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نشاني داده‌اندت از خرابات که التوحيد اسقاط الاضافات
  </p>
</blockquote>

They gave you instructions in a drinkery,[^21]

that tawhīd is relinquishing the extras.

Then, I talked of the late Mr. Qādī and Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī and
his honorable brother, Āyatullāh Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Ilāhī. The late
Mr. Āmolī said to me, “Sir! If a person must become something under
perfect authority and education, I do not know anyone better for you
than Mr. Tabātabā’ī, the author of “Al-Mīzān”.

Associate with him more for he and Sayyid Ahmad Karbalā’ī Kishmīrī were
the best students among all the students of the late Mr. Qādī. Mr.
Tabātabā’ī had many mystical revelations during that time.”

Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī’s “Risālah Muhākimāt”
------------------------------------------------

On Friday morning, the first of Dhū al-Qa‘dah 1392 AH, I was honored by
visiting Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī. Talk led to his Risālah Tadhyīlāt
in which he appraised the correspondences between the lofty mystic,
Sayyid Ahmad Karbalā’ī and the prestigious sage, Mr. Kompānī (hallowed
be their graves). These missives relate to a verse from the exalted
mystic Shaykh ‘Attār (hallowed be his grave):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
او بسر نايد زخود آنجا که اوست کي رسد عقل وجود آنجا که اوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

The mystic cannot, of himself, apprehend that which is Him.

How can the collective consciousness attain that which is Him?

In this treatise he imparts mystical subtleties and grand philosophical
views.

‘Alī wa al-Falsafah al-Ilāhiyyah, a work by ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī
---------------------------------------------------------------

One of the works of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī is the extremely dear
compendious book, “‘Alī wa al-Falsafah al-Ilāhiyyah” (‘Alī and Divine
Philosophy). In a paper that the Master sent to the Nahj al-Balāghah
Millennium Symposium in Tehran, he expressed his wish to finish this
book.

He expressed a sublime point regarding the fact that among all the
Companions [sahābah] of the Prophet of Allah (S)[^22], other than Amīr
al-Mu’minīn ‘Alī (‘a), no one has transmitted or revealed such great
divine truths as exemplified in “Nahj al-Balāghah”.

At the beginning of this compendious book, Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī
presents a solid important principle regarding religion and philosophy:
in truth, it is surely a great injustice to differentiate between divine
religion and divine philosophy.

This utterance issues from the heart of divine research and whoever has
heard it exclaims: the speaker of this is a great gem of God. Indeed,
considering divine religion and divine philosophy to be separate is
surely a great injustice.

At the end of his great book, “Tahsīl al-Sa‘ādah” (Acquiring the Bliss),
Abū Nasr Fārābī, celebrated as the Second Teacher [mu‘allim-e thānī]
(after Aristotle), expresses a noble philosophical report which leads to
this valuable statement, “A perfect philosopher is an imām.” In Asfār,
Mullā Sadrā wrote, “Death to a philosophy whose laws do not coincide
with the Book and Tradition.”[^23]

The chain of exponents of the practical mysticism of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 1966 CE, I benefited from the presence of Āyatullāh Sayyid Muhammad
Hasan Ilāhī Qādī Tabātabā’ī—the noble brother of Master ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī (may Allah, the Exalted, greatly raise them both in rank)—who
had taken residence in Qum to receive and impart blessings.

On a Thursday, March 16, 1967, we talked of the exponents of his and his
brother’s practical mysticism. He stated, “Our master was the late
Qādī—that is, Āyatullāh Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī Tabātabā’ī (may Allah be
pleased with him)—in turn, his master was Hāj Sayyid Ahmad Karbalā’ī,
and his master was Ākhūnd Mawlā Husayn Qulī Hamadānī, and his master was
Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Shūshtarī, and his master was Mullā Qulī Jawlā.

We do not know who Mullā Qulī Jawlā’s master was and we do not even know
who Mullā Qulī Jawlā truly was. Even Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Shūshtarī did not
know who he was.

The meeting of Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Shūshtarī with Mullā Qulī Jawlā
--------------------------------------------------------------

Hāj Sayyid ‘Alī Shūshtarī lived at the time of Shūshtar. A dispute arose
regarding a mortmain [waqf] section of land. Some held that the land was
not mortmain and they had secretly buried the mortmain deed [waqf-nāmah]
in a chest. Others claimed that the land was mortmain though they did
not have any evidence.

Anyway, for a few days Shūshtarī was baffled at judging upon the matter.
The litigants were insistent and came every day and demanded a judgment
from Shūshtarī. During all this, a man came and knocked on his door.
Someone went to the door and asked, “Who are you?” The man replied,
“Tell the man of the house that one called Mullā Qulī Jawlā wants to see
you.”

When he entered the house and came to Shūshtarī, he said, “Sir, I have
come to tell you that you must leave here and travel to Najaf and take
up residence there. Also, know that the mortmain deed of the land is
buried in such-and-such place and the land is mortmain.”

Though Shūshtarī did not know Mullā Qulī Jawlā, he instructed that they
dig the indicated place and there they found the mortmain deed. After
this he withdrew from judicature and left Shūshtar and took up residence
in Najaf.

There he attended Shaykh Murtadā Ansārī’s (may Allah be pleased with
him) lectures on jurisprudence and in turn the Shaykh attended
Shūshtarī’s lectures on ethics. At that time, Ākhūnd Mullā Husayn Qulī
Hamadānī embarked upon a quest for truth and went in search of a mystic
guide.

He left Hamadān and stayed with a savant for some time but he did not
find what he sought with him. He departed for Najaf and came into the
presence of Shūshtarī and Ansārī. There he learned much.

After Shaykh Ansārī’s death, Ākhūnd Hamadānī endeavored to write a
composition of Ansārī’s doctrines and jurisprudence. Shūshtarī forbid
him to do so and said, “This is not your duty; there are others to do
this. You must find the gifted.”

Thereupon, Ākhūnd Mullā Husayn Qulī (may Allah raise his rank) strove to
guide the gifted such that he instructed some from morn to dusk, some
from dawn to forenoon, and some from eventide to midnight. Thus, he was
successful in edifying three hundred individuals such that they each
became great saints [awliyā’] of God, among them Shaykh Muhammad Bahārī,
Sayyid Ahmad Karbalā’ī, Mīrzā Jawād Malikī Tabrīzī, Shaykh ‘Alī Zāhid
Qummī, and Sayyid ‘Abd al-Ghaffār Māzandarānī.

And this is just a part of the information Master Ilāhī Tabātabā’ī
conveyed on that day in Qum regarding the chain of exponents of their
mysticism.

Humans before this world, in this world, and after this world
-------------------------------------------------------------

Among the works of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī are the three valuable
books: “Al-Insān Qabl al-Dunyā’” (Humans before the World), “Al-Insān fī
al-Dunyā’” (Humans in the World), and “Al-Insān ba‘d al-Dunyā’” (Humans
after the World). As I mentioned at the beginning of this paper, the
Allāmah’s masterpiece is the great “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” which comprises
many of the important issues of his other works; for example the
treatise “Wilāyat” which is contained under the exegesis of the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَنفُسَكُمْ لاَ يَضُرُّكُم
مَنْ ضَلَّ إِذَا اهْتَدَيْتُمْ إِلَى اللّهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعًا
فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be mindful of your selves (souls): A person who
has gone astray cannot harm you, provided you are rightly guided. Unto
Allah is your return, every one. Then He will inform you of what you
did.”***[^24]

Also, the treatise “Al-Insān ba‘d al-Dunyā’” is contained under the
exegesis of verse 2:213. These individual works are also important for
the significant effort that was put in authoring them; thus, such works
must also be given weight and heed.

Here it is apt for us to mention the notable French astronomer Camille
Flammarion. Flammarion has valuable works on various subjects including
a three volume work named, “La Mort et Son Mystere” (Death and its
Secret).

The volumes are named respectively “Avant la Mort” (Before Death),
“Autour de la Mort” (About Death), and “Apres la Mort” (After Death). An
Egyptian scholar, Muhammad Farīd Wajadī, translated this book into
Arabic and has named it “‘Alā Ītlāl al-Madhhab al-Māddī” (On Refuting
the Materialist Doctrine) which is also, like its original, a valuable
book. It seems that the ‘Allāmah has named his treatises in accordance
with Flammarion’s books; however, we would have to ask him to be sure.

The aim of divine ambassadors is educating and edifying humanity
----------------------------------------------------------------

I have found the education and edification of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī
such as the Second Teacher, Abū Nasr Fārābī, wrote in “Tahsīl
al-Sa‘ādah”[^25], “Educating is formation of theoretical excellence in
societies whereas edifying is the method of forming moral virtues and
scientific activity among the people.

Education comes about through pure verbal expression. However,
edification is realized through accustoming societies and individuals to
act according to scientific norms such that their will drives them
towards performing these actions and the scientific norms and their
ensuing actions dominate their beings and people become eager to perform
thus—like lovers. ”

Each and every one of the publications of Master ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī is
noteworthy in these two principles and contains deep and exact
critiques. That this master educated and edified gifted souls in the
university of divine truths, i.e. the Qum Theological Seminary, at a
time when attachment to worldly affairs and material pleasures has
bewitched the majority is a blessing from Allah, the Exalted. A blessing
with a notification to all that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ذَلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاء وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ
الْعَظِيمِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is the bounty of Allah. He gives it to whom He wills and Allah
possesses great bounty.”***[^26]

This master has a long legacy of knowledge and piety and many of his
ancestors were great and notable personages in their own time (may Allah
be pleased with them all).

The most noteworthy oeuvre of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī, both prose and poetry
------------------------------------------------------------------------

All the works of this master are knowledge and thought, truth and
understanding, discussion and research, love and reason, Qur’an and
hadīth, and so forth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر کس سخن با سخني ضم کند قطره‌اي از خون جگر کم کند
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever joins words with words,

lessens a part of their anguish.

The great exegetic masterpiece “Tafsīr al­-Mīzān” in twenty volumes

Usūl-e Falsafah wa Rawish-e Ri’ālism (Principles of Philosophy and
Realism)

Hāshiyah bar Asfār-e Sadr al-Muta’allihīn (Commentaries on Asfār of Sadr
al-Muta’allihīn)

Musāhibāt bā Ustād Kurbin (Interviews with Professor Corbin)

Risālah dar Hukūmat-e Islāmī (Treatise on Islamic Government)

Hāshiyah Kifāyah (Commentaries on Kifāyah)

Risālah dar Quwwah wa Fi‘l (Treatise on Potential and Actuality)

Risālah dar Ithbāt-e Dhāt (Treatise on Substantiation of the Essence (of
God))

Risālah dar Sifāt (Treatise on Attributes (of God))

Risālah dar Af‘āl (Treatise on Actions (of God))

Risālah dar Wasā’it (Treatise on Intermediaries)

Risālah al-Insān Qabl al-Dunyā’ (Treatise on Humans before the World)

Risālah al-Insān fī al-Dunyā’ (Treatise on Humans in the World)

Risālah al-Insān ba‘d al-Dunyā’ (Treatise on Humans after the World)

Risālah dar Nubuwwah (Treatise on Prophethood)

Risālah dar Wilāyah (Treatise on Trusteeship)

Risālah dar Mushtaqqāt (Treatise on Derivatives)

Risālah dar Burhān (Treatise on Logical Reason)

Risālah dar Mughalitah (Treatise on Sophistry)

Risālah dar Tahlīl (Treatise on Analysis)

Risālah dar Tarkīb (Treatise on Synthesis)

Risālah dar I‘tibārāt (Treatise on Credibilities)

Risālah dar Nubuwwah wa Maqāmāt (Treatise on Prophethood and Ranks)

Manzūmah dar Rasm-e Khatt-e Nasta‘līq (Poem on Writing Nasta‘līq
Calligraphy)

‘Alī wa al-Falsafah al-Ilāhiyyah (‘Alī and Divine Philosophy)

Qur’ān dar Islām (the Qur’an in Islam)

Shī‘ah dar Islām (the Shī‘ah in Islam)

Muhākimāt bayn-e dow Mukātibāt (Appraisal of Two Missives)

Bidāyah al-Hikmah

Nihāyah al-Hikmah

Many scientific papers published in scientific articles

The final two books (“Bidāyah al-Hikmah” and “Nihāyah al-Hikmah”) are
very important philosophical texts; they are the greatest evolvement of
divine philosophy available—written by the same prudent hand that wrote
“Tafsīr al-Mīzān”. Currently, these two books are part of the Islamic
seminary curriculum.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن کس که زکوي آشنايي است داند که متاع ما کجايي است
  </p>
</blockquote>

The One from the friendship land,

knows where my goods come from.

I hastily wrote these few paragraphs as well as my knowledge could avail
regarding ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī and handed them over. I confess that I did
not do justice to the Master.

However, I have hopes that I may fulfill my duty of gratitude regarding
His Holiness and his brother (hallowed be their graves) and present it
upon the people. They were both my masters and I am much indebted to
them for their education and edification.

Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لقد علّمني رسول الله (ص) ألف باب يفتح کل باب ألف باب.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, the Prophet of Allah (S) taught me one thousand doors
(subjects), every door of which opens one thousand other doors.”[^27]

Zurārah and Abī Basīr cited regarding Imām al-Bāqir (‘a) and Imām
al-Sādiq (‘a) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«قالا علينا أن نلقي إليکم الأصول وعليکم أن تفرّعوا.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They told us, ‘We taught you the principles and it is for you to
elaborate on them’.”[^28]

‘Allāmah Hasan-zādah Āmolī

[^1]: Sūrat al-‘Alaq 96:1-5.

[^2]: A title reserved for exceptional religious savants. [trans.]

[^3]: A designation accorded to a person with great and extensive
knowledge. [trans.]

[^4]: A title used for those who have made the pilgrimage to Mecca.
[trans.]

[^5]: An appellation used for a person whose mother is a direct
patrilineal descendant of Alī ibn Abī Tālib (‘a).

[^6]: A denomination used for direct paternal descendants of Alī ibn Abī
Tālib (‘a).

[^7]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salām, ‘alayhim’us-salām, or ‘alayhā’s-salām [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is mentioned after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imāms from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^8]: Nahj al-Balāghah, sermon [khutbah] 131.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Nahl 16:89.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:23.

[^11]: According to exegeses this refers to Sūrat al-Fātihah which is
recited in prayer at least seventeen times a day. [trans.]

[^12]: Sūrat al-Hijr 15:87.

[^13]: This is the night in which the Holy Qur’an was first revealed
unto the Prophet (S).

[^14]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:124.

[^15]: Al-Mīzān, vol. 1, p. 277.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Wāqi‘ah 56:13-14.

[^17]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:44.

[^18]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:91.

[^19]: Tabaqāt A‘lām al-Shī‘ah by ‘Allāmah Shaykh Āqā Bozorg Tihrānī, p.
1565, fourth section of the first chapter on the notables of the
fourteenth century anno hegirae.

[^20]: Sūrat Fussilat 41:30-32.

[^21]: This is a literary allusion to the place where dervishes live and
worship because that is where they realize mystical ecstasy. [trans.]

[^22]: The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa ālihī wa sallam [may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). [Trans.]

[^23]: Asfār, vol. 4, p. 75.

[^24]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:105.

[^25]: Tahsīl al-Sa‘ādah, p. 29, Haydarābād Publications.

[^26]: Sūrat al-Jumu‘ah 62:4.

[^27]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 7, p. 281.

[^28]: Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, māddah f r ‘ [ف ر ع].


