Discourse One: The Spirituality of the Shi‘ism
==============================================

The method of apprehending truth
--------------------------------

One of the extraordinary distinctions and beauties of the divine
religion of Islam is that its teachings have been propounded so as to be
wholly assimilable by all human societies. Of course, to understand this
concept and its invaluable results, deep contemplation is necessary.

Many who are wallowing in worldly thoughts and have withdrawn completely
from spiritual life consider this, as well as other statements that
evoke spiritual issues and praise spiritual life, a poetic notion
lacking any real value.

They are people with limited knowledge who, upon hearing materialist
scholars say, “Religion is a relic from the Age of Legends”, have
neglected to look closely at Islam’s call and the veracious teachings of
this impeccable religion.

Needless to say, one should not expect a better and more profound
opinion or a more clear and logical outlook from such people and there
is no need for their acceptance or endorsement because if our view is
righteous and justified it does not rely on the judgment of others nor
require their approval. Hence, it is better that we leave them be: “Let
them die in their vainglorious agony!”

Islam makes assimilation of its teachings easier in every respect
through use of:

Instruction and guidance of the superior (those with expertise)

Logical exposition and reasoning

Conscience and observation

Clearly, these are the only ways for a human to understand and apprehend
any type of truth. By way of illustration, sick persons may obtain
prescriptions from a competent and sanctioned doctor, deduce the remedy
through their own medical knowledge, or realize it by observing the
positive effects of a treatment in similar patients.

In the same manner, students of foreign languages may learn the meaning
of words from an adept teacher, infer it through grammar and conditions
of the sentence, or learn it by observing its use by native speakers of
the foreign language.

Therefore, whenever we wish to fathom something as a “rational human”,
we must apprehend it through one or more of these methods. If possible
we learn facts by personal observation. In the event that this is not
viable, we deduce through our God-given reasoning.

Finally, if we cannot learn by either observation or reasoning, we must
refer to someone else who has grasped the knowledge through observation
or reasoning (albeit through one or more intermediaries) and follow
their view. Naturally, we must first verify that person’s competence
through observation or deduction if we ourselves cannot fathom the issue
itself by such means.

This is the collection of methods a person uses with the orientation of
the system of creation. Islam accredits all three ways, and the Noble
Qur’an, which is the divine book of Islam, explicitly bases the call of
God on the principles governing the world.

It enjoins and leads us to a series of ideological and practical
teachings necessitated by the relationship of humanity with the world
and the universal order in general. The human civilization will sooner
or later realize the necessity of believing in and effectuating these
teachings.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set thy face toward the pure religion; it is in accordance with
the nature [fitrah] of God upon which He has formed the nature of
humankind. There is no alteration in the creation of God. This is the
enduring (and true) religion, however most humans do not know.”***[^1]

Based on this, Islam enjoins us to adhere to knowledge and science and
has prohibited following irrational and unscientific paths. It warns of
speech and actions that are not in line with reason and necessitate
following doubt, conjecture, carnal lusts, desires, feelings, and
longings.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And follow not that of which you have no knowledge…”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... إَنَّ الظَّنَّ لاَ يُغْنِي مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely conjecture will not avail aught against the truth…”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلاَ تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَى فَيُضِلَّكَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not follow desire, for it shall lead you astray from the path
of Allah…”***[^4]

Method of the guidance of the superior [tarīq-e irshād-e mawlawī]
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the Divine Book, God, the Almighty, directly addresses His servants
and speaks with us. He portrays His divinity and pure qualities. He
describes the principles of the universal system, which He has created
and manages, and the genesis and termination of the cosmos, which He
directs. Also, He explains the decrees and instructions that must be
carried out in the human world which are founded upon the universal
system.

This method of expression seen in religious literature, i.e. the Holy
Qur’an and narrations of the Prophet (S) and the infallible members of
his Household, is an aspect of “the guidance of a superior” [irshād-e
mawlawī]. It shows that humans, who are infinitesimal before God, must
submit before the divine presence of the Creator and obey His
“canonical” [tashrī‘ī] laws just as they by their natures obey His
“genetic” [takwīnī] (i.e. natural, hence inviolable) laws.

No doubt, this method of expression is acceptable to true advocates of
Islam and disciples of the school of the Qur’an, that is, those who have
comprehended the righteousness of Islam and the divinity of the Qur’an
through knowledge and conviction. For, on the one hand, the Divine—who
has created all laws, reasons, and even the structure of causality—is
not restricted by His own creation. He is above these causes, and not
limited by them.

When we ask a person, “Why did you do that?” or “Why did you say that?”
we are asking for the cause. What we mean is: what external cause gave
you the right to do or say that?

Logically, this question or objection is only justifiable regarding a
person who is bound by external causes and whose rights derive from
external activities, effects, and rules. However, concerning a being
that has created the concept of necessity and effect of external causes,
this question or objection is completely irrelevant.

If what He commands is of the genetic order, His command is precisely
the external existence of the phenomenon.[^5] If it is of the canonical
order, it is an external virtue or evil that has been given the form of
an instruction or prohibition,[^6] and this is, of course, according to
reason.

On the other hand, with regard to the fact that Islam is a natural
[fitrī] religion (meaning that it is in line with human nature not that
it is mundane or secular) and that its intellectual and practical
substance derives from the universal system of creation, Islam asks only
that which conforms to the human make-up.

The existential constitution of humanity is equipped with abilities and
mechanisms which yearn for the religious call and, obviously, this does
not require comprehensive rationalization.

By way of illustration, a human, who is constitutionally equipped with
the faculty of nutrition from head to toe, does not require reasoning to
accept the statement of one who prescribes them food. In the same
manner, a person who is equipped with a reproductive system and does not
suffer from dispositional or mental deviations will never deny the
tradition of marriage and will not need an extensive rationale to accept
this institution.

It is self-evident, therefore, that genetic equipment makes its needs
palpable and acceptable to its host (on the condition that the host does
not deviate from the genetic or natural course on account of malady).

This method, pronounced in the statements of the Qur’an—i.e. guidance of
the superior—is one of the three methods that were previously indicated.
This concise encroachment upon this method was beyond the objectives of
this text. In fact, our chief aim is to demonstrate the authority Islam
bestows upon the other two methods: “the rational method” [tarīq-e
istidlāl] and “the empirical method” [tarīq-e mushāhidah wa ‘ayān].
Among these, major consideration is credited to the empirical method or
transcendent life of Islam, which is otherwise called “Islamic
eschatology”.

The rational method
-------------------

We cannot doubt that discourse and curiosity regarding the causes of
incidents and rationalization of doubtful or suspect theories is an
intrinsic and natural human characteristic.

Humans understand phenomena using all available faculties. They
necessarily accept and cannot disregard them. They comprehend that
knowing and understanding something that has causes and means depends
upon knowing those causes and means. Thus, when they intend to
understand something, first they discuss and enquire into its causes.

Humans are realists due to their God-given fitrah and do not depart from
the fortress of thought for as long as they are alive and healthy.
Whatever they comprehend is due to thought, something for which they
never asked. They eternally desire independence from thought and do not
regard it to be objective. They are forever seeking external truth and
independent of thought.

Consider a man who peers at himself though a mirror. Even though he
knows the mirror creates disruption in his appearance—such as inversion,
magnification, reduction, etc.—he is concerned with his own face not the
illusory image that is portrayed in the mirror.

In any event, humans are naturally realists. Even when those who deviate
from this belief through discourse or other factors and become sophists
or skeptics summarize the essence of their beliefs and say “we doubt
everything”, “we doubt everything external to ourselves”, or “there is
nothing but our thoughts”, it is evident that these statements are
presented as scientific and definite information in a realist
perspective.

In addition, in their daily lives they treat their thoughts
realistically like everyone else. When they encounter an external
advantage, they hurry to achieve it and when they come across
disadvantage, they try to avoid it and never treat their thoughts as
unreal. As a result, in practice, they confirm that they are realists.

Additionally, even when advocates of “pragmatism”, who have negated the
value of realism in thought and only give credence to realism in
practice, define the essence of their thought: “thought only has
practical value”, they put forth this statement as something with real
value.

It is evident that they want us to believe that in reality thoughts only
have practical value and this itself is a practical truth. If their
intent is only the practical value of this thought, then they are a type
of skeptic. If so, like true skeptics they would also give credence to
thought in words and deeds (as previously stated). Therefore, humankind
cannot escape from realism.

Obviously, we must not go too far and conclude that any thought, even
one deriving from human senses, completely corresponds with reality and
that reality is exactly what we perceive externally without human
cognitive processing.

What we mean is that the distance between self and the external world is
not completely obstructed and, in short, the human mind can access
external reality. (Further elucidation of this matter will come at its
proper place.)

These two issues, meaning “human realism” and “human rational
intellect”, which derive from human nature and genesis, have drawn the
attention of Islam—which is based upon the system of creation. As a
result, even though Islam has conveyed its teachings though divine
revelation (guidance of the superior), it has also traversed the path of
free reasoning and in this way encourages and emphatically recommends
following Islam.

For example, among the (over six thousand six hundred) verses of the
Holy Qur’an, many verses may be found that express the theoretical and
practical teachings of Islam in a ratiocinative manner. These verses
present their objectives with sufficient reasons to the realist instinct
and rational intellect of humanity.

None of these verses demand that their ideas be accepted without dispute
and the Qur’an does not reason about them as a pastime; rather, the
Qur’an requests: “Freely refer to your sound judgment. If you confirm
these assertions though the reasons and evidence provided (and you will
surely confirm them) accept and submit to Islam. (This is the
philosophical and free rationality outlook.)”

As a further example, amid the holy Qur’anic verses, there are many that
rebuke ignorance and rigidity of mind, praise knowledge and
understanding, and instruct humans to think, contemplate, plan, weigh,
debate, and inquire into every nook and cranny of the world of creation.

These verses are so profuse and clear that quoting them does not seem
necessary. However, there are some practical precepts that rise from the
superior knowledge of God, such as the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…That is better for you, if you know.”***[^7]

These verses combined with other verses that enjoin intellection and
thought indicate that every Muslim must understand the good and evil
which give rise to religious precepts, even if they cannot understand
their details and characteristics.

Many hadīths regarding this issue may be found in the traditions of the
Prophet (S) and statements of the noble members of his Household [ahl
al-bayt] (‘a).

Advantages of the rational method in Islam

The advantages of this approach in the lofty teachings of Islam are as follows:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When placed on the path of thought and free logical reasoning, the
teachings of Islam are assimilable for humans, who instinctively tend
toward philosophical contemplation and rational thought.

Apart from divine revelation, the rational method is another support
that keeps Islamic teachings alive for all people and all time and the
objectives of this pure religion will always be more consistent and
novel through the eyes of logic.

By opening this path, even after discontinuation of revelation and
termination of prophethood, religious teachings will never be vague or
abstract and will never be put aside as relics of a bygone age.

In order to better understand the important effects of this enlightening
Islamic method, we must inquire deeper into Islamic teachings and
especially inspect the two issues of “divinity” and “Islamic
eschatology” in more detail.

Using both methods (revelation and reasoning), Islam asserts that the
Lord of the Cosmos has absolute knowledge, power, and life. It also
asserts that all phenomena, in all aspects of their being, existentially
rely on His existence—like a shadow that follows an indicator—and are
“absolute need” before His “absolute needlessness”.

Logically, this infinite being is unique and the existence of more than
one such being is inconceivable.[^8]Because in their limited existence
all phenomena, whether tangible or not, and also the world as a whole
depend on His infinite and unlimited existence.

He exists and is evident in all aspects of every object’s existence.
Therefore, if some creature is cut off from Him, it will lose its
existence and dissipate into nihility and nothingness like a shadow that
detaches from its object.

In order to keep the uninformed from simplemindedly misunderstanding
these truths and thinking of the Divinity’s true sovereignty
[qayyūmiyyat-e haqīqī-ye ulūhiyyah] in the world as a type of
“incarnation” [hulūl], existential “mingling” [ikhtilāt], or
“incorporation” [imtizāj], the Infallibles (‘a) have broached this
subject by negating “anthropomorphism” [tashbīh] and making use of
negative theology.

They maintain that God has life but not like ours; He has knowledge but
different than ours; He has power but unlike the power we have; etc.

It can be said that the reason that “Allāh-u Akbar”[^9] is like a slogan
in Islam is to protect this truth from misinterpretation and prevent it
from being understood in terms of immanence or union [ittihād] and in
this way divest divinity of its infinitude in the minds of people. Even
if the intellectual form of divinity in our minds manifests as good and
righteousness, the pure essence of God is even greater than this finite
and limited concept.

In accordance with this principle, the Holy Qur’an clearly states: The
Divine is Infinite and All-encompassing and shall never be limited or
contained.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَلاَ إِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُحِيطٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know that surely He encompasses all things absolutely.”***[^10]

In this same manner, absolute authority and sovereignty are particular
to the Divine and He has no partner in the creation and management of
the cosmos or in the emanation of command.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ لا إِلَهَ إِلاّ
هُوَ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is Allah, your Lord, Creator of all things; there is no god
save Him…”***[^11]

Even though the general law of causality links the existence of objects
to each other and makes causes necessary for effects—and Islamic
teachings verify this—Islamic teachings refute the absolute independence
of causes. Strictly speaking, God has created causes and effects, the
relationship between them, and the superiority of cause over effect and
He reigns supreme over them.

The wheels of existence are in continuous rotation. Through the
relationship and union among objects, a stable system has been created.
God has created this system using the correlations He has made dominant
between objects and He guides all things toward the specific purpose of
their creation by means of these associations.

Furthermore, human social life cannot be maintained without a set of
rules and regulations. However, according to Islam only the commands of
God, the Honorable, the Glorious, must be obeyed. This is because
absolute proprietorship is His and no one has the right to expropriate
command of His creations except by His leave. Therefore, any command
that He issues and issued commands that He validates must be carried out
and all other commands are rejected.

Prophets: the epitome of divine manifestation
---------------------------------------------

As we previously stated, because the Absolute Existence completely
encompasses the world of contingents, His relationship with creation
cannot be explained in terms of incarnation [hulūl], unity [ittihād], or
dissociation [infisāl]; rather, the most proximate and suitable term is
“manifestation” [tajallī or zuhūr].

This term has also been utilized in the Qur’an and repeatedly in the
speech of the Infallibles, specifically the first leader of the Shī‘ahs.

Regarding God, the Infinite, who existentially encompasses the world of
creation, we cannot say that He has become incarnated [hulūl] into a
worldly object; that He has been limited and contained in the framework
of existence; or that He has transformed his necessary essence into the
essence of a contingent being [mumkin] and has become like one of His
creations!

Also, we cannot say that this Unlimited and All-encompassing Essence has
taken a place in a corner of the world in rank with His creations and
rules the domain of creation like a king.

Instead, as an explanation of the relationship of the Divine with this
world we may declare: the Boundless Existence of the Truth, who
absolutely encompasses everything, is perpetually manifest in all things
and places and shows Himself without soiling His divinity with
corporeality [māddah], temporality [zamān], or locus [makān].

All beings, with their explicit essential differences, are like mirrors
that show His pure existence to the extent of each of their capacities.
It is evident that any limitation that occurs derives from the mirror
[mir’āt] not the manifestation [mar’ī] and any defect that appears
derives from the form [mazhar] not the image [zāhir].

Clearly, this does not entail incarnation, unity, or dissociation all of
which necessitate limit and corporeality. Beings are neither one with
God nor are they distinct from Him. If the theory of incarnation and
unity were correct, there would be no difference between God and
creation—in fact, there would be no God.

Additionally, if the theory of dissociation were correct, a limited
aspect would exist between God and creation and due to this instance a
limitedness in God, and as a result He would lose the divine status. (We
shall return to this discussion later on).

Any person who disregards the thoughts and deeds of Muslims—especially
the first Muslims—and only refers to the Book of God and the sayings of
the Prophet (S) and members of his Household [ahl al-bayt] (‘a) would
inevitably understand that according to Islam, God does not retain
incarnation or association as part of His essence or essential aspects
in regard with the world of creation and humanity in particular.

The Qur’an and hadīth expressly assert: even the holy prophets (‘a), the
most prominent of which were Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad
(S), had no rank besides being servants of God.

Their human characteristics are similar to other humans. Ultimately, any
power that arises or knowledge that manifests in the framework of
prophethood is divine power and divine knowledge and any commandment
that issues from this institution is a commandment from God. The only
purposes of this institution are mediation and publicization of
messages, and prophets have no part in formulating the laws they
propound.

The only discernible difference between prophets and other humans is
that they possess the eminence of perfect servitude. That is to say,
regarding their spiritual lives, prophets and Imāms have attained utter
perfection and all other humans fall short of this state.

Emergence of incarnation [hulūl] in the Church
----------------------------------------------

Even though Islam has greatly endeavored in the promotion of the
monotheistic [tawhīd] view of God, His infiniteness, and His
encompassment of existence and has accorded no existential independence
or legislative or hegemonic rights to the realm of humanity, from the
time the Church gained power and became known as the haven of the
Christian world, it founded its teachings on incarnation (in the same
sense we have used previously).

There is no doubt that this doctrine restricted the Divine, in its
entirety, into the limited material existence of the honorable Jesus
Christ (‘a).

According to this doctrine, the Divine, whether or not it can separate
from humans, has the “capacity” to take on the identity of material man
and equip itself with human characteristics. In fact, many parts of the
contemporary Torah confirm this belief, as is evident in the account of
the creation of Adam (‘a) and the narratives regarding Noah, Abraham,
Lot, Jacob (‘a) and others.

This view, i.e. incarnation of divinity in a corporeal human, entails
negation of metaphysics. Thus, because in religion the issue of divinity
is fundamental and is the fountainhead of all ideological and practical
tenets, this view has toppled all other religious issues based upon
spirituality and has caused all spiritual issues to be explained in
terms of materiality.

This belief spread in the Christian world and became established. Of
course, the previous advocates of this belief had a close precedent with
idolatry. The issue of triumvirate divinity—which is a type of
idolatry—was one of their most deeply rooted religious beliefs and the
spiritual and lifestyle effects of this belief could not be so easily
forgotten.

At that time, idolatry reigned supreme over a great number of the
earth’s inhabitants. Belief in Trinity [tathlīth], incarnation, and all
their derivative beliefs—the best testimony of which are the histories
of creeds and religions—were of the primary characteristics of this
idolatry.

In fact, the belief in Trinity entered Christianity from idolatry after
minor adaptations in form. Indeed, it can be stated that the only
discord between idolatrous creeds and the Church is the issue of
prophethood.

Certainly, we do not intend to start a religious debate with advocates
of the Church. In pursuit of our aim we merely intend to evoke various
historic truths regarding Islam and Christianity.

In short, the incarnation tenet of the Church, the close relationship of
Christians with idolatry and triumvirate divinity, the Torah’s summative
verification of personification, and the contact of Christianity and
idolatry at the time all gathered together and laid the foundation of a
completely anti-spiritual materialist view in the structure of the
Christian World.

From that time, a panorama of a dark and evil materialistic thought was
imprinted upon the Christian World.

The Church did not content itself with the degree of incarnation which
it allowed for Jesus Christ. It applied this same incarnation to itself,
put itself in Christ’s place, and introduced itself as a sovereign that
must be obeyed without question.

In addition, with rites such as Holy Communion or Lord’s Supper [‘ishā’
rabbānī] they incarnate the flesh and body of Christ (divinity) within
everyone!

With the unchallengeable power the Church attained, it limited the
gospels, controlled beliefs and thoughts, and banned free debate in
religious teachings. The tribunal of belief scrutiny ruled the
possessions and lives of people with singular tyranny and the blood of
millions was spilt due to the inviolable and obligatory dictates of the
church.

The Church sanctified the kings and tyrants of the day, accepted the
repentance of and issued absolution for any sinner it wished, and
forever deprived whoever it wanted of the benefaction of spiritual bliss
and beatific heaven.

In his greatly spiritual utterances, Jesus Christ (‘a) affirmed that his
pure faith followed the pure faith of the great prophets (‘a), that it
shall always live, and that it shall never fade from the world. And the
Church, which juxtaposed that spiritual Christian faith with an
incarnational and material regime, drunk with pride from its increasing
power, thought that it would retain this power for as long as the world
existed.

However, it neglected the matter that immediately after taking on
material features any method or regime, even religious ones, shall
necessarily enter the worldly cycle and become limited by natural laws.
Thus, like other material phenomena, it shall have a limited lifespan
and go through the various stages of childhood, youth and old age, and
inevitably one day die.

That which is permanent in the world and shall not pass is spirituality
unadulterated by materiality and beyond the jurisdiction of nature. It
has no death and shall always, to a greater or lesser extent, accompany
humanity.

In any event, after a few centuries—which is nothing compared with the
entirety of history—of tyrannical rule, control of thoughts, and
suppression of contrary opinions and objectionable understandings, it
could not in the end resist the conscientious reason of the people.
Thus, it was defeated and lost its almost boundless power.

A comprehensive record of these events can be found in the history of
Christianity’s penetration into the great Roman Empire and the historic
timeline of the influence of the Church until its downfall.

The Church lost its horrific power and imprinted memories upon the minds
of the people of the West that: religion is an ambiguous material regime
that rules in the interests of the powerful and is prejudicial to the
weak! Religion is a set of incomprehensible beliefs that cannot be
explained with any type of logic!

Religion is a series of imitative thoughts that no one has the right to
debate or inquire about! Religion is tyranny of a type that the
conscience cannot accept but to which the tongue must succumb! And
finally, religion is a natural tradition that has embodied a stage in
humanity’s history after which it will give way to a better and more
complete natural tradition!

Naturally, the effect of this development was that some of the Church’s
adherents turned their backs upon it and others who remained faithful
turned the earlier “unconditional obedience” into “empty sanctification
and respect” and the Church became a formality.

The power the people attained by overthrowing the Church and the
privation from the benefits of life caused by several centuries of
suppression by the Church induced the people to take up a way of life
exactly opposite to the path of spirituality.

Thus, for the crime of being a method of exploitation of the Church,
wherever they came across spirituality they would turn aside from it and
lose themselves in the maelstrom of materiality.

Additionally, the people were not acquainted with true spiritual thought
due to the incarnational materialist training of the Church that had
become established in the depths of the people’s minds throughout the
centuries.

Hence, spirituality, which the people had inherited as traditions, was
gradually forgotten. In addition, the pastime of materialist scholars
who coined advancement as being parallel to industrial advancement and
the occupation of various governments in world conquest and domination
by means of the weapon of antireligious propaganda made an effective
contribution against religious beliefs and spiritual thought.

Naturally, in such an environment where popular thought defines
existence as nothing but materiality and material laws, religion becomes
defined as a social phenomenon that emerges in uncivilized and
semi-advanced societies.

Additionally, it could be defined as an intellectual phenomenon that
occupies a fragment of human history. Also, according to material
evolution, everything will progress into something better and more
complete. Therefore, the age of religion shall give rise to a better and
more complete age.

Responsibility for this unfortunate situation
---------------------------------------------

A person who meticulously considers these historical developments—from
the advent of Christianity until present day—or contemplates and
analyzes the current situation of the Western World—which is regarded as
the cradle of modern civilization—and retrogressively dissects the
proximate and distant causes of these historical developments, will have
no doubt that the main blame for humanity’s moral degradation,
abandonment of human spirituality and establishment of completely
material life in the place of spiritual life falls upon the Church and
its teachings.

The Noble Qur’an explicitly holds religious authorities responsible for
the religious disorder and the discord and chaos in human life.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ مِن بَعْدِ
مَا جَاءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيًا بَيْنَهُمْ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who were given the Book were not at variance save after
knowledge had come to them, being envious of one another…”***[^12]

Moreover, it declares that the issue of Trinity and the statement
“Christ is the son of God” [al-Masīh ibn Allāh] is a fabrication of the
Church, which has incorporated a type of idolatry into the heavenly
teachings of Jesus Christ (‘a) and has turned it into a tenet of the
Christian call.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَقَالَتْ النَّصَارَى الْمَسِيحُ ابْنُ اللّهِ ذَلِكَ قَوْلُهُم
بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ يُضَاهِؤُونَ قَوْلَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِن قَبْلُ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Christians say, ‘The Messiah (Christ) is the son of Allah’.
That is the utterance of their mouths imitating the utterances of those
who disbelieved before…”***[^13]

Following this they embodied divinity into the Church and introduced the
word of the clergy as unconditionally binding in order to attain their
material desires.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اتَّخَذُواْ أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِن دُونِ
اللّهِ وَالْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَمَا أُمِرُوا إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُوا
إِلَهًا وَاحِدًا لا إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ سُبْحَانَهُ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from
Allah and Messiah son of Mary; whereas they were not commanded save to
serve one God. There is no god but He; He is pure of what they associate
(with Him).”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... إِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الأَحْبَارِ وَالرُّهْبَانِ لَيَأْكُلُونَ
أَمْوَالَ النَّاسِ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَيَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely many of the rabbis and monks consume the wealth of the people
unrighteously and debar (them) from the way of Allah…”***[^15]

Furthermore, God, the Exalted, commands His Holy Prophet (S) to
encourage followers of other divine books to cooperate with Muslims in
two aims: first, that they attribute divinity exclusively to the One God
and worship no god but Him.

Second, that they ascribe mastery and lordship solely to God and refrain
from choosing one from among themselves, who is generally a peer and has
no preference in humanity, as an unconditional sovereign in order to
reconcile their livelihoods with the system of creation—the same system
that has created all humans with intelligence, freewill, and desire for
beatitude and has stamped no person’s forehead with the mark “unduly
dear”.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوا إِلَى كَلَمَةٍ سَوَاء بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ شَيْئًا
وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضًا أَرْبَابًا مِن دُونِ اللّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, O People of the Book! Come to a word common among us and among
you: That we serve none save Allah and that we associate nothing else
with Him and that some of us take not others as lords besides
God…”***[^16]

Islam’s recommendation to its followers
---------------------------------------

In its campaign against incarnation [hulūl] and unity [ittihād], which
the Church—and before them the Jews and idolaters—had advocated, Islam
has made deep and emphatic recommendations to its followers.

In many verses, the Qur’an urges Muslims to be firm in their
monotheistic belief [tawhīd], be sincere in their servitude
[‘ubūdiyyah], follow the Book [kitāb] and Tradition [sunnah] unanimously
and wholeheartedly, solve all intellectual disputes through the Book and
Tradition, and refrain from egotistical advice, exploitation, and
judgment using religious tenets. These matters have been discussed in
“Tafsīr al-Mīzān” under the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلاَ تَفَرَّقُوا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And hold you fast, all together, to the cord of Allah and divide
not…”***[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ادْخُلُوا فِي السِّلْمِ كَآفَّةً
وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ
مُبِينٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe, enter absolute peace and submission (to Allah)
and follow not the footsteps of Satan; surely he is an obvious foe to
you.”***[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... كُلُوا مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللّهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ
الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Eat of what Allah has provided for you and follow not the footsteps
of Satan; surely he is an obvious foe to you.”***[^19]

The Holy Qur’an advises Muslims to limit their spiritual commingling to
the Islamic society, which is the society of piety and theism, and to
shun spiritual commingling and superior-subordinate relationships with
non-Islamic societies including polytheists, idolaters, and followers of
divine books such as Christians, Jews, and Magi.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لاَ يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ
إِلاَّ أَن تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللّهُ نَفْسَهُ
وَإِلَى اللّهِ الْمَصِيرُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let not the believers take unbelievers for friends or superiors
rather than believers and whosoever does that has no connection with
Allah in anything, unless to dissimulate before them for fear. Allah
cautions you to beware of (disobeying) Him and unto Allah is the
return.”***[^20]

The Holy Qur’an has implicitly and explicitly mentioned in several
places the consequences of such spiritual commingling and
superior-subordinate relationships. For example, it says: until now (at
the close of the Prophet’s (S) life) you Muslims have been in danger due
to the covetousness of non-Muslim nations.

Every moment you were in peril of downfall, but today the unbelievers
have despaired from shattering your organized religious society. So fear
outsiders no longer and be at peace for they shall never be able to
seize this blessing from you and obliterate your religious
establishment, which is the Islamic approach.

Fear the unbelievers no longer but fear God. Because if you deviate from
the path that God has set for you (following the Book and Tradition) and
take up other paths, God will make the same trade with you that He made
with the others—He took away the gift of spiritual bliss and worldly
welfare, created division among them, and denied them every kind of
material and spiritual supremacy and independence.[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... الْيَوْمَ يَئِسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِن دِينِكُمْ فَلاَ
تَخْشَوْهُمْ وَاخْشَوْنِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Today, the disbelievers despaired of (harming) your religion;
therefore, fear them not, fear me…”***[^22]

Moreover, in its predictions (which must be considered divine reports),
the Noble Qur’an implicitly indicates that due to relationships with
non-Islamic societies, the Islamic society will successively abandon the
precepts of the Qur’an using various excuses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَذَا
الْقُرْآنَ مَهْجُورًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (on the Day of Judgment) the Prophet will declare: O my Lord!
Surely my people have forsaken this Qur’an.”***[^23]

Also, due to spiritual commingling with the Christian World, Islamic
methods and traditions shall be reversed. People will change religious
laws and turn virtue into evil and evil into virtue. They shall deem
religious tenets superstition and consider support of religion folly.

On that day, corruption will expand to the seas and deserts and trouble
shall succeed plight. Perhaps through this the people will tire of the
evil consequences of their unrestraint and ungodliness and return to the
natural religion.

Despair of Muslims before the West
----------------------------------

Here we will discuss repercussions of incidents at the advent of Islam
(after the passing of the Prophet until circa fourth century anno
hegirae (AH)) and the ensuing series of ramifications that expand and
deepen with the passage of time.

Discussion about whether or not the foremost agents of these occurrences
intended correction or sabotage and whether they were good or evil
people are not the aims of this discourse. However, these are singular
circumstances and in order to fully examine them we must perforce probe
into and analyze the initial roots.

Thus, we are compelled to refer to the dawn of the Islamic era in hopes
of locating our objective. Of course, persons who truly intend to learn
must not and cannot obscure the truths they uncover or invert in their
minds that which they have understood.

In order to elucidate this matter, we must say that today, in terms of
disorder in spiritual life, moral corruption, and confusion of human
mentalities we are similar to the West. Even though Professor Henry
Corbin professes that Muslims have yet to sample the flavor of modernity
(!), we still have some life left and the extirpating deluge has not
wrought destruction upon our spirituality as it has done with the
spirituality of the Western World.

Indeed, in loss of spiritual life and moral corruption our situation is
very similar to the West. However, it cannot be denied that contrary to
the West, we have not created this unfortunate situation ourselves;
rather, it happened the day the Western civilization came after its
Eastern customers—especially us Muslims—with its bewitching appearance
full of décor and finery, first as honored guests and then as powerful
hosts, and wriggled its way into our society.

With their effective and penetrating propaganda the West indoctrinated
us to think in the following manner:

‘We do not possess the necessary human intellect and resolve; therefore,
we must throw aside that intellect and resolve, being completely
useless, and only consider the path that the West determines for us. We
must do what they intend. We must abandon all our characteristics and
become westernized in speech and action, heart and appearance!’

As a result of this inculcation, when we reviewed our sad outmoded
lives, without distinguishing between harm and benefit, between poison
and panacea—because we had initially lost our intellectual
independence—we blindly imitated the Western lifestyle.

Hence, every case of Western corruption augmented the existing
corruption in our own society and every case of goodness and
correction—because we were not ready and did not have the capacity to
accept—brought about corruption in our affairs and no beneficial
outcome.

As it happens, from among the unfortunate conditions that exist in our
Islamic society, those that are similar to the adverse circumstances in
the West have come to us though imitation of the West and the
undesirable states of affairs that we have are not directly related to
the fact of our being Muslims and methods of previous centuries.

Nonetheless, if our foregoing background was not corrupt and mortified,
we would never accept this perversion so easily. We would defend the
most excellent treasure of our being—spiritual life and ethical
virtues—with felicitously and never would our cogitative mind, if we had
not lost it, submit to the iniquitous logic of unquestioning emulation!

In any event, in order to understand the root of our present deplorable
situation and discover its primal factors, we have no choice but to look
back and study past events and examine the general practice of the
Islamic society. We must return to the initial centuries of the advent
of Islam until we find an acceptable reason for our current situation.

In the first steps in this reminiscence, we realize that the general
situation of the Muslim World has been similar for nearly twelve entire
centuries (i.e. from the year 60 AH, about 100 years before the European
civilization gradually penetrated into Islamic countries).

All this time we have been dwelling in monotonous spiritual torpor and
moral degradation. Even though sometimes there were fluctuations in our
society because of historical turns, it has been persistently corrupt
and has had little similarity to the glistering radiance of the era of
the Prophet (S).

Therefore, we must draw our instruments of discourse and inquisitiveness
to the advent of Islam which is the era of the rule of the Companions of
the Prophet (S) [sahābah] and start our search from that period.

Of course, as we have stated, in this discussion we intend to
continually pursue our objective and it is not our intent to examine the
character of the religious persons of the advent of Islam or to write
the biography of the great sahābah. Even so, there is no choice but to
mention this series of historical events in order to clarify the main
discussion, which we now return to.

Inception of the deviation from the path of the Prophet (S)
-----------------------------------------------------------

By delving into the situation of Islam after the passing of the Prophet
(S), we see a similar and even symmetrical situation to the Christian
clergy and the powerful Church. The same signs can be seen among the
sahābah just as in the first days of the appearance of the Church and
the Christian clergy.

The belief of incarnation that the Church promoted regarding Jesus
Christ (‘a) was not duplicated by the important men of the advent of
Islam regarding Prophet Muhammad (S), except in one or two cases (the
Uhud battle and the day the Prophet passed away) in which some drew
their swords and shouted: “Muhammad has not died and will never die!”

Even so, because conditions were not favorable and because the Holy
Qur’an had annihilated this fallacy at the roots with overt statements
and had made it clear that the Noble Prophet (S) is a human like all
others and is similar to others in life and death, this susurration
easily died away and had no effect on the Islamic society.

A similar situation to the Church after Christ, which was referred to as
incarnation of divinity in the Church—meaning absolute sovereignty and
unquestionable rule—in previous pages and which gives control of both
spiritual and material aspects of the people to the Church (dictatorship
in its absolute form!), also manifested in the Muslim World in the first
days after the Holy Prophet (S) passed away, first in the form of the
caliphate and later extending to the sahābah.

This issue emerged with a very simple, relatively understandable,
logical statement. At its inception, in declaration of its general
program, the Caliphate stated, “The Holy Prophet (S) was assisted by
divine revelation [wahy] in decision-making and general administration;
however, with the passing of the Prophet (S) divine revelation has been
cut off so that we have no choice but to make necessary decisions
through ijtihād[^24].”

They also declared, “Like you, we sometimes have correct judgment and
sometimes we make mistakes. If we make a mistake in something advise and
correct us.” Of course, this statement seems very simple and reasonable.

At the time the people regarded its apparent and simple meaning and were
naturally thankful. However, observation of subsequent events and
acquaintance with a series of happenings has cast us into doubt about
the meaning of this statement and this compels us to delve deeper.

Incidentally, what is the meaning of the idea, “The Holy Prophet (S) was
assisted by divine revelation in his works; however, now that we do not
have divine revelation we must perform ijtihād.” Also, what are the
areas in which the Prophet (S) only relied upon divine revelation and
did not interpolate his own judgment and those regarding which a
contemporary Caliph might use his own discernment?

Do the Caliphs mean the divine precepts, which according to the
explication of the Qur’an are perennially immutable and unchangeable? Or
is their intent execution of these commandments, which according the
specific wording of the Qur’an brooks no negligence?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ \* لاَ يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِن
بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلاَ مِنْ خَلْفِهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most assuredly it is a sublime book. Falsehood approaches it not
from before it nor from behind it…”***[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whosoever judges not by that which Allah has revealed, verily
they are the evildoers.”***[^26]

Or are the judicial codes of the Prophet of God (S) which were issued
regarding litigations intended? Clearly by explicit testimony of the
Qur’an in these cases, the verdict of the Prophet of God (S) was law.

He would judge according to material evidence and the verdict was not
based on divine inspiration. Perhaps the intent was the commands that
the Prophet of God (S) issued in general affairs, in war and peace,
after consulting with his followers? It is evident that these affairs
were based upon consultation and the decision of the Prophet (S), thus
they were unrelated to divine revelation.

Or was it meant that the Prophet of God (S) apprehended the Islamic
jurisprudential commandments and rules directly through revelation,
without thought, and that we must deduce our course of action by
subjecting the Book (Qur’an) and Tradition [sunnah] to scrutiny and
ijtihād?

There is no doubt that the Prophet (S) was inspired with the divine
commandments through revelation and others must comprehend them through
ijtihād.

However, this is not limited to the Caliph—any person in the Islamic
society [ummah] capable of religious deduction [istinbāt] must grasp
jurisprudential precepts themselves through ijtihād. Furthermore, this
topic is irrelevant to the responsibilities and practical agenda of the
office of Caliph.

Expedience in the place of truth
--------------------------------

Indeed, the intent of the Caliphate by this utterance was intricate.

Even so, subsequent events clarified its meaning. It soon became clear
that the Caliphate meant to tell the people that it shall exercise its
opinion and ijtihād everywhere and in all things even execution of
divine commandments and religious precepts and that its policy is
expedience [maslihat] regarding the ummah, adaptation of prevalent
precepts with current interests, and ultimately, guidance of the Islamic
society through leadership driven by expediency.

Thus, this declaration means, ‘These religious laws and precepts are for
achieving and retaining your interests. Hence, religious precepts are
subject to contemporary expedience and interests. Basically, at the time
of the Prophet of God (S) discernment of current interests was committed
to divine revelation.

However, after the passing of the Prophet (S) and the loss of current
revelation, discernment of interests has been relegated to ijtihād and
we shall distinguish good from evil through deduction and execute what
is perceived as expedient!’

There is considerable evidence confirming this in the actions of the
first Caliph in the short period of his incumbency.

After the second Caliph assumed his office, many changes were made in
religious precepts which had no reason other than current expedience in
the opinion of the Caliph. At the time of the Third Caliph, there was no
longer any obscurity regarding the issue of modifying precepts in favor
of current expedience.

After this period, with the start of the rule of the Umayyad dynasty and
the domination of Mu‘āwiyah over the Islamic society this issue is so
clear that it can in no way be obscured.

This elevated the caliphate to a status equal to that of prophethood. In
consequence, just as the Holy Prophet (S) was the issuer of Islamic
precepts and administrator of the Islamic society, the Muslim Caliph
also had the same status in issuance of precepts and administration of
Muslim affairs.

One difference was that although the Holy Prophet (S) had the authority
to make necessary expedient decisions in administration of the affairs
of Muslims, he did not have the right to make the smallest change in
divine precepts and commandments whereas the Caliphate had plenary
authority and free reign in both Islamic precepts and administration of
Muslim affairs, and they could make any change they thought was in the
interests of the Islamic society!

At first, this was how the state of affairs progressed, i.e. the
interests of Islam and Muslims were implied. However, later on, the
interests of the Caliphate replaced the interests of Islam and Muslims!
As a result, the Islamic policy of the Holy Prophet (S) was lost and
execution of Islamic precepts and commandments became completely
dependent on the discernment and judgment of the Caliph.

In reply to a protest regarding prohibition of the grater pilgrimage
[hajj-e tamattu‘], temporary marriage [nikāh-e mut‘ah], and other
issues, the Second Caliph first said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«انا زميل محمد.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am the friend and associate of Muhammad.”

And then he explained the current expedience that caused the alteration
and interdiction of these precepts.

In the six-person council that was assembled by the instruction of the
second Caliph to appoint the Third Caliph, after much dispute, which
brought down the candidates to two from the original six (‘Alī (‘a) and
‘Uthmān), “‘Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf”, who had an extra vote in case of a
tie in accordance with the decree of the Second Caliph, extended his
hand towards ‘Alī (‘a) and said, “I shall pledge allegiance to you on
the condition that you deal with us in the same manner as the Shaykhayn
(the first two caliphs).”

‘Alī (‘a) answered, “I shall only act in the manner of the Prophet of
Allah (S).” ‘Abd al-Rahmān did not accept and extended his hand toward
‘Uthmān and presented him with his pledge with the condition of
following the policy of the Shaykhayn. He accepted and thus the matter
of allegiance was ended and ‘Uthmān took the caliphate.

Obviously, there is no difference between the policy of the Prophet of
Allah (S) and that of the Shaykhayn save that the Shaykhayn brought
about changes in the execution of God’s precepts and the method of the
Prophet of Allah (S) according to their understanding of current
interests.

Moreover, it is obvious that these changes were not limited to the
practical and administrative method of the Prophet (S); rather, it had
also spread to religious precepts. The following examples have been
chosen from hundreds of similar cases:

In order to resolve the problem of the apostates after the passing of
the Prophet (S) the First Caliph sent Khālid ibn Walīd, a Companion
[sahābah], with a group of others to war against “Mālik ibn Nuwayrah”.

After arriving at Mālik’s place of residence, Khālid proposed peace and
became his guest. On the same day, he took Mālik by surprise, severed
his head, and slept with his wife that night! After hearing about this
shameful incident the Caliph did not punish Khālid at all and after
‘Umar ibn Khattāb insisted that he be punished, the Caliph told the
latter, “I cannot sheathe an unsheathed sword of Allah!”

After banning temporary marriage, the Second Caliph decreed the
punishment for infraction be lapidation (stoning to death). Also,
regarding the six-person council, he decreed that if they do not vote
their heads should be cut off.

After Mu‘āwiyah seized the office of caliphate, due to the fact that his
father Abū Sufiyān had committed adultery with Ziyād ibn ‘Ubayd’s
mother, he publicly summoned Ziyād to Shām (Damascus) and ‘related’ him
to his father Abū Sufiyān! Even though this is against the explicit
wording of the Holy Qur’an, he officially pronounced Ziyād his brother.

Many similar incidents have been recorded in history in which the
caliphs put current interests before execution of incontrovertible
Islamic precepts. Bygone dialectic theologians exerted themselves to
attempt to match these actions to religious precepts using incomplete
justifications. However, some recent Sunnī experts concede and explicate
the fact that the first caliphs [khulafā’ al-rāshidīn] sometimes put the
interests of the ummah before execution of indisputable religious
precepts.

Consummation of caliph immunity and autonomy, and ramifications thereof
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As can be seen from our previous discussions, the caliphate had absolute
authority in ‘issuance of precepts’. In modern terms, they had the
jurisdiction to legislate or alter articles of the Constitution and they
also had the authority to legislate and execute statutes.

A shortcoming of this independency which required amendment was the
immunity of administrators and executives, i.e. the caliphate, vassals,
and officials, which consisted of many of the Prophet’s Companions
[sahābah]. An obligatory irrefutable religious dictum was necessary to
bring about religious immunity for officials and divest the people of
the right to protest against their words and deeds. In this way, the
sahābah would become completely autonomous.

This shortcoming was remedied with a narration the sahābah referred to
the Holy Prophet (S). In accordance with this narration, the sahābah of
the Prophet of Allah (S) were introduced as jurisprudents [mujtahid]
such that if their judgment was correct in a certain matter, they would
be rewarded by God and even if their judgment was incorrect, they were
rewarded and pardoned.

Again, they related another narration regarding the virtuousness of the
sahābah, according to which the sahābah of the Prophet of Allah (S) are
automatically forgiven and exempt from punishment and God is pleased
with them and whatever they do—good or bad, servitude to or offence
against God—entails no divine call to account!

This narration reinforced the previous narration (that the sahābah were
mujtahids or jurists and thus rewarded regardless), presented an
official authorization to the sahābah, and absolutely guaranteed the
unrestrained freedom of judgment and action of the sahābah of the
Prophet (S).

The direct consequence of the autonomy of the caliphate and the
religious immunity of the sahābah—who were the officials of the
caliphate—was that the religious and worldly affairs of the Islamic
society were completely entrusted to the caliphate. The result of this
situation was that the valence of religious precepts, both
worship-related and conduct-related, was restricted to “intuitive
deduction-social thought”.

Moreover, it introduced the practical laws and even theoretical
teachings of Islam as phenomena based upon the material life of people
which all people can understand.

As a consequence, the spiritual life of Islam fell from its lofty and
true status to the social level and became restricted to materiality.
According to the respected scholar, Professor Corbin, contrary to the
soul of Islam, divinity was incarnated into the Islamic society or in
the seat of caliphate and its vicinity.

As might be expected, the effulgence of Islam that had originated at the
time of the Prophet (S)—from his appointment to his passing—became
ancient history (consider this point carefully).

This eventuality was the fatalistic, natural, and inevitable effect of
the meddling of ijtihād in divine precepts. It had nothing to do with
the knowledge or ignorance of the original agents and founders and the
supporters of the electoral caliphate.

In truth, it must be said that many of the people of that day and even
subsequent periods did not understand the nature of this issue as they
should have and they were ignorant of its evil repercussions.

As we can see, the challengers of this electoral caliphate, who in
objection broke off from the majority on the first day, became widely
known as Shī‘ah. They were very few at first but at the eventide of the
era of the four first caliphs, they had become a significant party.

It is also evident that the majority of Sunnī scholars do not consider
ijtihād that is against the wording of the Book and Tradition
permissible even though the actions of the first caliphs can never be
vindicated without it.

Repercussions of the autonomy of the judgment and rulings of the caliphs
------------------------------------------------------------------------

As previously discussed, the general practical method of the caliphate
was execution of Islamic precepts by means of ijtihād and judgment. In
other words, their policy was to preserve the interests of the Islamic
society conforming to the Book [kitāb] and Tradition [sunnah] where
possible and putting current interests before the Book and Tradition if
not.

Furthermore, as mentioned, this changed the authentic and immaterial
spirituality of Islam into a socio-materialist regime which, like all
other material phenomena, must naturally retain the general aspects of
material beings such as childhood, adolescence, maturity, and old age.
For instance, the Second Caliph compared Islam to a camel that passes
through various periods and states such as infirmity, strength, and
subsequent infirmity.

This method was not the invariable method of the time of the Holy
Prophet (S). It was, rather, similar to democratic rule (where
democratic rule is incomplete because obviously it cannot conform to all
the incontrovertible principles of democracy).

Thus, it embodies an inner turmoil that is contrary to the stability and
consistency of an established social convention. Undeniably, each of the
four first caliphs came into office in a different manner. The first two
caliphs had relatively similar policies and the third and fourth caliphs
each had unique methods of office.

Additionally, Mu‘āwiyah took the Islamic caliphate in a dissimilar
manner to these four caliphs. He then made the caliphate “hereditary”
and publicly turned it into “despotic rule”.

In this way, the newly-established Islamic government became like its
contemporaneous empires, such as the Roman and Persian empires, first in
that it put an end to the convergence of social strata, which Islam
greatly struggled to establish.

As a result, social division—such as superior and subordinate, master
and servant, man and woman, Arab and non-Arab, Companion [sahābah] and
non-Companion, Immigrants [muhājirīn] and Helpers [ansār]—quickly caused
great rifts among the people. Second in that it used all its power for
world conquest and expansion of its control.

In order to incite the people to Holy War [jihād], the Second Caliph
even directed that the words “Hasten towards the best of deeds”[^27] be
dropped from adhān[^28] so that people would not prefer ritual prayer
[salāt] to jihād.

As a result of this intemperance, all of the exalted aims of Islam in
refining and perfecting the people were overshadowed. As a matter of
course, it cannot be denied that one of the important dictates of Islam
is jihād, which is the instrument of struggle against polytheism and
expansion of the monotheistic [tawhīd] maxim. Even so, it is evident
that the method of Islam is not the method of Alexander or Genghis Khān.

If Islam has given Muslims the mandate of world domination, with it, it
has also given the mandate of statesmanship. It is evident in holy
Qur’anic verses that the meaning of expanding the sphere of influence is
vivification of the word of righteousness, development of social
justice, and spiritual edification of the people; not establishment of a
Kaiserist dictatorship, world exploitation, extensive slave traffic,
taking of immeasurable spoils of war, and amassment of extraordinary
treasures.

Accumulation of treasure became so rampant at the time of the Third
Caliph that Abū Dharr, the truthful and cherished Companion of the
Prophet (S), campaigned against amassing wealth and obtaining treasure
and finally was martyred in this struggle.

When the Third Caliph wanted to resolve a problem of differing written
versions of the Qur’an and establish a uniform version, he insisted that
a “wāw” [و] be taken out of the “Verse of Wealth” [āyat ul-kanz] such
that he even threatened Abī ibn Ka‘b the great Qur’anic scribe with his
sword:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الأَحْبَارِ
وَالرُّهْبَانِ لَيَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ النَّاسِ بِالْبَاطِلِ
وَيَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ
وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلاَ يُنفِقُونَهَا فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُم
بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Most surely many of the rabbis and monks consume
the wealth of the people unjustly and turn them from the way of Allah;
and those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in the way of
Allah, give them tidings of a painful chastisement”***[^29]

Moreover, to the very end, Mu‘āwiyah insisted that the Verse of Wealth
proscription regarding amassing wealth was about the followers of other
divine books not Muslims.

This is understandable because history bears witness that everything he
and his collaborators did and every conspiracy and corruption that they
were involved in was effectuated through the force of wealth and the
blessing of ijtihād!

In any event, by stating these facts the intention was not to analyze
this segment of history at the advent of Islam; rather, the discussion
brought us here. Hence, we shall again return to the main aim of this
article, which is discussion of “Islamic eschatology according to the
Shī‘ahs”.

The autonomy of the caliphate in issuance of precepts and the privilege
of ijtihād—that the sahābah had gained in those days—had substantial
effects on the manifestation of Islamic teachings and precepts.

These directly affected the three methods of “transcendent revelation”,
“logical thought and reasoning”, and “guardianship and eschatology”,
which we discussed at the start of this article. As would be expected,
these three methods were altered to match the prevailing situation.

Alteration of teachings and precepts
------------------------------------

It can be understood from the words of the Qur’an that the theoretical
teachings and practical precepts in it have been canonized for everyone
and all times and they can never be changed, because the instructional
contents of the Qur’an are a series of general principles.

Furthermore, according to the explicit wording of the Glorious Qur’an,
the declarations of the Holy Prophet (S) are canonically binding and his
explications of precepts are statutory and are the same as revealed
verses. It is a clear historic fact that every word uttered by the Holy
Prophet (S) was retained by the sahābah and other hearers, word by word.

They would then relate these utterances to each other and publicize
them. Also, the Noble Prophet (S) regarded the words of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) as having this same credibility and canonicalness and has upheld
their explication and elucidation of general Islamic teachings and
precepts as his own.

Hence, general Qur’anic laws and the Noble Prophet’s (S) explanations of
religious canons [sharī‘ah] (which consist of the prophetic traditions)
hold the status of an immutable Constitution.

Only a temporary set of decisions that a Muslim viceroy is authorized to
make in accordance with prevailing interests and necessities in the area
of observing religious precepts may be altered or replaced. These
precepts are temporary and subsidiary rules and are concerned with the
short-term interests of the Islamic society. In the span of his
lifetime, this authority was held by the Prophet (S).

After the passing of the Prophet (S), the majority of the sahābah and
the people held this same opinion in regard with Islamic precepts.
However, as we discussed, the caliphate had a different notion. The
caliphate believed that the Islamic laws that must be observed in an
Islamic monotheistic atmosphere are divine precepts that have been
revealed in accordance with current interests and must naturally change
with the variation of the interests and needs of the ummah.

In modern terms, we can interpret this by saying that they believed that
the Islamic religion has a Constitution which is a set of divine rules
and regulations that were revealed upon the Noble Prophet (S).

These rules, which are in harmony with the interests of the Islamic
society, are immutable and mandatory unless the viceroy of the society
perceives the interests of the society in something else. The tasks of
administrating the Islamic society and propagating Islam after the
passing of the Prophet (S) were believed to fall to the ummah itself.

Keeping to the interests of Muslims, the society can appoint whoever it
wants to administrate its affairs and to hold the caliphate. Naturally,
any goodness or perversion that the caliph discerns is authoritative and
is equivalent to the discernment of the society. Any alteration in the
standing regulations of Islam by the judgment of the caliph is
considered acceptable and binding.

Obviously, this ideology is only attentive to divine rules and precepts
in the Holy Qur’an which it considers relatively immutable (similar to
the articles of the Constitution in democratic rule).

However, rules and precepts uttered by the Holy Prophet (S), especially
precepts not linked directly to the Qur’an, are considered temporary and
subsidiary regulations such as the practical method of the Prophet of
God (S) and the minor, temporary, and local commands he issued. Or at
least, the precepts in the Prophet’s (S) Tradition [sunnah] are not
considered to possess the constancy and solidity of Qur’anic precepts
and may easily be defined as current interests of the Prophet’s (S) era!

According to a notable hadīth among the Sunnīs and Shī‘ahs (the Hadīth
of Paper [hadīth-e qirtās]), when the Prophet (S) asked for paper and
ink at the last moments of his life to write a comprehensive directive
to be followed after him, the Second Caliph declared, “Surely this man
is delirious”[^30] and later he said, “The Book of Allah suffices
us”[^31].

There is no doubt that the second statement means that with the
existence of the Book of Allah we do not need the directive of the
Prophet (S) and this cannot be justified other than through the theory
we previously stated.

Also, in one of his speeches regarding the ban of “the greater
pilgrimage” [hajj-e tamattu‘], the Second Caliph said, “God would make
things permissible and prohibited for his Messenger. You must consider
only the beginning of the Verse of the Greater Pilgrimage [āyat
al-hajj-e al-tamattu‘] and disregard the end of the verse and the
implementation of the Prophet (S)!” (Contemplate this carefully.)

At the time of the first caliphs, great importance was placed upon
memorizing and reciting the Holy Qur’an whereas relating narrations
regarding the prophetic traditions and memorizing the Prophet’s (S)
statements regarding the details of Islamic jurisprudence were brushed
aside.

Even though at the time of the Prophet (S), the sahābah expended
considerable effort in memorizing and writing prophetic hadīths and
jurisprudential precepts, after the Prophet (S) inscription of hadīth
was strictly prohibited.

This prohibition lasted until the end of the rule of the Umayyad
dynasty. The First Caliph even collected a great many of the hadīths he
himself had written and burned them! The Second Caliph even forbade the
sahābah from relating hadīth.

The only incident that attracts attention in the issue of hadīth
propagation is that after coming into his office and ascendancy over
Islamic governance, Mu‘āwiyah made a public declaration that whoever
relates a narration [riwāyah or hadīth] regarding the virtues of the
first three caliphs shall receive a reward and whoever relates a
narration regarding the virtues of ‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib[^32] shall have no
immunity whatsoever and will be held in contempt by the caliphate.

He commanded his functionaries and governors to write down the names of
those who related hadīth on the virtues of the Triad Caliphs and give
them rewards from the public treasury [bayt al-māl][^33]. Subsequently,
a pandemonium of hadīths related to virtues of the Triad Caliphs was
released!

A result of this policy was that relation of hadīth in
non-jurisprudential areas, especially hadīths that were in some way
linked to the virtuosity of the Triad Caliphs and other sahābah,
developed extensively. However, no interest was expressed in regard to
religious laws and Islamic jurisprudential precepts and they largely
fell from grace.

Traditionist experts[^34] [‘ulamā’ al-rijāl] and historians have
recorded the names and backgrounds of approximately twelve thousand
sahābahs of the Holy Prophet (S) and have stated that this great group
of people lived for close to one century after the hijrah with absolute
respect from contemporary Caliphs and Muslims and that their ‘goods’,
which were prophetic hadīths, had great worth in the Bazaar of Islam.

When they state that the hadīths regarding Islamic jurisprudence and
religious precepts related by these esteemed individuals throughout this
lengthy period is only around five hundred hadīths, which means that
from every twenty-four sahābahs only one hadīth remains as memorial, a
person becomes awestruck and dazed beyond description!

In addition, some of the religious issues in these hadīths are still
obscure, ambiguous, or even contradictory and precepts that should have
become necessary and axiomatic due to their myriad frequency have become
unsolvable mysteries!

By way of illustration, we could describe the issue of the ritual
ablution [wudū]. The Holy Prophet (S) prescribed wudū and made this
ablution himself among the people several times a day for over twenty
years.

According to the narrations and relations of the sahābah, it is not
evident whether he washed his hands from top to bottom or bottom to top;
whereas, according to historic records, when the Prophet (S) made wudū
people would crowd around him and attempt to take the water of his wudū
as tabarruk[^35] and would try not to let even a drop fall to the earth.

The issues of inheritance of aunts[^36] and wrongdoing in the duties of
inheritance could also be cited.

In short, as a result of this ideology, Islamic jurisprudential precepts
were lost and syllogism [qiyās] and istihsān[^37] were substituted in
the place of religious stipulations.

Proscription of logical argumentation and debate
------------------------------------------------

Through their God-given nature, humans intuitively understand that
culture is the key to worldly bliss and happiness. Progress in life is
linked to cultural progress. Cultural progress is not possible without
logical argumentation and free debate.

Even though there was a time when this issue was not as clear as it
should have been due to unenlightenment and other unnatural factors,
today this issue is considered axiomatic and there is no longer the
least dubiety in this regard.

It has become evident through both discourse and experience that if
unnatural factors do not hinder them, due to their God-given natures,
humans promote open debates and logical thought and advance in this
manner. This is true especially in such as the Islamic society, where
religion is based upon logical reasoning and the divine Book does not
have even the least amount of reservation or negligence in regard with
logical thought.

Even so, at the advent of Islam—particularly synchronous with the first
and second caliphs when every day Islam was becoming more and more
renowned and the Islamic society was progressively developing—there is
no apparent trace of Islamic cultural development through discussion and
inquisitiveness.

We must most regretfully confess that in this period of its history, the
Islamic society manifested no substantial endeavors in this area and
they did not even put into “cultural development” one hundredth of the
effort that they put into “jihād”.

They placed Islamic principles, with all its subtle details and
scientific truths, before the simple understanding of the commons even
though various hadīths bear witness to the fact that at the time the
sphere of education went no further than the level of corporality and
the senses.

Among both the commons and the elite the belief reigned that the words
of the Holy Qur’an, with its simple meanings understandable to the
public, are sufficient for both thought and deed.

In line with this principle, all kinds of critical discussions and free
inquiry in doctrine were forbidden and considered religious innovations
or heresy [bid‘ah] and entailed heavy punishments. For example, a person
who debated an issue with the Second Caliph was whipped by the Caliph
until blood freely flowed from his body.

In another instance, the Second Caliph explained a Qur’anic verse in
such a manner that it seemed to authenticate fatalism. An Arab made an
objection and the Caliph verbally lashed out at him and threatened him
such that it seemed he intended to kill him, until finally several of
those present were able to quell his anger only with great difficulty!

Even so, a series of argumentations regarding religious doctrine could
not be avoided because:

First, as a result of Islamic conquests the Muslim society daily grew
and scholars of other faiths and creeds came to Muslim gatherings and
propounded various discussions regarding Islamic teachings. Thus Muslims
were forced to take part in debates and offer answers.

Second, the Islamic society was entangled with a motley of hypocrites
who propagated all kinds of doubts and perceived faults in Islam. Also,
there were religious minorities who disagreed with the majority in many
subsidiary beliefs. Hence, time and again, many scientific discussions
and debates would break out.

As a matter of course, a series of discussions that later became known
as “dialectic theology” [‘ilm al-kalām] were developed and circulated
among the people in spite of the aversion and prohibition of officials.
Finally, some individuals became experts in these debates and government
officials and jurists of the time who strived with all their might to
prevent dialectic discussions approved of the science of dialectic
theology.

In previous discussions we talked to some extent about the method and
style of dialectic theological discussions and there is no need to
repeat these arguments. However, we must state the fact that even though
the dialectic theology, which discusses the various theoretical
teachings of Islam, is a noble science, due to the shortcomings in its
original formation, it has been deprived of the true value of a rational
technique and completely free argumentation for two reasons:

As perfectly evident from Qur’anic verses, principles of Islamic
doctrine are a series of truths and realities that are much beyond the
understanding of the unlearned. Because the Islamic society and
government functionaries were heedless of or even opposed to free
logical debates, they subjected simple commoner beliefs to discussion
and advocated a series of mundane social thoughts as the final true
doctrines of Islam.

As a result, in their minds “divinity” [ulūhiyyah] and “the metaphysical
world” [‘ālam-e māwarā’ al-tabī‘ah], which are pure and flawless,
manifested in the form and identity of a material world similar to our
universe. In addition, they believed that our tangible world is governed
by the laws of “causality” [‘illiyyah] but the transcendent realm has no
fixed system and is completely uncontrolled!

Also, they held that our material world is subject to the senses and
that the incorporeal world, even though it is similar to this world, is
imperceptible to the senses and a time will come when all constituents
of the spiritual world even … [sic] will become tangible!

As a result of the prohibition of the practice of free debate,
rationalization became a pretense or pastime and the only proof
necessary for the thought being analyzed became imitation.

This is why the strongest reason and sharpest weapon among dialectics is
consensus [ijmā‘]. In flailing to authenticate unanimity first they
related this narration from the Holy Prophet (S), “My ummah shall not
unite in error.”[^38] and therefore, they consider unanimity of the
ummah to be sound reason.

Then, they substituted the ummah with the scholars [‘ulamā’] of the
ummah. Later scholars of a group within the ummah such as the
“Ashā‘irah” or “Mu‘tazilah” were substituted for scholars of the ummah.
After that, they swapped scholars of a faction with dialectic
theologians of that faction!

This ended here and as a result, obviously, the strongest reason of a
dialectic theologian [mutikallim] such as Ash‘arī in proving an
Ashā‘irah belief is the unanimity of the Ashā‘irah dialectic
theologians. It was quite frequent that a claim was repudiated even
though it was congruent with the Book [kitāb], Tradition [sunnah], or
reason [‘aql] because of being contrary to the consensus of scholars and
dialectics of the religious faction!

In line with these affairs, we see that:

First, the opposition of adherents to one Islamic faction regarding an
exclusive authorized unanimous view of a second faction is not
considered problematic for Islam; according to each faction supporters
of other factions are not part of the Muslim society!

Second, a person who accepts one exclusive principle of a faction must
accept the rest of its exclusive principles without question, whether or
not they have sufficient reason. It is clear that this method has
completely annihilated the spirit of rational thought and has dried out
the roots of free thought in the Islamic community. In this manner, it
has given absolute reign to fanatical imitation in all beliefs!

This method went beyond dialectic theology and contaminated other
Islamic sciences such as exegesis [tafsīr], jurisprudence [fiqh],
methodology [usūl], etc. and even interloped and caused havoc in
linguistic sciences such as morphology [sarf], grammar [nahw], semantics
[ma‘ānī], and rhetoric [bayān].

With a look at any of these sciences we see strange classifications such
as hanafiyyah, shāfi‘iyyah, etc. and kūfiyyīn, basriyyīn, etc. and the
like. Every faction rationalizes its unique thoughts and allegorically
reinterprets the reasons of others.

Third, as a result of the method of “reliance on tribal and factional
unanimity”, authoritative proofs, i.e. the Book and Tradition, lost
their true value and were demoted to formalities. For this reason, we
see that to prove their beliefs proponents of each faction first refer
to the consensus of its supporters and then they may turn to the Book
and Tradition. Also, they expressly and recklessly allegorically
reinterpret the proofs of other factions from the Book and Tradition and
thus invalidate them.

This style has even spread among literary scholars and every party
reinterprets the reasons and proofs of the opposition, which include
Arabic verse or prose, definition, collation, and other devices!

Spiritual and eschatological development
----------------------------------------

With the passage of a century, ignorant darkness spread throughout the
Islamic society. However, due to the inevitable contact of Muslims with
the scientific and cultural societies of the world, they realized their
desperate and increasing need for philosophical and logical sciences. On
account of their illogical imitation they never thought that there could
be authentic and logical wisdom in the content of the Book and
Tradition.

Thus, in their reckless need they sought wisdom elsewhere. At the
epilogue of the “Umayyad dynasty” and the prelude of the “‘Abbāsīd
dynasty” many books of logic, philosophy, mathematics, etc. were
translated from Greek, Syriac, and other languages into Arabic.

Even though introduction of these sciences into the Islamic society
generated great fervor and enthusiasm and contemporary caliphs
completely supported these “newly arrived guests”, contrary to
expectation, due to the clash of divine philosophy and various dogmatic
issues in Islam that were rationalized using the dialectic method, a
dispute ignited between “dialectic theologians and jurisprudents”
[mutikallimīn wa fuqahā]—who were backed by the admiration of the
public—and “advocates of philosophy”.

Ultimately, “philosophy” [falsafah] was rejected or abandoned and
“dialectics” [kalām] gained primacy owing to the merit that (in their
opinion) its discussions were in line with religious law [shar‘].

Those with sufficient literacy regarding spiritual life and inner
perfection that have grasped the true aims of this science, clearly
understand that the method of “inner advancement” and “spiritual life”
is based on the fact that human inner perfections and spiritual ranks
are genuine truths that exist beyond the realities of nature and the
material world.

In addition, they acknowledge that “the spiritual realm”, which is the
abode of spiritual life, is a world much more authentic, real, and vast
than “the world of corporality and the senses”.

Spiritual ranks are genuine truths and conditions of human existence.
They have never been formal concepts or social conventions.

Wealth and poverty, prominence and insignificance, mastership and
servitude, lords and subjects are a series of prescriptive or
conventional concepts or titles that have been proscribed for various
social aims and are given to persons through specific social rules.

Accordance of the title of lordship to a lord or vassalship to a vassal
does not affect their external nature or change their essence. Wealth is
not an essential part of a person who is wealthy and losing wealth does
not diminish the human essence nor take anything away from it.

Also, the only relationship between social actions and their
consequences (good or bad) is a prescriptive one. Thus, it happens much
that actions which at one time have generous rewards entail punishment
at later times or might not have any results at all.

Social ranks and titles are usually prescriptive and follow social
conventions. Further, the relationships among these titles and the
actions arising from them and between titles and their effects in the
society are all prescriptive and conventional.

However, the relationship between human actions and mental states,
between these states and the inner levels of human advancement, and
between these levels and the realm that incorporates these levels are
all genuine and real phenomena existing outside the authority and
dominion of material and nature. In short, spiritual life and
eschatology (in any form) are based on the authenticity of the spiritual
realm.

The view we mentioned before—the foundation of “the electoral
caliphate”—caused “the Islamic tradition” to become known as merely a
“social tradition”. Its cornerstones were exclusively the corporal
interests, which were discernible through social-based thoughts.

It is clear that this view has no connection with spiritual advancement
and eschatology and that effecting reconciliation between this view and
eschatology is impossible. This is because “pure materiality” and “pure
spirituality” are situated at two opposite poles. Thus, proximity to one
is remoteness from the other.

On this account, in the era of the Caliphs at the advent of Islam there
is no trace of the method of spiritual evolution. Except for an
assortment of religious worshipers and ascetics who were known only for
their good deeds, no one demonstrated spiritual evolution in any other
context. This continued until the preludes of the ‘Abbāsīd dynasty.

Activities of the Shī‘ahs for establishment of righteousness
------------------------------------------------------------

The majority of the Muslims of the first era of Islam were as we stated.
As a result of this condition, the theoretical and practical doctrines
of Islam were falling into decline. In addition, the methods of
understanding and advancing these truths, i.e. the free debate method
and the spiritual development method, headed towards the valley of
forgetfulness.

On the other hand, the Shī‘ah minority, which had risen against the
majority from day one, did not have sufficient power to strike down the
prevailing situation. In their view, restitution of the general
circumstances of the Holy Prophet’s (S) era did not seem likely.

Thus, they were forced to desist from general and positive resistance
and utilize a different approach—an approach in which they could protect
the theoretical and practical teachings of Islam and keep alive the
legitimate methods of advancement, which were the methods of free debate
and spiritual evolution.

The Holy Prophet (S) introduced the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) as the custodians
and teachers of Islamic precepts and the spiritual leaders of Muslims.
In accordance with this recommendation, the Shī‘ahs embraced the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and endeavored to learn and record religious precepts even
in the face of fear and trepidation.

In his twenty-five years of seclusion and arduous five years of office
as caliph, the first leader of the Shī‘ah, with his extraordinary
eloquence and elocution, which both friend and foe recognized as
unchallengeable and unrivaled, promoted Islamic precepts and opened the
doors to excellent free logical debates.

He fostered men of God, sahābah and tābi‘īn alike, such as Salmān,
Kumayl Nakha‘ī, Uways Qaranī, Rashīd Hijrī, and Maytham Kūfī. It cannot
be said that these people, with their special spiritual approach and
treasuries of knowledge and wisdom, had no effect upon the Islamic
society.

After the martyrdom [shahādah] of the first Shī‘ah leader, the dreadful
and despotic Umayyad sultanate emerged. During the reign of the Umayyad
dynasty Mu‘āwiyah and his agents and all other Umayyad sultans battled
the Shī‘ahs with all their might.

Everywhere they found a Shī‘ah, even those who were presumed to be
Shī‘ah, they would wipe them out and destroy their families. Conditions
for the Shī‘ahs became more grave and pressures more intense by the day.

Even so, in this period the second, third, and fourth Shī‘ah leaders
brooked no neglect in vivifying and keeping alive righteousness. They
operated in an environment awash in affliction and adversity under the
threats of sword, scourge, and torture. Thus, day after day the truth of
Shī‘ism proliferated and veridical radiance outspread.

The best testimony to this is the time immediately after this period at
the close of the Umayyad dynasty leading up to the consolidation of the
‘Abbāsīd sultanate, concurrent with the fifth and sixth Shī‘ah leaders,
i.e. Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (‘a) and Imām Ja‘far al-Sādiq (‘a), when for
a short period the chokehold on the Shī‘ahs weakened slightly and the
Shī‘ahs gained a moderate amount of freedom.

In this interval, personages, scholars, and traditionists [muhaddithīn]
gathered around these two great leaders to learn Islamic sciences. These
were not non-Shī‘ahs who first became Shī‘ah at the hand of the Imām and
then endeavored in studying the sciences; rather, they were Shī‘ahs who
by necessity lived in the guise of pretense and dissimulation [taqiyyah]
and dropped the façade at the merest of opportunities.

This evolved spirit was not without influence in the majority of the
social corpus. To a varying degree, it reflected righteousness and truth
in the mirror of the people’s minds and made everyone aware of the
innate human need for natural religion, free debate, and spiritual
evolution.

Furthermore, with the dark times that were progressively becoming darker
and the extreme oppression and unrestraint of government agents at the
time of the Third Caliph and throughout the Umayyad rule, the Shī‘ah
leaders made it clear to the people that religion is in no way safe in
the hands of the Caliphate; that administration of religious precepts
cannot be handed over to the Caliphate; that implementation of these
precepts cannot depend on the ijtihād and judgment of the Caliph; and
that ultimately, the power of the Caliphate works in its own interests
not the interests of the people and the Islamic society!

Consequently, it was clearly established that religious precepts are
immutable and eternal and that ijtihād which is against the wording of
the Book and Tradition is meaningless.

Only, due to the affection the majority of the people had towards the
sahābah and the Traditions that extolled the status of the sahābah and
acknowledged their ijtihād, the people refrained from protesting against
the first three caliphs and Mu‘āwiyah. Even though their incumbency was
blatantly based upon the previously-mentioned view and their conduct
corroborated this, the people would justify their meddling in Islamic
precepts and reinterpret these tamperings to make them seem correct. On
the other hand, sometimes they were fair and took part in free debates
and became acquainted with Islamic spirituality.[^39]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Isrā’ 17:36.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Yūnus 10:36.

[^4]: Sūrat Sād 38:26.

[^5]: Contrary to our speech, the speech of Allah is not a set of
compiled sounds that signify meaning on account of established
conventions and the speech of Allah is in no way similar to the speech
of creations. This is due to the fact that verbal expression is not
possible without corporeal form and Allah is free of corporeality.
Rather, the speech of Allah is the creation of an object, which
demonstrates the perfection of the Creator. As Amīr al-Mu’minīn ‘Alī
(‘a) has declared: “His speech is His deed.”

[^6]: Instruction, prohibition, and other ordinary commands are a type
of social accreditation that is normally carried out by utterance or
signal. Doubtless, it absolutely necessitates the corporeality and
sociality of the commander; this is impossible regarding Allah. Rather,
the instruction and prohibition of Allah is creation of something that
intrinsically expresses the command. For further information regarding
speech [kalām] refer to “Tafsīr al-Mīzān”.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:41.

[^8]: This issue is easily understood from Qur’anic verses and the
assertions of the first Imām of the Shī‘ah, Amīr al-Mu’minīn ‘Alī (‘a).
It is also discussed to some extent in “the Shī‘ah” Journal and in the
6th volume of the “Tafsīr al-Mīzān” of the Qur’an.

[^9]: Allāh-u Akbar means ‘God is the Greatest’, meaning that nothing
can supersede God or be better than Him.

[^10]: Sūrat Fussilat 41:54.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Mu’min (or Ghāfir) 40:62.

[^12]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:19.

[^13]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:30.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:31.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:34.

[^16]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:64.

[^17]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:103.

[^18]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:208.

[^19]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:142.

[^20]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:28. There are many such verses in the Holy
Qur’an that sternly enjoin Muslims from spiritual mingling with
non-Islamic societies. Refer to Mu‘jam al-Mufahris, māddah “a kh dh” [ا
خ ذ].

[^21]: This was extracted from the following Qur’anic verse (5:3) and
several others. More information may be found in the “Tafsīr al-Mīzān”
under this verse.

[^22]: Sūrat al-Ma’idah 5:3.

[^23]: Sūrat al-Furqān 25:30.

[^24]: Ijtihād has been defined as the exertion of a jurisprudent to
extract religious laws using specific methods from the Book, Tradition,
reason, and consensus of religious authorities. This definition was
derived from the “Dictionary of Dehkhodā”. [trans.]

[^25]: Sūrat Fussilat 41:41-42. Other verses also demonstrate this issue
and there is so much evidence pointing to this fact that it cannot be
doubted.

[^26]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:47. According to similar verses, those who do
not judge using what Allah has revealed are also oppressive [zālim] and
infidels [kāfir].

[^27]: Or “hayya ‘alā khayr al-‘amal” (Hasten to the best of acts.)
which refers to ritual prayer. [trans.]

[^28]: I.e., the call to ritual prayer. [trans.]

[^29]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:34.

[^30]: اِنَّ الرجلَ ليهجر.

[^31]: حسبنا کتاب الله.

[^32]: Alī ibn Abī Tālib (‘a) was the first Imām of the Shī‘ahs and was
elected the Fourth Caliph by the people. [trans.]

[^33]: The bayt al-māl is the treasury of the Islamic government in
which all Muslims have an equal right.

[^34]: Traditionist experts are scholars that critically study the
biography of relaters of traditions (traditionists) in order to
ascertain the validity of traditions. [trans.]

[^35]: A sacred token that increases blessings. [trans.]

[^36]: I.e., sisters of one’s father and mother. [trans.]

[^37]: According to “Kitāb al-Ta‘rīfāt” (The Book of Definitions) of
Jurjānī as cited by the “Dictionary of Dehkhodā”, istihsān means
abandoning deduction and propounding something that is easier for the
people to accept. [trans.]

[^38]: لا تجتمع أمتي علی خطأ.

[^39]: This paper was originally published in Farsi in the seventh
yearbook, “Maktab-e Islām”.


