Discourse Three: The Motive behind Creation
===========================================

From the first days of life, using their God-given intellects, humans
inevitably discover the existence of a series of unknowns. Because of
our natural inquisitiveness, we strive to clarify these obscurities. We
ask ourselves: does this manifest world have a creator? If there is a
creator, what was the motive for creation? If the world has indeed been
created, are we charged with responsibilities?

Clearly, if we give a positive answer to any of these questions, a
series of subsidiary questions come up regarding the properties of the
Creator and the manner and effects of its existence. As we have said,
the God-given nature of humankind desires a logical and decisive answer
to these questions.

Without a doubt, the matter at hand is one of the most elementary and
prominent issues faced by human nature. The human self understands the
need to rationally and conclusively solve this problem in the first
stages of life.

Analysis of the question
------------------------

Certainly that which compels us to inquire about the motive and aim of
creation is that we perform social and rational tasks in order to
achieve suitable and worthwhile aims. We eat to satisfy our hunger;
drink to slake our thirst; clothe ourselves to protect our bodies
against heat and cold; build houses in which to reside; speak in order
to communicate what is in our minds; etc.

In the things that are done intentionally and thoughtfully, humans—and
any intelligent being for that matter—have a motive and aim.

We do not do things that have no benefit whatsoever. By observing
intents in our voluntary actions and generalizing our mentality to all
intelligent agents we are faced with the following question: what is the
motive of the Creator, who is an intelligent agent, for creating the
world?

But then, can this amount of observation and generalization guarantee
the correctness of this question? Can we extend a relationship or
property found in several cases to all cases? The answer is no, and the
only definitive solution is through analysis of the meaning of ‘motive’
because it is not possible to use inductive reasoning or empirical
study.

As stated in the previous example, we attain the aim of satiation
through eating. Satiation is related to eating because it is the result
of this action. By entering the body, food activates the digestive
system and frees us of the need for more food. Thus, the body’s food
requirements are met and we become full which is an effect of eating.

Eating is a special process that starts with us and ends in satiation.
Eating also is related to us as the agent in that we do not have the
necessary materials within ourselves to go on living without
nourishment. In order to preserve our lives, we are equipped with
faculties with which the body may absorb necessary nutrition.

When our semi-intelligent internal faculties feel the need, through
natural mechanisms they force us to procure necessary nutrition and deal
with our existential weakness. Therefore, just as satiety is related to
eating, in another way it is related to us.

It is a perfection that completes our existential weakness, resolves our
needs, and with its manifestation upon our inner faculties, it forces us
to act to get what we need to complete ourselves.

By examining each of our innumerable volitional actions such as
drinking, sitting down, standing up, talking, listening, going, coming,
etc., the same characteristics that we found by inspecting eating will
be revealed–even among actions that are apparently completely aimless.

After careful consideration it becomes clear that we do not perform
actions that give us no benefit. When we undertake actions with no
motive other than philanthropy, such as giving charity, we are in truth
fulfilling our emotional desires and relieving the inner sorrow caused
by empathy with the poor and so on.

Therefore, we can conclude that, in general, the motive for a volitional
act is an appropriate effect lying within the result of the action and
is a perfection that rectifies a fault in the agent and completes it.

Purpose in all elements of existence
------------------------------------

Even though at first we supposed that motives and aims are specific to
agents that are equipped with intelligence and free will, upon closer
examination we see that all the effects and properties with which we
proved the existence of “motives” for volitional acts and agents also
exist in natural actions and agents.

Because, like volitional agents, every natural agent or material
phenomenon is equipped with faculties that are used to relieve their
existential needs. By performing their specific acts, they resolve their
needs and faults thus perfecting themselves. Finally, the effect of
their actions is directly and systematically related to the action and
themselves as well.

This is the same in voluntary acts; therefore, intelligence is not in
the least related to the realization of the result and its relationship
with the act or agent.

Even though we name this issue “motive”, which occurs in respect to the
actions of living intelligent individuals with free will and refrain
from using this term for other natural acts, instead using “result” or
figuratively utilizing the term “motive”, the end result is the same in
both terms. What a natural agent does in the dark recesses of nature, a
living human may do using the light of intellect without a change in the
aforementioned relationships.

Hence, “motive” is common to all elements of the world of creation and
as long as it rules over all general laws, such as the law of causality,
no act will be performed without aim and no agent is free of a purpose
and ideal.

All beings of every kind, whether human, insect, apple tree, wheat, hunk
of iron, molecule of oxygen, and so on, adapt to the external
environment using their active faculties, harmonize with active elements
in their environment, and perform specific actions in order to achieve
their evolutional or useful aims.

When this specific action is completed, it is substituted with the
result of the action, the natural or intentional desire is fulfilled,
and the perfection it sought is annexed to its being.

General types that exist all over the world, such as humans, horses,
apple trees, etc. are the same. With the specific acts of their type,
they strive to achieve their aims and ideals and by achieving them, they
remedy their genetic faults and keep on existing. This same thing can be
said of the entirety of world components, among which an indubitable
relationship exists.

Basically, any movement that occurs has a direction. This movement is
always intermediary and joins one thing or direction to the other. The
direction desired by the object is the result and motive that completes
the deficiency and aspiration of the agent.

When it is achieved, movement ceases. That is, it gains a static state
in relation to its previous state. Even though on a different
perspective, this static state is a new movement that aims at a new
result and motive.

We cannot imagine the realization of a movement that does not have a
direction or that has a direction but the “direction” has no
relationship with the movement and is realized solely through
happenstance. Or that a force creates movement without being causally
related to it. Or that even though the force has a relationship with the
movement, its relationship with the result of the movement is
accidental.

The awe-inspiring order that is seen throughout the world in causes and
agents and the general incontrovertible laws that impartially govern the
world of existence demonstrate that this world or existence was not
accidental.

A scientist has said that the assumption that ten different elements
combine by chance in a certain arrangement is one in ten billion.
Causeless occurrence of one possibility out of ten billion minus one
other possibilities cannot be considered anything but following of
baseless and unreasonable notions.

The intellectual thought and natural reason of humankind can never deny
the relationship between actions, agents, and the result of actions, for
this would debunk all human scientific reasoning and self-evident
thoughts.

Universal motive and ideal
--------------------------

There is an authentic relationship between the components of the wide
world of existence, from the tiniest particle to the greatest collection
of celestial objects and wondrous galaxies. According to scientific and
philosophical theories, this relationship makes the world an integrated
unit that transforms and evolves in a general direction.

According to the irrefutable aforementioned theory, when the world
reaches the boundary between movement and target, the objective replaces
its movement and the turbulent evanescent world transforms into a calm
and stable place.

The world of tomorrow will doubtless be calm and stable in relation to
the world of today. The deficiencies of this world will be resolved, the
world perfected, and all potentialities realized. Yet will this
stability and perfection be relative to the current conditions of the
world or will it reach ultimate inner stability and the end of
evolution?

In other words, will the general movement of the world—which is
substituted with its goal after reaching it—gain relative calm and
stability like current lesser movements, even though it is still moving
and evolving in other dimensions or will the future world attain true
internal perfection and stability where evolution—the existential role
of all phenomena—is completely terminated; where the compasses of
existence reach the starting point, stop turning, and leave a permanent
and perfect circle; where, in colloquial terms, the world becomes four
dimensional; and where phenomena no longer revolve around time?

The conclusion of this synopsis is compact, complex, and esoteric. There
is a stable and complete world in the wake of this mobile and incomplete
world. There is a calm stopping-place towards which the caravan of
existence strives with all its might and one day, all these wayfarers
will realize the result of their endeavors there.

Of course, on the path of understanding this conclusion we are faced
with the preceding question and many more. The gloom of these
obscurities is far-ranging. In reality, these mysteries form a series of
discussions that may be considered the most complex and profound general
discussions in philosophy.

This is because general theories that do not have tangible support are
difficult to understand. From the first time we opened our eyes we have
only seen material things. We are traveling on a path that cannot be
retraced. Those who leave this world have gone beyond the bounds of our
knowledge.

Nonetheless, by relying on positive reasons based on logical and
incontestable premises, critical philosophic discussions answer the bulk
of these questions. The theory that “the mobile and fleeting world has a
stable and fixed objective” conforms to the issue of eschatological
truths imparted upon us through revelations upon religious leaders.

The motive of God in creating the world
---------------------------------------

Therefore, “motive and aim” is related to action in that it transforms
active movement into immobility and tranquility and is related to the
agent in that it transforms the existential defect of the agent into
perfection. In addition, according to logical discussions regarding the
Attributes of the Creator of the world, His Pure Essence is Absolute
Perfection and contains no defect or need.

By merging these two theories, we can hypothesize and prove a motive for
the acts of the Lord of the world. If questions such as “What is the
motive behind creation?” and “Why did God create beings external to
Himself?” mean “What are the aims of God’s actions?” then the “action
motive” of this deficient world is a perfect one. However, such
questions are erroneous if they mean: “What defect does God resolve
within Himself by creation and what perfection or benefit does He
desire?”

The answer that is given for the issue of motive in religious discourses
is the same as what was discussed above: “The motive of God, the
Almighty, in creating the world is bringing benefit to others, not to
Himself.”

In conclusion, we must note that a motive is possible only when the
action or both agent and action have a deficiency that is resolvable
through the motive. Therefore, if we presuppose the existence of an act
(i.e. creation) that has no resolvable deficiencies—such as, in
philosophical terms, an abstract—our premise would be invalid.

Indeed, philosophers have found through careful analyses that the motive
of an act is perfection of the act and the motive of an agent is
perfection of the agent. To conclude, sometimes acts are gradual and
perfection is annexed to them at the end and sometimes they are
instantaneous and abstracted from materiality and movement. In this
case, the reality of the act is the act and its perfection and motive.

Moreover, the agent is sometimes flawed, attaining its perfection after
its act, and sometimes it is perfect; therefore, it is the agent and the
motive and aim. Thus, the motive of God in creating the world is His own
Essence and the aim of His act, i.e. this imperfect world, is a more
complete world. The aim of a more complete world is an even more
complete world. As for the aim of the creation of a perfect creature, it
is the creature itself.[^1]

[^1]: From the quarterly, “Maktab-e Tashayyu‘”.


