Discourse Five: Is Islam Still Practicable Today?
=================================================

Some ask if Islam can govern the human world and answer current needs in
the light of modern circumstances and staggering advancements. They
maintain that it is time for humankind, which delves into the deepest
reaches of space and masters the stars, to throw aside antiquated
religious ideas, select a new method for its glorious life, and focus
its thought and will on expanding its praiseworthy triumphs.

Are all issues subject to change?
---------------------------------

We must first note that even though we naturally like new things more
than old ones, this is not true in all cases, and we cannot apply this
method everywhere.

For instance, we cannot say that 2×2=4, which humans have used for
thousands of years, is now old and must be thrown away. We cannot say
that social life, which until now has been established among humans, is
antiquated and a new plan must be designed where people live solitary
lives.

We cannot say civil law, which greatly suppresses individual freedom, is
passé and has exhausted the people’s patience, or that, in an age that
humanity has mastered space and sends out probes to explore the galaxy;
we must open new paths and free ourselves of laws, lawmakers, and
law-enforcers.

There is no need to explain how baseless and absurd these statements
are. Fundamentally, oldness and newness only pertain to phenomena that
are liable to change—things that have the capacity to transform and
evolve. For instance, an individual that is one day happy and full of
joy may encounter hardships the next day and become sad and dejected.

Therefore, in discussions associated with natural requirements that aim
at realism and examine genuine world laws—one of which is whether Islam
can direct the human world in the current run of affairs—one must not
engage in such poetical thoughts spinning stories of old and new.

Every statement and every detail has its proper place
-----------------------------------------------------

As to whether or not Islam can direct humanity in the current state of
affairs, the question itself is not free of peculiarity. In fact, it is
quite surprising upon bearing in mind the true nature of Islam upon
which the Qur’anic call is based. “Islam” is the path that the system of
humanity and the world’s creation reveals.

“Islam” is the code and practice that harmonizes with the singular human
nature. Because of its complete consonance with human spiritual and
corporeal nature, it provides for and resolves the true needs of humans
as opposed to their fancies or desires.

Obviously, the nature and make-up of humankind will remain the same as
long as humans are human. Regardless of the time, place, and condition
people live in, they will retain their nature. Nature sets its path
before us, whether we chose to follow it or steer clear of it.

Hence in truth, the underlying meaning of this question is: if humanity
follows the path shown by its nature, will it find happiness and attain
its natural aspirations? For instance, if a tree keeps to its natural
course—for which it is naturally equipped—will it reach the desired
destination of its nature? Clearly such questions are self-evident and
skepticism is meaningless in this regard.

Islam is the path of primordial nature, which is perpetually the true
course of humankind. It does not vary in different conditions. The
aspiration of nature—as opposed to sentimental and irrational
desires—are the true desires of the human race and the final destination
of human nature is the abode and journey’s end of human happiness and
beatitude.

In the Honorable Qur’an, God, the Almighty, declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set thy face toward the pure religion; it is in accordance with
the nature [fitrah] of God upon which He has formed the nature of
humankind. There is no alteration in the creation of God. This is the
enduring (and true) religion; however, most humans do not know.”***[^1]

Turn towards and accept the religion, which is the religion that is the
special divine genesis upon which Allah has created people, with
resolution and moderation. There is no change in the creation of
Allah—it is immutable. This is the religion that can manage the lives of
people.

A short explanation: As it is manifest and tangible to us, the various
types of beings in the world of creation each have a specific life or
existence and a definite course. In the course of their existence, they
pursue a precise destination.

Their happiness and bliss is in attaining their journey’s end without
being blocked by corruptive and degenerative obstructions. In other
words, in order to realize happiness, they must follow the course of
their life or existence in accord with the provisions of their make-up,
without interference, to its conclusion.

A grain of wheat has a specific course in its plant life. In its make-up
it has specific apparatuses and mechanisms that activate in special
circumstances. It absorbs and consumes substances which it needs to grow
and thrive in determined amounts and ratios. Through a precise path, its
primordial nature leads the grass of wheat to its goal.

A wheat plant never alters its path, chosen by internal and external
factors, in the course of its growth. For example, it would be
impossible for it to change its course to that of an apple tree, grow a
trunk, branches, and leaves and start flowering.

It is also inconceivable that it might take up the course of a sparrow,
grow a beak and wings and fly away. This law governs all types of
phenomena in creation and humans are not exempted from this general
rule.

Humans also possess a natural and compositional path and a journey’s
end, which is their perfection, happiness, and bliss. The human
composition is equipped with faculties that show us our natural path and
lead us towards our true benefit.

Regarding this general guidance that is in effect in all phenomena in
existence, God, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قَالَ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Moses replied, ‘Our Lord is He who gave each thing its special
creation and then guided it towards its benefit’.”***[^2]

Also, regarding specific guidance in effect for humans, He declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا \* فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا \*
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا \* وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the soul and That which shaped it, then inspired it with
understanding of its wickedness and virtue. Surely, those who virtuously
cultivate their souls are saved and those who keep their souls from
virtuous development despair.”***[^3]

The difference between Islamic and human laws
---------------------------------------------

From the foregoing discussion it is clear that the true life path of
humankind which entails our happiness and bliss is the course led by
nature and fitrah; it is based upon our genuine interests and benefits
according to the requisites of our creation and that of the
world—regardless of whether or not it accords with our feelings and
emotions.

Desires, feelings and emotions should adhere to the guidance of nature
and fitrah. Nature and fitrah must not submit to unrestricted desires.
The human society, with the feelings and emotions of its people, must
found life upon realism not the unsteady foundations of superstitionism
and the delusive ideals of feelings and emotions.

This is the difference between Islamic laws and other civil laws. Normal
social laws adhere to the desires of the majority of the society (half
plus one) whereas Islamic laws conform to the guidance of natural
disposition [fitrah]—which reveals the will of the Almighty God. On this
base, the Holy Qur’an affirms that lawmaking [tashrī‘] and rule [hukm]
belong uniquely to the Almighty God. Thus, it declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... إِن الْحُكْمُ إِلاَّ لِلّهِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Rule belongs specifically to Allah…”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... ومَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللّهِ حُكْمًا لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who is better than Allah in terms of rule for the people of sure
faith?”***[^5]

Moreover, that which rules in normal societies is the desires of the
majority or a powerful dictator, regardless of whether or not these
conform to truth and righteousness and secure the genuine interests of
the society. On the other hand, in a truly Islamic society,
righteousness and truth rule and the desires of the people must comply
with it.

Here, an answer to another criticism becomes clear. That is, Islam does
not agree with the unhealthy temperament of human societies, and those
that enjoy unbridled freedom and realize every kind of desire will never
tolerate the many restrictions in Islam.

Of course, if we envision humankind in its current condition—where moral
corruption has pervaded into all corners of its life and it has become
tainted with every kind of wickedness and oppression and is threatened
with annihilation every moment—and compare it with Islam, we will not
see any kind of congruity between luminous Islam and Stygian humankind.

With the continuation of current conditions as they are, we cannot
expect the Islamic movement, which is merely a semblance of Islamic
laws, to provide perfect human happiness. This expectation is exactly
like us expecting the products and benefits of true democracy in a
despotic environment that is democratic only in name, or like a sick
person who expects to get well as soon as the doctor writes a
prescription.

On the other hand, if we envision the God-given nature of the people and
compare it with Islam, which is the religion of nature and fitrah, we
will see perfect harmony. And, how would it be possible for fitrah to
clash against the path it has determined itself, upon which it guides
and knows not any other way?

The struggle against deviation
------------------------------

Certainly, due to the deviation and distortion—caused by
unrestraint—that has currently afflicted fitrah, the identifying
relationship between fitrah and the path it shows has, to some extent,
been severed. Even so, in such unfavorable circumstances, the rational
thing to do is to make every effort against the unfavorable situation
and pave the way for the future, not to validate deviated nature and
completely and forever despair of human happiness and beatitude.

History also testifies that at first every new system or government
encounters strong opposition from the previous one and only after much
strife, which is usually bloody, it is able to open up a place for
itself in the society and gradually make the people forget about its
bygone rival.

The democratic system, which is in the view of its adherents the most
harmonious of methods, caused the bloody French revolution and similar
incidents in other advanced countries before becoming established.

Also, when the communist system, which is according to its supporters a
synthesis of advanced human movements and the greatest gift of history,
first arose in Russia and subsequently in Asia, Europe, and America, it
shed the blood of tens of millions of people before becoming
established.

On the whole, the initial resistance and dissatisfaction of a society is
not a logical rationale for the depravity and unfoundedness of a system.
Thus, no matter what, Islam is alive and may be presented to any
society.[^6]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^2]: Sūrat Tā Hā 20:50.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Shams 91:7-10.

[^4]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:40.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:50.

[^6]: From the annual journal, “Ma‘ārif-e Ja‘farī”.


