Discourse Six: The Social Status of Women
=========================================

From the day the human race appeared upon this globe and lived in a
community, it needed the female sex for both the survival of social life
and natural generation. Men were never able to do without women.

Human societies—both savage and civilized—have continually followed a
course of communal life with a series of regulations that have included
customs and traditions, and just or cruel laws. Hence, in every tribe
and every nation, specific regulations have been carried out regarding
women.

Just as all laws and traditions in human societies stem from a series of
natural factors and conditions (such as precedents in climate, regional,
and environmental demands), the law of evolution that reigns over nature
also manifests itself in and has an effect on social law which is an
offspring of nature.

Prevailing laws regarding women are not an exception and evolve in the
course of human life and follow—albeit slowly—the course of perfection.

The status of women in societies and its evolution may be summarized in
three stages:

Woman, a humanlike animal!
--------------------------

Stage one: In many nomadic human societies, women were not considered a
part of the human society and had no social status or value.
Transactions with women were like transactions with dumb beasts.

Because of the mentality of utilization and exploitation and in order to
resolve their needs, humans employ wild animals that live in their
environments, use them to pursue their natural aims and take possession
of them for their mortal interests.

They use the meat, skin, fleece, fur, bones, milk, blood, power,
abilities, and even the droppings of these animals. However, although
they give them a place in their society and nurture them, they do not
allow them any rights.

If humans provide domesticated animals the necessary instruments for
eating, drinking, and coupling and resolve their needs, it is for the
purpose of obtaining the benefits that they expect of them, not because
they are living beings that, like humans, possess understanding and
rights.

If a domestic animal employed by humans is mistreated or hurt and the
offender is rebuked or punished, it is because the offender has violated
the rights of the owner of the animal—a criminal act—not because the
animal in question has any rights in the human society.

In addition, in order to achieve welfare and ease, humans kill billions
of harmful microbes and insects using chemical toxicants and in order to
eat and resolve their other needs, they slaughter millions of birds and
herbivores and in doing this they feel not the slightest bit of remorse.

In primeval human societies, women had the same situation. As various
segments of history reveal and is also manifest from the remnants of
this practice among some tribes, many ages have passed in the life of
humankind—maybe millions of years—where women had the status of a
parasite and were not awarded membership in human societies.

The thought was that the sole reason for their existence in the society
was to meet a series of needs of the society not so that they could
enjoy their own social rights. Thus, ‘lowly’ and ‘worthless’ tasks were
given to women, such as carrying chattels during the tribe’s migration
between summer and winter settlements, carrying firewood, catching fish,
serving men, training children, and nursing the sick.

As long as a woman lived in her father’s or guardian’s house, not only
did she not own anything, she was the sole property of the man. Even her
clothes and ornaments belonged to the master of the house.

Any kind of policy or reprimand—even murder—regarding a woman could be
carried out with impunity. She was given to others as a gift, as a loan,
or to flatter a dignitary. As soon as she was transferred to her
husband’s house—which was in the form of a transaction (a remnant of
which is still the custom that endures in some places) that gave money
to the bride’s family as payment for nursing her—after having been taken
advantage of in her father’s house, she had to appease the desires of
her husband.

Even now, in the civilized society of modern times, one hears that in
some advanced cities, just as public lavatories are necessary for
expelling bodily wastes, public brothels are also necessary for
discharging the sexual fluids.

These establishments exist so that those who cannot form a family or are
temporarily deprived due to various factors, such as distance from their
spouse, may release the fluids of lust that have gathered within them.
This too is one of the practices of primeval humans, remaining to this
day.

In ancient societies, men had no restriction in the number of their
wives, whereas women did not have such a privilege. Men had the right to
divorce, but women did not. Women had to continually live under the
authority of men and had to absolutely devote themselves to the whims of
men—to such an extent that in widespread famines the flesh of women was
known to be eaten.

In short, in primitive human societies, women were considered only human
in form, but were treated like domestic animals.

Woman, liberated in chains!
---------------------------

Stage two: In a stage of the social life of women, civil laws appeared
within civilized nations. Such as the system of Hammurabi of Babylonia
and the laws of ancient Rome, Greece, Egypt, China, and Persia which
were similar to modern civil laws.

Even though these systems and laws were very different from each other,
a similarity may be found among them: women had rights as a human in
society, but they were viewed as a weak type of human that could not run
their lives by themselves.

In these societies, women had to be under the authority and guardianship
of men. They lived out their lives as followers and had no independence.
They were not given the freedom to choose their path in life nor possess
property.

They were not given independence of action so that they could ascribe
deeds to themselves and enjoy the proprietary rights or profits of the
actions. They did not have the right to sue or bear witness in court,
and they had no authority whatsoever.

In such societies, as long as a woman lives in her father’s house, she
must obey her father. A father could do anything he wanted regarding his
daughter; he could marry her off to any person or give her away or take
up any policy he desired.

In these societies, women generally did not possess an official familial
relationship—with men or other women—entailing inheritance and other
rights. They only possessed natural kinship which sometimes prevented
marriage with their father, brothers, and sons.

In ancient Persia, marriage with immediate family was acceptable. In
China and the Himalayas, natural relationship came from the woman and
lineage was focused on women. As a result, one woman could have several
husbands. This custom still prevails among some people. Instead of
tracing ancestry from fathers, the line of mothers is delineated.

Among these clans and nations, woman could possess no property except in
rare cases where they worked with the permission of their guardians or
were given a marriage gift and their guardians did not take it away. A
woman’s life was managed by her guardian. For this reason, a father or
husband had the right to punish their women in any way. They even had
the right to murder them if they saw fit.

Also, the hardest of times for a woman was when she was suffering her
monthly periods—in such cases she was shunned as an unclean creature—or
when she gave birth, especially when she delivered a girl!

If a woman did something good, its benefit and praise went to her
guardian and if she performed badly or unbecomingly, she herself was
responsible and was chastised accordingly. Exceptionally, through
fatherly affection or spousal warmth, she might be willed or gifted with
some property or given special privileges. Even so, women were accorded
no autonomy, determination, nor accomplishment.

For example, the condition of women within these nations was like that
of a young child that is unable to manage its own life and must live
under the guardianship of its custodians. For although young children
are human, in view of the fact that their wills and intellects are
undeveloped, they would cast the social system into a state of turmoil
and incapacitate the society if they were given autonomy.

Therefore, they must live under the guardianship of their elders and
obey them until they are experienced and worthy of membership in the
society.

In these societies, an analogy may be made between women and prisoners
who live out their lives in slavery and are deprived of freedom of will
and action, as a slave fallen into the hands of a conquering enemy.

Even though they are human and possess all human existential faculties,
in the view of the victorious population they are foes and their
self-determination would harm the cornerstones of the society.
Therefore, they should be divested of their freedom, dominated, debased,
and possessed so the subjugating society may go on living as normal.

Likewise, because of their feeblemindedness, capriciousness, and strong
emotions, they are enemies of the society and their autonomous entrance
into the society would bear nothing but paralysis of society and
enduring regret.

These were the common grounds among the policies and laws of all ancient
advanced societies regarding women. In addition, the status of women in
the society according to Jews and Nazarenes and their divine books—the
Torah and the Christian Gospel—was the same as in aforementioned ancient
civilized societies.

This was because even though the Torah and Evangel contain
recommendations regarding friendship and moderateness with women, it is
evident that these divine books assume that women will never be as good
as men and women’s social and religious status is much lower than that
of men.[^1] Moreover, in non-divine religions, the religious actions of
women have no considerable value or no value at all.

Women and Islam
---------------

Stage three: (This is an abbreviated account.) Islam regards women as
human individuals and unconditional parts of the human society. Islam
gives women the full value that can be given to any human individual as
regards the results of their will and actions.

In order to understand the view of Islam regarding women, it is
important to note that we live in an environment subject to opposing
political gales and contrary propagandistic tidal waves that amplify
anxiety and panic, divesting us of the desirability of correct thought.
In the name of following independent and correct thought, these environs
have transformed our innate and God-given logic into blind imitation.

Furthermore, in the centuries of illogical teachings, coercion, and
despotic and unrestrained methods of the Church in the Middle Ages
multitudes of correct thoughts were massacred and millions of humans
were undeservedly tortured to death.

In order to preserve the power and status of its feeble and baseless
institution, it accused Islam—which it identified as its most dangerous
and intractable rival—of anything it possibly could and introduced Islam
to its followers with every possible unbecoming belief and method.

It misrepresented the beautiful truths of this pure religion in the form
of the most monstrous of features. The imprudence and bombast of the
Church went on until in recent years the West—due to the independence of
thought they found within themselves as a result of their industrial
revolution—rounded up the power of the Church and fenced it in within
the walls of the Vatican.

The reaction to the Church’s many centuries of pretentiousness, tyranny,
and imposition of beliefs adversely affected the people’s thought to
such an extent that they no longer consider religious truths as anything
but a bunch of superstitions from the Age of Myths and they equate
‘religion’ with ‘blind imitation’.

Evidently, if they think of their own holy religion in this manner, it
is clear after extensive negative propaganda what they would think of
other religions, including Islam.

Furthermore, with the awe-inspiring power gained through scientific and
industrial advancement, European nations used everything in their power
to control the other continents and expand their political and economic
hegemony.

Their complete success convinced advocates of this system of their
theoretical and practical superiority and assured them that non-European
life has no value and is nothing except imitation of ignorant and
unenlightened ancestral superstitions. They declared that all sensible
humans must throw away their God-given logic and unquestioningly and
specifically take up the European lifestyle.

Western propaganda was completely successful in planting the seed of the
following logic: that which can truly be called the world is the Western
world. That which can truly be called human is the Western human, and
the life that entails human happiness is a Western style life.

As a result of these inculcations, the logic of our own
intelligentsia—no less—is that our antiquated religious precepts and
social laws do not conform to the modern world, and as a result we
require world-approved laws the style of which the civilized world of
today goes by (in these sentences by world is meant the West and
Westerners).

In addition—with utmost grief—we must confess to the truth that due to a
thousand years of internal strife and contention and the selfishness and
capriciousness of rulers and officials, we have completely lost our
intellectual independence and converted our free thought and God-given
logic into a series of racial prejudices and vain inflexibilities.

A result of the conjunction of these factors was that in the name of
achieving freedom of thought and breaking the shackles of imitation, we
threw away our God-given logic and wholly imitated Westerners, choosing
no path save that of keeping to their words and deeds.

For instance, we looked to them to explain and interpret for us our own
truths, spirituality, and teachings. We learned knowledge that belonged
specifically to us from them, whereas their knowledge of the truths of
Islam is limited to their previous acquaintances and unworthy memories
from the Middle Ages and the strange studies of orientalists.

After examining the writings of these scholars, because of their
extensive mistakes, one must emphatically bless the priests and writers
of the Crusades! For example, some orientalists write that Muhammad
married Khadījah at seven, that ‘Alī became caliph after ‘Umar, that the
eleventh Shī‘ah Imām is buried in Kāzimayn, and numerous other erroneous
accounts.

Based upon the above logic, these more-loving-than-a-mother nannies—no
less—identify the social status of women in Islam thus: in Islam women
live in captivity and absolute lack of social rights. They are bereft of
freedom in will and action, and their value in inheritance and testimony
is half of a man’s and even that only in name not in practice.

Women are imprisoned within their houses and deprived of literacy. If
they leave their house for an emergency, they must wrap themselves in a
long black veil so that their fronts cannot be distinguished from their
backs!

In light of this situation and its detriments, our mission and
responsibility is clear. We must rationally and logically refer to
Islam’s explications in this regard, and with regard to other religious
issues, and refrain from probing just anywhere or listening to just
anyone. We must discover the interrelations of rights with one another
and their factual rationales.

The common foundations of Islamic laws
--------------------------------------

Without doubt, the mark of distinction separating us from animals is our
intellect, which generalizes the products of our senses, orders them and
induces general laws to discover the unknown.

Even though humans possess many inner feelings and emotions—which they
use greatly in the course of their lives—considering the enduring human
distinction, they must all produce their effects under the management of
reason, for all animals possess these same feelings and emotions, and in
some aspects they may even be stronger than humans.

In many verses, the Holy Qur’an reminds humans of the gift of intellect
and holds humans responsible for their perceptions and intellect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ
وَالأَبْصَارَ وَالأَفْئِدَةَ قَلِيلاً مَا تَشْكُرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: ‘It is He that created you and appointed for you ears, eyes,
and hearts; how little you give thanks’.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ
وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ مَسْؤُولاً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And adhere not to that which you have no knowledge. Verily, ears,
eyes, and hearts are responsible (before Allah).”***[^3]

Based on this principle, Islam considers the human society dependent
upon reason and delegates social laws to the discernment of the
intellect, not the desires of feelings and emotions.

Hence, Islam deems binding only those laws and precepts that reason
considers right even if they contradict the inclinations of the majority
because, on the path to happiness humans should choose a destination
that their intellects judge to be the point of happiness not where their
animal urges favor.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ وَإِلَى طَرِيقٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Qur’an guides people towards Truth and a straight path.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ
وَالأَرْضُ وَمَن فِيهِنَّ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if Truth had followed their caprices, the heavens and the earth
and all in them would surely have been thrown into confusion and
corruption…”***[^5]

Islam views humanity as a superior unit, and men and women as equally
human. Even though they are different in their femininity and
masculinity, they are no different in their humanity, since all
humans—whether man or woman—come into being by the procreation of two
individuals: a woman and a man.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ
أُنثَى بَعْضُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I shall not leave unrewarded the work of any agent among you,
whether man or woman; you are all members of the same race…”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O people! Surely, I have created you as males and females and have
made you into [diverse] races and tribes that you may know one another.
Verily, the most noble among you before Allah is the most pious of
you…”***[^7]

Accordingly, Islam presents women—like men—as complete members of the
human society and equally considers each to be joint elements of the
community. It has decreed freedom of will and action for women; the same
as it has done for men. However, being a complete member of the society
does not necessitate that all members of the society have identical
rights and privileges.

This is because, with regard to membership, the differences between
individuals and members in their social benefit entail differences in
civil rights.

To the testimony of history, even though there have been numerous
societies throughout the history of humanity where men were members, the
rank of a scientist has never been given to an ignorant person, the
responsibilities of an able and experienced man were never given to an
inexperienced and incompetent person, and an unrestrained persecutor has
never been given the position of a just and virtuous person.

It is true that all members of the society must be equal before the law
yet this equality is equality regarding the execution of the law—i.e.
benefiting from justice—not equality in social value and determined
rights. How can it be possible for ruler and subject; adult and child;
intellectual and ignorant; sage and fool; or oppressor and righteous
person to be equal in all social privileges without the community
falling apart?

Therefore, membership in the human society is one thing and the manner
of membership is another and these two must not be confused with each
other. In order to give the human society its due consideration, social
justice must completely be observed among its members and each person
must benefit from rights fit for them.

The status of women in Islam
----------------------------

As we pointed out, before the sun of Islam rose above the azure horizon
of this world and brightened the world and its inhabitants with its
brilliant radiance, the world was divided into two groups:

The first group consisted of the civilized nations, such as the Roman
Empire, the Persian Empire, and other nations such as Egypt, Abyssinia,
India, and China. In these societies, women were the same as
captives—meaning that they were completely deprived of autonomy and the
general privileges of society.

They did not receive inheritance. Their deeds were not respected. They
did not have any freedom or independence in food, clothing, residence,
marriage, divorce, socialization, property, and many other things. Their
every breath and every step had to have the approval of men. If they
were oppressed, they had to take their case up with courts governed by
men where their litigation, testimony, and words were not heeded.

The other group was comprised of backward tribes and peoples such as
tribes in Africa. Among these peoples, women were not even considered
human but were parasites of the society in rank with exploited animals.

They carried loads, fished, served men, trained children, nursed the
sick, appeased the lusts of their husbands, or whoever their husbands
chose, and so on. This was the general situation of the world at the
advent of Islam.

The specific environment where Islam emerged was the Arabian Peninsula.
Its people were generally Bedouin due to its vast deserts. It was
surrounded on the outside by the great nations of Rome, Persia,
Abyssinia, and Egypt and on the inside it were associated with the Jews
of Yathrib, the Nazarenes of Yemen, and what is now known as Iraq.

The majority religion was Wathanīyyah—a type of dualistic worship.[^8]
Their customs and traditions were an amalgam of the traditions and
regulations of their surrounding nations.

Similar to Rome, Persia, and other nations, women were deprived of
rights. Men kept them under absolute custody and no social respect was
given them.

Apart from the fact that they fundamentally considered women a cause of
shame and loathed daughters, the tribe of Banī Tamīm even buried their
daughters alive. Thus, the Qur’an specifically remonstrates against
these two problems:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِالأُنثَى ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا
وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ \* يَتَوَارَى مِنَ الْقَوْمِ مِنْ سُوءِ مَا بُشِّرَ
بِهِ أَيُمْسِكُهُ عَلَى هُونٍ أَمْ يَدُسُّهُ فِي التُّرَابِ أَلاَ سَاء
مَا يَحْكُمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when one of them was given the good tidings of the birth of a
girl, their face would darken in repressed anger. They would hide from
the people because of the bad news they received asking themselves
whether they should keep it in disgrace or bury it in the earth. Ah!
Evil is that which they judge.”***[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذَا الْمَوْؤُدَةُ سُئِلَتْ \* بِأَيِّ ذَنْبٍ قُتِلَتْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the infant daughter that was buried alive is asked for what
crime she was killed.”***[^10]

Within the environment that we have described, Islam made women true and
complete members of the society, released them from their captivity, and
granted them autonomy. In Islam, like men, women have a share in the
legacy left by the departed. They inherit from their fathers, brothers,
uncles, spouses, etc.

They are free to have any legitimate work and good lifestyle they
choose. Their deeds have value and social respect. They can directly
approach qualified and legal authorities. If their rights have been
encroached upon they can take legal action and also bear witness. In all
these phases, whereby the generalities of a woman’s life are completely
ensured, men have no dominance, charge, or command over women.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنْفُسِهِنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The responsibility of what women do within the confines of religious
law and custom is not yours (and they are free)…”***[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلِلنِّسَاءِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ
وَالأَقْرَبُونَ مِمَّا قَلَّ مِنْهُ أَوْ كَثُرَ نَصِيبًا مَفْرُوضًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And women have a share in what their parents and family leave; be it
slight or considerable.”***[^12]

The practice of the Holy Prophet (S) is full of fine points in this
matter; however, we cannot give a detailed account in this article.

Comparison and contrast of the rights of women and men
------------------------------------------------------

1. Regarding inheritance, on the whole, women receive half that of men
just as the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ الأُنثَيَيْنِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To the male an equivalent of the share of two females (must be
given)…”***[^13]

Even though in this aspect women have a lower position than men, this
deficiency has been resolved in another place. That is, the nafaqah
(financial support) of women is on the shoulders of men. The Islamic
fundaments behind this law are examined elsewhere.

Doubtless, a woman’s natural emotional and sentimental disposition holds
sway over that of her intellect. All the states and actions of women are
manifestations of various elegant and exquisite emotions and sentiments
whereas men, according to their nature, possess an opposite mentality.

As we noted at the start of this discussion, in organizing the affairs
of the human society, Islam has given reason superiority over emotions.
If we consider the entirety of the human populace, in each age the
wealth in the world belongs to the population of that same age. They
benefit from their wealth as long as they live and, after they die, they
pass it on to their family—the ensuing stratum.

As soon as the current stratum is extinct and the surviving
stratum—generally consisting of an equal distribution of men and
women—comes into office; so to speak, men receive two thirds of the
wealth and one third is withheld from them. The two thirds belonging to
men is used equally by both men and women; therefore, two thirds of the
world’s wealth is used by women and one third by men.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The precepts that have been ordained to the advantage of women are
equal to those that are against them…”***[^14]

According to this type of division, regarding ownership, administration,
and cultivation of property, men control the majority of the world’s
wealth.

On the other hand, regarding its utilization and benefit, women control
and benefit from the majority of wealth. Social justice necessitates
that the protection and administration of wealth be in the hands of
reason and benefiting from it be in the hands of emotions and
sentiments.

2. In connection with respect for deeds and property, Islam gives
complete autonomy to women in making use of the products of their deeds.
In this case, women possess freedom of will and action without being
under the supervision of men.

3. As regards legitimate and correct social interaction, they are not
the least different from men. They are free to socialize on the
condition that they refrain from showing off their adornments, flaunting
themselves, flirting, and inflaming the lusts of men.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The responsibility of what women do within the confines of religious
law and custom is not yours (and they are free)…”***[^15]

4. With respect to religious deeds and privileges, the only source of
difference between people in rank is their piety and respect before God.
There is no difference between women and men.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ
أُنثَى بَعْضُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I shall not leave unrewarded the work of any agent among you,
whether man or woman; you are all members of the same race…”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people! Surely, I have created you as males and females and have made
you into [diverse] races and tribes that you may know one another.
Verily, the most noble among you before Allah is the most pious of you.
Truly, Allah is All-knowing, All-aware.”[^17]

In an area where no privilege is given to any class and the only mark of
distinction is piety and Islamic religious service, men and women are
not different and one devout woman is more respectable and preferable to
one thousand impious men.

5. As regards the issue of marriage, women are free to marry anyone they
want. However, considering that the precepts regarding inheritance and
marriage are based upon genealogy, a woman can under no circumstances
have sexual relations with anyone save the one husband she has chosen.
Nevertheless, a man can take more than one wife on the condition that he
is able to behave justly and equitably with all his wives.

It is evident, however, that Islam has not necessitated polygyny rather
it has merely given permission for men to marry up to four women and
this precept requires background. This means that the situation must be
such that social order is not threatened by a shortage of women and
congestion of men.

One thing that is clear for men is that because the residence and living
expenses of women and children are the responsibility of men and in view
of the fact that justice and equity are stipulated, taking such action
is feasible for a limited number of men, not all. In fact, nature and
external incidents often provide more women fit for marriage than men.

The validity, purposefulness, and reasonability of this precept is made
clear by contemplation of the true nature of human societies and
unexpected incidents. Supposing an equal proportion of men and women in
the world—something that is usually statistically valid—if we set a
certain year as starting point and separately add up male and female
births, in the first year that the young men reach natural maturity or
legal age we would be faced with a much greater number of marriageable
girls.

In the sixteenth year the number of women fit for marriage would be
seven times that of available men. In the twentieth year, the fit women
to fit men ratio would be 11:5, and in the 25th year, which is the
average age for marriage, this ratio would be 16:10. In this case, if we
assume the ratio of men that have more than one wife to be one fifth,
80% of men would have one wife and 20% would have four and in the
thirtieth year, 20% of men would have three wives.

Apart from this, uncontrollable events such as brutal wars and dangerous
occupations cause the deaths of countless men. This leads to an abundant
population of marriageable widows and women who—if polygyny was
forbidden—would have no course but to give up their chastity perhaps
even bringing illegitimate children lacking guardianship into the world.

The two recent world wars proved this fact beyond doubt such that the
population of spouseless women in Germany requested that—in accordance
with Islamic law—the government permit polygamy and in this way appease
the population of single women. Regrettably, due to the opposition of
the Church, their request was denied.

This incident demonstrates that the opposition of women to polygyny is
based on habit not the exigency of nature and fitrah and it was the best
answer to censure the assessment within Islam that, ‘The decree of
polygyny has hurt the feelings of women and dispirited them. It has
instigated their desire for vengeance and causes many deplorable
incidents.’

This event and similar ones prove beyond doubt that when there is need
and a shortage of eligible men, all these opposing thoughts transform
into acquiescence.

In addition, polygamy was practiced for ages before Islam without any
limit in the number of wives and in Islam with a specific delimitation
and it never caused disorder or chaos in the society. Women who went to
a wedded man as their second, third, or fourth wife did not grow from
the earth or fall from the sky; rather, they were these same women who
according to critics, are naturally opposed to polygyny.

Aside from the fact that Islam has not made polygyny obligatory, but has
made it permissible—on the condition that the man is not afraid he might
act unjustly and is fit to behave equitably—there are methods in Islamic
jurisprudence whereby a woman may prevent her husband from marrying
another man unless he is willing to divorce her first.

The same thing also exists in the matter of divorce. Even though the
authority for divorce is in the hands of the man, in accordance with the
sharī‘ah, women can resort to methods to separate from their husband or
may predict necessary situations and obtain this right so they may enjoy
peace of mind and contentment.

The existence of divorce in conjugal life and the fact that it has been
entrusted to men on the basis of the sharī‘ah is a hallmark of the holy
religion of Islam. Even so, there are special ways whereby women can
obtain divorce under specific circumstances.

Due to a great deal of suffering and lengthy conflict, civilized nations
and legitimate governments all over the world were finally forced to
sanction divorce.

However, since they gave the power of divorce directly to both women and
men, the rise in the divorce rate—especially as requested by women—has
weakened these governments and they are continually seeking a solution
to this problem. Some of the reasons that women provide as basis for
their divorce which are broadcast in newspapers and mass media
especially ratify the correctitude of this Islamic view.

Rule of reason or sentiments?
-----------------------------

What is understood from preceding discussions is that women are not
inferior to men in affairs of life and social privileges. In all
conditions they retain their autonomy and are not under the control of
men. However, one thing that is certain is that a woman must obey her
husband in matters of marital relations.

The threefold restriction that women, who are full of love and
sentiment, have in Islam are in the domain of rationality which Islam
devolves to men, who have a greater tendency for rational thought and
decision-making, and must be separated from the environment of
sentiments and feelings. These three matters are: leadership,
judicature, and jihād.

According to the religious statements and practice of the Holy Prophet
(S), women cannot hold governance and leadership in the Islamic society,
cannot act as a judge and cannot directly participate in jihād and
supervise battles.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَوَ مَنْ يُنَشَّأُ فِي الْحِلْيَةِ وَهُوَ فِي الْخِصَامِ غَيْرُ
مُبِينٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Are then those who have been brought up amid adornments and who by
nature cannot show their true aims in times of hostility to be
considered daughters of Allah and given governance of affairs of
state?”***[^18]

Therefore, men are responsible for these threefold aspects:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men are the protectors and supervisors of women.”***[^19]

The relationship of these three issues with reason and their impairment
by the interference of feelings and sentiments is so clear that there is
no need for discussion and research and a decisive trial will leave no
room for doubt.

I’ll never forget early in the recent World War, when the battle came
upon French soil and extreme hostilities continued, while fire fell from
the skies and blood seethed on the earth, according to the newspapers a
high-ranking female member of the French army general staff designed a
beautiful female hat with a scissor mark at the front![^20]

[^1]: In 586 C.E., after much discussion regarding the issue of women,
the Religious Assembly of France ordained that women were human although
they had been created to serve men. Until approximately one hundred
years ago, in England women were not considered part of the human
society. Additionally, most ancient religions did not consider the deeds
of women accepted by God. In ancient Greece it was even said that women
were a wickedness created by the Devil.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Mulk 67:23.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Isrā’ 17:36.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Ahqāf 46:30.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:71.

[^6]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:195.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Hujurāt 49:13.

[^8]: Advocates of Wathanīyyah believed in one God as Creator; however,
the reason that this creed is considered a type of idolatry is that its
adherents deemed beings other than God worthy of veneration. Even so,
they did not ascribe divinity to their idols, which were representations
of prophets, angels, stars, etc. (Extracted from the “Dictionary of
Dehkhodā”) [trans.]

[^9]: Sūrat al-Nahl 16:58-59.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Takwīr 81:8-9.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:234.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:7.

[^13]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:11.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:228.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:234.

[^16]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:195.

[^17]: Sūrat al-Hujurāt 49:13.

[^18]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:18.

[^19]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:34.

[^20]: From the yearbook, “Maktab-e Tashayyu‘”.


