The Fifteenth Century
=====================

The 15th cent. is not distinguished in English letters, due in part to
the social dislocation caused by the prolonged Wars of the Roses. Of the
many 15th-century imitators of Chaucer the best-known are**John
Lydgate** and**Thomas Hoccleve** . Other poets of the time
include**Stephen** **Hawes** and**Alexander** **Barclay** and the Scots
poets**William** **Dunbar** ,**Robert** **Henryson** , and**Gawin**
**Douglas** . The poetry of**John Skelton** , which is mostly satiric,
combines medieval and Renaissance elements.

The miracle play, a long cycle of short plays based upon biblical
episodes, was popular throughout the Middle Ages in England. The
morality play, an allegorical drama centering on the struggle for man's
soul, originated in the 15th cent. The finest of the genre
is**Everyman** (a 15th century English morality play).

***Everyman*** is the best surviving example of the type of Medieval
drama known as the morality play. Moralities evolved side by side with
the mystery plays, although they were composed individually and not in
cycles. The moralities employed allegory to dramatize the moral struggle
Christianity envisions universal in every individual.

*Everyman* , a short play of some 900 lines, portrays a complacent
Everyman who is informed by Death of his approaching end. The play shows
the hero's progression from despair and fear of death to a "Christian
resignation that is the prelude to redemption." First, Everyman is
deserted by his false friends: his casual companions, his kin, and his
wealth. He falls back on his Good Deeds, his Strength, his Beauty, his
Intelligence, and his Knowledge. These assist him in making his Book of
Accounts, but at the end, when he must go to the grave, all desert him
save his Good Deeds alone. The play makes its grim point that we can
take with us from this world nothing that we have received, only what we
have given.

The play was written near the end of the fifteenth century. It is
probably a translation from a Flemish play,*Elckerlijk* (or*Elckerlyc* )
first printed in 1495, although there is a possibility that*Everyman* is
the original, the Flemish play the translation. There are four surviving
versions of*Everyman* , two of them fragmentary.


