WILLIAM CAXTON AND THE INTRODUCTION OF PRINTING TO ENGLAND, 1476.
=================================================================

Malory's book is the first great English classic which was given to the
world in print instead of written manuscript; for it was shortly after
Malory's death that the printing press was brought to England by William
Caxton. The invention of printing, perhaps the most important event of
modern times, took place in Germany not long after the middle of the
fifteenth century, and the development of the art was rapid. During the
year 1476, just a century before the first theatre was to be built in
London, Caxton returned to England and established his shop in
Westminster, then a London suburb. During the fifteen remaining years of
his life he laboured diligently, printing an aggregate of more than a
hundred books, which together comprised over fourteen thousand pages.
Aside from Malory's romance, which he put out in 1485, the most
important of his publications was an edition of Chaucer's 'Canterbury
Tales.' While labouring as a publisher Caxton himself continued to make
translations, and in spite of many difficulties he, together with his
assistants, turned into English from French no fewer than twenty-one
distinct works. From every point of view Caxton's services were great.
As translator and editor his style is careless and uncertain, but like
Malory's it is sincere and manly, and vital with energy and enthusiasm.
As printer, in a time of rapid changes in the language, when through the
wars in France and her growing influence the second great infusion of
Latin-French words was coming into the English language, he did what
could be done for consistency in forms and spelling. Partly medieval and
partly modern in spirit, he may fittingly stand at the close, or nearly
at the close, of our study of the medieval period.


