THE MORALITY PLAYS.
===================

The Mystery Plays seem to have reached their greatest popularity in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The Morality Play probably arose in
part from the desire of religious writers to teach the principles of
Christian living in a more direct and compact fashion than was possible
through the Bible stories of the Mysteries. As compared with the usual
type of Mystery plays the Moralities had for the writers this advantage,
that they allowed some independence in the invention of the story; and
how powerful they might be made in the hands of a really gifted author
has been finely demonstrated in our own time by the stage-revival of the
best of them, 'Everyman' (which is probably a translation from a Dutch
original). In most cases, however, the spirit of medieval allegory
proved fatal, the genuinely abstract characters are mostly shadowy and
unreal, and the speeches of the Virtues are extreme examples of
intolerable sanctimonious declamation. Against this tendency, on the
other hand, the persistent instinct for realism provided a partial
antidote; the Vices are often very lifelike rascals, abstract only in
name. In these cases the whole plays become vivid studies in
contemporary low life, largely human and interesting except for their
prolixity and the coarseness which they inherited from the Mysteries and
multiplied on their own account. During the Reformation period, in the
early sixteenth century, the character of the Moralities, more strictly
so called, underwent something of a change, and they were--sometimes
made the vehicle for religious argument, especially by Protestants.


