The Early Period
================

Several poems in early Middle English are extant.*The Orrmulum* - a
12th-century work of Biblical exegesis, written in early Middle English
verse by a monk named Orm. It’s a verse translation of parts of the
Gospels which is of linguistic and prosodic rather than literary
interest. Of approximately the same date,*The Owl and the Nightingale*
is the first example in English of the*débat,* a popular continental
form; in the poem, the owl, strictly monastic and didactic, and the
nightingale, a free and amorous secular spirit, charmingly debate the
virtues of their respective ways of life.

The Thirteenth Century
======================

Middle English prose of the 13th cent. continued in the tradition of
Anglo-Saxon prose—homiletic, didactic, and directed toward ordinary
people rather than polite society. The “Katherine Group” (c.1200),
comprising three saints' lives, is typical. The Ancren Riwle (c.1200) is
a manual for prospective anchoresses; it was very popular, and it
greatly influenced the prose of the 13th and 14th cent. The fact that
there was no French prose tradition was very important to the
preservation of the English prose tradition.

In the 13th cent.**the romance** , an important continental narrative
verse form, was introduced in England. It drew from three rich sources
of character and adventure: the legends of Charlemagne, the legends of
ancient Greece and Rome, and the British legends of King Arthur and the
Knights of the Round Table.**Layamon’s Brut** , a late 13th-century
metrical romance marks the first appearance of Arthurian matter in
English.

***Layamon's Brut*** , also known as the***Chronicle of Britain*** and
often called simply***Brut*** , is a Middle English poem compiled and
recast by the English priest Layamon. It is named for Britain’s mythical
founder, Brutus of Troy. The*Brut* is 16,095 lines long and narrates the
history of Britain. The rhyming style is the alliterative verse line
style commonly used in Middle English poetry. Layamon's Brut (c. 1215)
is a history of England in verse written in a form of Middle English and
it remains one of the best extant examples of early Middle English.

Original English romances include***King Horn*** ( one of the earliest
Middle English romances which was written in a South Midlands dialect
somewhere around 1225 by an unknown poet and which is based on the
Anglo-Norman story) and**Havelok the Dane (** a Middle English romance
story). Both 13th-century works retain elements of the Anglo-Saxon
heroic tradition.

However, French romances were far more influential than their English
counterparts. In England French romances popularized ideas of adventure
and heroism quite contrary to those of Anglo-Saxon heroic literature and
were representative of wholly different values and tastes. Ideals of
courtly love, together with its elaborate manners and rituals, replaced
those of the heroic code; adventure and feats of courage were pursued
for the sake of the knight's lady rather than for the sake of the hero's
honor or the glory of his tribal king.

Continental verse forms based on metrics and rhyme replaced the
Anglo-Saxon alliterative line in Middle English poetry. Many French
literary forms also became popular, such as a moral tale, the animal
fable, and the dream vision. The continental allegorical tradition,
which derived from classical literature, is exemplified by the Roman de
la Rose, which had a strong impact on English literature.

Medieval works of literature often center on the inevitability, sadness,
change, loss, and death; and the vanity of human grandeur. A number of
13th-century secular and religious Middle English**lyrics** are extant,
but like Middle English literature in general, the lyric reached its
fullest flower during the second half of the 14th cent. Lyrics continued
popular in the 15th cent., from which time the**ballad** also dates.

The Fourteenth Century
======================

The poetry of the alliterative revival includes some of the best poetry
in Middle English. The Christian allegory***The Pearl*** is a poem of
great intricacy and sensibility that is meaningful on several symbolic
levels.***Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,*** by the same anonymous
author, is also of high literary sophistication, and its intelligence,
vividness, and symbolic interest render it possibly the finest Arthurian
poem in English. Other important alliterative poems are the moral
allegory***Piers Plowman*** *,* attributed to William Langland, and the
alliterative***Morte Arthur*** *,* which, like nearly all English poetry
until the mid-14th cent., was anonymous.

Pearl
-----

It is a Middle English alliterative poem written in the late 14th
century. Its unknown author, designated the "Pearl poet" or "Gawain
poet", is generally assumed to be the author of*Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight* ,*Patience* , and*Cleanness* and may have composed*St.
Erkenwald.*

The poem may be divided into three parts: an introduction, a dialog
between the two main characters in which the Pearl instructs the
narrator, and a description of the New Jerusalem with the narrator's
awakening. The narrator, upset at the loss of his Pearl, falls asleep
and begins to dream. In his dream he is transported to a garden.
Wandering by the side of a beautiful stream, he becomes convinced
paradise is on the other shore. He sees a young maid whom he identifies
as his Pearl.

When he asks whether she is the pearl he has lost, she tells him he has
lost nothing, that his pearl is merely a rose which has naturally
withered. He wants to cross to her side, but she says it is not so easy,
that he must resign himself to the will and mercy of God. He objects to
the idea that God rewards every man equally, regardless of his apparent
due. She responds that God gives the same gift of Christ's redemption to
all. She instructs him on several aspects of sin, repentance, grace and
salvation. She describes the earthly and the heavenly Jerusalem. She
advises him to forsake all and buy this pearl. He asks about the
heavenly Jerusalem; she tells him it is the city of God. He asks to go
there; she says that God forbids that, but he may see it by a special
dispensation. They walk upstream, and he sees the city across the
stream, which is described in a paraphrase of the Apocalypse. He also
sees a procession of the blessed. Plunging into the river in his
desperation to cross, he awakes from the dream back and resolves to
fulfill the will of God.


