Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (c. 1375 - 1400)
================================================

Sir Gawain was one of the most popular heroes of Arthurian legend;
nephew of King Arthur, a knight of King Arthur’s Round Table. He was
regarded, particularly in the early romances, as the model of
chivalry—pure, brave, and courteous. In later romances, when spiritual
purity was valued more than chivalrous deeds, his character
deteriorated, becoming treacherous and brutal. Gawain is most famous as
the hero of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.

In the tale, Sir Gawain accepts a challenge from a mysterious warrior
who is completely green, from his clothes and hair to his beard and
skin. The "Green Knight" offers to allow anyone to strike him with his
axe if the challenger will take a return blow in a year and a day.
Gawain accepts, and beheads him in one blow, only to have the Green
Knight stand up, pick up his head, and remind Gawain to meet him at the
appointed time. The story of Gawain's struggle to meet the appointment
and his adventures along the way demonstrate the spirit of chivalry and
loyalty. He sets out to find the Green Knight, and undergoes many trials
to his ideals and virtue, as compared with Beowulf who has to fight
Grendel and his dam to save his people.

*Sir Gawain and the Green Knight* is a Medieval English romance in the
Arthurian tradition. The text is thought to have been composed in the
mid- to late fourteenth century. The anonymous author is today called
alternately "The Pearl Poet," after the poem*Pearl* in the same
manuscript, or "The Gawain Poet."

***Gawain* is a verse romance.**

*Sir Gawain and the Green Knight* is written in a North or West Midlands
dialect.*Gawain* was first published in 1839, and numerous translations
and retellings have appeared since.


