WILLIAM LANGLAND ( c. 1330 - 1387)
==================================

Langland, William, c.1332-c.1400, putative author of*Piers Plowman.* He
was born probably at Ledbury near the Welsh marshes and may have gone to
school at Great Malvern Priory. Although he took minor orders he never
became a priest. Later in London he apparently eked out his living by
singing masses and copying documents. His great work,*Piers Plowman,*
or, more precisely,*The Vision of William concerning Piers the Plowman,*
is an allegorical poem in unrhymed alliterative verse, regarded as the
greatest Middle English poem prior to Chaucer.

Piers Plowman
-------------

It is the title of a Middle English allegorical narrative poem by
William Langland.*Piers* is considered by many critics to be one of the
early great works of English literature along with Chaucer's*Canterbury
Tales* and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight during the Middle Ages. The
poem—part theological allegory, part social satire—concerns the
narrator's intense quest for the true Christian life, which is told from
the point of view of the medieval Catholic mind. This quest entails a
series of dream-visions and an examination into the lives of three
allegorical characters, Dowel (*"Do-Well"* ), Dobet (*"Do-Better"* ),
and Dobest (*"Do-Best"* ).

The poem begins in the Malvern Hills in Malvern, Worcestershire. A man
named Will falls asleep and has a vision of a tower set upon a hill and
a fortress  in a deep valley; between these symbols of heaven and hell
is a "fair field full of folk", representing the world of mankind. In
fact, he has different visions, which he describes, and in which he
exposes the corruptions of society, the dissoluteness of the clergy, and
the allurements to sin, with considerable bitterness. In the early part
of the poem Piers, the humble plowman of the title, appears and offers
himself as the narrator's guide to Truth. The latter part of the work,
however, is concerned with the narrator's search for Dowel, Dobet and
Dobest. It is both a social satire and a vision of the simple Christian
life. The poem consists of three dream visions: (1) in which Holy Church
and Lady Meed (representing the temptation of riches) woo the dreamer;
(2) in which Piers leads a crowd of penitents in search of St. Truth;
and (3) the vision of Do-well (the practice of the virtues), Do-bet (in
which Piers becomes the Good Samaritan practicing charity), and Do-best
(in which the simple plowman is identified with Jesus himself).

The works of**Geoffrey Chaucer** mark the brilliant culmination of
Middle English literature. Chaucer's***The Canterbury Tales*** are
stories told each other by pilgrims—who comprise a very colourful cross
section of 14th-century English society—on their way to the shrine at
Canterbury. The tales are cast into many different verse forms and
genres and collectively explore virtually every significant medieval
theme. Chaucer's wise and humane work also illuminates the full scope of
medieval thought. Overshadowed by Chaucer but of some note are the works
of**John Gower.**


