Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343 - 1400)
=================================

Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343 - 1400) - is considered the greatest poet of
the Middle English period. He's well-known for "The Canterbury Tales."
He has been called "the father of English poetry. With his knowledge of
Latin, French and Italian literature, he transformed the world of
literature. Chaucer's greatest work was his "Canterbury Tales," a
collection of stories told by pilgrims on their way to Canterbury

**Birthplace: London, England**

Chaucer (the name is French and seems to have meant originally
'shoemaker') came into the world probably in 1338, the first important
author who was born and lived in London, which with him becomes the
centre of English literature. About his life, as about those of many of
our earlier writers, there remains only very fragmentary information,
which in his case is largely pieced together from scattering entries of
various kinds in such documents as court account books and public
records of state matters and of lawsuits. His father, a wine merchant,
may have helped supply the cellars of the king (Edward III) and so have
been able to bring his son to royal notice; at any rate, while still in
his teens Geoffrey became a page in the service of one of the king's
daughters-in-law. In this position his duty would be partly to perform
various humble work in the household, partly also to help amuse the
leisure of the inmates, and it is easy to suppose that he soon won
favour as a fluent story-teller. He early became acquainted with the
seamy as well as the brilliant side of courtly life; for in 1359 he was
in the campaign in France and was taken prisoner. That he was already
valued appears from the king's subscription of the equivalent of a
thousand dollars of present-day money toward his ransom; and after his
release he was transferred to the king's own service, where about 1368
he was promoted to the rank of esquire. He was probably already married
to one of the queen's ladies-in-waiting. Chaucer was now thirty years of
age, and his practical sagacity and knowledge of men had been
recognized; for from this time on he held important public positions. He
was often sent to the Continent - to France, Flanders, and Italy - on
diplomatic missions; and for eleven years he was in charge of the London
customs, where the uncongenial drudgery occupied almost all his time
until through the intercession of the queen he was allowed to perform it
by deputy. In 1386 he was a member of Parliament, knight of the shire
for Kent; but in that year his fortune turned - he lost all his offices
at the overthrow of the faction of his patron, Duke John of Gaunt (uncle
of the young king, Richard II, who had succeeded his grandfather, Edward
III, some years before). Chaucer's party and himself were soon restored
to power, but although during the remaining dozen years of his life he
received from the Court various temporary appointments and rewards, he
appears often to have been poor and in need. When Duke Henry of
Bolingbroke, son of John of Gaunt, deposed the king and himself assumed
the throne as Henry IV, Chaucer's prosperity seemed assured, but he
lived after this for less than a year, dying suddenly in 1400. Chaucer
was buried in Westminster Abbey, becoming the first to occupy what is
now called Poet's Corner.

Early Works
-----------

Chaucer's literary activity is often divided into three periods. The
first period includes his early work (to 1370), which is based largely
on French models, especially the Roman de la Rose and the poems of
Guillaume de Machaut. He drew inspiration from the rich French poetry of
the period, which was produced partly in France, partly in England.

Chaucer experimented with the numerous lyric forms which the French
poets had brought to perfection; he also translated, in whole or in
part, the most important of medieval French narrative poems, the
thirteenth century*'Romance of the Rose'* of Guillaume de Lorris and
Jean de Meung, a very clever satirical allegory, in many thousand lines,
of medieval love and medieval religion. Chaucer's chief works during
this time are the***Book of the Duchess*** *,* an allegorical lament
written in 1369 on the death of Blanche, wife of John of Gaunt, and a
partial translation of the***Roman de la Rose.***


