Italian Period
==============

Chaucer's second period (up to c.1387) is called his Italian period
because during this time his works were modelled primarily on Dante and
Boccaccio. It dates from his first visit to Italy in 1372-3, where at
Padua he may perhaps have met the fluent Italian poet Petrarch, and
where at any rate the revelation of Italian life and literature must
have aroused his intense enthusiasm. From this time, and especially
after his other visit to Italy, five years later, he made much direct
use of the works of Petrarch and Boccaccio and to a less degree of those
of their greater predecessor, Dante, whose severe spirit was too unlike
Chaucer's for his thorough appreciation. The longest and finest of
Chaucer's poems of this period,***'Troilus and Crisside'*** is based on
a work of Boccaccio. It’s one of the great love poems in the English
language. Here Chaucer details with compelling power the sentiment and
tragedy of love, and the psychology of the heroine who had become for
the Middle Ages a central figure in the tale of Troy. Chaucer perfected
the seven-line stanza later called*rhyme royal.*

Major works of the second period include poems:***The House of Fame***
*,* recounting the adventures of Aeneas after the fall of Troy;***The
Parliament of Fowls*** *,* which tells of the mating of fowls on St.
Valentine's Day and is thought to celebrate the betrothal of Richard II
to Anne of Bohemia; and a prose translation of Boethius'*De consolatione
philosophiae* .

Chaucer's third period, covering his last fifteen years, is called his
English period, because now at last his genius, mature and
self-sufficient, worked in essential independence. Among the works of
this period are the unfinished***'The Legend of Good*** ***Women*** *,'*
- a series of romantic biographies of famous ladies and the prose
fragment***The Treatise on the Astrolabe,*** written for his son Lewis.

The Canterbury Tales - portrait of real people.
-----------------------------------------------

To Chaucer's final period, in which he achieved his fullest artistic
power, belongs his masterpiece,*The Canterbury Tales* (written mostly
after 1387) - a poetic collection of stories widely regarded as the
beginning of English literature. This unfinished poem, about 17,000
lines, is one of the most brilliant works in all literature in which he
draws us into a very down-to-earth world. The poem introduces a group of
pilgrims journeying from London to the shrine of St. Thomas à Becket at
Canterbury. To help pass the time they decide to tell stories which are
bawdy, comical and pious.  Chaucer himself is among the pilgrims in the
tales. Together, the pilgrims represent a wide cross section of
14th-century English life.

By chance, 29 other pilgrims come trooping into the tavern, also headed
for Canterbury. Chaucer chats with all of them, becomes part of their
group, and decides to leave with them early the next morning. Chaucer
then tells us all about the group he's joined: who they are, what their
station in life is, even what they're wearing.

He proceeds to give us detailed descriptions of almost all of them,
starting with the Knight, the highest-ranking member of the group.

The Host has a plan - he proposes that each pilgrim should tell two
tales on the way to Canterbury and two more on the way back. Whoever
tells the best tale-the most morally instructive as well as the most
amusing - gets treated to dinner by the rest of the gang on the return
trip (at the Host's inn, of course). Chaucer's description of each
character tells us something about the character's personality. We'll
also learn something more about the character based on the story he or
she tells. Chaucer tells us much about each pilgrim, not only by telling
us what they do for a living, but also through description of their
clothes, attitudes, even their bodies. Chaucer's list of attributes
often parodies the standards set for a given rank, turning some
descriptions into great comedy. Through Chaucer's superb powers of
characterization the pilgrims—such as the earthy wife of Bath, the
gentle knight, the worldly prioress, the evil summoner—come intensely
alive.

This literary form--a collection of disconnected stories bound together
in a fictitious framework--goes back almost to the beginning of
literature itself; but Chaucer may well have been directly influenced by
Boccaccio's famous book of prose tales,*'The Decameron'* (Ten Days of
Story-Telling). Between the two works, however, there is a striking
contrast, which has often been pointed out. While the Italian author
represents his gentlemen and ladies as selfishly fleeing from the misery
of a frightful plague in Florence to a charming villa and a holiday of
unreflecting pleasure, the gaiety of Chaucer's pilgrims rests on a basis
of serious purpose, however conventional it may be.

The pilgrims' tales include a variety of medieval genres from the
humorous fabliau to the serious homily, and they vividly indicate
medieval attitudes and customs in such areas as love, marriage, and
religion. Chaucer was a master storyteller and craftsman, but because of
a change in the language after 1400, his metrical technique was not
fully appreciated until the 18th cent. Only in Scotland in the 15th and
16th cent. did his imitators understand his versification.

Chaucer was among the first to use English to create a great work of
poetry, in an age when courtly languages like Latin and French were
typically favoured for poetry and stories.


