John Gower (c. 1330? - 1408) - English poet.
============================================

Gower, John was the best-known contemporary and friend of Chaucer, who
addressed him as “Moral Gower,” at the end of*Troilus and Criseyde.*
Apparently he was a Kentish landowner who lived in London until his last
years, when he became blind and retired as a layman to the priory of St.
Mary Overey. In the 15th and 16th cent. Gower was frequently paired with
Chaucer as a master of English poetry. He is remembered primarily for
three major works, the***Mirroir de l'Omme*** ,***Vox Clamantis*** ,
and***Confessio Amantis*** , three long poems written in French, Latin,
and English respectively, which are united by common moral and political
themes. Gower's first work was*Mirour de l'Omme* (*i.e* .**Mirror of
Man** ) (written before 1381), an allegorical poem in French meditating
on the fall of man and the effect of sin on the world. Gower later
changed the title to*Speculum Meditantis* to fit with the titles of his
later works. is an allegorical manual of the vices and virtues; Around
1381, Gower began work on*Vox Clamantis* (*i.e* .**The Clamoring Voice**
), an essay in Latin elegiac verse. Like the*Speculum Meditantis* , it
too treats of sinfulness, and criticizes the corruption of the society.

It also provides a contemporary view of the Peasants' Revolt of 1381.
Gower's moral and philosophical writings were highly praised by his
peers. In 1385, Gower's good friend, Geoffrey Chaucer, dedicated
the*Troilus and Criseyde* to him, giving him the epithet "moral Gower."

***Confessio*** ***Amantis*** *,* (i.e.**Lover's Confession** ) Gower's
masterpiece (written c.1390) is a collection of stories that illustrate
the Seven Deadly Sins. Unlike his previous works, Gower wrote
the*Confessio* in English at the request of Richard II who was concerned
that so little was being written in English. It is a collection of tales
and exempla treating of courtly love. The framework is that of a lover
complaining first to Venus, and later in the work, confessing to her
priest, Genius.*Confessio Amantis* made an important contribution to
courtly love literature in English. Some of the stories have their
counterparts in Chaucer's*Canterbury Tales* , and one of the stories
later served as the source for Shakespeare's*Pericles* , in which
Shakespeare had Gower appear in the Chorus. Gower revised*Confessio
Amantis* in 1393, replacing the praise of King Richard II with a
dedication to Henry of Lancaster. In return, Henry presented Gower with
an ornamented collar.

Next, Gower composed a series of Latin poems. Among his minor works
are***Cinkante Ballades*** *,* which are love poems in French, and***In
Praise of Peace*** *,* a poem in English.

Old and blind, John Gower died in 1408, leaving a considerable estate.
He was buried in St. Mary Overies, now Southwark Cathedral, where his
tomb can still be seen today.


