SIR THOMAS MALORY (c. 1405 - 1471)
==================================

Malory, English author of*Morte d'Arthur.* It is almost certain that he
was Sir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revell, Warwickshire. Knighted in 1442,
he served in the parliament of 1445. He was evidently a violent, lawless
individual who committed a series of crimes, including poaching,
extortion, robbery, rape, and attempted murder. Most of his life from
1451 on was spent in prison, and he probably did most of his writing
there. Malory's original book was called*The Book of King Arthur and His
Noble Knights of the Round Table* and was made up of eight romances that
were more or less separate. William Caxton printed it in 1485 and gave
it the misleading title of***Morte d'Arthur*** ("The Death of
Arthur")*.* This work is generally regarded as the most significant
accomplishment in English literature in the two centuries between the
works of Chaucer and those of such masters as Spenser and Shakespeare.
The last medieval English work of the Arthurian legend, Malory's tales
are supposedly based on an assortment of French prose romances.
The*Morte d'Arthur* is noted for its excellent dramatic narrative and
the beauty of its rhythmic and simple language. It remains the standard
source for later versions of the legend.

"Le Morte Darthur" was written in English and consists of eight tales in
507 chapters in 21 books, so arranged by Caxton, for clarity of
understanding. It is the basis of most modern tellings of the Arthurian
story and was the inspiration for Tennyson's "Idylls of the King."*Le
Morte Darthur* is undoubtedly the last definitive interpretation of the
Arthurian myth before the dawn of the English Renaissance.


