Prophecies in Hindu Scriptures
==============================

As the Holy Prophet of Islam was to bring a universal religion for the
whole mankind, and as that religion was to continue up to the end of the
world, all Prophets in all religions of the world had informed their
followers of his advent, and told them to accept his religion without
any 'ifs' and 'buts'. In many instances, they also gave the details of
his personal and family life so that the people might easily recognise
him.

It is not possible to mention in this small booklet all the prophecies
from all the books. However, I intend to give here a few prophecies from
the religious books of the Parsis, the Hindus, the Jews and the
Christians.

It is necessary to point out that in many places, the good tiding about
the Holy Prophet of Islam is followed by description of his
family-members who were to be his successors. I have given some of such
prophecies. Several useful books have been written on this subject in
past centuries. Important among them are:

Mir'atu 'l -Makhlyqat
---------------------

1. **Mir'atu ' l -Makhlýqat,** by late Molvi Abdu 'r-Rahman Chishti of
India. This book was written in 1041 Hijri (=1631-32 C.E.). It contains
translations from relevant parts of the sacred books of Hinduism.

Basharat-e-Ahmadi
-----------------

2. **Basharat - e - Ahmadi,** by late Molvi Abdul-Aziz, of Lucknow

Anisu'l -a'laam
---------------

3. **Anisu'l -a'laam,** by late Fakhrul-Islam Muhammad Sadiq. He was an
Armenian and formerly a Christian priest. He knew Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Syrian, Armenian, Persian and Arabic. He accepted Islam because of his
research in the meaning of 'Paracletos' whose coming is forecasted in
the Gospel of St. John. He was convinced that it referred to the Holy
Prophet of Islam.

His book in two volumes, in Persian, was published in 1891 A.D. It is a
treasure of valuable research for all those who are interested in
comparative religion; and almost all books written afterwards are based
upon it (though few people have acknowledged this debt).

The Parsi prophecies have been taken from the Zoroastrian prophecies
found in Zend Avesta and Dasatir, as quoted in A.H. Vidyarthi & U. Ali's
book, Muhammad in Parsi, Hindu and Buddist Scriptures.

The prophecies given here have been taken from these books.

Barm Uttar Khand
----------------

Barm Uttar Khand is a book of Hindu religion. Late Abdu 'r-Rahman
Chishti (11th century of Hijra) translated it into Urdu, in his ' *Mir'
atu ' l - Makhlu - q ýt '* .According to that book, the famous Hindu
avatar, Mahadev told his wife, Parbati, all the events of the future,
while they were on the mountain, Kailash Parbat, and Bishist Muni, his
disciple, wrote it down. The relevant parts are translated here from
Muqaddamah Anwaru'l-Qur'an (by late Maulana Sayyid Rahat Husain
Gopalpuri) pp.40-43. Mahadevji says:-

“After six thousand years, the Almighty (God) will create a wonderful
person among the children of Adam in Mundarne, which is between the
seas.[^1] …….O Parbati, he will be from the loin of *Kant Bunjh*; [^2]
and he (Abdullah) will have the piety and knowledge of God like a river;
so (from that river) will emerge a pearl. And the name of his wife will
be '*Sank* *Rakhiya* ' [^3]

And he (i.e. Abdullah) will have read three books; and he will leave the
fourth book after reading only: 'Alif Lam Mim'… … O Parbati, he (i.e.
Abdullah) will be a chief in his tribe; people from all villages will
come to his door and will follow him. (Abdullah's son) will have no fear
of the creatures; he will be very brave and having the knowledge of
Allah, and his name will be '**Mahamat'**.

People will be astonished to see his style… … And he will not worship as
the people of his tribe will be worshipping and he will tell the people
that “I have been told by that Almighty and Only One (God) not to
indulge in such senseless worship; and I am not turning but to Allah;
therefore, you should follow me.”[^4]

O Parbati, **Mahamat** will teach his own shari'at to all the creatures,
by abrogating all ways of worship and all previous shari'ats; and he
will try to make all people follow him. Gradually, countless people will
come into his religion, and many of them will reach God. And as people
use our Sakh era, likewise, upto the end of Kaljug (the last era) people
will use the era of **Mahamat.**[^5]

.. … O Parbati, after him (after the death of Muhammad's son) the
Almighty who has none like Him, will give a daughter[^6] to **Mahamat**
who will be better than 1000 sons, and she will be very beautiful and
matchless, and very perfect in the worship of God. Never shall she utter
any wrong, and she will be protected from every sin—big or small; and
through her father she will reach nearer to God. That Almighty (God)
will give two sons[^7] to the daughter of Mahamat, both will be handsome
and beloved of God, strong, having the knowledge God, courageous, brave
and matchless in the …of virtuous deeds. And the Almighty will not
create, after them, any human being having such perfection in hidden and
known virtues.

The same two sons of Mahamat will be his successors; and they will have
numerous children; and they will bring people into the religion of
Mahamat day by day by their true arguments; and they will illuminate the
religion of Mahamat. And Mahamat will love them more than all his
people, even more than his own daughter. And these two sons will be
perfect in the religion of Mahamat; they will not do any work for their
own pleasure, and all their utterances and deeds will be for the
pleasure of the Almighty.

O Parbati, a few years after the death of Mahamat, some evil man will
unjustly murder these grandsons of Mahamat without any cause; just for
the sake of worldly greed; the whole world will become 'headless' by
their death. Their killers will be ' Maliksh' (atheists), cursed in both
worlds; they will have no love for Mahamat and will never get
deliverance from ' Nark' (i.e. Hell). But in appearance, they will
remain in the religion of Mahamat, and gradually others also will follow
them, and stubbornly will do many deeds against the way of Mahamat and
his sons. Only a few people will remain on the path of Mahamat. Majority
will follow the path of those who killed the sons of Mahamat; yet in
appearance they will be called the followers of Mahamat; and in the last
days of k aljug (last era) there will be many of those hypocrites and
will create disturbance in the whole world.”

After that Mahadevji explains the appearance of Imam Mahdi; coming of
Quiyamat and arrival into Paradise of Bibi Fatima together with her
followers.

Kalki Puran
-----------

In many holy books of Hindus, mention has been made of coming of ten
*Avatars* . So far nine have come and tenth is awaited by Hindus. The
name which is ascribed to this tenth *Avatar* is ”*Kalki Avatar* ”
(Kalki Prophet).

Description and symptoms, which are found in the books, correspond
exactly with those of Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a)

Kalki Puran is one of the holy books of the Hindus. It is written in
this book that the reason why this Prophet will be known as “Kalki”
Avatar, is that he will remove Kalki (rust and darkness) from the hearts
of the people, and will prevail over all the artifices of the evil
people.
It is also written that people of his community will be worshippers of
God.

The name of the father of Kalki Prophet is written as “Vishnuais” a
combination of two words, *Vishnu* (God) and *ais* (Servant): both put
together mean “Servant of God”. This is the meaning of Abdullah, the
name of the father of Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.).

The name of Kalki Prophet's mother is “Somti” which means “Trustworthy”.
And the name of Prophet Muhammad's (s.a.w.a.) mother was Amina, which
also means “Trustworthy”.

Further it is written that Kalki Prophet will have three brothers named
Kavi, Samati, and Parak.

(1) “Kavi” means 'wise' and same is the meaning of 'Aqeel'.

(2) “Samat” means 'Knowledge' and same is the meaning of 'Ja'far'.

(3) “Parak” means “One who commands high position” and same is the
meaning of 'Ali'.

Aqeel, Ja'far and Ali were three (cousin) brothers of Prophet Muhammad
Mustafa (s.a.w.a.)

The birth-place of Kalki Prophet is mentioned as “Shambhal Nagari”— a
name given to the Hijaz in Arabia. “Shambhal” means, “Sand” and
“Shambhal Nagri” means a country of sand or “desert” which fits Arabian
peninsula perfectly.

Regarding Kalki Prophet, it is also written that he will worship in
cave. It is well known in Islamic world that Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.)
got his first “Revelation” in the cave of mount Hira - a desert hill and
his chosen place of retreat near Mecca.

Further in “Kalki Puran”, it is written that he will receive education
through “Prash Ram” which means “Soul of God.” It is well known by all
Muslims that it was the Angel Gabriel who brought the first “revelation”
to Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) in the cave of the mount Hira.
Gabriel i.e. Jibra'il is called “Ar-Ruh-al-Amin” (The Trustworthy
Spirit) in Islam.

Further it is written that Kalki Prophet will marry the daughter of the
king of Shambhal Deep. Thus Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) married the
wealthiest woman of Arab, named Khadijah.
It is also written that Kalki Prophet will migrate to the hills of
North. Thus on the command of God, Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a)
had to migrate from Mecca to Medina which is in the North.

From Kalki Avatar
-----------------

17 years after the first appearance in 1970, of my book, Pandit
Vedaprakash Upadhyai, a Bengali Brahmin of Allahabad University,
published his book 'Kalki Avatar'. In that book he declared that the
description of the “awaited” leader and guide Kalki Avatar, fits only to
the Prophet Muhammad of Arabia. His views were endorsed by eight other
eminent Pandits.

He mentions the Purans and gives its interpretation. We give here a gist
of his descriptions:

1. Kalki Avatar will be the last Messenger of God, and will appear for
the guidance of the whole world. (It is selfexplaining.)

2. He will be born on an isle. (Arabia is surrounded on three sides by
the sea.)

3. His father's name is Vishnubhagat. (Vishnu = God; Bhagat = devotee or
slave; Vishnubagat = Slave of God = 'Abdullah.)

4. His mother's name is Sumaani. (Sumaani = Peace = Aminah.)

5. His staple food will be dates and olives. (Exactly.)

6. He will be the most honest and truthful person. (As-Sadiq al-Amin =
the Prophet's well-known attributes.)

7. He will be born in an honourable clan. (The Quraysh and especially
the Bani Hashim were the most honourable tribe and clan.)

8. God will teach him through His messenger in a cave. (The first
revelation was brought to him by Jibra'il in the cave of Hira.)

9. God will give him a very speedy horse to travel the whole world and
the seven skies. (It indicates *Buraq* and Ascension—Mir'aj.)

10. He will be an excellent horse-rider and swordsman. (No need to
comment.)

From at Harvaved
----------------

Late Molvi Abdu 'r-Rahman Chisti has given many quotations from other
Purans and even Veds. One of which is translated here from Muqaddamah
Tafsir Anwaru 'l- Qur'an: -

(a) Atharva Ved: Lailaha Harni Papan Illallaha Paran Padam Janm Baikunth
Birap newti to jane name Muhammadam.
Translation: Saying 'La Ilah' removes the sins saying 'Illallah'
bestows Parm Padwi
if you want paradise eternal
Always recite the name 'Muhammad'

The present Atharva Ved does not have the above words. But the founder
of Arya Samaj Dyanand Sarswati has admitted in his book, 'Satyarth
Parkash (Urdu) (Chapter 14; p. 739) that Alloo Upnishad mentions the
name of Muhammad as Rasul. He contends that someone, in the days of
Akbar (the Mughal emperor) must have added it in the Atharva Ved. Then
he writes: “Someone may say that how can you claim it when nobody has
said or written so in all these days? How can we accept your claim (of
later addition) without any proof? But this claim cannot be wrong by
non-acceptence of anyone.” What a claim! And what a proof!

[^1]: The Arab peninsula is surrounded on 3 sides by the sea.

[^2]: Kant Bunjh' means 'Servant of God, which, in Arabic becomes
“Abdullah”. Abdullah was the name of the father of the Holy Prophet.

[^3]: Sank Rakhiya' means 'Peaceful' which in Arabic is 'Amina.' Name of
the mother of the Holy Prophet was 'Amina.'

[^4]: Compare it with the ayat of the Qur'ãn: “Say: I am commanded to
worship God, and not to join partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and
unto Him is my return.” (13:36)

[^5]: i.e. era of Hijra.

[^6]: Fatimah, the lady of Paradise, the Chief of all the women.

[^7]: Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.).


