Prophecies in Parsi Scriptures
==============================

Zartushtra, or Zoroaster, is acknowledged as the Founder of the
Zoroastrian religion, commonly known as Parsi-ism. There are two sets of
Parsi scriptures: Zend Avesta and Dasatir

I am copying some prophecies from A.H. Vidyarthi's book, *Muhammad in
Parsi, Hindu and* *Buddhist Scriptures:*

Zend Avesta
-----------

God addressed Zoroaster in the following terms: The most powerful among
the companions of the Muslims, O Zaratushtra, are those of the men of
the primitive law, or those of the Soeshyant (not yet born) who are to
restore the world.” (Farvardin Yasht, XIII:17).

Dasatir
-------

It is a collection of 15 epistles of which the epistle of Sasan I
records a prophecy about the Holy Prophet of Islam in very clear words.
This edition of *Dasatir* was published by Mulla Pheroze with the help
of several other learned Zoroastrian priests at the time of Nasiru'd-Din
Shah Qachar of Persia. The original text is in Pahlawi language; but
every sentence is followed by its Persian translation which was
obviously done by Mulla Pheroze and his team of priests.

The sum and substance of the prophecy is that the Zoroastrian people
will forsake their religion and will become dissolute:

“When they will commit such deeds, a man will appear from the Arabs
before whose followers crown, throne, kingdom and religion shall be
overthrown, and arrogant people will be subjugated. Instead of the house
of idols and the temple of fire, they will look at the House of worship
of Abraham without any idols in it and will make it their Qibla.

“And they will be a mercy for the worlds. And then they will capture the
places of the temples of fire, and subjugate Madain, Tus, Balkh, the
sacred places of the Zoroastrians and the neighbouring territories.
Their prophet will be an eloquent man, and his message will be
well-connected.”


