Caliphs and their Distinctive Position
======================================

The eleventh tradition is reported by three Sunni scholars, Abd
al-Wahhabi Kilabi (d. 396 AH) in his *Musnad*[^1], Ibn Asakir in his
*Tarikh Medina Demishq* and Khatib Baghadadi in his *T'arikh Baghdad*.

Khatib Baghadadi narrates this tradition from Abd al-Wahhab bin Hasan
Demishqi from Abu al-Qasim Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Tamimi
Mu'allim – known as Ghabaghabi – from Dirar bin Sahl Dirari from Hasan
bin 'Arafa from Abu Hafs Abbar Umar bin Abd al-Rahman from Hamid from
Anas, from Ali bin Abi Talib who quotes the Holy Prophet (S) saying:

O Ali! Allah has ordered me to choose Abu Bakr as my father, Umar as my
advisor, Uthman as my backer and you – Ali -as my supporter…

After narrating this tradition, Khatib says that this tradition is
utterly unknown and only two unknown reporters named Dirar bin Sahl and
Ghabaghabi – quoting Dirar bin Sahl – have report it using the said
chain.[^2]

In his *al-Ma'wdu'at*, Ibn Jawzi narrates some traditions on the virtues
of caliphs. The first tradition he mentions is this tradition which is
as follows:

Abu Mansur narrates from Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Ali Khatib from Abd
al-Wahhab bin Hasan Demishqi from Abu al-Qasim Abdullah bin Ahmad bin
Muhammad Tamimi – known as Ghabaghabi – from Dirar bin Sahl from Hasan
bin 'Arafa from Abu Hafs Abbar from Hamid from Anas…

After narrating this tradition, he quotes Khatib as saying: This
tradition is utterly unknown and only two unknown reporters named Dirar
bin Sahl and Ghabaghabi – quoting Dirar bin Sahl – have reported it
using the said chain.[^3]

According to Dahabi Dirar bin Sahl narrates false traditions from Hasan
bin Arafa. He says he does not know who this creature is! This tradition
is also narrated by Ibn 'Arafa.

Abbar narrates from Hamid from Anas from Ali (S) who quotes the Holy
Prophet (S) as saying:

O Ali! Allah ordered me to choose Abu Bakr as my father.

This tradition is reported by Akhu Tabuk Abd al-Wahhab Kilabi from
Abdullah bin Ahmad Ghabaghabi – one of the two unknown reporters – from
Dirar.[^4] It has to be mentioned here that Ibn Hajar has also narrated
this opinion of Dahabi.[^5]

Evaluation of tradition
-----------------------

It has become thus far clear that the said tradition is among the
fabricated traditions. Like Dahabi, Ibn Hajar, after quoting the said
tradition, says: Akhu Tabuk Abd al-Wahhab Kilabi has narrated this
tradition from Abdullah bin Ahmad Ghabaghabi.

After introducing Ghabaghabi as one of the two unknown reporters as did
Dahabi, Ibn Hajar, commenting on Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Tamimi
known as Aba'abi, says: Aba'abi has narrated a tradition on the virtues
of caliphs from Dirar bin Sahl through Hasan bin Arafa. Abd al-Wahhab
Alaee has however also narrated this tradition from Aba'abi.

You see that Ibn Hajar mentions first 'Ghabaghabi' and then 'Aba'abi'!
At one time he introduces Abd al-Wahhab 'Kilabi as the reporter and at
another time Abd al-Wahhab 'Alaee!

Ibn Hajar quotes Khatib as saying: This is an utterly unknown tradition.
No one other than Dirar has narrated this tradition using the said
chain. Both Dirar and Aba'abi are unknown. According to Ibn Asakir he is
from the race of Faras bin Habis Tamimi, brother of 'Aqra' bin Habis.
'Aba'abi was a teacher at al-Jasiyya in Damascus and died in 425 AH.

According to Ibn Hajar, 'Aba'abi was a popular reporter whereas there
are doubts concerning Dirar.[^6]

A critique of Ibn Hajar's opinion
---------------------------------

Based on what was said though Ibn Hajar is skeptic about the title of
'Aba'abi and his reporter (Abd al-Wahhab), he tries to introduce
'Aba'abi as a popular person. It has however to said that he is not
successful in his endeavor. This is because to prove that he was popular
he did not present any document. The fact that he was a teacher at a
certain location and died in such and such year does not solve the
problem. Otherwise, Dahabi, Khatib Baghadadi – who narrates from him
through one medium -, Ibn Jawzi – who narrates from Khatib through one
medium- would not have introduced him as unknown!

[^1]: - It has to mentioned that Musnad Abd al-Wahhab Kilabi contains
Musnad Demishq.

[^2]: - Tarikah Baghadad, vol. 9, p. 348.

[^3]: - Al-Mawdu'at, vol. 1, pp. 301 and 302.

[^4]: - Mizan al-Itidal, vol. 1, pp. 301 and 302.

[^5]: - Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 3, pp. 238 and 239.

[^6]: = Ibid, p. 250.


