Heterogeneous Excellences
=========================

The twelfth tradition on the excellences of caliphs and the order of
their caliphate is narrated by Timidhi. He quotes Imam Ali (a.s) as
saying:

May Allah bless Abu Bakr. He married me his daughter. He advised me to
migrate to Medina and he freed Bilal through his own wealth. No one's
wealth has been so helpful to me for the promotion of Islam as Abu
Barkr's.

May Allah bless Umar who speaks the truth even though it be bitter.
Truth left him alone but did not find any other friend.

May Allah bless Uthman whom angels did not face out of modesty. He
equipped Jaish al-Usra[^1] and he expanded our mosque to the extent it
accommodated us.

May Allah bless Ali! O Allah! Make truth accompany him wherever he
goes.[^2]

Jalal al-Din Suyuti narrated this tradition from Tirmidhi and considered
it as authentic.[^3]

Mukhtar bin Nafi'a
------------------

Among the reporters of this tradition is Mukhtar bin Nafi'a who is
rejected by the scholars of tradition. According to Abu Zar'a, his
narrations are weak. According to Bukhari, Nisaee and Abu Hatam his
traditions are unknown. Based on what Nisaee has said elsewhere, he is
not a reliable person. In Ibn Hayyan's point of view, he used to narrate
unknown traditions from well-known people. It seems as if he was doing
it intentionally.

According to Abu Ahmad Hakim, scholars are of the view that he is not
reliable in narrating tradition. Saji is of the view that his traditions
are unknown.[^4]

Based on what was mentioned above, memorizers of traditions have
considered this tradition among false ones. For example, Ibn Jawzi first
relates this tradition through Mukhar and then says: This tradition owes
its reputation to the name 'Mukhtar'. According to Bukhari he narrates
unknown traditions. Based on Ibn Hayyan's opinion, he narrated unknown
traditions from well-known people to the extent that it was thought that
he was doing it purposely.[^5] According to Dahabi, he narrated
tradition from Abu Hayyan Tamimi. On the basis of the opinions of Nisaee
and others, he is not a credible reporter. According to Ibn Hayyan his
traditions are extremely unknown. Ahmad bin Abd al-Rahman Kazbarani says
that Mukhtar narrated this tradition from his father from Ali (a.s) in
marfu'a format. Bukahri is of the view that his traditions are unknown
and his nickname is Abu Ishaq.[^6]

Manawi says: The author has implied that this tradition is authentic but
his opinion is not correct. This is because Ibn Jawzi has considered
this tradition among weak ones. This tradition owes its reputation to
the name 'Mukhtar'. According to Ibn Hayyan, Mukhatar narrates unknown
traditions from well-known people to the extent that it was thought that
he was doing it purposely.

*Mizan al-Itidal* on the other hand mentions that his traditions are
unknown. The author of *Mizan* places this tradition among unknown
traditions reported by Mukhtar.[^7]

[^1]: - The army that was dispatched to Tabuk is called Jaish al-Usra.
This is because this army was dispatched at a time of prevalence of
famine, drought and scarcity of food.

[^2]: - Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 5, p. 297, tradition, no. 3798.

[^3]: - Al-Jami'a al-Saghir, vol. 2, p. 9, tradition, no. 4412.

[^4]: - Tahdib al-Tahdib, vol. 10, p. 63.

[^5]: - Al-Ilal al-Mutanahiya, vol. 1, pp. 255 and 256.

[^6]: - Mizan al-Itidal, vol. 6, p. 386.

[^7]: - Fayz al-Qadir, vol. 4, p. 25.


