Writing on the leaves of Paradise trees
=======================================

The thirteenth tradition on the excellences of caliphs and the order of
their caliphate is reported by Tabarani, Abu Na'aeem Isfahani, Ibn Udai,
Khatib Baghadadi and other Sunni scholars. They have reported this
tradition from Ibn Abbas.

Khatib Baghadadi narrates from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy Prophet (S)
as saying:

It is written on each leaf of Paradise trees that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, Abu Bakr is truthful, Umar is the distinguisher
between truth and falsehood and Uthman is the owner of two lights.[^1]

Scholars and fabricated tradition
---------------------------------

In section devoted to the excellences of Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman, Ibn
Jawzi has narrated a few traditions. The first tradition of this section
is narrated from Abd al-Rahman bin Muhammad Qazzar, from Ahmad bin Ali
bin Thabit from Qazi Abu al-Faraj Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Hasan Shafi'ai
… from Mujaheed from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

It is written on each leaf of Paradise trees that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, Abu Bakr is truthful, Umar is the distinguisher
between truth and falsehood and Uthman is the owner of two lights.

Commenting on this tradition, Abu Hatam says that this tradition is
false and fabricated. Ali bin Jamil used to fabricate traditions. It is
by no means permissible to narrate from him.

According to Abu Ahmad bin Udai no one other than Ali bin Jamil has
narrated this tradition from Jarir. It is he who narrated false
traditions from reliable narrators. He is thus a stealer of
traditions.[^2] Based on Dahabi's point of view, he narrates from Jarir
bin Abd al-Hamid and Isa bin Musa. Ibn Hayyan rejects him and Dar Qutni
and others regard him as weak in narrating traditions. Ali bin jamil
narrates from Jarir from Mujahid from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy
Prophet (S) as saying: During the Mi'araj, when I was ascended to Heaven
…..

An unknown master named 'Ma'aruf bin Abi Ma'aruf Balkhi has narrated
this tradition like Ali bin Jamil from Jarir.[^3]

Commenting on this tradition and its reporter, Suyuti says: Tabarani
narrates from Sa'eed bin Abd Rabbah Saffar Baghdadi from Ali bin Jamil
Ruqqi from Jarir bin Abd al-Majid from Laith from Mujaheed (in a marfu'a
format) from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

There is no tree in Paradise except that its leaves bear ….

According to Ibn Hayyan this tradition is fabricated by Ali bin Jamil.
Suyuti says that Abu Na'aeem Isfahani has narrated this tradition in his
al-Hilliya, from Qazi Abu Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ahmad bin Hasan bin
Abd al-Malik from Ali bin Jamil.

In his *al-Dibaj*, Khatli says that Qasim bin Ali Kufi has narrated this
tradition in a marfu'a format from Abd al-Aziz bin Amr Khurasani from
Jarir Razi from Laith from Mujaheed from Ibn Abbas.

According to Dahabi in his al-Mizan, Abd al-Aziz is an unknown figure
and this tradition is false. This is the fault that lies with this
tradition.

In Ibn Udai's point of view, Ahmad bin Amir Barqi'adi has narrated this
tradition using a marfu'a format from Ma'aruf Balkhi in Damascus, from
Jarir, from Laith, from Mujahid from Ibn Abbas.

Dahabi remarks that this tradition is forged and fabricated.[^4]

[^1]: - Ta'arikh Baghadad, vol. 5, p. 207.

[^2]: - Al-Mawdu'at, vol. 1, p. 251.

[^3]: - Mizan al-itidal, vol. 5, p. 144.

[^4]: - Al-Lu'ali al-Masnu'a, vol. 1, pp. 292 and 293.


