The Holy Prophet (S) talks to Mount Hira
========================================

The third fabricated tradition is narrated by Muslim in his *Sahih* in a
chapter devoted to the excellences of Talha and Zubair. He narrates from
Ubaidullah bin Muhammad bn Yazid bin Khanis and Ahmad bin Ysuf bin Azdi
from Ismael bin Yunus bin Abu Uwais from Sulayman bin Bilal from Yahya
bin Sa'eed from Sahl bin Abu Salih from his father who quotes Abu
Huraira as saying:

Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) was on the mountain of Hira'
that it stirred; thereupon Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him)
said: Hira! be calm, for there is none upon you but a Prophet, a Siddiq,
a martyr, and there were upon it Allah's Prophet (may peace be upon
him), Abu Bakr, 'Umar, Uthman, 'Ali, Talha, Zubair, Sa'd b. Abi
Waqqas.[^1]

Evaluation of tradition
-----------------------

Though the tradition mentioned above does not arrange the names of
caliphs on the basis of the order of their caliphate, we, however, look
at it from two angles: First, the inventor of this tradition has dealt
with the issue of the order of the names of caliphs elsewhere in this
tradition, using the language of the Holy Prophet (S). Two, in addition,
this tradition intends to attributethe adjective 'siddiq' to Abu Bakr
and the adjective 'shahid' to all others who follow him. It has to be
however mentioned that this tradition is fabricated on two grounds: its
text and its chain of transmitters.

### 1. Text of Tradition

This tradition attributes the adjective 'shahid' to the people mentioned
above, whereas none of them except Imam Ali (a.s) was martyred. Sa'ad
bin Abi Waqqas died in his castle a natural death. That is why in a
tradition preceding this tradition in *Sahih Muslim* no mention is made
of the name of Sa'ad. This in itself is a thought provoking point!
Others have however, complying with the implication of the tradition,
said that Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas died of plague. Whoever dies of plague is
a martyr![^2]

### 2. Chain of transmitters of tradition

In assessing the chain of transmitters of this tradition we suffice to
looking at Ismael bin Uwais, omitting thus other reporters this chain
includes. Scholars of traditions have given varied comments in regard
with him.

Nisaee says he was weak in terms of transmitting traditions.[^3] Yahya
bin Mu'aeen accuses Ismael and his father of stealing traditions.
Dulabi, commenting on weak narrators, quotes Nadr bin Salama Maruzi as
saying that Ismael bin Abu Uwais is a full liar. After quoting this
quotation, Zahabi says: Ibn Udai narrated three traditions from Ismael
and said: He narrated strange traditions from his maternal uncle which
are not reliable at all.[^4]Ibrahim bin Junaid quotes Yahya as saying:
Ismael bin Abu Uwais is a liar. He is not a credible narrator.[^5]

In his *al-Muhalla*, Ibn Hazm quotes Abu al-Fath Azdi as saying: Saif
bin Muhammad told me that Ibn Uwais was in fact fabricating
traditions.[^6]

Commenting on Ismael, 'Aini says that he himself confessed that he was
fabricating traditions. Nisaee has also mentioned the same point,
quoting Salma bin Shu'aib.[^7]

[^1]: - Sahih Muslim, vol. 5, p. 33 and 34, tradition no. 2417. Another
version of this tradition is also reported by Muslim. See: Abu Huraira
reported: Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) was upon the
mountain of Hira,' and there were along with him Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman.
'Ali, Talha, 'Zubair, that the mountain stirred; thereupon Allah's
Messenger (may peace be upon him) said: Be calm, there is none upon you
but a Prophet, a Fiddle (the testifier of truth) and a Martyr.(Book 31,
Number 5942). Bukhari has also narrated traditions of this kind. See for
example: a) Allah's Apostle ascended the (mountain) of Uhud with Abu
Bakr and 'Uthman and it shook. Allah's Apostle said, "Be calm, O Uhud!"
I think he stroked it with his foot and added, "There is none on you but
a Prophet, a Siddiq and two martyrs." (The two martyrs were Umar and
Uthman) (Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 5, Book 57, Number 46). b) The Prophet once
climbed the mountain of Uhud with Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman. The
mountain shook with them. The Prophet said (to the mountain), "Be firm,
O Uhud! For on you there are no more than a Prophet, a Siddiq and two
martyrs. (Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 5, Book 57, Number 24) c) The Prophet
ascended the mountain of Uhud and he was accompanied by Abu Bakr, 'Umar
and 'Uthman. The mountain shook beneath them. The Prophet hit it with
his foot and said, "O Uhud ! Be firm, for on you there is none but a
Prophet, a Siddiq and a martyr. (Vol. 5, Book 57, Number 35)

[^2]: - See, al-Shifa and its commentary Nasim al-Riyad, vol. 3, p. 192.

[^3]: - Al-Du'afa wa al-Matrukun, p. 51.

[^4]: - Mizan al-Itidal, vol. 1, pp. 379-380.

[^5]: - Tahdib al-Tahdib, vol. 1, p. 280.

[^6]: - Ibid, p. 281.

[^7]: - Umda al-Qari, vol. 1, p. 8,


