As Prophet (S) falls ill he wants to meet someone
=================================================

The fourth fabricated tradition is about the excellence of Uthman. This
tradition is mentioned by Ibn Majah in his *Sunan*. He narrates from
Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Namir and Ali bin Muhammad from Waki'a from
Ismael bin Abu Khalid from Qays bin Abu Hazim who quotes Aisha as
saying:

As the Holy Prophet (S) fell ill he said: I would like to have one my
companions with me.

We said: O Messengers of Allah! Should we bring you Abu Bakr?

The Holy Prophet (S) was silent saying nothing.

We said: Should we bring you Umar?

The Holy Prophet (S) was silent saying nothing.

We said: Should we bring you Uthman?

The Holy Prophet (S) said: Yes

We told Uthman to come and he came and met the Messenger of Allah. As
the Holy Prophet was talking to him, Uthman's face was turning pale.

Qays quotes Abu Sahla, Uthman's slave as saying that Uthman bin Affan on
Yawm al-Dar said: The Messenger of Allah made a covenant with me and I
am going to fulfill it.

Ali bin Muhammad has narrated this tradition in a slightly different
manner. According to his version, Uthman says: I will continue to keep
that covenant.

Qays says: It was believed that the covenant was the day when Uthman was
killed.[^1]

Hakim has narrated this tradition on his own documentation from Ismael
bin Abu Khalid, from Qays bin Abu Hazim from Abu Sahla (Uthman's slave),
from Aisha. He adds that the chain of its transmitters is authentic,
though Muslim and Bukhari have not reported it.[^2]

Evaluation of tradition
-----------------------

One of the narrators this chain includes is Qays bin Abu Hazim about
whom scholars of tradition have said different things.

Zahabi and Ibn Hajar narrated something from Ya'aqub bin Shaiba
concerning him. In his *Mizan al-Itidal*, Ibn Hajar says: Companions
have talked about Qays. Some have regarded him as great and honorable
considering his traditions as the most authentic ones whereas others
have criticized him saying that he reported unknown traditions. Those
who have praised him have not regarded these traditions as unknown. They
have put them in the rank of strange traditions. Others have criticized
him saying that he used to criticize Ali (a.s).

It is however clear that he used to prefer Uthman to Ali (a.s) and that
is the reason why most Kufis have not reported any tradition from
him.[^3]

In his *Tadrib al-Rawi*, commenting on him, Suyuti says: Here I want to
mention names that were accused of innovation, but Bukhari and Muslim or
one of them have however, reported from them. He considers Qays as one
of those who were accused of showing hostility towards Ali (a.s).[^4]

[^1]: - Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 1, p. 139 and 130, tradition, no, 113.

[^2]: - Al-Mustadrak als al-Sahihain, vol. 3, p. 106, tradition, no,
4543.

[^3]: - Mizan al-Itidal, vol. 5, p. 476 and Tahdib al-Tahdib, vol. 8, p.
336.

[^4]: - Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. 1, pp. 278 and 279.


