Messenger of Allahâ€™s dreams
===========================

The seventh fabricated tradition is narrated by Abu Dawood. In his
*Sunan*, he says: Umar bin Uthman narrated from Muhammad bin Harb from
Zubaidi from Ibn Shahab from Amr bin Aban bin Uthman from Jabir bin
Abdullah who quotes the Holy Propeht (S) as saying:

Tonight I saw a pious person in my dream. Abu Bakr held to the Messenger
of Allah. Umar hang onto Abu Bakr and Uthman onto Umar.

Jabir says when I was leaving the Holy Prophet (S) alone I said to
myself that that pious man was the Holy Prophet (S) himself and their
hanging onto each other shows that Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman are
supposed to carry out a mission Allah has ordered His Prophet to do.

After narrating this tradition, Abu Dawood says that Yunus and Shu'aib
have also narrated this tradition, though they have not mentioned the
name of Umar.[^1]

Hakim has narrated this tradition from Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin
Abdullah Saffar from Ahmad bin Mahdi bin Rustam from Musa bin Harun
Bardi from Muhammad bin Harb from Zubaidi from Zuhri from 'Amr bin Aban
bin Uthman bin Affan from Jabir bin Abdullah who quotes the Holy Propeht
(S) as saying:

Tonight I saw a pious person in my dream. Abu Bakr held to the Messenger
of Allah. Umar hang onto to Abu Bakr and Uthman to Umar.

Jabir says when I was leaving the Holy Prophet (S) I said to myself that
that pious man was the Holy Prophet (S) himself and their hanging onto
each other shows that Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman are supposed to carry
out a mission Allah has ordered His Prophet to do.

According to Hakim this traditionbeing also reported by Abu Huraira, is
authentic though Muslim and Bukhari have not narrated it.[^2]

Evaluation of tradition
-----------------------

In his *Talkhis,* Dahabi deals with this tradition as an authentic one,
though Hakim seems skeptic about it. He narrates this tradition, using
another chain, from Uthman bin Sa'eed Darmi, from Muhammad bin Harb from
Sa'eed bin Abdullah Jarjisi from Zubaidi from Zuhrifrom 'Amr bin Aban
bin Uthman from Jabir. Thereupon he says: according to Darmi Yahya bin
Mu'aeen believes that the chain of this tradition contains Muhammad bin
Harb from whom and Zuhri people narrate mursal traditions. The chain of
this tradition includes 'Amr bin Aban whereas Aban bin Uthaman did not
have a son named 'Amr.[^3]Dahabi looks eye to eye with Hakim in this
regard.

In order to reject this tradition, we do not need to study the faults
Yaqut Hamavi has found in his *Mu'ajam al-Buldan* concerning Muhammad
bin Harb and Muhammad bin Walid Zubaidi. According to him, they were
from Hams and were known for their hostility toward Ali (a.s). According
to the author of *Tahdib al-Tahdib* they were among the judges of the
oppressive government of their time in Egypt. Ibn Shahab Zuhri was among
the well-known opponents of Ali (a.s). All these objections aside, to
reject this tradition we suffice to what Abu Dawood and Yahya bin
Mu'aeen have said.

It has to be pinpointed that nothing came to our mind to iron out the
apparent contradiction that exists between Hakim and Zahabi's words.

[^1]: - Sunan Abu Dawood, vol. 3, pp. 213 -214, tradition, no. 4636.

[^2]: - Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihain, tradition, no. 4439.

[^3]: - Ibid, vol. 3, p. 109, tradition, no. 4551.


