Introduction
============

For sometime now, we have been looking at giving the up and coming
generation the attention that they deserve. Our aim is to make available
to them the sort of things and literature that they identify with and
like in different languages, amongst which is English. It is an
undeniable fact that English has become the primary language of
communication between our second generations living here in the West.

Accordingly, the Alul Bayt (a.s.) Foundation for Reviving the Heritage,
London, U.K. has recognised the need for setting up a publishing house
whose duty it is to translate the gems of our religious and cultural
heritage to the main living languages. After discussing the idea with
Hujjatul Islam as-Sayyid Jawad ash-Shahristani, the establishment of Dar
Al-Hadi in London, U.K. has become a reality.

It is a known fact that many members of our younger generation aspire to
become acquainted with and/or study the different disciplines taught in
the conventional centres of religious learning and scholarship. And yet,
it has been difficult for them to materialise this aim because of the
complexity of the subject matter.

However, we have been lucky enough to come across a series of books
intended to untangle these often highly complex fields and make them
readily discernable by the layman. The author, Martyr Murtadha
Mutahhari, who is among the luminaries of our school of thought, has
been known for his original thought and vast contribution to the Islamic
library.

This series has been chosen to inaugurate a project that we hope will
grow to satisfy a pressing need for familiarisation with such complex
material, which our younger generation have heard of but yet to
understand its content and objectives.

Introducing these generations to Islamic sciences in this style, which
aims to unravel the vague and make meaningful the ambiguous, is our main
goal.

In the end, we pray to the Almighty to make this effort of ours
beneficial to those who aspire to gain this type of knowledge, and
bestow success on us to produce these booklets. Our aim and hopes are to
gain happiness in this world and the hereafter. And Allah is the best
friend and helper.

**Fadhil Bahrululum**

**Dar Al-Hadi Publications**

**London, U.K.**

*Thul Hijja, 1423 H. (February 2003)*


