Lesson Six: The Ash’arites
==========================

As we have already explained in the previous lessons that the ideas that
led to the emergence of the Mutazilite School of Thought can be traced
back to the second half of the first century of the Islamic era.

In an attempt to understand the fundamentals of religion and propagating
them, they advocated an approach that was a mixture of logic and
deduction. It goes without saying that the first parameter in this
approach was giving precedence to the independent judgement of reason
over any other thing. It is obvious too that the wider general public
are not concerned with reasoning and examination, considering
“practicing religion” synonymous to “worship”, and the manifest, or
exoteric, meaning of Qur’anic verses and*hadiths* (Prophetic
traditions), especially the latter, as a forgone conclusion. They even
believe that any reasoning or exerting effort in this regard is a kind
of rebellion against religiousness. This is particularly so, when the
ruling establishment encourages this type of thinking; more so, if some
of the clergy are proponents of such strand of ideas, and worse still if
some are pseudo-clerics. Examples of these abound. The intolerance
shown, and harsh smear campaigns waged, by the*Ikhbaris [a Shia sect
that depends solely on reported tradition (Akhbar) in formulating its
juridical rulings* ] against the fundamentalists and the*mujtahids
[jurists, who depend on reason, in addition to other tools of
jurisprudence, such as the Qur’an, and Sunna “Prophetic tradition”, in
arriving at religious judgements* ] is one such example. Another is the
attack by some jurists and speculative theologians on the philosophers
in the Islamic world.

The Mu’tazilites had made great leaps in understanding Islam,
propagating and defending it against the*Dahriyeen* [*proponents of the
doctrine of the eternity of the world, a materialistic, atheistic trend
in medieval Islam* ], Jews, Christians, Magians, Sabians, and others.
They were responsible for educating scores of propagators and sending
them far and wide to promote Islam. They, nevertheless, were threatened
from within the camp of Islam at the hands of Dhahirites, i.e.*Ahlul
Hadith* , or*Ahlus Sunna* . They were fatally stabbed in the back, so
much so that they waned and eventually died out.

In the beginning, i.e. until late in the third and early fourth
centuries of the Islamic era, there were no theology schools that were
opposed to their school, as was the case much later. All differing views
were reactions to the views that were advanced by the Mu’tazilites that
boiled down to*hadith* and*sunnah* . However, originally, the chief
exponents of the school of*Ahlul Hadith* , such as Malik bin Anas
[d.179/795] and Ahmad bin Hanbal [d. 245/833] declared the study and
inference in matters of belief taboo. Thus, the Sunnis not only had no
school for scholastic theology (*kalaam* ) to counter the Mu’tazilite
one, but they denied*kalaam* and made dabbling in it unlawful (haraam).

However, at the close of the third and the turn of the fourth centuries,
a new development took place on the ideological landscape. Abul Hassan
al-Ash’ari [d. 324/935] arrived at the scene. He was a towering figure
endowed with genius. He studied for years at the hands of Judge Abdul
Jabbar al-Mu’tazili. He defected to the Sunni camp. He drew on his
experience and

Mu’atazilite roots and managed to set up a distinct Sunni School of
Thought, championing deduction in arriving at the fundamental beliefs of
the Sunnis.

Contrary to the leaders of*Ahlul Hadith* , such as Ibn Hanbal,
al-Ash’ari sanctioned the use of critical examination, deduction, and
logic in the fundamentals of religion. He substantiated his research
with evidence from the Holy Qur’an and the*Sunnah* (Prophetic
tradition). He wrote a book in this regard entitled, “A treatise in
approving of the embarkation on*kalaam* (scholastic theology)”. With the
advent of the Asha’rite school,*Ahlul Hadith* (the People of the
tradition) were split into two groups, the Asharites, who endorsed the
involvement in*kalaam* , and the Hanbalites who made the involvement in
this type of theology unlawful. It is to be noted, however, that Ibn
Hanbal wrote a book, justifying the barring of experimenting in logic
and scholastic theology.

It did not come at a worse time for the Mu’tazilites, i.e. when they had
already been weakened by the blows they had suffered. Ordinary people
started deserting them in droves, especially during the events of
“tribulation”, that is, when they attempted to force their way of
thinking on the people under duress, making use of rulers who were
sympathetic to and supportive of their brand of doctrine. Among the most
vexing issues was the question of “the creation of the Qur’an”. It is
well documented that the events, which were given the name,
“tribulation”, led to many deaths; and people were persecuted and made
prisoners of conscience. The people blamed the Mu’tazilites for those
events and thus became averse to their doctrines because of what they
saw of their responsibility for the mayhem.

The people’s welcoming the arrival of the new school of thought, the
Asha’rite, was due to these two reasons. After the departure of Abul
Hassan al-Asha’ri, there appeared new figures, who contributed to
cementing his ideas and developing them. Among them were Abu Bakr
al-Baqillani (d. 403 H.), who was a contemporaneous of ash-Sheikh
al-Mufid, Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayeeni, Imam al-Juwaini, the teacher of
al-Ghazzali, Imam al-Ghazzali (d. 505 H, 1111 CE) himself, the author of
the book, “*Ihya’ Uloomuddin* – Revival of the sciences of religion”,
and [physician, philosopher, chemist and freethinker], Imam Fakhruddin
ar-Razi [c.250/864 – 313/925 or 320/932].

The Ash’arite School had undergone gradual change, especially at the
hands of al-Ghazzali, who watered down its*kalaam* image, giving it a
gnostic, i.e. mystic or sufi, colour. During the time of al-Fakhr
ar-Razi, it bordered on the philosophical. However, when the time of
al-Khawaja Nasiruddin at-Tusi [the theologian, philosopher, scientist,
and vizier 597/1201 – 672/1274] came, and wrote his book, “Tajridul
I’tiqad – Uncovering of Belief”, he took the science of*kalaam*
(speculative theology) to an almost entirely philosophical domain. The
book of this Shiite philosopher and theologian set the agenda for all
scholastic theologians, who succeeded him, be they Ash’arite or
Mutazilite.

After “*Tajridul I’tiqad* ”, at-Tusi wrote “*al-Mawaqif* – The
Positions” and “*al-Maqasid* – The Intents”, and the annotations that
went with them. In style and approach, the last two were not different
from “*Tajridul I’tiqad* ”.

In fact, with the passage of time, the Ash’arites had become far removed
from the teachings of the founder of their school, becoming closer to
the Mu’tazilite ideology and philosophy.

We give below a broad list of the tenets of al-Ash’ari, who defended the
fundamental beliefs of the Sunnis, or more appropriately made these
beliefs clearly defined, in some measure:

**The disunity of the Attributes [of God] with His Essence.**

**The universality of the Divine will, decree and destiny across the
board of all occurrences, i.e. the opposite position taken by the
Mu’tazilites and in conformity with the view of the philosophers.**

**Both evil and good originate from God.**

**Man has no freewill.**

**What is judged as good or repugnant is the exclusive preserve of the
sharia Law, i.e. these characteristics are not inherent.**

**It is not incumbent on God to show grace and choose what is in the
best interest of man. This goes contrary to the Mu’tazilite
standpoint.**

**Man’s power to commission any action is activated while he is carrying
it out not before embarking on it.**

**There is not such a thing as complete “tanzih”, i.e. the principle of
elimination of “form and qualities of man” from the conception of the
Divine.**

**Man does not create his action; rather, he earns it.**

**God can be physically seen in the hereafter.**

**The godless is a believer.**

**There is no problem in the Divine granting forgiveness, even without
man repenting. Likewise, a believer can be punished.**

**There is no problem in intercession.**

**The universe is created, i.e. in time.**

**God’s Word is eternal, i.e. self-speech rather than the spoken word.**

**God’s actions do not necessarily follow a purpose or an aim.**

**There is no objection to requiring man to do what is not in his
power.**

Abul Hassan al-Ash’ari was a prolific writer, so much so that it is said
that he wrote more than two hundred works. Some one hundred titles of
these are mentioned in the bibliographies. It is evident, though, that
most of these books had been lost. However, the most famous of his books
could be, “*Maqaaltul Islamiyyin* – The Tracts of the Islamists”. Anther
book is, “Alluma’ – The Brilliancy”.

Al-Ash’ari’s views left an indelible mark on the Islamic doctrinal
landscape, and this is regrettable. However, the Mu’tazilites and the
philosophers wrote many books, refuting his opinions. Many of his
beliefs and views were mentioned in Ibn Sina’s (Avicenna’s) book,
“Ash-Shifa’ - The Healing, without quoting the source, and were
disproved. Not only this, some of his followers, such as Judge
al-Baqillani and Imamul Haramain al-Juwaini had revised his theory on
man’s compulsion.

Although Imam Mohammad al-Ghazzali was Ash’arite, and was instrumental
in consolidating the doctrinal principles of the Ash’arite School, yet
he revamped it with new ideas. He was responsible for bringing the
science of*kalaam* (scholastic theology) closer to gnosis (*irfan* ) and
Sufism. The Iranian poet ar-Rumi, the author of the book, “al-Mathnawi”
was Ash’arite, and yet, he was more inclined to radical*irfan* . Because
of

Imam ar-Razi’s philosophical background, he gave the Ash’arite*kalaam* a
new impetus and a breath of fresh air.

The triumph of the Ash’arite in the world of Islam came at a high cost.
It is a victory for inflexibility, or inertia, and prohibitive practices
over freedom of thought. Although the warring was mainly between the
Mu’tazilites and the Ash’arites, i.e. within the Sunni branch of Islam,
yet the Shia World did not escape unscathed. However, there were
historical as well as social reasons for this victory. Furthermore,
certain political developments had a great influence on this front.

The Abbasid Caliph, al-Mutawakkil, had played a significant part in
making the Sunni School of Thought gain the upper hand. A century later,
Abul Hassan al-Ash’ari gave the School a speculative theologian touch.
It goes without saying that had al-Mutawakkil been of the same
persuasion of his predecessor, al-Ma’moun, the Mu’tazilites would not
have faced that fate.

It is noteworthy that the ascendancy of Turkic Seljuks in Iran had
played a part in the triumph and spread of the Asha’rite doctrines. The
Seljuks were not people of thought and liberty, unlike aal-Buwaih,
during whose rule, Shi’ism and Mu’tazilte ideology made a comeback.
Ibnul Ameed and as-Sahib bin Abbad, among the politicians and scholars,
were anti Asha’rite.

We are not trying to defend the beliefs of the Mu’tazilites, in that we
will take issue with several of their simplistic ideas. However, one is
left with no alternative but to sing the praise of their rational
methodology, which died out with their departure from the Islamic
ideological scene. As is known, a religion as rich and as profound as
Islam is in need of*kalaam* , which is based on the freedom of the
intellect and well founded belief and faith.


