Introduction
============

A small Book of about twenty-five pages 'The King of Martyrs' was
published in 1925 and since then, it was reproduced four times and every
time in several thousands and yet he demand for it had been on the
increase, and this is the Fifth enlarged edition.

With the increase in the standard of literacy among the masses, the
demand for the Islamic literature in its original purity is growing
steadily. Today, more than ever, the awakened intellect of the human
world, is seriously in quest of the invaluable knowledge which Islam
alone can provide. The pity is that most of the great Muslim scholars,
who are the stores of knowledge about the original teachings of Islam,
do not care for the modern western languages, and those who have
mastered these languages have never had the benefit of a serious study
of Islamic literature through the original sources. Whatever knowledge,
about Islam and the Islamic literature, these scholars of the modern
languages possess, they could have it from the prejudicial translations
into those languages mostly by the missionary class,

brought out with the exclusive purpose of spreading prejudice against
Islam, and the Holy personalities of the Faith to secure the unearned
glorification for their own heroes and enlist believers in their own
respective creeds. Unfortunately some of our own brethren get the
information from such hostile sources and present it as the genuine
truth and never care to scrutinize with reference to the original
sources of the knowledge. The kind or the degree of knowledge about
Islam and the Islamic affairs which some of these men possess in
disclosed form their talks and writings.

Particularly in regard to the great event of KARBALA which has been
termed in the very Word of God, i.e., the HOLY QUR'AN, as 'ZIBHE AZEEM'
or the Great Slaughter, most of our Muslim brethren either do not know
it at all or they have been missing which has been often noted, that is
when such ill-informed ones are rightly informed, they immediately
acknowledge the Truth, the glory of HUSSAIN, they Holy King of Martyrs,
the divinity endowed in his Holy Personality and the important part the
devotion to the Holy Imam, plays in elevating the human soul to the
heights of heavenly glory.

This book is intended just to give a glimpse of the divine plan
implemented in the enactment of the great heart-rending tragedy and the
unique and the glorious position of its Holy Hero and the Godly Band of
his faithful comrades.

Uninformed or misinformed of the original teachings of Islam and the
actual position of its great Heroes, some of our brethren have
unwarrantedly and unreasonably criticized certain acts of devotion on
the part of the devotees of the Faith and its Great Heroes, terming it
polytheism. A very brief clarification of the matter has also been given
at the end of this brief work for the information of those who would
like to have it. It is earnestly hoped that the learned readers will
mind the matter, graciously by-passing the mistakes, if any, in the
printing matter. This book needs reprinting and it is under
contemplation, and God willing the next issue will be free from such
shortcomings.

I am indebted to the following devotees of the Holy King of Martyrs who
helped the publication of this humble work:

MOHAMMAD ABDALLAH AL-HUSSAINY (Our American Brethren in Faith and a
staunch Devotee of the King of Martyrs and the one whose attachment of
the HOLY AHLUL-BAIT is ideal)

I have to helplessly restrain myself from mentioning the names of the
devotees of the Holy Imam who have helped this publication, for their
expressed desire not to have any publicity of their names.


**Hussain (AS) The King of Martyrs**

**THE IMPORTANCE OF THE CONTEXT**

It is a fact acknowledged by one and all in the world of intelligence
that things isolated from their natural set-up away from the connected
events, without the necessary reference to their original context, can
neither be properly studied nor correctly understood nor duly judged.
The great heart-rending martyrdom of HUSSAIN, the second grandson of the
Holy Prophet Muhammad, was not a casual event of an ordinary sacrifice
of any ordinary saint. The divinity endowed in the gruesome tragedy, can
be correctly viewed only when it is studied along with the background
concerned with its genetic factors. If any one has failed to understand
the real value of the great event of universal import to the human race
as a whole, it must be due to the wrong angle from which it would have
been viewed.

What a world of difference, the difference in the point of view a
reader creates, can very well be seen from the various opinions which
the readers of one and the same holy scripture, from, for the view of
one and the same object, naturally differs a great deal from angle of
angle. Taking for instance the example of the HOLY QUR'AN which being
the unmistakable and the unchallengeable Final Word of God; it is
understood differently by different people who study it from the
different points of view, away from the correct one.

Some are rightly guided by the HOLY QUR'AN but from the very same Holy
Book of God, some draw a different meaning altogether misleading, and
get themselves beguiled to criticize its teachings and to attack the
Holy Prophet Muhammad. The HOLY QUR'AN has itself declared this aspect
of its study saying:

"This book (the QUR'AN) no doubt is there (about its being the Word of
God), (but) it is a guidance (only) for the pious" [HOLY QUR'AN, 2:2].
"This (The HOLY QUR'AN) is only a narrative for (the ordinary) people,
and a guidance and an exhortation to the pious" [HOLY QUR'AN, 3:138].
Thus to have a correct view of the great sacrifices offered by the Holy
Prophet and the divinely chosen members of his family, more particularly
the invaluable sacrifices offered by the HOLY IMAM HUSSAIN, the second
grandson of the Holy Prophet,

it is essential to view the events in their proper context connected
with their causative factors and the other important environmental
background. It is only to serve this unavoidable demand for the correct
understanding of the Great Events that some of the important factors
connected with the Great Tragedy, are herewith given with the maximum
possible brevity, leaving the other details for a deeper study of the
subject by those interested in it.


**THE WHOLE HUMNA RACE- ONE FAMILY**

Humanity or the human race as a whole, was originally one family,
consisting of the children of one and same parents, which fact had long
been forgotten and even today, in many parts of the world, it is totally
neglected and has become practically unknown. Leaving aside the wild
tribes of the wilderness of Africa, one cannot help sorrowfully and
disgracefully citing the living instance of the treatment which the
colored members of the human family, receive from the white ones of the
same lineage, in spite of the latter's lofty claim to the high standard
of civilization and culture. The truth about the unity of the human race
as a whole was declared to the world, most expressively and repeatedly,
for the first time by the HOLY QUR'AN.

"All human beings are single nation.." [2:213]
"And human beings are naught but a single nation and yet they
disagree.." [10:19].
"And verily this your nation (the human being) is a single nation..."
[21:92].
"And verily this your nation (the human beings) is a single nationâ€¦"
[23:52].
No other scripture prior to the QUR'AN and no leader of any Faith
before the Holy Prophet of Islam, had so expressly and emphatically
preached this Truth.

**HOW THE HUMAN FAMILY GOT DIVIDED**

Groups of the members of the human family moved in various directions,
searching for a better living for themselves and their livestock and
inhabited the various parts of the globe as they found them helpful to
their interest. According to the kinds of placed they occupied, the need
of one settlement naturally differed from the other. The various
climates of the different places, gradually affected the original
features and the complexion of ht different groups in the different
places of their respective habitations.

The ways and the means of living also, of the group in one place
naturally differed from that of the others in the other parts of the
earth. Those who settled in the tropical zones got their skins sun-burnt
and grew to be black, and those in the cold climates remained white in
their complexion. New things and new situation that each group had to
adjust itself with, needed new words to be coined to name the new
objects. These new names peculiar to each group, put together brought
forth a separate language of each group as its own, according to the
needs peculiar to it, quite different from that of the others.

The lack of the means conveyance and communication, with the natural
barriers of high mountains, the deep seas, the wide rivers, the vast
plains and the dense forests full of wild beasts, was not helpful for
easy and frequent visits between the different groups settled afar from
each other. Gradually with the passage of time, the groups of the
members of one and the same human family, got permanently separated into
different units by themselves, separating each other by virtue of the
differences in their physical features, complexion, language, dress and
the ways of living.

To identify itself, distinguishing and differentiating from the others,
each group got itself known by a particular name like the Aryans, the
Mongolians, the Semites, the Dravidians, the Saxons, and with the
various other names as the different tribes in Africa and elsewhere have
chosen for themselves. As time passed on, each group began priding over
the other and looking down upon them, with its own fanciful
distinctions. Thus gradually the universal family interest got divided
into group interest, and this sectional feeling developed into group
selfishness which generated group quarrels and tribal wars which
separated the various groups from each other furthermore.

Each group got interested in destroying the other group altogether, to
own their properties and to kill or capture the men, women and even the
children to serve them, or to make money by selling them to the others
as salves. Thus started the shedding of the blood of the human family by
its own members, with the dissensions getting more and more intensified,
the hatred between the groups becoming deeper still, the gulf of the
differences separating each other becoming wider and wider, and each
group losing its interest in the other, the feeling of mankind belonging
to one and the same family was altogether lost, and each group treated
the other as the alien one, unknown to it, without any bonds of affinity
at all. Thus man became the enemy of man, and lived a beastly life in
the jungles he occupied, each group preying upon the other.

**The Man- Made Gods and Deities**

The inherent consciousness of the individual weakness, physical, moral
and spiritual, in each human being, forced him to seek a supreme
protector with superhuman powers to secure his life and his
life-interest, against his antagonists, both human as well as imaginary
demons and devils. Owing to his own enmity and hatred against the
others, man feared man and at the same time believed in all sorts of
evil spirits, and dreaded their haunts. To protect himself against his
enemies, real and imaginary, and for the success in his efforts, in his
own fanciful gods and imaginary guardian deities and began worshipping
them, offering all sorts of sacrifices to them.

To please his own fancifully coined gods or to appease the wrath of his
own fantastically dreaded imaginary demons and devilish beings, man used
to offer sacrifices of not only animals but also his fellow human
beings. Thus came forth not only tribal gods but also the favorite
family gods and the gods of each member of a family, who were fancied to
be powerful patrons and protectors. A particular form of each such
imaginary deity was fancied and it was idolized, and thus began idolatry
in the world. Besides the innumerable idolized man-made gods, whatever
was found to be huge or awesome to him, man began worshipping it,
thinking that by paying homage to such things, the harm or the hurt
which those objects were fancied to effect, could be averted. Thus fire,
the mountains, the seas, the huge rivers, the venomous serpents like the
cobra and other similar fantastically dreaded object, became the objects
of worship.

Similarly, whatever was found to be beneficial to him and serving his
purpose, man began worshipping the things, thinking that by his worship
he was pleasing those objects viz., the sun, the moon, the various
planets and the stars, the animals like the cow which gives milk and the
bull which ploughs the field etc.

**THE GUIDANCE FROM GOD**

Although the All-Merciful Creator Lord of the Universe has endowed each
living creature with the instincts and senses necessary for its proper
behavior to exist, yet man having been stationed amidst the temptations
of the various impulses from within his own self and the other objects
of attraction from without, needed the extra mercy of the All-Merciful
to be guided through some divinely inspired agencies. The correct
guidance to the creatures, can only come from none but the All-Knowing,
All-Merciful Lord Himself.

Man, left to himself without any guidance from his Creator, could never
have any ray of the light of knowledge of the things and the energies in
the midst of which he has been placed. With the advent of human life on
earth started also the divine guidance from God, through God's own
inspired and divinely conditioned messengers. Some of these apostles
were adhered to, by man, some suffered the worst of tortures and
miseries at the hands of the people, and some were even mercilessly
killed. Very rarely was any prophet listened to, and rarer still was any
prophet safe among the people,

and the rarest is the case of any of the heavenly messengers having
been honored in this world. When in this modern age of ours, the age of
the wonderful advance of human intellect, to the extent of successful
flight of man round the earth several times within a few hours, and when
man has hit the moon and there are the efforts with prospects of
success, to reach the other planets and the stars, we have on our earth,
in millions, human beings will worshipping stone-gods, animals,
serpents, mountains,

rivers and even trees and many other similar objects, it can easily be
imagined in what an abyss of ignorance, degradation and barbarity, the
souls in human frames were lying in, and what a beastly and brutal life
it would have been thousands of years ago. Prophet after prophet, the
All-Merciful continued to send to each unit of the human family in the
different parts of the earth, and in spite of the brutal treatment man
meted out to the apostles of God, no people were deprived of the divine
blessing of proper guidance. This fact also was announced for the first
time to the world, by the HOLY QUR'AN:

"And every people had a Prophetâ€¦" [10:47].
"And certainly We raised in every people a Prophet â€¦" [16:36].
"And there is not a people but a Warner has gone among them" [35:24].

No scripture prior to QUR'AN and no religious leader prior to the Holy
Prophet of Islam, had ever declared this so impressively and so
repeatedly. And every prophet that was sent to a people was sent with
the respective language of ht people and this fact also was for the
first time declared to the world by the QUR'AN:

"And We did not send any apostle but with the language of the people,
so that he might explain to themâ€¦" [14:4]. Thus, through His infinite
Mercy, the All-Merciful Lord did not cease His guidance to man, although
man was not tired of his torturing and murdering of messengers from
God.

**HUMANITY AND ITS GUIDANCE**

As already explained above, every creature could have guidance only
from its Creator Lord and man having been created with a decidedly
higher sources than mere instincts which are also gifted in the nature
of the lower sphere of creation. Man has been endowed with a unique
native endowment called the Conscience, which is a common award gift to
the human specie as a whole. This great guiding fact, called
"RASOOL-E-BATINI" or the latent apostle which invariably guides every
human being in enabling him to differentiate between the true and the
false, the good and the bad and that which is profitable the harmful to
his being.

Since this unique blessing is liable to be snatched away by the satanic
forces which are ever active against wholesome human life on earth, the
All-Merciful Lord, to further strengthen the human conscience,
instituted the manifest guidance through the external preaching of the
truth by His apostles who were duly inspired with the knowledge to serve
the purpose of putting humanity, which had gone astray, again on the
right track. With the spread of the human family and its inhabiting the
different parts of the earth apostles of God were also sent to each such
habitation to guide the people of the place, in the various languages
they had developed for their own respective uses, which fact is borne
out by the HOLY QURAN Vide 14:4.

And lest his people may fall easy victims to imposters or false
prophets, every apostle of God identified his successor, and even
prophesied about the advent of the other prophets who were to come in
the later generations, if they had to come with any special message of a
higher value for the people. "Yea, and all prophets from Samuel and
those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold
of these days". (New Testament) (Acts 3:24).

God Himself had declared beforehand about the advent of some of His
apostles, exhorting mankind to follow them, if they wished salvation for
themselves. The last one of the apostles of God had to come to mankind
as a whole, with the Final Code of Discipline for a Universal Control,
and for elevation of human life in all parts of the earth, for all times
until the end of the world. The prophecies about the Last Apostle of God
were incorporated in all the heavenly scriptures and had earned great
currency among the peoples in the various parts of the globe. The HOLY
QRU'AN refers to this fact:

"Those who follow the Apostle, the UMMI, whom they find written down
with them in the Torah and the Evangelâ€¦" [HOLY QUR'AN, 7:157]. The above
verse of the HOLY QUR'AN informs us that the advent of the Holy prophet
Muhammad, was prophesied by all the preceding apostles of God, and a
covenant was also taken from the respective people that they should
accept him and hearken to whatever he would tell them. Verses 22 to 25
of Chapter 3 of the Acts of the New Testament bear testimony to this
fact:

22- "For Moses truly said unto the fathers. A Prophet shall Lord your
God raise up unto of your brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye
hearken in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you".

23- "And it shall come to pass, that soul, which will not hear that
Prophet shall be destroyed from among the people".

24- "Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow later,
as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days".

25- "Ye, are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which
God made with our fathers saying unto Abraham; and in thy seed shall all
the kindred of the earth be blessed". (New Testament. Acts 3:22-25)

While all the preceding apostles of God conveyed to their respective
people the glad tidings of the advent of the Universal Prophet of God,
whom every human soul on the earth had to compulsorily follow, the
Universal Prophet, the Holy Prophet Muhammad came to lay down as a
cardinal doctrine of his faith that all apostles of God preceding him
should be accepted as equally truthful, infallible and holy: "The
Apostle Muhammad believeth in what hath come down unto him form his
Lord, and so do the believers and His Books (the different Holy
Scriptures) and His apostles. They say: We make no difference between
any of His Apostlesâ€¦" [HOLY QUR'AN, 2:285].

The believers in Islam are also described in the HOLY QUR'AN:

"And those who believe in that which has been revealed to thee (O' our
Apostle Muhammad) and that which was revealed before theeâ€¦" [HOLY
QUR'AN, 2:4].

Thus the position of the Holy Prophet Muhammad is unique among all the
apostles of God, that while the predictions about his advent, made by
the preceding apostles, are fulfilled in him, he on the other hand
unlike any one of his predecessors, had enforced a compulsory article of
Faith, to believe in the truthfulness and infallibility of all the
apostles of God gone before him and who had been victims of blasphemies
and blackmailing by the people.

This same fact has been borne out in another place in the Holy Book of
the Christian church: "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee of thy brethren, like unto me: unto him
ye shall hearken". Deut. 18:15. "I will raise them a Prophet form among
their brethren, like unto them, and will put My words in his mouth; and
he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him".

"And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto My
words which he shall speak in My Name. I will require it of him" (Deut
18:18-19) A covenant was made with Abraham which is referred to the HOLY
QUR'AN:

"And when his Lord tired Abraham with certain words, and he fulfilled
them, He (God) said: 'I will make thee an Imam (a guide) for mankind'.
(Then) said he (Abraham) 'and of my offspring?' Said (then the Lord) My
(covenant) shall not reach the unjust" [HOLY QUR'AN, 2:124]. The Old
Testament corroborates this statement in relating the divine promise of
God to Abraham about his two sons ISAAC and ISMAEL: "And I will make of
thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great; and
thou shall be a blessing". (Genesis 12:2-3). "And as for ISMAEL, I have
heard thee; Behold I have blessed And will make him fruitful, and will
multiply him exceedingly: Twelve Princes shall he beget and I will make
him a great nation". (Gen. 18:20).

"And I will establish my covenant between Me and thee and thy seed
after thee in generations for an everlasting covenant to be a God unto
thee and thy seed after thee".

"And I will give unto thee and thy seed after thee, the land wherein
thou art a stager, all the land of CANAAN, for an everlasting possession
and I will be their God". (Gen. 17:7-8)

And God fixed circumcision as a token of this covenant:

"This is My covenant which ye shall keep between Me and you and thy
seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised". (Gen.
17:10) "And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin and it shall
be a token of the covenant between Me and thee". (Gen. 17:11) "And
Abraham took ISMAEL his son, and all that were born in his house, and
all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of
Abraham's house and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the
selfsame day as God has said unto him". (Gen. 17:20) Under the same
covenant, Jesus who was an Israelite through his mother Mary did also
receive the circumcision after eight days of his birth and only after
that was he named Jesus:

"And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcision of the
child, his name was called Jesus". (Luke 2:21) And every Muslim as a
true follower of the tradition of Abraham whose direct descendant was
the Holy Prophet Muhammad, receives circumcision, the token of the Great
Covenant, fixed by God.

John the Baptist who appeared just before Jesus clarified the matter
furthermore when he answered the enquirers who asked him: 'who art
thou?' "And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him art thou? And he confessed, and denied
not; but confessed, I am not the Christ.

And they asked him, what then? Art thou Elias? And he said I am not.
Art thou that Prophet? And he answered No". (John 1:19-21) The questions
of the Jews and the answers given by John the Baptist, make it crystal
clear that the expectation of the advent of the Promised Last Prophet,
had gained a household currency among the people. Eh advent of Elias and
Christ had been fulfilled. Jesus, before his departure from this world,
took special care to announce in his repeated prophecies about the
advent of the Last one of the Apostles of God, who had to deliver to
mankind the Final Word of the Lord, and who, in the religion which he
would preach, would abide with mankind for ever, and who had to give out
the whole of the truth to mankind which Jesus could not do for his
people's inability to bear it:

"And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever". (John 4:16) By he above statement
of Jesus, it is quite clear that his mission was only for a time and hot
for all times and that which was to be permanent had yet to come:

"Nevertheless I tell you the truth, that it is expedient for you that I
go away, for it I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but
if I depart I will send him unto you, and when he is come he will
reprove the world of sin and of righteousness and of judgment". (John
14:7) Jesus made it clear that the Last one of the Apostles of God could
not come to deliver the Final Word of God and the whole of Truth, until
the one who had come just to serve the timely need of the age, did not
depart, lest the imperfect and the perfect should be confused, and it
would create discord, disorder and confusion instead of unity and
harmony:

"But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things to your
remembrance whatever I have said unto you" (John 14:26) By the above
declarations, Jesus had made it perfectly clear that he that had to come
after him was the Holy Ghost, and the same statement of Jesus also makes
it clear that he had not said everything about the Truth, which duty
according to him, had been assigned by the Lord of the Comforter who was
the Holy Ghost.

Jesus had done his best when he said:

"I have yet many things to say unto you but ye cannot bear them now".
"Howbeit when the 'Spirit of Truth' is come; he will 'guide you unto all
truth' for he shall not speak of himself, but 'whatever he shall hear
that shall he speak' and will show you things to come" (John 16:12-13)
The above declaration by Jesus makes it clear:

1- That Jesus had to go away, without disclosing the whole truth due to
the inability of the people to bear it then.
2- That the one who had come after him would guide mankind unto all
truth which he (Jesus) could not do.
3- That the one to come after him 'would speak' only that which he will
hear from the Lord which quality Jesus did not claim for himself.
4- That the Spirit of Truth to come after him would show mankind things
to come which Jesus did not do, and he will abide for ever.

Besides all the above prophecies, there are many similar declarations
made by the other Apostles of God in the various parts of the earth, at
different times, emanating from the Divine Mercy of the Lord, to keep
mankind informed of the Great Guide mankind would be blessed with, who
would consolidate all the goodness preached through the different
Apostles gone before him in the various parts of the world, at different
times, against the clouds of ignorance which were impending to darken
the atmosphere of the earth as a whole. The promised Last Deliverer,
Muhammad, appeared when in spite of the labors of all the preceding
apostles of God, there was darkness everywhere on the earth.

**THE SEED OF ABRAHAM CAUSED TO GROW IN THE WILDERNESS**

The Holy Prophet Abraham, at the command of God, had brought and left
his wife HAGAR with his baby ISMAEL, in the wilderness of the barren
desert land of Arabia, at spot now called Mecca. The post where HAGAR
and the Baby ISMAEL were left was not only barren, sandy and
uninhabited, but was also waterless. For miles together around the place
there was no trace of water. In short, when the poor mother wanted a
little water for her Baby dying of thirst, she ran hither and thither in
her agony of maternal love for her dying Baby. She ran from hillock to
hillock, getting on the heights and throwing glances all around
searching for some trace of water, but all in vain. At last she sat down
totally disappointed, only to witness the impending death of her child,
when suddenly she noticed a miraculous fountain of fresh drinking water
gushing out from under the heels of her Baby (ISMAEL) as it struck its
feet on the earth, in its struggle with choking thirst. This fact has
also been vouched by the Bible: "And the water was spent in the bottle,
and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.

And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it
were a bowshot; for she said: Let me not see the death of the child. And
she sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept. And God
heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to HAGAR out of
heaven, and said unto her, What (ailthe p21) thee, HAGAR? Fear not; for
God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thin hand for I will make him a
great nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and
she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink".
(Gen. 21:15-19) This miraculous spring, today is called the ZAMZAM which
is mown surrounded by the great Mosque around the Holy KA'BA. This
divinely created spring, generated from under the feet of ISMAEL began
giving fresh drinking water, not only to the poor mother and her baby
son but also to the travelers and their caravans, and through this
providential facility, the spot developed into a habitation with its
unique importance as the halting place for the various important centers
of trade.

HAGAR and ISMAEL lived at the place, and when Abraham again visited
them, ISMAEL his son whom he had left in babyhood, to the care of God,
was a grown-up young lad. Abraham, aided by his young son ISMAEL raised
up the walls of the ancient Prayer House which was founded since time
immemorial, exclusively for worship to the only True God, which is now
called the Holy KA'BA to which HAJ (the pilgrimage) or a devoted visit
has been enjoined by Islam on all its adherents. The same spring which
gushed out from under the feet of ISMAEL even today flows with greater
force, more than sufficient to supply fresh drinking water to millions
of visitors to the House of God raised by Abraham and ISMAEL.

Abraham, while raising the walls of the Holy House prayed to God to
accept it, saying:

"And when Abraham and ISMAEL raised the foundations of the House
(saying) Our Lord: accept from us; surely Thou art the Knowing. Our
Lord: and make us both submissive (Muslims) to thee and (raise) form our
off springs a nation submitting to Thee, and show us ways of devotion
and turn to us (Merciful), surely Thou art the Oft-Returning (to mercy),
the Merciful:

Our Lord: and raise up in them an Apostle from among them who shall
recite to them Thy communications and purify them; surely Thou art the
Mighty, the Wise" [2:127-129]

In response to the above prayers, God addressing Abraham said: "And
when We made the House a resort for men and a (place of) security, and:
Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing place of
Abraham.

And We enjoined Abraham and ISMAEL, 'Purify My House for those who
visit (it) and those who abide (in it) for nation and those who bow down
(and) those who prostrate themselves" [2:125]


