Prayer Before Any Object
========================

In SHIA'ISM, NAMAZ (or prayer or worship) is due to none but to God,
and God alone. If any one prays before any object of His worship, it is
not objected by Islam. One can offer his prayers before anything even a
grave, if the individual does not mean the object as the object of his
worship. It is in this spirit and with this point of the faith in view
that prayers in the holy Shrines of NAJAF, KARBALA, MASHHAD, etc. are
offered, and offering prayers in such sacred places, though they are not
mosques, or in places sanctified by dedication to the memories of the
godly ones, is definitely commendable and has its 'FAZEELAT' or the
Grade of Excellence, is without the least opposition or prejudice to the
excellence of the prayers offered in a mosque.

**DEDIICATION OF ANY PLACE AS MEMORIAL WITH REGARD FOR IT**

Erecting a mosque or any such premises in memory of any sacred object
or event, has been allowed by the holy QUR'AN. See about the Mosque
commanded to be raised at the spot where lay the 'AS'HAABE-KAHF' the
Sleepers of the Cave (18:21). Holding such places in sanctity with
regard and reverence for them, is certainly the sign of piety of the
heart, and devotion to God Himself. To preach against offering prayers
before graves or in any shrines quoting the HADITH or the saying of the
holy Prophet prohibiting making any grave or a shrine a mosque, without
the context in which it was said is nothing short of betraying one's
ignorance of the Islamic History.

OMME SALAMA the virtuous wife of the holy Prophet on her return from
the ABYSSINIAN Exile, reported to the holy Prophet that she had seen in
ABYSSINIA the Christians worshipping the images of Jesus and Mary and
the graves of their saints. The holy Prophet issued the ordinance or the
HADITH prohibiting prayers on the graves as the object of worship. The
point underlying in the saying is against a prayer being offered before
or around any grave or graves. This point is clarified in the verse
18:21 which commands building of mosque on the grave by which the object
is not to start worship of the grave but to consecrate the place by
dedicating it to the worship of the Lord, to Whom the departed soul had
been devoted, and had itself surrendered. **REMEMBRANCE OF THE RIGHTEOUS
ONES**

Remembrance of the holy personalities for their righteousness has been
ordained by God, See 38:48.

Every educated and awakened mind knows that the remembrance of the
godly ones by every possible means is remembering God Himself and such a
remembrance is highly commendable, rather essential to keep the models
of the various aspects of godliness always in view to be imitated or
copied by one, for himself or herself to become godly. The object of the
holy Ones having been sent into this World was only to set up the models
necessary for the guidance of man, for man to copy them and thus get
himself qualified and fit for the higher levels of the life of eternal
bliss.

The secret is that the ill-informed or the misinformed critics have not
at all understood the Most Exalted position of God. They do not know
that God is too Great, too Exalted, too Just, too Gracious, too Merciful
and too Excellent to be only the watch to catch hold of every one and
chastise him, judging merely the actions or the external appearances,
irrespective of the intention or the real object latent in man. It is
man who cannot probe into the secrets of the heart of another man, that
accuses another man basing his accusation merely on his limited and
defective knowledge of the outward appearances or the external outlooks.
It must be remembered that man's actions are judged by God, the
All-Knowing Lord, by his intention.

Let every Muslim remember the well-known declaration of the holy
Prophet: "An act is naught but with its intention and 'Verily the
actions are judged only by the intention".

**'SEENA-ZANI' OR THE BREAST-BEATING**

The SHIA young, in mourning for the great Martyrs of the holy AHLUL
BAIT, particularly for the First holy Imam AMIRUL MOMINEEN ALI and the
holy Imam HUSSAIN, the King of Martyrs, beat their breasts, sometimes to
the extent of bleeding themselves. Hurting of ones self is of course not
allowed in Islam. SHIA'ISM the Islam-Original, knows it and recognizes
it fully and has no sanction against it. but when it is a matter for a
godly cause, it contents itself with exhortations from the pulpit and
the press, and if the uncontrolled emotion of any its enthusiasts in his
extreme love and devotion to the godly cause, helplessly gives
expression to it in beating his breast,

the law has to be considerate and tolerable in view of the intention of
the action not being any defiance of the law, but the helplessness to
the love for the godly ones who suffered the miseries, tortures and the
most cruel death in the way of the Lord. In such cases, mere common
sense will say that the All-Merciful Lord will not only tolerate the
well intentioned excess but love the expression of the extreme devotion
to His cause. Thus the breast-beating in mourning for the great martyrs
in the way of the Lord is not condemnable but tolerably commendable, for
hurting of one's self is prohibited if that be for any worldly cause
besides God's and when it is in the cause of the Lord Himself, the SHIA
ULEMA do not spare exhorting the enthusiasts to control their emotions
while expressing their love and devotion in this regard,

and since the action does not affect any of the fundamentals of Islam
and the intention is not to violate any law which rather in a way
strengthens the bias for devotion to a godly cause, it is not stopped by
forces. Such a toleration is illustrated in the historic even popularly
reported about the great devotee of the holy Prophet OWAIS-E-QURANI,
who, with his own hands pulled out his teeth and this action is praised
by the ULEMA from the pulpit while they speak of the love and devotion
to the holy Prophet. Why should the same and identical action by the
SHIAS for the AHLUL BAIT be seriously considered and unsparingly
criticized instead of issuing a similar to admiration the one given to
OWAIS.

There is an apt example in the practical and every day life of man to
know how far such actions are ingrained in the native endowments in
man.

**WHAT IS ALAM?**

The ALAM wrongly called, the 'PANJA' in Southern India, is an emblem or
the copy of the holy Banner of the holy Imam. It is installed in the
houses of the devotees of the holy Imam and also in separate apartments
called the 'ASHURKHANAS' or the IMAMBARAS and is respected and honored
as the standard of a king, loyal, respected and honored by him faithful
subjects. The Brute YAZID lowered the one standard of Truth which the
holy Imam held in KARBALA but today God alone knows how many millions of
such token standards of the holy Imam are made and honored in the world
by his devotees.

It should be remembered that the ALAM is not at all an idol in any
sense of the word. It is never held either in the place of God or in the
place of even the holy Imam. It is only a copy of the holy Standard of
Truth carried by the holy Imam when he fought against Falsehood. The
'ALAM' is held in high esteem and honor as stated above and it is never
in any way worshipped. Worship in Islam is due only to God and not even
to the holy Prophet who is next only to God in authority over his
followers.

About the holy Imam HUSSAIN, KHAWAJA MOINUDDIN CHISTI, one of the great
mystics of India has said:

"HUSSAIN King, the King of Kings, He is Faith, Defense of Faith from
him springs Beheaded though He never bowed to YAZEED By God, God's unity
by him is established". 'in which greave is his throne, and his crown
where is it. O' Earth! Show us where is the might of YAZID today". (JOSH
MALEHABADI)

Let Muslim remember the well-known declaration of the holy Prophet:

"And act is naught but with its intention" Verily the actions are
judged only by the intentions". Take for instance, when a man dies, the
nearest of his relatives particularly his own children and even among
his children, they who love him the most will naturally fell the
separation from the departed soul, more than any body else. One of the
sons may be violent in the expression of his grief, hurting himself in
an uncontrollable state of behavior, while the other son may be quietly
shedding tears, and others who may also be sorrowful remains suppressing
their grief. At the same time such of the relatives and selfish friends,
who were only waiting for the death of the man, to have a share in the
property left over by him, or to occupy the post or position which he
may be vacating,

will naturally feel happy though appearing quiet on the occasion. The
same is the case in regard to the degree of expression of the grief for
the 'AHLUL BAIT' by the SHIAS, and the rejoicing made at their martyrdom
by others. The fact is that those who are not sorry for the sufferings
of the holy Ones, seek an excuse for their hard-hearted inimical
attitude towards the family of the holy Prophet, and take shelter under
the guise of abiding by the law, and since they are not sorry for
calamities inflicted on the holy Ones, they do not want others to
express their sorrow for the holy victims, for it discloses the devilish
character and conduct of the assassins whom they regard as their
religious leaders.

**ALAM OR THE EMBLEM**

'The ALAM' which is installed in the IMAMBARAS, is another target of
attacks from our ignorant friends who not knowing its actual
significance and criticize it as 'BID'AT' i.e., unwarranted innovation.
Be it known to the critics that the ALAM is only the Emblem of the holy
Standard of Islam of which, Ali the Ever Victorious Lion of God was the
Bearer on behalf of the holy Prophet, and which was held also by ABBAS
the lion hearted son of Ali the Lion of God on behalf of the holy Imam
HUSSAIN, the grandson of the holy Prophet Muhammad, against the devilish
forces of YAZID in KARBALA,

when the YAZIDIAN power and authority wanted to destroy the original
teachings of Islam. Since the devilish forces disrespected the holy
Standard of Islam and the holy Prophet Muhammad, every sincere Muslim
today, particularly those attached to the holy AHLUL BAIT the SHIA,
install an emblem of the holy Standard and pay respect and regard to it,
as they would have done, had they been with the holy Imam in KARBALA.
Every lover of Islam and the holy Prophet, would certainly like to do it
with all the sincerity and devotion at his command, for as a Royal
Banner represents the King and respect to Banner is respect to the King
himself. This token or the emblem, the ALAM, represents Islam and the
holy Prophet, respect for the ALAM is respect to Islam, and respect to
Islam is respect to the holy Prophet himself.

Before criticizing the respect or regard for the ALALM or the ZAREES,
i.e., the models of the shrines of the holy AHLUL BAIT let the critics
remember the vacant model of the MAHMIL of HAZRAT AYSHA the wife of the
holy Prophet, which until yesterday was brought in a Ceremonial way to
Mecca every year on the occasion of HAJ, attended by the ULEMA walking
solemnly along with it. Was HAZRAT AYSHA actually sitting in it? if any
empty MAHMIL without an occupant in it could be respected and solemnly
followed by the ULEMA, how could the emblem of the Standard of Ali,
HUSSAIN or ABBAS or any of the holy Ones of the AHLUL BAIT, become a
'BID'AT' and the respect to it be deemed, objectionable.

**MAJLIS-E-AZA OR THE MOURNING CONGREGATIONS**

When the tyrannies and the torturous death inflicted on the holy AHLUL
BAIT, could not be denied, the other course adopted to hide the most
disgraceful and most brutal and heinous deeds is to declare the
MAJLISE-AZA or the mourning congregation for the Martyrs of the AHLUL
BAIT who are the authentic custodians of the holy QUR'AN and its
teachings as 'BID'AT' and 'KUFR'. The MAJLIS-E-AZA is the
'SUNNAT-E-ZAIBANI', i.e., what was inaugurated in Damascus itself by
HAZRATE ZAINAB the sister of the holy Imam HUSSAIN,

the Great Martyr of KARBALA, as soon as she was out of the prison in
Damascus. And what the SHIAS do today is only in the footsteps of the
holy sister of the King of Martyrs, Lady ZAINAB who was one of the
members of the family of the holy Prophet, the daughter of ALI and
FATEMA, one of the great sufferers at KARBALA, KUFA and Damascus, and
who herself was martyred in the way of the Lord was buried in Damascus.
This action of the holy Lady Martyr ZAINAB has been regularized by the
decree of the holy Imam thus it has become a prescribed duty of every
true Muslim to carry out the godly command.

When the MAJLISE-AZA for the mourning of the Martyrs is criticized,
what about the 'MEELAF' and the 'GYARWIN SHERIF' celebrated every year
which had their origin only recently. Can any one prove for many
historic record of accepted authenticity like TABARI etc., that any such
celebrations were ever held in the ancient days even a century ago
anywhere in the world? Why then this innovation now? And if such
celebrations are commendable for the holy Prophet or any other person
held as holy, what objection can there be against a similar
commemoration for the holy Ones of the AHLUL BAIT? The objection can no
doubt be if it is to stop the narration of the torturous sufferings
inflicted on the holy Ones, which automatically disclose as to who the
devils of the tyrants were, who enacted the heartless massacres of the
godly ones of the AHLUL BAIT of the holy Prophet.

The fundamental or the basic point underlying the mourning by the SHIAS
for the great martyrs of the holy AHLUL BAIT is, not merely for the
death of those holy Ones for, death is there for every one except God.
The SHIAS know it fully well that those who die in the way of the Lord,
are not dead but alive (2:154, 3:168). The great martyrs of the holy
AHLUL BAIT have reached the glorious heavenly destination of the life,
of the highest eternal bliss exclusively reserved for them by their
Lord. Any one, be he a Muslim or a non-Muslim, and a friend or even a
foe, if he is only a human being and not a brute, will naturally feel
for the miserable sufferings and the painful death of another human
being, particularly when the sufferers are godly ones surrendering their
selves for the Truth. Only those who are void of the basic human
qualities of feelings, will remain effect-less and unmoved under such
circumstances.

The mourning by the SHIAS is mainly for the heartless and inhuman
treatment inflicted on the holy Ones by those who, professing themselves
to be Muslims, have caused such shameful and disgraceful blots on the
pages of the history of the conduct and character of man on Earth, that
it can never be erased and for which every member of the human family
will certainly be unceasingly grieved, and will be ever cursing the
brutes in the human forms until the end of the world.

The MAJLIS-E-AZA has also been declared 'BID'AT' i.e., an unwarranted
innovation saying that mourning for the dead is forbidden by Islam. The
hollowness of this allegation against the natural act of expressing
fellow feelings has already been dealt with above. Even granting for a
while that mourning for the dead is forbidden none can show any
objection from Islam to the oppressed or the aggrieved protesting
against the miseries inflicted on them. The MAJLIS-E-AZA is a
congregational protests against the brutal atrocities inflicted on the
godly members of the family of the holy Prophet as a revenge against
Islam itself. None will object to such protests excepting those
responsible for the brutal actions or those who support the devilish
conduct and character of those who are temperamentally identical with
the brutes possessing the same devilish tendencies.

The actuating factor behind all this mischievous move to mislead the
Muslims and to create dissensions among them, is only Satan who, during
the lifetime of the holy Ones, instigated his disciples the tyrants, to
inflict the most painful miseries and the torturous death on God's
commissioned guides to humanity, and now the same Devil is busy
beguiling the ignorant ones among the Muslims by inspiring in their
minds all sorts of doubts and false notions against the truth and those
who have been successfully converted by Satan are employed by him as his
missionaries spreading the falsehood.

By God's Grace, all the awakened minds in the ranks of Islam be they
SHIAS or SUNNIS or of any other school of thought, are unanimous in
paying the due regard and reverence to the holy AHLUL BAIT, particularly
in the matter of HUSSAIN, all Muslims are united. Each one of the
sincere lovers of Islam today is ready to surrender his all for the holy
Prophet and the holy AHLUL BAIT, more particularly for HUSSAIN, the King
of Martyrs.

**TAQLEED:**

The only, the greatest, and the best protection afforded in SHIA'ISM,
against the continuous as well as the occasional raids by Satan and his
disciple missionaries is the ordinance about 'TAQLEED' (16:43) or to
always abide by the 'A'LIM' or the Most learned one, called the
'MUJTAHID' . this course guides one always to the right or the correct
way of the practice of the faith and protects him from committing any
excess and from shortcomings, and at the same time the individual from
being exploited by the instigations of the satanic forces.

'TAQLEED' has also been misinterpreted into the innovated institution
of the 'MUREEDS' blindly following the 'PIRS'. Be it known that being
guided by a MUJTAHID in matters of doubt about the practice of the
Faith, has nothing in common with it, and can never be compared to any
such unwarranted blind following. 'TAQLEED' is only being attached to
any one of the greatest scholars who had reached the level of 'IJTIHAD'
(i.e., the ability to derive the required correct inference from the
holy QUR'AN or the genuine traditions of the holy Prophet) in matters of
doubt any articles of the practice of the faith 'FURU-E-DEEN'.

'TAQLEED' or any kind of following any one in the articles of faith
i.e. 'USOOL-E-DEEN' is 'HARAM' (i.e., prohibited). As every one of the
adherents of the Faith cannot be expected to know all the minutest
details about the practice of the Faith, or be able to draw the correct
inference about any doubts, from the Word of God, the holy QUR'AN, and
the HADITH or the Sayings of the holy Prophet, the divinely prescribed
course to keep a Muslim always on the right course of his practical
life,

as well as to protect him from getting astray by the misgivings from
the ill-informed one is 'TAQLEED' by which one chooses of his own
independent discretion any one of the accredited scholars who in his
considered opinion is the greatest on of the most learned and the most
pious ones of the age, and is always guided by the directive of such a
scholar in all matters of the individual's doubts regarding any matter
of the practice of the Faith. By this course one is not only assured of
the best possible guidance in the right course, by the highest intellect
of the age but also of the safety against his getting deluded by the
unqualified, misqualified or purposeful misgivings by any one.

Since the practice of the Faith by any adherent, unbounded by this
course of, 'TAQLEED', it cannot doubtlessly be free from irregularities,
hence it will naturally be unacceptable.

The question of following the highest authority in knowledge and piety,
is only in the case of 'FATWA' or the opinion of the Scholar about the
law and not about the application of the law for which 'IJTIHAD' is
sufficient. The caution that SHIA'ISM, the Islam-Original, has sounded
against the ruinous effects of unqualified administration of justice is
worthy of note here for the information of the sincere adherents of
Islam, i.e., the special importance SHIA'ISM attaches to Justice being
meted out in the proper manner, and to the extraordinary care taken
against any unqualified and defective administration of it. the
following is the decree of the Sixth holy Imam, JA'FAR IBNE MUHAMMAD the
Regulator of the SHIA faith: "None shall take this seat save a Prophet
of God, the successor to the prophet or the evil one".

This declaration clearly warns any unqualified one without any
authority from the holy Prophet and the holy Imam, who assumes the seat
of 'QAZAIAT' or (Justice) will be none but the evil one. Hence 'QAZI' a
(Judge) can be none but a 'MUJTAHD' who gets himself qualified under the
declaration of the Imam reported above.

While condemning the yielding to the rule of 'TAQLEED' i.e., an
authority without the divine sanction, the Sixth holy Imam JA'FAR IBNE
MUHAMMAD AS-SADIQ said that 'instead of submitting to such tyrant, seek
the greatest of the scholars among you, who has leanrt our traditions
and gained deep insight into our sanctions and prohibitions and who
knows our rulings well and accept him as your Judge (i.e., QAZI) and
your Ruler, as I have appointed him to rule over you. And if he gives a
ruling and if it is not accepted by any one, it will be contempt of
God's Sovereignty which is almost 'SHIRK' i.e., the recognition of an
authority beside God's.

The definition and the requirements of 'IJTIHAD' and 'TAQLEED' given
below, are those that have been prescribed by the 'MASOOM' i.e., the
Twelfth holy Imam, as ordained by the holy QUR'AN and the 'SUNNAT', as a
part and parcel of the whole system of the Divine Sovereignty and the
Absolute Theocracy which is implemented in the very term 'Islam' which
means acceptance of the Absolute Sovereignty of God and complete
submission to His will. It is on this basis that the institution of
apostleship is established. God communicates His will to mankind through
the chain of the apostles, which was consummated in the apostleship of
the holy Prophet of Islam through whom was presented the Final Word of
God in the form of the holy QUR'AN, and his own apostolic sayings. And
in the continuation of that sovereignty and the institution of
apostleship, the holy Prophet declared Ali and the Eleven Imams in his
descent, as the authority joined with the holy QUR'AN representing his
as well as God's will.

When the period of the codification and the consolidation of 'KITAB'
and 'SUNNAT' was completed, the age of the Imamate for that legislative
purpose came to its conclusion. Hence the seclusion of the Twelfth Imam
was effected though his hidden existence continues as a necessity, as a
medium factor between God and His Creatures, in the process of the
Creative administration of the universe. The Imams declared the
institution of 'IJTIHAD' as given below, as sole directive authority on
their behalf, in leading mankind on the right path of submission to the
sovereignty and the will of God, in all the practical aspects of the
covenant which the 'KITAB' and the 'SUNNAT' had already dealt with.

In short, 'IJTIHAD' and 'TAQLEED' are the supplementary institutions to
'Imamate' which in turn is supplementary to 'RISALAT' (Apostleship)
which as a whole is the manifestation of the Divine Sovereignty. There
is no room left for any individual view or irrespective of any racial or
geographical bias or restriction, to qualify one's self in knowledge and
piety to the level of 'IJTIHAD'. The decree of the holy Imam about the
institution of 'IJTEHAD' is as follows:

'AMMA HAWADISAL WAQI'AAT, FARJIEOO ILA RUWATE AHADEESENA, FA INNAHOM
HUJJATI ALAIKUM WA ANA HUJJATULLAH'. 'in all the events of life, refer
ye to those who bear our tradition, they are the authority over you on
my behalf, and I am the authority on behalf of God'.

**The Decree Of The Holy Imam**

The above decree of the MASOOM (i.e., the Sixth holy Imam) in this
respect which is about 'IJTIHAD', is not the only tradition but there
are many undisputed traditions also of the other Imams establishing the
institution of 'IJTEHAD' prescribing the minutest details of its
functioning, only a very brief outline of which is given below: O the
many declaration of the other Imams in this respect, two of them are the
most outstanding. One from HAZRATE IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ, known as the
'MAQOOL-E-OMAR BIN HANZALA' (the tradition of OMAR IBNE HANZALA) and the
other is from the Eleventh holy Imam, HASSAN AL-ASKARI.

**THE DEFINITION OF 'IJTEHAD'**

'IJTEHAD' literally means an all out effort to interpret and explain
explicitly the divine orders, rules and regulations from the
denotations, the connotations and the implications contained in the holy
QUR'AN and the authentic sayings of the holy Prophet and the apostolic
Imams. 'IJTEHAD' does not mean the use of one's discretion in the
findings, parallel to the QUR'AN or the SUNNAT, but it means the use of
one's discretion and sound reasoning in understanding the contents of
the holy QUR'AN and the SUNNAT. And one who has the capacity of
understanding the details of the Divine Law, Rules and Regulations from
the QUR'AN and the SUNNAT of a 'MASOOM' as given above, is a 'MUJTAHID'
provided he is of outstanding learning, knowledge and piety be he a good
scholar in certain branches of the Islamic literature, is termed as a
layman in regard to the field of religion.

A man who has not reached the stage to take decisions in every detailed
point of the Laws of Islam, on the authority of the holy QUR'AN and the
SUNNAT, is a layman, and he has to follow a person who has definitely
reached that standard, and whoever has reached that standard has to
follow his own decision, and it is forbidden for him to follow any one
else.

In case there are several men of equal standard, and they differ in
their decision, the layman has the choice to follow any one of them and
in case the 'MUJTAHIDS' differ in the degree of their accomplishments
the best among them is to be followed. In case one is better in
knowledge and the other in piety, the latter is to be followed.

As to how to find the best one among the 'MUJTAHIDS' the layman should
refer to the evidence of the competent pious scholars of Islamic
Theology who have no claim to 'AAMAMIAT' or to the evidence of the
'MUJTAHIDS' of the approximate standing about the best next of them. By
the collection of all these evidences, one can easily consider for
himself as to who is the best. This is the best method followed
throughout the history of the 'NIABAT' of the Imam after the
'GHAIBAT'.

There is no room for any election or the counting of votes of any class
or group to appoint one as the ecclesiastical head as used in the Papal
system of Christianity, not is it the 'PEERI' and the 'MUREEDI'
practiced in the mystic system which is an unwarranted innovation among
the Muslims, carried as a counter section or parallel to the institution
of Imamate. Be it known that the qualifications for 'IJTEHAD' are known,
recognized and measurable and the qualifications for a 'PEERI' is only
fanciful heresy blindly accepted and neither fixed nor measurable.

It is to be noted that the question of following the opinion of the
best in knowledge and piety is confined to such questions where the
'MUJTAHIDS' differ, and the question of following any 'MUJTAHID' does
not arise in matters unanimously accepted by all 'MUJTAHIDS'. It is to
be noted that for the administration of the theological centers and the
other religious and ecclesiastical services, any pious 'MUJTAHED' is
competent for the undertaking, and if any pious 'MUJTAHED' offers
himself to shoulder the task the other 'MUJTAHED' should not stand in
his way, on the other hand he must help him.

**CONSOLIDATED VIEW OF THE ACCOUNT AS A WHOLE AND THE CO-RELATION OF
THE EVENTS**

We have gone through a few of the various events of the life of the
holy Imam and the Great Wholesale Slaughter at KARBALA. Now let us take
a consolidated view of the accounts as a whole and co-relate the events
and find out what is the mean or the norm and where the arc or
co-relation ends.

If we take the isolated parts of a monotype printing machine separated
from each other and study each one of the parts for ages together we
will never be able to know the maker or the deviser's mind or wisdom in
it. Nor we will ever be able to know the purpose it serves nor the
enormous use of the implement to the human life unless all the parts are
duly put together and see how they work together and what result they
produce. Similarly, if we take the words of a heavenly scripture
separated from the sentences and isolated from each other, spend ages
together on the various meanings each word gives we will never know
those individual words work together in a sentence to give a sensible
meaning and unless the sentences are duly arranged none can ever know
the heavenly guidance endowed in their proper combinations.

Unless we put together all the events of the life of the holy Ones of
the AHLUL BAIT, particularly HUSSAIN, the personality of our concern in
this brief treatise on him we will never be able to have a proper view
of the divine purpose of the All-merciful Alwise Creator Lord in the
creation of this holy soul and sending him on the earth and the
fulfillment of the purpose for the benefit of man in this world.

Let us recapitulate in brief the whole matter of brief work into a
consolidated compact whole to have the overall view of it from God's
given heights of intelligence to realize the glorious grandeur of the
heavenly sight of the Great Event in a harmonious whole, with the data
at our disposal vouched by history and illustrated by the words of the
holy scriptures. 1-It is a fact known to one and all of the educated
ones in the world that man is a created being by the Creator who is
acknowledgly Ever-living, Alwise and Omnipotent Absolutely Supreme
Authority.

2-Man in the primitive stages of the life of his species, led a wild
life in the jungles without any morals to control or law to bind his
though or action with Might as the Right to survive.

3-The All-merciful Lord Creator of the Universe with His gracious will
to educate man and train him for the higher object of his creation and
to qualify him for the glorious heights of the heavenly bliss sent
apostle after apostle from Him. 4-Apostles of God were sent in every
part of the earth to the people inhabiting it. Some were sent as mere
preachers and some with scriptures, some were for a limited zone and
some for a wider area, some superior of the others. Some has law givers
as Moses and some as the renewers of the already given law, like Jesus.
Most of them prophesying the advent of the Last or the Final of God's
Apostles and prophets.

5-Of the children of Adam God had chosen a particular lineage, and the
Lineage was particularly blessed to be progenitors of the selected
apostles of His. Abraham was given the Imamate to be perpetuated in his
seed but reaching only those free from iniquity. 6-The Divine device was
to present a pathetic sight of sacrifice in the way of the Lord,
depicting the sublime submission to the Divine Will, which is the only
source or the only Royal Road to the heavenly bliss in store for man who
earns it.

7-A rehearsal of the divinely destined drama of the sacrifice was made
employing Abraham and his son ISMAEL for the trial. 8-Abraham and ISMAEL
proved true the selection but the event was not to be as it was
temporarily enacted only as a trial. The aim behind its proper enactment
was too high, too great and too grave. There was yet no demand for them
to be presented on a mount unseen by any man and it was not unknown to
the human world. Just to make Abraham pass the knife that a living body
was placed under it. 9-Abraham was told by the Lord that the divinely
designed event was a Great Sacrifice.

10-Abraham was promised that God's Covenant will be established with
him and his seed. Abraham had two sons ISMAEL (through Lady HAJAR) and
ISAAC (through Lady SARAH) but the promise to Abraham even according to
the Bible of the Christian church does not mention the name of any of
the two sons, but only it was said that the Covenant will be with
Abraham and his seed.

"and I will establish my covenant between me and thee and in thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant". 11- The
divinity of the purity, physical as well as spiritual endowed in Abraham
flew in both the channels of his seed, ISMAEL and ISAAC and Twelve
Princes (Imams) were promised in the seed of ISMAEL (OT. GEN. 18:20).

12- The race that sprang of Isaac called the Israelites got corrupt and
rebellious and violated the Covenant of God the prophets that were
raised among them either they killed them (….) or they deified them and
worshipped them as the sons of God and those of the apostles they did
not follow, they blackmailed them with horrible charges to create hatred
against them (……). The Israelites who hated Jesus charged the holy
Virgin Mary of adultery for having given birth to Jesus, without a male
partner to her. At last the Kingdom of God was taken away from the seed
of Isaac and given to another nation (the seed of ISMAEL). Jesus
informed them of it:

"Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from you
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof". 13- The higher
truth about the life divine of the process of the complete submission to
the Absolute to attain the glorious heights of eternal bliss could not
be given in its fullness to man in his mental evolutionary stages. It
has to be administered gradually Jesus clearly announced that he could
give out to the people many things for they could not bear it then (….)
and prophesied about the advent of the Spirit of Truth who would fill
the world with righteousness and truth (….).

14- Moses was told by the Lord about the Prophet to come in whose mouth
will the Lord put His words whom every one would hearken (…).

15- The great sage of India BUDDHA had prophesied of the advent of the
Last BUDDHA called 'MAETREA' in the PALI language which in Arabic means
'RAHMAT' the title with which the holy Prophet Muhammad has been
addressed in the words of God (….).

16- At last come the Last of the apostles of God - the Prophet
prophesied to Moses - The Spirit of Truth, the holy Ghost prophesied by
Jesus and the MAETREA prophesied by BUDDHA the holy Prophet Muhammad in
the seed of Abraham through his son ISMAEL to give out the truth in its
fullness about the Kingdom of God - preaching the truthfulness and the
purity physical and spiritual of the personalities of all preceding
prophets who had been blackmailed by the Israelites - Preaching the
Absolute Unity of God and brotherhood of man and the commitment of man
to his Lord - with a final code in the Last Revealed Word of God the
holy QUR'AN as the final code of discipline for human life on earth -
Since all the previous scriptures were a challenge that it will be
preserved by God Himself for it had to remain current for ever for there
was no prophet had to come after the holy Prophet.

17- To preserve the purity of the Final Word from God to man and to
maintain the originality of its teachings and its practice, the
institution of the Imamate was started to succeed the Last Apostle of
God for the guidance of man against his getting astray after being
guided aright. The Imams had to be brought forth from the family of the
holy Prophet himself hence the holy family was sent into this world duly
purified by God Himself (33:33).

18- The holy Prophet had taken all possible steps to introduce the
position of his AHLUL BAIT, particularly of Ali identified. At the very
outset of the apostolic mission and also at the conclusion of it Ali was
declared in clear cut words as the KALIF Vicegerent, Brother, and the
Master or the MAULA, or the AMIR, in the place of the holy Prophet.

19- On the very first day of his advent into this world, HUSSAIN'S
mission in this world and the fate in store for him was declared out by
the holy Prophet.

20- As misfortune would have it, immediately as the holy Prophet
departed from this world, the AHLUL BAIT were alienated from their
position preached by the holy Prophet, and the people forgot all that
was said about Ali and Ali's appointment in the place of the holy
Prophet.

21- The final word of the holy Prophet to the people was that he had
left Two important things behind him; the Book of God the holy QUR'AN
and his AHLUL BAIT and the people would be attached to these two.

22- With alienation of the holy AHLUL BAIT, the religion got gradually
corrupted and by the time of YAZID son of MU'AVIAH son of ABU SUFYAN,
the disbelief in the holy QUR'AN being the revealed word of God and the
holy Prophet Muhammad being the Apostle of God was openly pronounced
from the throne and people had become irreligious and the teachings of
Islam were openly defied, the Religion of Islam was on the verge of
being annihilated for ever, and the holy QUR'AN had practically lost its
original value as the word of God. The question or rescuing the holy
QUR'AN and its faith, Islam, arose but demanded the one like the holy
Prophet to defy the falsehood and even to offer the greatest sacrifices
it may need. None but one from the family of the holy Prophet, the one
purified by God Himself (33:33) could do it and from among the divinely
purified ones only HUSSAIN was now left in the world, to face the
situation. The sacrifice the task needed was the Greatest One, i.e., the
'ZIBHE AZEEM'.

**CONCLUSION**

The historic heart-rending event of KARBALA has been presented in the
light of its historic background and the guidance of the Holy
Scriptures. It is for the learned readers to say that if it was or was
not that divinity pure and maximum had not gone into action to have
successfully resisted the satanic moves to re-establish the truth and
godliness with the maximum amount of the sacrifices the Humanity could
afford to offer in the way of the Lord.

It is now left for the historians of the world who never believe in any
effects with their causes and thus always related events with their
causative factors to trace out and declare to the world, what were the
causes of the effects of the tragic events suffered by the godly members
of the House of the holy Prophet Muhammad. If there is truth in it or
not, if it said that if the holy Ones of the AHLUL BAIT, particularly
Ali had not been alienated fixed by God and preached to man through His
Apostle the holy Prophet, and if the OMAYYID family of ABU SOFYAN, with
the knowledge of its attitude towards the holy Prophet and Islam, had
been brought into power, as it was done, would the calamities that
befell the holy House, have been ever imaginable?

Could by any stroke of imagination, be ever deemed the object of
HUSSAIN the holy Imam be any thing other than to demonstrate of man to
what extent falsehood should be resisted and at what cost the truth, the
obedience to God and to none else, should be established. HUSSAIN'S
object was to educate man with the absolute submission to God and to
yield only to God and to none else and to establish godliness on earth.
To yield only to right, however much it might of whatever intensity and
strength it might be and in doing it no sacrifice on the part of man is
too great.

It is for the civilized world to pronounce its verdict if any act of
extra gravity of the devotion of God consisting of superb sacrifices and
ideal surrender and submission to the Lord, would be remembered or
forgotten, and if any remembrance of any such act in a fitting way be
righteous or sinful, commendable or condemnable, and at the same time
forgetting it will be gratitude or ingratitude to God and godliness.

Hurting one's self for any worldly gain is undoubtedly condemnable and
also a sin in Islam but the same act if it be in the way of the Lord is
called martyrdom and if it be in the love of any apostle of God has been
commended viz. , OWAIS who broke his teeth with his own hands in his
sympathy for the holy Prophet's losing his in a battle in the way of the
Lord, was highly commended by the holy Prophet and is cited by all
scholars of the Islamic law as an action of devotion.

If a father dies, one of his sons might mourn the loss quietly, the
other might cry aloud and the third might not control his love and
attachment to his departed father and might in the excessive emotion of
his, tear his clothes and strike his head with his own hands. The
sympathizers with the bereaved family will only control the emotional
conduct and not condemn or punish him. If any devotee of the holy Imam
unable to control his emotion and acts similarly, the godly world will
do its best to control the overactive individual and not punish him, or
condemn him as irreligious. On the other hand, while commending control,
will only admire the individual's uncontrollable devotion to God and
godliness.

There is one thing which irresistible comes out a natural and logical
inference from the events that OMAR could have invited the public to the
position of the AHLUL BAIT in relation to the life of the people and had
averted all the miseries they suffered. OMAR was a man of fiery
temperament, a fact acknowledged by history and even by SHIBLI NO'MANI
in his well-known work 'ALFAROOQ', and he was the brain that was carried
there and it was at OMAR'S command that ABU BAKR extended his hand to
receive the fealty to him as the KALIF.

It is an undeniable fact OMAR was a man of his will. Whatever he
willed, he did it and none could resist it. it was he who overruled the
system or the method of any kind of election in the matter of his
succession and handed over the affair to a committee of his own choice.
If OMAR had done one thing, which however was not done, that after
controlling the affair at the 'SAQEEFA' as he effectively did, and when
matters had settled, after the last services to the holy Prophet, he
could have called for a general assembly of the people of Medina and had
addressed them as follows:

"O ye brethren of mine, O' ye Muslims!"

It is our misfortune that we have been deprived of the presence of the
Apostle of God from our midst. We have suffered the greatest loss. But
at the same time let us be thankful to God that when He withdrew His
Apostle from our midst he has spared amongst us ALI IBNE ABI TALEB who
is of the same Light of which was the holy Prophet. You have heard the
holy Prophet saying: 'I and Ali are of one and the same Light'. You know
the holy Prophet at the very outset of his ministry had shown Ali to the
world and said: 'This is my Brother, my Vicegerent and my KALIF' and you
know the historic event conducted by the holy Prophet at GHADEER-E-KUHM
when he declared 'Of whosoever I am the MAULA the Master this Ali is his
Master' and took allegiance to him and the first to pay allegiance to
Ali was my own self. Besides all the qualities that we need in the one
to rule over us are undoubtedly there in Ali.

We need the most learned to rule over us. Who else can be a greater
scholar than the one about whom the holy Prophet has declared: 'I am the
City of knowledge and Ali is its Gate'.

We need the just to manage our affairs. Who else could be more equities
than the just among you is ALI IBNE ABI TALEB'. We need the bravest to
lead us. It is Ali and none else who has earned the exclusive
distinction of being called by the holy Prophet 'ASADULLAH' (the Lion of
God) and the 'KARRARAN GHAIRA FARRANIN' (the repeated attacker and the
one who know not running away leaving the field to the enemy). You know
that it was Ali who stood with the holy Prophet when every one of us
being unable to stay any longer ran away from the field. Besides, you
have all heard the holy Prophet addressing Ali: "Thou art to me as Aaron
was to Moses save that there is not apostle to come after me". 'Thou art
to me as the head is to the body'. 'Thou art to me as the soul is to the
body'. You all know that Ali is the self of the holy Prophet which was
shown to us on the day of the historic 'MUBAHALA'.

O' Muslim! The holy Prophet has left behind two things: the holy QUR'AN
and his AHLUL BAIT and we have been asked to hold these Two fast for
these will not be separated from each other and the holy Prophet has
declared: 'QUR'AANUN MA'A ALI WA ALIYYUN MA'AL QUR'AN' i.e., the QUR'AN
will be with Ali and Ali will always be with the QUR'AN.

Brethren you know that the holy Prophet had not even breathed his last
people had assembled in the 'SAQEEFA' with the problem about the
succession. You know myself and ABU BAKR had also been there. It was
just to avoid any wrong step being against the verdict of the holy
Prophet for you know that going against the decision of the holy Prophet
is losing the faith and become infidels for the Lord has clearly
declared in the holy QUR'AN: "But no! thy Lord! They believe not until
they make thee a judge of what is in dispute, between them, then find
not any straitness in their hearts as to that which thou decidest and
submit with full submission" [4:65].

Now brethren let us not go against the declared will and the decision
of the holy Prophet which he declared at the very outset of his ministry
in the 'DAWATE ASHEERA' and again reiterated it at the conclusion of it
at 'GHADEER-E-KUHM', for by doing so we, under the above verdict of the
holy QUR'AN, be of those who have not believed at all.

You know brethren what happened at the 'SAQEEFA' and my getting ABU
BAKR declared as the KALIF but be it known that it was only an interim
arrangement to avoid the calamity to any violation of the will of the
holy Prophet and I and ABU BAKR did it at the cost of our absence even
from the last services to the holy Prophet and his funeral. And now that
matters have been settled let us all request Ali to come forward and
bless us by his lead".

At the end of such a speech from OMAR, if ABU BAKR had get up and
said:

"Brethren! Think not I accepted the KALIFATE to own any power or
authority not bestowed on me by the holy Prophet. I accepted OMAR'S
suggestion just as an interim arrangement to avert the disturbance which
I and OMAR apprehended immediately at the departure of the holy Prophet.
OMAR and myself had rushed to the SAQEEFA not minding even the last
services to the holy Prophet and his funeral to that the decision of the
holy Prophet about his declared vicegerent Ali. And now I would request
you to join me and OMAR in requesting Ali to come forward and take up
the reigns to rule our destiny as the one nearest to the holy Prophet
both in his relation to him and also in his personal purity and
excellence declared about the AHLUL BAIT by the Lord in the verse of
'TATHEER'" [33:33]

Islam in the blood of Muslims. The husband of FATEMA united in his
person the right of succession as the lawful heir of the Prophet as well
as the right by election. It might have been thought that all would
submit the selves before his glory: So pure and so grand". (The Spirit
of Islam by AMIR ALI)

Had OMAR and ABU BAKR acted as above none could have doubted the
nonafide of their intentions in their activity at the SAQEEFA and today
their act would certainly have been held as a golden deed and their
praise would certainly have decorated the pages of the Islamic History.
Neither the OMAYYIDS had come to power nor any one of the members of the
House of the holy Prophet had suffered any of miseries and the
calamities, and the wholesale heart-rending massacre of KARBALA would
never at all have taken place, the world today, under the godly rule of
the AHLUL BAIT had enjoyed the heavenly bliss on earth.

(ailthe-14) thow 18- strave 21- pregenetal 44- desirest 49- decardeth
55- helpeth 55- Garded 85- bonafide 89- Vicegerency 92- equitous 101-
pretentions 108- thine 117- Histroty of Saracents 122- spitter 131-
recasted 147- supplicative 168- ange 177- purdah 183- Misarrangement
212- vielded 214- Warners 218 bestower 218- misqualified 229- leanrt
230- Alwise 233- acknowledgly 233- renewers 234- nonafide 241


