The Successor To the First Kalif Nominated
==========================================

When on 13th JAMADI II. 13 A.H. (634 A.D.), ABU BAKR got ill and got
hopeless of recovery, he nominated OMAR in his place. (For details the
readers are referred to TKS., translation by JARRET). Any enlightened
man or woman would ask:

1- What happened to the principle of election resorted to in the case
of the choice of the first KALIF?
2- On what authority of the holy QUR'AN or HADITH or the principle of
politics was the appointment of the successor to the first KALIF
effected?

**THE SUCCESSOR TO THE SECOND KALIF CO-OPTED**

When OMAR felt the approach of his end, he avoided election as well as
nomination and appointed a committee of six men of his own choice to
elect a successor to him:

1- ABDUR RAHMAN B. AUF.
2- ALI IBNE ABI TALEB.
3- SA'D IBNE ABI WAQQAS.
4- OTHMAN IBNE AFFAN.
5- ZOBEIR F. ALAWAM.
6- TALHA IBNE OBAIDALLAH.

If was by OMAR that MU'AYIAH was appointed as the governor of Syria.
(MR. ANNL., ENI). To know the details as to what took place and how
OTHMAN was elected, and how the KALIFATE was conducted by him, one would
do better by referring to TABARI and KAMIL IBNE ATHEER etc., and W. MUIR
has given the details in his ANNALS on p. 324. However, OTHMAN was
co-opted to the KALIFATE. OTHMAN'S patronage of his relatives gave
further strength to MU'AYIAH son of ABU SOFYAN to the extent that
MU'AYIAH'S son YAZEED could play the havoc of the heartless wholesale
massacre at KARBALA, and his issues, the OMMAYIDS, followed by the
ABBASIDES, killed the holy Imams of the House of the holy Prophet, one
after another, until the eleventh of them, and the Twelfth one, like
Jesus, was rescued by God to be kept alive as per the will of the
Lord.

**FATEMA'S HOUSE ATTACKED**

In compliance with God's command "BALLIGH MA ONZILA ILAIK.." (Divine
guidance in succession to the Final apostleship) and had placed Ali as
the First in charge of it, and had declared it at the historic
ceremonial event at 'GHADEER-E-KHUM', before the multitude of the
thousands of the HAJIES, on 18. 12. 10. A.H. at the conclusion of which
event was revealed 5:6. declaring the religion to be perfect and Islam
to be the religion for man, accepted by God. In pursuance of the
expressed divine will of the Lord, Ali could not recognize or yield to
the man-made authority set up at the 'SAQEEFA' and hence had not paid
fealty to it.

**ALI TO EXERCISE PATIENCE**

The holy Prophet who knew through the divine gift of knowledge as to
what would happen after him till the Day of Judgment, had advised Ali to
exercise the maximum possible patience against every atrocious move that
might confront him. In compliance with the apostolic will, without the
least interference into, or any concern with the affairs that proceeded
at the 'SAQEEFA', Ali had retired with a determination not to get out
until collects together all the notes on the holy QUR'AN which he had
from the holy Prophet about the external as well as the internal
meanings of the Final Word of God.

Without Ali being subjugated, the authority set up at the 'SAQEEFA'
could not have the seal of the recognition of it, by the holy AHLUL-BAIT
and Ali was now the Chief of the AHLUL-BAIT the House of the holy
Prophet, and he would not yield. The retirement of Ali was exploited and
a charge of conspiracy was coined and the people of the newly set up
rule, headed by OMAR, collected at the door of FATEMA, demanded Ali to
come out of the house. The reply from inside was that it was a vow Ali
had made not to come out until the collection of the important notes on
the holy QUR'AN is not completed. But the insurgent crowd would not
agree and a big row was set into action.

**FATEMA'S HOUSE THREATENED WITH FIRE**

The holy Lady FATEMA, bereaved only a day or two before, deeply sunk in
grief, standing behind the door of her abode remonstrated saying: "O'
people! It is only yesterday that my father, the holy Prophet, departed
form you and today you have the audacity to attack his house in which
his daughter is mourning for him, which door he did not enter but with a
salutation on its inmates". Some historians say that fire and firewood
was already collected at the door of the holy House with the threat to
set the abode on fire and some say fire was already kindled. However,
SHIBLI NO'MNAI in his well-known 'ALFAROOQ' says:

"some say that fire was already set, but with the short temperedness of
OMAR this act was not improbable" (AF).

**FATEMA WOUNDED**

A violent kick at the door from one among the crowd pushed it down on
the side of the holy Lady FATEMA standing behind it, breaking her rib
and the Queen of Paradise, fell unconscious and ultimately the hit and
the wound killed the holy Mother along with the baby son in her womb.
According to the tradition of the AHLUL-BAIT, the Baby was already named
'MOHSIN'.

**ALI'S PATIENCE**

Even at this juncture the Lion of God abided with the will of the holy
Prophet and like a helpless one, kept quiet without any resistance or
retaliation which, if he had only willed to resort, would have played
havoc with the insurgents. In short, if the valor and prowess of Ali
during the time of the holy Prophet in the establishment of Islam and
its propagation was a wonder, his patience and forbearance and fortitude
which he exercised against all the atrocities from even the cowards
among the people, was on less a surprise and a wonder.

The point quite obvious in this regard is that to Ali the first concern
was the safety, security and the maintenance of the faith and not the
owning of any fortune through any temporal power, though the right to be
the temporal leader as well besides being the spiritual guide, in the
place of the holy Prophet, was of none but his, which fact is
unanimously acknowledged and openly declared even by his antagonists.

ALI ARRESTED

However, when the crowed shouted to Ali to come out, and even the door
of his abode had fallen on the side of his wife the holy Lady FATEMA,
throwing her down unconscious and seriously hurt, Ali came out. He was
tied by a rope round his neck and the world witnessed the unbelievable
sight of Ali the Lion of God, the Conqueror of KHAIBAR, the Victor
against the giant warriors of Arabia, OMAR IBNE ABDA'WOD and MARHAB,
being dragged by the people to the court of the KALIFATE. It is to this
extent that Ali fulfilled his promise of patience, to the holy Prophet.
They holy Prophet had predicted to Ali saying:

"Others will be preferred to thee when they will not be in their own
rights. Resign thyself to it until thou reacheth me at the Spring
(KAUTHAR)" (S.M).

ALI READS OUT SALMAN'S MIND

Along with Ali, was also arrested SALMAN the well known faithful
companion of the holy Prophet and the servant of Ali, on whom the holy
Prophet had conferred the exclusive and the unique honor of declaring
him as: "SALMAN MINNA AHLUL-BAIT".

"SALMAN is of we the AHLUL-BAIT". SALMAN was also tied with a rope and
was marched behind Ali. SALMAN was a very old gentleman, who, according
to the historians, was more than two hundred years old, for he is
reported to have died in 35 A.H. while he was 250 years of age and
according to some historians his age at his death was 350 (EHI). While
marching under arrest, the oldest devotee of the House of the holy
Prophet could not keep pace with the men dragging him and at the same
time he was sunk deep in wonder and surprise saying heart: "What! Is
this the same Ali, the ever victorious Lion of God whose strength is
unconquerable and whose valiance and prowess matchless, who fought and
killed the giant warriors of Arabia in single combats and who knew no
running way from the battlefields even in the worst of the circumstances
and when even the closest of the companions had deserted the holy
Prophet?". Lost in his wonder and the irreconcilable surprise at the
absolute patience of Ali, poor old SALMAN could not keep pace with those
who were dragging him violently. Suddenly a violent blow from some one
in the crowd, fell on the neck of SALMAN with a shout to be quick. Ali,
who was walking quietly under the rope, looking down, sounded to SALMAN
behind him:

"SALMAN! The blow thou didst receive is the reward for thy wonder at
heart about my silence and patience. What dost thou know SALMAN! When to
draw the sword and when to be quiet. This is to fulfill the will of the
Lord declared to me though His Prophet".

**The Open Enmity Becomes Settled Hypocricy**

With the establishment of Islam and the successful conclusion of the
ministry of Muhammad, the Last Apostle of God, ended the need to fight
any open enemy of the faith or of the holy Prophet, for there did not
remain any in the land who did not profess the faith who could defy it
openly. As long as the faith was not firmly established and there were
the open enemies strong enough to openly attack Islam and the Muslims,
there was the need of Ali, the Lion of God 'KARRARAN GHAIRA FARRARAN',
who knew only to fight the enemy of God and the of the holy Prophet and
he knew not even to turn his face away from his antagonist, far from
running away from him.

Thus Ali was given to the holy Prophet, with the godly strength, the
matchless bravery and the wonderful prowess to play the role of the
Ever-Triumphant Protector of the faith and faithful. But with the
extirpation of the open opposition and aggression against the faith,
ended the duty of the Lion of God of an open fight against any open
enemy, and with the departure of the holy Prophet from this world,
started the problem of the perseverance of the faith and the maintenance
of the fellowship of its adherents, lest the tender plant of the just
established faith which had not yet been sufficiently rooted in the
minds and the hearts of the people, would perish for ever, and there was
no other prophet to come to re-establish it.

Until the firm establishment of Islam, there were the disbelievers who
repeatedly attempted to regain the power and authority for their pagan
cult, and with the firm establishment of Islam as an unshakable power,
and the holy Prophet departing from this world, started the struggle
within the ranks of those who had embraced the faith half-heartedly, for
power and authority which they restlessly waited to own for themselves.
The one impediment in the way of these opportunists, was the problem of
the declared position of the 'AHLUL-BAIT', particularly of Ali who the
declared Vicegerent of the holy Prophet, openly announced both at the
very outset of the apostolic ministry (at the 'DAAWATE-ASHEERA' the
Feast of the Relatives) and finally at the conclusion of the
apostleship, at 'GHADEER-E-KHUM'. Thus the pre-Islamic enmity against
the 'AHLUL-BAIT' particularly against Ali, for without subjugating Ali
and neglecting the 'AHLUL-BAIT' none could have his own way

**THE THREE CLASSES OF THE PROPHET: THE BELIEVERS, THE DISBELEIVERS AND
THE HYPOCRITES**

With the advent of Islam, the people of Mecca and Medina got sorted
into two main groups: the believers and the disbelievers, and among
those who professed belief in Islam, there were the sincere ones the
'MOMINS' and those who had joined the ranks succumbing to the changed
circumstances over which they could not gain any hold, they were called
the 'MONAFIQS' or the Hypocrites. As regards the sincere believers and
the Hypocrites, holy QUR'AN clearly exposes the fact:

"The dwellers of the desert say 'We believe'. Say thou (O' Our apostle
Muhammad unto them) 'We do not believe (in fact). (Hence) say ye 'we
have submitted' (i.e., only embraced Islam) and the faith has not yet
entered your heart.." [49:14]. Even the declaration of the hypocrites,
bearing witness to the apostleship of the holy Prophet Muhammad has been
flatly denied by God, as a false profession:

"when the Hypocrites come unto thee (O' Our Apostle Muhammad) say they
(unto thee) 'Verily thou art the Apostle of God, and God knoweth that
verily thou art His Apostle, and God beareth witness that the hypocrites
are certainly liar" [63:1]. Thus besides the evidence of history, there
is the unchallengeable verdict of the Word of God about the fact that
those who professed Islam and called themselves as Muslims, during the
time of the holy Prophet, all were not sincere. There were those in
whose hearts the faith, far from getting rooted therein, had not even
entered, they were only Muslims [49:14] i.e., those submitted to the
circumstances unavoidable for them. Verse 63:1 clearly gives out that
the lip-profession of the faith in the apostleship of the holy Prophet
was not also the genuine conviction at the heart of people and the
people have been clearly termed by God himself, as the Hypocrites.

**WHAT HAPPENED TO THE HYPOCRITES**

Besides history, the holy QUR'AN is too eloquent and too aloud to
declare the fact, about the hypocrites being in a definite group of
their own and how busy were the hypocrites in their subversive plans.
The importance and the significance of making known the presence of the
hypocrites among the Muslims and their inimical activities, is quite
evident from a separate chapter altogether being assigned to describe
their conduct and character and declare their evil intentions and
devices.

The wonder is, what happened to the hypocrites, that as the holy
Prophet departs from this world, there is a sudden silence about them,
and there is no mention of them at all any of the writings of the
Muslims. The amazing questions arise:

1- Have they all suffered a wholesale death, immediately at the
departure of the holy Prophet, which no history reports?
2- Or, were they only waiting for the departure of the holy Prophet and
immediately as he left this world, they all, overnight became sincere
believers, that there is no mention of them at all?
3- Or, they are those who have joined together and formed an organized
front against the House of the holy Prophet, for only in such a case
none can expect the hypocrites themselves to call themselves hypocrites
thereafter? Otherwise where have they gone? What has happened to them
that none speaks or makes mention of them at all?

**THE POSSIBLE AND THE ACCEPTABLE ANSWER**

The one and the only object of the hypocrites and their hidden
subversive activities, was the regaining of the power and authority from
the holy Prophet, which they could not do until his stay in this world.
They only waited for his departure, and the moment he left, they had
their own way and has successfully established themselves in power and
authority neglecting the House of the holy Prophet (i.e., the holy
'AHLUL-BAIT'). Thus the dirty body of hypocrisy went under the cloak of
general Islam and whenever the evils of hypocrisy became too obvious to
be hidden or to be defended, they were termed as unintentional
indiscretion of a well-intended 'IJTEHAD'.

The holy QUR'AN and the history is there to vouch that as hypocrites,
during the lifetime of the holy Prophet. They tried the worst possible
for them to displace the authority of the holy Prophet by deserting him
in the battle of HUNAIN, and it is a historic fact that HOZAIFA the
faithful companion of the holy Prophet, had the list of the plotters who
were shown in their very person to the holy Prophet, by heavens, through
a timely lighting. And now as Muslims, having the power and authority
which they lusted for so long, they easily bypassed the holy
'AHLUL-BAIT' and established themselves over and above them, and planned
to do away with them totally, by killing the godly ones one after
another.

Thus, with departure of the holy Prophet, ended the peace and the
safety for the 'AHLUL-BAIT', and started the age of their godly patience
and endurance against the atrocious murderous treachery of ht people,
and simultaneously began the persecution and the slaughter of their
devotees.

**THE LIFE IN THE HOUSE OF THE 'AHLUL-BAIT'**

FATEMA during her lifetime, set the best examples of a righteous and a
correct womanhood on earth.

Her marriage was so simple that if the Muslims, particularly those who
proudly claim to be the devotees of the 'AHLUL-BAIT', only follow the
example in their practical life, they will themselves be the happiest
souls in their practical life. FATEMA'S obedience to her husband was
ideal and the contented life she led was a lesson to every Muslim woman.
Her godliness and god-mindedness was a beacon light of guidance to
womanhood.

Her treatment to her handmaid 'FIZZA' is a practical example to every
righteous woman. In her household life every alternate day FATEMA
herself minded the whole work of the household and 'FIZZA' was given
rest. It was FATEMA who said that the best thing for a woman is neither
to cast her glance on any 'Non-MAHRAM' man not to expose herself to his
glance. It is worth imagining that if women follow this FATEMA Watchword
for chaste Womanhood how pure and safe will be womanhood and how
graceful, healthy, happy and holy would have been the human society
today.

**FATEMA'S POSITION**

The distinctive and the distinguishing titles of the holy Lady FATEMA,
the only surviving issue and the most beloved one of the holy Prophet
have already been given above. The following are a few of the well-known
declarations of the holy Prophet about this holy soul: MANSOOR BIN
MAKRMAH records that the holy Prophet said: "FATEMA is a piece of my
flesh. The one incurred her wrath, incurred my wrath too". "A scion of
mine is FATEMA" said the holy Prophet "Whatever maketh her happy, maketh
me happy, and whatever filleth her with pain, filleth me too with
pain".

"FATEMA is a part of mine, whosoever annouyeth her, hath annoyed me,
and whosoever annoyeth me, hat annoyed God and whosoever annoyed God,
hath turned an infidel" [SB., SM., KU., MST. Etc). Before assessing the
correct value of the above apostolic declarations, one should remember
the position of the holy Prophet under the following announcement of the
holy QUR'AN:

"He (the holy Prophet) speaketh not anything of his own inclination
save what hath been revealed to him (by God)" [53:3] It is how for every
believer in the holy QUR'AN as the revealed Word of God, to say that if
what is declared by the Lord is true, whatever the holy Prophet said
about his 'AHLUL-BAIT', including the above announcements of his about
FATEMA, was it not the will of the Lord that was communicated to mankind
through His Apostle?

About annoying the holy Prophet, the holy QUR'AN declared: "Those who
annoy God and His Apostle, God hath cursed them in this world and the
hereafter, and He has prepared for them an abasing chastisement"
[33:57]

**THE MISERABLE PLIGHT OF THE HOLY LADY**

This holy Lady FATEMA, the dearest of the holy Prophet, the wife of the
First holy Imam Ali, the holy Mother of the Eleven holy Imams, about
whom the holy Prophet had taken the special care to repeatedly announce
her divine heavenly position, was the first victim of the treachery of
the people immediately after the departure of the holy Prophet.

First of all, she was the most struck with sorrow and grief at the
departure of the holy Prophet from this world, when the holy Prophet was
about to breath his last, he found FATEMA standing before him shedding
tears. He embraced her and said something in her ears. The holy Lady who
was sunk in sorrow and grief and restlessly shedding tears, on hearing
what told into her ears by her departing Holy Father, went into a smile
and looked cheerful. When asked about what was it that suddenly turned
her sorrow into cheer and made her smile, she said that the holy Prophet
consoled her saying:

"Grieve not FATEMA! For thou will be the first among my 'AHLUL-BAIT' to
meet me, and it is a very interval of a few counted days of separation".
It is already said that soon after the funeral of the holy Prophet, only
a day or two had passed, instead of offering condolences to the bereaved
holy family, an insurgent crowd surrounded the abode of this holy Lady,
a kick at her door by a tyrant caused the door to fall on her side,
wounding her, breaking her rib, the wound which proved fatal.

The holy Lady wept so much for her father the holy Prophet that even
the people in the neighborhood could not bear the laments. Besides the
grief and the sorrow for her father, was the treatment meted out to her
husband Ali, the Vicegerent of the holy Prophet. To add to her grief,
she was deprived of her rights over the garden of FADAK which was
bequeathed to her by her father the holy Prophet. To know the details as
to how her claim was rejected by the KALIFATE, the reader may refer to
SAHEEH BOKHARI, which relates from AYSHA a detailed note about FATEMA'S
claiming the 'FADAK' and how it was rejected and how FATEMA got annoyed
and to whom it was that she did not even talk, until she departed from
this world.

**FATEMA MARTYRED: SUCCUMBING TO THE WOUND**

Thus after seventy-five or ninety days after the departure of the holy
Prophet, as prophesied, the holy Lady passed away. But before breathing
her last, she called Ali and desired that none of those particularly a
few ones, who had turned hostile to the House of the Prophet and
violated the will of the Apostle of God, should be informed of her
departure from this world, and that she should be quietly buried in the
darkness of night. Some reporters say that when the body was lowered
into the grave, by Ali, in the grave appeared the two hands of the holy
Prophet, with a voice addressing Ali:

"Come on! Ali! Return thou the part of mine, to me".

It is said that Ali shedding tears responded to the voice saying:

"I am ashamed of thee O' Apostle of God, for I look FATEMA from thee
sound in her body but I am now returning her unto thee rib-broken". Thus
the holy Lady was the first of the Martyrs among the AHLUL-BAIT', after
the departure of the holy Prophet. It is now left to the intelligent
ones of the readers to judge the position of those who annoyed this holy
one of God, (i.e., Lady FATEMA) under the apostolic announcements of the
holy Prophet and the verse of the holy QUR'AN referred to above. It is
authentically reported that the holy Lady once referring on her
miserable plight and the sorrowful life she had to lead, addressing her
father, the holy Prophet, standing before his grave, said:

"Oh! Father dear! After thee, fell on me such miseries that had they
fallen on bright days, the bright days would have turned into darkest
night". The holy Lady of Light left behind two sons and two daughters
whose ages at the time of her departing from them, were: HASSAN about 8
years HUSSAIN about 7 years ZAINAB (daughter) about 6 years UMME
KALTHOOM (daughter) about 5 years

**THE 'AHLUL-BAIT' THEIR LOT, BEFOREHAND**

It is a universally acknowledged fact that every one of the holy
AHLUL-BAIT, knew beforehand, everything that would befall in his or her
life in this world, and the manner in which his or her earthly sojourn
will end.

1- The holy Prophet had announced a year ago that year was the last one
of his stay on earth and the pilgrimage he would perform that year,
would be the last one and no pilgrimage thereafter he would have to
do.

2- The holy Prophet had already informed every one of the members of
his 'AHLUL-BAIT', every calamity that would befall them and the
treacherous course the people would adopt after him with regard to his
family.

3- The holy Prophet had informed particularly about the calamities that
would befall HUSSIAN and the details of the gruesome massacre at
KARBALA.

4- To Ali the holy Prophet had already said that he was seeing Ali with
his (Ali's) beard drenched with the blood of his (Ali's) head, in the
Mosque of KUFA.

5- FATEMA had already foretold even her handmaid FIZZA about her
departure. She was informed be the holy Prophet about her stay in the
world after him.

6- Ali even used to point out to ABDUR RAHMAN IBNE MULJIM as his
assassin, when there was no apparent sign of IBNE MULJIM entertaining
any idea of killing Ali. Days before his martyrdom, Ali had been
continuously informing his family about his destined departure and had
already given the details of his funeral and the location of the place
of the burial.

7- HASSAN knew his end and had advised HUSSAIN to be patient against
the atrocious behavior of the people and not to insist upon his burial
besides his grandfather the holy Prophet when it will be resisted and
prevented.

8- HUSSAIN'S Martyrdom was already prophesied by the holy Prophet with
all the details of the Tragedy. The holy Prophet had even given a
handful of a mysterious dust to UMME SALAMA his wife, saying that it was
the dust of KARBALA where HUSSAIN will be martyred and when HUSSAIN
would be martyred, the dust would turn into blood, and it happened so.

It is reported that FATEMA before her departure, called her daughter
ZAINAB to her and willed to her that on the day when HUSSAIN would ask
her for some torn clothes, it will be the last departure of HUSSAIN from
her (ZAINAB), then to kiss HUSSAIN on her behalf on HUSSAIN'S throat on
which will pass the sword of SHIMR the assassin. FATEMA again called
HUSSAIN to her and willed to him, that before his ultimate separation
from her (ZAINAB) to kiss on her behalf, on the two sides of her
(ZAINAB'S) arms on which will be tied the rope when the ladies of the
camp will be taken captives by the YAZIDIAN forces.

**ALI'S REGARD FOR FATEMA**

Ali's regard for FATEMA was the same as was the regard of the holy
Prophet for Lady KHADIJA. Until the life of Lady KHADIJAH, the holy
Prophet did not accept the hand of nay other woman and likewise until
the life of FATEMA, Ali did not marry any other woman.

The critics of Islam, in their ignorance of the truth, betray their
prejudice in their venture to criticize saying that the holy Prophet was
extremely polygamous. Such prejudiced critics should know that when the
holy Prophet was in the bloom of his youth, he was not only contented
but was the happiest husband of a lady in the decline of her age and the
death of the lady who was older than himself, he observed the whole of
the year following the death, as AAMUL-HUZN, i.e., the year of Grief. It
is an elementary truth of human life that if a man be lusty in his
sensual desires,

particularly matrimonial, he would be such in his youth. When the holy
Prophet was in the fullness of his youth and when he had an aged wife,
and if he had only desired to have a young lady, there was already the
offer from the people of Mecca to give the fairest woman of his own
choice, if he only spares his condemning idolatry, but he bluntly
refused. The fact is that the attachment of the holy Prophet to Lady
KHADIJA was so much that none dared to offer his daughter and no woman
had the courage of even thinking of offering herself.

It was only at the departure of Lady KHADIJA that ABU BAKR could offer
his daughter AYSHA who was of about nine years. History is there to
vouch that when AYSHA was offered to him, at Mecca, the holy Prophet
refused and it was only in Medina after the migration that the holy
Prophet could reject the offer of ABU BAKR any longer, just to please
the companion that the offer was accepted, otherwise he would not have
asked for the hand of a girl of only nine, when he had already crossed
the fiftieth year of his age and when there were only a few years before
his departure from this world. And the alliance of HAFSA with the holy
Prophet, was only to please his other companion OMAR. Similarly, came
one after another ladies, some of them far advanced in age imploring the
holy Prophet to give them the honor, privilege and the pride to be the
wives of the Apostle of God. As the Mercy unto the Worlds which he was,
the holy Prophet could not deny the grace asked for, from him.

To know how happy and harmonious was the life of the holy Prophet with
his aged wife KHADIJA, let us hear what Carlyle reports about it: This
young brilliant AYSHA was, one day, questioning him: "Now am not I
better than KHADIJA? She was a widow; old, and had lost her looks: You
love me better than you did her?" "No" by Allah! Answered Muhammad: "No,
by Allah! She believed in me when none else would believe. In the whole
world I had but one friend, and she was that!" SEID, his Slave, also
believed in him: these with his young Cousin Ali, ABU TALEB'S son, were
his first converts. (Carlyle's Sartor Resartus).

It is unimaginable that one who did not think of any other woman
besides his wife, when he was a full-grown youth, to have ever thought
of any woman, in the age of about 55 years: The truth is that none of
the ladies besides Lady KHADIJA, did the holy Prophet desire to marry.
They were either offered by their parents or the ladies themselves
volunteered with prayers to accept them. The holy Prophet, the Mercy
unto the Worlds, could say no to none.

It was perhaps a providential plan to prove to man the weakness in
women that even the Apostle of God who never talked or acted but by the
revealed will of the Lord, having mercifully accepted the ladies in
matrimony, could not escape the miseries that these ladies inflicted on
him which went to the extent that for about a full month or even more,
he discarded all of them and the suspension of his connection with the
ladies was so long, that people even suspected him to have divorced the
ladies and it was at the revelation of verse (66:1) that he resumed his
connections with them. See the interpretation of this in any commentary
of the holy QUR'AN by any commentator of any school of thought,

be he a Muslim or a non-Muslim. This was definitely to show to man that
when even an Apostle of God who is the most balanced head and the
divinely conditioned personality, in spite of maintaining full justice
among them, could not escape the torment of the envy of the women
against each other, how can an ordinary man manage with more than one
wife at a time. Even the sanction of having four wives at a time is only
a sanction under emergencies and exigencies and not an order. The
closing clause of the verse [4:3] clearly says that if equity could not
be maintained then man should take only one wife and the verse further
clearly asserts that man will never be able to maintain equity among the
women, which means that he can take only one at a time. If any one
misinterprets the law to suit his own fancy, law can never be
responsible nor the Law-giver.

It must also be remembered that it was not Islam that started Polygamy
in the world. Most of the ancient prophets and even the great sages in
India who are worshipped as gods or the incarnations of gods, were
polygamous. On the other hand, Islam is the first of all the religious
orders of the world, which controlled and regulated the matrimonial life
of man and woman, protecting the rights of woman and restricted the
unbridled and unlimited polygamy is such a logical and realistic way
that it made man either naturally monogamous or got the lust in man for
sexual enjoyment, fully harnessed, loaded with heavy responsibilities to
his wives, safeguarding the rights of woman. The responsibilities or the
restriction imposed on polygamy are such that the holy QUR'AN clearly
warns man saying it will be impossible for him to bear them. What Islam
has done for woman, no another religion in the world had even thought
of.

**The Holy Quran; Its Compilation**

It is a historic fact acknowledged on all hands that as and when the
holy QUR'AN was revealed in SURAS, in parts of SURAS, and in lonely
verses, it was then and there recorded by the scripts engaged by the
holy Prophet for the purpose. It is also said that at the receipt of
each revelation, the holy Prophet used to direct the scripts to place it
in a certain SURA and thus by the end of the ministry the Book of God,
the holy QUR'AN, was completely compiled in the form of a perfect Book
and before his departure, the holy Prophet declared:

"I have behind amidst you, Two great things, the Book of God and my
'AHLUL-BAIT'. Should ye be attached to these Two, never, never will ye
get astray after me, for verily these Two will never be separated from
each other until they both meet me at the Spring of KAUTHER" (TA., DM.,
SM., and others).

The above declaration of the holy Prophet, the genuineness of which is
universally acknowledged by all the traditionalists, clearly indicated
that at the time of the departure of the holy Prophet there was the holy
QUR'AN in the form a complete Book approved by him. Otherwise the
statement on the part of the holy Prophet that he was leaving the Book
will hold no truth. Secondly, there is the clear undertaking by God
Himself about the preservation of the holy QUR'AN in its originality and
purity, and the holy Book being garded by God Himself:

"Verily We have sent down the Reminder (the holy QUR'AN) and We
Ourselves shall be its Guardian" [15:9]. Who can believe that the above
declared will of the Lord, expresses as a challenge to those who had
swallowed up the previous scriptures, was not fulfilled and any human
hand to have obstructed its fulfillment. Besides, history loudly
declares and it is acknowledged by all the traditionalists that the
following persons had the full text of the holy QUR'AN in the form of a
complete Book which had been read out to the holy Prophet and which he
had approved:

1- ALI IBNE ABI TALIB.
2- ABDULLAH IBNE MAS'OOD.
3- K'AB IBNE OBAI.
4- MA'AZ BIN JABAL.

And the copy of ALI IBNE ABI TALEB contained the explanatory and the
special notes about the external as well the internal meaning of each
verse of the holy Book, given by the holy Prophet. (RN., TIB.)

The question arises that when the above historic facts were known to
one and all in Medina and Mecca and to the world around, where was the
necessity of any fresh endeavor on the part of any one to collect the
holy QUR'AN anew:

It is said that the steps to collect the QUR'AN were first taken during
the regime of the first KALIF and continued during the whole of the
regime of the second KALIF, without any result, for, history says that
the whole collection was deposited with UMMOL MONINEEN AYSHA, the
daughter of the first KALIF and there, a part of the collection was
eaten away by a goat. There is no historic record say that that
collection was ever completed and if so by whom and whether it was ever
put to any use by any one thereafter. What history says is only the
third KALIF took some authentic copy and granted it, his official seal
as the authorized version and commanded that that version of the holy
QUR'AN only shall be followed, and in fact the same version was there in
the use of the people all the while since the departure of the holy
Prophet hence there was not the least murmur or objection to it from any
quarter. Since the copy with the official seal was the one which was
already with them, the AHLUL-BAIT also allowed it to be called the
official version.

It cannot be believed by any Muslim that until about twenty five years
there was no QUR'AN in the world. What was it then that the holy Prophet
had said that he was leaving the Book of God and what happened to the
challenging declaration from God Himself (15:9) God Himself being the
Guardian of the Book which He revealed to the holy Prophet?

There is history which declares that by the time the third KALIF set
his official seal on a copy of the holy QUR'AN and declared it as the
official version of the holy Book, Iran had embraced Islam and the faith
had reached up to Azerbaijan on one side, and up to Egypt on the other,
and the holy QUR'AN was already in the regular daily use of the
people.

Thus the present QUR'AN is the copy the holy Book which was compiled in
its present order and read to the holy Prophet and approved by him and
was in use of the Muslim World since then. No doubt, the copy of ALI
IBNE ABI TALEB contained the special explanatory notes but when Ali
offered that copy, it was rejected by the KALIFATE, however, the notes
of Ali were given out by his successor Imams, after him, to their
disciples which are found in the commentary of the holy QUR'AN based on
the version of the AHLUL-BAIT. Whatever opinion about the holy QUR'AN
any one might have,

but this is the Truth and to say that there was nothing to be called a
Book of God and yet the holy Prophet said that he was leaving it among
the people is a clear calumny or that ALI IBNE ABI TALEB had the
complete copy to it, but he suppressed it and did not allow the public
to have the due benefit to it, and he did not publish it even when he
had the opportunity to do it, when he was the KALIF, is a false charge
against the holy Prophet and the holy Imam Ali and a blasphemy against
God Himself of having taken the undertaking to guard the holy Book and
not fulfilling His Word.

When one speaks of anything of Islam or about Islam, the holy QUR'AN
and the HADITH or the Traditions of the holy Prophet must be kept in
view otherwise what will be said, will be nothing but conjectures of no
value whatsoever.

The holy Prophet says that he has left Two very weighty things and they
will never be separated from each other until they reach him at the
'Spring KAUTHER. If there was not such a book to be called the holy
QUR'AN until the third KALIF compiled it, in 35 A.H. it would mean that
the AHLUL-BAIT were without the Book of God for about twenty five years,
which is against the declaration of the holy Prophet, which can never
be, which is definitely an impossibility, for the word of the holy
Prophet, according to the holy QUR'AN, is the Word of God (53:3-4).

If it be said that of the AHLUL-BAIT had a complete copy of the holy
QUR'AN and the saying of the holy Prophet was not wrong, then the
proposition goes against the wording of the saying which is "I leave
among you" i.e., among the people, and not among the AHLUL-BAIT.
Secondly, if the Book of God was secured with the AHLUL-BAIT, with its
unavailability to the general public, how could the parting advice of
the holy Prophet 'if ye be attached to these Two' be enacted by the
Muslims?

The Truth is that when the holy Prophet gave out the declaration the
'HADEETHU- THAQALIAN' (the tradition of the Two Weighty things) there
was the holy QUR'AN with people, the present copy of it and it is a fact
that the AHLUL-BAIT will always be with the holy Book and the holy Book
in its present external form and with its meanings plain as well as
latent, will be with the AHLUL-BAIT.

If intelligently read, the 'HADEETHU- THAQALAIN', is a clear guarantee
or a proof-positive of the fact about the reverse of the statement
'never will they be separated from each other', which clearly indicates
that as long as the holy QUR'AN is there in the world, there will surely
be one from the 'AHLUL-BAIT' i.e., one of the divinely commissioned
Imams of them. It is a clear guidance that in this age also there is one
from the 'AHLUL-BAIT' the last one of them the holy Imam MUHAMMAD
AL-MAHDI. It is quite a different thing altogether, people believing in
him or not. There is God, as He is not seen some people deny His
Existence, it does not mean that the Existence of God, is really
questionable,

God, the Almighty has kept certain chosen ones of His, like 'KIDR',
'IDREES', and 'JESUS' some people may not believe in this fact but it
does not mean that God also is as helpless as any one of us to be
subjected to the little and the limited knowledge of the laws of nature
which we possess, whereas, He is the Independent Author of nature and
nature is subject to His will, and His will is not subject to nature.
Nature is nothing but the enactment of His Will.

The motive behind such allegations against the position of the holy
QUR'AN is obviously to say that the compilation, the preservation and
the propagation of the holy QUR'AN was not done by the AHLUL-BAIT but by
somebody else. This was another move to deprive the holy ones, of their
divine right. Or it can be a charge against Ali that though he possessed
a copy of the holy Book, he did not make it available to the Muslims,
even when he once came to power as a KALIF.

Some of scholars seem to have been misled when they speak of the number
of the verses reported to have been found in some version of the holy
Book. They have obviously mistaken the explanatory notes might have been
there recorded besides the verses in those versions, owned by the
different people, as the verses themselves. While arguing about the
number of the versed found in any other version with anybody else, one
should also remember the declaration of the Sixth holy Imam 'JA'FAR IBNE
MUHAMMAD AS-SADIQ that the holy QUR'AN is 'what is in between the two
pads', i.e., nothing less and nothing more.

**THE DEVIL'S PLAN FRUSTRATED**

ABU SOFYAN the old arch enemy of Islam and the holy Prophet, thinking
Ali to have been disappointed at others getting into power, position and
authority over the Muslim Empire, deemed it an opportunity to create a
rift in the Muslim rams and to initiate a civil war among the Muslims
themselves. He came to Ali and condemning the conduct of the people
against the legitimate rights of Ali, offered to aid Ali with a huge
army, if only Ali wanted to revolt against the KALIFATE established by
the people. But Ali's reply utterly frustrated the Devil's plan to bring
ruin to Islam and the Muslims. Ali old ABU SOFYAN.

"You wanted to ruin Islam and the Muslims during the lifetime of the
holy Prophet and now also you aim to do the same, but Ali will never
allow you to succeed".

**MIRACLES: THEIR VALUE AND SIGNIFICANCE**

If people, particularly the enlightened minds of the educated ones
among us, only know the meaning of a miracle, its actual value and its
significance in the field of guidance to humanity towards the divine
truth, far from demanding it, they would never think to it. A miracle is
called in Arabic 'MO'JIZA', i.e., an act or manifestation which makes
the world helpless against it, i.e., none in the world other than the
men of God, can work it. a miracle has three definite aspects of its
indication:

1- The need of it relating to the mission of an apostle of God, means
his helplessness to make men realize the truth or understand it, through
the appeal to the faculty of reasoning in the intellect of the people.
Or the unreasonable adamancy on the part of the people to believe in the
bonafide of the man of God being in fact an apostle of God.

2- The demand of it on the part of the people, is an indication of the
lack of the necessary strength of the faculty of reasoning to realize,
understand or recognize the truth by means of their own native endowment
of the intellect, and their readiness to believe in a thing only when
they are made helpless against it.

3- The use of a miracle in leading the people to the belief in a
factor, is to somehow compel them to do it, forcing the belief on them,
though they may like it or not.

The power to work miracles was given to every apostle of God, and the
holy Prophet the last one of them and along with him every one of the
Imams or the divinely commissioned guides from holy House, was given the
power in its totality. All the prophets, preceding the holy Prophet,
freely used the power and worked out miracles for two reasons:

1- The people in the initial or transitory stages of their intellect,
failed to grasp the truth by their limited reasoning and needed
something unusual and impossible to be enacted to convince them of the
bonafide of the claim of the man of God to be the apostle from God. 2-
Since man in those ages, with his yet to develop intellect, was on the
wrong track, the divine mercy willed to stop his straying, even by the
force of the manifestation of the supreme power of the miracles.

When the final message of guidance in its perfect consolidation was to
be given to man with his intellect developed to the extent necessary to
understand the right and the wrong without any difficulty, and when man
had to be given the individual responsibility after receiving the final
guidance, there was no necessity to force the conscience or the
intellect in man to accept anything blindly, merely guided by the
manifestations of miraculous events. When the heaven's decree of 'No
compulsion in faith' 'None shall bear the burden of the other' 'Every
atom of goodness shall have its return and every atom of evil shall be
punished' had to be announced, there was neither the necessity to show
any miracles nor there was any meaning in forcing the truth on man when
man had to be tried with the responsibility of the individual choice of
the right course.

**THE BIGGEST MIRACLES OF THE HOLY PROPHET**

The explanation regarding the meaning of a miracle, and its
significance given above, does not mean that the holy Prophet or the
Imams of His holy House did not show any miracles to their people. The
miracles shown by the previous prophets ended with them and remained
only in the scriptures, but the miracles of the holy Prophet had been of
various kinds. Some of his miracles were timely as those of the previous
apostles- viz.

1- The dead, dried and the rotten tree getting evergreen his touch.

2- The coming of the date palm to him and its returning its original
position, by his command.
3- His foretelling the fate of the Benedict against ABU TALEB, hung in
the KA'BA.
And the innumerable other similar events. Some were those which
continued until his stay on earth viz.
1- The sweet fragrance of his body which every approaches to him
felt.
2- His possessing a shadow-less body.
3- His belt being taken out of his waists, without being untied or
loosened, passing through his body.
4- His seeming taller than the tallest one when walking besides him.
5- His prophecies, besides the revelations from the Lord.
6- His having no education under any mortal, and yet being the
fountainhead of knowledge to be called the 'City of Knowledge'.

And the greatest and the ever-current or the everlasting miracle of
his, is the holy QUR'AN with its ever-current challenge to the world as
a whole, to bring a chapter, or a few verses of its kind, which humanity
till now could not do, nor would it do until the end of the world.
Similarly, every Imam of his holy House worked innumerable miracles in
his own time.


