The State of Affairs : Ali Was Offered
======================================

People and the state of affairs Ali had been offered to rule, can not
be depicted in this brief work. Readers interested to know about the
details of the historic chaos, confusion and turmoil and the unrest that
prevailed when Ali was forced to undertake the KALIFATE, may refer to
TABARI or the other detailed works on the History of the Muslims after
the departure of the holy Prophet. The following quotation from the
famous and the popular work the 'Spirit of Islam' by Justice AMIR ALI
will suffice to give a rough idea of the situation:

"Under OTHMAN there was complete reversal of the policy and the
administration, Merit and faithful services were wholly disregarded. All
offices of trust and emolument were seized by the OMAYYIDS. The
governorships of the provinces were bestowed on men who proved
themselves most inimical to Islam, and the treasury was emptied in their
favor". (IS. AA.).

People had mostly been naturalized in corruption and accustomed to
bribing bargains. Some of the opportunists were laboring under some
false expectations. The corrupt ones thinking Ali to have been
disappointed all the while until the Third KALIF, for not getting the
chance to rule, and now having got it, expected Ali also to canvas
support and the unearned and illegal popularity at a higher scale to
maintain his position by the same favoritism and bribes.

To rule a wicked people, strictly by the Word of God with the strict
maintenance of the scale of justice, is quoting unpopularity and
troubles. Thus Ali had always to face intrigues and revolts against his
godly rule with his uncompromising love of truth, pure void of any kind
of nepotism or favoritism which were unknown to him, and to every one of
the AHLUL-BAIT. Justice AMIR ALI remarks:

"Had Ali been allowed to reign in peace, his virtues, his firmness and
his ascendancy of character would have perpetuated the old republic and
its simple manners". (IS. AA.).

In fact, if Ali had been allowed to have his own ways in the rule and
administration of the affairs of the state and of the people, even after
the chaos and the confusion which ruled the state when he received the
reigns of the rule after the Third KALIF, the world would have enjoyed
the godly kingdom on earth. There would not have been any trouble at all
if the OMAYYIDS the declared enemies of Islam and the holy Prophet, had
not been given the opportunity to rule over the destiny of the Muslims.
The trouble started with MU'AVIAH and was perpetuated by him in the
start of the OMAYYID dynasty of the assassins of the holy ones of the
AHLUL-BAIT, who also murdered their own kith and kin, and were the
debauchees and the drunkards who had broken the records of all kinds of
licentiousness.

The first revolt against the KALIFATE of Ali unanimously set up by the
people as a whole was MU'AVIAH. The Muslim world very well knows as to
who MU'AVIAH was and of what caliber he was. He was the son of ABU
SOFYAN the Arch-enemy of Islam, who was the causative factor behind
every battle that was forced on the holy Prophet. MU'AVIAH, had gathered
strength sufficient to establish his independence in Syria. Thus Ali had
to meet MU'AVIAH in a battle at SIFFIN. The treachery and the deceit
with which ended this battle, is there in the history.

After MU'AVIAH, Ali was force to meet the army under the command of
AYSHA in the battle at BASRA, called the Battle of the Camel (JAMAL).
After the battle of JAMAL, Ali had to meet the forces of the hypocrites
at NAHRAVAN, in which Ali had prophesied that only none will be killed
on his side and only nine will escape death, on the other side and it
happened exactly so.

The godly rule of the Muslim empire, by Ali, the Vicegerent of God, was
not allowed to continue beyond 40 A.H., (i.e., for about four years).

**THE UNIQUE POSITION OF ALI**

Ali's departure from this world was actually the departure of the holy
Prophet, for both of them, were the personification or the
manifestations of one and the same Divine Light. "I and Ali are of one
and the same Divine Light". (SM).

The holy Prophet Muhammad had come to conclude the apostleship and Ali
was sent to inaugurate the Imamate, i.e., the serial of the divinely
commissioned Guides, the Imams, himself being the First of them. Though
the apostleship had concluded with the holy Prophet, the guidance from
God for mankind is an ever continuous process of the divine grace which
has to remain until the end of the world. God had never allowed any gap
to be in the continuity of his guidance. Prophets were sent in all parts
of the world, one after another; where one Prophet was called back,
another one in his place was sent as a prophet or a vicegerent or the
WASI of the retiring one.

"We abrogate not a sign or cause it to be bypassed but We bring one
better than it or one like it; knowest thou not that God over all things
is powerful" [2:106]. The wordings of the above verse of the holy QUR'AN
needs a careful study. It clearly says that when one sign of God is
removed, another better than it or the like of it is brought in its
place. An apostle was sent in the place of the apostle retiring from
this world and each succeeding one, came with a superior message and
with a higher status:

"And these apostles, We have exalted some of them over the others. Of
them are some unto whom God hath spoken and some He hath raised in
degrees…" [2:253].

The Last one God's apostles, under the principle laid down in the above
verse, must naturally be the one with the superior-most message and with
the highest degree in status among the community of the apostles of God.
And when the holy Prophet Muhammad the Superior-most and the Best of
God's creation, has already come, the one that would be brought under
verse (2:106) could not be the better than the Best for the term is
meaningless and hence, he would be the equal to his predecessor the holy
Prophet, and the verse (2:106) has the provision for it, in its words
from the people, Ali the one equal to him in his purity (33:33) and
excellence, as of one and the same divine light and the 'NAFSE' or the
self or the soul of the holy Prophet shown at 'MOBAHALA' under the
command of the verse (5:67), as the 'MAULA', i.e., the Master or the
Lord or the Commander or the Ruler or the Governor in the place of the
holy Prophet, as was the holy Prophet himself.

What is said above is the truth and it is quite a different thing
altogether if any one accepts it or not and truth can never be wiped out
even if the human world as a whole jointly endeavors to do it, for it is
challenge of the Lord that His Light, the Truth, none shall put out:
"They desire to put out the Light of God with their mouths, but God
perfected His Light, though the disbelievers may be averse to it"
[61:8].

**COMPARING ALI TO OTHERS**

Before thinking of comparing Ali to any one besides the holy Prophet,
one should first get himself informed of the unique position of Ali and
the glorious height of his position in divinity identical with the holy
Prophet, as depicted by the holy QUR'AN the Word of God and as open
declaration by the holy Prophet, about him.

In what sense can any one be compared to the one who was of one and the
same Light with the holy Prophet? How could the Brother of the holy
Prophet be equal to any one else? What comparison could any one have
with the one who was the Head of the Body of Muhammad, who was the Soul
to the Body of the Apostle of God, who was of the same blood and flesh
of the holy Prophet? "LAHMOKA LAHMI, DAMOKA DAMI".

How could any one be compared to the 'ASADULLAH' i.e., Lion of God who
stood fast with the cause of God, along with the holy Prophet on the
trying occasions when every one even the closest companions had taken to
their heels and disappeared for days together. Ali was declared the Gate
of the City of Knowledge. How could the Treasurer of knowledge be
compared to the ignorant ones: "Are those who know and who know not,
alike…" [39:9].

The holy Prophet had told Ali: "O Ali thou seest what I see and thou
hearth what I hear…". How could the one who had the divine sight and
insight, as had the holy Prophet, be compared to any one who owns not
this gift of the Lord. "Are the blind and the seeing alike? Or, are
darkness and light equal?" [13:16]. How could Ali, who, though wrongly,
was doubted by some people (the 'NUSAIRIES') to be God Himself, be
compare to any one of those whose bonfide about the sincerity of their
faith itself is questionable.

To go into the details of the exclusive distinctions of Ali in his
excellence which was doubtlessly divine and certainly incomparable with
any other mortal save the holy Prophet, will need a separate volume of
its own. In short it could be said that to attempt to compare Ali to any
one else besides the holy Prophet, will be nothing short of the
bankruptcy of the intellect or the betrayal of one's ignorance of the
position of this holy one in the human race. The same is the position of
Lady FATEMA in her personal excellence, and the divinity of her soul
cannot be compared to any other Lady in the world.

**Hussain Intercedes For Shimr**

It is reported that once, in KUFA, SHIMR was convicted and imprisoned
during the rule of Ali. Through the window of the prison, SHIMR saw
HUSSAIN passing by, and cried aloud:

"O son of the Apostle of God; I intercede on my behalf to thy Father
Ali and get me free from this prison". HUSSAIN went straight to his
Father Ali and appealed for mercy for SHIMR:

Ali asked: "Dost thou know, HUSSAIN, that this is SHIMR, he would be
the murderer of thine and the Torturer of thy family at KARBALA?".
HUSSAIN said: "Father! I am the Son of the Apostle of God who is the
mercy unto the worlds and thy Son who is Commander of the faithful and
the Reliever of the distressed ones and the Son of FATEMA the Lady of
Paradise and the Liberator of the sinners -SHIMR has appealed for mercy
through me- Father! I will act as I should, and let SHIMR act as he
liketh".

Thus SHIMR was granted mercy and the same SHIMR was the one who severed
the head of HUSSAIN in KARBALA and raised it on his lance, and tortured
his family and children.

**HASSAN RECIEVES THE IMAMAT**

When FATEMA had left this world suffering the treachery of the
followers of her father, and Ali had shed the blood of his head, in
prayer in the niche of the Mosque of KUFA and had departed from this
world, HASSAN and HUSSAIN were left alone amidst an atmosphere totally
hostile and murderous to the AHLUL-BAIT.

After Ali, HASSAN his eldest son became the Second Imam and along with
the Imamate, he received also the KALIFATE or the Rule of the Muslim
Empire. But MU'AVIAH the son of ABU SOFYAN the Governor of Syria,
appointed by OMAR and strengthened by OTHMAN, had by this time been
adding strength to his strength and has firmly established himself as an
independent monarch at Damascus, making the place a powerful stronghold
to execute his rebellious plans against the central authority, and had
assumed for himself the sole indefinable paramount power of a despot.

**THE AHLUL BAIT AND THE TEMPORAL POWER**

There is the famous saying of Ali which gives out the actual attitude
of the holy ones of the AHLUL BAIT towards this world and its
enjoyments: "AD-DONYA JEEFATON WA TOLLABOHA KILAB".

"The world is a corpse and its seekers are dogs". Neither the holy
Prophet, nor Ali any one of the other holy Imams were ever inclined
towards the least enjoyment of this world. They were the rays of one and
the same Divine Light destined to enlighten the world during their own
respective times, in their respectively assigned ways to guide humanity
on the right path to raise itself from the abyss of the material
degradation to the glorious heights of the heavenly bliss. None of these
holy ones ever thought of any secular power or any worldly kingdom. The
God's given kingdom to them, was ever with every one of them. Their
throne was the hearts of the believers and they had come to exercise the
godly authority over the sincere believers in God. They had nothing to
do with any enjoyment on earth. The one and the only object of their
life-mission on earth, was service to the Lord in total submission to
Him towards the fulfillment of His will.

HASSAN as an Imam received the reins of the godly kingdom of the faith
and only as a convention had received the KALIFATE after his father. As
Ali, his father, HASSAN had accepted to be a KALIF only in the interest
of the people and his being the KALIF was an honor to the KALIFATE and
not any additional distinction or honor to his holy self. The real
'KHILAFAT' or the Vicegerency of God, succeeding the holy Prophet, was
now with HASSAN and what else could be greater and grander than, the
godly office which he now held.

**THE AGE OF POLITICAL INTRIGUES AND MURDEROUS PLOTS**

With the OMAYYID KALIFATE, started the age of political intrigues tore
has made known to us, of what loins MU'AVIAH had come into this world.
His father ABU SOFYAN had made a mark and earned a special distinction
in the enmity against Islam and the holy Prophet, and MU'AVIAH'S mother
HIND was the woman who tore open the corpse of HAMZA and taking out the
other internal parts of the corpse, she put them on, around her neck.
The factor of heredity both from his father and mother, had its full
play in the issue of ABU SOFAYN and HIND, and MU'AVIAH now after the
departure of Ali from this world, had become an open enemy of the AHLUL
BAIT.

We are not here to go into the dirty details of the political history
of the age, and all the intrigues and the crafty moves of the ruling
authorities, employed to strengthen their hold of the state and the
people. Only a few events directly connected with the miseries of the
AHLUL BAIT, are referred to , to indicate the treachery of the people
against the House of the Apostle of God and the attitude of the holy
Ones during the calamitous age, towards the guidance of the people at
the cost of their own lives.

HASSAN was the eldest son of Ali and FATEMA, and the First grandson of
the holy Prophet. The Muslims World in Medina had seen HASSAN and
HUSSAIN on the shoulders of the Apostle of God on the morn of the
festival day, and in the lap of the holy Prophet on the occasion of the
historic 'MOBAHALA', had declared 'HASSAN and HUSSAIN are the Chiefs of
the youth of Paradise and these were the two for whom had been sent
festive robes from heaven. In-spite of all that the holy Prophet had
declared about these two holy souls, the world had turned totally
hostile to them, and was bent on putting and end to their godly lives on
earth.

Not only did MU'AVIAH aim at owning the paramount power of the KALIFATE
or the rule of the Muslim empire as a whole, exclusively for himself,
but wanted also to have his way cleared off the holy ones of AHLUL BAIT
to perpetuate the kingdom in his family, passing the throne of the
KALIFATE to his son YAZEED, for which he employed several kinds of
crafty means and men. MU'AVIAH now being openly hostile to the House of
the Apostle of God, hired mercenaries to cause mischief in the different
parts of the empire. The intelligentsia among subjects including the
jurists had been purchased by the sate, hence the question of winning
over the general masses was not a problem. Corruption began to rule the
destiny of man.

People opposing the corruption were plundered and mercilessly
massacred. There was no safety or security of life or property
particularly of those who were loyal to the House of the holy Prophet,
who called themselves the SHIAS or the devotees of the AHLUL BAIT.
Preachers were ordered to curse Ali openly in their sermons from the
pulpits. The mischievous move from MU'AVIAH became more and more
intolerable. The people employed to create mischief, acted as devils in
human frames. There was regular bloodshed caused by the agents employed
for the purpose.

The holy Imam HASSAN knew full well that all the troubles were for the
seat of the KALIFATE which he then most reluctantly occupied. The public
which had begged his father AMEERUL MOMINEEN ALI to accept the KALIFATE
and rule the state, by the crafty campaign of MU'AVIAH had tuned
disloyal, deceitful, hostile and treacherous.

HASSAN the holy Imam, the Vicegerent of God on earth, the Successor to
the holy Prophet, whose first concern was the peace and safety of the
people, did not need any contested throne to exercise his divine rights.
Ultimately in the interest of the welfare of the people, the safety of
the public life and property, and the security of the chastity of the
gentle womanhood HASSAN relinquished the KALIFATE to MU'AVIAH under a
written and a signed treaty with the following terms:

1- MU'AVIAH should rule over the state strictly according to the Word
of God the holy QUR'AN as depicted by the traditions of the holy
Prophet.
2- The people should be allowed to enjoy perfect peace and security of
life and property.
3- The persecution of the SHIAS, i.e., the devotees of Ali, should at
once be stopped and they should no more be harassed.
4- MU'AVIAH should not in any way interfere with HASSAN and HUSSAIN or
any one of the AHLUL BAIT.
5- The cursing of Ali on the pulpits, be at once stopped.
6- All prisoners, particularly the SHIAS of Ali, the devotees of the
House of the holy Prophet who had been unlawfully put into prisons and
mercilessly torture therein should at once be released.
7- MU'AVIAH should not appoint any heir to the throne of the KALIFATE
but leave it to the decision of the Muslim public.

**HASSAN MARTYRED**

When the above terms of the treaty agreed to and signed by MU'AVIAH,
HASSAN relinquished the rule of the state to MU'AVIAH and retired into
complete seclusion, having no concern whatsoever with politics or any
affairs of the state and yet he was not left to live in peace even to
spend his life in devotion to God and guiding the people to a godly life
on earth. MU'AVIAH'S main object was to make the way for his son YAZEED
to succeed him to the throne of his monarchical KALIFATE and hence he
was devising plans to see that HASSAN is once for all done with by
putting an end to his life. Justice AMIR ALI in his famous work the
Spirit of Islam, quotes OSBORN in depicting the personality of
MU'AVIAH:

"Astute, unscrupulous and pitiless, says Osborn the first KALIF of the
OMAYYIDS (MU'AVIAH) shrank from no crime necessary to secure his
position. Murder was his accustomed mode of removing a formidable
opponent. The grandson of the Prophet he caused to be poisoned. MALEK
ASHTAR, the heroic lieutenant of Ali, was destroyed in the like way. To
secure the succession of YAZEED. MU'AVIAH hesitated not to break the
word he had pledged".

Though the holy Imam had retired into complete seclusion and did not at
all interfere in any maters of the people in general, totally
unconcerned with the matters of the state, the OMAYYID enmity would now
allow him to live even in seclusion. Several attempts on the godly life
of the holy Imam was made through poison and somehow the attempts did
not prove successful. Ultimately, MU'AVIAH succeeded in hiring a wicked
woman who was a wife of HASSAN, tempting her with the promise to get her
remarried to his son YAZEED the heir to the throne and with rich
presents in cash, to poison HASSAN fatally.

**HASSAN'S ADVICE TO HUSSAIN**

The poison was administered through the drinking water and it was so
strong that no sooner did HASSAN drink the water, than he began vomiting
blood and the bits of his liver and knowing the ultimate result of the
drink he had, HASSNA called his brother HUSSAIN and advised him saying:
"Brother HUSSAIN! I am going. Be thou patient in the will of the Lord
being done. Let my body be interred beside my Grandfather lay beside my
Mother in the BAQI".

It is said that the departing holy Imam even prophesied as to who will
object to his burial beside his Grandfather.

**HASSAN'S BODY SHOT AT**

As the funeral proceeded towards the grave of the holy Prophet, some
OMAYYIDS mounted on horses obstructed and AYSHA appeared, mounting a
mule, shouting that the grave of the holy Prophet was in her house and
she would not allow the grandson of KHADIJA to be buried beside the holy
Prophet. With the shouts from AYSHA a shower of arrows fell on the
coffin. HUSSAIN in the fulfillment of the last wish of his departed
brother, turned the procession of the funeral towards 'BAQI' and when
the body was taken out of the coffin to be laid to rest in the grave,
HUSSAIN finding some of the arrows which were showered at coffin, had
struck holy body of his martyred brother, cried addressing the body
saying:

"I am ashamed of thee O' Brother, that HUSSAIN is alive and seest thy
body wounded and cannot do anything". Oakley, the well-known historian
Scholar in his famous work the Histroty of Saracents, reports:
"MU'AVIAH, therefore, being desirous of leaving the KILAFATE to his son
YAZEED, and thinking that he could not bring his design about, so long
as HASSAN was alive, determined to get rid of him! 'And at last AYSAH
said it was her house and she would not allow him (HASSAN) to be buried
there".

**THE FATE OF THE DEVOTEES OF THE HOUSE OF THE HOLY PROPHET**

MU'AVIAH did not, in the least honor the treaty he had signed. The
SHIAS or the faithful devotees of the House of the holy Prophet were
vigorously persecuted and mercilessly put to death. Those who professed
faith and loyalty to the House of the holy Prophet, particularly to ALIM
or any one found reciting any traditions of the holy Prophet in the
praise of Ali, were caught and mercilessly killed. MEESAM-E-TAMMAR, for
refusing to curse Ali, met a brutal death; he limbs were severed, and
his body was put on the trunk of a tree; nailed to it, and when found
still praising Ali, his tongue was cut off. When the man came to cut his
tongue, MEESAM himself offered his tongue extending it out of his mouth
saying that the prophecy about his meeting the calamity and the end of
it, had been given to him by Ali, and he was glad that the prophecy of
AMEERUL MOMINEEN was being fulfilled. HIJAR-EL-KINDI met a similar fate
for his faithfulness to Ali. The fate of poor Muhammad, son of ABU BAKR,
for after his murder, his body was packed into the belly of an ass
killed for the purpose and the corpse of the poor animal with the body
of MUHAMMAD IBNE ABU BAKR in its belly was thrown into a flaming fire
prepared for the purpose.

The reign of MU'AVIAH, particularly after the Martyrdom of HUSSAN, had
become the age of plunder, pillage, pitiless killing and heartless
murders and inhuman or ruthless persecution of the true Muslims and
particularly those who were attached to House of the holy Prophet, were
mercilessly butchered, and thousands of families migrated to various
places outside the jurisdiction of the OMAYYAD rule.

Not only was the praise of Ali and the AHLUL BAIT, totally banned but a
the same time a free and uncontrolled manufacture of counterfeit
traditions were in full seeing praising the enemies of the House of the
holy Prophet.

**THE FATE OF THE FAITH**

Under the OMMAYYAD desire of establishing an independent OMAYYAD
dynasty with the paramount power over the Muslim empire, not only the
deceitful intriguers and crafty agents were hired but also the Muslim
jurists were purchased to adulterate the doctrines of the faith in favor
of the ruling authority and its supporters.

Thus the Islam-Original was left only with the AHLUL BAIT with whom the
holy Prophet had left the holy QUR'AN and according to his saying if any
one wanted the faith Islam, in its Original form and the holy QUR'AN
with its true interpretation, could have only from his AHLUL BAIT about
the attachment of his holy House, the holy Prophet had said: "The
likeness of my AHLUL BAIT is that of the Ark of Noah. Whosoever got into
it, got saved and whosoever turned away from it, got drowned and
lost".

It is the same Islam-Original which is called SHIISM, distinguished
from the Islam-general corrupted at the hands of the OMAYYIAD fortune
hunters. SHIISM is nothing but the Original Islam as preached by the
holy Prophet and preserved by his AHLUL BAIT without any unwarranted
additions to it or subtractions from it, and nothing else besides the
pure, strict and the original QUR'ANIC faith.

**HASSAN'S SERVICES AND SUFFERINGS**

HASSAN the Second holy Imam was the Fourth of the Martyrs among the
holy ones of the House of the holy Prophet, who are popularly called by
the Muslim World as the 'PANJETANE-PAK' or the holy Five. (MUHAMMAD,
ALI, FATEMA, HASSAN and HUSSAIN). The sufferings of this holy Imam, were
of special intensity and the calamitous and the murderous situation he
had to face, was peculiar in its gravity and the patience and the
fortitude the holy one, displayed was divinely superb and exemplary.

Immediately as the OMAYYIDS gained the paramount power over the Muslim
empire, their first effort was to endeavor as much as they could, to
find fault with some aspect or the other of the practical lives of the
holy members of the AHLUL BAIT and when they could not all succeed in
their wicked venture, they hired corrupt scholars of the age, to
fabricate traditions in favor of their enemies.

**THE TRUTH UNDERLYING THE SEX DIFFERENCE IN THE CREATION**

The native endowment of the sex urge in the animated species of the
creation, is itself, eloquently evident that the object of the ALWISE
Creator of the universe, is to maintain the wheel of procreation going,
in the fulfillment of His Omnipotent will to effect the continuation of
life on earth for an ever progressive development up to a term unknown
to man. The physical world is classified in four commonly realms viz.,
the Mineral, the Vegetable, the Animal, and the Human. Of these four
general classes of the physical existence on earth, excepting the
granite of the minerals, every other specie expands itself, either
through development in itself or by procreation. The botanist scholars
will vouch that sex is not restricted only to the animal and the human
realms but it is also found in the vegetable world. Even among the
minerals there are species which expand themselves through the process
of crystallization.

The sex urge is a native endowment in every living specie, more
apparently evident in the animal and the human kinds. The love of
multiplication, is enacted through the sex urge as a divinely devised
course for the continuity and the development of the specie on earth.
The lack of this urge in any individual is a want, not commendable but
deplorable. A fruitless tree is first selected for fuel, a barren animal
is first chosen for slaughter and an impotent man is not counted among
the males for any manly service, and a issueless man or woman always
prayerfully longs for an issue.

The commend-ability among the human beings regarding the use of this
native endowment is not as to how less it is used or how much it is
neglected but how best and how healthily and to what maximum it has been
utilized in the fulfillment of the will of the Almerciful Donor of the
great gift. The beauty lies not in the total or a partial suppression of
this urge but in the maximum desirable use of it, avoiding successfully
the misuse of the gift.

If this divine gift is used just for the timely sensual enjoyment, it
is a sin and a crime and if the same is used for the healthy procreation
of healthy souls to serve the will of the Lord, i.e., for the
development and the progress of human life on earth, is a reward-able
virtue. The apostles of God, like Solomon, the saints and the sages in
the various parts of the earth, had several wives at a time, not for the
lust of any sexual enjoyment but to supply the souls desired by the Lord
for the continuation and the expansion of humanity on earth. The holy
Prophet Jesus, for want of a male partner in the parental process of his
advent into this world, might not have been given this urge, for the
main purpose of his creation was only to manifest the omnipotent
creative power of the Originator of the universe to prove that He is not
subject to the laws of nature which are known to man but the same laws
being subservient to His Omnipotent will. Our Christian brethren exploit
the want of this native endowment in Jesus, to prove his godhead or his
being the son of God.

The lack or the absence of this urge, is a want and weakness and a want
or a weakness is a defect, and none with any want a defect can ever be
imagined to be God Who is the Omnipotent Perfection Absolute, and
impotency is a defect in nature and hence unnatural, and anything
unnatural or defective, can not be godliness or a commendable virtue.

When God had given the urge for the continuity of His creative will, to
restrain the use of it, or to neglect it, or suppress it altogether, can
never be righteousness. It will be ingratitude to reject the gift of the
Lord and it will be rebellion to act against His object in His vesting
the native endowments in the individual. If any one gifted with sight
destroys his eyes or spends his life without his using sight, it will be
sheer foolishness and not a virtue.

Thus polygamy desired by God if correctly used, will not be a sin but a
commendable virtue and monogamy if undesirably restricted defying the
will of the Lord, or if Celibacy is unnecessarily imposed, it will he no
virtue but a self-imposed deprivation, prone to sinful resorts of
unhealthy and criminal outlets for the native urge.

It is some modern adulterous people, to cheat the innocent women, their
legal wives, that pretend to be monogamous and condemn polygamy, while
in practice, without the knowledge of their wives, that are
ultra-polygamous in their private lives, not minding even if their wives
also become polyandrous behind them. Whereas the god-fearing righteous
ones, who keeping their wives happy and honored, are polygamous only as
God has permitted and even that, only when necessary and otherwise
remain contentedly monogamous.

It was one of the wicked moves of MU'AVIAH that a talk was set afloat
among the public that HASSAN had a large number of wives, frequently
marrying the women and divorcing them, and had scores of children. This
is such a falsehood that the enemy could easily fabricate but none of
them could ever substantiate the allegation through any historic
records. This was one of the OMAYYED moves to cast prejudice in the
minds of the public against the holy Imam and to divert the attention of
the people away from him, and the holy ones of the House of the holy
Prophet.

The modern day writers quote the narrations about this allegation about
HASSAN from the Great SHIA tradition MULLAH BAQUIR MAJLISI and the
others. Before resorting the quote anything on the authority of the
great learned MULLAH, one should know that the great MULLAH had never
said that whatever he has quoted is a gospel truth. The collection of
the traditions, he has made, is a store of food for the thought of those
busy in the scrutiny of the traditions of the holy Prophet, and it is up
to the seekers of the knowledge of the AHADEES (tradition), to pick out
the genuine ones from the collection and from the false ones to know the
turn of the minds which effected the counterfeit sayings. It is a fact
universally acknowledged by all scholars that the great work of the
collection of the traditions by MULLAH BAQUIR-E- MAJLISI named 'BIHAR
UL-ANWAR' or the Oceans of Lights, contain in its tradition:

SAHEEH - Correct GHALAT - wrong or false
M'OTABAR - reliable GHAIRA M'OTABAR - unreliable
MUSTANAD - certified GHAIRA MUSTANAND - uncertified
MUSALSAL - continuously related GHAIRA MUSALSAL - not

Continuously related The narration about the number of wives is nothing
but a false allegation against the holy Imam to make him unpopular for
none of the reports, gives the names of all the wives and the names of
all his children. The stories are mere folklore fabricated and
purposefully made current to level a calumny against the holy Imam.

If the holy Imam HASSAN had in fact married such a large number of
wives, it is also said at the same time that he divorced also a large
number. HASSAN being the Vicegerent of God on earth would never have
been unjust to have married unnecessarily and to have divorced any women
unreasonably. It clearly indicated that as he is reported to resemble
his Grandfather the holy Prophet, in having unfaithful wives as had the
Apostle of God, whom he had to discard for about a month until the
revelation of the SURA-E-TAHREEM (SURA No. 66). The fact that HASSAN was
poisoned by none else other than one of his wives hired by MU'AVIAH,
proves the kind of women, some of his wives were.

**THE SULHI-HUDAIBIAH REPEATED**

The historic SULH (or Truce) was concluded at HUDAIBIAH by the holy
Prophet, who having gone to Mecca had to return content with the Treaty.
People taking it to be a defeat of the purpose of the holy Prophet,
doubted even in the bonafide of his claim to the apostleship saying:
"Never did I doubt the apostleship of the holy Prophet as I did at
HUDAIBIAH".

But the Treaty of HUDAIBIAH later proved to be one of the greatest
stratagems which only a divine, like the holy Prophet could have struck,
and it proved to be of invaluable worth and value to the establishment
and the progress of Islam and without which Islam could not have
proceeded further. The same thing happened with HASSAN. People doubted
the wisdom in the Truce or the Treaty he had entered into with MU'AVIAH.
The Treaty of HASSAN with MU'AVIAH proved of the same value and worth as
did the SULHE HUDAIBIAH concluded, by his Grandfather the holy Prophet.
Without the SULH or the Truce which HASSAN concluded, the SHIAS of Ali,
the devotees of the AHLUL BAIT, the advocates of the Original Islam
would been totally wiped out and there could have been no opportunity
for the holy Imam and his devotees to preserve the Original Faith and to
carry it further, upon this day, which today is identified with the
caption of 'SHIA'ISM'. Besides there would not have been the least peace
and security in the land for life and the property of the gentle public,
and the gentle womanhood would have suffered the worst at the hands of
the devilish forces let loose to gain the paramount power of the
KALIFATE.

It must be remembered that the aim or the object of the lives of the
men of God, particularly the apostles, is not to own any temporal power
in earth. Their first and the foremost concern is to guide man on the
right path of thought and action, and to do the best possible to
establish peace in earth and maintain it. Men of God had been on the
earth to act as demanded by the circumstances:

ZUL-QARNAIN:

Was sent to conquer some mischief - mongering and blood -shedding
nations

JOB:

To manifest divine patience and submission to the divine will.

DAVID:

To show the standard of justice

SOLOMON:

To own power and dominion as a godly monarch

ZACHARIAH & JOHN:

As the sincere supplicants to the Lord

MOSES:

The National Leader of the Israelites to lead them out of the clutches
of Pharaoh and put them on the path of godliness

JESUS:

To re-establish the Mosaic Law and manifest passive resistance to
aggression

MUHAMMAD (THE LAST APOSTLE):

To consolidate the religious Truth and give the Final Code for faith
and its practice.

ALI (THE FIRST IMAM):

To help the Last Apostle of God in establishing Islam and to dissipate
the highest knowledge of the QUR'ANIC Philosophy and the Divine Truth

HASSAN (THE 2nd IMAM):

To preserve the faith by Ideal patience

HUSSAIN (THE 3rd IMAM):

To re-establish Islam with his matchless sacrifice the 'ZIBHE AZEEM'.

**A LIAR HAS NO MEMORY**

It is a well-known fact that liars cannot remember their own lies. The
fabulous stories about the number of the wives HASSAN had married and
divorced, prove the truth in the proverb that Liars have no memory. The
reports about the number of the wives of HASSAN are so funny and
fabulous that even a schoolboy will laugh at the self-contradictory
stories, and the ridiculous number reported. One says that HASSAN had
married fifteen wives, the other says no, Seventy-five, another one says
hundred and seventy, the fourth one says they were two hundred and fifty
and the sixth one says three hundred. Any one will only be puzzled and
none would ever believe such cock and bull stories. It is quite evident
that those who were bribed with a greater sum gave a greater number and
those who were given less money gave the lesser number.

**HAD WOMANHOOD GONE MAD**

It is not difficult but impossible to believe that womanhood as a
whole, in KUFA had gone mad to rush to HASSAN continuously in-spite of
knowing the fate of the hundreds of the divorced ones of their own sex.
Or was it that history repeated the state of affairs with the holy
Prophet after the departure of Lady KHADIJA, when though he had crossed
the age of fifty, girls of even the tender age of nine and eleven were
offered to him and ladies who were far advanced in age coveted to be the
wives of the holy Prophet had become the Fourth KALIF and people knew
that HASSAN would succeed his father as the Fifth KALIF, was it that
women in order to be the wife i.e., the queens of the ruler of the
Muslims Empire, coveted to gain the royal positions. In fact all the
allegations are merely the vicious fabrications of the corrupt ingenuity
employed for the wicked purpose to blackmail the holy Imam.

THE FALSE ALLEGATION AGAINST HASSAN AS WELL AS ALI

The fabrication has gone to the extent of saying that HASSAN had
married so many and divorced so many women that Ali preached in the
Bazaars of KUFA advising women not to marry hi son HASSNA, for he is the
greatest divorcer of the women, and not content with the Bazaar
preaching's of his against his own son, Ali even went to the extent of
preaching openly from the pulpit the same thing. It must be remembered
that Ali was openly cursed from the pulpits and any one who refused to
curse Ali was put to death. The heartless treatment meted out to MEESAM
has already been given above, and this story of Ali's preaching against
his son, HASSAN'S conduct, is only in continuation of the same
propaganda against Ali, for an intelligent reasoning mind will say that
the preaching of Ali against HASSAN is not in fact so much against
HASSAN as it is against Ali himself, for knowing the moral defect in
HASSAN and himself making it known to the public his own knowledge of
it, Ali handed over the charge of the Imamate to HASSAN.

It is for the readers now to think how far and in what all ways the
propaganda against the holy ones of the House of the holy Prophet was
carried on and how patiently the holy ones suffered all the calamities
against the divine purity of their godly selves. None in the Muslim
World as a whole, can deny the fact that HASSAN is one of the holy AHLUL
BAIT who have been purified by God (33:33). He is one of those holy Five
of the historic mysterious event of the KISA (or the Mantle) whose
perfect purity was employed on occasion of the historic MUBAHALA the
Spiritual contest with the Christian disbelievers of NAJRAN.

In-spite of all the efforts to do the worst possible to blackmail these
holy ones, every attempt failed and only proved like throwing dust to
cover the sun, or spitting on the sun which brings back the spit on the
face of the spitter himself. Though the people had turned hostile to
these holy ones, but the stamp of their personal divinity on the hearts
of the people could not be removed. And when HASSAN was martyred, even
the worst of his enemies shed tears and were struck with sorrow. But
M'UAVIAH on getting the news of HASSAN'S passing away, was jubilant.

HASSNA THE THIRD 'MUHAMMAD'

If the following is in fact the Word of God: "Muhammad is but an
apostle" [3:144]. And if the following Word of God bears any truth in
it:

"He (the holy Prophet), speaketh not of his own inclination but a
revelation revealed (unto him)" [53:3-4]. The holy Prophet's word as
well as action, his conduct and character, his love and hatred, his life
personal and private as well as social and public, must necessarily and
essentially be apostolic and divine, and his word must be the revealed
will of the Lord given expression through the words uttered by him.

Similarly, if it is true that the holy Prophet had said that the First,
the Middle, the Last and Every one of his 'AHLUL BAIT' was Muhammad,
undoubtedly HASSAN was the Third Muhammad and HUSSAIN was the Fourth and
son on until the Last of the holy Imams of the holy House. It is
certainly true that God has created a wonderful House, of His own chosen
ones of the family of Abraham WITH Personalities of amazing purity of
body and soul for the guidance of mankind on earth and certainly such
perfected ones of His Own, must have been the First and the Foremost of
His Creative Will, i.e., the Objects of His creation, in the Arc of
Descent and the Last in the Arc of Ascent as the Greatest Luminaries of
His Creative Art:

"verily the First House appointed for the guidance of men is the one at
'BAKKA' (Mecca) blessed and a guidance for the world" [3:96]. The next
verse identifies the houses of the members of the above House:

"(There are) the houses in which God has permitted to be exalted and
His name glorified. Therein do (they) glorify Him in mornings and
evenings, the men whom neither merchandise or selling diverts them from
the remembrance of God" [24:36-37]. It is about the members of His Own
appointed House that God has announced:

".. God only willeth to keep away un-cleanliness from you O' people of
the House and to Purify you a (thorough) purification" [33:33]. And
certainly none else but only Ali, as belonging to those mentioned in
verse 24:37, could keep himself undisturbed in his supplication to the
Lord while the JARRAH, i.e., the surgeon cut open his foot and took out
the point of the arrow stuck into it. similarly did HASSAN and HUSSAIN
remain undisturbed in their godliness while facing the worst persecution
and the wholesale murder of their dear ones and their faithful devotees.
The holy Prophet had told to Ali:

"Thou hearest whatever I hear and thou seest whatever I see". HASSAN
proved his being of the same quality of the caliber of his father and
possessed the same divine excellence, for it is reported that HASSAN
used to hear what was revealed to his Grandfather the holy Prophet, by
the Messenger Angel, and used to come to his mother, the Lady of Light,
and would smile and relate it to her father the holy Prophet who would
embrace HASSAN and kiss him and say: "He is of me and I am of him". This
was HASSAN the Second Imam and the Brother of HUSSAIN.

**HASSAN'S PATIENCE: THE REASON FOR IT**

If is asked why did not HASSAN handle the sword as did HUSSAIN and why
did not HUSSAIN exercise patience as did his elder brother HASSNA? The
answer is: That MU'AVIAH though a rebel against the established KALIFATE
which was only a temporal power, and to own it, he had played havoc, and
though religion was continuously undergoing corruption and adulteration,
but the ruling authority had not stopped to the deliberate YAZIDIAN
infidelity and the open disbelief in the bonafide of the holy Prophet
and the truthfulness of Islam. Be it known that neither the holy Prophet
nor the godly AHLUL BAIT had come into the world to wield their swords
for any territorial ambition or to own any temporal power by force. The
sword and the strength God had given to these the holy ones, was for use
in the cause of God, on the occasions divinely destined for the purpose,
which they knew beforehand.

As HUSSAIN re-established Islam rescuing it when it was on the verge of
being annihilated for ever, HASSAN maintained it, in an equally
effective way, from getting wiped out, by avoiding the true and the
faithful devotees of the faith the SHIAS being totally wiped out to
existence and the faith getting extinct with them. If HASSAN had not
pulled on with his ideal godly patience he would have witnessed the end
of Islam with his own eyes through the wholesale slaughter of the
faithful devotees and the advocates of the faith through whose existence
the Islam-Original could be maintained and spread in the world, though
it was done under the most hostile and the murderous persecutions.

According to the situations, did act the two holy Imams, HASSAN and
HUSSAIN. HASSAN should not have used the sword and HUSSAIN could not
remain patient, both the holy ones acted as they did, in the interest,
of the Religion of God and godliness on earth.

Ali, the ASADULLAH, the Lion of God, the Ever Triumphant Matchless Hero
of Islam, who had no match for his godly strength, prowess and bravery,
when occasion demanded it to save Islam, allowed himself to be tied in
ropes and dragged by the cowards of the people, HASSNA followed the
footsteps of his father to do the same. If any occasion had only
demanded it, HASSAN would certainly have risen equal to the occasion as
did his father during the time of the holy Prophet.

The holy Prophet being the Apostle of God the greatest godly advocate
of Peace on earth who had come to establish peace in the true meaning of
the word, had to use the sword when it was unavoidable to save the
Religion of God from being wiped out by the disbelievers. HUSSAIN
followed the footsteps of his Grandfather in this regard as in any
other, to re-establish the same faith when infidelity intended to
destroy it for ever and when the Muslim World was being misled and taken
far astray from the right path, with the open declaration of the
disbelief in the apostleship of the holy Prophet and the holy QUR'AN
being the revealed Word of God.

Both the holy Imams, HASSAN and HUSSAIN, had acted duly according to
their respective divine assignments. Before doubting in the divine
wisdom in HASSNA'S patience and his treaty with MU'AVIAH, one should
remember that the people doubted even in the bonafide of the holy
Prophet when he concluded the SULHE HUDAIBIAH (the Treaty of HUDAIBIAH).
The godly ones only know the will of the Lord they executed and man
always criticized it.

**HUSSAIN TAKES CHARGE OF THE IMAMATE**

Before breathing his last, HASSAN handed the charge of the Imamate to
his brother HUSSAIN. HUSSAIN was now the Third Imam, the Vicegerent of
God on earth, in the place of the holy Prophet Muhammad. The world was
now without the Apostle of God. FATEMA the holy Lady of Light had been
martyred. Ali and HASSAN had also left the world. HUSSAIN was left alone
in an atmosphere totally hostile, for MU'AVIAH had successfully
purchased the public support to execute his plan of placing YAZID on the
throne of the KALIFATE, to perpetuate the rule of the Muslim Empire in
his family and thus to start the OMAYYID dynasty of the KALIFS. All
possible efforts to bring the people and keep them under the complete
control of the throne, were employed. Corruption and godlessness ruled
the destiny of the people.

As Ali had done during the reigns of the first three KALIFS, and HASSAN
after MU'AVIAH usurping the paramount power, HUSSAIN also following the
footsteps of his father and brother, had retired into seclusion in
Medina. HUSSAIN'S main concern was supplication to the Lord and acting
as the heavenly torch of the Divine Light of guidance towards God and
godliness.

HUSSAIN was now the godly commissioned guardian of the holy QUR'AN, its
teachings and its correct practice. He was the Vicegerent of the Lord
holding the Kingdom of God on earth. It is surely ridiculous even to
imagine HUSSAIN'S ever thinking of, or aspiring for, any temporal power
or authority, when he already held the Imamate divinely assigned to the
House of the holy Prophet and as such was God's Deputy on earth, he had
nothing to do with the politics of the state or the political affairs of
the people.

HUSSAIN had already been informed of every detail of the divine
assignment to him and he knew every step of the march of his life up to
its end. The holy Prophet had already informed HUSSAIN of all that was
in store for him to meet, and when and where each event will take place.
It was only with the knowledge of the lot to befall HUSSAIN, his father
Ali had desired to have a son like ABBAS. It was only in view of the
great task of re-establishing Islam by HUSSAIN with the great sacrifice,
i.e., the 'ZIBHE AZEEM', the holy Prophet had said: "HUSSAIN is of me
and I am of HUSSAIN". Now waiting for the hour to fulfill his covenant
with the Lord to save His Religion Islam and to secure His Final Word to
man, the holy QUR'AN, for ever

HUSSAIN passed a quite life of supplication, discharging the duties of
the Imam in the place of his Grandfather the holy Prophet.


