The Ruling Power and the Ahlul Bait
===================================

There is one thing about the holy members of the House of the holy
Prophet which needs mention here, that no ruling power or any
monarchical pomp. Power or glory could ever create the least impression
on the godly minds of these holy ones. No threat or terror, could ever
create the least awe in them to subjugate their godly inclinations and
their attitude to this life. Neither Ali could be subjected by the first
three KALIFS nor was HUSSAN in the least impressed by the awe-striking
threats or the pomp, power and the monarchical glory of MU'AVIAH.
HUSSAIN, in this regard was bolder still, for whenever MU'AVIAH
atrocities affected the human rights or the interest of the safety and
the security of life and the integrity of the people, HUSSAIN never in
the least hesitated in reprimanding MU'AVIAH. Whenever HUSSAIN heard of
any godly soul particularly of the devotees of the House of the holy
Prophet, suffering any unprovoked aggression, he was moved to tears for
the helpless souls, and when HIJR BIN ADI-EL-KANDI was mercilessly
killed, HUSSIAN did not spare admonishing and condemning MU'AVIAH
through open, written communications from him, warning him against the
wrath, of God.

**A WONDERFUL ACT OF PURE GODLINESS**

MU'AVIAH, governor of Iraq, ABDULLAH'S wife ZAINAB was a pious lady of
noted beauty. The exaggerated accounts of the beauty of the good lady
had reached even Damascus. YAZID the son of MU'AVIAH heard it and at
once his voluptuous mind naturalized in licentiousness determined to
somehow own the wife of ABDULLAH for his own. All possible ways and
means of deceit and temptations to induce ABDULLAH to divorce his wife
went in vain.

MU'AVIAH to please his son, though of a very crafty device. ABDULLAH
was at once summoned to the capital. When ABDULLAH came to Damascus, he
was received with unusual and extraordinary honors and regards and was
housed in a palatial abode luxuriously furnished particularly for him.
On the third day of his arrival, ABDULLLAH was offered to wed MU'AVIAH
daughter, to which ABDULLAH resented, but the offer was also with the
threat of losing his position as well as his life against any refusal.
Poor ABDULLAH was forced to accept the offer. The next day of his
acceptance, ABDULLAH was asked to divorce ZAINAB, saying that the
daughter of the Ruler, a princess, could not have any rival to her bed.
ABDULLAH was forced to write a letter of divorce to ZAINAB. When
ABDULLAH had executed the divorce, the very next day after it, he was
not given even an interview with MU'AVIAH, saying that the offer to wed
his daughter was only an offer and had been withdrawn.

The letter of divorce was sent to ZAINAB through a special messenger
with YAZID'S offer to wed her, ZAINAB was then at Medina when ABUD DARDA
the messenger for MU'AVIAH arrived there.

God is always there to protect the interest of the righteous ones when
they are unjustly aggressed by any tyrant. ABU DARDA before going to
ZAINAB, went first to pay his regard to HUSSAIN the holy Imam and
intimated to him the object of his visit to Medina. HUSSAIN hearing the
painful story, told ABUD DARDA to convey his own (HUSSAIN) offer to
ZAINAB along with that of YAZID'S. ZAINAB receiving the letter of her
divorce, began to sob. When the offers of YAZID and HUSSAIN were
conveyed to her she readily preferred the holy Imam, and got herself
wedded to him.

When the disappointing story was conveyed to MU'AVIAH and YAZID, it
enraged both the father and the son. ABDULLAH was dismissed from the
governorship, and all his property in Iraq and elsewhere was confiscated
and he was rendered destitute. Poor ABDULLAH having lost his wife, his
post, and all his properties, did not know what to do, and at last he
walked all the way from Iraq to Medina to recover from ZAINAB the money
he had left with her. Reaching Medina he went to the residence of the
holy Imam. Now ZAINAB could talk to ABDULLAH only from behind the
screen; neither he could see her nor she could look a him. Both, stood
quietly shedding tears, when HUSSAIN suddenly appeared and removed the
screen from between them saying:

"ABDULLAH! God is my witness, not a glance of mine has fallen on thy
wife. ZAINAB is still they safe as was she before, for the divorce under
compulsion was no divorce and my wedding her was no wedding. I wedded
were just to protect her and restore her unto thee. Take her with thee
and go happy".

Both, ABDULLAH and ZAINAB were stunned with tears of joy in their eyes
and returned home praising the holy Imam and cursing those who had
wickedly devised to separate them.

**THE SITUATION THAT DEMANDED ANOTHER 'MUHAMMAD' TO RESCUE THE CORRECT
FAITH**

It was the Seventh Century A.D., Europe was still a wilderness. Rome
and Greece were still pagan, the Christian creed emanated from the
welding of the monastic Christianity with the pagan cult of Rome,
effected by King Constantine of Rome, after about 300 years after the
departure of Jesus was still ignorant of the elementary knowledge about
the world. Its knowledge even about the earth was childish for even
centuries later it had yet to pelt stones on Columbus when he told them
that the earth was round. This was the state of Europe when Islam had
already preached the truth about the Universe as a whole; the truth
which even to this day is the highest and the modern scientists with all
their claims of wonderful advancement and amazing discoveries, have yet
to arrive at the Islamic disclosures already made through the holy
QUR'AN. America was yet to be discovered and it was the part of the
earth unknown to man.

Africa was called the Dark Continent. Man there had yet to learn the
necessity to cover its body and was a nude. India was a country with
petty princes ruling small states drowned in idolatry rituals extending
to human sacrifice. China was led by the impracticable and emotional
creed of Buddhism; of the total renunciation of the earthly life which
even the people claiming to be Buddhist by creed, could not as a whole
practice.

The only hope lay in the most practicable and the most reasonable
Faith, Islam, and its practice, but, with the alienation of the AHLUL
BAIT from the paramount authority over the affairs of the people,
started the corruption in the faith and with OMAYYADS on the throne,
began the ever progressive adulteration of the Faith and the unwanted
innovations in its practice. The only hope of the world getting on the
right track was in Islam, but with YAZID on the throne declaring
disbelief in the bonafide of the apostleship of the holy Prophet and the
holy QUR'AN being the revealed Word of God, all hopes of the redemption
of humanity form the abyss of material degradation and the lack of the
truth about the real Creator of the Universe and the position and the
commitment of man in it, were at stake.

In short, the same atmosphere of darkness was once again, impending to
shroud the world which prevailed half a century ago and which had
demanded the advent of the holy Prophet. But no apostle was yet to come,
for the final code of the necessary knowledge and discipline for man on
earth been given in the holy QUR'AN. However, the situation demanded on
like Muhammad to brave the forces of falsehood and re-establish the
Truth once again so that never may it again be shaken or disturbed.

When no apostle was to come, the only one to play the role of an
apostle was HUSSAIN, the Imam of the age, who was in the place of the
Apostle, the Vicegerent of God on earth. Only in view of the unique
position of his grandson HUSSAIN, and the duty identical with his own,
which HUSSAIN was destined to discharge, that the holy Prophet had
said:

"HUSSAIN is of me and I am of HUSSAIN".

It is for this occasion of the imperative demand for the rescue of the
True Faith that the All-Knowing Lord had reserved the 'ZIBHE AZEEM'".
Letters inviting HUSSAIN to handle the situation, began to pour in from
all parts of the country, particularly from KUFA, imploring HUSSAIN to
proceed to guide the people. There were waiting to act under his
command. But the invitations contained the taint of political knew and
territorial ambition and HUSSAIN was not for it at all. He knew the Hour
was getting nigh and waited for a call pure and plain exclusively for
God and godliness.

HUSSAIN was fully conscious of the heavenly object of his very advent
in the world being nothing but to meet this situation and to rescue
Islam, God's revealed faith, to elevate mankind to the glorious heights
of the heavenly bliss. HUSSAIN knew the godly task of the divine
assignment to him. He lived all these days in waiting for the hour to
act as per his commitment to the Lord. He also knew when to respond to
the call from the people. If HUSSAIN had any desire to gain any temporal
power, the hundreds, rather thousands, of the letters with the strongest
promises and assurances from the people to march under his command, were
more than sufficient to stimulate an ambitious mind. Like his father
hated the world as a rotten bone of a leper's corpse in the mouth of a
dog.

If HUSSAIN had taken any initiative to act of his own accord at the
invitations from the people, with the assurance of the armies ready to
act under his command, the sincerity or the purity of his purpose would
have been marred by his intention of getting misunderstood by the world
and doubted by the general public attributing to it selfishness and
ambition to gain the political power for himself. He waited for a call
from the situation purely in the name of God for the godly cause of
saving the faith one day which he knew, was sure to come from the
people.

**HUSSAIN PROPHESIES HIS SON'S MARTYRDOM**

HUSSAIN'S second son Ali (who after the tragedy of KARBALA became known
as ALI-E-AKBAR) resembled the holy Prophet Muhammad so much in all his
physical features that people from distant places, desirous of having
again a view of the departed Apostle of God, the holy Prophet Muhammad,
visited Medina to have a look at ALI-E-AKBAR. It is reported that once a
party of such visitors had come to Medina from Egypt and having seen
ALI-E-AKBAR were amazed at the wonderful beauty of the young Ali and his
remarkable resemblance to the holy Prophet. HUSSAIN, the holy Imam,
asked them as to how much they would like to have a son like Ali, they
submitted:

" O' Son of the holy Prophet, we as the humble beings and sinners to
have such a great blessing from God?". HUSSAIN asked as to how much they
would value it if they were blessed by God with such a handsome son.
They submitted: "O' Son of the holy Prophet, if we get such a gift from
God, we will not allow the child to walk on the ground. We would prefer
a lance piercing our eyes instead of nay thorn pricking his foot".

HUSSAIN said:

"Know ye all that when this very same handsome son of mine will be in
the prime of his youth in the eighteenth year of his age, I will offer
him in the way of the Lord at KARBALA, myself witnessing his beautiful
breast pierced with a lance". The people could not control shedding
tears.

**The Call From The Governor**

In 60 A.H., it was night when the news of the death of MU'AVIAH was
conveyed to Valid the Governor of Medina on behalf of YAZID the son of
MU'AVIAH who had succeeded as the KALIF at Damascus. Besides the
intimation about the death of MU'AVIAH, the letter contained orders to
Valid to demand BAIBTH, i.e., allegiance particularly from HUSSAIN and
if HUSSAIN refused to pay it, to cut off his head and send it to YAZID,
at Damascus. On receipt of the letter from YAZID, Valid immediately
called his servant and sent word inviting HUSSAIN, the holy Imam, to
visit him. It was night and HUSSAIN was in the Mosque when VALID'S
servant came to him with the message inviting HUSSAIN to the Government
House. The moment HUSSAIN heard of the call from the Governor, he
suddenly exclaimed that MU'AVIAH had died.

In reply to the call HUSSAIN sent word to the Governor Valid saying, it
was too late and he was in the Mosque and he will visit him the next
morning.

HUSSAIN returned home with the news to his family about the invitation
he had from the Governor. The first to get worried were his sisters
ZAINAB and OMME KULTHOOM. ZAINAB extremely worried immediately asked
HUSSAIN:

"What has the Governor to do with us, Brother?" HUSSAIN Replied:

"The will of the lord is being done sister dear! But worry not now, for
the day of worry for thee is yet to come!". The next day when HUSSAIN
prepared to go to the Governor, the HASHIMITES youth and particularly
ABBAS, submitted to the holy Imam saying: "Master! We will accompany
thee fully prepared with our swords to meet any deceitful eventuality,
never will we allow thee to go alone to the crafty servants of the
crafty ruler". HUSSAIN said:

"Brethren! I fully appreciate your offer but the Governor has invited
only me it behooves not me to take others with me uninvited". The most
worried sister of HUSSAIN, ZAINAB implored saying: "Brother dear! I will
not allow thee to go alone, take these men with thee. I will send my
sons though young to accompany thee. Take ABBAS with thee Brother".

HUSSAIN at last agreed but reaching the entrance of the Governor's
house, he told the HASHIMITES to stay at the door watchful and if they
hear HUSSAIN talking unusually aloud they may get in to him.

As HUSSAIN entered the court, it was customary in those days that when
a dignitary visited another dignitary, a slave of his visitor always
accompanied him. After entering the court, HUSSAIN remembered that he
had not brought any one with folded hands, like a slave. HUSSAIN said:
"ABBAS, I had told thee to be out". ABBAS immediately replied: "Master!
Leave thou, thy shoes, ABBAS will take them and depart and return when
thou neediest them. Valid stood erect in regard for the holy Imam and
with all respect and regard offered him the seat besides him and read
out the letter he had received from YAZID and when he reached the matter
asking him to send the severed heard of HUSSAIN, if HUSSAIN refuses to
pay allegiance, Valid gave the latter to HUSSAIN to himself read the
passage. HUSSAIN read it and smiled and said:

"O' Valid invite the Muslims of Medina tomorrow and ask them if they
say that I should pay allegiance to YAZID, let us then decide". Valid
readily accepted the holy Imam's reply but MARWAN the old enemy of Islam
who was expelled by the holy Prophet out of Medina, seated there,
addressing Valid said: "Let not HUSSIAN go out of thy grip now, lest the
fox is out of the four walls of thy court thou wilt not approach the
dust behind it. cut off his head now and here let not this unique
opportunity go for thou wilt never get it again".

When MARWAN uttered the above insulting word HUSSAIN stood up to depart
from the Governor and hearing the insulting words of MARWAN, HUSSAIN the
son of Ali the Lion of God put his hand on his sword and exclaimed
aloud: "O' enemy of God! Thou or this man (Valid) to touch my head?".
MARWAN immediately got up and ran away and the HASHIMITE youths who
stood restless and anxious, hearing the voice of the holy Imam, rushed
into the court with drawn swords and the first of them all was ABBAS.
HUSSAIN immediately commanded restraint and had not HUSSAIN controlled
the situation, the matter would have been settled then and there, which
no bounds, and brought all of the HASHIMITES back home.

**HUSSAIN DECIDES TO LEAVE MEDINA**

HUSSAIN decided to leave Medina. Learning about the decision of the
holy Imam, people in groups approached him asking the reason for his
decision to leave the holy city. HUSSAIN said that his refusal to pay
'BAIAT' to YAZID, will certainly be defied and YAZID will not spare
shedding blood for it, and he did not like the holy city of his
Grandfather, the holy Prophet, to become the battlefield and the poor
people of the city to suffer the wholesale massacre the tyrant's forces
will enact. Poor people, old and young, men and women, and even young
children will perish and the city will be ruined. Secondly, if HUSSAIN
remained there, later people would say, why did not HUSSAIN leave the
place when he knew the enemy would not leave him un-chased. Hence he had
decided to go to Mecca and after the pilgrimage to decide what to do.
HUSSAIN visited the shrine of his Grandfather and leaning on it said:

"O' Grandfather dear! Seest thou my fate after thee at the hands of the
people who profess to follow thee. I leave thy city and thy grave, not
of my own accord but forced by the circumstances. Pardon thou thy
grandson for going away from thee".

While saying this a drowse dawned on HUSSAIN and HUSSAIN saw in a
vision his Grandfather standing out form his grave and telling him:
"HUSSAIN my dear! Hasten thou toward Iraq; the Lord willeth to see thee
martyred and thy Grandfather is with thee'.

HUSSAIN arose from the holy grave and then visited his Mother's grave
and took leave of it and then visited his Brother HASSAN'S grave and
taking leave of it, returned home and started preparations for the
journey. From every house in Medina, particularly of the HASHIMITES, was
heard the laments of the people for losing the holy Imam from the city.
Ladies in groups visited ZAINAB and in surprise asked her the reason for
the decision of the holy Imam to leave the place. ZAINAB could only say
that it is God's will that her Brother HUSSIAN, the holy Imam, was
allowing to be done and none had any voice in it.

The youth of the city came to meet the children of HUSSAIN with tears
in their eyes and asking when they would return, to which the young
souls said: "If God wills it. none could say when".

HUSSAIN'S sister UMME KULTHOOM being a widow resided with HUSSAIN and
ZAINAB who had been married to ABDULLAH BIN JAFFAR, rushed to her
husband and implored for permission to accompany HUSSAIN, saying that
she would not live without HUSSAIN in the city. ABDULLAH granted the
request and ZAINAB returned and prepared to leave with HUSSAIN.

FATEMA SUGHRA, a daughter of HUSSAIN was sick with high fever and
HUSSAIN the Guardian of the Word of God, could not act against it and
thus had decided to leave the young daughter at home with his
grandmother OMME SALAMA the faithful wife of the holy Prophet who alone
remained attached to the House of the holy Prophet. The young soul
FATEMA SUGHRA, anxious to accompany her parents and not be left in the
deserted house, was restlessly imploring her father the holy Imam who
was unable to take her against the Word of God. The poor daughter of
HUSSAIN in her sickness was requesting every member of the family to
recommend her case her father and none could go against the decision of
God. The whole house was shedding tears for this young, sick and
miserable soul.

The implorations from the citizens to HUSSAIN to reconsider his
decision to leave Medina, did not cease till the last moment.
MUHAMMAD-E-HANAFIA one of the sons of Ali came to HUSSAIN and advised
him in the same way as others had done to which HUSSAIN said that he had
to go in the fulfillment of the Divine Will disclosed to him by his
Grandfather the holy Prophet. Then Muhammad asked why he was taking the
women and children with him, to which HUSSAIN said the Lord has destined
that they should suffer captivity. ZAINAB who heard this discourse cried
to Muhammad saying: "Why dost thou O Muhammad! Endeavor to cause
separation between me and my brother?". Hearing ZAINAB, Muhammad kept
quiet.

Lady OMME BANEEN whom Ali had married with a definite desire to have of
her a son like ABBAS, called her four sons and said: "Go ye, all of you
in the service of the son of FATEMA. Beware! If anything untoward
happeneth to HUSSAIN or to any of his children, ye shall not return unto
me alive! Let me have the face to show to FATEMA on the Day of
Judgment".

Then the lady called ABBAS and said:

"Be thou to HUSSAIN wherever he is and see that nothing untoward
happens to him or any of his children. It is for this day thy father
desired thy advent into this world, and see the object of thy father is
realized to his satisfaction. Beware! ABBAS! The world has turned
inimical to HUSSAIN. Shed thou thy life-blood but let now HUSSAIN or his
family and children be inconvenienced in the least. Go, God be with
Thee!". ABBAS and his brothers kissed the feet of their mother and ABBAS
said: "Mother dear! I assure thee in the name of God, that until ABBAS
is alive, nothing shall happen to my Master HUSSAIN or any one of his
dear ones".

**THE HOLY IMAM'S DETERMINATION**

People of Medina were fully aware of the dreadful consequences that
would follow the blunt refusal of the holy Imam to pay (BAIAT) to YAZID.
They went to the holy imam in large number to know his final decision.
HUSSAIN replied to them: "Do you imagine for a moment that HUSSAIN,
fearing death and destruction at the hands of the tyrant would ever
allow to be undone all that his holy Grandfather, the Last Apostle of
God, had done after facing untold dangers and undergoing in numerable
difficulties?". "Do you think that HUSSAIN would allow all the
sacrifices offered and the bitterest experiences suffered and the
heart-rending tortures by his Father, Mother and Brother to go in
vain?"

"Do you imagine HUSSAIN would ever allow the Faith revealed by God for
humanity as a whole, to perish and to vanish away for ever, when it has
been established by the shedding of the sacred blood of his father in
the Mosque of KUFA?". "Nay! Never! God willing, you all shall see that
HUSSAIN, wading through his own blood, directs the Ark of Islam out of
the stormy seas, safe to the haven of everlasting safety".

At last dawned the historic day of HUSSAIN'S leaving Medina. All the
ladies mounted the fully veiled letters on the backs of the camels and
when the turn of ZAINAB came to mount, ALI-E-AKBAR held the screen and
ABBAS lowered his knee for ZAINAB to place her foot on it and HUSSAIN
held her hand to help her, and the daughter of FATEMA mounted the camel.
At last HUSSAIN bade goodbye to every one of the huge crowd of citizens
that had assembled, and turning towards the graves of his Grandfather,
Mother and Brother, HUSSAIN gave his last salutation. The caravan began
to move with the people of the city crying aloud behind it with their
lamentations saying:

"Today died the holy Prophet. Today died the holy Lady FATEMA and today
died HASSAN". FATEMA SUGHRA in the high fever and in her disappointment
had swooned and availing of the unconscious state of his daughter,
HUSSAIN had asked the people of the house to make haste and start. When
the caravan had left, FATEMA returned to consciousness and seeing the
whole house empty, asked OMME SALAMA about the inmates to which she was
told that they had all gone. FATEMA got up and with the help of a stick
in her hand, began to walk behind the caravan crying out:

"BABA! BABA! BABA! i.e., Father! Father! Father!" The caravan had gone
sufficient away but God alone knows how HUSSAIN could hear the feeble
voice of the crying of his ailing daughter coming at a considerable
distance behind the caravan in-spite of the loud noises of the moving
caravan, HUSSAIN called aloud to ABBAS telling him: "Stop ABBAS! Stop !
FATEMA is coming behind".

The caravan stopped and FATEMA somehow reached the caravan and began to
implore saying: "Father dear! If there be no space for me with my mother
and sisters, I will sit with the servant maid FIZZA and will not worry
any one with my sickness".

HUSSAIN came down from his horse and tried to console her, explaining
his inability owing to her sickness under which the Word of God does not
allow him to take her on the journey. This is an occasion for parents
among the readers to imagine the state of mind of FATEMA'S mother and
her other relatives. At last FATEMA made a request to her father which
he could not resist granting: "Father! If I have to be left behind,
leave with me my baby brother ALI-E-ASGHAR. I will spend my time with
him and will see he is duly looked after by a HASIMITE nurse".

HUSSAIN said:

"Yes, beckon thy brother Ali, if he cometh, take him away with thee".
FATEMA went near the camel on which her mother with her baby rushed into
her lap. How could the caravan move now, with the mother leaving away
the suckling baby away from her? The mother tried her best to get the
baby back from FATEMA, and along with the mother all other relatives
tried, and even HUSSAIN tried his best to see that the baby returns from
FATEMA but every one failed and every time the baby looked at the face
of the one who beckoned it and smiled and turned around and put both its
hands round FATEMA'S neck, the caravan had stopped. At last HUSSIAN
getting near the baby's ears, moved his lips saying something in the
ears of the innocent and the baby which did not respond to any one
before and even to his mother, now hearing the words uttered into its
ears by the holy Imam, at once left FATEMA and got into the lap of the
holy Imam.

After the Massacre of KARBALA, some one asked ALI IBNUL HUSSAIN as to
what was it that HUSSAIN said into the ears of the baby which did not
respond to anybody's beckoning and even to HUSSAIN when he did it
before, at once came away into HUSSAIN'S lap. In reply SYYED-E-SAJJAD
ALI IBNUL HUSSIAN sighed aloud saying:

"AH! AH! What a heart-rending event, O' man! Thou reminded me of! "My
father only told in the ears of my baby brother Ali. Son I need thee
also at KARBALA for thy name also is there in the list of the martyrs
and without thee, my darling, my sacrifice will incomplete! Hearing this
my baby brother at once responded to the call and returned from my
sister FATEMA'S lap".

**THE SITUATION WORSENS AND THE ATMOSPHERE GETS TOTALLY DARKENED**

The people found infidelity and godlessness spreading all around them,
and its intensity being ever on the increase and getting more and more
aggressive. There was on security for the faith and the faithful.
Religion getting horribly adulterated with counterfeit traditions coined
in favor of the grossly anti-religious elements. The practice of the
faith laid down by the holy Prophet strictly on the QUR'ANIC lines, was
recasted into the wrong mounds of infidelity. The situation had become
openly hostile to the House of the holy Prophet, the love or
faithfulness to the members of which, was under the command of the Lord,
decreed incumbent on every Muslim with a definite ordinance of the holy
QUR'AN on it had become a mercilessly punishable crime:

"..Say thou (O' Our Apostle Muhammad!) I ask ye naught in return for it
(the apostleship) save the love for my relatives.." [42:23]. Those who
professed faithfulness to the House of the holy Prophet identifying
themselves as the SHIAS of Ali were persecuted, plundered, mercilessly
crucified and brutally murdered and their properties were confiscated.
People faithful to the holy House had either to be killed or to go
underground under the cover of 'TAQIAH' (hiding the faith); they were
even then chased spied and hunted and when found out, were condemned to
death. The situation actually need a Muhammad to brave the devilish
forces and deliver the people from the clutches of the SATANIC'S way
over the people and the cruel authority of the crown, as was sent Moses
to deliver the Israelites from the clutches of Pharaoh. But the prayer
of the people for another apostle or prophet would be only in vain for
the Last Apostle had come. The only way to salvation for the faith and
the people was appeal to HUSSAIN, the holy Imam of the age, who was the
vicegerent of God in the place of the holy Prophet, to come to their
rescue.

The authority to rule over the destiny of ht people in the various
parts of the state was distributed by nepotism. Merits of personal
righteousness and the sense of justice had lost their recognition and
had no worth or value in the eyes of the administrators of the matters
of the state. People at last sent messengers with the written request to
HUSSAIN, the holy Imam, to come to the rescue of the faith and the
faithful, with a note of threat that should HUSSAIN fearing death and
destruction not come out and save the religion of God from getting lost
and the faithful religionists from getting astray any longer, on the Day
of Judgment the people would complain to God and His holy Prophet
against him. The deputation from the people of KUFA signed by a
multitude of them approached HUSSAIN at Mecca.

The call now was without any taint, purely for the rescue of the faith
and the faithful. HUSSAIN now could not but respond. The holy Imam knew
that it was the destined and the awaited call. He offered prayers and
looked to the heavens and decided to act, to fulfill his covenant with
his Lord.

**HUSSAIN AT MECCA AND THE DEPUTATION FROM KUFA**

HUSSAIN arrived in Mecca on 3rd SHABAN 60 A.H. for the pilgrimage and
thereafter to decide for his future step. He could not stay in Medina
without paying (BAIAT) to YAZID or getting killed in return for his
refusal to pay the allegiance. Allegiance meant recognizing the Devil in
the place of God which HUSSAIN, could never do.

His murder at Medina would have caused the clash of the MEDINITES,
particularly the HASHIMITES with the YAZIDAIN force, resulting in the
destruction of the poor citizens and the ruin of the holy city of his
Grandfather for which he did not like to be responsible. Besides, if he
had stayed there in Medina with death facing him, the world would have
questioned his stay there and not taking shelter somewhere out of it. He
came to Mecca, and here he received the deputation from KUFA with the
persistent implorations to go and guide them of the right path of the
faith against the straying away from the faith forced on them with the
infidelity and godlessness spread all over the country.

HUSSAIN could neither blindly accept the call from KUFA, for the KUFEES
who were known for their unstable character and unsettled conduct, if
later turn treacherous, the world would question HUSSAIN'S ready
response to their call without the necessary caution. Therefore HUSSAIN
decided to send a deputy of his to KUFA to write to him after studying
the sincerity in the invitation.

**MUSLIM… THE HOLY IMAM DEPUTY TO KUFA**

The holy Imam commanded his cousin Muslim, son of AQEEL, to proceed to
KUFA and to report from there, after studying the bonafide of the call
from the people of the place. On 14th Ramadan 60 A. H. Muslim left Mecca
with two guides of the route. Muslim took two young sons of his, along
with him. The party lost their and both the guides perished in the
desert. Muslim taking the death of the guides as an inauspicious omen
and reaching a halting place called 'MUZEEQ MIN BATNE JANNAT' wrote to
the holy Imam informing him, of the fate of the guides and requesting
him to spare him and depute someone in his stead. The holy Imam wrote
back to Muslim saying:

"This is from HUSSAIN son of AMEERUL MOMINEEN ALI IBNE ABI TALEB, to
cousin Muslim son of AQEEL. Verily I have heard my Grandfather, the holy
Prophet, saying that we AHLUL BAIT take not omens form events
extraordinary. The moment thou receivest this letter, proceed thou as I
have commanded thee. Peace and the blessings of God be with thee".

**MUSLIM IN KUFA**

The KUFEES gave Muslim a very warm reception and thousands of them paid
their [BAIAT] to the holy Imam on the hands of Muslim. Poor Muslim,
impressed with and guided by the enthusiasm of the deceitful KUFFES and
not knowing what would befall him the very next day, wrote a letter to
HUSSAIN to go over to KUFA. When the letter inviting the holy Imam had
gone with a favorable report about the situation of KUFA, Muslim learnt
of the treachery, i.e., the turn of the tide of the situation. YAZID,
having learnt of Muslim's arrival at KUFA as the Deputy of the holy Imam
and the KUFEES having paid their homage to the holy Imam, as their
religious head, sent IBNE ZAID to handle the situation in his favor. In
a day or two, almost all the leaders of the town were bribed and strong
threats from YAZID'S deputy the Governor of KUFA,

made the people of the town as a whole, desert poor Muslim. Under the
strict ordinances issued against those who gave even shelter to him,
Muslim was left all alone in KUFA. None in KUFA would now even speak to
Muslim and he was left actually homeless, wandering in the streets with
everyone in town, now hostile to him. None would allow him even to rest
for a while in the shade of his house. At every door he stood, he was
being driven away, not even to cup of water he could have from anyone in
the town. Hungry and thirsty, the helpless Deputy of the holy Imam
actually wandered in the streets of KUFA with his two innocent children,
in the hope of help from some one, but none took pity on him, and not
even of the innocent young children. The helpless father and his tow
young children were being driven from place to place, nowhere to rest
even for a while.

HANI IBNE ORWAH, the good-hearted KUFEE who offered hospitality to
Muslim was mercilessly butchered. All those miseries and persecution did
never upset Muslim in the least but the one and only worry he left, and
which grieved him the most of which he frequently shed tears, was that
he had written to the son of FATEMA, the holy Imam, in favor of such a
treacherous people and had invited him to go over to a place where only
death and destruction waited for him. He could not leave the town for he
was not allowed to do it, nor could he send any note to the holy Imam to
intimate the treacherous change in the situation.

**MUSLIM SENDS OUT HIS CHILDREN WITH HIS MESSAGE TO THE HOLY IMAM**

At last Muslim somehow managed to send his two young children out of
KUFA with his message to the holy Imam, a counter to his previous
communication to him, requesting HUSSAIN never to think of KUFA anymore.
The two innocents of the House of the holy Prophet with the divine gift
of bravery and courage against the odds and the miseries in the way of
the Lord, walked through the desert during nights, hiding themselves
from the sight of the people and during day time hid themselves in some
bush or on the top of some date palms, hungry and thirsty as naturally
they would but be in the desert. But nothing daunted them from their
mission. The one and the only concern of the two young souls, was to
somehow reach the holy Imam with the message. The two young innocent
fugitives were passing through a dreadful and mortal atmospheres. They
were passing through the Valley of Death. Whenever they happened to meet
anyone they would not disclose their identity and if any one took pity
on their age and their plight, and offered any hospitality, they
accepted it, otherwise they contented themselves with their lot but
always mindful of the Lord and prayerful to Him.

**MUSLIM ARRESTED AN MARTYRED**

Having dispatched his sons, Muslim, discarded by one and all in KUFA
and hunted by the men of IBNE ZIAD, wandered in KUFA, as a homeless
destitute without any shelter or shade to lay his head or even to rest
awhile against the scorching sun. none dared to give him even a cup of
water. Passing through a street Muslim halted at the door of a godly
lady TAU'A who asked him, not recognizing him, who actually he was: "O'
man why dost thou not return home and rest?"

"Where to go? I have no home here!" The good lady looked at Muslim and
asked; "Who are you?" Muslim replied: "I am Muslim, son of AQEEL, the
Deputy of HUSSAIN the holy Imam! Hunted by the AMIR"

TAU'A, immediately as she learnt about the identity of Muslim and the
name of the holy Imam, told him to get into her house. No sooner had
Muslim taken shelter in TAU'A house, the son of the lady, and
incorrigible delinquent, returned home and TAU'A advised the lad
repeatedly not to let any one know about the whereabouts of Muslim.
Early next morning, the lad informed the state authorities. Muslim heard
the approach of the soldiers to TAU'A house and apprehending that if he
stays any longer in the house, the house of the poor lady will be
ruined, rushed out and after a wonderful resistance, was arrested by the
contingent and carried to the court of the AMIR, Muslim replied:

"Who is the AMIR? A drunkard and debauchee? My AMIRIS HUSSAIN the holy
Imam!" The AMIR retorted:

"Dost thou know thy fate? Salutation or no salutation from thee, thou
shalt be beheaded". Muslim replied:

"Threaten thou with death and destruction the dogs who hunt after this
world and not any one of the House of the Apostle of God!" IBNE ZIAD
called his men and commanded Muslim to be taken on the roof of a
building to be beheaded and his body to be thrown down form the top, to
the ground.

Hearing the verdict of the AMIR about him, Muslim replied: "Ready I am
to pass on in the way of the Lord" and then turning to the audience in
the court asked, if there was any QUREISHITE among them there to hear
his last desire in this world and execute it. OMAR IBNE SA'D, a
QUREISHITE, replied: "Yes, I am here! Say thou what hast to say!" Muslim
said: "Look O' son of SA'D! the first thing I request you to do is write
to the holy Imam or send a message at once to him never to think of
coming over to KUFA!

Secondly, I owe seven hundred dirham to the people here in KUFA. Here
is my horse and my armor. Sell thou these two things and disburse the
dues. Thou art a QUREISHITE! Bury thou my body out of my own money
raised by the sale of my belongings without any obligation from any one
of the KUFEES". OMAR replied we will act as deemed desirable by us. The
people seated around in the court wept but none spoke a word against the
brutal behavior against Muslim.

Muslim when taken on the top of a building, asked respite of the
executioners to offer his last prayer to the Lord. After the prayer he
turned toward Mecca and cried:

"Pardon me O' holy Imam, for I was misled. But think thou not of coming
over to KUFA". No sooner Muslim had finished his prayer, and his cry to
the holy Imam, fell the stroke of the sword from the executioner. His
head was taken and the body was thrown down on the ground. The heads of
HANI IBNE ORWAH and MUSLIM IBNE AQEEL were dispatched to YAZID as a
token of the faithful execution of his orders by his Deputy IBNE ZIAD.

The bodies of Muslim and HANI, with a rope tied in the legs, were
dragged into the streets of KUFA, as an active and visual warning to the
people against their loyalty to the House of the holy Prophet and
particularly to HUSSIAN the holy Imam. At last the body of Muslim and
HANI were hung at the gateway of the City and remained there hanging for
days together. None of the last desires of Muslim was executed and
immediately orders were issued to comb the city and its surroundings and
find out the children of Muslim. A tempting prize was announced on the
heads of the innocents.

**CHILDREN OF MUSLIM MARTYRED**

The two young souls in their concealed march from KUFA, traveling
during nights, lost their way in the desert. Once they were arrested and
imprisoned but the pitiful guard of the prison, allowed them to escape
and at last they were found by the good-hearted lady, the wife of
HARITH, who was already in search of the innocents to win the rich
reward. The good-hearted lady hid the children in her house and HARITH
returned late in the night complaining to his wife saying that day and
night, he was in search of the children of Muslim but could not find
them. The lady asked HARITH: "What will you gain after shedding the
blood of the innocents of the House of the holy Prophet?" HARITH
replied:

"What thou askest me, knowest thou I will get the rich reward from the
AMIR?" The lady kept quiet and HARITH went to bed but at midnight the
innocents saw their father in a dream telling them: "Worry not my dear
ones! Very soon you will meet me!". Both the children awoke crying:

"Father dear! Where art thou? We are wandering as helpless fugitives".
Hearing the cry of the innocents, HARITH awoke and asked his wife as to
whose cry was that, that came from one of the rooms. The good lady could
no longer conceal the fact and the moment HARITH came to know of the
presence of the innocents in his very house, he jumped with joy and
getting into the room dragged those two young souls out of their beds
saying:

"I killed myself in your search the whole day for you and you are here
in m y own house".

The brute kept the innocents tied to post the whole night and at dawn
HARITH took them to the bank of the Euphrates and the good lady
accompanied them pleading for them. When HARITH wanted to behead them,
the children cried to the good lady addressing her ad "Mother dear!" The
poor lady was already imploring the brute of her husband not to lay his
hands on the helpless innocents. But the heartless brute would not
listen to the implorations from the lady. When he raised his sword, the
lady ran to intervene and stop the stroke, and got her two hands
severed. It is reported that the two innocents prayed to the brute to
allow them to offer their last prayers to which the brute consented and
no sooner the holy souls had finished their supplication to the Lord,
then HARITH wanted to behead them. The elder brother implored saying:

"O' man! Listen to me, behead not my younger brother before me for my
mother when we parted from her last, handed him over to me. Oblige me
thou by beheading me first". With a stroke of the sword the head of the
elder one of the two innocents fell and HARITH threw the body into the
river, and then turning to the younger one, he did the same. It is said
that when the first body, i.e., of the elder brother was thrown into the
river, the younger one cried to it saying: "Brother dear! Tarry thou a
little, I also come with thee". It is said that the body of the first
innocent floated stationary in the waves of the river until the body of
the second one joined it and both floated away together.

**NO REFUGE FOR THE HOLY IMAM EVEN IN THE HOLY KA'BA**

News had reached Damascus that HUSSAIN had left Medina for Mecca. YAZID
hired thirty men to guide themselves as pilgrims (HAJIES) with daggers
hidden in their pilgrim grabs to murder the holy Imam even while
performing the pilgrimage rites, be he even in the very precincts of the
Great Sanctuary of the holy KA'BA. HUSSAIN had received the letter from
his Deputy Muslim in KUFA to proceed to the place, the letter which
Muslim had written before what befell him later. HUSSAIN only waited for
the pilgrimage to start for KUFA thereafter. But he got intelligence
about the plot to kill him even in the holy Sanctuary.

**HUSSAIN SAVES THE SANCTITY OF THE GREAT SANCTUARY**

The holy KA'BA, a Sanctuary, the Holiest of the holy Places of Islam, a
Sanctuary wherein no creature animate or inanimate could be disturbed
wherein even a confirmed convict could not be killed, not even a plant
be plucked out. If the sanctity of the Holiest Shrine of Islam be
violated by the shedding of the blood of the holy Imam which was the
very blood of the holy Prophet himself, no security for any one else
would be left thereafter, the holy KA'BA would cease to be a
Sanctuary.

The next day was the day of the pilgrimage and HUSSAIN in the interest
of the sanctity of the place with his whole caravan, performing the
briefer pilgrimage 'OMAR' instead of the full pilgrimage, HAJ, which
could be done only the next day. People uninformed of the secret plot of
YAZID against the life of the holy Imam, wondering at the surprising
decision of HUSSAIN to move out of Mecca on the very eve of the
Pilgrimage when every Muslim rushes to the place and covets to be there,
thronged to the holy Imam enquiring about his mysterious move, HUSSAIN
replied:

"This year's HAJ I have to perform at KARBALA". When the people asked
where the animals of sacrifice were, HUSSAIN replied: "In this HAJ I
have to offer the sacrifices, not of animals but of my own kith and
kin". Saying this HUSSAIN said: "Do ye like to see my sacrifices?"
HUSSAIN called his brother ABBAS, his eighteen year old son of Ali
(ALI-E-AKBAR), his nephews WASIM, AUN and Muhammad and others. When all
these had come and stood before him, HUSSAIN said: "These are my
sacrifices".

HUSSAIN left Mecca for KUFA in response to the implorations of the
people of the place.

**THE HOLY IMAM LEARNS OF THE FATE OF HIS DEPUTY, MUSLIM**

HUSSAIN was proceeding the KUFA and a large number of the people
thinking that if HUSSAIN, the holy Imam, the grandson of the Apostle of
God stands against YAZID, the Muslim World as a whole would support the
holy Imam of the age and those who support HUSSAIN'S cause will
certainly get the share of the booty, accompanied him. At every step
HUSSAIN warned them saying their imagination was totally wrong and will
never be realized. However, the crowd accompanied HUSSAIN until when the
news of the fate of HUSSAIN'S Deputy, Muslim, reached him on the way,
and the crowd began deserting HUSSAIN in large numbers.

WHERE SHOULD HUSSAIN GO

If after knowing the fate of his Deputy, Muslim, at KUFA, HUSSAIN
proceeds towards the town, the world would know about the atmosphere at
KUFA having turned totally hostile to him, why he threw himself and his
family in the jaws of death. He could not stay any longer in Medina, nor
at Mecca even until the HAJ and now he could not proceed to KUFA. Where
should HUSSAIN go? HUSSIAN now directed his move towards an unknown
destination.

WATER STORED FOR THE ENEMIES

As the caravan proceeded, at a certain place the holy Imam directed his
brother ABBAS to see that the caravan carries with it as much water as
possible. People submitted to the holy Imam that there would not be any
dearth of water in any of the coming stations. The holy Imam
mysteriously insisted 'I tell you, you do it'. the people were told that
it would be required, but did not disclose for whom, and every one
wondered at this mysterious command. However, the order was carried.

THE HUNT FOR THE holy IMAM

Information about the holy Imam's leaving Mecca and proceeding towards
an unknown destination reached KUFA and Damascus and fearing that
HUSSAIN would escape away out of the Muslim dominion and thus get out of
the grip, military contingents were immediately dispatched in all
directions in the desert to stop the holy Imam where he may be found and
not allow him to go any further but to get him either to KUFA or to
Damascus and in case of resistance to kill him wherever he is found.

**HUSSAIN SAVES THE ENEMIES FROM DEATH**

As the caravan of the holy Imam proceeded, suddenly the men in the
forefront cried aloud 'ALLAHO AKBAR' (God the Greatest). HUSSAIN smiled
and asked what the matter was and what had made the people glorify God
all of a sudden; what was the occasion for it. People submitted that a
garden is sighted which usually was not found on that route. HUSSAIN
smiled and told the people to look ahead carefully. Shortly afterwards
the men reported to the holy Imam saying that it was not a garden but an
army coming towards them. It was a contingent of YAZID'S army which had
been sent under the command of a famous Commander 'HUR' to arrest the
move of HUSSAIN and divert the course of KUFA or Damascus or to fight
and kill the holy Imam.

When the contingent of the YAZIDIAN forces under 'HUR' reached the
caravan of the holy Imam, both the men and the animals were dying of
thirst. Having exhausted the store of water they had, the whole regiment
was practically trapped in the burning desert with the heat from all
sides roasting their bodies. The whole army was about to perish. They
could not get any trace of water anywhere for miles together. HUR and
his men, instead of capturing HUSSAIN or attacking the Caravan, shouted
aloud in appealing voices 'Thirst! Thirst!' water, and begged the holy
Imam to quench their thirst first. The holy Imam at once ordered the
whole of the stored water to be placed at the disposal of the enemy army
under HUR. HUR, his soldiers and all the animals of the army were fully
served and were rescued from the jaws of death.

When the enemy had quenched their thirst, HUSSAIN asked HUR, the
purpose of his coming out into such a killing heat in the desert.
Whether the expedition was for him or against him, HUR related his
object and also said that he was there not to allow the holy Imam to
move from that place. The Caravan stopped.

HUR was a good man, noble and a gallant officer, but could not allow
HUSSAIN to have his way, in the presence of his men, for he feared that
they would bring calamity upon him. Without the knowledge of his men,
HUR begged the holy Imam to have his own way as if without the knowledge
of his men to some direction and to facilitate this he camped his
regiment a little way from HUSSIAN'S camp. HUSSAIN had to accept HUR'S
offer and direct his Caravan to move on, but to none did he mention the
destination. The holy Imam's Caravan moved on but none knew to what
destination it was bound for. It was a mysterious move divinely guided
by the will of the Lord, to fulfill the Great Sacrifice destined to take
place in the seed of Abraham.

**THE PROPHESIED DESERT OF KARBALA**

At the place near the Euphrates, the holy Imam's steed suddenly and
in-spite of the unusual spotting, the animal did not move; but raised
its head towards heaven, as if to say that it was helpless and could not
step forward any more. HUSSAIN changed six horses one after another but
none of the animals moved from the spot. Gathering the people in the
neighborhood, the holy Imam enquired the name of the place. Some said
'MARIA' some said 'NAINAWA' and some said 'SHATTUL FURAT' but the holy
Imam was not satisfied and continued his enquiry asking if there was any
other name for the place. An old man stepped forward and said: 'O' Son
of the Apostle of God! I have heard from my ancestors this plain being
called also as 'KARBALA'. The moment the holy Imam heard the name of
KARBALA, he smiled and thanked God and said:

"Surely this is the plain I was in quest of. This is the place where my
holy Grandfather had prophesied that I, with all my faithful companions,
will lay slain after suffering three days' hunger and thirst. Here will
the Garden of FATEMA be cut and destroyed. I can not and I will not move
an inch from this place- I have reached the destined destination".

Saying this, the holy Imam ordered the Caravan to be stopped and
declared that the journey had ended as he had arrived at the desired
destination. Tents were ordered to be pitched but HAZRAT ZAINAB,
HUSSAIN'S sister, hearing of the Imam's decision to camp there, wept and
sent for HUSSAIN and requested him saying:

"Brother dear! Do not camp here! Somehow my heart is restless and does
not consent. Brother dear! Since our arrival on this plain, I distinctly
hear the lamenting voice of our dear mother, somewhere nearby in this
desert". HUSSAIN, hearing his mother's name, shed and said:

"ZAINAB! We need not fear when God is with us. It is immaterial,
Sister, where we camp. This is the place, Sister dear, I was in quest
of, and thanks to God I am at it, and now sister dear, I cannot move
from here". Tents were pitched at the bank of the Euphrates for the holy
Imam's Caravan.

**THE HOLY IMAM POINTS OUT THE DESTINED SPOTS**

While the men were busy pitching the tents, the holy Imam went into the
surrounding lands stopping at certain spots thoughtfully; and at a
certain spot, he laid himself down on the earth and raise his head to
look towards his camp. When asked what he meant by the action, he said:
"It is the place where I will at last fall from my horse and will lay to
be slain! I wanted to see if my lying there wounded to be slain by SHIMR
who will be seated on my breast, will be visible to the ladies in my
camp, for ZAINAB, my Sister, will then be standing at the doorway of her
tent, shouting for me".

The holy Imam took his brother ABBAS around and pointed out the various
spots in the plain where each one of his comrades would fall and be
slain.

HUSSAIN PURCHASES THE SITE FOR THE GRAVES OF THE MARTYRS

The holy Imam gathered the people of the surrounding places, the owners
of the plain of KARBALA, and purchasing the land from them gifted the
same to the people. Addressing the males among them he said: "On the
Tenth day of this month ye shall see us lying here slain, our bodies
lying on the plain with our heads severed and taken away. I request you
to kindly bury us, and when our devotees come to visit our graves, hold
them in honor as your guests and point out to them the places of our
burial".

He then addressed the ladies: "O Virtuous ladies! If your husbands,
fearing the wrath of YAZID do not bury us, you kindly encourage them to
do it or do it yourselves". The holy Imam then turned to the young
children in the gathering and addressing them said: "O Innocent ones! If
your parents, out of fear of the wrath of the Ruler, do not bury us, you
may, by way of playing bring some mud in your laps and throw it upon our
bodies and hide them". The appeal was so touching that the whole
gathering wept.

**ARRIVAL OF YAZID'S FORCES**

The brute IBNE ZIAD at KUFA got the information of HUSSAIN'S getting
out of the control of HUR and also learnt that the helpless Imam had
camped near the River Euphrates. Regiment after regiment began to pour
in on the plain of KARBALA from all sides and ultimately the enemy's
forces compelled HUSSAIN to shift his camp from the bank of the river to
the interior of the burning desert.

HUSSAIN'S brother, the lion-hearted ABBAS, objected to this demand from
the enemy, claiming priority of occupation and the right of the son of
the holy Prophet, the holy Imam, to stay where he had first camped. When
the enemy wished to march towards the holy Imam's camp, the brave ABBAS
at once drew his sword and stood firm and shouted to the men:

"One step forward if ye advance, ye shall lay headless there". Knowing
the bravery, valor, and prowess of the valiant son of Ali, the Lion of
God, none cared to step forward. But HUSSAIN called his Brother saying:
"Brother ABBAS! Let not bloodshed be initiated from our side. Let them
occupy any place they like. They call themselves my Grandfather's
followers. Let them enjoy every comfort they want. We shall suffer for
them, being away form the water. When God is with us, Brother, what if,
the river is far away from us".

With these words, the holy Imam, in order to avoid bloodshed, issued
orders to shift this camp into the interior of the burning desert and it
was immediately done.


