The Basic Principles On Which Islam Is Founded
==============================================

**PRELIMINARY**

To define its understanding of man, the universe and life, to organize
man's activities, and to delineate man's behaviour, thinking, social and
legal relatio~ns, Islam starts from certain general principles. These
general bases are the axis around which revolve all its concepts, and
are the starting point from which proceed the law, rules, teachings, and
on which are founded all human obligations. This has been done in such a
way that complete harmony between these principal bases, and the goals
of the Islamic religion and its objectives are not in the least
compromised.

The principles have been mentioned above and in order to throw more
light on these basic ideas, we shall handle them individually and in
detail.

**1. TO ALLAH BELONGS SERVITUDE AND RULE:**

"..His are the creation and command. Blessed be Allah, Lord of the
worlds! ". Holy Our an (7:54)

"â€¦Judgement belongs only to Allah; He has commanded that you worship
none but Him. This is the most right religion; but most people know not.
" Holy Qur'an (12:40)

From this comprehensive basis springs every legislation. concept and
law in Islam. It is the essential starting point expressing the Unity of
Allah, the Exalted, and man's servitude to Him and his connection with
Him.

His are Creation, Sovereignty, Commandment, Will, and effective Wish.
It is not for man in this life to believe, make rules or behave contrary
to Allah's Will and Wisdom.

From this concept of submission and adherence there arises in Islam.the
notion of rejection of human despotism, and the idea of divine authority
ruling human beings, as all are subject to Allah's Justice and related
to His Will. The Righteousness of the human being's attitude and conduct
is dependent on the extent of its coincidence with Allah's Will,
represented by the divine religion, heralded by the Envoy of Mercy,
Muhammad (s.a.w.).

No one is to legislate laws, nor act according to one's own interests,
wishes or desires, in a way as to take oneself as legislator and
lawmaker (2). Even the prophets and the messengers who were the best of
people, and the examples for humanity, were not given this right. They,
as human beings, could not practice it. Thus, the Qur'an addresses the
last Prophet, saying:

"And when our clear signs are recited to them, those who hope not in
meeting Us say: Bring a Qur'an other than this, or alt er it. Say (0
Muhammad): It is not for me to alter it of my own accord. I only follow
nothing except what revealed tome. Surely I fear that for dls obeying my
Lord I shall be punished on the great (Day od Judgemnet). " Holy Our'an
(10:15)

Thus, this principle - believing in Allah, in man's servitude to Him,
and in surrendering commandment, legislation and sovereignty to Allah
alone - is regarded as the basic starting point for the structuring of
thought, culture and human conduct.

**2. COORDINATION BETWEEN CREATION AND LEGISLATION:**

The second principle essential to Islam in legislating laws, is that of
the connection between creation and legislation, and harmonizing these
aspects of existence. Islam has fully recognized the creative aspect of
man, founding all its rules, duties, obligations and responsibilities on
this basis and observing in this formulation that man is a complete
subjective unit, comprising a physical body in addition to spiritual and
psychological forces. Islam freely admits the requirements and needs of
these two sides, legislating the necessary laws to organize and satisfy
them.

Islam believes that man, in respect to his bodily construc tion, is
part and parcel of nature, has instinctive, natural material needs, such
as food, drink, shelter, clothing, medical treatment, marriage, etc.
While Islam has handled this physical side of man with great interest
and strict educational and legal care, it has similarly paid keen
attention to the spiritual and psychological side of man. It has charted
the course of his growth, directing and satisfying him in a way that
balances the unity of human advancement and progress:

"Seek through your wealth the gains of the hereafter in that which
Allah has given you and neglect not your portion of this life, and be
kind to others just as Allah has been Kind to you, and seek not
corruption in the land, surely Allah loves not corrupters". Holy Qur'an
(28:77)

This verse affords man material welfare and spiritual happiness in
life. Additionally, it guarantees the hereafter and eternal happiness in
the world of eternity, without separating these two real ties in such a
way that may cause a split, or result in a contradiction between the
elements of human nature and its intellectual and behavioural aspects.

**3. BELIEF IN UNITY OF HUMANKIND**

The Islamic message in its dealings with mankind, starts from a
practical and creative overview based on believing in the unity of
mankind, and in the fact that all people spring from a common origin.
Naturally then, they all share the common feature of humanity, and all
are equals in their creation and nature as human beings living in this
world.

It follows that they share similar feelings, inclinations, and basic
needs. Owing to these incontestable features, Islam rejects the
discriminatory practices and limits of human interaction instituted by
man and inspired by the concepts of ignorance which reflects the human
spirit of egoism, ignorance and arrogance.

The Qur'an wages war against these relics and concepts of ignorance,
and raises the slogan of the unity of mankind and beckons towards this:
"0 mankind! We have created you male and female, and have made you
nations and tribes that you may know one another. The most honourable
among you, in the sight of Allah, is the most pious of you in conduct.
Allah is All-knowing, All-aware". Holy Our'an (49:13)

"0 mankind! fear your Lord Who created you from a single soul and
created its mate of the same (kind), and spread from these two many men
and women; and fear Allah by Whom same (kind), you appeal to one another
and (to) the kinship ties; Surely Allah is ever Watchful over you". Holy
Qur'an (4:1)

Muhammad (s.a.w.), the final Prophet to mankind, confirmed these lofty
principles, and referred to them in his timeless speech in the wake of
his farewell pilgrimage. He said:

"0 people! Your Lord is One, and your father is one.. .All of you are
from Adam, and Adam is from clay, The most honourable among you, in the
sight of Allah, is the most pious of you in conduct', and there is no
preference for an Arab over a non-Arab, except in' terms of piety"(3).

Islam has based its practical criteria for distinguishing and giving
respect on these supreme principles. It has fixed the measure of
preference and evaluation on a scientific and accurate calculation. This
course leads humanity towards progress and perfection, and activites in
man the motivation towards good and innovation. Islam has restricted the
reasons for preference to faith and piety.

a. Faith and Piety: Islam fixed this principle as a basis of respect.
because it is the fountain head of good deeds, a cause for the
perfection of man's personality, and a start for setting him on the
right path in life:

"...the most honourable among you, in the sight of Allah, is the most
pious of you in conduct..." Holy Otjr'an (49:13)

The Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said:

"...and there is no preference for an Arab over a non-Arab,except in
terms of piety."

b. Knowledge: The second measure of preference in Islam is knowledge.

Allah, the Exalted says:

"...Allah will exalt those who believe among you, and those who have
knowledge, to high ranks..." Holy Qur'an (58:11)

"...say: Are those who know equal with those who know not? But only
people of understanding will pay heed." Holy Qur'an (39:9)

c. Jihad (striving seeking Allah's pleasure), and defending the truth
and the good values of life which the prophets have proclaimed. Allah,
the Most High, says:

"...Allah has excelled those who struggle with their possessions and
their selves in degree over those who stay (at home); yet to each Allah
has promised good; and Allah has excelled those who struggle (in His
way) over those who stay (at home) with great reward..." Holy Qur'an
(4:95)

In this way Islam confirms the wisdom of its measures and criteria
regarding the preference for piety, so that the benevolent and the
offender may not be regarded on the same footing. This stirs in every
man the desire for doing good vis a vis humanity.

Accordingly, these Islamic principles are humane ones open to all, and
everybody may aspire to reach them. At the same time, they are real
criteria expressing man's innate personality and evaluating his efforts
and the very quality of his humanity. This runs contrary to the values
of ignorance.

based on sex, race, class, wealth, party, power, relations, etc., which
do not express, in any way, the beauty of the spirit hidden inside the
individual. These criteria are no help in orientating the human towards
good and acts of devotion beneficial to mankind. On the contrary, they
kill in the individual the spirit of goodness and creativity. These
sentiments suppress in man his sense of being human, of his sGcial
importance, and of his ability to exalt his own being through
(spiritual) progress.

This is because in their personal judge- ment, (Such people are
subjected to artificial frames of reference) which have nothing to do
with man's will, humanity, abilities, and personal disposition.
Consequently. they close the doors pf social advancement, kill the sense
of the feeling of equality, and provoke the spirit of hatred and
dissension amongst the different classes of society.

**4. MANKIND IS THE BEST OF CREATION ON EARTH:**
To judge man and to deal with him. Islam uses a major principle,
acknowledging the human race as the most advanced being, the most
excellent form of creation, dignified creature and the most precious
truth on this earth. Everything here is at his service, and was created
for his well being. Allah, the Exalted, says:

"It is He Who created for you all that is in the earth, then turned His
will to heaven and fashioned it into seven heavens, for He is the
Omnicient." Holy Qur'an (2:29)

"And has made subservient to you whatever is in the heavens and the
earth. In this there is an evidence (of truth) for people who ponder."
Holy Qu'ran (45:13)

"And indeed We have honoured the children of Adam and carried them on
the land and sea, and provided them with good pro visions and preferred
them over many of whom We created with preference." Holy Our'an
(17:70)

Thus, wealth, the sun, the moon and stars, the land and water
resources, the flora and the fauna, and all things in this world are
meant to serve mankind and its interests. Man's very humanity which
distinguishes him from other creatures, is the greatest reality on this
earth, because of what it represents of intellect, will, knowled2e.
life, etc.

Having been given these merits and privilags. mankind has become in the
sight of Islam, responsible for maintaining and developing these exalted
human attributes, and for carrying out the duty of building a world of
thoughtful reflection and good conduct on this earth, parallel in its
goodness and benefits to that which fills this planet. The human is
obliged to be a luminous word in the book of this big universe, and a
being harmonious with the spirit of this beautiful and colourful world.
Only in this way can he be the Divine's trustee to and worthy of
endearment and honour:

"We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains,
but they could not bear this burden and were afraid of it. And man was
able to accept this offer but he was unjust to himself and ignorant of
the significance of this Trust." Holy Quran (33:72)

If man is to recognize his real value and position on this earth, and
if he is to realize the extent of his responsibility, he is obliged to
direct his activities and abilities with keen exactitude to serve
humanity. He will then proceed on the road of perfection according to
the type of life envisaged by Allah's Care and Wisdom, so that he may
enhance humanity. honour and dignity. Otherwise he will he turned into
merely an insignificant being according to the values of the ignorant,

which view man as a means of production and of execution, regard him as
a mechanical device void of human feelings, spirituality and values. In
order that man may not neglect this fact, and ignore his own value and
merits, the Qur'an imhues in him the spirit of humanity. SOWS in his
depths the essence of originality, defines for him his natural position
among things, thus, re-balancing in himself the relation between the
means and the objective. The Qur'an reminds him that everything in this
world is to serve him and provide for his welfare, so that he is not
deceived by material attractions, nor enslaved by the tyrants of
ignorance and arrogance.

"And indeed We have honoured the children of Adam and carded them on
the land and sea, aiIIl provided them with good provisions, and
preferred them over many of whom We created with preference." Holy
Our'an (17:70)

On this basis Islam has established its attitude towards man in
relation to his abundant and beneficial natural surroundings. This
religion, has formed all its laws and values, so as to personify this
fact and stamp it on man's world, brimming, as it is with animation and
life.

**5. BALANCE AND MODERATION:**

Islam's point of view towards human activities, and its treatment of
material things, is different from the attitude of other social
theories, such as communism, capitalism, socioalism. etc. Its outlook
also differs from other philosophies, ethic systems, psychology,
sociology, etc., represented by diverse schools of thought, cultural
inclinations and explanatory theories. These human configurations have
pushed the individual and society into a state of disorder and
instability in its pyschic and behavioural balance, because of the
interpretations they offer by way of explaining the concepts of pleasure
and pain, and of judging behaviour and freedom.

These variant interpretations have had their effects on man's politics,
economics and inter- human relations, both individually and socially, in
as much as instances of extravagance and deficiency, lavishness and
poverty, have become destructive phenomena of civilization, sporting
with man's physical and spiritual health, and despoiling the wealth, the
social system and stability of life.

Thus, nothing of the conduct of this materialistic man can be subjected
to a measure, or can be weighed in respect to values of good behaviour,
since he regards pleasure as a goal, and untrammeled freed as the basis
for human conduct, expressing his being in the quest for pleasure of
different forms and means. Through this type of understanding, all
criteria, which systematize human conduct, are lost, and the balance of
life is disturbed. Choas and disorder thus reign, making man's conduct
and inclinations too negligible to be measured.

This materialistic culture has produced a superficial man, unbalanced3
with a lusty and restless personality. The historian or social scientist
may call this contemporary materialistic civilization, "the civilization
of futility and loss . Man, under the sway of this culture, indulges in
a variety of activities far from the rules of moderation and
uprightness. Such practices may concern his instincts and social
conduct, to satisfy needs like food, drink, sex, pleasure, wealth,
power, etc. It may also concern the way he expresses his emotions and
feelings, like love, anger, consent, indignation, hatred, etc.

In all these practices he is a rootless and unbalanced creature, since
his ability to be spiritually upright has died in his depths. The
criteria of morality and spiritual virtue have essentially faded away
from his world.

But Islam, in order, to save man from this restless materialistic
current, subjects. behaviour, desires, psychological inclinations and
social relations to universal and general org~Inization and
regulations.

Islam subordinates man's conduct and relations to measured rational
calculations, based on a firm psychological and moral infrastructure, as
well as on legal discipline, and social guidance represented by Islamic
tradition and public Opinion. Many Qur'anic verses, Islamic texts and
related concepts confirm this principle, formulating out of it a canon
regulating life, that is. a canon for producing a disciplined, balanced
and moderate Muslim.

Perhaps the strictest text on this subject are the divine words
addressed to the finest examplar of humanity, Muhammad (s.a.w.). It
says: "So go straight as you have been commanded, and whoever repents
with you, and transgress not. Surely He sees what you do." Holy Qur'an
(11:112)

In other Qur'anic instructions there are clear descriptions and well
defined explanations of this basic principle of the heavenly law and its
values. For example, we may mention the divine saYing in respect to the
conduct of the Islamic personality and how it deals with wealth and
possessions and how it utilizes them:

"And those who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor string;
and there is ever a firm station between the two. Holy Qur'an (25:67)

"And keep not your hand chained to your neck, nor stretch it wide lest
you sit down cringing and weary. Holy Our'an (17:29)

"0 Children of Adam! take your adornment at every mosque (time and
place of) worship, and eat and drink, but waste not. Surely He loves not
the prodigals. Holy Our'an (7:31)

The Qur'an's directing man to be moderate and not to be prodigal or
miserly. is not confined to material things alone. It also includes
guiding man's emotional and psychological states, and controlling the
balance of his psychology.

It says:

"And if you punish, then punish with the like of that with which you
were punished and if you are patient, it will certainly be best for
those who are patient." Holy Our'an (16:126)

"So that you grieve not for what you have lost, nor become too happy
about what Allah has given to you. Allah loves not all prideful
boasters." Holy Qur'an (57:23)

"And slay not the soul that Allah has forbidden save with justice, and
whoever is unjustly slain, then we have appointed to his next of kin
authority; but let him not exceed in slaying. Surely he will be helped."
Holy Qur'an (17:33)

Examples of invitation to moderation and equilibrium are many in the
Scripture, Tradition and the studies compiled on morals and behaviour,
and the teachings diffused by Muslim scholars with respect to the bases
and roots of Islam. The idea of moderation and equilibrium is obvious in
every Islamic law and concept: it is visible in keeping the balance
between the affairs of this world and those of the hereafter, as is in
His saying:

"But seek the gains of the hereafter in that which Allah has given you
and neglect not your portion of the world, and be you kind even as Allah
has been Kind to you,..." Holy Qur'an (28:77)

The need to keep a balance between personal and social interests in
order to maintain equilibrium between the interests of the individual
and the society is obvious. The necessity simply stated is to suppress
man's selfishness, on one band, and to protect individual freedom and
will, on the other. Islam's concern is obvious in keeping the equipise
between the rights and the duties of the individual, the state and the
society.

It is obvious in the balance between the two sexes, male and female. It
goes without saying that this principle of moderation and balance has an
important effect on the establishment of order and discipline, and in
directing the latent potential of man and nature to the benefit and
welfare of mankind.

**6. THE WORLD AS A TRANSIENT STAGE IN MAN'S EXISTENCE:**

One of the most important basic principles effective in the steady
profession of the Islamic life is believing in the hereafter, the
eternal extension of man's life after death, rejecting the idea of a
final end and the evanescence of humanity. The idea of an abrupt
severance of life, ending by burying a corpse under the surface of the
earth, and limiting it to the time frame of the period lived in this
world, is a materialistic ignorant one, denying resurrection, the Day of
"Allah; and those - they are the successful ones. Their Lord proclaims
them glad tidings of mercy from Him, and good pleasure; for them await
Gardens wherein is lasting bliss." Holy Qur'an (9:20-21)

"And those who believe and do good deeds: such are the inhabitants of
Paradise; therein dwelling forever." Holy Qur'an (2:82)

"Say: 'In the bounty of Allah and in His mercy in that let them
rejoice. That is better than what they gather.'" Holy Qur'an (10:58)

"0 mankind! The promise of Allah is true. So let not the life of the
world beguile you, nor let the (avowed) beguiler beguile you about
Allah." Holy Qurari (35:5)

These are the most important basic principles promulgated by Islam for
building society's intellectual framework, conduct and order of life.
This religion pays attention to every facet of life so that these
principles and beliefs do not remain merely theoretical ideas in the
mind of a Muslim, nor may they be regarded as commandments and teachings
which live apd die within the frarpework of a theory or a thought. Islam
tries, in fact, to turn them into the scientific basis on which all
aspects of life, activity and conduct may be founded.


