Glimpses of the Journey
=======================

The mighty pen of the biographers has spared not a single event of the
sacred life of the Prophet. But you will have to admit that the minutest
details concerning the passage and halting places through which this
caravan passed has been treasured in the annals of history in a unique
manner. We get no other example where one solitary occurrence has been
described so comprehensively. Nor we can trace any other instance when
so many resources have publicized an affair with such prominence and
vividity as we witness in respect of this great festival.

It would be no exaggeration if we assert that history has preserved each
and every impression of the footprints of this caravan in its pages. It
has transmitted the reflections of this memorable event to its readers
from various points of views and angles.

The journey from Medina to Mecca was completed in ten days. Its details
are that in the early morning of Sunday, the twenty sixth of the month
of Zilqa'ad 10 A.H. this caravan reached  
 Yalamlam. For a short while during the night it stopped for prayers and
meals at Sharfus Sayyala.

Morning-prayers was offered at Irquz-Zubya and in the early hours the
caravan was at Rauha. Few moments were spent at Munsarif for
noon-prayers and at the place of Muta'asha there was a short break of
journey for evening prayers and supper. In the dusk of night the Prophet
graced the alighting place known as Isaba.

When the golden rays of the sun were emerging from the east the soil of
Arj, watching the dust of the caravan, was all welcome for the worthy
guest. On Tuesday the Apostle of God entered Lahi Jamal and on Wednesday
he got down at Suqya. Most of the night was spent in the way and at dawn
he arrived at Abwa. At Abwa the shrine of the Prophet's beloved mother
is situated and there the noble son of A'minah offered prayer.

On Friday the caravan was at Johfa and on Saturday it halted at Qudaida.
It reached Asfan on Monday and starting hurriedly, from here the members
of the caravan stayed at Marruz- Zahran. After a short rest it headed
for its next destination, Sarf. The sun has almost set at Sarf but the
Holy Prophet did not offer evening prayers here. He rather preferred to
cover a sufficient distance and perform prayers near the hillocks of
Mecca. Satisfied with the safe conclusion of his journey he comfortably
passed the whole night at his last destination.

It was Wednesday when the Messenger of God joyfully entered the sacred
city of Mecca. He went round the House of God and thereafter became
completely engrossed in prayers. In the meantime, Ali bin Abi Talib also
arrived. After performing the rites of pilgrimage the last Apostle of
God bid good-bye to the House of God and left the sacred soil.


