The Holy Voice of Heaven
========================

Reaching the border of Ghadir the caravan had to halt unexpectedly. Why?
Because, Archangel Gabriel had come down with the word of God and the
Apostle of God were all ears to the voice of heaven. God ordained:

***"O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people". (Qur'an, 5:68)***

The trustee of the words of God conveyed the divine proclamation and the
Holy Prophet entrusted all his energies for its proper execution and
accomplishment. It was terribly hot. The earth was burning like fire.
Some people had gone forward and some were left behind. The Prophet of
Islam recalled the swift-footed persons and sent a message advising the
slow moving to reach him quickly. The ardent lovers of the Apostle of
God began to flock together group by group.

The Prophet gave instructions for making arrangements and setting in
order a meeting place where the divine wish may be proclaimed. He
ordered the people to be seated and told them that nobody should occupy
a place around those five gum-acacia trees, which were in front of them.
The pulpit platform, he said, should be erected under the shadow of the
gum acacia trees; the ground to be encompassed should also be cleared
and swept. And as to the pulpit, the camels' packsaddles were to be
placed.

The arrangements being thus completed it was already time for
noon-prayers! Bilal in a melodious tone proclaimed the call for prayer.
People began to form lines. The Holy Prophet walked briskly towards his
place of prayer and started praying.

As soon as the prayers were completed the Beloved Messenger of God cast
a glance of surprise and astonishment over the surging crowd and
gracefully moved towards the unique and historic pulpit.


