From The Heights of the Pulpit
==============================

The possessor of unique distinction of 'not speaking out of personal
desire' gracefully ascended the pulpit, glanced at the anxious crowd and
started his speech cast in the mold of revelation:

"All praise is for God, We seek only His help. We have Faith in Him. We
rely only upon Him. Also we seek shelter with Him from blemishes of our
character and evil desires. There is no guide for one who goes astray
and one whom He guides nothing can cause him to deviate from the right
path. I witness that there is no God worthy of worship except Allah and
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger".

Therefore, the Prophet said, "God, the Knower of subtleties and the
Aware has apprised me that no prophet had lived more than half of the
age of his predecessor. Now very soon I shall meet death. Yes! What
about the message of God? Look here! In this respect not only will I be
held responsible but you also will be interrogated. Now let me know what
would be your answer?"

The historians relate that in reply to this question of the Holy Prophet
the surging congregation of 150,000 persons with one voice said, "O God!
We witness that you have ably performed the responsibilities of Prophet
Hood, advised us and constantly kept yourself busy for our guidance. God
may bestow upon you His reward".

The stream of eloquence overflowed again and the 'interlocutor of the
Holy of Holies' continued his fascinating discourse, "Do you not
acknowledge that there is no God worthy of worship except Allah, and
Muhammad is His servant and Apostle? Do you not believe that His
Paradise, His Hell, His 15 Law of Death, the Prospective Doomsday
(devoid of any doubt or suspicion) and restoration of life afresh on the
Day of Resurrection are incumbent and positive?"

The participants of the congregation said in chorus, "Without the
slightest doubt we unequivocally affirm all these eternal truths". When
the voices gradually died down the Prophet said, "O God! Be our
witness". Then he enquired, "Is my voice reaching all of you?" The
Muslims replied in the affirmative saying, "Yes my Lord! Every word of
yours is piercing our hearts".

Continuing his sermon the Apostle of God said, "I am reaching the
Fountain of Kawthar before you and you all will follow me. The width of
the Fountain of Paradise would be equal to the distance that lies
between Sana'a and Basra (the way between Yemen and Syria). What to say
of the number of silver bowls and drinking-vessels? They are countless
like the stars in the sky. Now it is to be seen that after me with what
respect you regard these two most precious things that I shall leave
behind".

At this stage somebody from the crowd said loudly, "O Apostle of God!
What do you mean by these two most precious things?" The Prophet rep
lied, "One is the Book of God. One end of which is in the Hand of God,
the Glorious and Majestic and the other is in your hands. Hold it fast,
lest you deviate from the right path. And the second valuable thing is
\`my Descendants'. God, the Knower of the subtleties and the Aware has
informed me that both these things will never separate from each other
till they reach me at the Fountain of Kawthar. (Their union is eternal).
I have also sought the same for them from my God. You should never dare
to linger behind or surpass them. If you venture to do so you would be
doomed and ruined".

Saying this, the Prophet of Islam taking the hand of Ali raised it high
to its full extent. And then he addressed the grand mammoth gathering in
these words, "O Muslims! Let me know, who else has got more power over
the believers than they themselves?" The audience replied, "God and  
 His Prophet know better".

Hearing this, the 'confidant of the Holy Secrets' declared from the
heights of the pulpit of Ghadir, "God is my Master. I am the master of
the faithful and I have right over them even more than they themselves
possess. Therefore, of whomsoever I am master[^1] Ali is his master too"

The historians write that the Messenger of God repeated this sentence
thrice. But Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal insists that the Prophet repeated this
sentence not only three times but also four times. After that the
Prophet said, “O My God! Be a Friend of him who is a friend of Ali and
treat him like a Foe who opposes Ali. Help them who help Ali and abandon
them who go against Ali. And O My Lord! Whichever way Ali turns orient,
the Right is in the same direction”.

He continued, "Look here! This is binding upon them who are here that
they should convey this message to those who are not present".

The celebrated historian Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari (deceased 310 A.H.)
in his book 'Al- Wilaya' with reference of the famous companion, Zaid
bin Arqam (died in 66 A.H.) has discussed a few more parts of the
sermon.

According to his description the Prophet at the end said, "O Muslims!
Say that we pledge for this. We give our word of honor and extend our
hands of allegiance. We shall transmit your message to our children and
other members of our family. We shall not make any sort of alteration or
change in it. You should stand witness to our pledge and acknowledgement
and for this God's witness is enough".

Later the Prophet said, "Gentlemen! Repeat whatever I have said and
salute Ali on his designation as the Commander of the faithful".

Zaid bin Arqam narrates that at the end of the Prophet's discourse
people advanced group by group towards the pulpit and amidst the tumult
of greetings and congratulations they began to swear allegiance to Imam,
Ali.

According to the research of the commentators, in the meantime, the
possessor of the Revelation descended with this word of God***,***

***"This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed my
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion ". (Qur'an, 5:3)***

[^1]: The word used for \`master' by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was
\`Mawla' (in Arabic)


