Coronation Celebrations
=======================

If there had been any worldly empire or the occasion of the accession to
the throne of any Imperial Majesty, the ornamented crown and jewel
bedecked diadem would have definitely dazzled the eyes of imagination.
But the occasion related to an Islamic State and a Sovereign appointed
by the Prophet of Islam as his immediate successor and vicegerent.

Every manner of Islam is strange by itself and so are all of its aspects
unique. Neither does the civilization of this religion resemble another
nor does its culture harmonize with any other creed.

The civic decorum brought by the religion of God is without any blemish
and its social order is far removed from other civilizations and is
rather unique.

On the plains of Khumm and near the border of Ghadir we see that the
Apostle of God after proclaiming the vicegerency and lieutenancy of the
'Master of the pious' under mandate of God called Imam Ali by his side.
He wound his special turban over his head and said, "O Ali! The turbans
are the crowns and tiaras of Arabs".

Allama Shablanji, the writer of \`Nurul-Absar' writes, "Among various
appellations of honor a title of the Holy Prophet was Possessor of the
crown' ". Illustrating his assertion the same writer further says, "Here
the crown means \`turban' because it is confirmed by a Hadith of the
Holy Prophet".

The turban wrapped by the Holy Prophet over Ali's head was called
\`Sahab' or cloud. Interesting details of Ali's coronation are available
in the books such as, \`Isaba', \`Kanzul Ummal', \`Riazun Nazara',
\`Faraedus-Simtain' and Ibne Asir's \`Nihaya'.

According to the narration of Ibne Shazan the Apostle of God with his
own hands wound the turban over the head of the Commander of the
faithful, leaving one of its ends at the back and the other one on the
shoulders. After that he asked Ali to turn his back. Ali did likewise.
Then he said, "Alright! Now turn your face towards me". And Ali stood
face to face with him. The Apostle of God glanced Ali with delight from
head to foot and in a tone of profound love and affection said, "The
crowns worn by the angels are as the same".

We find yet another narration in \`Kanzul Ummal' ascribed to Imam Ali.
Its gist is, "The Prophet after performing this ceremony at Ghadir Khumm
said, "O my beloved cousin Ali! The angels through whom God Almighty
helped us in the battles of Badr and Hunain were all wearing turbans.
Turban is that sign of distinction which distinguish between paganism
and Faith in God, in His Word and in His Apostles". The Prophet always
used to recall this turban of eminence and superiority. This
recollection was very dear to him".

Allama Ali bin Burhan Uddin in his book 'Insanul Oune Fi Seeratil
Mamoon' write, "The Prophet had a turban which was called \`Sahab' or
cloud. He had adorned Ali bin Abi Talib's head with it on the day of
Ghadir Khumm. Whenever Ali wearing this turban appeared before the
Prophet, the Apostle of God addressing the people would say, "Here comes
Ali wearing the \`Sahab' ".

This means that the Prophet of Islam himself was always delighted on
seeing the robe of honor which lie had bestowed on Ali and was also
desirous to see Ali's coronation celebrations being commemorated in the
Islamic Society.


