The Congregation Greets Ali
===========================

A renowned historian lbne Khawand Shah (deceased 903 A.H.) on page 173
of the First Volume of his book \`Rawzatus Safaa' and yet another famous
historian, Ghiasliddin (deceased 942 A.H.) on page 144, volume III of
his great presentation, \`Habibus Siyar' write, "When the meeting held
under the serene and blissful atmosphere of the Revelation ended, the
Holy Prophet made Imam Ali sit in a specially pitched tent and ordered
the Muslims to proceed group by group and congratulate I mam Ali for his
succession. When the males leave finished their greetings the Apostle of
God ordered his revered wives to go and offer their congratulations.

According to the narration of a respectable companion of the Prophet,
Zaid bin Arqam, immediately on receiving the orders of the Prophet the
entire crowd with one voice said, "By all means we shall most willingly
obey the mandate of God Almighty and His Apostle".

Later all present moved forward towards Imam Ali bin Abi Talib. Abu
Bakr, Omar, Othman, Talha and Zubair were first to clasp the hand of Ali
and swear allegiance.

The Muhajirs and Ansars one by one, by the rest of the congregation who
swore allegiance and congratulated Ali on his designation as Commander
of the Faithful, followed them. This grand celebration continued for
full three days. (Kitabul Wilayah, by Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari,
deceased 310 A.H.).

Abu Hamid Ghazali (deceased 505 A.H.) describes the words which Omar bin
Khattab uttered at the time of greetings and they are, as follows,
"Excellent! How fortunate you are O father of Hasan! Now you have become
my master as well as of all the Muslims". (\`Sirrul Alamain' page 9).

Hafiz Abu Bakr Khateeb Baghdadi (deceased 463 A.H.) has also quoted
these words in his book on history. If we go through the pages of
history, biography, Hadith, Tafseer and Arabic literature we shall find
that this great festival of the Islamic world was begun with the
recitation of an ode of Hassan ibne Thabit, who was an esteemed p6et of
the court of the Prophet and died in 54 A.H.

Hafiz bin Abdullah Marzbani (deceased 378 A.H.) with reference of the
companion of the Prophet, Abu Saeed Khudri, writes in \`Mirqatush Sher'
that when the Apostle of God had declared the proclamation of Ali's
succession Hassan ibne Thabit said, "O Messenger of God! I have composed
a few couplets in praise of Imam Ali and I beg you to allow me to recite
them". The Holy Prophet said, "Alright, you can recite".

On getting this permission Hassan began to recite his ode. The opening
couplet was:  
 \` Yunadihumu Yawmal Ghadir Nabiyyuhum Be Khummen Wasma' Bir Rasule
Munadiya'

This impromptu and befitting poem of the Prophet's court has reached us
through thirty- eight most authentic and correct literary sources. One
very important phase of Hassan's ode is that this renowned literary
figure of the seat of Islam gave such an apt elucidation and explanation
of the word \`Mawla' that it presents a vivid and clear meaning of this
expression. The result was that this explanation left no room for any
conjectures on the part of the non-Arab critics and thus put stop to any
possible adverse effects on the good literary taste.


