Ali the Master
==============

The event of 18th Zilhaj 10 A. H. was neither a matter of secrecy, nor
an underground gathering nor a hidden endeavor. As such no room is left
for any sort of doubt, suspicion, uncertainty or ambiguity. This mammoth
congregation attended by thousands was held by the mandate of God, under
the supervision of the Prophet of Islam, in a vast desert, in the full
light of the day. The main proceedings of this feast are preserved in
the official documents of Islam (Qur'an and Hadith).

Similarly statements, the accounts of the eyewitnesses and feelings of
prominent literary figures and intellectuals who attended this important
session of Islamic History has been recorded in the books of history and
biography. How strange it is that in spite of all these undeniable facts
some persons have tried to present their own biased sentiments in regard
to the event of Ghadir. In the writings of such prejudiced writers the
word \`Mawla' has been the center of discussion and comments.

They consider that the word \`Mawla' does not mean \`master, leader,
head, superior' but it has been used in the sense of \`friend, helper
and cousin'. Had this been a minor objection we would have definitely
overlooked it. But the word \`Mawla' is the most important word uttered
on the day of Ghadir.

Every reasonable person would have to admit that the Holy Qur'an does
not present enigmas and the Apostle of God never indulged in quibbles
and puns. This mode of conversation is against the very spirit of
sincere guidance and purity of thought and speech.

The word \`Mawla' in the Arabic language has twenty-seven meanings. The
Prophet while using this word in his Prophetic discourse had clarified
its reference and its context so clearly that everyone among those who
heard his sermon proclaimed, "Ali, is \`Mawla' in the same sense in
which the Prophet is master".

Moreover, the Holy Prophet later on explained the true sense of this
word at length. Ali bin Hameed on page 38 of his book \`Shamsul Akhbar'
writes, "When it was enquired from the Apostle of God about the Hadith
\`Whose master am I' he said, "As God is My Master, so I am the master
of the faithful and in the same sense Ali also is their master".

Among the companion of the Prophet, Abu Bakr, Omar, Abdullah bin
Ja'afar, Abdullah bin Abbas, Salman Farsi, Jabir bin Abdullah Al-Ansari,
Abu Saeed Khudri, Zaid bin Arqam, Abu Ayyub Ansari, Qais bin Sa'ad bin
Ubada, Hassan bin Thabit and Ammar bin Yasir have also considered the
meaning of the word \`Mawla' to be the master who holds the greatest
right of disposal.

Among the religious heads and scholars Muhammad bin Saib Kalbi (deceased
146 A.H.), Yahya bin Ziad Kufi (deceased 207 A.H.), Abu Obaida Basri
(deceased 210 A. H.), Abul Hasan Akfash Nahwi (deceased 215 A.H.), Abu
Zaid bin Aus Basri (deceased 125 A.H.), Ibne Qutaiba Deenwari (deceased
276 A.H.), Abul Abbas Salab Shaibani (deceased 291 A.H.), Abu Bakr
Anbari (deceased 328 A.H.), Abul Hasan Rummani (deceased 384 A.H.), Abul
Hasan Wahidi (deceased 468 A.H.), Sa'ad- Uddin Taftazani (deceased 791
A.H.), Shahab Uddin Khafaji (deceased 1069 A.H.), Hamzawi Maliki
(deceased 1303 A.H.). Abu Is'haq Salabi (deceased 427 A.H.), Husain Bin
Mas'ud (deceased 510 A.H.),

Jarullah Zamakhshari (deceased 538 A.H.), Abu Baqa Ukbari (deceased 616
A.H.), Qazi Nasiruddin Baizawi (deceased 692 A.H.), Alla Uddin Khazin
Baghdadi (deceased 741 A.H.), Muhammad bin Ismail Bukhari (deceased 215
A.H.), Ibne Hajar Haithami (deceased 974 A.H.), Mohammad bin Jarir
Tabari (deceased 310 A.H.), Hafiz Uddin Nasafi (deceased 701 A.H.), Abu
Sa'ud Hanafi (deceased 972 A.H.), Sharif Jurjani (deceased the
reflections of the event of Ghadir have continued to shed their rays
throughout the wide expanse of the entire human civilization.

Ask the commentators of the Qur'an, contact the compilers of Hadith,
interrogate the historians, inquire from the biographers, discuss with
the intelligentsia, consult the scholars and then ponder on the
importance of the event of Ghadir.

Every heart has been moved by the event of Ghadir and every soul has
been stirred by it. This event has established its authority among
various religious and social groups and almost every school of thought
has acknowledged its authenticity.

Ghadir is that living truth which emerged from the horizon of history
shedding its light, like the sun and the stars on every age and region.

Anyone researching on Ghadir would surely come to know that five verses
of the Holy Qur'an describing this august event have been revealed vis.,
verse 68 of Chapter \`The Food' (Chap. 5), verse number 3 of the same
chapter and three verses of chapter, \`The Ways of Ascent'.

Regarding the revelation of the first verse a summary of the research of
thirty famous commentators is that when the caravan of the Apostle of
God, while on his way from Mecca to Medina, stopped at the place of \`
Khumm' the archangel Gabriel descended with the proclamation of God
Almighty, "O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your
Lord".

Sixteen eminent scholars presenting their researches regarding the
second verse write that when the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) had
proclaimed the succession of Ali bin Abi Talib as the Commander of the
Faithful the angel assigned with the task of conveying the words of God
descended with the Holy verse, 'Today have I perfected for you your
religion'.

The reason why three verses of the chapter \`The Ways of Ascent' (Chap.
70) came down is said to be that Hadith bin Noaman Al-Fahri or Nazr bin
Harith Al-Abdari denying the leadership of Ali had said, "If God has
bestowed this exaltation on Ali and the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) is
correct in respect of the declaration of the leadership of Ali then I
may be cursed with God's punishment".

That very moment he received chastisement and God Almighty through
threefold verses viz., \`One demanding, demanded the chastisement which
must befall' preordained the universal and eternal proclamation of this
great event. The literary investigations of thirty most prominent
commentators of the Qur'an' and Hadith have confirmed this event.

In the same way when we look towards the origins, sources and
authorities of Ghadir we feel that the enthusiasm and spirit, which the
scholars, commentators and historians have shown in this connection, has
been exemplary. Perhaps no other event of Islamic History has been
related or written with such zeal and zest. For brevity's sake only a
brief statistics is presented here:

In the list of the narrators of the event of Ghadir we find 110 names of
the companions of the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.)

Among the narrators we come across the names of 84 "Tabe'in". Tabe'in
(followers) were those respected persons who had not seen the Prophet,
but who followed him immediately in time and had remained in the company
of the Prophet's companions.

If you hurriedly go through the period from the first century Hijri to
the fourteenth century Hijri you will find that there are about four
hundred scholars of Hadith, commentary, history and criticism who have
discussed the details of Ghadir in their world famed writings. About one
of them, Hafiz Abul (See Note page 43- 3 8) Ya'ala Al-Attar Al-Hamdani
who belonged to the fifth century Hijri. It is said that he used to
relate the tradition of Ghadir under the authority of quotations from
250 narrators (Al-Qawlul Fasl, Vol.I, page 545).

During the early history of Islam the event of Ghadir has been quoted
many times, but on it has been recorded on 22 definite occasions for
reference.

About 32 full-fledged books have so far been written on the subject of
Ghadir; e.g., the famous historian and commentator Muhammad bin Jarir
Tabari has collected the traditions of Ghadir in two volumes (Tarikh
Ibne Katheer, Vo1.V); and some other historians have written books on
this subject in at least 29 volumes (Yanabi-ul-Mawaddah, page 36).

In every age, Ghadir has stirred the imagination of so many poets and
writers. From the very inception of this event up to this day in all
ages the masters of art and poetry have written in praise of Ghadir.
This event is an everliving topic for the literary gatherings of the
Orient.

A celebrated Lebanese Christian literature of our age, Polas Saldma has
versified his feelings under the name of \`AI-Ghadir'. This masterpiece
comprises 3,151 couplets and Al-Nasr Press, Beirut, has published it.
Allama Amini in a number of volumes of his celebrated book \`Al-Ghadir'
has dealt with the poems and literary works relating to this event and
it is considered to be a scholarly work.

Impressed by the extra-ordinary fame and importance of the event of
Ghadir no less a scholar that the famous Allama Zia-Uddin Muqbibi
(deceased 1108 A.H.) had to decide that \`if the tradition of Ghadir is
not considered to be wellknown then no aspect of the religion of Islam
can be traced and proved'.

Abu Reihdn Al-Biruni, Sa'alebi, Ibne Talh\`a Shafeyi, Ibne Khallekan and
Mas'udi have regarded the day of Ghadir among the big days of rejoi
cings of the Islamic world. For reference books, Al-A'sarul Baqiya, page
334; Thamaratul Quluob, page 511; Matalibus-Su'ul, page 53; Al-Wafiyat,
Vol.II, page 223; and Al-Tanbeeh wal Ishraf, page 221, can be consulted.
Muhaqqiq Al-Kulaini (deceased 329 A.H.) in his valuable writing
\`Usul-e-Kafi' narrates from Sahl bin Ziad that it was enquired from
Hazrat Imam Ja'afar Sadiq (a.s.) whether there is any other day of
rejoicing in the Islamic world besides the days of rejoicings of Friday,
Eid Al-Azha and Eid Al-Fitr. The great Imam said, "Yes, the most revered
one".

The questioner asked, "Which celebration is it?" The reply was, "When
the Apostle of God appointed the Commander of the Faithful as his
successor and proclaimed \`whose master I am Ali also is his master' ".
When asked about the date the Imam replied, "Eighteenth of the month of
Zilhaj".

When further asked as to what the Muslims should do on this auspicious
day the Imam said, "Keep fast on this day, busy yourselves in prayers,
and devote yourselves to the service of God. It is also essential to
remember and narrate the virtue of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his
Descendants because the Prophet had asked Ali to observe the day of
Ghadir as a day of rejoicings. The conduct of all the Prophets had been
to declare the day of appointment of their successors to be the day of
rejoicings".


