Chapter 10: The Obstacles on the Way and the Tortures Inflicted by the Quraysh
==============================================================================

From the very day the Holy Prophet of Islam started his public
propagation of Islam, the Quraysh chiefs resorted to any means to
silence him.

As usual, they first began with attempts to lure him and tried hard to
get him interested in wealth, status, and other material benefits that
they promised to give him if he submitted to their ungodly will, and,
after realizing that this method was of no use in their dealing with
him, they attempted to threaten and then to torment and torture him.

Thus a new stage - an exceedingly troublesome phase -started in the
blessed life of the Holy Prophet of Islam. The enemies of Islam, who had
well understood that the triumph and rule of Islam would surely put an
end to their law of the sword, tyrannies, and exploitation of the
deprived people, launched their combat against the Holy Prophet of Islam
most brutally and ruthlessly, discarding all moral and humane
principles - if they had any - and taking up the arms of rancour and
cruelty so that they could hamper the spread of Islam and guard the
interests of the Quraysh chiefs and men of power.

Of course it cannot be denied that one of the reasons for the opposition
of the people of that age to the perfect faith of the Holy Prophet of
Islam was their intellectual immaturity. But from the very day the
Quraysh tribe heard that the Holy Prophet of Islam called the idols and
wooden and stone statues they worshipped valueless and useless, they
exhibited the utmost enmity and opposition toward Islam. The Prophet
asked the people, \`What do you want with these lifeless objects?.' They
were even more enraged when the Prophet denounced the wooden and stone
idols of the Quraysh left to them by their ancestors, which they
regarded among their ancient glories.

On the other hand, the divine teachings of the Holy Prophet of Islam
were inconsistent with the interests of the oppressive class of the
chiefs of the Quraysh who wanted to continue exploiting the poor people
and possessing innumerable slaves, as well as with the interests and
inhumane desires of the usurers who wished to amass wealth at the
expense of the deprived class of their society.

It goes without saying that in an environment where no divine law is
obeyed and no human right is respected, the strong will forcibly violate
the honour, property, and chastity of the defenceless people, and so the
new faith - Islam - which severely opposed and fought this wrong social
system, enraged those whose interests and selfish considerations were
endangered.

Such notorious people as Abu Jahl, Abu Sufyan, Abu Lahab, Aswad ibn Abd
Yaghwan, \`As ibn Wail, \`Utbah and Shaybah, Walid ibn Maghirah, and
\`Aqibah ibn Abi Ma'ayyat were among the leaders of the opponents of
Islam.

Cruel, false accusations, physical torment, foul language, economic and
financial pressure and boycotts were among the inhumane methods used by
the Quraysh chiefs against the Prophet and his faithful companions.

Here some examples of the offences and torments which the enemies of
Islam inflicted upon the Holy Prophet are mentioned:

**1.** One day a number of Quraysh gave the uterus of a sheep to their
servants to throw at the blessed face and head of the Prophet. They
obeyed their brutal master, thus making the Prophet rather sad. [^1]

**2.** Tariq Maharibi has narrated, \`I saw the Holy Prophet saying in a
loud voice to the people, "O people! Say there is no god but God so you
would find salvation".

\`He urged the people to submit to Islam and become monotheists while
Abu Lahab followed him step by step and threw stones at him injuring him
so that his feet were covered with blood, but the Holy Prophet continued
to guide the people and show them the path of eternal salvation and
prosperity. Abu Lahab cried out, "People! This man is a liar. Do not
listen to him"." [^2]

**3.** In addition, the Holy Prophet of Islam, as well as his loyal
friends and those who had newly adopted Islam, were most severely
tortured and tormented by the infidels.

One day, the Holy Prophet of Islam observed 'Ammar Yasir and his family
being- tortured by the enemies of Islam. Addressing-\`Ammar and his
faithful family, he said, \`I give you, 'Ammar's family, the good
tidings that Paradise will be your eternal abode'. [^3]

Ibn Athir has written, 'Ammar and his parents suffered severe tortures
from the idol worshippers. The idol worshippers forced them out of their
house in the hot burning weather and tortured them under the burning
rays of the sun, inflicting the most unbearable tortures upon them so
that they would leave the faith.'

Sumayyah, 'Ammar's mother, was the first woman martyr of Islam, killed
by a blow from Abu Jahl's weapon. Yasir, 'Ammar's father, too, died
under the torture of the infidels. 'Ammar himself was most cruelly
tortured by the enemies of Islam but resorted to dissimulation and thus
saved his own life.[^4]

**4.** Bilal, an Ethiopian slave, was among the Prophet's most faithful
followers, and, because of his faith in Islam, his ruthless master
brutally tortured him. At midday when it is scorching hot, his master
would make Bilal lie down on the burning hot desert pebbles and sand and
put a large and heavy stone on his chest to force him to stop obeying
the Holy Prophet of Islam and to worship their idols instead of
worshipping the One God.

Bilal resisted all his threats and tortures most bravely and admirably
and responded just by repeating the word \`Ahad' (One), meaning \`God is
One and Peerless and I will never become an idol worshipper'. [^5]

Unfortunately, there is no room in such a relatively small book to
narrate in detail all the sad stories of the Muslims of early Islam.
Thus we content ourselves with observing that the enemies of Islam
resorted to any means at their disposal in their fight against Islam and
the Muslims, some of which were:

***Economic struggle:*** The Quraysh had started a fierce economic
struggle against the Prophet and his followers. One of the inhumane
weapons they used against the Muslims was economic pressure and boycott
of any sort of transactions with the Muslims.

***Psychological warfare:*** Prohibiting of marriage with Muslims,
cutting off all relations with them from the Quraysh, and accusing the
Holy Prophet of Islam of witchcraft, telling lies, and the like were
psychological tactics meant to break down the resistance and
perserverance of the first Muslims.

***Physical torment and torture:*** Another anti-human method of
fighting the new movement and its adherents used by the Quraysh was
physical torture of the Muslims, which resulted in the martyrdom of a
number of faithful Muslims at the beginning of Islam.

In spite of all the brutal methods that the infidel Quraysh utilized in
their struggles against Islam, the Holy Prophet and the Muslims, Islam
advanced and the Prophet continued to urge the people to go the right
way. Islam and the Muslims continued their efforts and struggles.

To maintain their faith in Islam, the Muslims underwent extremely severe
torture, sufferings, and hardships and showed admirable resistance in
following this honorable path.

A careful and just survey of the conditions of the Muslims at the
beginning of Islam reveals the significant fact that, unlike the picture
the enemies of Islam have always tried to present, Islam, this holiest
of faith, has not been promoted at the point of the bayonet or by the
sword, but for 13 years, the Holy Prophet of Islam and the faithful
Muslims tolerated the tortures, torments, and swords of the infidels and
the idol worshippers to promote this divine religion revealed by God for
their salvation.

[^1]: A'lam Alwari, new edition, p.57.

[^2]: Manaqib Vol. 1, p.51.

[^3]: A'lam Alwari, p.58.

[^4]: Kamil, Vol. 2, pp.66-67.

[^5]: Â Ibid.


