Chapter 11: The Migration of the Prophet: the Source of Historical Transformation
=================================================================================

Going Into Exile To Achieve The Divine Goal
-------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet of Islam was well aware of the fact that people who
were plunged in prejudice, superstition, and ignorance would not abandon
their beliefs and ways easily and that it would take extensive struggle,
severe hardships, and sincere self-sacrifice to save them from the pit
of corruption and guide them onto the path of virtue and monotheism. He
could easily read in the faces of the people of Makkah, the opposition
to Islam and their bigoted determination to fight the Muslims.

The divine foresight of the Holy Prophet of Islam had given him a dark
image of the future. With such an insight and divine knowledge, he held
high the banner of prophecy and adopted patience and tolerance. The
Prophet struggled with the enemies of Islam in Makkah for 13 years and
resisted all their torments and obstructions, but the opponents of Islam
did not give up their devilish beliefs and manner and utilized all their
power to destroy Islam. [^1] Under such circumstances, the universal
mission of the Holy Prophet of Islam necessitated his migration to a
calm, suitable place and to find a new arena for his work and mission.

Yathrib - Ready To Submit To Islam
----------------------------------

At the time of the pilgrimage to the Ka'aba, some of the men of
importance of the Khazraj tribe came to Makkah and met with the Holy
Prophet in the Masjid al-Haram. He explained the divine faith of Islam
to them and encouraged them to believe in this religion, which is the
faith of peace and fraternity. The Khazraj chiefs, who were tired of
their deep-rooted disputes and conflicts with the Aws tribe, felt that
Islam was exactly what they needed, and so they most willingly submitted
to Islam.

When the Khazrajis, who had become Muslim, were about to return to
Yathrib, they asked the Holy Prophet of Islam for a missionary, and he
assigned Mas'ab ibn \`Umir to accompany them. Thus, the people of
Yathrib were informed of the rising sun of Islam and hurried to gain
information about the new faith.

The most effective factor in making the people ready and eager to adopt
Islam was listening to the luminous verses of the Holy Qur'an. Mas'ab
reported the conversion to Islam of the chiefs and leaders of both the
Khazraj and Aws tribes to the Holy Prophet. Later on, a large number of
the people of Yathrib who had come to Makkah to take part in the Hajj
pilgrimage held a secret meeting with the Prophet at midnight and swore
allegiance to support him just as they supported and protected their own
families. [^2]

The Plot To Murder The Holy Prophet Of Islam
--------------------------------------------

Dawn had hardly broken when the infidel Quraysh were informed of the
allegiance of the Yathribi Muslims. They hurriedly attempted to
frustrate it and hinder the advance of Islam. For this purpose, they
held a council in the place where the Quraysh gathered to pass judgment
and to consult each other. After a great deal of talk and consultation,
it was resolved that they select one man from each tribe to rush into
the house of the Prophet at night and murder him so that the basis of
the propagation of Islam would be destroyed. [^3]

But Almighty God made the Holy Prophet aware of the intrigue of his
enemies and commanded him to leave Makkah by night.[^4] The Prophet,
upon receiving this revelation, decided to leave his homeland and
migrate to Yathrib.

Ali’s Self-Sacrifice
--------------------

When the Holy Prophet of Islam was divinely commanded to migrate to
Yathrib, he called 'Ali, disclosed his secret to him, gave him the
people's trusts to be returned to their owners and then said, \`I have
to migrate, but you must lie in my bed'. 'Ali sincerely obeyed the Holy
Prophet and lay in his bed, thus devotedly exposing himself to the
dangers that threatened the Holy Prophet of Islam. [^5]

'Ali's self-sacrifice was so sincere and significant that God praised it
in the Holy Quran. [^6]

The Holy Prophet Of Islam Goes To The Thawr Cave
------------------------------------------------

At midnight the enemies of Islam surrounded the house of the Holy
Prophet to carry out their satanic plot. But since God was the supporter
and protector of the Prophet, He saved him from harm at the hands of the
murderous infidels.

While reading verses from Sura Yasin, the Holy Prophet of Islam came out
of his house and through a by-way, went to the Thawr cave, which was
situated outside Makkah. Abu Bakr was informed of the matter and
accompanied the Holy Prophet." [^7]

The infidels rushed towards the Prophet's bed with drawn swords in their
hands, but to their surprise, they found 'Ali in his place. Upset and
enraged, they asked, \`Where has Muhammad gone? 'Ali answered, \`Had you
assigned me to watch him? Well, you intended to expel him and he has
left the city'. [^8]

Realizing that all their plots were frustrated, the idol worshipping
Quraysh took serious measures but all in vain.

On The Way To Yathrib
---------------------

After staying in the Thawr cave for three days, the Holy Prophet of
Islam proceeded towards Yathrib. [^9] One of the Makkans, Saraqa ibn
Malik, attempted to pursue him, but his horse's hoof sank into the
ground three times and threw him down, so he repented and returned to
Makkah." [^10]

On the 12th of Rabi al-Awwal, the Holy Prophet of Islam reached a place
called Quba, [^11] where he stayed for a few days." [^12]Abu Bakr
insistently asked the Prophet to begin travelling towards Yathrib, but
the Holy Prophet refused to go without 'Ali. He said to Abu Bakr, 'Ali
has endangered his own life to save mine. He is my cousin, my brother,
and the dearest among the family to me. I will not leave here until he
joins me'.[^13]

After fulfilling the mission assigned to him, 'Ali joined the Holy
Prophet in Quba, but his legs were so bruised that he could hardly walk.
The Holy Prophet embraced him most affection­ately, blessed his hurt
legs with the saliva from his own mouth which healed 'Ali's swollen
legs. Thus together they started towards Yathrib. [^14]

Yathrib Eagerly Awaiting The Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------

Yathrib had taken on an extraordinary air and intense excitement and
eagerness had overtaken the whole city. In every alley and neighbourhood
people impatiently awaited the Holy Prophet of Islam.

He entered Yathrib on Friday. [^15]People were overjoyed and could not
stop looking at the resplendent countenance of the Prophet.

The Holy Prophet of Islam settled in Yathrib and there laid the
foundations of Islam and a magnificent culture based on justice and
faith.

After the blessful entrance of the Holy Prophet of Islam into Yathrib,
its name was changed into Medinat ul-Nabi, meaning \`the City of the
Prophet'." [^16]That year, the year the Holy Prophet of Islam migrated
from Makkah to Yathrib, was recognized as the origin of history, due to
this significant historical event, the triumph of righteousness and
justice. The illuminating sun of Islam gave new life to the people. They
discarded all the old superstitious beliefs and thoughts and all the
wrong deeds and manners of the past, replacing them with the perfect
life-giving culture of Islam.

A Lesson From The Hijra
-----------------------

14 centuries have now passed since the momentous historical event of the
Hijra - the migration of the Holy Prophet from Makkah to Medina. A
careful study of history reveals the sincere and indefatigable efforts
of the Muslims in the cause of the migration and laying the foundation
of Islam.

After migration to Yathrib, the migrant Muslims had obviously rid
themselves of the torment and torture of the infidel Quraysh and found a
peaceful, agreeable environment. Nevertheless, they showed no tendency
towards self-indulgence and pleasure­ seeking. Rather they ceaselessly
endeavoured to establish an Islamic civilization and to spread the
divine faith of Islam.

It was these very sacrificial efforts and hard work of the Muslims that
rescued them from slavery and so many miseries and brought them honour,
prosperity, and glory.

It is indeed necessary for the Muslims all over the world to be
constantly reminded of the devotion and incessant efforts of the Muslims
in the early days of Islam, who relied on their faith in God and,
through obeying the instructions of the Holy Prophet, managed to make a
holy revolution and attained great achievements.

It is of vital significance to Muslims in all places and at all times to
take a lesson from the lives and sacrificial endeavours of those truly
devoted Muslims. Each year, on the occasion of the anniversary of the
migration, sincere reflection on the lives of these godly men and women
will effectively serve this purpose.

It is also incumbent upon us to teach posterity the fact that the
Muslims of the beginning of Islam owed their glory and greatness to
their faith and their sincere efforts and that we must try to adopt
their manners if we want to regain the honour and greatness that devoted
Muslims really deserve.

[^1]: Ibid., p.108.

[^2]: A'lam Alwari, pp.55-61.

[^3]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.i229; A'lam Alwari, pp.61-62.

[^4]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1231; Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, p.60.

[^5]: Sirihi ibn Hishim, Vol. 1; p.481; Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1232.

[^6]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, p.78.

[^7]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1234.

[^8]: A'lam Alwari, p.63.

[^9]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.486; Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, p.69.

[^10]: Ibid., p.489; p.88.

[^11]: Kamil, p.106. Quba is a place near Medina.

[^12]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1245.

[^13]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, p.116.

[^14]: Kamil, Vol. 2, p.106.

[^15]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.494; Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 9, p.122.

[^16]: Mu jim ul-Buldan maddihi Yathrib and Majma' ul-Bahrin Maddihi
Tharb.


