Chapter 12: Islamic Fraternity
==============================

Laying the Foundation for an Islamic Fraternity in Medina
---------------------------------------------------------

The existence of sympathy, sincerity, and harmony among the people of a
society makes that society a living one - one that is fit for human life
and evolution, in which all can find salvation and progress and can
enjoy each other's sympathy and sincerity.

In the process of establishing such an ideal human society, Islam does
not pay the least bit of attention to such considerations as race,
language, skin colour, and geographical location. Rather, this holy
religion regards all Muslims as equal." [^1] It looks only at the
people's faith in God, which is the root of all unity.

\`Islamic brotherhood' is the phrase best revealing this all­ embracing
unity. This meaningful, clear expression in the Holy Qur'an describes
this Islamic precept:

**\`Truly** ***the faithful are brothers' (49:10).***

The Prophet's Initiative In Creating Islamic Brotherhood
--------------------------------------------------------

After having settled in Medina and after building a mosque that was
indeed the military and constitutional base of the Muslims, the Holy
Prophet of Islam took an excellent initiative. He laid the foundation of
Islamic brotherhood, so that great unity and sincerity would be
engendered in Muslim society and so that the emigrant Muslims would know
that, though they had lost a number of their friends and relatives and
had been forced to leave their homes, in return, they had gained
brothers who were much more loyal and sympathetic from every point of
view.

Therefore, besides the general fraternity and brotherhood that exists
among all Muslims, the Prophet concluded contracts of brotherhood among
his followers. He announced each two Muslims to be brothers. He himself
selected 'Ali as his own brother and said, "Ali is my brother'. [^2]

In the Holy Qur'an, Islamic brotherhood has been elevated and held in
reverence:

***\`And hold fast to the covenant of God, all together, and remember
the favour of God upon you when you were enemies, then He united your
hearts so by His favour you became brethren, and you were on the brink
of a pit*** **of** ***fire, then He saved you from it; thus does God
make clear to you His communications that you may follow the right way'
(3:3).***

Islamic Brotherhood: Byword Of Unity And Fraternity
---------------------------------------------------

Islamic brotherhood is not a honorific expression but a reality mingled
with the spirit of faith whose fruits emerge one after the other.

Our Holy Leader Imam Sadiq has explained some of the fruits of Islamic
brotherhood in the following way: \`A believer is the brother and guide
of another believer. He does not betray or oppress him, nor does he ever
cheat his brother. A believer never breaks his promise'. [^3]

One of the requirements of Islamic brotherhood is that whatever a Muslim
desires for himself, he should desire for his brother in Islam, and he
should help his Muslim brothers by any means possible, whether by his
wealth or by his speech or by any other means. It is far from Islamic
brotherhood if you have enough food, water, and clothing while another
Muslim is hungry, thirsty and naked.

Imam Sadiq, peace be upon him, has said, \`If you have a servant and
your brother in Islam does not have any, you must send your servant to
help your brother prepare food, clean clothes, and perform any other
needed work'. [^4]

Islamic fraternity has overshadowed all relationships, even family
relationships. The Qur'an openly says,

**\`You** ***shall not find a people who believe in God and the latter
day befriending those who act in opposition to God and His Apostle, even
though they were their own fathers or their sons or their brothers or
their kinsfolk' (58:22).***

It was the principle of Islamic brotherhood that made the Ethiopian
Bilal and the Persian Salman brothers and two of the best companions of
the Holy Prophet of Islam. In the light of Islamic brotherhood, many
deep-rooted enmities were reconciled and divided groups were united.
This unity requires that all Muslims share each other's sorrows and joys
like members of a large family. Muslims should be sincere and
affectionate toward each other, and their watchword should be unity and
brotherhood.

Islamic brotherhood firmly holds all Muslims responsible toward each
other and establishes an all-embracing responsibility so that Muslims
cannot be heedless of each other's troubles and problems but every
Muslim must, within his own abilities, endeavour to solve the problems
of Muslims and to create possibilities for the advancement and promotion
of Islam.

This responsibility is divided into two parts:

**Economic Cooperation:** This responsibility is related to meeting
people's economic needs, such as hygiene, education, shelter,
employment, and the like, and part of the precepts of the Holy Qur'an
and the instructions of religious leaders deal with this as well as with
fundamental precepts and programs such as zakat (the poor-due prescribed
by Islam), almsgiving, charity, and the like.

**Scientific and Educational Cooperation:** This part includes
propagation, guidance, and teaching. That is to say, all Muslims are
duty-bound to communicate to others whatever they have learned and not
to neglect each other's guidance.

Also, there are two basic principles among the practical precepts of
Islam that urge Muslims to call upon each other to perform their
religious duties and to refrain from committing sins. These precepts,
which are indeed most beneficial to Muslims, are rated among the most
significant requirements of Islamic brotherhood. But unfortunately,
Muslims seem to have forgotten this great precept due either to
imaginary fears or to selfish interests, and perhaps due to both.

As we clearly observe, in most Muslim societies, prohibition from
committing sins and mutual encouragement to obey religious instructions
have long been neglected. This deplorable situation has resulted in the
ruin of the ethical spirit of Islamic brotherhood, and following this
ruin, other superiorities and advantages of this living society are
lost.

Islamic Brotherhood In The Present Age
--------------------------------------

In our age, Muslims need real unity more than ever. God has endowed
Islamic countries with invaluable resources which others intensely
covet. Thus, they try every means possible to divide Muslims and
distract them from their critical situation. It goes without saying that
dispersion, lack of unity, and negligence are extremely effective causes
of ruin and slavery, and obviously the world-devouring enemies of
Muslims are quite aware of this fact.

Therefore, we Muslims must be alert and vigilant in order to overcome
those who clearly intend to exploit us, devour our natural resources,
and bring us humiliation and misery.

The solution to our problems concerning our brutal enemies lies in
Islamic brotherhood of which the foundation has been laid by the blessed
hands of the Holy Prophet of Islam, and in following Islamic precepts.

No matter how powerful the Muslims are, still they greatly need unity.
So the lesson of unity and Islamic brotherhood should be effectively
taught to primary school students, and later on, as youngsters grow
older and are promoted to higher grades, practical training programs
treating Islamic brotherhood and other precepts of Islam must be added
to their education, to strengthen their Islamic spirit. Moreover, it is
one of the greatest duties of Muslim parents to bring up children who
are real Muslims and sympathetic to other Muslims.

It is crystal clear that if the Muslims had observed the principles of
Islamic brotherhood and had been united and sympathetic, they would
never have suffered so much tyranny, humiliation, and exploitation from
the non-Muslims. But it is a pity that the Muslims' negligence has
,given the covetous exploiters an opportunity to enslave, humiliate,
degrade, and plunder millions of Muslims in Africa, Asia, and all over
the world, Muslims who really deserve lordship and superiority if they
follow Islamic precepts.

[^1]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 73, p.293; Rudih Kafi, p.246.

[^2]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 2, pp.504-505.

[^3]: Usul ul-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp.166-167.

[^4]: Ibid., p.169. 


