Chapter 13: Jihad, Religious and Spiritual Struggle in the Way of God
=====================================================================

More than 1,000 million Muslims in different parts of the world unitedly
celebrated the beginning of the 15th century of the actualization of the
prophetic mission of the Holy Prophet of Islam.

This celebration was held to glorify the great day when the Prophet
hoisted the flag of peace and brotherhood and laid the foundations of
universal peace and peaceful co-existence; just as Almighty God has said
to the Prophet,

***\`...And We have not sent you but as a blessing to the worlds'
(21:107).***

Islam has best resolved the racial and class differences that are the
causes of most wars, conflicts, and disastrous events, whereas the
so-called civilized world of today is deeply involved in bloody wars and
ruinous conflicts and each day the world's murderous statesmen and super
criminals find a new pretext under which to fan the flames of war.

Islam's care for peace and justice is so great that in the Qur'an, the
followers of the Book, the Jews and the Christians, have been explicitly
urged to adopt unity and harmony in the moving expression,

***\`Say: O followers of the Book! Come to an equitable proposition
between us and you that we shall not serve any but God and (that) we
shall not associate aught with Him...' (3:74).***

When the Muslims migrated to Medina and the flag of victory was hoisted
over their heads, numerous peace proposals were offered to the Prophet
by his opponents and he welcomed them. An undeniable testimony to this
fact was his peace agreements with several Jewish tribes that were
concluded in the first year of the Hijra. [^1]

The Purpose Of Jihad
--------------------

Islam is a dynamic, comprehensive school that aims at the rectification
of the social and economic systems of the world in a special manner.

Unlike the beliefs of the ancient Romans, the Jews, and the Nazis, Islam
is not restricted to a certain community or a certain race, but is for
all human beings and aims at human prosperity and salvation. This divine
faith requires all Muslims, guided by the holy precepts and instructions
of Islam, to endeavour to rescue the oppressed masses, to establish
peace and justice, and to acquaint the unaware people of the whole world
with Islam and Islamic rules and regulations.

The combatants of Islam do not intend to gain control of a land or
overthrow an oppressive rule to replace it with a similar rule through
jihad. Rather, jihad is a pure humanitarian struggle fulfilled in God's
way and for human evolution and the rescue of the oppressed people. This
struggle culminates in the elimination of all sedition and in the
establishment of peace and prosperity.

This great undertaking and the dynamic precepts of Islam put an end to
the negligence and degradation of large groups of people, just as they
end the oppressive rule and tyrannical lordship of those who live in
luxury at the expense of the poor and the defenseless.

Human nature urges that the corrupt members of society be destroyed like
weeds so the way may be paved for human salvation and prosperity and so
the oppressed may be released from the tyranny of the oppressor.
Humanitarian, justice loving, and noble people adhere to this holy
struggle and embark upon it.

God's Words
-----------

***\`And were it not for Gods repelling some men with others, the earth
would certainly be in a state of disorder, but God is gracious to the
creatures' (2:251).***

In the theory of Islamic law, war is not an end in itself, but it is
regarded as the final means of hindering tyranny and aggression and
paving the way towards salvation for mankind.

Once the spokesman for the Arab Muslims said to Rustam Farrokhzad, the
Iranian military commander, \`God has assigned us to lead the people who
worship other people into worship of the unique, peerless, One God, to
urge them to leave a degrading life for a nobly one and to rescue them
from the torments of false religions Through Islamic justice. We will
let go of the land of any people who accept our invitation to Islam and
will go back to our own land." [^2]

Did Islam Prevail By The Force Of The Sword?
--------------------------------------------

As a matter of fact, through jihad, the Muslims have mainly meant to
establish connections with the people who are under the oppressive rule
of tyrants, so the oppressed masses would become acquainted with Islamic
rules and precepts and so they would comprehend the glory and
genuineness of independence and salvation. The Muslims are well aware of
the fact that the oppressed masses will most willingly accept Islam as
the best divine faith if Islam is correctly explained to them.

In fighting the infidels, the Muslims did not force people to become
Muslims but gave them the choice to retain their own faith provided they
submitted to the conditions of peace. In return, the Islamic government
would protect them.

In the peace agreement of Hudaybiyah, [^3] the Holy Prophet of Islam
undertook that no Muslimwould shelter any of the infidel Makkans even if
they became Muslims before or at the time of seeking refuge with the
Muslims in Medina and would return them to Makkah, and he stood by his
promise. [^4] If the Holy Prophet had wished, he could have taken the
same promise from his enemies that if a person left Islam and sought
refuge with the infidels of Makkah, he would be returned to Medina.

When Makkah was conquered by the Prophet and his followers, he gave the
Quraysh freedom of choice. He did not force anybody to adopt Islam. He
wanted them to become Muslims as a result of their true understanding of
Islam and of their own free will, not by force. He ordered the Muslims
not to kill anybody in Makkah except for a few who were constantly
causing trouble for the Muslims. [^5]

When the infidels asked him for refuge, he would give them refuge and
the opportunity to study Islam and then to submit to it freely. For
instance, Safwan ibn Umayyah fled to Jeddah when Makkah was conquered by
the Muslims. When some people asked the Holy Prophet for refuge on his
behalf, he sent his turban for him as a sign of refuge to give him
immunity on returning to Makkah.

Safwan returned from Jeddah and asked the Prophet to give him a respite
of two months. He agreed to his request and gave him a respite of four
months. And Safwan accompanied the Holy Prophet of Islam to Hunayn and
Ta'if and finally discarded infidelity and submitted to Islam of his own
free will." [^6]

Conclusion
----------

We conclude that in Islam, the sword is resorted to only in dealing with
those who have realized the truth and yet fight it and thus try to
hinder others from achieving salvation, and that force is applied to
banish tyranny, to release the oppressed, and to create favourable
conditions for human progress and evolution.

The sincere and loyal faith of the Muslims at the beginning of Islam and
their resistance to all torture and hardship are themselves the best
testimonies to the fact that Islam was not promoted by force. History
bears witness to this reality: that the Muslims at the beginning of
Islam were so devoted to their faith that they persevered in it through
their struggles no matter what torture arid torment the infidels
inflicted upon them. Many of them even left their homeland and migrated
to other places.

The Ethiopian Bilal was among those who took the lead in accepting
Islam. Abu Jahl made him lie on the burning hot pebbles, placed a heavy
stone on him, the torture of which is, needless to say, beyond
endurance. When the faithful Bilal was being tormented, Abu Jahl shouted
at him, \`Disbelieve in Muhammad's God. Discard Islam.' But Bilal just
repeated, \`The One. The One', [^7]meaning God is the One, and \`I
worship the One God'. In fact Bilal, as well as many other faithful
Muslims at the beginning of Islam, suffered a great deal from the
enemies of Islam who had aimed most obstinately at the destruction of
Islam.

All of them tolerated all the pains and torture and did not leave their
faith even for a single moment. We see therefore very clearly how the
accusation that Islam prevailed by force and by the law of the sword is
false and far from the truth.

Having found no weak point in Islam, the opponents of this divine
religion obviously resorted to such accusations to stain Islam, unaware
of the fact that Islam prevails because it is the most supreme divine
faith, perfectly compatible with human nature. It gives shelter to the
oppressed, deprived masses and presents solutions to all problems facing
human beings, whether they be in the material, spiritual, emotional,
educational, or political realms.

A Frenchman has written, \`Islam easily prevailed, and this should be
rated as one of the special characteristics of Islam. Islam persists
forever wherever Muslims step'. [^8]

Another Christian writer has written: \`The commercial and cultural
contacts beyond the borders of Islam have by far been more effective in
the expansion and promotion of the Islamic world than have been military
conquests'. [^9]

[^1]: A'lam Alwari, p.69.

[^2]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 5, p.2271.

[^3]: Bihar ul-Amwar, Vol. 20, p.350.

[^4]: Ibid., p.362.

[^5]: A'lam Alwari, p.110.

[^6]: Kamil, Vol. 2, pp.248-249.

[^7]: Usud ul-Ghabih, Vol. 1, p.206.

[^8]: Tamadduni Islam wa Arab, p.807.

[^9]: Jang wa sulh dar Islam, translated by Sayyid Ghulam Riza Sa'idi,
p.345.


