Chapter 14: The Motives of the Wars of the Prophet
==================================================

Unlike the self-centered rulers and kings all over the world who embark
on wars for expansionist purposes, for the exploitation of human powers,
and for the plunder of other people's wealth and natural resources, the
Prophet of Islam refused to resort to the sword and fighting unless it
was necessary and unavoidable. Instead, he advanced carrying the torch
of the Holy Book and the divine laws and would get involved in war only
to remove the stumbling blocks - the thorns in the way of salvation - to
hinder oppression and tyranny, and to hoist the flag of justice and
truth.

The battles of the Prophet of Islam against the infidels were, needless
to say, meant to remove those brutal selfish pagans from the scene who
for the sake of their own satanic passions and desires inflicted all
kinds of oppression against God's pure creatures and prevented the
promulgation of Islamic precepts and beliefs. He only fought to bring
about conditions of justice and equity under which human beings could
materialize the ideology of world peace and mutual understanding.

Can such a war be considered illegitimate and unjust? It goes without
saying that such struggles are necessary and that no Prophet could avoid
combating those who intend to bring ruin on human societies and cause
corruption and social decay. No doubt any wise, humanitarian person
accepts such combat and admires it because there is no other way to
achieve the sacred ends of the Prophets.

Jesus Christ, peace be upon him, had a short prophetic life and lived
under conditions that did not permit war, so he did not attempt any
wars. Otherwise, he too would have destroyed the weeds and troublemakers
of human society.

Christian propaganda purposely misinterprets the holy wars of the
Prophet of Islam and ascribes large numbers of casualties to them to
weaken the morale of Islamic nations, to hinder the ever-increasing
expansion and prevalence of Islam, and to make the murder of millions of
innocent people by the masters of churches and in the crusades appear
trivial and negligible to the people of the world.

Here we will first point out the motives of the Prophet of Islam in the
wars he undertook, and then we will briefly cite the casualties of all
the wars at the time of the Prophet, so the truth may be made clear. In
this way, readers can realize the philosophy of Islamic wars for
themselves and can also see that the casualties of these holy wars were
trivial in comparison with those of other wars.

The War Of Badr
---------------

For 13 years after the advent of the prophetic mission of the Prophet of
Islam, he and his followers were tormented and tortured by the infidel
Quraysh in Makkah. Finally, the Prophet of Islam left Makkah and
migrated to Medina. Yet the infidel Makkans did not stop tormenting the
Muslims who had remained in Makkah and also did not let them leave
Makkah and migrate somewhere else. [^1]

At the same time, the Makkan enemies of Islam had decided to put Medina
under a -severe economic siege. They had forbidden all caravans from
carrying provisions and foodstuffs to Medina. This siege lasted such a
long time that the people of Medina were faced with many troubles and
hardships and had to go as far as the coasts of the Red Sea to buy
foodstuff." [^2]

Abu Jahl, too, wrote an extremely harsh and rude letter to the Prophet
of Islam and in that letter warned him to expect the attack of the
Quraysh. [^3] It was on this occasion that God said,

***\`Those who have been expelled from their homes without a just cause
except that they say, "Our Lord is God." Had there not been God's
repelling some people by others, certainly there would have been pulled
down cloisters and churches and synagogues and mosques in which God's
name is much remembered,' and surely God will help him who helps His
cause; most surely God is strong, mighty'*** **(22:39-40).**

In the second year of the Hijra, the Holy Prophet of Islam arose to
guard Islam, to defend the basic rights of the Muslims, and to frustrate
the satanic conspiracies of the Quraysh. In the war of Badr, they
confronted the Quraysh troops. Although the number of Muslim combatants
was one-third that of the infidel forces the Muslims defeated the
infidels by their power of faith and by God's help. [^4]

The War Of Uhud
---------------

Since a considerable number of the infidel troops had been killed in the
Badr war, the next year, the third year after the Hijra, the Quraysh
prepared for war to take revenge for their defeat in the Badr war. They
proceeded to Medina. They faced the army of Islam in a place called
Uhud. Since a number of the Muslims in the war did not fully obey the
instructions of the Holy Prophet, the Muslims did not become victorious
in the Uhud war." [^5]

The Ahzab (Trench) War
----------------------

In the fifth year of the Hijra, a Jewish tribe called Bani Nazir went to
Makkah and incited the Quraysh against Islam and the Muslims. The
Quraysh took advantage of the opportunity, gathered a huge army from
different anti-Islamic groups, and started toward Medina.

To guard Medina, the headquarters of Islam, the Muslims dug moats all
around the city and lined up in front of the enemy army, whose number
amounted to 10,000. 'Ali, peace be upon him, overcame and defeated their
commander, and finally the war ended to the advantage and victory of the
Muslims." [^6]

The Bani Qurayzah War
---------------------

The Bani Qurayzah [^7] had concluded a peace agreement with the Holy
Prophet of Islam, but they violated that agreement in the war of Ahzab
and rendered help to the Quraysh. [^8] Since the Prophet had recognized
them as a \`dangerous' people, the Muslims had no choice but to kill
them.

After the war of Ahzab, the Prophet ordered his army to proceed against
the Bani Qurayzah. For 25 days, the Bani Qurayzah were besieged by the
Muslim army, and they finally surrendered.

The Aws tribe asked the Holy Prophet of Islam to forgive them and spare
them the punishment of death. He asked them, \`Are you ready to select
Sa'ad Ma'az, who is one of the men of status among you, as the arbiter
and accept his arbitration?' They all agreed, hoping that Sa'ad would
take their side. But Sa'ad Ma'az's verdict was to kill their fighters,
to take their possessions as booty, and to take their women captive.

The Holy Prophet said, \`The arbitration of Sa'ad Ma'az is the same
arbitration God has passed upon such people'. Then all their fighters
were killed. [^9]

The Bani Mustalaq War
---------------------

The Bani Mustalaq were a group of the Khaza'ah tribe who took measures
against the Muslims. The Holy Prophet of Islam came to know their plots
and proceeded against them with his combatants to repel their brutal
assault, fought them in a place called Marisa, and defeated them. This
war occurred in 6 A. H.[^10]

The Khaybar War
---------------

Large numbers of Jews lived in the Khaybar forts and had military and
economic relations with the infidels. Since the security of the Muslims
was constantly threatened by those anti-Â­ Islamic Jews, in 7 A.H. the
Muslims started towards Khaybar, which was the headquarters of the
enemy, surrounded the fort, and, after a triumphant war, made the Jews
submit to the Islamic government. [^11]

The Mutah War
-------------

In 8 A. H., the Holy Prophet of Islam sent Harith ibn Umar with a letter
to the king of Basra, but his messenger was killed in a place called
Mutah. [^12]At the command of the Prophet, the army of Islam marched
towards the enemy, and in Mutah they confronted the army of Marqal, the
king of Rome. His army comprised 100,000 Roman .and non-Roman fighters.

A war broke out between the two armies in which Zayd ibn Harith, Ja'far
ibn Abi Talib, and Abdullah ibn Rawahah, the three famous commanders of
the army of Islam, were martyred, and the Muslims could not overcome the
infidels, so they returned to Medina.[^13]

The Conquest Of Makkah
----------------------

In the Hudaybiyah peace agreement, the Quraysh had promised the Holy
Prophet of Islam not to transgress against or oppress the Muslims and
their confederates, but they violated the agreement and helped the Bani
Bakr tribe to destroy the Khaza'ah tribe, which was one of the
confederates of the Muslims. To hamper their aggression, the Prophet
approached Makkah in secrecy, entered it through an elaborate device,
and conquered the city.

Then he made a pilgrimage to God's House, the Ka'aba - and delivered a
historic speech in which he declared, \`You should beware that you have
been bad neighbours for God's Prophet. You refuted us, tormented us,
expelled us from our homeland, and yet did not content yourselves with
so much torture and troublemaking; you even did not let us have peace in
Medina and attempted to fight us. But in spite of all this, I set you
all free and let you go unpunished'. [^14]

This great tolerance and forgiveness brought about the submission of the
people of Makkah to Islam. In this triumphant battle, the Prophet
ordered the Muslims not to fight for any reason other than defense and
against the violations of the infidels. However, he passed a death
sentence upon eight men and four women, and conflict arose between the
army of Khalid and a number of infidels who had fought under the
leadership of Akramah ibn Abu Jahl in which a number were killed. [^15]

Hunayn And Ta'if
----------------

The Havazin tribe had gathered an army against Islam. The Holy Prophet
was informed of their satanic intentions and mobilized 12,000 Muslim
soldiers to confront them. The two opposing armies fought each other in
the valley of Hunayn, and finally the Islamic army defeated the army of
the infidels and subdued them. [^16]

After this victorious war, the Prophet attempted to fight the Saghif
tribe, who had conspired with the Havazin against Islam, but after
having besieged it for a while; he dispensed with its conquest and
returned to Makkah." [^17]

Some other less severe wars also took place between the army of the Holy
Prophet of Islam and the infidels, and also several journeys for the
propagation of Islam were made during these blessed times.

Now the data on casualties, from both the Muslim army and the infidel's
army, of all the wars that took place between the Muslims and the
infidels are presented, having been gathered from credible documents.

It goes without saying that, in comparison with the casualties in the
crusades of the Christians, those of the Islamic wars against the
infidels are trivial, and also there is no doubt, therefore, that none
of the wars of the Holy Prophet of Islam were launched out of motives of
expansion, revenge, or aggression. Rather, they were aimed at the
repulsion of the aggressors, defense of the honour of the Muslims, and
independence and the exaltation and prevalence of right, truth, and
justice.

A Frenchman relates, \`While Islam has made it incumbent upon Muslims to
make jihad, it has ordered Muslims to treat the followers of other
faiths with tolerance, justice, and remission and has given them freedom
of religion'. [^18]

[^1]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, p.143.

[^2]: Muhammad sitari kih dar maccih dirrakhshid, p.92.

[^3]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 19, pp.265-266.

[^4]: Kamil, Vol. 2, p.118; A'lam Alwari, p.76.

[^5]: Tabaqat, pp.27-29.

[^6]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, pp.1463-1476.

[^7]: A Jewish tribe residing near Medina.

[^8]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 20, p.191; Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1472.

[^9]: Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, pp.1487-1493.

[^10]: Â Kamil, Vol. 2, p.192; Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1511.

[^11]: Kamil, Vol. 2, p.216; Tabaqat, Vol. 2, pp.77-78; Tarikhi Tabari,
Vol. 3, pp.1575-1584.

[^12]: A place near Damascus.

[^13]: Tabaqat, Vol. 2, pp.92-94.

[^14]: A'lam Alwari, pp.104-112; Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 21, p.106.

[^15]: Kamil, Vol. 2, pp.247-250.

[^16]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 21, p.149.

[^17]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, p.482.

[^18]: Tamaddun, p.148.


