Chapter 16: The Last Prophet
============================

Muhammad, the Last Prophet
--------------------------

All Muslims of the world, no matter what their sects are, hold in common
that the Holy Prophet of Islam was the last prophet, and in fact,
Muslims believe in divine prophecy having ended with him, just as they
believe in the Unity of God.

Islam is always fresh, wonderful, and comprehensive, and the more
extensive is one's insight, the more one comprehends the
comprehensiveness of Islam. As a matter of fact, there is no end to
Islam's wonders and, miracles.

Now let us survey the truth of this belief. First we will explain the
most effective reasons for a faith being eternal, and then we will
consider Islam.

The most important factor causing a faith to persist and enjoy
perpetuity is its being consistent with and based on human nature. A
religion of which the instructions are in accordance with natural and
innate human characteristics will continue to prevail forever, will
never suffer annihilation as a result of the passing of time, nor will
such a faith become out of date and useless.

Instructions and precepts that are not restricted to a certain place or
period of time are compatible with any kind of progress and will stay as
valid and powerful as they have always been no matter how many changes
take place in the material aspects of human life and how much advance is
made in technology and natural sciences.

On the contrary, instructions and rules that are limited to a particular
period or a special group fail to fulfill all aspects of human needs at
all times and under all circumstances. For example, if a rule is made
that commands people are only allowed to use natural vehicles such as
horses and camels for traveling and transportation, such a rule will
obviously be discarded and outdated because new necessities make people
utilize new means and equipment. One of the reasons why past faiths are
not durable is that they have been meant for a certain group or a
special period of time.

Comprehensiveness: An eternal faith must be all-embracing,
comprehensive, and able to meet all human needs and wants. It is an
already experienced fact that man's thirsty, stormy soul does not find
peace and satisfaction with a series of empty ceremonies but is in great
need of comprehensive precepts and rules that are capable of guiding him
all through his life, of providing solutions to his various problems
both in personal and social life, and of satisfying his spiritual
demands and wants.

Giving guidance in deadlocks: There are certain occasions in human life
when either due to the conflict of general rules or due to an unexpected
emergency, man finds himself in a deadlock and starts wondering what to
do and how to proceed.

Thus an eternal faith must, in addition to overall rules and
instructions, provide man with other sets of rules and guidelines that
explain the solutions to exceptional problems and emergency situations
that general rules are incapable of handling.

And it is such a comprehensive faith that is in accord with all times
and all conditions of life and can benefit all. In fact, it is only a
perfect faith that serves the supreme purpose of leading human beings
onto God's path. The foregoing factors are the most significant causes
of the duration and perpetuity of a faith all of which are in Islam. Now
let us find some explanations for these factors.

Islam: The Immortal Faith
-------------------------

It is a reality that, in the legislative system of Islam, human nature,
which is the same at all times and in all places, has been taken into
consideration and positive answers have been given to natural human
wants and needs. A careful study of Islamic precepts and programs
reveals the fact that they have been so designed as to regulate all
human instincts.

For example, for the proper satisfaction of human sexual instincts,
various simple plans and rules have been offered that properly satisfy
and regulate this natural instinct at the same time that they prevent
unrestrained sexual relations, so human societies may be immune from the
corruption and decline that sexual freedom causes.

The fundamental rules anti laws in Islam are meant not just for a
particular time or a particular place needing modification and change as
conditions change, they are compatible with all environments and all
times and are capable of providing human beings with all the guidelines
they need to live happily and prosperously and to find eternal salvation
as well.

In the Islamic programs and teachings concerning jihad, for instance, no
emphasis is placed upon weaponry and tactics of the time of the Prophet,
such as fighting with swords. Rather, Islam has given this general
command concerning jihad: Strengthen your fighting abilities, mobilize
your forces, and-Â­acquire good arms and ammunition so you will be able
to defend your vital rights against your enemies and overcome them.

This is a general all-embracing rule that is in accordance with all
conditions of life and all sorts of progress made in technology. And
thus this comprehensive rule can invariably give guidance on the
questions concerning war in Islam, and the same is the case with other
Islamic rules and instructions.

To the deadlocks and emergencies that occur in human life, either
individual or social, the faith of Islam has offered laws such as \`the
law of emergency', \`the law of not guilty', \`the law of no loss', [^1]
and the like, which present suitable solutions to all problems, however
complicated they might be. Moreover, the Imams, the successors of the
Holy Prophet of Islam, and religious leaders whom Muslims follow can
offer decisive solutions to social deadlocks and problems.

The programs and rules designed by Islam are far more extensive and
elaborate than those presented by other schools of thought. In Islam,
all legal, economic, military, moral, and other issues and points have
been presented and surveyed in the most elaborate and perfect manner.
The Islamic theologians have so far compiled thousands of books on the
fore-going subject for which the sources are the Holy Qur'an, the
sayings of the Holy Prophet of Islam, and the teachings of the offspring
of Prophet.

Thus, taking into consideration these facts and proven realities, any
knowledgeable person will admit that Islam is a perfect faith, capable
of fulfilling human needs and of presenting solutions to all problems,
and so there is no need for any other faith or any new school of
thought.

The End Of Prophecy With The Prophet
------------------------------------

The comprehensiveness of the rules and precepts of Islam and the end of
prophecy with the Holy Prophet of Islam have been clearly expressed in
the Qur'an:

***\`And the word of your Lord has been accomplished truly. and justly;
there is none who can change His words, and He is the Hearing, the
Knowing' (6:115).***

***'Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the
Messenger of God and the Last of all Prophets, and God is cognizant of
all things' (33:40).***

In the Arabic language, wherever the word *\`khatam' is attached* to a
word, it conveys the meaning of \`the last' and in this verse it refers
to \`the last of the prophets'. *Nabi* means any type of divine
messenger. [^2]

Obviously, the word messenger can be applied to all prophets so by
saying that Muhammad is the last of all prophets, God means that he is
the last of all messengers and that after him there will come no
prophet, nor any messenger from God, nor any person with a new holy
book.

***\`Surely this Qur'an guides to that which is most upright and gives
the good news to the believers who do good that they shall have a great
reward (17:9).***

Therefore, human beings have no need for any other prophet, any other
rules and regulations, or any other school of thought because all they
need is to be found in the Qur'an.

There are so many documents and testimonies to the fact that the Prophet
was the last of all prophets that in Islam this reality is considered
one of the clearest points.

Now your attention is drawl to some narrations:

The Prophet has himself said, \`You must know that there will come no
Prophet after me and no faith after my faith of Islam...'.[^3]

Imam Baqir (peace be upon him) has said, \`God has ended Holy Books with
your Book, the Qur'an, and prophets with your Prophet...'. [^4]

Hazrat 'Ali (peace be upon him) has said, \`God assigned Muhammad, peace
and the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants, to be a prophet
after all other prophets and has ended revelation with him'. [^5]

The Prophet said to Hazrat 'Ali, \`Your relation to me is like that of
Aaron to Moses, peace be upon him, with the difference that there will
come no prophet after me'." [^6]

Imam Riza (peace be upon him) has said, \`The faith of Muhammad (peace
and the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants) will not be
abolished until the Day of Resurrection, and no prophet will come after
him until that day'. [^7]

These and many other traditions and narrations are perpetual
proclamations of the Prophet as the last of all prophets and Islam as
the only comprehensive faith.

The splendour of the purport of this faith as well as its profound
precepts and comprehensive rules ensure its perpetuity till the Day of
Judgment.

Now that God has endowed us with such a matchless magnificent faith,
surely it is our duty to communicate it to all other people so all will
benefit from this holy faith.

[^1]: The law of emergency is applied in emergency situations. The law
of non-guilt is applied in cases of severe trouble. The law of no loss
is applied when a loss may occur. The conditions and qualifications of
these laws have been explained in detail in the books on theology wind
jurisprudence.

[^2]: Jami' ul-Javami', p.275; Tafsir al-Mizan, Vol. 2, p.144; Tafsir
ul-Kashif, Vol. 3, p.164; Tafsir ul-Biyadwi, p.477; al-Bayan, Vol. 7,
p.91; Ruh ul-Ma'ani, Vol. 22, p.32.

[^3]: Â Mustadrak, Vol. 2, p.262.

[^4]: Usul ul-Kafi, Vol. 1, p.177.

[^5]: Najh ul-Balaghah, Fiyd ul-Islam, sermonn 133, p.403.

[^6]: Kamil, Vol. 2, p. 278.

[^7]: Uyun akhbar ul-Reza, Vol. 2, p.80.


