Chapter 2: The Prophet's Birth and Childhood
============================================

Makkah was covered by a heavy blanket of darkness. No signs of life and
activity could be observed in it. Only the moon slowly emerged from
behind tie darkened surrounding mountains and cast its pale, delicate
rays upon the simple, austere houses and upon the sandy regions outside
the city.

Little by little, midnight gave way to dawn. A gentle breeze rustled
through the burning land of the Hijaz and prepared it for a short rest.
Now the stars, too, added to the beauty of this pure banquet of nature
and smiled at the residents of Makkah.

It was now early dawn and the early rising, vigilant night birds were
singing beautifully in that heavenly weather. They seemed to be speaking
in a romantic language to their Beloved! The horizon was on the verge of
the brightness of dawn but still a mysterious silence prevailed over the
city. All were asleep. Only Amina was awake, feeling the contractions
she had been expecting.

Gradually the contractions became stronger. Suddenly Amina saw several
unknown women in her room. The room was filled with light and there was
fragrance in the air. She wondered who they were and how they had
entered her room through the closed door. [^1]

Soon her baby was born, and thus, after several months of waiting, Amina
had the pleasure of seeing her child in the early dawn of the 17th of
Rabi ul-Awwal. [^2]

All were overjoyed with the child's birth. But when Muhammad (peace and
the mercy of God be upon him and his descendants) illuminated Amina's
dark and silent room of prayer, her young Abdullah, was not present. He
had passed away in Medina while returning from Damascus and had been
buried there, leaving Amina alone. [^3]

The Wonderful Baby
------------------

The Prophet was born and his blessed birth gave rise to numerous
wonderful incidents in the sky and on the earth, especially in the East,
the cradle of civilization.

News of these events spread quickly and informed the people of an
imminent, very significant incident. Since this newborn child was
predestined to destroy the people's old superstitious beliefs and
customs and to lay new foundations for human progress and prosperity,
from the very beginning he sounded the reveille.

On that blessed night, the Persian monarch Anushiravan's magnificent
palace, which incarnated a false fantasy of power and eternal monarchy
and upon which people looked with fear and awe, trembled. [^4]Fourteen
of its turrets collapsed, and the fire in the fire-temple of Persia,
which had been flaming for 1,000 years, was suddenly extinguished. [^5]

So the humiliated worshippers of that false, destructive object of
worship, whose minds had been blocked by the obstacles of prejudice and
false imitation and who thus could not reflect upon nature took notice
of the truth and were attracted toward a totally different direction.
The drying out of the Savah Lake awakened the people of another great
region."[^6]

Halima, The Prophet's Nurse
---------------------------

For many centuries it had been customary among the Arabs to give their
newborn children to women from the tribes around the city to be
wet-nursed. This was done so that their children would grow up in the
fresh air and the natural environment of the desert and also learn the
eloquent Arabic dialect whose purest form was to be found at that time
in the desert. [^7]

For this reason and since Amina had no milk to feed her child, Abdul
Muttalib, his grandfather and guardian, felt it necessary to employ an
honorable, trustworthy lady to look after the child of his dear son,
Abdullah. After making appropriate inquiries, he selected Halima, who
was from the Bani Sa'd tribe (a tribe famous for bravery and eloquence)
and who was rated among the most chaste, noble women.

Halima took the infant to her own tribe and looked after him as though
he were her own child. The Bani Sa\`d tribe had long been suffering from
famine in the desert. The dry desert and lack of rains had added much to
their poverty and misery.

But from the very day lie entered Halima's house, good fortune and
blessings entered with him. Her life, which had been filled with poverty
and destitution, suddenly changed into a happy and prosperous one. The
pale faces of Halima and her children became rosy and full of life. Her
dry breasts swelled with milk, and the pasture of the sheep and camels
of that region turned fresh and green, whereas before he came to their
tribe, people lived in poverty and faced many difficulties.

He grew up more rapidly than other children, ran more nimbly, and did
not stammer like them. Good fortune and auspicious­ness so accompanied
him that all the people around him easily realized this fact and
admitted it. Halima's husband, Harith, told her, \`Do you know what a
blessed baby we have been given?'[^8]

In The Storm Of Events
----------------------

The Prophet was just six years old [^9] when his mother, Amina, left
Makkah for Medina to visit her relatives and probably to pay a
respectful visit to her husband's grave. He accompanied his mother on
that trip. But after visiting her relatives and expressing love and
loyalty to her husband at Abdullah's graveside, on her way back to
Makkah, Amina passed away at a place named Abwa'. [^10] Thus, the
Prophet had lost both his mother and father by that tender age when
every child needs a father's affections and a mother's loving embrace.

A Glimpse Into The Prophet's Character
--------------------------------------

Just as the Prophet's birth and the events that followed his blessed
birth were extraordinary and suggestive of his majesty and supreme
character, so his behaviour and manner of speaking in childhood also
made him different from other children. Abdul Muttalib realized this
fact and respected his majesty greatly. [^11]

Abu Talib, the Prophet's uncle, used to say, \`We have never heard any
lies from Muhammad, nor have we seen him misconduct himself or make
mischief. He never laughs unduly nor speaks idly and he is mostly
alone'. [^12]

The Prophet was seven years old when the Jews remarked, \`In our Books
we have read that the Prophet of Islam refrains from eating any food
which is religiously prohibited or doubtful. Let's try him'.

So they stole a hen and sent it to Abu Talib. Not knowing that the hen
had been stolen, all ate from the cooked hen but Muhammad, who avoided
even tasting it. When they asked the reason for this avoidance of the
food, he answered, \`This food is forbidden by God, and God protects me
against anything that He has forbidden...'.

Then the Jews took a hen from a neighbour, intending to pay for it later
on, and sent it to Abu Talib's house. Again he avoided eating the hen,
saying, \`This food is doubtful and...'.

Then the Jews said, \`This child has an extraordinary character and a
supreme position'. [^13]

Abdul Muttalib, the chief of the Quraysh tribe, did not treat his
grandson like other children, but held him in great respect and
reverence.

When a special place was arranged for Abdul Muttalib at the Ka'aba, his
offspring surrounded that special place, inhibited by Abdul Muttalib's
dignity and glory from stepping into his abode. But the Prophet was by
no means impressed by so much grandeur and honour and would always
directly go to that particular seat. Abdul Muttalib's sons tried to
hinder him, but he protested and said, \`Let my son go. I swear by God
that he has a glorified, majestic position'.

Then Muhammad sat beside the chief of the Quraysh, Abdul Muttalib, and
spoke with him. [^14]

[^1]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, p.325.

[^2]: Ibid., p.250.

[^3]: Kamil ul-Tawarikh, second section, p.10; Tabaqat, Vol. L, p.61;
Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, p.125.

[^4]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, p.257.

[^5]:  Ibid., pp.258-263.

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Sirihi Halabiyih, Vol. 1, p.99. 1

[^8]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, pp.331-395; Sirihi ibn Hisham, printed in
1375 A.H.L., Vol. 1. pp.159-60; Halabiyih, printed in 1382 A.H.L., Vol.
1, p.99.

[^9]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, pp.402, 406.

[^10]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.168.

[^11]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, pp.382, 402, 366.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]:  Ibid., p.336.

[^14]: Ibid., p.142; Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.168.


