Chapter 3: Childhood and Youth
==============================

Some Scenes From The Prophet's Childhood And Youth
--------------------------------------------------

A Few Scenes
------------

Muhammad went through the difficulties of orphanhood in his childhood
with the support of his high-spirited grandfather, Abdul Muttalib, and
his affectionate uncle, Abu Talib. It seems that the heart-rending pains
of orphan hood must have severely tormented his pure delicate soul. It
is logical to believe that these sufferings were necessary for the
foundation of his supreme character and that such difficulties taught
him how to resist the hardships of life and to bear the heavy
responsibility later to be put on his blessed shoulders.

As time went on, Muhammad grew up and his childhood gave place to youth,
when instincts and potentials bloom. Although he was deprived of a
mother's care and a father's affection, he received affectionate care
and attention from Abu Talib, who, due to his moral attitudes and in
obedience to his father's emphatic order, protected and supported him.

In fact, Muhammad represented three things to Abu Talib: a son, a
reminder of his brother, Abdullah, and of his father, Abdul Muttalib. So
the Prophet became a beloved member of Abu Talib's family, lived in his
house, and was treated as his own son. To the Prophet, Abu Talib was an
affectionate father, a loyal uncle, and a compassionate preceptor. These
two - uncle and nephew - were so fond of each other that their lives
seemed to be intertwined. This very intense affection had caused Abu
Talib to refuse to ever part from him.

He would take his hand in his own and go with him to the famous Arab
markets of \`Akaz, Majnah, and Zil-Majaz. Even when he was to accompany
the caravan on travelling on business from Makkah to Damascus, he could
not bring himself to part with his nephew. So Abu Talib took him along
to Damascus. Riding on a camel, the Prophet started the long journey to
Yathrib and Damascus. [^1]

Bahira's Interview With The Prophet
-----------------------------------

On the day the Quraysh caravan was nearing Basra, [^2]Bahira, a devout
monk, caught sight of it through his monastry's window. He observed the
caravan shaded by a little cloud that kept pace with it.

Bahira came out of his monastry, stood in a corner and instructed his
servant, \`Go and tell them that today they are all my guests'.

All came to him but the Prophet, who was standing beside the property
and equipment of the caravan. Seeing that the cloud had ceased to move,
Bahira asked his guests, \`Are all the members of the caravan present
here?' They answered, \`All but a youth who is the youngest'. Bahira
said, \`Tell him to come as well'. So he was asked to come to the monk's
room. The keen eyes of Bahira noticed that the cloud over his head moved
with him. Taken by surprise, Bahira kept staring at the young boy. When
the meal was over, the pious monk told him, \`I have a question to ask
you and you must swear by Lat and \`Uzza [^3]to answer my question'.

Muhammad said, \`These two you have asked me to swear by are the most
detestable things to me'. Bahira said, \`Swear by Allah to answer my
question'.

He said, \`Ask your question'.

After a short interview with him, Bahira knelt down before him and
started kissing his hands and feet, saying, \`If I live till you start
your divine mission, I will most faithfully aid you and fight your
enemies. You are superior to all of Adam's offspring...'.

Then he asked, \`Whose son is this youth?' The caravan members pointed
to Abu Talib, saying, \`His son'. Bahira said, \`No. His father must be
dead!'

Abu Talib said, \`You are right. He is my nephew'. Bahira then said,
\`This youth will have a brilliant, extraordinary future. If the Jews
find out what I have realized about him, they will destroy him. Take
great care lest the Jews should hurt him'.

Abu Talib said, \`What is he destined to do? What have the Jews to do
with him?' Bahira said, \`He is predestined to become a Prophet, and the
angel of inspiration will come down and make divine revelations to him'.
Abu Talib said, \`God will not leave him alone and will Himself protect
him against the Jews and his malevolent enemies'.

The Prophet As A Shepherd And A Contemplative Man
-------------------------------------------------

Although Abu Talib was rated as a man of status among the Quraysh, his
income, was not sufficient to support his family. Now that Muhammad was
of mature age, he was naturally inclined to find a job to ease the heavy
burden upon his uncle's shoulders. But what kind of job should he engage
in to suit his supreme character?

Since he was destined to become a great Prophet and a sublime leader, to
face unrestrained obstinate people, to fight against the superstitious
beliefs and wrong customs of the period of ignorance, and to lay the
foundations of the magnificent palace of justice and proper laws and
regulations, he found it expedient to become a herdsman.[^4]

Our Holy Prophet would take the sheep and cattle of his relatives and
those of the people of Makkah to the surrounding deserts to graze. He
gave his uncle the wages he received in return. [^5]

This engagement outside the noisy, agitated environment of the city and
away from people's disputes and conflicts gave him an invaluable
opportunity to acquire much experience, of which the sweet fruits
appeared during his prophethood and time of leadership.

Indeed, during this period, he acquired many superior human
characteristics such as generosity, good temper, magnanimity, good
behaviour towards neighbours, tolerance, truthfulness, trustworthiness,
and avoidance of vices. He became known as 'Muhammad, the Trustworthy’.
[^6]

The Prophet's Chastity
----------------------

When childhood gives its place to maturity and human instincts and
potentialities bloom, youngsters suddenly find themselves in the stormy
stage of maturity - much more exciting and agitating than childhood.
During this critical period of life, various kinds of deviations,
seditions, moral deteriorations, and forms of heedlessness threaten the
young and their future life. Unless they are properly directed and
carefully looked after, or themselves endeavour to control and restrain
their overflowing instincts, they will so fall into the terrible abyss
of misery and immorality that they can hardly attain happiness and
prosperity for the rest of their lives.

The Prophet lived in a severely polluted environment, the atmosphere of
which was darkened with all kinds of moral deteriorations and sins. In
the Hijaz, not only the youth, but also the aged had become most
shamefully involved in sexual deviations and unchasity. In every alley
and neighbourhood, black flags had been hung over some houses as a sign
of corruption, inviting un-virtuous people inside.

The Prophet grew up in such a foul society, but though he remained
unmarried until the age of 25, the sordid environment could not affect
him the least bit, nor did anybody observe any immoral action springing
from him. Both his friends and his enemies regarded him as the best
model of chastity and virtue.

The poems commemorating his blessed marriage with Khadija - the great
lady of the Quraysh - remind its of modesty, Addressing Khadija, the
poet says, \`...O Khadija, among all the people of the world, you have
attained a sublime position, the most honourable position. You have been
granted the honour of being wife to Muhammad, the great man whose peer
has not been born by any woman in the whole world. All praiseworthy
virtues and majestic qualities plus modesty are to be found in him and
will be so forever’. [^7]

Another poet had said, \`If Ahmad is weighed against all other
creatures, he will outweigh them, and truly his virtues are obvious to
the Quraysh'. [^8]

[^1]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.180.

[^2]: Basra was a small town near Damascus.

[^3]: Lat and Uzza were two of the famous idols that the Arabs
worshipped and swore by on various occasions.

[^4]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.181; A'lam Alwari, published in
Najaf, 1390 A.H.L., p.26; and Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 15, pp.193-204.

[^5]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.167 (footnote).

[^6]: Ibid., p.183.

[^7]:  Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, p.3; Tarikh Ya'aqubi, Vol. 2, p.15.

[^8]: Ibid., p.74.


