Chapter 4: The Prophet’s first Marriage
=======================================

The Prophet's First Marriage
----------------------------

Youth is the period of the blooming of instincts and the emergence of
one's sexual\` potencies. When youngsters, both male and female, are
of -mature age, they are drawn to the opposite sex, and a fire of
passion starts flaming in their hearts that will not be extinguished
unless they form a union of marriage. It is only in this way that they
will find peace of mind.

Therefore, to make the proper use of such potentials and to prevent the
various deviations that overflowing sexual instincts may create in human
societies, Islam has emphatically ordered that the youth should marry as
soon as possible and not shun the command of marriage on the pretext
that they may be unable to support their family later on.

***\`And marry those among you who are single and those who are fit
among your male slaves and your female slaves; if they are needy, God
will make them free from want out of His grace; and God is Most
Generous, Knowing. And let those who do not find the means to marry keep
chaste until God makes them free from want out of His grace'
(4:31-32).***

But there may be times when financial conditions do not permit one to
undertake the responsibilities of married life. No doubt, under such
circumstances, marriage must be postponed until conditions are
favourable, and, all through this period of celibacy, the youth must
necessarily acquire virtue and chastity.

Muhammad suffered just such hard conditions. Due to financial problems,
he was unable to take a wife until he was *25.* [^1] *So*he found it
advisable to temporarily refrain from marriage and to wait for a
suitable occasion when life's conditions would allow the formation of a
family. [^2]

Khadija's Business Proposal
---------------------------

Khadija, who was an honourable wealthy woman, used to put her wealth at
the disposal of others who traded for her and received wages in return
for their services.

As Muhammad's fame for honesty, virtue and trustworthiness spread
throughout Arabia and reached Khadija, she started seeking his
cooperation. Then she made this proposal to him: \`I will put at your
disposal some property plus a servant, Masara, and pay you more than
others'.

Being well aware of his uncle's financial problems due to his old age,
low income, and large family, Muhammad accepted Khadija's ofher. [^3]

Khadija
-------

Khadija, the daughter of Khuwalid, was a lady of supreme character. She
had been twice married, to Abu Halah and Atigh Makhzumi, and twice
widowed. Though she was forty years old, her enormous wealth,
popularity, and prestige had led many wealthy and powerful Quraysh to
court her.

But she did not accept any of them as her husband and avoided marriage,
for she knew well that they either were interested in her wealth or were
men whose character she detested. [^4]

Prophet's Journey To Damascus
-----------------------------

When the commercial caravan of the Quraysh was ready to start moving
towards Damascus and the Prophet, too, had made provisions for the trip
and was about to join the caravan, Khadija ordered her servant, Masara,
to accompany him to Damascus and be always ready to serve him.

Obviously, it is not possible to explain in detail this historical
journey, and we content ourselves with mentioning the following points:
This journey brought about many blessings and much good fortune, such as
enormous profits in commerce, the manifestation of the Prophet's
wonderful personality to the people in the caravan, the meeting with the
Christian monk, the prediction of his prophecy, [^5] and the preliminary
causes of an auspicious matrimonial union. When the trading was over,
the caravan returned from Damascus.

Masara explained the trip to Khadija in detail, reporting the huge,
unprecedented profits they had gained. She also spoke about the
Prophet's excellent character and his generosity, as well as his many
other virtues manifested during this journey.[^6]

Upon hearing this and hearing about the predictions of a learned Jewish
man about his divine character and his marriage with the most honorable
woman of the Quraysh, Khadija not only started to cherish his love in
her pure heart, but also came to realize that he was her ideal husband.
[^7]

Also, her uncle, Warqa ibn Nawfal, had talked to her about tile
predictions of the last prophets, and about the good news of his
marriage with Khadija. [^8]These words, too, added to her love and
enthusiasm.

But how was she to talk to him about her desire and heavenly affection?
This was not so easy for Khadija, who was herself the most respected
woman of the Quraysh.

Khadija's Proposal Of Marriage
------------------------------

Khadija asked Nafisa, who was her close friend and whom she always
trusted with her secrets, to speak to the Prophet about marriage. Nafisa
went to him and asked, \`Why do you not get married?' He answered, \`My
living conditions and financial situation do not allow me to get
married'. Nafisa said, \`Will you agree to get married if this problem
is solved and a rich, beautiful, and honorable woman from a well-known
family asks you to marry her?'

He asked, \`Who is this woman you are talking about?' Nafisa answered,
\`Khadija'.[^9]

He said, \`How is it possible? She has rejected the proposals of many of
the Quraysh aristocrats and rich men. Would she marry me?' Nafisa said,
\`This union is possible and I will arrange it'.

When he became quite sure of Khadija's inclination towards marriage with
him, the Prophet talked to his uncles about the matter. They were very
pleased with this good news, and they attempted to arrange the marriage
for their blessed nephew. And finally this auspicious marriage was
celebrated with special ceremonies. [^10]

The Prophet spent 25 years of his life with Khadija, who was not only a
loving wife for him, but also his best and most helpful mate. [^11]This
period is considered to be the best period of his married life.

Khadija, peace be upon her, was the first woman who believed in the
Prophet's divine prophecy. She put all her wealth at his disposal to
propagate and promote Islam. [^12]Six children were born of his
marriage: two sons named Qasim and Tahir who passed away as infants in
Makkah and four daughters named Ruqiyah, Zaynab, Umm Kulsum, and Fatima,
who was the most prominent and honoured of them all. [^13]

Khadija was so devoted to her husband and showed such great sympathy and
self-sacrifice for him and for the promotion of his religion that not
only did he love her dearly and respect her highly during her lifetime,
but even after her death, each time he remembered her, his blessed heart
filled with sorrow [^14] and he wept at her loss. Khadija's brilliant
sun of life set at the age of 65, ten years after the actualization of
the prophetic mission of the Prophet. [^15] In this way, the house of
our Holy Prophet became deprived of the light of Khadija's existence
forever.

[^1]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, p.3; Tarikh Ya'aqubi, Vol. 2, p.15.

[^2]: A'yan ul-Shi'ah, Vol. 2, p. s; Sirihi Halabiyih, Vol. 1, p.152.

[^3]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.188; Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, p.22.

[^4]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, p.12; Tarikh Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1127.

[^5]: Sirihi ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, p.188. This monk was not the monk who
met the Prophet in his childhood.

[^6]: Kamil ibn Athir, Vol. 2, p.39. Printed in Beirut, 1385 A.H.L.

[^7]:  Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, pp.20-21.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Sirihi Halabiyih, Vol. 1, p.152; Ayan ul-Shi'ah, Vol. 2, p.8.

[^10]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, pp.56-73.

[^11]: Ibid., pp. 7, 10; A'lam Alwari, p.146.

[^12]: Ibid., pp.10-71; A'yan ul-Shi'ah, Vol. 2, p.8.

[^13]: Ibid., p.3; A'yan, p.18; A'lam, p.146.

[^14]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 16, pp.8, 13.

[^15]: Ibid.


