Chapter 7: The Beginning Of The Revelation
==========================================

We have so far taken a glance at the earlier part of the blessed life of
the Holy Prophet of Islam. Now we must talk about some of the most
momentous phases of his life. By the age of 40 he was still living among
an extremely backward people who were devoid of any traces of
civilization and humanity. These hard conditions severely tormented his
pure soul. He observed nothing in that society but the darkness of
ignorance. He would go to the Ka'aba, but instead of witnessing the
worship of God, he witnessed. idolatry. He would then leave the Ka'aba
and go among the people. But there, too, he was troubled by what he saw.
He was pained by the ugly customs and false thoughts of his people. The
pitiable condition of the poor and the destitute caused him great
anguish. The deplorable situation of women, who were treated worse than
animals, as well as the prevalence of gambling, wine drinking and murder
tortured his blessed heart.

When he dealt with people as a merchant, their immoral behaviour gave so
severe an emotional shock to him that he had to go to a lonely place
where he would not be tormented by people's inhuman behaviour. For these
reasons and to find peace of mind, he would go to Mount Hira and there
think deeply about the amazing phenomena of nature and the vestiges of
God's All-Embracing Compassion. [^1]

The Prophet At The Age Of Forty
-------------------------------

By the time the Holy Prophet of Islam reached the age of 40, he was
ready for his divine mission." One day suddenly, while he sat in a cave
at Mount Hira, Gabriel, the Angel of Revelation, appeared to him and
said, \`Recite!' He said in surprise, \`What shall I recite?' Again the
divine voice very clearly and openly called out, \`Recite, O
Muhammad!'[^2]

And a third time Gabriel repeated[^3],

***\`Recite in the Name of Your Lord Who created. He created the human
being from a clot. Recite and your Lord is Most Honourable, Who taught
(to write) with the pen, taught the human being what he knew not'
(95:1-5).***

An indescribable excitement and eagerness overcame the Holy Prophet, for
he had come into contact with a supreme supernatural world. His high
spirit had now found a sacred support and an eternal refuge. He saw in
himself the power of prophecy. No longer was any worry or agitation to
be found in his blessed being. There was now just peace and confidence
within him.

Was the Prophet really going through the learning process in that cave
on Mount Hira? Some orientalists and foreign authors have answered this
question in the affirmative. They have remarked, \`On Mount Hira, the
Prophet thought deeply about the concepts of the Bible as well as the
instructions of the prophets. There he spent his time in meditation and
enjoyed this intellectual meditation'. [^4]

This remark is meant to imply that he was a self-made man who invented
the religion of Islam by studying and carefully thinking about the Old
and New Testaments! But there are certain documents that attest to the
contrary, some of which are:

**1.** If the Holy Prophet of Islam had derived the Qur'an from the
Bible and from the teachings of the prophets before him, the conceptions
and contents of the Qur'an would have had to perfectly resemble those in
the Old and New Testaments, whereas the purport of the Qur'an is quite
different from that of the Old and New Testaments.

**2.** The magnificent and extremely beautiful wording and style of the
Qur'an have brought the greatest literary men of the ages to their
knees, proving that the Holy Prophet of Islam has been in direct contact
with the Creator of the world. The Holy Prophet could have derived such
a style from no other book.

**3.** No credible authentic source has ever mentioned such false
accusations. Rather, these bigoted rumours are made by the Christian
clergy and by the western orientalists who have selfish, hostile
motives.

**4.** If the Qur'an had been brought into existence through study of
the Old and New Testaments, those intending to fight against the Qur'an
through tampering with some of its verses could have more easily made
reference to the Old and New Testaments and would have achieved their
purpose with a great deal less trouble.

**5.** All agree that the Prophet was unlettered. [^5] Is it logical to
believe that an uneducated, unlettered person, brought up in an
ignorant, backward society that was devoid of any knowledge, learning or
scholarly books could offer such an amazing book, full of startling
facts and extremely advanced learning? Such bigoted persons have to be
asked, \`How was the Holy Prophet of Islam able to study the Old and New
Testaments? How is it possible for an unlettered man who has not been
taught by any teacher nor gone to any school, to make predictions of the
future and relate events of the past?'

What Is Revelation?
-------------------

What is certain is that there have been relations between prophets and
the Creator of the universe, that they have received the facts from the
original source of creation, and that these relations have had to do
with their purified selves and, fortified spirits.

It is obvious that if these relations with the divine source were taken
away from the prophets, they would have no such supreme position. All
the honour and value of the prophets lie in their having relations with
the divine source. So there has been no ambiguity in their sayings, and
they were all quite sure of what they said and knew very well the
Source, Support, and Cause of their words and teachings, unlike those
who claim a \`discovery' that might be made as a result of undergoing
some ascetic practices. Such people often have no realization of what
they have discovered. In fact, their claims are often mingled with
fantasy and mere imagination and are sometimes untrue.

The superiority of prophets to such people is so obvious as to need no
explanation. Divine prophets have seen and said nothing but the truth,
and not even one single unclear, ambiguous point has ever been found in
their speeches and teachings. Thus, divine revelation has resulted from
a relation between God and His prophets. This relation has sometimes
been made through the medium of Gabriel and sometimes directly, without
any medium.

Is Revelation A Kind Of Hysteria?
---------------------------------

Some western writers who are no doubt prejudiced have been dubious about
the descent of revelation upon our Holy Prophet[^6] and have considered
it a sort of disease called hysteria.

Fortunately, this false accusation is so vain and baseless that it calls
for no arguments to prove its falsehood. It is well-known that hysteria
has certain moods and indispositions, none of which has been observed in
the Holy Prophet of Islam.

As John Davenport has said, \`This remark that Muhammad has suffered the
attacks of epilepsy is one of the false, awkward sayings of the Greeks
by which they meant to stain the prestige of the propagator of a new
religion, and turn the world of Christianity against his moral behaviour
and qualities. [^7]Even in the deepest moments of revelation, none of
the piercing cries of severe agitation common in hysteria have been
observed in the Holy Prophet of Islam.

Another reason is that when the person suffering from hysteria recovers
from such indispositions, and comes to an ordinary state, that person
does not remember anything from what he has seen or heard in his state
of hysteria, while the contrary was the case with the Holy Prophet of
Islam. He did not speak to anybody during the time revelations came upon
him and after each revelation was over, he started talking to the people
about the meaning of the revelation and announced everything he had
heard or seen. Moreover, the expressions of a hysteric are usually
related to the delusions brought about by his suffering and exhausted
nerves.

For example, some hysteric people imagine terrible faces that threaten
them with death, and their cries are all about such things. And so far
nobody has observed a hysteric say something that turns out to be law;
knowledge or guidance, like the Islamic rules and teachings that, after
14 centuries, nobody has been able logically to find a single fault
with.

Revelation And Today's Science
------------------------------

Unlike what some people might imagine, the advent and advance of
scientific discoveries not only have not reduced or damaged the
importance or high position of the orthodox religion of Islam, but they
have confirmed and supported them.

The inventions of radar, radio, and teletypes have proved the fact that
revelation is by no means inconsistent with the laws of nature or
incompatible with the secrets of creation. The same God who has provided
so many facilities, abilities, and mysterious ways of communication is
able to set up special relations and communications with His prophets,
though these two sorts of communications are not comparable.

In addition, the advance of the sciences of extra-sensory perception,
hypnotism, telepathy and the like have made it clear that the facts of
our world are not limited to the framework of our material senses.

Thus both history and science bear testimony to the fact that the Holy
Prophet of Islam has been selected by God for the divine mission of
leading mankind into the path of virtue and salvation and saving it from
the deadly pit of corruption and deviation and that all those excellent
ideas and advanced programs were inspired through divine revelation.

The world of Islam is proud of its great leader, the Prophet, whose
divine religion not only brought life and prosperity to the world of his
own time, but today, after the passing of 14 centuries, is truly the
best guide of civilized societies. Each day more and more educated
people come to realize the magnificence and value of his profound
precepts and teachings.

[^1]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 18, p.206.

[^2]: Manaqib, Vol. 1, p.40

[^3]: Kamil, Vol. 2, p.48; Tarikhi Tabari, Vol. 3, p.1148.

[^4]: Udhri Taqsir, p.19.

[^5]: Ibid., p.18.

[^6]: Hysteria is a mental disease.

[^7]: Udhri Taqsir, p.20.


