Wiping Over Slippers And Socks
==============================

The Muslim jurisprudents disagreed upon wiping over slippers and socks
so widely that we couldn’t discuss all the details in this short
chapter. Generally the research concerned its permissibility or
impermissibility, specifying its position, time, conditions and
contradictions.

As for its permissibility, there were three sayings:

**First:** it was permissible at all whether in travel or residence.

**Second:** it was permissible only in travel and not in residence.

**Third:** it was impermissible at all because it had not been confirmed
by the laws of the religion.

These three sayings were narrated from the first age (of Islam) and from
Malik.[^1]

As for specifying its position (on the feet), it was disagreed upon it.
Some said that what was obligatory was wiping the upper side of the
slipper and that wiping its lower side was mustahab.[^2] Some said it
was obligatory to wipe the upper side and the lower side of the
slipper.[^3] Some said it was obligatory to wipe the upper side only and
wiping the lower side was neither obligatory nor mustahab.[^4] Some
might say that it was optional to choose between wiping the upper side
and the lower side. Which of them was wiped would be obligatory.[^5]

As for the position of wiping, those who believed in wiping over the
slippers disagreed upon wiping over the socks; some permitted it and
others prohibited it.[^6]

As for the kind of the slipper, they disagreed upon wiping over the torn
slipper; some said it was permissible as long as it was called a slipper
even if it was so badly torn;[^7] some prohibited it if there was a tear
in the front of the slipper that something of the foot might appear even
if it was so little[^8] and some permitted it if the tear was small.[^9]

As for the time of wiping, they disagreed upon it too. Some said it was
not timed and that the wearer of the slippers could wipe over them as
long as he didn’t take them off or he didn’t become impure.[^10] Some
said it was timed with a certain time for the resident and another time
for the traveler.[^11] They disagreed upon the kind of travel and its
distance.

As for the conditions of wiping over the slippers; the feet must be pure
(by wudu’) when wearing the slippers. Most of them decided this
condition but it was mentioned that Malik had considered it as not
necessary.[^12] They disagreed in this concern about one, who washed his
feet and put on his slippers and then completed his wudu’ that if he
would be satisfied with washing his feet or he had to wipe over the
slippers. There were two different sayings.[^13]

Among the contradictions of wiping over the slippers was taking off the
slippers. Some said that one would remain pure if he took his slippers
off until he committed something invalidating his wudu’ and he didn’t
have to wash his feet.[^14] Some said that one’s purity would be
invalidated as soon as he took his slippers off.[^15] Others said that
one would remain pure if he washed his feet after taking off the
slippers but if he offered the prayer without washing his feet he would
have to offer the prayer again after washing his feet[^16] besides other
different sayings and beliefs concerning wiping over the slipper, which
we didn’t want to detail them in this chapter.

The Shia believed, according to their infallible imams (s), that wiping
over the slippers was impermissible whether in travel or in residence.
Our evidence for that was the saying of Allah the Almighty: (***…and
wipe your heads and your feet to the*** (***two***) ***ankles***)***.***
Allah had ordered to wipe the feet themselves so who had decided to wipe
over the slippers? Was this Quranic verse annulled? Was it allegorical?
Certainly not! It was one of the decisive verses of the Quran according
to the consensus of the umma. The interpreters agreed upon that no verse
of sura of al-Ma’ida, which included this verse of wudu’, was annulled
except one verse (***O you who believe! do not violate the signs
appointed by Allah…***)[^17] 5:2.

The traditions talking about wiping over the slippers were not evidenced
by the Shia according to the conditions determining the rightfulness of
traditions besides other things that showed the weakness of those
traditions:

**First:** those traditions contradicted the Quran and the true
traditions of the Prophet (s). The Prophet (s) said: “If someone
narrates a tradition to you pretending that I have said it, you are to
compare it to the Quran. If it complies with the Quran, then you are to
accept it but if not then you are to deny it.”[^18]

**Second:** those traditions contradicted themselves and contradicted
each other; therefore much disagreement happened between those, who
acted according to them and tried to justify them in a way or another.
Their sayings were contradictory because the traditions themselves were
contradictory.[^19]

**Third:** the infallible imams (Ali and his progeny) agreed upon the
impermissibility of wiping over any obstacle (other than the bare foot)
whether it was slippers, socks, shoes or anything else.[^20] The
traditions narrated by them contradicted clearly that ones narrated by
the Sunni that permitted wiping over slippers.

The basic rule in dealing with the contradictory traditions was to
depend upon what complied with the holy Quran. This would be if the
traditions were equal in the reliability of the series of the narrators
and the subject of the traditions. But would anyone be equal to the
Prophet’s progeny; the infallible imams, who were as equal as the Quran?

**Fourth:** if those traditions were true, they were recurrent in every
age and in every country because knowing the purity of the feet in
wudu’-as we said before-was necessary for all the men and the women of
the umma. It was necessary in every day and every night whether in
residence or travel. If it was other than the wiping mentioned in the
Quranic verse, it would be known by the Muslims at the age of the
Prophet (s) and after that and it would be famous among all the Muslims
throughout the ages especially when it was abnormal and odd! But as it
was not so, the weakness of those traditions appeared clearly and made
them be brushed aside.

**Fifth:** if it was supposed that those traditions were true, then they
would be annulled by the sura of al-Ma’ida because it was the last sura
of the Quran that nothing was revealed after it, with which Allah (had
perfected the religion, completed the favor and chosen Islam as a
religion) so its obligations were obligatory until the Day of
Resurrection and its haram was haram until the Day of Resurrection as
Aa’isha had said to Jubayr bin Nufayr, who had visited her after
performing hajj: “O Jubayr, did you recite al-Ma’ida?” He said: “Yes, I
did.” She said: “It was the last sura of the Quran that was revealed.
Whatever permissible thing it has (it orders to be followed), you are to
do it and whatever impermissible thing it has (it forbids from) you are
to avoid it.”[^21]

In spite of that the Sunni clung to the act of wiping over the slippers
even after the revelation of al-Ma’ida. They depended upon a tradition
narrated by Jareer. Once he made water and then he performed wudu’ and
wiped over his slippers. He was asked: “Why did you do so?” he said: “I
saw the Prophet (s) do so. He made water and then he performed wudu’ and
wiped over his slippers.”

Muslim mentioned this tradition and said that it was admired by them and
he justified that by saying that Jareer became a Muslim after the
revelation of al-Ma’ida.[^22]

Jareer became a Muslim before the revelation of al-Ma’ida because he was
present with the Prophet (s) during the last (farewell) hajj of the
Prophet (s). He was ordered, at that day, to ask the people to be
silent-as it was mentioned in *al-Issaba*.

So definitely he became a Muslim before that hajj and definitely
al-Ma’ida was not revealed before that hajj.[^23]

At-Tabarani mentioned a tradition that Jareer had said: “The Prophet (s)
said: Your brother an-Najashi died…” The death of an-Najashi was before
the revelation of al-Mai’da. There was no doubt that he had died before
the tenth year of hijra.

Al-Qastalani had another odd saying about wiping over the slippers. He
said: “Wiping was not annulled because the tradition narrated by
al-Mugheera showed clearly that the Prophet (s) had wiped over his
slippers during the battle of Tabook, which was the last battle of the
Prophet (s), and al-Ma’ida was revealed during the battle of
al-Muraysee’…”

The battle of al-Muraysee’ was the battle of bani al-Mustalaq itself. It
was in the fifth-and it was said in the fourth or in the sixth-[^24]
year of hijra. After this battle many suras were revealed besides
al-Ma’ida. What was revealed during this battle was the verse of
tayammum, which was a part of sura of an-Nisa’:

***(…and if you are sick, or on a journey, or one of you come from the
privy or you have touched the women, and you cannot find water, betake
yourselves to pure earth, then wipe your faces and your hands; surely
Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving) 4:43.***

The true saying about that was narrated by Aa’isha and mentioned by
al-Wahidy in his book *Asbab an-Nuzool*. Refer to it to be sure that
al-Qastalani was confused between the verse of wudu’ and the verse of
tayammum.

In fact al-Mugheera and Jareer were among those, whom we couldn’t trust
or rely upon. Soon you shall see the history of al-Mugheera that makes
us not trust in him.

Jareer had a situation towards Imam Ali that made us not trust in him
too.

Sixth: Aa’isha, the Prophet’s wife, who was so clever and aware of the
Sunna and who lived in the house, where the Quran was revealed, denied
wiping over the slippers very strongly. Ibn Abbas, who was the scholar
of the umma and the vessel of the Book and the Sunna, also denied wiping
over the slippers so insistingly. They both denied this matter to a
degree that Aa’isha said: “To cut my feet is much more desirable to me
than to wipe over the slippers” and ibn Abbas said: “To wipe over a
donkey’s skin is much more desirable to me than to wipe over the
slippers.”[^25]

Would this kind of denying comply with those traditions?

Certainly not! If these sayings were said by these persons, who lived
with the revelation of the Quran and knew every corner of it, then would
we brush them aside to rely upon sayings said by persons coming
centuries after the revelation of the Quran?

Whoever pondered impartially on the denying of the Prophet’s wife, the
Prophet’s cousin and the Prophet’s pure progeny, definitely would
suspect those false traditions.

Then you would know well that saying that those traditions were
recurrent was just a lie. Were they so recurrent whereas those close
persons to the Prophet (s) ignored them or pretended to ignore them?
Glory be to Allah! This was but a great fabrication!

In fact if those traditions were recurrent, they wouldn’t be denied by
Abdullah bin Omar,[^26] Imam Malik[^27] and many other Muslims.

He, who said: “I am afraid that whoever doesn’t believe in wiping over
the slippers will be unbeliever”[^28] had done wrong so badly.

It was mentioned that wiping over the slipper was neither of the bases
of the religion nor of the necessities of its branches nor was
determined by the Quran or the Sunna nor was agreed upon by the
consensus of the umma. It was just a concession among a group of the
Muslims away from the others. Would it be a sin if a Muslim gave it up
in order to de according to the clear Quranic verse of wudu’, which all
the Muslims agreed unanimously upon the validity of acting according to
the verdicts mentioned in? They agreed upon that unanimously unlike
wiping over the slipper, which was a point of dispute and disagreement
among the Muslims and which would never lead to remove any impurity from
the feet and so the validity of the prayer would be uncertain.

Then would he, who followed the orders of the Quran and performed his
obligations with precaution, be considered as unbeliever? O you Muslims!
What would you say about Aa’isha, Ali, ibn Abbas and the rest of the
Prophet’s progeny, who denied wiping over the slippers?

Wiping over the turban
----------------------

The Shia ulema thought that wiping over the turban was impermissible.
This was the belief of ash-Shafi’iy, Abu Haneefa and Malik.

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, Abu Thour, al-Qassim bin Salam, al-Awza’iy and
ath-Thawri[^29] contradicted that and said that it was permissible
according to their analogy in applying wiping over the slippers to the
turban and depending upon a tradition narrated by al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba
that the Prophet (s) had wiped over his forelock and over his turban. In
some ways of his tradition he said that the Prophet (s) had wiped over
the turban and he didn’t mention the forelock.

The Quran sufficed us when saying: (***… and wipe your heads…***) and
the Sunna proved that the Prophet (s) used to wipe his forelock and this
was confirmed unanimously and didn’t need any explanation.

Their excuse by applying analogy to the divine verdicts was not
acceptable because the religion of Allah was not to be taken by analogy.

Wiping over the slippers was denied as you already knew. The tradition
of al-Mugheera was null even if it was mentioned by Muslim in his
*Sahih*. Abu Omar bin Abdul Birr said about this tradition: “It is a
suspicious tradition.”[^30] Perhaps Abu Haneefa, ash-Shafi’iy and Malik
didn’t care for this tradition because it was suspicious for them too.

Al-Mugheera had a biography full of cunning, deception, changeableness,
trickery, immersing in sins, plunging into lusts and exceeding in
perfidy. He exceeded all the limits in supporting the enemies of the
Prophet’s progeny and in opposing the loyal believers.

He became a Muslim in order to spare his blood from bani[^31] Malik.
Once he went with some notable men of bani Malik to visit al-Muqawqas in
Alexandria. The people of bani Malik won the prize of the king but
al-Mugheera didn’t. Greediness led him to betray them. He invited them
to drink while they entrusted in his companionship. He made them drink
until they became drunken. Then he killed them one after the other and
seized their monies.

Since he couldn’t find any shelter to resort to in order to be safe from
being revenged on except to join Islam, he went to the Prophet (s) in
Medina and said the shahada. The Prophet (s) accepted his shahada as he
used to do with everyone saying the shahada. When al-Mugheera offered to
give the monies to the Prophet (s), the Prophet (s) with his holy soul
disdained to accept them because they were seized by betraying.[^32] In
this way al-Mugheera became a Muslim.

Abu Bakra, who was one of the great prophet’s companions, and his
companions witnessed that al-Mugheera had committed adultery, which
would have led him to be punished by being stoned until death according
to the Islamic laws. This was very famous case among the events of the
year seventeen A.H.[^33] O you people! How could we then deny the holy
Quran and depend upon a tradition narrated by such a man?!!

Does wiping the head have a limit?
----------------------------------

The Shia ulema thought that there was no limit in wiping the head
whether for the wiping organ (the hand) or for the wiped organ (the
head). It was enough for the Shia to wipe the least part of the head as
possible.[^34] This was the belief of ash-Shafi’iy too. Imam Malik, Imam
Ahmad and others thought that it was obligatory to wipe all the head.
Abu Haneefa thought that it was obligatory to wipe a quarter of the head
with three fingers and less than that would not suffice.

Our evidence (the Shia’s evidence) was the Quranic verse (***… and wipe
your heads…***)***.***[^35] The real meaning of the verse referred to
the general wiping of the head. Since wiping the head was achieved by
wiping all the head or a quarter of it, also it would be achieved by
wiping less than that even by passing one finger or a part of a finger
over a part of the head. There was no any evidence confirming what they
said in this concern. If Allah wanted all the head to be wiped, he would
say: (wipe your heads-without using the preposition) as He had said:
(wash your faces) and if the required thing to be wiped was certain,
Allah would specify it with some kind of definition as He had said when
talking about washing the hands (*… and wash… your hands to the elbows*)
and when talking about the feet He said: (*… to the ankles*).

[^1]: Refer to Bidayatul Mujtahid and Nihayatul Muqtasid by ibn Rushd,
vol.1 p.14.

[^2]: This was the belief of ash-Shafi’iy.

[^3]: This was the belief of ibn Nafi’.

[^4]: This was the belief of Abu Haneefa, Dawood, Sufyan and many
others.

[^5]: This was the belief of Ashhab.

[^6]: Sufyan ath-Thawri, Abu Yousuf and Muhammad bin al-Hasan
ash-Shaybani permitted it whereas Abu Haneefa, ash-Shafi’iy and others
prohibited it.

[^7]: It was mentioned that Sufyan had said so.

[^8]: This was one of two sayings of ash-Shafi’iy about the subject.

[^9]: It was mentioned that this was the belief of Malik and his
companions. Abu Haneefa specified the tear by being less than an area of
three fingers gathered together.

[^10]: This was said by Malik.

[^11]: This was the belief of Abu Haneefa and ash-Shafi’iy.

[^12]: Mentioned by ibn Lubana in his Muntakhab.

[^13]: Abu Haneefa said it was sufficient but ash-Shafi’iy said it was
not.

[^14]: Dawood and ibn Layla thought so.

[^15]: This was the belief of al-Hasan bin Hay.

[^16]: Ash-Shafi’iy said so. Each one of these three sayings was adopted
by a group of the successors.

[^17]: Refer to at-Tafseer al-Kabeer by al-Fakhr ar-Razi, vol.3 p.371.

[^18]: Ar-Razi’s Tafseer vol.3 p.371.

[^19]: Ibn Rushd in his book al-Bidayah wen-Nihaya, vol.1 p.15
acknowledged this contradiction concerning the position of wiping over
the slippers. In p.16 he mentioned their disagreement about the time of
wiping. He said: “The reason behind their disagreement was because the
traditions were different in talking about the subject. Three different
traditions were narrated in this concern.” He mentioned the three
traditions; one of them showed that the time was three days and three
nights for the traveler and one day and one night for the resident. The
second showed that it was permissible to wipe over the slipper according
to one’s option without timing whether in residence or in travel whereas
the third one contradicted the two previous sayings. Refer to
(Jurisprudence according to the four sects) established by the ministry
of religious affairs in Egypt by the order of King Fu’ad the first to
see full details about he subject.

[^20]: Many scholars mentioned the identical belief of all of the
infallible imams (s). Refer to al-Burhan al-Qati’ by Sayyid Ali
at-Tabataba’iy. All the Shia looked forward to be near to Allah by
worshipping Him according to the doctrine of the pure imams of the
Prophet’s progeny since their days until now because they were the best
ones, who knew well the real religious verdicts and the true Islamic
jurisprudence.

[^21]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.2 p.314.

[^22]: An-Nawawi said when commenting on this saying: “Allah said in
al-Ma’ida: (wash your faces and your hands as far as the elbows and wipe
your heads and your feet to the (two) ankles). If Jareer became a Muslim
before the revelation of al-Ma’ida, it would be possible that his
tradition was annulled by the verse mentioned in al-Ma’ida but since he
became a Muslim after the revelation of the sura, then his tradition
would be valid…” How could we decide that he became a Muslim after the
revelation of al-Ma’ida whereas we showed that al-Ma’ida was revealed
lastly?

[^23]: Al-Bukhari mentioned that some of the verses of al-Ma’ida were
revealed to the Prophet (s) while he was on his sumpter during the
farewell hajj.

[^24]: As it was mentioned by al-Bukhari in his Sahih. So was said by
an-Nawawi in his ar-Rawdha.

[^25]: Refer to Ar-Razi’s Tafseer vol. 3 p.371 to see the sayings of
Aa’isha and ibn Abbas.

[^26]: Atta’ said, as it was mentioned by ar-Razi in his Tafseer vol.3
p.372: “Ibn Omar objected to the people about wiping over the slippers
but he didn’t die until he agreed with them.” But his objection to Sa’d
when he saw him wipe over the slippers was fixed in al-Bukhari’s Sahih.

[^27]: Refer to ar-Razi’s Tafseer vol.3 p.372 and the other books of
jurisprudence.

[^28]: Al-Karkhi had said that as it was mentioned by al-Qastalani in
his Irshad as-Sari vol.2 p.4.

[^29]: Mentioned in al-Bidaya wen Nihaya by ibn Rushd and at-Tafseer
al-Kabeer by ar-Razi.

[^30]: Al-Bidaya wen Nihaya by ibn Rushd vol.1 p.10.

[^31]: Bani means “the tribe of” or “the family of”.

[^32]: Refer to ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat vol.4 p.25.

[^33]: To see the details, refer to Wafiyyat al-A’yan by ibn Khillikan
and all the books of the historians, who wrote about the events of the
year seventeen A.H.

[^34]: Since the Prophet (s) used to wipe his forelock so the Shia were
satisfied with wiping this part of the head as possible but one could
wipe more area of the head as he liked.

[^35]: In the Arabic text of the verse there is a preposition before the
phrase (your heads). It has a sense of partialness.


