Six Disputable Questions
========================

1. Wiping the ears
------------------

The Shia agreed, according to their infallible imams, upon that wiping
the ears was not a part of wudu’ at all because neither the Quran nor
the Sunna or the consensus of the umma had evidenced it. In fact the
clear Quranic verse of wudu’ determined that wudu’ was to be performed
with two washings and two wipings; washing the face and the two hands
and wiping the head and the two feet.

The Hanbalites said that it was obligatory to wipe the two ears with
their meatuses. Ibn Rushd said in his book[^1] that this was the belief
of Abu Haneefa and his companions.

Ash-Shafi’iy and Malik said that wiping the ears was mustahab and not
obligatory but they disagreed upon wiping them with new water or with
the same water of wudu’ remained on the hands. Some of their companions
said that the ears were to be washed with the face. Others said that the
interior parts of the ears were to be wiped with the head and the
external parts of them were to be washed with the face.

Ash-Shafi’iy said that it was mustahab to repeat wiping the ears as he
said that it was mustahab too to repeat wiping the head.

They depended upon weak traditions that were not proved to be true by
the Shia. Also al-Bukhari and Muslim didn’t pay any attention to them.
Those, who acted according to these traditions although they were so
weak, justified that by saying that acting according to these traditions
was famous among them.

The infallible imams of the Prophet’s progeny didn’t pay a bit of
attention to these traditions. They were the people of the Prophet’s
house and definitely the people of a house would be more aware of what
there was in the house than anyone else.

2. Does washing the head instead of wiping it suffice for wudu’
---------------------------------------------------------------

The people of the four Sunni sects agreed upon that washing the head
instead of wiping it would suffice for wudu’ but they disagreed upon
that if it was makrooh[^2] or not. The Hanafites and the Malikites said
that it was makrooh justifying their belief by saying that washing the
head was opposite to what Allah had ordered. The Shafi’ites said that it
was not makrooh but it would be against the worthier act. The Hanbalites
said that washing the head instead of wiping it would suffice for wudu’
on condition that the hand must be passed over the head.

As for the Shia, they agreed unanimously upon that washing the head
would never suffice for wudu’ because it was opposite to what Allah had
ordered and opposite to the Prophet’s Sunna. The Prophet (s) used to
wipe his forelock in wudu’ and he didn’t wash his head. Hence washing
the head in wudu’ was null and it would invalidate wudu’ too. You
already knew that we said previously that washing and wiping were two
different facts.

3. Order in performing wudu’
----------------------------

The Shia agreed unanimously, according to their pure imams, upon the
obligation of the order of the acts of wudu’ as they were arranged by
the Quranic verse of wudu’.[^3]

The Malikites, the Hanafites, Sufyan ath-Thawri and Dawood thought that
the order of the acts of wudu’ was not necessary. They considered it as
mustahab and said that wudu’ wouldn’t be invalidated if the order of its
acts was violated. They said that wudu’ would be valid if one began his
wudu’ by washing his left foot and ended his wudu’ by washing his face
although his acts were opposite to the order of wudu’ mentioned in the
Quranic verse.

The Shia’s evidence was the Quran and the Sunna. The Quranic verse
showed the order of the acts of wudu’ clearly. The Sunna confirmed that
the Prophet (s) kept to the order of the acts of wudu’ whether his wudu’
was for a wajib prayer or a mustahab prayer. He was pure along his life.
Whenever his wudu’ was invalidated, he performed it. He often perform
wudu’ although he was pure by the previous wudu’.

He often said: “It is a light on alight.” The umma agreed upon that the
Prophet (s) had never performed wudu’ unless he followed the order of
its acts. If the order of wudu’ was not a condition for wudu’ to be
valid, the Prophet (s) would break it even one time or he would declare
that it was permissible to break the order of the acts of wudu’ to show
the right verdict as he used to do whenever there was a religious
verdict.

Since the Prophet (s) didn’t break the order of wudu’ and didn’t declare
that it was permissible to break it, so we knew definitely that the base
was to follow the order of wudu’ as a condition for wudu’ to be valid.

4. Succession of acts of wudu’
------------------------------

The Shia ulema, according to their imams, thought that the
succession[^4] of the acts of wudu’ was a necessary condition for the
validity of wudu’. The previous organ, which was to be washed, must not
dry before finishing washing the following organ when the environments
were normal.

The Shafi’ites and the Hanafites said that the succession of the acts of
wudu’ was neither a condition nor wajib but it was mustahab. It was
makrooh for them to separate between the organs of wudu’ if there was no
excuse but if there was an excuse, it would be not makrooh. For example
if one forgot to wash one of his organs and after a period of time he
remembered or the water he had ran out and he went to bring some water
to complete his wudu’.

The Malikites said that succession would be wajib if one remembered and
was able to do that and it would be not wajib if one forgot or there was
another excuse.

Our evidence was the doing of the Prophet (s). He kept to succession in
performing the acts of wudu’ as he kept to the order of the acts of it.
It was not mentioned at all that he had slacked in performing the acts
of wudu’. If that was not a condition for wudu’ to be valid, he would
break it even for one time or he would declare that it was permissible
to break it in order to show the Muslims the real legal verdict but
since he hadn’t done that, we knew that succession was obligatory in
performing wudu’.

Wudu’ would be valid if it had all the conditions determined by the
Quran and the Sunna but if it didn’t have all its conditions then its
validity would be disputable by the different sects of the Muslims. The
infallible imams of the Prophet’s progeny (s) thought that if wudu’
didn’t have all of its conditions, it wouldn’t be valid and it wouldn’t
make the prayer valid.

5. The intention
----------------

The Shia agreed unanimously, according to their imams, upon the
conditionality of the intention in the validity of wudu’ and ghussl[^5]
because they were among the acts of worship that Allah had ordered his
people to do. (***And they were not enjoined anything except that they
should serve Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience.*** 98:5) This was
the belief of ash-Shafi’iy, Malik, Ahmad, Dawood, Abu Thour and many of
the Sunni imams.

The Hanafites said that the obligation of wudu’ and ghussl with pure
water[^6] was but to lead to the purity that would be achieved only by
flowing the water over the organs whether it was done with an intention
or not or even if it was done without one’s option. They said if someone
fell into water without his option or he entered into water just to
enjoy himself, to cool himself or to clean himself or just to join the
others and then water covered all his organs of wudu’, he could offer
the prayer with this wudu’ even if he was unbeliever when he entered
into water and then he became a Muslim when he left the water. They
didn’t consider believing in Islam as a condition for the validity of
wudu’.

They stipulated the intention for the validity of tayammum because soil
didn’t purify in its nature but its purification was a devotional act so
the validity of tayammum required an intention. So was about performing
wudu’ and ghussl with date-juice or the leftover water, from which a
donkey or a mule drank, because the purity of this date-juice and such
leftover water was devotional like the soil in tayammum.

They went too far in detailing wudu’ and ghussl. They permitted
performing wudu’ with date-juice or the leftover water of the donkey or
the mule and they considered this as an (unreasonable kind of worship)
and they said that intention was obligatory for such act. On the other
hand they considered performing wudu’ with pure water as one of the
obligations that led to the perceptible cleanness like getting rid of
any impurity.

I didn’t know how they became so certain that the aim of Allah, when He
had legislated wudu’, was but perceptible cleanness, which would be
gained by the flowing of water over the organs! Every Muslim, man or
woman, knew that wudu’ and ghussl were performed to remove the effect of
any (hadath)[^7] in order to make the prayer (after wudu’ or ghussl)
valid and this thing was not perceptible or understood by people. It was
just a devotional act determined by the Most Aware of every fact that
was unknown by the people, the jinn, the angels and all the creatures.
Yes, we believed that wudu’ was legislated to remove the minor hadath
and ghussl to remove the major hadath exactly as we believed in the
other obligations like prayer, fasting, zakat and hajj.

Mere happening of the perceptible cleanness by wudu’ or ghussl in many
times didn’t make them (wudu’ and ghussl) as the attainment of the very
cleanness. If the purpose of wudu’ and ghussl was just to gain the
perceptible cleanness, then they wouldn’t be obligatory for one, who
committed a hadath, if he was so clean and tidy. This was against the
consensus of the umma and against the true Sunna of the Prophet (s), who
had said: “Allah doesn’t accept a prayer of anyone, who commits a hadath
until he performs wudu’.” He also said: “Allah doesn’t accept any prayer
without wudu’ and doesn’t accept any charity gained out of injustice.”

The Quran and the Sunna might be depended upon as evidences confirming
the necessity of the intention in performing wudu’.

As for the Quran, the verse mentioned in sura of al-Ma’ida (*O you who
believe! when you rise up to prayer, wash* **your** *faces and your
hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to the
ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a total ablution,
then wash* (*yourselves*)*…* 5:6) confirmed that wudu’ and ghussl were
among the obligations that the Muslims had been ordered to do and the
verse mentioned in the sura of al-Bayyina (***And they were not enjoined
anything except that they should serve Allah, being sincere to Him in
obedience.*** 98:5) confirmed that all what the Muslims had been ordered
to do must be done with loyalty to Allah. But in this conclusion there
was a kind of consideration or in fact a kind of paradox.

As for the Sunna, the way of the Prophet’s wudu’ confirmed that he had
kept to the order of the acts of wudu’ besides the intentions according
to the account that (the validity of the deeds depended upon the
intentions (to do them)). The Hanafites said: “The perfection of the
deeds depends upon the intentions” and so this would not be as evidence
for what we said. It might be said when answering them that the first
saying would be better because the validity of the deeds was more
required for the truth than the perfection of the deeds for what was
more required would be more possible to occur to the mind.

The Shia followed their imams in all what they believed in. The beliefs
of their imams were considered as fixed evidences because the infallible
imams of the Prophet’s progeny were equal to the Quran as the Prophet
(s) had said in one of his traditions. They were the vessel of the
Prophet’s Sunna, the ships of rescue for the umma; whoever rode in them
would be safe and whoever lagged behind them would drown. They were the
gate of forgiveness. They were the firmest handle, which would not break
off. They were the safety of the umma, which would keep them away from
separation. They were the secure shelter, which would protect the umma
against torment. They were the guardians of the Prophet (s) and the
heirs of his knowledge and wisdom. They were the worthiest in following
the Prophet’s Sharia.

6. Performing wudu’ with juice
------------------------------

**Performing wudu’ with juice**[^8]

The Shia agreed unanimously, according to the pure imams of Muhammad’s
progeny (s), upon the conditionality of the purity[^9] of the water used
in performing wudu’ and ghussl whether in residence or travel. They also
agreed upon that if there was no water, one had to perform tayammum with
clean soil. This was the belief of ash-Shafi’iy, Malik, Ahmad and
others.

Abu Haneefa and Sufyan ath-Thawri said that it was permissible to
perform wudu’ and ghussl with date-juice in travel when there was no
water.[^10] Al-Hasan al-Basri and Abul Aaliya Rafee’ bin Mihran said
that it was makrooh. Atta’ bin Abu Rabah said: “Performing tayammum is
more desirable to me than to perform wudu’ with milk or yogurt.”[^11]
Al-Awza’iy said that it was permissible to perform wudu’ and ghussl with
all kinds of juices[^12] and all kinds of pure (permissible)
liquids.[^13]

The evidences of the Shia for this matter were the Quran, the Prophet’s
Sunna and the consensus of the umma.

The Quran said: (***… and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to
pure earth, then wipe your faces and your hands.*** 4:43) Allah ordered
to perform tayammum instead of wudu’ when there was no water and He
didn’t give any other choice.

As for the Sunna, it was enough for us that the Prophet (s) had said:
“The pure earth is the Muslim’s wudu’ if he doesn’t find water.” This
Prophet’s saying was like the previous verse. It didn’t suggest any
option other than wudu’ and tayammum.

But as for the consensus, all the Muslims agreed unanimously upon one
thought. Whoever contradicted this thought was abnormal and violating
the consensus of the Muslims and then no one would care for his
abnormality. Among the abnormal sayings was this one: “It was not
permissible to perform wudu’ with seawater.”[^14]

Abu Haneefa, Sufyan ath-Thawri and others depended in their thought upon
a tradition narrated by ibn Mass’ood in two ways:

First: al-Abbas bin al-Waleed bin Sabeeh al-Khallal ad-Damashqi from
Marwan bin Muhammad at-Tatiri ad-Damashqi from Abdullah bin Luhay’a from
Qayss bin al-Hajjaj from Hanash as-Sina’iy from Abdullah bin Abbas that
ibn Mass’ood had said: “The Prophet (s) asked me in the night (of the
jinn): “Do you have some water.” I said: “No, I don’t. But I have some
juice in (sutayha) a vessel.” The Prophet (s) said: “A good date and
pure water! Pour over my hands!” I poured (of the juice) over his hands
and he performed wudu’ with that juice.”

No one mentioned this tradition, in this way, except Muhammad bin Yazeed
bin Maja al-Qazweeni in his *Sunan*-as I knew-because of the many
defects it had. Al-Abbas bin al-Waleed was neither trusted nor reliable.
The scholars of jarh and ta’deel left him aside. Abu Dawood was asked
about him as it was mentioned in *Mizanul I’tidal* and he said: “He knew
much about the narrators and traditions but I don’t narrate from him.”
The scholars didn’t depend upon his traditions because he was weak.

As for his sheikh Marwan bin Muhammad at-Tatiri, he was one of the
deviate Murjites.[^15] Al-Aqeeli mentioned him in his book of the weak
narrators. Ibn Hazm declared that he was weak. All that was mentioned in
*Mizanul I’tidal*. His sheikh Abdullah bin Luhay’a was considered by the
scholars of jarh and ta’deel as a weak narrator. Refer to *Mizanul
I’tidal* to find that ibn Mu’een and ibn Sa’eed had confirmed that he
was weak. Some of the other narrators of this tradition had defects too
but we didn’t need to show other details.

Second: the series of the narrators of the two ways of the tradition
reached Abu Zayd the freed slave of Amr bin Hurayth that ibn Mass’ood
had said: “The Prophet (s) asked me in the night of the jinn: “Do you
have tahoor[^16] (some water)?” I said: “No, just some juice in (adawa)
a vessel.” He said: “A good date and pure water.” Then he performed
wudu’.”

It was mentioned by ibn Maja, at-Tarmithi and Abu Dawood. This tradition
was null in this way as it was null in the first way. It was enough for
this tradition to be null that its main narrator was Abu Zayd the freed
slave of Amr bin Hurayth. He was unknown by the scholars of Hadith as it
was said by at-Tarmithi and others. Ath-Thahabi mentioned him in his
*Mizanul I’tidal* and said that no one knew him and that he narrated
from ibn Mass’ood but his traditions were not true. Al-Bukhari mentioned
him among the weak narrators and said that the text of his tradition
was: “The Prophet of Allah performed wudu’ with juice.” Al-Hakim said
about him that he was unknown and that he had narrated nothing save his
(null) tradition.

After all, the earlier ulema agreed upon the weakness of this tradition
in both of its ways.[^17] It was contradicted by another tradition
mentioned by at-Tarmithi in his *Sahih* and Abu Dawood in his *Sunan*.
All the scholars considered this tradition as true. The tradition said
that Alqama had asked ibn Mass’ood: “Which of you was with the Prophet
(s) in the night of the jinn?” Ibn Mass’ood said: “No one of us was with
him.”

Even if it was supposed that the tradition was true, then it would be
annulled by the Quranic verse of tayammum because the night of the jinn
was in Mecca before the hijra whereas the verse of tayammum was revealed
in Medina after the hijra.[^18]

The tradition-if it was supposed that it was true-could be interpreted
in a way that there might be some dried dates in the water that wouldn’t
change its purity and aspects.

Al-Awza’iy, al-Assamm and others, who thought that it was permissible to
perform wudu’ and ghussl with all the pure liquids, justified their
thought by saying that when Allah had ordered of washing and wiping and
as they were achieved with water, they could be achieved with any other
pure liquid as well.

The answer: Allah made tayammum obligatory when there was no water and
hence permitting performing wudu’ with other than that would annul the
verdict of Allah. The Quranic verse limited washing to water only and
this was showed very clearly.

When the Hanafites permitted performing wudu’ with milk mixed with
water,[^19] they might depend upon the same justification, upon which
al-Awza’iy and al-Assamm Hatim bin Onwan al-Balkhi had depended.

This what Allah had helped his slave and the son of his slave, Abdul
Husayn bin sharif Yousuf bin al-Jawad bin Isma’eel bin Muhammad bin
Muhammad bin Sharafuddeen Ibraheem bin Zaynul Aabideen bin Ali
Nooruddeen bin Nooruddeen Ali bin al-Husayn Aal Abul Hasan al-Musawi
al-Aamily to do for the sake of Him. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.

[^1]: Bidayatul Mujtahid vol.1 p.11.

[^2]: Undesirable act.

[^3]: The Shia stipulated order in the very organs of wudu’ themselves.
They said it was obligatory to wash the upper parts before the lower
parts imitating their infallible imams and acting according to their
traditions.

[^4]: It means to perform the acts of wudu’ one after the other
immediately without a long period of time between them in order to show
that wudu’ is one unit.

[^5]: Obligatory bathing that is required after certain acts or
occurrences.

[^6]: Pure water means the water that is not mixed with any other liquid
or matter that may change its original aspects.

[^7]: Hadath is any condition requiring wudu’ or ghussl such as
excretion, making water, wet dreaming or making love. Minor hadath means
excretion, making water or farting. Major hadath refers to wet dreaming
or making love.

[^8]: It is meant by juice here the mixture of water and dates or water
and raisin to make the water taste sweet. There are two kinds of such
juice; intoxicating and non-intoxicating. Definitely the intoxicating
kind is haram. What is meant here is the non-intoxicating kind.

[^9]: Not to be mixed with any other liquid or matter that may change
its original aspects.

[^10]: This saying of Abu Haneefa was so famous. It was mentioned by ibn
Rushd in his Bidayatul Mujtahid, by ar-Razi in his Tafseer vol.3 p.375
and by as-Sindi in his comments on ibn Maja’s Sunan.

[^11]: Refer to al-Bukhari’s Sahih.

[^12]: Ibn Rushd’s Bidayatul Mujtahid and ar-Razi’s Tafseer vol.3 p.375.

[^13]: Al-Bukhari’s Sahih.

[^14]: Abdullah bin Amr bin al-Aass said that performing wudu’ with
seawater was not permissible. It was mentioned by ar-Razi in his Tafseer
when interpreting sura of al-Ma’ida.

[^15]: one of the earliest Islamic sects to believe in the postponement
of judgment on committers of serious sins, recognizing God alone as
being able to decide whether or not a Muslim had lost his faith.

[^16]: The literary meaning of tahoor is purifier.

[^17]: Refer to Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by al-Qastalani and Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari by Zakariyya al-Ansari vol.2 p.43. (Two books printed
together).

[^18]: Wudu’ was mustahab before the revelation of this verse and
tayammum was not legislated until this verse was revealed after the
hijra.

[^19]: Al-Qastalani mentioned in his Irshad as-Sari vol.2 p.44: “For the
Hanafites it was not permissible to perform wudu’ with pure milk but if
it was mixed with some water then it would be permissible.”


