Preface
=======

These are juristic questions discussed in a clear and firm way. They
depend upon the true evidences and follow the straight way. It is enough
for them to be a result of a high learned mind and a wonderful pen
depending upon the accurate scientific theories so that they are
directed easily towards the bright way of rightness and assisted by
those accurate theories.

This is a book among tens of books written by our honored great uncle
Imam Sharafuddeen, who has supplied the Arabic library with what makes
the seekers of the truth ladle from this pure knowledge and makes them
appreciate his apposite thinking, truthfulness of evidences,
impartiality and defending the rightness.

In this valuable research you will find a correct knowledge depending
upon the Book of Allah and the Sunna of His messenger for the author
hasn’t depended upon other than them. Although the jurisprudential
points discussed in this research are few, you will get a great benefit
out of them.

Imam Sharafuddeen discussed these certain questions especially and made
them the subject of his short thesis because these secondary questions
were the source of much argument and disagreement. Much ado and fierce
attacks often and often aroused about these points, hence Imam
Sharafuddeen tried to ease the fierceness of the attackers and to lead
the fair prudent ones towards the truth. On the other hand, he wanted to
clear that the Shia wouldn’t adopt any religious matter, unless they
were certain and sure that it was derived from the holy Quran and the
true Sunna.

These questions are true examples giving you a clear image about the
successful conclusion and fair jurisprudential investigation. You notice
in them the high justification for they don’t care for other than clear
evidences and true excuses derived from the holy Book of Allah and the
sacred Sunna of the Prophet (s).

**Nooruddeen Sharafuddeen**


