Is Bassmala A Quranic Verse? Is It To Be Recited In Prayers?
============================================================

The Muslim scholars disagreed on this matter.[^1] Malik and al-Awza’iy
thought that it was not a part of the Quran and they prohibited their
followers from reciting it in the prayers whether it was in the
beginning of sura of Hamd[^2] or in the beginning of the second sura and
whether it was recited loudly or softly but they permitted to be recited
in nafila.[^3]

Abu Haneefa, ath-Thawri and their followers recited bassmala with sura
of Hamd but they said that it must be recited softly even in the
loud-recited prayers.[^4] This showed that they agreed with Malik and
al-Awza’iy. We didn’t find any evidence justifying that except that they
didn’t consider it as part of the Quran.

Ash-Shafi’iy recited bassmala loudly in loud-recited prayers and softly
in soft-recited prayers and considered it as a verse of sura of Hamd. So
was the thought of Ahmed bin Hanbal, Abu Thour and Abu Obayd.

Different sayings were mentioned about the thought of ash-Shafi’iy
concerning bassmala; whether he believed that it was a part of every
sura except Bara’a[^5] (9) or it was not a verse except in sura of Hamd.
But his companions agreed upon that bassmala was a verse of all the
suras[^6] and justified the two different sayings mentioned about their
Imam’s thought.[^7]

As for us-the Shia-we agreed, according to our infallible imams, upon
that bassmala was a complete Quranic verse of every sura except Bara’a
and whoever left reciting it in the prayer intendedly, his prayer would
be vain whether the prayer was wajib (obligatory) or mustahab. It must
be recited loudly in loud-recited prayers and it was desirable
(mustahab) to be recited loudly in soft-recited prayers.[^8]It was a
piece of a verse in sura of an-Naml. The traditions of our infallible
imams were clear in denying the sayings of their opponents. Imam Sadiq
(s) said: “What?! They attacked the greatest verse of the Book of Allah
the Almighty and they pretended that it was a heresy and then they
spread their heresy about the verse (***In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful***)***.***[^9]

Our evidence from the Sunni side is the traditions mentioned in their
Sihah and how many they are!

1. Ibn Jurayj narrated from his father from Sa’eed bin Jubayr that ibn
Abbas when talking about the Quranic verse (***And certainly We have
given you seven of the oft-repeated*** (***verses***) ***and the grand
Quran*** 15:87) had said: “It is the Fatiha[^10] of the Book; ***In the
name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. All praise is due to Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds…etc.***)***.*** Ibn Jurayj said: “I asked my
father: Did Sa’eed tell you that ibn Abbas had said that (***in the name
of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***) was a Quranic verse? He said:
Yes!”[^11]

2. Ibn Abbas said: “The Prophet (s), whenever Gabriel came to him and
recited ***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***, knew
that it was a sura.”[^12]

3. Ibn Abbas said: “The Prophet (s) didn’t know that a sura was
completed until a new ***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful*** was revealed to him.”[^13]

4. Ibn Abbas said: “The Muslims didn’t know that a sura was completed
until ***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful*** was
revealed. When it was revealed, they became certain that the previous
sura was completed.”[^14]

5. Umm Salama said: “The Prophet (s) used to recite (***in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. All praise is due to Allah, the
Lord of the Worlds…etc.***) and scanned it verse by verse.”[^15]

Umm Salama said in another way: “The Prophet (s) recited in the prayer
(***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***) and counted
it as the first verse and then recited (***All praise is due to Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds***) and counted it as the second, then (***The
Beneficent, the Merciful***) as the third, (***Master of the Day of
Judgment***) as the fourth, then (***Thee do we serve and Thee do we
beseech for help***) and gathered his five fingers.”[^16]

6. Na’eem al-Mujammir said: “I was behind Abu Hurayra (in offering the
prayer) when he recited (***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful***) then he recited al-Fatiha until he finished it and said
amen and the people said amen! When he finished the prayer, he said: “I
swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, that I am the most similar to
the Prophet (s) in offering the prayer.”[^17]

Abu Hurayra said: “The Prophet (s) used to recite (***in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***) loudly in the prayers.”[^18]

7. Anass bin Malik said: “Once Mo’awiya offered a prayer in Medina and
he recited (***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***)
loudly for al-Fatiha but he didn’t recite it for the second sura. When
he finished the prayer, some of the Muhajireen and the Ansar,[^19] who
heard him, shouted at him: “O Mo’awiya! Did you steal the prayer or
forget?” When he offered the prayer after that, he recited bassmala for
the second sura.” Al-Hakim mentioned this tradition in his Mustadrak and
considered it true according to (Imam) Muslim’s conditions.[^20] The
tradition was mentioned by others like Imam ash-Shafi’iy,[^21] who
commented on it. It would be better to quote his comment. He said:
“Mo’awiya was a very powerful ruler, so unless reciting bassmala loudly
was a certain verdict among all the companions of the Muhajireen and the
Ansar, they wouldn’t dare to object to him when he didn’t recite
bassmala.”[^22]

I would like to comment on this tradition to draw the attention of every
researcher to the evidence this tradition had that confirmed our thought
(the Shia’s thought) about bassmala in the prayer and that it was not
permissible to recite bassmala with al-Fatiha only and not to recite it
with the second sura, otherwise the companions wouldn’t have objected to
Mo’awiya unless the matter of bassmala had been like the Shia’s thought.

8. It was narrated from another way that Anass had said: “I heard the
Prophet (s) reciting (***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful***) loudly in the prayer.”[^23]

9. Muhammad bin as-Sariy al-Asqalani said: “I offered Fajr and Maghrib
prayers behind al-Mu’tamir bin Sulayman innumerable times. He recited
(***in the name of Allah, the*** ***Beneficent, the Merciful***) loudly
before al-Fatiha and before the second sura. I heard al-Mu’tamir saying:
I haven’t failed to imitate my father’s prayer and my father said: I
haven’t failed to imitate Anass’ prayer and Anass said: I haven’t failed
to imitate the Prophet’s prayer.”[^24]

This tradition and other traditions showed that they (the Sunnis) used
to recite bassmala with the second sura after al-Fatiha in the prayers
like the Shia. Many other traditions confirmed this matter.[^25]

Qatada said: “Anass bin Malik was asked that how the Prophet (s) recited
in his prayers. He said: “He used to stress his reciting.” Then he
recited (bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem)[^26] and he stressed ar-rahman
(the Beneficent) and ar-raheem (the Merciful).”

Hameed at-Taweel narrated that Anass bin Malik had said: “I offered
prayers behind the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali. All of
them recited bassmala loudly.”

All the previous traditions were mentioned by Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin
Abdullah al-Hakim an-Nayssaboori in his Mustadrak. He said after the
last tradition: “I mentioned this tradition to be evidence for the
previous traditions. These traditions showed clear objection to the
tradition narrated by Qatada that Anass had said: “I offered prayers
behind the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman and I didn’t hear any
of them reciting (***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful***)***.***”

Then al-Hakim said: “Many other traditions narrated by Othman, Ali,
Talha bin Obaydillah, Jabir bin Abdullah, Abdullah bin Omar, al-Hakam
bin Omayr ath-Thimali, an-Nu’man bin Basheer, Samra bin Jundub, Burayda
al-Aslami and Aa’isha bint Abu Bakr concerning this subject. I didn’t
mention them in order not to overburden the reader with them. I chose
from among what might fit this chapter. Also I mentioned in this chapter
those, who recited bassmala loudly in their prayers, of the companions,
the successors and the successors’ successors.”[^27]

Ar-Razi mentioned in his at-*Tafseer* *al-Kabeer*[^28] that al-Bayhaqi
had mentioned in his *Sunan* some traditions about reciting bassmala
loudly in the prayer narrated by Omar bin al-Khattab, ibn Abbas, ibn
Omar and ibn az-Zubayr. Then ar-Razi said: “As for Ali bin Abu Talib
(may Allah be pleased with him), it was proved recurrently that he
recited bassmala loudly in his prayers and whoever imitated Ali bin Abu
Talib in his religion, would be guided. The evidence for that was the
saying of the Prophet (s): “O Allah! Turn the rightness with Ali
wherever he turns.”

It would be a sufficient evidence for bassmala to be a Quranic verse in
the beginning of every sura except Bara’a, that all the companions,
their successors and the successors’ successors of every generation of
the umma had agreed unanimously, since the Quran had been written down
until nowadays, upon writing down bassmala at the beginning of every
sura except Bara’a.

They wrote it down as they wrote every other Quranic verse without any
difference between them whereas they had agreed unanimously upon not
writing anything that was not of the holy Quran unless they would put a
distinguishing mark in order not to be mixed up with the Quranic words.
Didn’t you see how they distinguished the names of the suras, the
symbols of the sections, the parts…etc. and put them out of the text of
the Quran in order to be known that they were not of the Quran so that
the Quran would be protected as it had been revealed? You knew well that
the umma had never agreed unanimously upon any matter as it had agreed
upon this matter and this was enough evidence proving that bassmala was
independent Quranic verse coming at the beginning of every sura written
by the ancestors and the successors.

It was mentioned that the Prophet (s) had said: “Every important task
that doesn’t begin with (in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful) will be amputated.”[^29] and: “Every important task that
doesn’t begin with (in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful)
will be amputated or mutilated.”[^30]

It is certain that the holy Quran is the best of what Allah, the
Almighty has revealed to His apostles and prophets and that every sura
in it is important and great that Allah has challenged all the people,
who failed to produce a sura like the Quranic suras. So would it be
possible for the Quran to be amputated? Allah, His Quran and its suras
be exalted highly above any raving!

The prayer is the success and the best of doings as it is announced from
above the minbars and the minarets. It is known by everyone. Nothing is
to be compared with it after believing in Allah, His prophets and the
Day of Resurrection. Then is it possible for Allah to legislate the
prayer so amputated and mutilated? Neither a pious nor a dissolute one
dares to say so but the pious imams Malik, al-Awza’iy and Abu Haneefa
(may Allah be pleased with them) were distracted from these necessities;
and every mujtahid would be rewarded and not to be blamed whether being
right or wrong when trying his best to deduce his conclusion from the
legal evidences.

The excuse of our opponents
---------------------------

They justified the matter with some excuses:

First: if bassmala was a verse of al-Fatiha and was a part of every sura
of the Quran, then repeating (***the Beneficent, the Merciful***)[^31]
would be necessary to be repeated one hundred and thirteen times
throughout the Quran.

The answer: the situation might require repeating if it was to pay much
attention to some great affairs in order to be taken in consideration
with much carefulness. The holy Quran had many examples of this thing;
for example in sura of ar-Rahman (55), al-Mursalat (77) and al-Kafiroon
(109). Was there anything of the affairs of this life and the afterlife
deserving utmost attention and greatest carefulness like the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful? Were the prophets delegated, the
angels sent down and the Books revealed without ***in the name of Allah,
the beneficent, the merciful*** or His guidance? Were the heavens and
the earths constructed but with ***in the name of Allah, the beneficent,
the merciful?***[^32]

(***O men! call to mind the favor of Allah on you; is there any creator
besides Allah who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth?
There is no god but He; whence are you then turned away***) 35:3.

Second: the tradition narrated by Abu Hurayra that the Prophet (s) had
said: “Allah the Almighty says: I have divided the prayer between Me and
My servant into two halves. If the servant says: ***All praise is due to
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.*** Allah says: My servant praises Me. If
he says: ***The Beneficent, the Merciful.*** Allah says: My servant
thanks Me. If he says: ***Master of the Day of Judgment.*** Allah says:
My servant glorifies Me. If he says: ***Thee do we serve and Thee do we
beseech for help.*** Allah says: this is between Me and My servant…etc.”

Their evidence in this tradition was that he didn’t mention (***in the
name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***) with the verses of
al-Fatiha. They said that if it was a verse of al-Fatiha, he would
mention it.

The answer: this tradition was contradicted by a tradition narrated by
ibn Abbas when saying: “Allah says: I have divided the prayer between Me
and My servant. If the servant says: ***in the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful*****.** Allah says: My servant calls
me…etc.”[^33] The tradition was too long but our evidence was that it
included bassmala and so it contradicted Abu Hurayra’s tradition. In
fact Abu Hurayra himself narrated a tradition that the Prophet (s) used
to recite bassmala loudly in the prayer and that he himself used to
recite it loudly in his prayer. He said: “I am the most of you in
imitating the Prophet’s prayer.” This tradition was mentioned
previously.

Third: the tradition narrated by Aa’isha that the Prophet (s) began his
prayer with takbeer[^34] and reciting (al hamdu lillahi rabbil
aalameen).[^35]

The answer: this couldn’t be an evidence for them because Aa’isha made
(al hamdu lillahi rabbil aalameen) as a name for this sura exactly as
when one said: “I recited (qul huwal-lahu ahad)”[^36]to mean that he
recited sura of al-Ikhlass or when saying that someone recited (inna
fatahna laka fathan mubeena)[^37] to mean that someone recited sura of
al-Fat~h and so on. So the meaning of the tradition was that the Prophet
(s) began his prayer with takbeer and reciting this sura, whose
beginning was ***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful.***[^38]

Fourth: the tradition narrated by ibn Mughaffal when saying: “My father
heard me reciting ***in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful.*** He said to me: “O my son! Beware of changing the Sunna! I
offered prayers with the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman. I
didn’t hear any of them reciting it (bassmala).”[^39]

The answer: the scholars of jarh and ta’deel[^40] didn’t know who ibn
Mugaffal was. They didn’t mention any of his traditions. Ibn Rushd
mentioned him when talking about bassmala in his book Bidayatul
Mujtahid[^41] and brushed him away when quoting the saying of Abu Omar
bin Abdul Birr that ibn Mughaffal was unknown man.

Fifth: Shu’ba narrated from Qatada that Anass bin Malik had said: “I
offered prayers with the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman. I
didn’t hear any of them reciting ***in the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful***.”[^42] Another one narrated by Hameed
at-Taweel that Anass said: “I offered prayers behind Abu Bakr, Omar and
Othman. All of them didn’t recite ***in the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful***.”[^43]

The answer: you found in our evidence mentioned previously true
traditions narrated by Anass contradicting these two traditions. You
might refer to them.

Imam ar-Razi mentioned this tradition of Anass in his *Tafseer* and
said: “The answer to this tradition is in many ways;

First: Sheikh Abu Hamid al-Isfarayeeni said: “Six traditions were
narrated from Anass in this concern. The Hanafites narrated from him
three traditions. One of them was his saying: I offered prayers behind
the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman. They began the prayer with
(***All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds***)***.***

The other was his saying: …they didn’t mention ***in the name of Allah,
the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

The third saying: …I didn’t hear any of them reciting ***in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

These three traditions agreed with the thought of the Hanafites and
there were three other traditions contradicting this thought;

one of them was his tradition about Mo’awiya, who didn’t recite bassmala
in the prayer and then the Muhajireen and the Ansar objected to him and
this showed that reciting bassmala loudly in the prayer was a certain
matter, which was agreed upon unanimously among them.

The other one: Abu Qulaba narrated from Anass that the Prophet (s), Abu
Bakr and Omar used to recite bassmala loudly in the prayers.[^44]

The third one: that Anass was asked about reciting bassmala loudly or
softly and he answered: “I don’t know about this matter.” Ar-Razi said:
“It was clear that Anass’ traditions about this matter became so
confused and contradictory and hence we had to depend upon other
evidences…and also there was another suspicion in his traditions that
Ali (s) exaggerated in reciting bassmala loudly but when the Umayyads
seized the rule, they exaggerated in forbidding from reciting bassmala
loudly in order to remove everything referring to Ali (s).[^45] Anass
might be afraid of the Umayyads; therefore his sayings became confused.

Whatever we doubted about something, we would never doubt about that if
there was a contradiction between the sayings of persons like Anass and
ibn al-Mughaffal and the sayings of Ali bin Abu Talib (s), who kept on
that until the end of his life, certainly depending upon the sayings of
Ali would be better. This was a final answer…and whoever took Ali as the
imam of his religion, would certainly lay hold on the firmest handle of
religion and life…etc.”[^46]

*All praise is due to Allah Who guided us to this, and we would not have
found the way had it not been that Allah had guided us.*

[^1]: Basmalah is saying (bissmillah~ir rahman~ir raheem: in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful).

[^2]: It is the first sura in the Quran that must be recited in every
prayer. It is also called al-Fatiha.

[^3]: Nafila means not wajib (obligatory) prayer. It is (mustahab).
Refer to ibn Rushd's Bidayetul Mujtahid, vol.1 p.96. Ar-Razi said in his
at-Tafseer al-Kabeer, vol.1 p.100 about bassmala: "Malik and al-Awza'iy
said that it was not a part of the Quran except in sura of an-Naml (27)
and that it was not be recited whether loudly or softly except in
mustahab prayers in Ramadan.

[^4]: In Fajr, Maghrib and Isha’ prayers sura of Hamd and the second
sura must be recited loudly and in Dhuhr and Assr prayers the two suras
must be recited softly.

[^5]: Sura of Bara’a didn’t begin with bassmala.

[^6]: Refer to at-Tafseer al-Kabeer by ar-Razi, vol.1 p.104.

[^7]: They said that the disagreement was not about considering bassmala
as a verse or not but it was about whether bassmala was a complete
Quranic verse or a piece of a verse of each sura.

[^8]: Imam ar-Razi, in his at-Tafseer al-Kabeer when talking about
bassmala, mentioned many evidences about reciting bassmala loudly. In
one of them he said that Imam Ali (s) thought that bassmala was to be
recited loudly in all the prayers. He said: “This evidence is strong in
my self and deep-rooted in my mind. It will never be removed at all.”

[^9]: Refer to Majma’ul Bayan by at-Tabarsi when talking about bassmala
in vol.1.

[^10]: Sura of Hamd; the first sura of the Quran.

[^11]: Refer to al-Hakim’s Mustadrak when interpreting sura of al-Fatiha
and ath-Thahabi’s Talkhees, vol.2 p.257.

[^12]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.1 p.231.

[^13]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak and ath-Thahabi’s Talkhees, vol.1 p.231
(printed together as one book).

[^14]: Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.1 p.232 mentioned the tradition
and said: “It was a true tradition according to the two sheikhs;
al-Bukhari and Muslim.” Ath-Thahabi in his Talkhees mentioned it and
considered it true according to the two sheikhs too.

[^15]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak and ath-Thahabi’s Talkhees, vol.1 p.232.

[^16]: Mentioned by al-Hakim in his Mustadrak after the previous
tradition.

[^17]: The Shia don’t recite (amen) after al-Fatiha. They consider it
neither a part of al-Fatiha nor a part of the Quran at all. Neither the
Shia scholars nor their imams have narrated something of that, whereas
the Sunni have depended upon it as a norm of them and they have
mentioned many traditions confirming it; one of them is this tradition
of Abu Hurayra.

[^18]: Al-Hakim mentioned this tradition in his Mustadrak after the
previous tradition. Al-Bayhaqi mentioned it in his as-Sunan al-Kabeera.
Refer to ar-Razi’s Tafseer, vol.1 p.105.

[^19]: Muhajireen; the first Muslims, who emigrated from Mecca to
Medina. Ansar; the people of Medina, who believed in the Prophet (s) and
supported him and his companions.

[^20]: Ath-Thahabi mentioned it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak and
considered it true according to Muslim’s conditions. Al-Hakim and
ath-Thahabi considered this tradition to be the contrary of the
tradition narrated by Qatada that Anass said: “I offered prayers behind
the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman. I didn’t hear any of them
reciting in the name of Allah, the beneficent, the merciful.” This
tradition is null as we shall explain that soon inshallah.

[^21]: Refer to his Musnad p.13.

[^22]: At-Tafseer al-Kabeer by ar-Razi, vol.1 p.105.

[^23]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak and ath-Thahabi’s Talkhees. They said that
all the narrators of this tradition were reliable and they considered it
as contrary to the tradition narrated by Qatada from Anass.

[^24]: Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak and at-Thahabi in his Talkhees
mentioned this tradition and said that all its narrators were reliable.
They considered this tradition as evidence to refute the vain tradition
narrated by Qatada from Anass.

[^25]: It was mentioned by Imam ash-Shafi’iy in his Musnad p.13 that ibn
Omar hadn’t given up reciting bassmala with al-Fatiha and the second
sura in his prayers.

[^26]: (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful).

[^27]: Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.1 p.234.

[^28]: vol.1 p.105.

[^29]: Mentioned by Abdul Qadir ar-Rahawi in his Arba’een narrated by
Abu Hurayra, mentioned by as-Sayooti in his al-Jami’ as-Sagheer, vol.2
p.91 and al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his Kanzul Ommal, vol.1 p.193.

[^30]: Mentioned by ar-Razi in his Tafseer, vol.1 when talking about
bassmala.

[^31]: It was repeated in the third verse of al-Fatiha besides the first
verse (in the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful).

[^32]: The faithful person begins all his/her works with in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. If he/she eats, drinks, stands up,
sits down, comes in, goes out, takes, gives, reads, writes, dictates,
makes speech or slaughters a sacrifice, he/she will say: in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. When the midwife holds the new-born
baby during its birth, she says: in the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. When the faithful person is dying, he/she says: in the
name of Allah, the Beneficent the merciful and when he/she is put into
the tomb it is said: in the name of Allah, the Beneficent the merciful
and when he/she is resurrected, he/she says: in the name of Allah, the
Beneficent the merciful and when he/she attends before Allah, he/she
says: in the name of Allah, the Beneficent the merciful and is there a
shelter or a resort then save Allah?

[^33]: Kanzul Ommal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, vol.1p.320.

[^34]: Saying (Allahu akbar; Allah is great).

[^35]: All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.

[^36]: Say: He is Allah, the One! 112:1.

[^37]: Surely We have given to you a clear victory. 48:1.

[^38]: This was the summary of what Imam ash-Shafi’iy had said when
refuting their justification out of this tradition.

[^39]: Imam ar-Razi mentioned this tradition in his Tafseer, vol.1 p.106
and then said: “Anass and ibn Mughaffal mentioned the three caliphs in
their traditions and didn’t mention Ali. This showed that Ali recited
bassmala loudly in the prayers.”

[^40]: Jarh means to prove that a narrator of a tradition is not trusty.
Ta’deel means to prove that a narrator is trusty and reliable.

[^41]: Vol.1 p.97.

[^42]: mentioned by Muslim in his Sahih, chap. Of bassmala.

[^43]: Refer to Malik’s Muwatta’.

[^44]: We mentioned previously the tradition narrated by Hameed
at-Taweel that Anass had said: “I offered prayers behind the Prophet
(s), Abu Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali. All of them recited bassmala
loudly.”

[^45]: Such was the conduct of the Umayyads towards Imam Ali and his
progeny in many of the divine laws until the rightness and falseness
were confused. There is no power save in Allah, the Almighty!

[^46]: Refer to at-Tafseer al-Kabeer by ar-Razi, vol.1 p.106-107.


