Takbeeratul Ihram
=================

The Shia agreed, according to their pure imams, unanimously upon that
*takbeeratul ihram*[^1] was a necessary pillar of every wajib and
mustahab prayer. Without *takbeeratul ihram* the prayer would be
invalid. The only form of *takbeeratul ihram* was (Allahu akbar). If the
prayer began his prayer with anything else than Allahu akbar even if it
had the same meaning, his prayer would be invalid. Also saying it in any
language other than Arabic would invalidate the prayer. It was enough
for us that *takbeeratul ihram* was obligatory that the Prophet (s) had
never begun any of his prayers except with it. You already knew that the
Prophet (s) had said: “Offer the prayer as you saw me offering it.”

The obligation of *takbeeratul ihram* was confirmed by the Quran, the
Sunna and the consensus of the umma. Allah said: (***And your Lord do
magnify*** 74:3)***.***[^2] The consensus of the umma agreed upon that
the verse referred to *takbeeratul ihram* and the orders of Allah were
to be obeyed obligatorily. According to the consensus of the umma too
that other than saying (Allahu akbar) at the beginning of the prayer was
not obligatory. The Prophet (s) said: “The key of the prayer is the
tahoor,[^3] its tahreem[^4] is saying Allahu akbar and its tahleel[^5]
is by saying tasleem.”[^6] This tradition was mentioned by Abu Dawood in
his *Sunan*.

The Hanafites said that tahreem was not a pillar of the prayer but it
was related to standing up towards the qibla. They said that it was not
necessary to say *takbeeratul ihram* in Arabic and they permitted
translating it into any language the prayer liked whether he was able or
unable to speak Arabic. They said that *takbeeratul ihram* would be
valid if the prayer said instead of (Allahu akbar) (subhanallah) or (la
ilaha illallah) or any of the attributes of Allah the Almighty on
condition that it was not to be said more than the attribute of Allah.
The prayer could say (Allah), (ar-Rahman; the Beneficent) or any one of
the other attributes of Allah to begin his prayer. This was their belief
and their evidence for that was only approval!

[^1]: Saying (Allahu akbar). It is the necessary (key) for the prayer to
be valid.

[^2]: The verse in Arabic is (wa (and) rabbaka (your god) fa-kabbir
(say: Allahu akbar; Allah is great).

[^3]: Tahoor is either pure water used for wudu’ or pure soil used for
tayammum. Tayammum is ablution with soil when there is no water.

[^4]: Tahreem is making the prayer as a sacred sanctum that saying or
doing anything else than the prayer’s parts during offering the prayer
will be haram.

[^5]: Tahleel means making one free from the restrictions of the prayer.

[^6]: Tasleem is saying (as-salamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh)
to end the prayer.


