Wiping The Feet Or Washing Them In Wudu’
========================================

The Muslim scholars disagreed upon the kind of ablution of the feet from
among the parts included in wudu’. The Sunni jurisprudents, including
the four imams,[^1] determined that washing the feet in wudu’ was
obligatory. Dawood bin Ali and an-Nassir lil-Haqq, who were from among
the imams of the Zaydites, said it was obligatory to perform both of
washing and wiping the feet.[^2] Some of them might say that it was
optional to choose between washing and wiping.[^3] The Shia, according
to their pure imams, thought that wiping the feet was prescribed by the
holy Quran.[^4]

The evidence of the Shia
------------------------

The evidence of the Shia for this matter was the Quranic verse

(***O you who believe! when you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands as far as the elbows and wipe your heads and your feet to
the*** (***two***) ***ankles.*** 5:6)

Imam ar-Razi sufficed us in showing the point of the argument in this
verse when he declared: “The evidence of those, who thought that wiping
the feet was obligatory, was based upon the two kinds of reciting the
phrase (***and your feet***) mentioned in the verse of wudu’. Ibn
Katheer, Hamza, Abu Amr an Aasim recited the phrase in genitive and
Nafi’, ibn Aamir and Aasim recited it in accusative. Reciting it in
genitive determined that (***your feet***) was coupled to (***your
heads***) and then as it was obligatory to wipe the head it would be
obligatory to wipe the feet. As for reciting it in accusative, it also
determined that it was obligatory to wipe the feet because the saying
(***and wipe your heads***) made (***your heads***) as object and
(***your feet***) was coupled to (***your heads***) so both of them were
objects of the verb (***wipe***)”

This was his very saying.[^5] But he said: “Many traditions were
narrated about the obligation of washing the feet (in wudu’). Washing
included wiping but wiping didn’t. So washing was nearer in taking
precaution and hence it had to be performed in wudu’ as wajib.[^6]
Therefore it had to be determined that washing the feet would replace
wiping them…”

You will see the thought of the infallible imams of the Prophet’s
progeny and their followers about the traditions talking about washing
the feet soon inshallah.

As for his saying that washing included wiping, it was a clear fallacy
because washing and wiping were two different acts literally,
traditionally and legally.[^7] It had to be determined then that washing
wouldn’t replace wiping but ar-Razi stopped between two precautions;
either to contradict the Quranic verse or to contradict the traditions
as he thought and so he contradicted himself when saying that washing
included wiping and that it was nearer in taking precaution. He thought
by saying so that he would reconcile the verse with the traditions.
Whoever pondered at the justification of ar-Razi would find that he was
confused. Since the verse was clear in determining the obligation of
wiping so he didn’t need to put washing instead of wiping.

Some of the great jurisprudents and linguists declared that the verse
had showed the obligation of wiping the feet and not washing them. Among
them was the jurisprudent Sheikh Ibraheem al-Halabi in his book
Ghunyatul Mutamalli fee *Sharh* Munyatul Musalli according to the
Hanafite school. He said: “The verse was recited (according to the rules
of Arabic) by putting “***your feet***” either in accusative form or
genitive form.

The most famous reciting was to put “***Your feet”*** in accusative form
by coupling it to “***your faces***” or in genitive form according to
(neighboring). But the most correct form was to couple “***your feet***”
to “***your heads***” because “***your feet***” wouldn’t be coupled to
“***your faces***” that the two phrases were separated by a different
sentence (***and wipe your heads***). The rule in linguistics was not to
separate between the two with a word so how about a full sentence.”[^8]

Among those, who followed this clear way in dealing with this verse, was
Imam Abul Hasan Muhammad bin Abdul Hadi as-Sindi. He said: “Wiping the
feet was declared by the verse because reciting the phrase in genitive
form was clear according to the wording of the verse and reciting the
phrase in accusative form would be not acceptable according to the
linguists because the two coupled phrases were separated by a full
sentence and so the apparent meaning of the verse showed wiping the
feet.”[^9] He also, like the others, tried to subject the Quran to the
traditions that determined washing the feet.

Az-Zamakhshari philosophized in his Kashshaf when talking about this
verse. He said: “The feet were among the (three) organs that were to be
washed (in wudu’) by pouring water over them. Perhaps it was considered
as bad wasting, which was prohibited, so “the feet” were coupled to “the
heads”, which were to be wiped, not in order to be wiped but just to
draw the attention to the necessity of economizing in pouring water over
them. It was said “***to the ankles***” as an end of washing in order to
clear the meaning for those, who thought that the feet were to be wiped,
because no end was determined for wiping in the Sharia.”

This philosophy of coupling “the feet” to “the heads” and in mentioning
the end (limit) of washing the feet had nothing to do with deducing the
legal verdicts out of the verse at all. The verse had nothing of that at
all but it was his way in submitting the verse to his doctrine instead
of deducing the legal verdicts out of the evidences the verse had. He
was so odd in his affectation, which no one would listen to except who
thought that washing the feet was irrefutable according to one’s belief
but as for it was the point of the dispute then no one would listen to
because many of the Sunni had confessed that the verse declared the
obligation of wiping the feet. The rules of Arabic determined that
“***your feet***” was coupled to “***your heads***” which must be wiped
according to the consensus, and this sufficed as clear evidence.

A look at the traditions of washing
-----------------------------------

The traditions talking about washing the feet were two kinds:

1. The traditions that didn’t evidence washing like the tradition
narrated by Abdullah bin Amr bin al-Aass and mentioned in al-Bukhari and
Muslim’s *Sahih*s. He said: “In one of our travels with the Prophet (s),
the Prophet (s) retarded a little. Then he joined us when it was the
time of Assr prayer. We began to wipe our feet (in wudu’). He said: Woe
be to the heels from Hell!”[^10]

If this tradition was true, then wiping the feet would be the correct
act of wudu’ because the Prophet (s) didn’t deny it but he confirmed it.
He only denied the filthiness of the heels. Among the Muslims were
ignorant bare-footed nomads, who often made water over their heels
especially in travel, so he threatened them of Hell lest they offered
prayer with those impure heels.

2. The traditions that referred to washing the feet in wudu’ like the
tradition narrated by Hamran the freed slave of Othman bin Affan. He
said: “I saw Othman pouring water from his vessel over his hands and
washed them three times and then he rinsed his mouth and his nose… then
he washed each foot three times… then he said: I have seen the Prophet
(s) doing wudu’ like mine.”[^11]

Another tradition of Abdullah bin Zayd bin Aasim al-Ansari when he was
asked: “Would you do wudu’ before us like the wudu’ of the Prophet (s)?”
He asked for a vessel of water. He poured some water over his hands…then
he washed his feet to the ankles. Then he said: “The Prophet (s) did
wudu’ like this.”[^12] There were other traditions having the same
meaning.

We had some notes about these traditions as the following:

First: these traditions contradicted the holy Quran and the traditions
of the infallible imams of the Prophet’s progeny, who agreed upon the
obligation of wiping the feet in wudu’. The Quran and the Prophet’s
progeny were the two weighty things the Prophet (s) had left for the
umma. If the umma kept to them, it would never go astray. Hence every
thing contradicted these two things would be brushed aside.

It sufficed as evidence for denying washing the feet in wudu’ and
refuting the traditions talking about it that the scholar of the umma
and the vessel of the Quran and the Sunna, Abdullah bin Abbas often
said: “Allah determined two washes and two wipes (in wudu’). Didn’t you
see that when He mentioned tayammum, He determined two wipes in stead of
the two washes (of wudu’) and cancelled the two wipes (of wudu’).”[^13]

Abdullah bin Abbas often said: “Wudu’ is two washes and two wipes.”[^14]

When he was informed that ar-Rabee’ bint Afra’ al-Ansariyya pretended
that the Prophet (s) performed wudu’ at her house and washed his feet,
he came to her asking her about that. When she told him of that he said
denyingly: “The people insisted on washing (the feet in wudu’) whereas I
didn’t find in the Book of Allah save wiping.”[^15]

Second: if these traditions were true, they would be recurrent and would
be narrated by the all because knowing about the purity of the feet in
wudu’ was a necessary need of the Muslims; men and women, frees and
slaves, and it was a necessity needed every day and night. If it was
else than the wiping mentioned in the Quranic verse, then it would be
known by the Muslims, who lived at the time of the Prophet (s) and after
that. It would be a certain thing among all the Muslim and it would
spread in every country and at every age and there would be no way to
deny it or to doubt about it. But since it was not so, the traditions
appeared to be so weak and then to be brushed aside.

Third: the traditions talking about the kind of the purity of the feet
contradicted each other. Some of them showed that it was to wash the
feet in wudu’ like the traditions narrated by Hamran and ibn Aasim and
some showed that it was to wipe the feet like the tradition mentioned by
al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* and narrated by Ahmad, ibn Abu Shayba, ibn Abu
Omar, al-Baghawi, at-Tabarani and al-Mawardi. All of them narrated the
tradition from a trusted and reliable series of narrators.[^16] The
tradition reached Abul Aswad from Abbad bin Tameem from his father, who
said: “I saw the Prophet (s) performing wudu’ and wiping his feet.”

Also there was the tradition narrated by Zurara bin A’yun and Bukayr bin
A’yun that Imam Baqir had imitated the Prophet’s wudu’ by wiping his
head and his feet with the leftover water of his hands.

It was mentioned in Majma’ul Bayan that ibn Abbas had imitated the
Prophet’s wudu’ and wiped his feet.

Since there was a contradiction between the traditions, so we had to
depend upon the Book of Allah as our reference.

A look at their excuse of approval
----------------------------------

The Sunni might justify washing the feet that they found it more
suitable for the feet than wiping as that wiping the head was more
suitable than washing it because the filthy feet often wouldn’t be
purified unless they were washed unlike the head, which would often be
purified by wiping.

They said that the reasonable interests could be reasons for performing
the religious obligations until the Sharia noticed two meanings; one
referred to interest and the other referred to worship. They meant by
interest what referred to the perceptible things and by worship what
referred to the purification of the soul.

We believe that Allah the Almighty has noticed His people in all what He
has charged them with of the legal obligations. He hasn’t ordered them
to do anything unless it is for their benefit and He hasn’t forbidden
them from doing anything unless it causes corruption to them. In spite
of that He hasn’t let the divine verdicts be decided according to the
people’s thoughts whether they cause benefit or corruption. He has
ordered them to worship Him according to irrefutable evidences and He
hasn’t left to them any outlet to slip to other than His verdicts. The
first of these evidences is the holy Quran. The Quran has determined
wiping the heads and the feet in wudu’ and it must be obeyed. As for the
cleanness of the feet, it must be done before performing wudu’ according
to special conditions saying that the purity of the organs, which were
to be washed or wiped in wudu’, must be confirmed before performing
wudu’.[^17] Washing the feet done by the Prophet (s) as it was mentioned
in those traditions might be of this kind or it might be for cooling or
it might be to exaggerate in cleanness after performing wudu’.

Note
----

Ibn Maja mentioned in his *Sunan* a tradition narrated by Abu Iss~haq
that Abu Hayya had said: “I saw Ali perform wudu’ and then he washed his
feet to the ankles. He said: I wanted to show you how the Prophet (s)
performed wudu’.”

As-Sindi said: “This was a serious refutation against the Shia, who
believed in wiping the feet, where Ali believed in washing the feet.
Therefore the author mentioned it and began his chapter with it. He did
well in mentioning this tradition in this concern. May Allah reward him
good. The apparent meaning of the Quranic verse required to wipe the
feet as it was narrated by ibn Abbas and so it must be interpreted to
mean washing the feet.”[^18]

May Allah forgive him, ibn Maja and all the Sunni scholars. They knew
well that this tradition was null in many ways:

First: Abu Hayya, the narrator of this tradition, was nobody and was one
of the most obscure narrators. Ath-Thahabi mentioned him in his Mizan
and said: “No one knew who he was.” Then he mentioned that ibn
al-Madeeni and Abul Waleed al-Fardhi had said: “He was unknown.” He also
said: “Abu Zar’a said: His name was never mentioned.”[^19] Then
ath-Thahabi said: “I researched more and more on Abu Hayya but I got
nothing about him save ignorance and obscurity. This name might be
fabricated by the one, who had fabricated the tradition. Allah is the
most Aware!”

Second: this tradition was narrated from Abu Hayya by Abu Iss~haq
only.[^20] Abu Iss~haq became too old, dotard and often forgot;
therefore the people brushed his traditions aside[^21] and no one
narrated from him save Abul Ahwass and Zuhayr bin Mo’awiya
al-Ju’fi,[^22] who were criticized by people for that.[^23]

There was no doubt that if a narrator became dotard, then all of his
traditions narrated after his dotage would be null whether it was known
that the traditions were narrated after the dotage like this tradition
or it was unknown when they were narrated.

Third: this tradition contradicted the holy Quran and it contradicted
the certain traditions of Imam Ali and his infallible sons (s) and then
it must be brushed aside.

To the ankles
-------------

The ankle mentioned in the Quranic verse was the joint between the foot
and the leg. Zurara bin A'yun and Bukayr bin A’yun asked Imam Baqir (s)
about the ankles and he answered them so.[^24] So was mentioned by
Sheikh as-Sadooq.[^25] The linguists said that every joint of bones was
called “ka’b” ankle.

The Sunni scholars said that the two “ka’bs” ankles were the two
protruding bones on the two sides of the leg. They justified that by
saying that if the “ka’b” was the joint between the foot and the leg,
then each leg would have one “ka’b” and so it should be said (and your
legs to the “ka’bs” ankles)[^26] as each hand had one elbow so it was
said (and your hands to the elbows).

I said: if it was mentioned in the verse (the two elbows), it would be
right too without any confusion. Then the meaning would be (wash your
faces and hands to the two elbows of each of you and wipe your heads and
feet to the two ankles of each of you). The duality or plurality of the
two words in the verse didn’t affect the meaning and also the duality of
one of them and the plurality of the other wouldn’t affect the right
meaning. Perhaps diversity in expression required that.

This would be if each leg had one ankle but if each leg had two ankles
then there would be no way for their justification.

The anatomists confirmed that there was a round bone like the ankle of a
cow or a sheep beneath the bone of the leg forming a joint between the
leg and the foot. It was called ankle (ka’b) too.[^27] Hence wiping each
foot ended to “ka’bayn” two ankles, which were the very joint and the
round bone under it. In dualing the word “ankle” only without the word
“elbow” in the verse there was a wonderful point referring to something
that was not known except by the anatomists. Glory be to Allah, the
Creator, the Aware, the Wise!

[^1]: Abu Haneefa, Malik, ash-Shafi’iy and Ahmad bin Hanbal; the imams
of the four Sunni sects.

[^2]: Fakhruddeen ar-Razi talked about them in his Tafseer when
explaining the verse of wudu’. He said that as if they became confused
because of the contradiction between the verse and the traditions they
depended upon; therefore they determined to perform both washing and
wiping.

[^3]: Like al-Hasan al-Basri and Muhammad bin Jareer at-Tabari. Ar-Razi
talked about them in his Tafseer and showed that they thought that both
the Quran and the Sunna (the traditions they depended upon and thought
they were true) must be followed and so they thought that both of
washing and wiping were required, hence they said it was obligatory to
choose one of them optionally.

[^4]: This was the belief of ibn Abbas, Anass bin Malik, Akrima,
ash-Shi’bi and Imam Baqir as it was mentioned by ar-Razi in his Tafseer.
This was not only the belief of Imam Baqir but also it was the belief of
all our imams (s).

[^5]: At-Tafseer al-Kabeer vol.3 p.370.

[^6]: Precaution doesn’t occur except by performing both of washing and
wiping because they are two different acts.

[^7]: Washing means the pouring water over the object being washed even
if it is a little whereas wiping doesn’t mean pouring water but it is
just to rub the wiped object by the hand.

[^8]: Refer to Ghunyatul Mutamalli p.16.

[^9]: Refer to Sharh Sunan ibn Maja vol.1 p.88. Those, who declared like
what ar-Razi, al-Halabi and as-Sindi had declrared, were many that we
couldn’t quote all the sayings about the subject. The sayings of these
three imams (may Allah have mercy upon them) were enough for us.

[^10]: This phrase (woe be to the heels from Hell) was mentioned in the
traditions narrated by Amr, Aa’isha and Abu Hurayra according to
al-Bukhari and Muslim’s Sahihs.

[^11]: It was mentioned by al-Bukhari in his Sahih.

[^12]: Mentioned by Muslim in his Sahih.

[^13]: Kanzul Ommal vol.5 p.103.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Mentioned by ibn Maja in his Sunan when talking about washing the
feet and mentioned by others.

[^16]: Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani said in his book al-Issaba, vol.1 when
mentioning the biography of Tameem bin Zayd that all of them were
trusted and reliable. So was said by the authors of the books of Hadith
when mentioning them.

[^17]: Therefore you see the barefooted ones, the farmers and those, who
don’t care much for the purity of their feet during working, wash their
feet when the time of prayer comes and wipe them, in wudu’, after being
dried.

[^18]: He wanted to submit the holy Quran to his doctrine and not vice
versa!

[^19]: Abu Hayya was just a surname.

[^20]: Mentioned by ath-Thahabi in his Mizan.

[^21]: Refer to Mizanul I’tidal and other books of biographies when
talking about Omar bin Abdullah as-Subay’iy, Abu Iss~haq’s full name.

[^22]: Mizanul I’tidal by ath-Thahabi when talking about Abu Hayya.

[^23]: Imam Ahmad said: “Zuhayr bin Mo’awiya was reliable but there was
weakness in what he narrated from Abu Iss~haq. Abu Zar’a said: “Zuhayr
bin Mo’awiya was reliable but he narrated from Abu Iss~haq after he had
become dotard. Ath-Thahabi said: “The weakness in Zuhayr’s traditions
was because of Abu Iss~haq and not of Zuhayr.”

[^24]: In a tradition mentioned by Sheikh at-Toosi that they asked Imam
Baqir (s): “Where are the ankles?” He said : “Here are they.” He meant
the joints beneath the legs.

[^25]: He said that Imam Baqir had imitated the wudu’ of the Prophet (s)
and then he wiped his head and the back of his feet to the joints of his
legs.

[^26]: It was mentioned in the verse “ka’bayn” that meant two “ka’bs”
(two ankles) whereas with the hands it was said “marafiq” (more than two
marfaqs-two elbows).

[^27]: Muhammad bin al-Hasan ash-Shaybani and al-Asma’iy said that the
“ka’b” mentioned in the verse was this bone, which was beneath the bone
of the leg. Al-Asma’iy said: “The two protruding bones on both sides of
the leg are called (manjamayn).” Ar-Razi thought that this was the
belief of the Shia so he confuted them by saying that the round bone
beneath the bone of the leg was hidden and not known except by the
anatomists unlike the two protruding bones on both sides of the leg that
they were apparent and the evidences of the general (religious)
obligations must be apparent and not hidden. When ar-Razi saw the Shia
wipe their feet to the ankles, he thought that they believe in what
ash-Shaybani and al-Asma’iy had said and he didn’t know that the “ka’b”
according to the Shia was the very joint, which was known and
perceptible by every one.


