Prefaces
========

Publisher's Preface to the First Edition
----------------------------------------

Slavery is one of the oldest evils of society which defied the attempts
of reformers for so many centuries. Ancient civilisations could not
eradicate slavery, so they compromised with it. Some of these
civilisations even patronised slavery. The Christian churches
participated in slave-trade. Their priests blessed the ships carrying
human cargo and admonished the slaves to be obedient, but never urged
the masters to be kind.

As late as 1970, Roman Catholics purchased 1500 Indian girls because
European girls did not like to live as nuns. Among all the religions it
was only Islam that attacked the very foundations of this evil. But it
is the irony of the history that the people who nourished slavery,
supported it, and derived benefit from it, later became champions of its
abolition.

'Allamah Sayyid Sa'eed Akhtar Rizvi, the Chief Missionary of Bilal
Muslim Mission of Tanzania has very ably and painstakingly written this
book. Like a research scholar that he is, he has objectively treated the
theme of this book. He has marshalled fact after fact from history;
quoted from the Holy Qur'an, the traditions, and contemporary writers on
the subject; and cited Islamic and ancient laws. He has clearly and
vividly shown that Western civilisation is not so great a champion of
emancipation of slaves as it poses to be. In fact this book will prove
to be an eye-opener for those who blindly nod in approval to the
propaganda about Western humanism.

Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust proudly presents this volume to the readers
and hopes that it will gain approval of the public.

Trustees,  
 Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust Karachi, Pakistan  
 15 Jamadi I, 1392  
 27 June, 1972

Author's Preface To The Second Edition
--------------------------------------

This book was written on the request of late Haji Hasanali P. Ebrahim,
who published it from Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust, Karachi, in 1972. It
went out of stock very soon, but the demand continues. Responding to
that demand, my son, Hujjatul Islam Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi has now
prepared this second edition.

Some minor changes have been made in chapters' arrangement; paragraphs
have been added here and there; and my son has prepared the foot-notes
which has enhanced the academic value of the book. May Allah grant him
long life and strength him to serve the cause of true Islam with
sincerity.

I am also thankful to all the friends who have contributed in any way to
this publication.

S. S. A. Rizvi  
 Gopalpur (India)  
 28 November, 1987.


