Churches Participate in Slave-Trade
===================================

What was the attitude of the Christian church towards the Negro slave
trade? From its inception, Christianity kept its eyes closed to the
plight of the slaves. As mentioned earlier, the only reference to the
slavery is found in the epistle of St. Paul returning a slave to
Philemon to his master. That is all. Ameer Ali rightly comments that
Christianity **“**found slavery a recognised institution of the empire;
it adopted the system without any endeavour to mitigate its baneful
character, or promote its gradual abolition, or to improve the status of
slaves.**”**[^1]

To recognise the part played by the Christian churches in the slave
trade one should read again the words of Mr. Alpers who writes, *inter
alia,* that the Christians **“**were aware that to sell their fellow
human beings could not be morally justified. Yet the Christian church
came forward with excuses for the slave-trade. Many priests themselves
carried on slave-trading, especially in Angola, and many others owned
slaves in the Americas.

The only reason the Catholic Church give for its action was that it was
trying to save African souls by baptising the slaves. The Protestants
were worse, for they did not even make it clear that they accepted that
the Africans had a soul. Instead, they supported the view that the
African slave was a piece of property like furniture or a domestic
animal. There is no part of the history of Christian church which was
more disgraceful than its support of the Atlantic slave-trade.**”**[^2]

The arguments of James Boswell have already been quoted where he
emphasises that slavery was an institution sanctioned in all ages by God
and that to abolish slavery would be to shut the gate of mercy on
mankind!

Now I quote from *Capitalism and* *Slavery* of Dr. Eric Williams, who
was a recognised historian and was also the Prime Minister of Trinidad
and Tobago. He writes, **“**The Church also supported the slave trade.
The Spaniards saw in it an opportunity of converting the heathen, and
the Jesuits, Dominicans and Franciscans were heavily involved in sugar
cultivation which meant slave-holding.

The story is told of an elder of the Church in Newport who would
invariably, the Sunday following the arrival of slaves from the coast,
thank God that 'another cargo of benighted beings had been brought to
land where they could have the benefit of a gospel dispensation.' But in
general the British planters opposed Christianity for their slaves. It
made them more perverse and intractable and therefore less valuable. It
meant also instruction in the English language, which allowed diverse
tribes to get together and plot sedition.

The governor of Barbados in 1695 attributed it to the planters' refusal
to give the slave Sundays and feast days off, and as late as 1832
British public opinion was shocked by the planters' rejection of a
proposal to give the Negroes one day in the week in order to permit the
abolition of the Negro Sunday market. The Church obediently toed the
line.

The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel prohibited Christian
instruction to its slaves in Barbados, and branded 'Society' on its new
slaves to distinguish them from those of the laity; the original slaves
were the legacy of the Christopher Codrington. Sherlock, later Bishop of
London, assured the planters that 'Christianity and the embracing of the
Gospel does not make the least difference in civil property.' Neither
did it impose any barriers to clerical activity.

For his labours with regards to the Asiento which he helped to draw up
as a British plenipotentiary at Utrecht, Bishop Robinson of Bristol was
promoted to see of London. The bell of the Bristol churches pealed
merrily on the news of the rejection of Parliament of Wilberforce's bill
for the abolition of the slave-trade. The slave trader, John Newton,
gave thanks to the Liverpool churches for the success of this last
venture before his conversion and implored God's blessing on his. He
established public worship twice every day on his slaver, officiating
himself, and kept a day of fasting and praying, not for the slaves but
for crew. 'I never knew', he confessed, 'sweeter or more frequent hours
of divine communion than in the last two voyages to Guinea.'

The famous Cardinal Manning of the nineteenth century was the son of a
rich West Indian merchant dealing in slave-grown produce. Many
missionaries found it profitable to drive out Beelzebub by Beelzebub.
According to the most recent English writer on the slave trade, they
'considered that the best way in which to remedy abuse of Negro slaves
was to set the plantation owner a good example by keeping slaves and
estates themselves, accomplishing in this practical manner the salvation
of the planters and the advancement of their foundations'. The Moravian
missionaries on the island held slaves without hesitation; the Baptists,
one historian writes with charming delicacy, would not allow their
earlier missionaries to deprecate ownership of slaves. To the very end
the Bishop of Exeter retained his 655 slaves, for whom he received over
12,700 pounds compensation in 1833.

**“**Church historians make awkward apologies that conscience awoke very
slowly to the appreciation of the wrongs inflicted by slavery and that
the defence of slavery by churchmen 'simply arose from want of delicacy
of moral perception'. There is no need to make such apologies. The
attitude of the churchmen was the attitude of the layman. The eighteenth
century, like any other century, could not rise above its economic
limitations. As Whitefield argued in advocating the repeal of that
article of the Georgia charter which forbade slavery, 'It is plain to
demonstration that hot countries cannot be cultivated without Negroes.'.

**“**Quaker nonconformity did not extend to the slave trade. In 1756
there were eighty-four Quakers listed as members of the Company trading
to Africa, among them the Barclay and the Baring families. Slave dealing
was one of the most lucrative investments of English as of American
Quakers, and the name of slaver, The Willing Quaker, reported from
Boston at Sierra Leone in 1793, symbolizes the approval with which the
slave trade was regarded in Quaker circles. The Quaker opposition to the
slave trade came first and largely not from England but from America,
and there from the small rural communities of the North, independent of
slave labour. 'It is difficult', writes Dr. Gray, 'to avoid the
assumption that opposition to the slave system was at the first confined
to a group who gained no direct advantage from it, and consequently
possessed an objective attitude.'...

**“**Slavery existed under the very eyes of eighteenth century
Englishmen. And English coin, the guinea, rare though it was and is, had
its origin in the trade of Africa. A Westminster goldsmith made silver
padlocks for blacks and dogs. Busts of blackamoors and elephants,
emblematical of the slave trade adorned the Liverpool Town Hall. The
insignia and equipment of the slave traders were boldly exhibited for
sale in the shops and advertised in the press.

Slaves were sold openly at auction. Slaves being invaluable property,
with title recognised by law, the postmaster was the agent employed on
occasions to recapture runaway slaves and advertisements were published
in the official organ of the government. Negro servants were common.
Little black boys were the appendages of slave captains, fashionable
ladies or women of the easy virtue. Hogarth's heroine, 'The Harlots
Progress' is attended by a Negro boy, and Marguerito Steen's Orabella
Burmester typifies eighteenth century English opinion in her desire for
little black boy whom she could love as her long-haired kitten. Freed
Negroes were conspicuous among London beggars and were known as St.
Giles blackbirds. So numerous were they that a parliamentary committee
was set up in 1786 for relieving the black poor.

**“**'Slaves cannot breathe in England,' wrote the poet Cowper. This was
licence of the poet. It was held in 1677 that 'Negroes being usually
bought and sold among merchants, so merchandise, and also being
infidels, there might be a property in them'. In 1729 the Attorney
General ruled that baptism did not bestow freedom or make any alteration
in the temporal condition of slave; in addition the slave did not become
free by being brought to England, and once in England the owner could
legally compel his return to the plantations. So eminent an authority as
Sir William Blackstone held that 'with respect to any right the master
may have lawfully acquired to the perpetual service of John or Thomas,
will remain exactly in the same state of subjection for the life,' in
England or elsewhere.**”**[^3]

When ships loaded with human cargo sailed from Christian countries to
Western hemisphere, Christian priests used to bless the ship in the name
of Almighty and admonish the slaves to be obedient. It never entered
into their minds to admonish the masters to be kind to the slaves.

It is hard to believe but it seems that the Roman Catholics think it
quite in keeping with the teachings of their church to obtain slaves
even in this era of 1970s. In August 1970 the world was shocked to hear
that the Roman Catholics had purchased, at the price ranging from 250
pounds to 300 pounds each, about 1500 Indian girls to shut them into
convents because European girls do not like to live as nuns.[^4] There
was so much outcry in the world press that the Vatican had to establish
a commission to enquire into this affair. But even before the commission
started its enquire, a Vatican spokesman had to admit that there was an
**“**element of truth**”** in the reports, though he dutifully condemned
the *Sunday Times* for its sensation-mongering.

[^1]: Ameer 'Ali, Spirit of Islam (London: University Paper-backs, 1965)
p. 260.

[^2]: Alpers, op. cit., p. 22.

[^3]: Williams, op. cit., pp. 42-5.

[^4]: Sunday Times (London) as quoted in East African Standard
(Nairobi), August 25, 1970.


