Why Slavery Was Abolished
=========================

Someone may point out: Was it not the Christian Britain which finally
abolished the slavery?

Well, if someone practices tyranny isn't he the one who has to give up
that practice? As already explained, Britain was the biggest
slave-trader; and when economic forces compelled her to abolish
slave-trade she did so. But does she or Christianity deserve any thanks
for it? Should not we thank the economic forces behind that move?

The fact is that the movement against slavery was not spear-headed by
Churches; it was led by a handful of moralists whose cries remained
unheeded till the economic necessity compelled the Parliament to pass a
bill in 1807 against slave-trade. After 26 years, another bill was
passed to abolish slavery itself in British-held countries in 1833.

As Professor D. W. Brogan writes in the introduction of Dr. Eric
Williams' magnificent book *Capitalism and Slavery,* **“**the abolition
of the slave-trade, then the abolition of the slavery, were not merely
the results of a rising standard of political ethics in Britain
(although Dr. Williams does not dismiss as unimportant the work of men
like Clarkson) but were a form of cutting of losses. The West Indies
sugar monopoly became intolerable to a booming industrial society,
rightly confident in its invulnerable competitive position in the early
days of the industrial revolution.**”**

To summarise, in the words of Prof. Brogan, the slave system was
**“**tolerated, defended, praised as long as it was profitable.**”**

**“**It was highly profitable and for a long time. On the profits of the
West Indies plantations were based the fortune of Bristol and Liverpool
and to some extent, of Glasgow. The West Indian planter was the rival in
ostentation of the East Indian nabob.. It was in vain for moralists to
point out that every brick of the great warehouses of Bristol and
Liverpool was cemented in Negro blood.. But the voice of the moralists
was seldom overheard amid the chink of guineas (the very name recalls
the triangular trade between Britain, Africa and the transatlantic
colonies).**”**

What the **“**triangular trade**”** meant? From England, sundry
assortment **“**typical of the slave trader's cargo**”** was taken to
Africa: **“**Finery for Africans, household utensils, cloths of all
kinds, iron and other metals, together with guns, hand-cuffs and
fetters.**”** From Africa human cargo was taken to West Indies and
Americas. From West Indies and other colonies sugar, tobacco, indigo,
cotton, coffee and other raw materials were taken to the mother country
(i.e., England) where they were processed and then re-imported.[^1]

The plantations were founded on slavery and were protected by
monopolies. Then came the secession of 13 colonies of America which
closed a big market against the British held West Indies. It’s another
effect was that the now independent U.S.A. turned towards French held
Islands of Saint Domingue (Haiti), Cuba and Brazil. Dr. Williams writes,
**“**The superiority of the French sugar colonies was for the British
planters the chief among the many ills which flew out of the Pandora's
Box that was the American Revolution. Between 1783 and 1789 the progress
of the French sugar islands, of Saint Domingue especially, was the most
amazing phenomenon in colonial development. The fertility of the French
soil was decisive, French sugar cost one-fifth less than Britain, the
average yield in Saint Domingue and Jamaica was five to one.**”**[^2]

The disastrous effect upon British West Indies may be judged by the fact
that **“**in 1775 Jamaica had 775 plantations; by 1791, out of every
hundred, twenty three had been sold for debt, twelve were in the hands
of receivers, while seven had been abandoned; and the West Indian
planters, indebted to the enormous sum of twenty millions.**”**
Gradually, British planters irretrievably lost that ascendancy which
they had so long enjoyed in the European Market. **“**French colonial
exports, over eight million pounds, and imports, over four millions,
employed 164,000 tons of shipping and 33,000 sailors; British colonial
exports, five million pounds, and imports, less than two millions,
employed 148,000 tons of shipping and 14,000 seamen. In every respect
the sugar colonies had become vastly more essential to France than they
were to England.**”**[^3]

Thus the cost of sugar (and likewise of all such products) was becoming
too high. Dr. Williams explains, **“**The West Indian monopoly was not
only unsound in theory, it was unprofitable in practice. In 1828 it was
estimated that it cost the British people annually more than one and a
half million pounds. In 1844 it was costing the country 70,000 pounds a
week and London 6,000 pounds. England was paying for its sugar five
millions more a year than the Continent...Two-fifths of the price of
every pound of sugar consumed in England represented the cost of
production, two-fifths went in revenue to the government, one-fifth in
tribute to the West Indian planter..**”**[^4]

Gradually, Saint Domingue (Haiti) held by France emerged as the most
important sugar producer. From the standpoint of the British Prime
Minister, William Pitt, this was the decisive factor. The age of the
British sugar islands was over. The West Indian system was unprofitable,
and the slave-trade on which it rested, **“**instead of being very
advantageous to Great Britain...is the most destructive that can well be
imagined by interests.[^5] Therefore, Pitt turned to India to cultivate
and produce sugar. **“**Pill's plan was twofold: to recapture the
European market with the aid of sugar from India, and to secure an
international abolition of the slave-trade which would ruin Saint
Domingue. If not international abolition, then British abolition. The
French were so dependent on British slave traders that even a unilateral
abolition by England would seriously dislocate the economy of the French
colonies.

**“**Pitt's plan failed for two reasons. The importation of East India
sugar, on the scale planned, was impossible owing to the high duties
imposed on all sugar not the produce of the British West Indies..
Secondly, the French, Dutch and Spaniards refused.. to abolish the
slave-trade. It was not difficult to see the political motives behind
Pitt's cloak of humanitarianism. Gaston-Martin, the well-known French
historian of the slave-trade and the Caribbean colonies, accuses Pitt of
aiming by propaganda to free the slaves 'in the name no doubt of
humanity, but also to ruin French commerce.' and concludes that in this
philanthropic propaganda there were economic motives.

Then occurred a unique episode. The French planters of Saint Domingue,
in 1791, fearful of the consequences of French Revolution offered the
islands to England; soon Windward Island followed suit; Pitt accepted
the offer in 1793. Expedition after expedition was sent, unsuccessfully,
to capture the island.

Dr. Williams comments: **“**This is of more than academic interest. Pitt
could not have had Saint Domingue and abolition as well. Without its
40,000 slave imports a year, Saint Domingue might as well have been at
the bottom of the sea. The very acceptance of the island meant logically
the end of Pitt's interest in abolition. Naturally he did not say so. He
had already committed himself too far in the eyes of the public. He
continued to speak in favour of abolition, even while giving every
practical encouragement to the slave trade...Pitt's reasons were
political and only secondarily personal. He was interested in the sugar
trade. Either he must ruin Saint Domingue by flooding Europe with
cheaper Indian sugar or by abolishing the slave-trade; or he must get
Saint Domingue for himself.**”**[^6]

**“**It would give Britain a monopoly of sugar, indigo, cotton and
coffee... But if Pitt captured Saint Domingue, the slave-trade must
continue. When Saint Domingue was lost to France, the slave-trade became
merely a humanitarian question...

**“**But the ruin of Saint Domingue did not mean the salvation of the
British West Indies. Two new enemies appeared on the scene. Cuba forged
ahead to fill the gap left in the world market by the disappearance of
Saint Domingue.**”**[^7]

**“**Whilst, under the American flag, Cuban and other neutral sugar
still found a market in Europe, British West Indian surpluses piled up
in England. Bankruptcies were the order of the day. Between 1799 and in
1807, 65 plantations in Jamaica were abandoned, 32 were sold for debts,
and 1807 suits were pending against 115 others. Debt, disease and death
were the only topics of conversation in the island. A parliamentary
committee set up in 1807 discovered that the British West Indian planter
was producing at a loss. In 1800 his profit was 2 1/2 per cent, in 1807
nothing. In 1787 the planter got 19/6d profit per hundredweight; in
1799, 10/9d; in 1803, 18/6d; 1805, 12/-; in 1809, nothing. The committee
attributed the main evil to the unfavourable state of foreign market. In
1806 the surplus of sugar in England amounted to six thousand tons.
Production had to be curtailed. To restrict production, the slave-trade
must be abolished.**”**[^8]

Thus, in the words of Dr. Williams, **“**abolition was the direct result
of that (economic) distress.**”**[^9]

[^1]: Williams, Dr. Eric, Capitalism and Slavery, p. 65.

[^2]: Ibid, p. 122.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 123.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 138-9.

[^5]: Ibid, p. 146.

[^6]: Ibid, p. 147-8.

[^7]: Ibid, p. 148-9

[^8]: Ibid, p. 149.

[^9]: Ibid, p. 150.


