Hypocricy of the Abolitionists
==============================

If anybody wishfully thinks that the main cause of the abolition of
slavery was moral and ethical development, he would be well-advised to
look at the attitude of abolitionists within the frame work of their
economic aims.

Thus we see that the same West Indian interest holders who before the
previously mentioned distress were the ardent supporters of slave-trade
now became enthusiastic **“**humanists**”**. Dr. Williams says,
**“**Ironically enough, it was the former slave owners of the West
Indies who now held the humanitarian torch. Those who, in 1807, were
lugubriously prophesying that abolition of the British slave-trade would
'occasion diminished commerce, diminished revenue and diminished
navigation; and in the end sap and totally remove the great cornerstone
of British prosperity,' were, after 1807, the very men who protested
against 'a system of man-stealing against a poor and inoffensive
people.**”**'

The West India interest in 1830 put a resolution **“**to adopt more
decisive measures...*to* *stop the foreign slave-trade; on the effectual
suppression of which the prosperity of the British West Indian
colonies... ultimately depends.* Jamaican envoys, sent to Britain in
1823, declared that 'the colonies were easily reconciled to the
abolition of a barbarous commerce, which the advanced civilization of
the age no longer permitted to exist' ...A great mass movement for
abolition of the slave-trade developed in Jamaica in 1849. Auj claplo,
parties and sects were united on the question of justice to Africa. They
denounced the slave-trade and slavery as 'opposed to humanity -
productive of the worst evils to Africa - degrading to all engaged in
the traffic, and inimical to the moral and spiritual interests of the
enslaved,' and pleaded that 'the odious term **“**slave**”** be expunged
from the vocabulary of universe. *slavery must fall, and, when it falls,
Jamaica will flourish.'* England, they declared pointedly, had gone to
wars for less justifiable causes.**”**[^1]

And what was the worth of all such high-sounding phrases may be judged
from the fact that the British capitalism, even after destroying West
Indian slavery, **“**continued to thrive on Brazilian, Cuban and
American slavery.**”** So, in the words of Professor Brogan, **“**we get
the paradoxes of the reversal of roles. It was all very well for the
abolitionists to deplore the use of slave-produced sugar in the West
Indies, but no one proposed to stop the use of the slave-produced cotton
from the United States. Indeed, no one proposed seriously to stop the
use of the slave-produced sugar from Brazil or Cuba. Money not passion,
passion of wickedness or goodness, spun the plot**”**.

Dr. Williams writes, **“**After India, Brazil and Cuba, by no stretch of
imagination could any humanitarian justify any proposal calculated to
rivet the chains of slavery still more firmly on the Negroes of Brazil
and Cuba. That was precisely what free trade in sugar meant. For after
1807 the British West Indians were denied the slave-trade and after 1833
slave labour. If the abolitionists had recommended Indian sugar,
incorrectly, on the humanitarian principle that it was free-grown, it
was their duty to their principles and their religion to boycott the
slave-grown sugar of Brazil and Cuba. In falling to do this it is not to
be inferred that they were wrong, but it is undeniable that their
failure to adopt such a course completely destroys the humanitarian
argument. The abolitionists, after 1833, continued to oppose the West
Indian planter who now employed free labour. Where, before 1833, they
had boycotted the British slave-owner, after 1833 they espoused the
cause of the Brazilian slave-owner.**”**[^2]

**“**The barbarous removal of the Negroes from Africa continued for at
least twenty five years after 1833, to the sugar plantations of Brazil
and Cuba. Brazilian and Cuban economy depended on the slave-trade.
Consistency alone demanded that the British abolitionists oppose this
trade. But that would retard Brazilian and Cuban development and
consequently hamper British trade. The desire for cheap sugar after 1833
overcame all abhorrence of slavery. Gone was the horror which once was
excited at the idea of a British West Indian slave-driver armed with
whip; the Cuban slave-driver armed with a whip, cutlass, dagger and
pistols, and followed by bloodhounds, aroused not even comment from the
abolitionists.**”**[^3]

Thus it is clear that the real reasons of the British humanitarianism
was not so much moral uprightness or ethical awakening but the economic
pressure and to harm their business competitors. In the words of
Professor Brogan, the lesson of Capitalism and Slavery is chilling if
not new:

**“**Where your treasure is there will your heart be also.**”**

[^1]: Ibid, p. 175-6.

[^2]: Ibid, p. 188.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 192.


