Was American Civil War to Emancipate The Slaves
===============================================

I think it is in the interest of the readers to critically review the
story that the American Civil War was fought to emancipate the slaves.
It is a myth, having no relation with reality. I propose to quote here
from chapter 22 of *Lincoln, the Unknown* written by the famous author
Dale Carnegie.[^1] He begins with these words:-

**“**Ask the average American citizen today why the Civil War was
fought, and the chances are that he will reply, 'To free the slaves'.

**“**Was it?**”**

**“**Let's see. Here is a sentence taken from Lincoln's first inaugural
address: 'I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with
the institution of slavery in the States where it now exists. I believe
I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do so.'

**“**The fact is that the cannon had been booming and the wounded
groaning for almost eighteen months before Lincoln issued the
Emancipation Proclamation. During all that time the Radicals and the
Abolitionists had urged him to act at once, storming at him through the
press and denouncing him from the public platforms.

**“**Once a delegation of Chicago ministers appeared at the White House
with what they declared was a direct command from Almighty God to free
the slaves immediately. Lincoln told them that he imagined that if the
Almighty had any advice to offer He would come direct to headquarters
with it, instead of sending it around via Chicago.**”**

Further on, Dale Carnegie quotes from Lincoln's reply to Greedy's
article 'The Prayer of Twenty Million':

**“**My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is
not either to save or destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without
freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all
the slaves I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing some and
leaving the others alone, I would also do that. What I do about slavery
and the coloured race, I do because I believe it helps to save the
Union, and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would
help save the Union. I shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am
doing hurts the cause; and I shall do more whenever I believe doing more
will help the cause.**”**

To explain that reply, Dale Carnegie writes:

**“**Four slave States had remained with the North, and Lincoln realised
that if he issued his Emancipation Proclamation too early in the
conflict he would drive them into the Confederacy, strengthen the South,
and perhaps destroy the Union forever. There was a saying at the time
that Lincoln would like to have God Almighty on his side, but he must
have Kentucky.

**“**So he bided his time, and moved cautiously.

**“**He himself had married into a slave-owning, border State family.
Part of the money that his wife received from the settlement of her
father's estate had come from the sale of slaves. And the only really
intimate friend that he ever had, Joshua Speed was a member of a
slave-owning family. Lincoln sympathised with the Southern point of
view. Besides, he had the attorney's traditional respect for the
Constitution and for law and property. He wanted to work no hardship on
any one.

**“**He believed that the North was much to blame for the existence of
slavery in the United States as was the South; and that in getting rid
of it, both sections should bear the burden equally. So he finally
worked out a plan that was very near to his heart. According to this,
the slave-owners in the loyal border States were to receive four hundred
dollars for each of their Negroes. The slaves were to be emancipated
gradually, very gradually. The process was not to be entirely completed
until January 1, 1900. Calling the representatives of the border States
to the White House, he pleaded with them to accept his proposal.

**“**The change it contemplates, Lincoln argued, would come gently as
the dews of heaven, not rending or wrecking anything. Will you not
embrace it? So much good has not been done, by one effort, in all past
time; as in the providence of God' it is now your high privilege to do.
May the vast future not have to lament that you have neglected it.**”**

The reader would remember that this plan of emancipation **“**that was
very near his Lincoln's heart**”** was the same which had already been
effected and practised 1300 years ago in Islam and which had produced
wonderful results in the Islamic world. Had that plan been accepted by
Lincoln's compatriots, there would not have been so much racial hatred,
internal strife, social upheaval and emotional instability which is
still persisting in the USA a century after the so called
**“**emancipation of Negroes**”** there.

Unfortunately, the representatives of those border-states rejected that
plan. Carnegie says, **“**Lincoln was immediately disappointed. I must
save this Government, if possible, he said, and it may as well be
understood, once for all, that I shall not surrender this game, leaving
any available card unplayed... I believe that freeing the slaves and
arming the blacks has now become an indispensable military necessity. I
have been driven to the alternative of either doing that or surrendering
the Union.

**“**He had to act at once, for both France and England were on the
verge of recognising the Confederacy. Why? The reasons were very simple.
Take France's case first.**”**

Napoleon III was on the throne of France. **“**He longed to cover
himself with glory, as his renowned uncle, Napoleon Bonaparte, had done.
So when he saw the States slashing and shooting at one another, and knew
they were much too occupied to bother about enforcing the Monroe
Doctrine, he ordered an army to Mexico, shot a few thousand natives,
conquered the country, called Mexico a French empire, and put the
Archduke Maximilian on the throne.

**“**Napoleon believed, and not without reason, that if the Confederates
won they would favour his new empire; but that if the Federals won, the
United States would immediately take steps to put the French out of
Mexico. It was Napoleon's wish, therefore, that the South would make
good its secession, and he wanted to help it as much as he conveniently
could.

**“**At the outset of the war, the Northern navy closed all Southern
ports, guarded 189 harbours and patrolled 9,614 miles of coast-line,
sounds, bayous and rivers. It was the most gigantic blockade the world
had ever seen. The Confederates were desperate. They couldn't sell their
cotton; neither could they buy guns, ammunition, shoes, medical
supplies, or food. They boiled chestnuts and cotton-seed to make a
substitute for coffee, and brewed a decoction of blackberry leaves and
sassafras roots to take the place of tea. Newspapers were printed on
wall-paper. The ear-then floors of smoke-houses, saturated with the
drippings of bacon, were dug up and boiled to get salt. Church bells
were melted and cast into cannon. Street-car rails in Richmond were torn
up to be made into gunboat armour.

**“**The Confederates couldn't repair their rail-roads or buy new
equipment, so transportation was almost at a standstill; corn that could
be purchased for two dollars a bushel in Georgia, brought fifteen
dollars in Richmond. People in Virginia were going hungry.

**“**Something had to be done at once. So the South offered to give
Napoleon III twelve million dollars’ worth of cotton if he would
recognise the Confederacy and use the French fleet to lift the blockade.
Besides, they promised to overwhelm him with orders that would start
smoke rolling out of every factory chimney in France night and day.

**“**Napoleon therefore urged Russia and England to join him in
recognising the Confederacy. The aristocracy that ruled England adjusted
their monocles, poured a few drinks of Scotch Whisky, and listened
eagerly to Napoleon's overtures. The United States was getting too rich
and powerful to please them. They wanted to see the nation divided, the
Union broken. Besides, they needed the South's cotton. Scores of
England's factories had closed, and a million people were not only idle
but destitute and reduced to actual pauperism.

Children were crying for food, hundreds of people were dying of
starvation. Public subscriptions to buy food for British workmen were
taken up in the remotest corners of the earth: even in far off India and
poverty-stricken China. There was one way, and only one way, that
England could get cotton, and that was to join Napoleon III in
recognising the Confederacy and lifting the blockade.

**“**If that were done, what would happen in America? The South would
get guns, powder, credit, food, railway equipment, and a tremendous lift
in confidence and morale.

**“**And what would the North get? Two new and powerful enemies. The
situation, bad enough now, would be hopeless then.

**“**Nobody knew this better than Abraham Lincoln. 'We have about played
our last card,' he confessed in 1862. 'We must either change our tactics
now or lose the game.'

**“**As England saw it, all the colonies had originally seceded from
her. Now the Southern colonies had, in turn, seceded from the Northern
ones; and the North was fighting to coerce and subdue them. What
difference did it make to a peer in London or a prince in Paris whether
Tennessee and Texas were ruled from Washington or Richmond? None. To
them, the fighting was meaningless and fraught with no high purpose.

**“**'No war ever raging in my times,' wrote Carlyle, 'was to be more
profoundly foolish looking.'

**“**Lincoln saw that Europe's attitude towards the war must be changed,
and he knew how to do it. A million people in Europe had read *Uncle
Tom's Cabin* - had read it and wept and learned to abhor the heartaches
and injustice of slavery. So Abraham Lincoln knew that if he issued his
Proclamation of Emancipation, Europeans would see the war in a different
light. It would no longer be a bloody quarrel over the preservation of a
Union that meant nothing to them. Instead, it would be exalted into a
holy crusade to destroy slavery. European Governments would then not
dare to recognise the South. Public opinion wouldn't tolerate the aiding
of a people supposed to be fighting to perpetuate human bondage.

**“**Finally, therefore, in July 1862 Lincoln determined to issue his
proclamation, but McClellan and Pope had recently led the army to
humiliating defeats. Seward told the President that the time was not
auspicious, that he ought to wait and launch the proclamation on the
crest of a wave of victory.

**“**That sounded sensible. So Lincoln waited; and two months later the
victory came.**”**

And so, to further the cause of Union War, the Proclamation of
Emancipation was published in September 1862, which was to be effective
on 1st January, 1863.

I have highest respect for Abraham Lincoln and he has been one of my
favourite heroes since childhood. But that respect is based upon the
facts and reality; not upon myths. He was a humanitarian and he, from
the depth of heart, was against slavery. But it does not mean that we
should glorify him by false propaganda. The reality was that he did not
fight civil war to emancipate the slaves; rather he emancipated the
slaves to win the civil war and save the Union.

[^1]: Carnegie, Dale, Lincoln: the Unknown (Surrey, U.K.:The Word Work
Ltd, 1948) chp. 22.


