Territorial Slavery
===================

Up to now we have discussed one type of slavery, i.e., household
slavery. But it was mentioned in chapter one that slavery is of two
kinds, the second being the Territorial Slavery or subjugation of one
nation by another.

Though the household slavery is now supposed to be abolished, the
territorial slavery is still very much alive. With a heart full of
sorrow one notes the systematic destruction of human lives and human
dignity perpetuated by the Christian civilization in almost all parts of
the world.

Red Indians were the original inhabitants of the New World. Where are
they now? They were gradually pushed out from their own lands and have
been forced to live in less fertile rather unproductive patches of
U.S.A. Aborigines of Australia were subjected to the same treatment. Red
Indians and Aborigines both were hunted like buffaloes and now their
number is nearing the extinction point. Dr. Eric Williams quotes a story
of the Indian chieftain, Hatuey, who doomed to die for resisting the
invaders, staunchly refused to accept the Christian faith as the gateway
to salvation when he learned that his executioners, too, hope to get to
Heaven.[^1]

Even more tragic is the fate of the Africans in Southern Africa.
Portuguese, armed with the Pope's decree to **“**reduce the infidels to
servitude**”** are tenaciously keeping Angola and Mozambique under the
yoke of Territorial Slavery.

It is really astonishing to note that Pope Paul VI often issues
statements on political problems of the world; but has never seen it fit
to advise Portugal to negotiate with its **“**subjects**”** in Africa
and elsewhere. Instead the Popes have maintained special relations with
Portugal and Spain, the two Roman Catholic nations which stubbornly
refuse to free their African colonies. In July 1970, Pope Paul VI
received some leaders of freedom fighters of Portuguese African
colonies. This audience infuriated Portugal, which issued a protest;
Vatican nervously issued an explanation. Commenting upon it, the
following letter entitled **“**Pope's Note A Comfort**”** was published
in the *Standard* Dar es-Salaam (Tanzania), by 'A Black Roman Catholic':

**“**The news item 'Pope's note comforts Portugal' (*Standard*, July 11)
refers. I quote the relevant sentences:

A Vatican note said that Pope had received them (i.e., the leaders of
liberation movements of Africa under Portuguese rule) as Catholics and
Christians, without reference to their political functions. He reminded
them to the Church's teaching that peaceful means should always be used
even in seeking what one considers to be one's right.

**“**The earlier news that the Holy Father had received the said leaders
had perturbed me much. Now this clarification has put my anxiety to
rest. Let me explain why. It was the Roman Catholic Church which
established Western colonialism by dividing all the newly discovered
lands and countries into two halves: giving the Spaniards the Western
half (like Americas), and granting Portugal the Eastern half (like
Africa and India).

**“**Portugal's colonies in Africa are firmly founded on that important
Papal decree. When I read earlier that Pope Paul VI had received the
leaders of the Liberation movements, I was surprised how it was
possible. According to our beliefs of the Papal infallibility, Pope Paul
VI is bound to carry on and justify whatever was decreed by his Holy
predecessors. Therefore, according to my thinking he should not have
encouraged those leaders.

**“**Now his clarification has comforted me a lot spiritually. Now I may
sleep in peace with a sure knowledge that my Church has not condemned
itself by implying that previous Popes were wrong in establishing and
supporting the 'enlightenment' of this black continent under Portuguese
Imperialism.

**“**Also, his advice to these so called 'victims of colonialism' to
remain peaceful (i.e., to disband freedom-fighter units and beg Portugal
to grant them Uhuru) is the same old wine in a new bottle. It reminds me
of the invocations of priests of the Roman Catholic Church at the time
of sailings of the slave-ships from Portuguese ports for West Indies.
They always prayed to the Almighty to ensure the safety of the ships and
always admonished the black slaves to behave gently and obediently. Of
course, they did not think it necessary to advise the masters of the
slaves to think of them as human beings. I am glad that my Church has
not changed during all these long centuries.**”**

South Africa's policy of Apartheid is universally condemned by UNO and
elsewhere. But the Churches had always toed the line. It is only after
the **“**change of wind**”** in Africa and rapid emergence of
independent African nations that the Churches have realised the need to
oppose the nefarious system which denies the original inhabitants of the
country the right to work, walk, sit, ride, earn or sleep in their own
land. And even when all other Churches, forced by the political
necessity, have shown their opposition to this type of slavery, the
Dutch Reformed Church still supports that inhuman system.

Rhodesia is following in the foot-steps of South Africa. A common
African joke in these parts of the world describes an African telling a
European: **“**When you came, you had the Bible and we had the land. Now
we have the Bible and you have the land.**”**

Apart from this blatant subjugation, there are other disguises in which
the territorial slavery shows its face. Like a chameleon, it changes its
colour according to the environment. Naked colonialism has now been
replaced by neo-colonialism; but it still amounts to the same
subjugation of nations and peoples by the superpowers through more
subtle or not so subtle methods. We have seen what happened to the
League of Nations. It has been replaced by the UNO, but when the weak
nations cry and appeal for justice, diplomatic pressure is exercised and
their just demands for their basic rights are shelved, or postponed.
There is political blackmail, and the colour of the skin is still a
deciding factor. In fact the governing nations or those who are powerful
and well-equipped with instruments and means of wholesale destruction
and annihilation, still hold their sway.

This type of slavery is practised today not only by Christo-capitalist
nations but by communists also; and it will continue so long as human
society remains divided into the strong and the weak or until the
existence of Omnipotent and All-powerful God is recognised and His
Sovereignty over the world is fully believed in and accepted.

Even now when the 20th century is marching towards its close and the
Americans pride themselves on their achievements, the **“**Negro**”**
question is in the forefront and still unsolved. Despairingly, O.A.
Sherrard says, **“**Slavery has existed from the beginning and will last
in one form or another as long as men lust after power. It has resulted
in more misery, more murder, more degradation, more sadness, suffering
and sin than any other human institution. It crushes individuals; it
blights communities; it sours all human intercourse, for its sign-manual
is fear...

It has dealt viciously with the past, and perhaps more viciously with
the present; for in modern forms slavery if less obvious is more
widespread and its fear more pervasive. The fear of a servile rising
among its satellites haunts the Soviet Presidium; the fear of a servile
fate heightens the tension between East and West; the fear of a servile
revenge broods in South Africa and overshadows the States; the fear of
servile indignities, brain-washing, torture and sudden death, cows vast
multitudes throughout the world.**”**[^2]

But we do not share this pessimistic view. We realise that the problem
is gigantic, but we also know that Islam is the Religion sent by Allah,
the Omnipotent. Islam, 1400 years ago brought three-sided program for
eradication of slavery:

Blocking the ways of acquiring new slaves, emancipation, and restoration
of the human dignity to the slaves. And the fact is that though Bani
Umayyah sabotaged the first side of that program by re-introducing
slavery by purchase, they could not minimise the impact of the other two
programs. And the slaves in the Muslim world regained their lost human
dignity.

A system which has shown its worth and which achieved success in fields
where other systems have utterly failed, will surely achieve the total
eradication of every type of division, segregation, inequality and
inequity if it is given chance. Ameer Ali writes, **“**It remains for
the Moslems [*sic*] to show the falseness of the aspersions cast on the
memory of the great and noble Prophet [by the traducers and enemies of
Islam], by proclaiming in explicit terms that slavery, [bondage in any
shape and the difference of race and colour are] reprobated by their
faith and discountenanced by their code.**”**[^3] And we are sure that
Islam will be given opportunity by Allah to establish full and complete
justice in the world.

The Shi'ite Imams, the Divine Guides, carried on the work of the Holy
Prophet and instilled in their followers the true spirit of Islam. They,
by their own examples and through sermons, preserved the original Islam
for their followers.

And the last divine Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (peace be upon him),
the Awaited One, is to re-appear when this world will become full of
injustice, tyranny and dishonesty. When the Awaited One comes out from
Occultation, he will fill this world with complete justice, honesty and
mercy. We believe in a better world and we know that whatever the
disguise of slavery at the time of re-appearance of the Twelfth Imam,
the Awaited One, it is bound to disappear, vacating its place to
universal brotherhood and human dignity.

[^1]: Williams, op. cit., p. 8.

[^2]: Sherrard, op. cit., pp. 188-189.

[^3]: Ameer Ali, Spirit of Islam, p. 267


