Postscript
==========

The first edition of this book was published fifteen years ago. Many
changes have occurred in this period on the world stage. The wind of
change has blown away the Portuguese rule from Africa, giving freedom to
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea Bissau. Rhodesia's black majority has
overthrown Ian Smith's **“**independence**”** of the White settlers,
putting Zimbabwe on Africa's map. Spain too had to withdraw from the
**“**Spanish Sahara**”**.

I have re-read the preceding chapter (Territorial Slavery) to see if
some changes were advisable. But it seems that no alteration would be
justified. The fact is that no substantial change has occurred in the
overall picture. Rather the situation has gone from bad to worse - the
flag independence of some countries notwithstanding.

South Africa, with whole-hearted **“**ethical, philosophical and
scriptural**”** support of the Dutch Reformed Church, is relentlessly
pursuing its policy of apartheid. In spite of pressures from O.A.U,
Commonwealth and UNO members, the United States and the United Kingdom
have stubbornly refused to impose economic sanction against South
Africa. On the other hand, USA supports South Africa in its ventures to
destabilise Angola and Mozambique.

The wave of Islamic awakening, with Islam's unambiguous stand against
oppression of man by man, or exploitation of nation by nation, is
proving a stumbling block to the oppressors of the weaker people. Not
without reason, the 1986 Synod of the Dutch Reformed Church had declared
that Islam was a great danger to South Africa - i.e., to the idea of
racial supremacy.

With all the propaganda being made by the super powers about the Human
Rights, the same powers go on unabashedly trampling the basic human
rights of weaker nations. Their tentacles are strangulating the Middle
East and Afghanistan, as well as Central America and Central Asia. Nor
has the Vatican changed its stance *vis-à-vis* freedom movements and
down-trodden masses.

Although the appearance of neo-colonialism has changed to some extent,
its reality has not changed at all. It was thought better, therefore, to
let the concluding chapter stand as it was.

Gopalpur, India

November 27, 1987


