Christianity and Slavery
========================

Though slavery was an ancient institution which started in pre-historic
era of mankind, it is safe to say that the volume of this trade reached
its zenith through the Christian nations of Europe and America who, as
is their nature, turned it into a meticulously organised commerce and
started capturing slaves by thousands. Before we describe the nefarious
trade in slave started by the Portuguese, the Spaniards and other
maritime powers of the Christian West for their newly acquired colonies,
let us see if Christianity, as a system and as a creed, did anything in
the earliest period to alleviate the lot of slaves.

Justice Ameer Ali writes about Christianity:

It found slavery a recognised institution of the empire; it adopted the
system without any endeavour to mitigate its baneful character, or
promise its gradual abolition, or to improve the status of slaves. Under
the civil law, slaves were mere chattels. They remained so under the
Christian domination. Slavery had flourished among the Romans from the
earliest times. The slaves whether of native or foreign birth, whether
acquired by war or purchase, were regarded simply as chattels. Their
masters possessed the power of life and death over them.. Christianity
had failed utterly in abolishing slavery or alleviating its evil.[^1]

Will Durant describes the position of the Church as follows:

The Church did not condemn slavery. Orthodox and heretic, Roman and
barbarian alike assumed the institution to be natural and
in-destructible. Pagan laws condemned to slavery any free woman who
married a slave; the laws of Constantine [a Christian emperor] ordered
the woman to be executed, and the slave to be burned alive. The Emperor
Gratian decreed that a slave who accused his master of any offence
except high treason to the state should be burned alive at once, without
inquiring into the justice of the charge.[^2]

The only redress prescribed by Christianity is seen in the letter of St.
Paul to a certain Philemon sending back to him his slave, Onessimus,
with a recommendation to treat him well. Nothing more. It is interesting
to note that the word **“**slave**”** of original Hebrew has been
changed to **“**servant**”** in the Authorised Version of the Bible, and
to **“**bond servant**”** in the Revised Standard Version, because, in
words of The *Concise Bible Commentary*, **“**this word [i.e., slave] is
avoided because of its association.[^3] One wonders whether a translator
has a right to change the original just because of
**“**associations**”**?

It would be of interest to note here that the word **“**slave**”** is of
European origin. It came into existence when the Franks used to supply
the Spanish slave market with the **“**barbarians,**”** and those
captives happened to be mostly the people of Turkish origin from the
region known as Slovakia (now a part of Czechoslovakia). These people
are called **“**Slav**”** and so all captives came to be known as
**“**slaves**”**.

The following quotation graphically shows the attitude of Islam and
Christianity on the subject of slavery and race:

**“**Take away the black man! I can have no discussion with him,**”**
exclaimed the Christian Archbishop Cyrus when the Arab conquerors had
sent a deputation of their ablest men to discuss terms of surrender of
the capital of Egypt, headed by Negro 'Ubaydah as the ablest of them
all. To the sacred Archbishop's astonishment, he was told that this man
was commissioned by General 'Amr; that the Moslems held Negroes and
white men in equal respect judging a man by his character and not by his
colour.[^4]

This episode gives you in a nutshell what I propose to explain at length
in this booklet.

[^1]: Ameer Ali, op. cit., pp.260-261.

[^2]: Lecky, W.E., History of European Morals, vol.II (New York, 1926),
p.61, as quoted by Will Durant, op. cit., vol. IV, p.77.

[^3]: Clarke, Rev. W.K.L., The Concise Bible Commentary (London:
S.P.C.K., 1952), p.976.

[^4]: Leeder, S.S., Veiled Mysteries of Egypt (London, 1912), p.332.


