Islam Attacks Slavery
=====================

Islam has often been represented by Christian writers as a religion
which not only tolerated slavery but also encouraged it. This is a
serious accusation levelled against Islam, and in this book I propose to
show its falsity. I would have taken, if possible, the charitable view
that the charge against Islam is based on ignorance of facts, but I am
grieved to note that in majority of the critics the overflowing motive
seems to be prejudice, and malice.

We have mentioned briefly the attitude of Christianity towards slavery,
and more will be said afterwards. Here, to begin with, let us have a
look at Islam and its codes.

As far as slavery was concerned, Arabs in the pre-Islamic days were as
bad offenders as their neighbours. Slaves were a commercial commodity,
and slavery was an established institution. It was a source of
livelihood for thousands and a source of labour for scores of thousands.
To the elite, the number of slaves in the household was a symbol of
status.

This was the state of affairs at the advent of Islam. Slavery offended
the spirit of Islam as much as idolatry did. But while the latter had
its roots in spiritualism and hence could be countered by reason,
slavery had its roots in commerce, in social structure, in agriculture
undertakings; and reason alone was but a feeble weapon against a foe so
insidious and so deeply rooted. How was then slavery to be eradicated?

The ill-informed may well suggest that the Prophet of Islam could have
used force. But the ineffectiveness of force for such purpose is well
recognised by all dispassionate students of sociology. Force may achieve
submission but it inevitably achieves hostility, and very often
hostility is so fierce that many a good cause has been lost when force
has been employed for its advancement.

The sad plight of the Negroes of America is but one illustration of how
ineffective the employment of force can be when the object is to achieve
a social reform. The emancipation of slaves did not change the attitude
of the white masters towards their ex-slaves; and what a bitter legacy
of racial antipathy has it left! Toynbee writes, **“**The Blacks in the
United States who were emancipated jurisdically in 1862 are, with good
reason, feeling now, more than a century later, that they are still
being denied full human rights by the white majority of their
fellow-citizens.[^1]

Islam's war against slavery aimed at changing the attitude and mentality
of the whole society, so that after emancipation, slaves would become
its full-fledged members, without any need of demonstrations, strikes,
civil disobedience and racial riots. And Islam achieved this seemingly
impossible objective without any war. To say that Islam waged no war
against slavery would not be a true statement. A war it waged, but a war
in which neither sword was resorted to, nor blood was spilled.

Islam aimed at striking at the roots of its foe and created allies by
arousing the finer instincts of its followers. A three-pronged attack on
slavery was launched.

**Firstly,** Islam placed restrictions on acquisition of slaves. Prior
to Islam, slavery was practised with abandon. Debtors were made slaves,
war captives were either killed or made slaves. In weaker nations,
people were hunted like animals, killed or captured and reduced to
slavery. Islam, in unambiguous terms, forbade its followers to enslave
people on any pretext. The only exception was an idolatrous enemy
captured in a war which was fought either in self-defence or with the
permission of the Prophet or his rightful successors. This exception
was, in words of Ameer Ali, **“**in order to serve as guarantee for the
preservation of the lives of the captives.**”**[^2]

As 'Allamah Tabataba'i has described at great length, prior to Islam
strong and dominant people, throughout the world, used to enslave weak
persons without any restraint. Important among the **“**causes**”** of
enslavement were the following three factors:

1. War: The conqueror could do with the vanquished enemy whatever he
liked. He could put the arrested soldiers to death, condemn them to
slavery or otherwise keep them under his authority or clutch.

2. Domination: A chief or ruler could enslave, depending on his sweet
wish, anyone residing under his domain.

3. Guardianship: A father or grandfather had absolute authority over his
offspring. He could sell or gift him or her away; could lend him or her
to someone else, or exchange him or her with another's son or daughter.

When Islam came on the scene, it nullified and negated the last two
factors completely. No ruler or progenitor was allowed to treat his
subjects or offspring as his slaves. Every individual was bestowed with
well-defined rights; the ruler and the ruled, the progenitor and the
offspring had to live within the limits prescribed by religion; no one
could transgress those limits.

And it drastically restricted the first cause, i.e., war, by allowing
enslavement only in a war fought against unbelieving enemy. In no other
way could anyone be enslaved. At the same time, Islam raised the status
of slavery to that of a free man; and opened many ways for their
emancipation.[^3]

Before slave trade was started on a large scale by the Westerners (when
colonisation began), it was only in wars that men were made captives.
But Islam did not permit wars of aggression. All the battles fought
during the life-time of the Prophet were defensive battles. Not only
this, an alternative was also introduced and enforced:

***“…..to let the captives go free, either with or without any ransom
“(The Qur'an 47:4).***

In the battles forced upon the Muslims, the Prophet had ordered very
humane treatment of the prisoners who fell into Muslim hands. They could
purchase their freedom on payment of small sums of money, and some of
them were left off without any payment. It all depended upon the
discretion of the Prophet or his rightful successors, keeping in view
the safety of the Muslims and the extent of danger from the enemy. The
captives of the very first Islamic battle, Badr, were freed on ransom
(in form of money or work like teaching ten Muslim children how to read
and write), while those of the tribe of Tay were freed without any
ransom.[^4]

Even in such enslavement a condition was attached that a mother was not
to be separated from her child, nor brother from brother nor husband
from wife nor one member of a clan from his clan. The Prophet and the
first Shi'ite Imam, 'Ali bin Abi Talib, prescribed severest penalties
for anyone who took a free man into slavery: cutting off the hand of the
culprit.

Ameer Ali writes in *Mohammedan Law:*

The possession of a slave by the Koranic laws was conditional on a
bona-fide war, waged in self-defence, against idolatrous enemies; and it
was permitted in order to serve as a guarantee for the preservation of
the lives of the captives.. Mohammad found the custom existing among the
pagan Arabs; he minimised the evil, and at the same time laid down such
strict rules that but for the perversity of his followers, slavery as a
social institution would have ceased to exist with the discontinuance of
the wars in which the Moslem *[sic]* nation were at first involved.

The mutilation of the human body was also explicitly forbidden by
Mohammad, and the institution which flourished both in the Persian and
the Byzantine empires was denounced in severe terms. Slavery by purchase
was unknown during the reigns of the first four Caliphs, the
*khulafai-rashidin,* 'the legitimate Caliphs' as they are called by the
Sunnis. There is, at least, no authentic record of any slave having been
acquired by purchase during their tenure of office. But with the
accession of the usurping house of Ommeyya *[sic]* a change came over
the spirit of Islam.

Mu'awiyah was the first Muslim sovereign who introduced into the
Mohammedan world the practice of acquiring slaves by purchase. He was
also the first to adopt the Byzantine custom of guarding his women by
eunuchs. During the reign of the early Abbasides the Shi'a Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq preached against slavery, and his views were adopted by the
Mu'tazila. Karmath, who flourished in the ninth century of the Christian
era ..seems to have held slavery to be unlawful.[^5]

Thus we see that the earnest attempt of Islam to stop its followers from
acquiring new slaves was foiled by Banu Umayyah. And I must record to
the lasting disgrace of a large number of Muslims that, in later times,
they utterly ignored the precepts of the Prophet and the injunctions of
the Qur'an, and the Arabs too participated with the European Christians
in the abominable slave-trade of East Africa. The West African
slave-trade was totally in the hands of the European Christians.

**Secondly,** Islam commenced an active campaign to emancipate the
slaves. Emancipation of slaves was declared to be expiation for a number
of sins. This question is related to canonical laws of Islam, but we
shall enumerate a few of them to show how for small sins of commission
the penalty imposed was manumission of slaves. For instance, if a man
failed to fast without any reasonable excuse during the month of
Ramadan, or if he failed to observe fast of *i'tikaf* or vow, etc, he
had to free a slave for each day, in addition to fasting afterwards.

Similarly, a slave had to be freed for every breach of vow; or for
tearing one's garment as a demonstration of grief on the death of a
spouse or child; or if a woman beat herself or cut or pulled her hair in
grief over the death of anyone; or for accidental homicide and, in some
cases, even for intentionally killing a Muslim; or if a husband told his
wife that she was to him like his mother, and for many other
trespasses.[^6] From these instances, some of them trivial but deeply
ingrained in Arab culture, one can see how religious laws were enacted
for the emancipation of slaves, and the total eradication of the curse
of slavery from the society.

It may well be argued that by prescribing emancipation of slaves as
penance for sins, Islam envisaged continuance of slavery as a permanent
institution. This was not so. For every instance emancipation of a slave
was prescribed as a penance, an alternative was also prescribed -
clearly indicating that Islam's objective was in time to create a
society free from this pernicious institution.[^7]

Islam also declared that any slave woman who bore a child by her master
could not be sold and, on her master's death, she became automatically a
free woman.[^8] Moreover; in contrast to all previous customs, Islam
ordained that the child born to a slave woman by her master should
follow the status of the father.[^9] Slaves were given a right to ransom
themselves either on payment of an agreed sum or on completion of
service for an agreed period. The legal term for this is *mukatabah*.
Allah says in the Qur'an:

***And those who seek a deed [of liberation] from among those [slaves]
whom your right hands possess, give them the writing (kitab) if you know
of goodness in them, and give them of the wealth of Allah which He has
given you.. (Qur'an 24:33)***

The word *kitab* in the verse stands for the written contract between
the slave and his master known as ***“**mukatabah* - deed of
contract**”**. The significant factor in *mukatabah* is that when a
slave desires to get into such a mutual written contract, the master
should not refuse it.[^10] In the verse quoted above, God has made it
incumbent upon Muslims to help the slaves in getting liberated.

When a slave wants to get himself freed, the master has not only to
agree to it, but he is also directed to help the slave from his own
wealth.[^11] The only provision being the satisfaction to the effect
that the slave would live a respectable life after earning his freedom.
Thus, about 1400 years ago Islam dealt in the most effective way a death
blow to slavery.

It also directed that the slaves seeking freedom should be helped from
the public treasury *(baytul mal*).[^12] Thus, as a last resort, the
Prophet and his rightful successors were to provide ransom for the
slaves out of state coffers. The Qur'an recognises the emancipation of
slaves as one of the permissible expenditures of alms and charity.[^13]

It is worth remembering that a slave automatically became free if the
master cut his ear or blinded his eye.[^14] Also if the slaves, living
in an Islamic state, accepted Islam before their masters, then they
would become free automatically. If the slave became blind or
handicapped he would become free.[^15] According to Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(peace be upon him), if a slave is Muslim and has worked for seven years
then he should be set free. Forcing him to work after seven years is not
permissible.[^16] It is because of this tradition *(hadith)* that the
religious scholars are of the opinion that freeing the slave after seven
years is a highly recommended deed of virtue.

In addition to these compulsory ways of emancipation, voluntary
emancipation of slaves was declared as the purest form of charity. Imam
'Ali emancipated one thousand slaves, purchasing them from his own
money.[^17] The same was the number of the slaves emancipated by the
seventh Imam Musa al-Kazim. The fourth Imam, 'Ali bin al-Husayn, used to
emancipate every slave in his household on the eve of 'Idd (the annual
celebration of Muslims). It is important to note that in all the above
cases, the freed slaves were provided with sufficient means to earn
their livelihood respectably.

Islam is the first and the only religion which has prescribed liberation
of slaves as a virtue and a condition of genuine faith in God. No
religion other than Islam has ever preached and enjoined how best we can
show our love for fellow human beings in bondage. In chapter ninety of
the Qur'an, liberating a slave has been prescribed as a cardinal virtue
of the faith:

***Certainly We have created men [to dwell] in distress. What! Does he
think that no one has power over him? He shall say, “I have wasted much
wealth” Does he think that no one sees him? Have We not given him two
eyes, a tongue and two lips, and We pointed out to him the two
conspicuous ways [of good and evil]? But he would not attempt the uphill
road. What will make you comprehend what the uphill road is? It is the
setting free of a slave....(90:4-13)***

It should be mentioned that the setting free of a slave has been highly
commended. Islam controlled slavery in such a graceful and practical way
that it made the maintaining of a slave a great responsibility for the
master, and at the same time it enjoined so much care and kindness to
the slaves that in many cases when the slaves were set free they did not
like to leave their masters.

**Thirdly,** Islam restored dignity to slaves and enhanced their social
status. It made no distinction between a slave and a free man, and all
were treated with equality. It was this fact that always attracted
slaves to Islam. It is painful to see that those who never cease to be
vociferous in their unjust criticism of Islam should take no notice of
this principle of equality, when even in this enlightened age there are
countries where laws are made discriminating against the vast majority
of population, to keep them in practical servitude.

Islam recognises no distinction of race or colour, black or white,
citizens or soldiers, rulers or subjects; they are perfectly equal, not
in theory only, but in practice. The first *mu'azzin* (herald of the
prayer call) of Islam, a devoted adherent of the Prophet and an esteemed
disciple, was a Negro slave. The Qur'an lays down the measure of
superiority in verse thirteen of chapter forty-nine. It is addressed to
mankind, the whole human race, and preaches the natural brotherhood of
man without distinction of tribe, clan, race or colour. It says:

***O you men! We have created you of a male and a female, and then We
made you (into different) races and tribes so that you may know (and
recognise) each other. Surely the most honourable of you with Allah is
the one who is most pious among you; surely Allah is All-Knowing and
Aware.(49:13)***

This verse makes clear the view point of Islam as regards human life on
earth. It lays down only one criterion of superiority or honour and that
is piety, which means complete obedience to the will of God. It
annihilates all man-made and artificial distinctions of race and colour
which we find all over the world even now. To explain the qualities of
piety, let us note what Allah says:

***It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and
the West, righteousness is this that one should believe in Allah, the
Last Day, the angels, the Book and the Prophets, and give away wealth
out of love for Him to the near of kin, the orphans, the needy, the
wayfarer, the beggars and to those in bondage and keep up prayers, pay
the poor-rate; and those who fulfil their promise and the patient ones
in distress and affliction and in the time of war - these are they who
are the truthful and these are they who are pious. (The Qur'an 2:177)***

This verse clearly shows that by itself there is no specific virtue in
turning towards any particular direction for prayer. (The unity of the
*Qiblah* indicates the unity of faith which leads to spiritual unity and
culminates in physical harmony.) The belief and practice enjoined in the
verse are the real virtues, and apart from being ordered by God, they
appeal to human reasoning. Please mark that **“**to give away wealth out
of love for God to...those in bondage**”** is one of them.

In a tradition from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, it is stated that when a
person hits his slave (male or female), without any legal justification,
then the only way of accounting for that act is setting the slave free
even if that act of hitting is within the limits fixed by God. In
another tradition, Zurarah asked the same Imam about the attitude of a
master towards the slaves. The Imam answered that **“**an act
unintentionally done by the slaves is not punishable but when they are
persistently and intentionally disobeying the will of the master, then
they can be punished.**”** It would be of interest to know that a slave
was given the right to sue his master.

A third tradition from the same Imam says that a man possessing the
following four characteristics will be forgiven and will be placed
highly in the values of realms of heaven:

(1) one who shelters an orphan and takes interest in the circumstances
and problems in which orphan is placed and is kind to him in a fatherly
way, gives him the love of parents;

(2) one who is kind and helpful to the weak;

(3) one who spends on his parents and is kind, thoughtful and looking
towards them;

(4) and lastly, the one who is not furious in his behaviour towards his
servant or slave and helps him in the work one has ordered, and refrains
from ordering him such task which is beyond his capacity.

**“**Islam enjoined that a master should treat his slave as one of his
family-members; he must be given all the necessities of life, just like
any other dependent. The Prophet used to eat together with his slaves
and servants, and sit with them; he himself did not eat or dress better
than them, nor did he discriminate against them in any way.

**“**The masters were obliged not to put them under hardship; slaves
were not to be tortured, abused or treated unjustly. They could marry
among themselves (with their master's permission) or with free men or
women. They could appear as witnesses, and participate with free men in
all affairs. Many of them were appointed as governors, commanders of
army and administrators.

**“**In the eyes of Islam, a pious slave has precedence over an unpious
free man.**”**[^18]

It is stated in reliable traditions from the Prophet that one should
feed his slave what he himself eats and should dress him with what he
himself dresses. In his famous sermon in 'Arafat, on 9th Dhul-hijjah 9
AH, during his last pilgrimage, the Prophet said, **“**...and your
slaves, see that you feed them such food as you eat yourselves and dress
him with what you yourself dress. And if they commit a mistake which you
are not inclined to forgive then sell them, for they are the servants of
Allah and are not to be tormented...**”**[^19]

To say that Islam treated slaves on the basis of equality would be an
understatement. Because, in fact, for a number of offences, the
punishment meted out to a slave was half of the punishment meted out to
others.[^20] This was in contrast to the established practice of every
nation to punish slaves more severely than the freemen. Professor Davis
writes, **“**The criminal law was almost everywhere more severe for
slaves than freemen.**”**[^21]

The Prophet of Islam always exhorted his followers to treat their slaves
like family-members. He and his household always treated their servants
as such. A female servant in the employ of Fatimah, the Prophet's
daughter, testifies that her mistress had made it a rule to share all
household drudgery with her and insisted that the servant should have
rest every alternative days when she, Fatimah, would attend to the work.
Thus, there was equal division of work between the mistress of the house
and the maid-servant

It is also recorded that once 'Ali and his male servant Qambar went to a
shop where 'Ali selected two garments, one a cheap coarse dress, the
other expensive. He gave the expensive garment to Qambar. Qambar was
shocked. **“**Oh Master!**”**, he said, **“**This is the better one and
you are the ruler of the Muslims. You should take this one.**”** 'Ali
replied, **“**No, Qambar, you are young and young man should wear better
clothes.**”**

Could such a treatment produce any sense of inferiority in slaves?
Masters were forbidden to exact more work than was just and proper. They
were ordered never to address their male or female slaves by the
degrading appellation, but by the more affectionate name of **“**my
young man', or **“**my young maid**”**; it was also enjoined that all
slaves should be dressed, clothed and fed exactly as their masters and
mistresses did. It was also ordered that in no case should the mother be
separated from her child, nor brother from brother, nor father from son,
nor husband from wife, nor one relative from another.

Let us now refer to the Qur'an:

***Worship Allah (alone) and associate nothing with Him, and do good to
parents, to kinsfolk, to orphans, to the needy, to the neighbour who is
a relative, to the neighbour who is a stranger, to a companion by your
side, to the wayfarer and to (the slave) which your right hands possess;
verily Allah loves not the proud, the boastful. (4:36)***

The Holy Prophet gifted a slave to Abu Dharr al-Ghifari and told him to
maintain him in the best way, to feed him whatever he himself ate, to
clothe him with whatever clothes he liked for himself. Abu Dharr had a
robe which he immediately tore into two, and gave one piece to the
slave. The Prophet said, **“**Excellent!**”** Abu Dharr took the slave
home and liberated him. The Prophet was highly pleased with Abu Dharr
and said, **“**God will reward you for it.**”**

How Imam Zaynul 'Abidin, the fourth Imam, treated his slave-girl is
well-known in Islamic history. Once while serving food to the Imam, she
accidentally dropped a bowl of hot soup on him. She was deeply conscious
of the injury and pain she had caused to the Imam. She knew very well
the disposition of the holy Imam and began reciting the Qur'anic verse:

***“Those who restrain their anger.”***

**“**I have restrained my anger,**”** the Imam replied.

***“**And those who forgive the people,**”*** she went on.

**“**I have forgiven you,**”** he said.

Lastly, she said, **“***And God loves those who do* *good to
others.**”***

The Imam replied, **“**I set you free to seek the pleasure of God.**”**

The slave-girl had quoted those words from verse 134 of chapter 3 of the
Qur'an. We reproduce the full verse here:

***Those who spend (in alms) alike in prosperity and straitness, and who
restrain (their) anger, and those who forgive the people, and Allah
loves those who do good (to others).***

Once someone remarked that the slaves of Imam Zayn al-'Abidin say to
each other that they were not in the least afraid of him. On hearing
this, the Imam prostrated to God in thanks-giving and exclaimed, **“**I
thank God that his creatures are not afraid of me.**”**

From what we have said above it must be clear how kindly and lovingly
the slaves were treated by the Holy Prophet and the Imams of Ahlul Bayt,
and those who followed the injunctions of the Qur'an and the examples
set by the Prophet and the Imams.

On the attitude of Muslim master with his slaves, Will Durant says,
**“**...he handled them with a genial humanity that made their lot no
worse - perhaps better, as more secure - than that of a factory worker
in nineteenth-century Europe.**”**[^22]

At the end of the 18th century, Mouradgea d'Ohsson (a main source of
information for the Western writers on the Ottoman Empire) declared:

**“**There is perhaps no nation where the captives, the slaves, the very
toilers in the galleys are better provided for or treated with more
kindness than among the Muhammedans.**”**[^23]

P. L Riviere writes:

**“**A master was enjoined to make his slave share the bounties he
received from God. It must be recognised that, in this respect, the
Islamic teaching acknowledged such a respect for human personality and
showed a sense of equality which is searched for in vain in ancient
civilization**”**[^24]

And not only in ancient civilisations; even in the modern Christian
civilisation the ingrained belief of racial supremacy is still
manifesting itself every day. A. J. Toynbee says in *Civilization on
Trial*:

**“**The extinction of race consciousness as between Muslims is one of
the outstanding achievements of Islam, and in the contemporary world
there is, as it happens, a crying need for the propagation of this
Islamic virtue...**”** Then he comments that **“**in this perilous
matter of race feeling it can hardly be denied that (the triumph of
English-speaking peoples) has been a misfortune.**”**[^25]

Napoleon Bonaparte is recorded as saying about the condition of slaves
in Muslim countries:

**“**The slave inherits his master's property and marries his daughter.
The majority of the Pashas had been slaves. Many of the grand viziers,
all the Mamelukes, Ali Ben Mourad Beg, had been slaves. They began their
lives by performing the most menial services in the houses of their
masters and were subsequently raised in status for their merit or by
favour. In the West, on the contrary, the slave has always been below
the position of the domestic servants; he occupies the lowest rug. The
Romans emancipated their slaves, but the emancipated were never
considered as equal to the free-born. The ideas of the East and West are
so different that it took a long time to make the Egyptians understand
that all the army was not composed of slaves belonging to the Sultan
al-Kabir.**”**[^26]

[^1]: Toynbee, A. J., Mankind and Mother Earth, (N.Y.: Oxford University
Press, 1976), p.12.

[^2]: Ameer Ali, Muhammadan Law, vol.2, p.31.

[^3]: al-Tabataba'i, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, al-Mizan fi Tafsir'l
Qur'an, vol.16, 2nd ed. (Beirut, 1390/1971), pp. 338-358.

[^4]: al-Waqidi, Muhammad bin 'Umar, Kitabul Maghazi, ed. M. Jones, vol.
I (London: Oxford University Press, 1966), p.129; Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqatul
Kabir, Vol. II:1 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1912), pp.11, 14.

[^5]: Ameer Ali, Muhammadan Law, vol. 2, pp. 31-2.

[^6]: al-Khu'i, Sayyid Abu'l Qasim, Minhajus Salihin, 3rd ed., vol. II
(Najaf, 1974), pp. 328-331; also see the Qur'an, 4:92, 5:89, 58:3.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: al-'Amili, Hurr, Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'ah, vol.16 (Tehran, 1983),
p.128.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: al-'Amili, op. cit., vol.16, p.101.

[^11]: Ibid, p. 111.

[^12]: Ibid, pp. 121-2.

[^13]: See the Qur'an 9:60, 2:177.

[^14]: al-Hilli, Muhaqqiq, Sharaya'ul Islam, (kitabul-'itq); also see
The Encyclopaedia of Islam:, vol. I (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1960), p. 31.

[^15]: Ibid, pp. 31-3.

[^16]: Ibid, pp. 43-4.

[^17]: Ibid, p. 3.

[^18]: al-Tabataba'i, op. cit., vol.16, pp. 338-358.

[^19]: Ibn Sa'd, op. cit., vol. II:1, p. 133; al-'Amili, op. cit.,
vol.16, 21.

[^20]: al-Amili, op. cit., vol.18, pp. 401f, 527-8, 586-7; vol. 19, pp.
73, 154f.

[^21]: Davis, D.B., The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture (N.Y.:
1969), p. 60.

[^22]: Hurgronje C., Mohammedanism, (N.Y., 1916), p. 128 as quoted by W.
Durant, The Story of Civilization, vol. IV (N.Y., 1950), p. 209.

[^23]: As quoted in The Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol.I, p. 35.

[^24]: Riviere P.L., Revue Bleaue (June 1939).

[^25]: Toynbee, A.J., Civilization on Trial (New York, 1948), p. 205.

[^26]: Cherfils, Bonaparte et l'Islam (Paris, 1914), p. (?).


