The Origin of Negro Slavery
===========================

Now that we have seen the attitude of Islam towards slavery, let us have
a look at Christianity and its followers, and see what they did in this
respect.

It is surprising to see that Christians, who for the reasons of their
own, now-a-days pose themselves as champions of human freedom, were the
most outspoken advocates of the system of slavery. They invented
philosophical and moral justifications for enslaving the
**“**uncivilised**”** people. One of their arguments was they were
saving them from their cannibal neighbours in this world, and from
eternal disgrace in the life hereafter.

Islam and its followers never thought on these lines. The vast multitude
of Islamic literature is empty from this kind of pathetic effort at
moralisation. But the Christian writers always mention slave-trade as
though they had nothing to do with it and that it was Islam which
**“**encouraged and legalised slavery**”** while they, the Christians,
had always tried to abolish this nefarious system!

It is interesting to note that when speaking about the West African
totally Christian slave-trade, the Christian writers and historians call
it **“**West African slave-trade**”** or **“**Atlantic slave-trade**”**;
but when they turn to Eastern Africa, the term changes to **“**Arab
slave-trade**”**.

Christianity, by such false propaganda, has succeeded to a great extent
in extending its influence among those Africans whom its propaganda
machinery has kept blissfully unaware of the fact that all Christian
churches were active participants in African slave-trade. The following
chapters will present the true picture for the readers.

**“**When in 1492 Columbus, representing the Spanish monarchy,
discovered the New World, he sent in train the long and bitter
international rivalry over colonial possessions for which, after four
and a half centuries, no solution has yet been found. Portugal, which
had initiated the movement of international expansion, claimed the new
territories on the ground that they fell within the scope of a papal
bull of 1455 authorising her to reduce to servitude all infidel people.

The two powers, to avoid controversy, sought arbitration and, as
Catholics, turned to the Pope - a natural and logical step in an age
when the universal claims of the Papacy were still unchallenged by
individuals and governments. After carefully sifting the rival claims,
the Pope issued in 1493, a series of papal bulls which established a
line of demarcation between the colonial possessions of the two states:
the East went to Portugal and the West to Spain. The partitions,
however; failed to satisfy the Portuguese aspirations and in the
subsequent year the contending parties reached a more satisfactory
compromise in the Treaty of Tordesillas, which rectified the papal
judgement to permit Portuguese ownership of Brazil.**”**[^1]

But this arbitration could not bind other powers aspiring to grab as
many countries as possible; England, France and even Holland began to
claim their places in the sun. The Negro, too, **“**was to have his
place, though he did not ask for it: it was the broiling sun of the
sugar, tobacco and cotton plantations of the New World.

**“**According to Adam Smith, the prosperity of a new colony depends
upon one simple economic factor - 'plenty of good land.' The British
colonial possession up to 1776, however, can broadly be divided into two
types. The first is the self-sufficient and diversified economy of small
farmers... The second type is the colony which has facilities for the
production of staple articles on a large scale for an export market. In
the first category fell the Northern colonies of the American mainland;
in the second, the tobacco colonies and sugar islands of the Caribbean.

In colonies of the latter type, as Merivale pointed out land and capital
were both useless unless labour could be commanded. Labour, that is,
must be constant and must work, or be made to work, in co-operation..
Without this compulsion, the labourer would otherwise exercise his
natural inclination to work his own land and toil on his own account.

The story is frequently told of the great English capitalist, Mr. Pell,
who took 50,000 pounds and three hundred labourers with him to the Swan
River colony in Australia. His plan was that his labourers would work
for him, as in the old country. Arrived in Australia, however, where
land was plentiful - too plentiful - the labourers preferred to work for
themselves as small proprietors, rather than under the capitalist for
wages. Australia was not England, and the capitalist was left without a
servant to make his bed or fetch him water.**”**[^2]

**Thus the ideal solution was slavery.**

**“**'Odious resource', though it might be, as Merivalle called it,
slavery was an economic institution of the first importance. It had been
the basis of Greek economy and had built up the Roman Empire. In modem
times it provided the sugar for the tea and the coffee cups of the
Western world. It produced the cotton to serve as base for modern
capitalism. It made the American South and the Caribbean
islands.**”**[^3]

**“**With the limited population of Europe in the sixteenth century, the
free labourers necessary to cultivate the staple cops of sugar, tobacco
and cotton in the New World could not have been supplied in quantities
adequate to permit large-scale production. Slavery was necessary for
this and to get slaves the Europeans turned first to the
aborigines.**”**[^4]

**“**But Indian slavery never was extensive in the British dominions...
In the case of the Indian ... slavery was viewed as of an occasional
nature, a preventive penalty and not as normal and permanent condition.
In the New England colonies Indian slavery was unprofitable, for slavery
of any kind was unprofitable because it was unsuited to the diversified
agriculture of these colonies. In addition the Indian slave was
inefficient. The Spaniards discovered that one Negro was worth four
Indians. A prominent official in Hispanolia insisted in 1581 that
'permission be given to bring Negroes, a race robust for labour instead
of natives so weak that they can only be employed in tasks requiring
little endurance such as taking care of maize fields or farms....

The future staples of the New World, sugar and cotton, required strength
which the Indians lacked, and demanded the robust 'cotton nigger' as
sugar's need of strong mules produced in Louisiana the epithet 'sugar
mules.' According to Lauber, 'when compared with sums paid for Negroes
at the same time and place the prices of Indian slaves are found to have
been considerably lower.'

**“**The Indian reservoir, too, was limited, the African inexhaustible.
Negroes therefore were stolen in Africa to work the lands stolen from
the Indians in America. The voyages of Prince Henry the Navigator
complemented those of Columbus, West African history became the
complement of West Indians.**”**[^5]

[^1]: Williams, Dr. Eric, Capitalism and Slavery (London, 1964) p. 4.

[^2]: Ibid, pp. 4-5.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 5.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 6.

[^5]: Ibid, pp. 8-9.


