Christians Organise Slave-Trade
===============================

Slaves were taken from Africa even during the Roman Empire, but the real
**“**slave-trade**”** started in 16th century with the advent of the
Christian European countries.

Edward A. Alpers of the University College of Dar-es-salaam, writes that
**“**as we draw a distinction between the incidental trade in slaves
which trickled across the Sahara from West to North Africa as long as
the days of the Roman Empire, on the one hand, and the phenomenon which
we call the West African slave-trade, on the other hand, so we must draw
a similar distinction for East Africa.**”**[^1]

Walter Rodney also of University College, Dar-es-salaam, begins his
booklet *West Africa and the Atlantic Slave-Trade* with the following
words: **“**It must always be remembered that the Atlantic slave-trade
was an event in world history, involving three continents - Europe,
Africa and America. The people who set out to seek slaves were Europeans
coming from every country between Sweden in the north and Portugal in
the south. The Portuguese arrived in West Africa shortly before the
middle of the fifteenth century. Immediately, they started seizing the
Africans and taking them to work as slaves in Europe, particularly in
Portugal and Spain. But the most important developments took place in
the sixteenth century, when Europeans capitalists realised that they
could make enormous profits by using the labour of Africans to exploit
the wealth of the Americas.

As a result, Africans were taken to North America, Central America,
South America and the Caribbean to provide slave-labour in gold and
silver mines and on agricultural plantations growing crops of sugar,
cotton and tobacco. This notorious commerce in human beings lasted
altogether for more than four hundred years, since the Atlantic
slave-trade did not come to end until the late 1870's.

**“**Much can be said about the way that the Atlantic slave-trade was
organised in Europe, and about the vast profits made by countries such
as England and France. A lot can also be said about the terrible journey
from Africa to America across the Atlantic Ocean. Africans were packed
like sardines on the slave-ships, and consequently died in great
numbers.**”**[^2]

And what a sardine! For details of these packing, read the following:

One of the most chilling of all the appalling documents is 'The Plan of
the Brookes', a notorious eighteenth-century scheme for stacking slaves
into the slave-ship 'Brookes'...By a precise mathematical calculation,
the technology of horror is laid out - feet and inches, standing room
and breathing space assigned with lethal concern for maximum profit. A
Mr. Jones recommends that 'five females be reckoned as four males, and
three boys or girls as equal to two grown persons. ..every man slave is
to he allowed six feet by one foot four inches for room, every woman
five feet ten by one foot four...', and so it continues until every
scrap of flesh is accommodated - 451 in number. But an Act of Parliament
allows for 454. So the document concludes that, 'if three more could be
wedged among the number represented in the plan, this plan would contain
precisely the number which the act directs.'[^3]

![](/sites/default/files/plant-of-the-slave.png)

Once the Africans landed on the other side of the Atlantic, they were
really in a **“**New World**”**, full of oppression and brutality. The
following revelations may be helpful in understanding the situation
prevailing at that time. Rodney writes:

**“**From the time of the arrival of the [Christian] Europeans until
1600, about one million Africans were carried away in slave-ships.
During that period, the Portuguese were the chief slave-traders in West
Africa. They either took Africans to Brazil, which they owned, or else
they sold them to the Spanish settlers in Mexico, Central America, South
America and the Caribbean Islands. In the seventeenth century, some
seven to eight million West Africans found their way across the
Atlantic. The Dutch joined the Portuguese as the leading slave-traders
in the seventeenth century, and in the following century the British
were the biggest slave-traders. By the time that the Atlantic
slave-trade was at its height in the eighteenth century, British ships
were carrying more than half of the total of slaves, leaving the rest to
be divided up between the Dutch, the French, the Portuguese and the
Danes.

**“**By the nineteenth century, there was another change of the people
who took the leading role in exploiting Africa. The European countries
themselves were not as active in the slave-trade, but instead Europeans
who had settled in Brazil, Cuba and North America were the ones who
organised a large part of the trade. The Americans had recently gained
their independence from Britain, and it was the new nation of the United
States of America which played the biggest part in the last fifty years
of the Atlantic slave-trade, taking away slaves at a greater rate than
ever before.

**“**When the Atlantic slave-trade began on the West African coast, it
took the form of directed attacks by Europeans on Africans living near
the shore. When the first Portuguese sailors reached the coast of what
is Mauritania, they left their ships and hunted the Moors who lived in
that region. In reality, this was not trade at all - it was violent
aggression. However, after being surprised on a few occasions, the
Africans on the coast naturally kept watch for their European attackers
and defended themselves vigorously.

Within a very short while, the Portuguese came to realise that raiding
was a very unsafe manner of trying to obtain slaves. Besides, they also
wanted gold and other African commodities, which they could acquire only
by trading peacefully. So instead of raiding, the Portuguese considered
offering the manufactured goods in order to encourage the Africans to
exchange local products and to bring African captive to the European
ships. Not only the Portuguese, but all other Europeans found that from
their point of view this was the best way to obtain goods in Africa; and
it was in this way that they laid their hands on so many million
Africans.**”**[^4]

Commenting on this aspect of the slave-trade the writer says that,
**“**One of the most important things is to recognise the very painful
and unpleasant fact that there were Africans who aided and partnered the
Europeans in enslaving other Africans. It means that we cannot take the
simple attitude that the whites were the villains and blacks were the
victims. A useful parallel which would help in the understanding of what
took place in West Africa during the centuries of slave-trading can be
found in Africa today, where many leaders join with the European and
American imperialists to exploit the great majority of the African
people.

**“**In the long run, West Africans were reduced to the state of 'sell
or be sold'. Here the question of firearms was particularly important.
To be strong, a state needed firearms, but to get firearms from the
Europeans, the Africans had to offer slaves. African rulers found
themselves selling slaves to get guns to catch slaves to buy more guns.
This can be described as a 'vicious circle'. It does not entirely excuse
the African rulers who helped the Europeans, but it explains how in the
end they were not so much the partners of the Europeans but rather their
servants or lackeys.**”**[^5]

And what was the church doing all that time? Hear the same author
commenting: **“**Because there was so much profit to be made by taking
slaves from Africa, Europeans refused to listen to their consciences.
They knew about the suffering that was inflicted upon people in Africa,
on the slave-ships and on the slave-plantations of the Americas, and
they were aware that to sell their fellow human beings could not be
morally justified.

Yet the Christian church came forward with excuses for the slave-trade.
Many priests themselves carried on slave-trading, especially in Angola,
and many others owned slaves in the Americas. The only reason the
Catholic Church could give for its actions was that it was trying to
save African souls by baptising the slaves. The Protestants were worse,
for they did not even make it clear that they accepted that the Africans
had a soul. Instead, they supported the view that African slave was a
piece of property like furniture or a domestic animal. There is no part
of the history of the Christian church which was more disgraceful than
its support of the Atlantic slave-trade. **“**[^6]

According to the Lloyd's List, slaves were most decidedly considered to
be a cargo, and very precious. Policies taken out at Lloyd's insured
slaves for as much as 45 pounds each - a considerable sum in early 18th
century England.

![](/sites/default/files/slave-device.png)

To prevent them escaping, or to punish them, extraordinary devices such
as shown here were used both in West Africa and the West Indies.[^7]

There were always a few individuals who protested against the Atlantic
slave-trade right from the beginning; but governments and traders paid
no attention to them during the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. It was not until the late eighteenth century that serious
attempts were made to put a stop to this trade.

James Boswell, trying to refute the arguments of abolitionists, writes
in his *Life of Johnson* that, **“**The wild and dangerous attempt which
has for some time been persisted in order to obtain an act of our
legislature, to abolish so very important and necessary branch of
commercial interest, must have been crused at once, had not the
insignificance of the zealots who vainly took the lead in it, made the
vast body of Planters, Merchants, and others, whose immense properties
are involved in that trade, reasonably enough suppose that there could
be no danger. The encouragement which the attempt has received excites
my wonder and indignation; and though some men of superior abilities
have supported it, whether from a love of temporary popularity, when
prosperous; or a love of general mischief, when desperate, my opinion is
unshaken.

To abolish a status which in all ages God has sanctioned, and man has
continued, would not only be robbery to an innumerable class of our
fellow-subjects; but it would be extreme cruelty to the African Savages,
a portion of whom it saves from massacre, or intolerable bondage in
their own country, and introduces into a much happier state of life;
especially now when their passage to the West Indies and their treatment
there is humanely regulated. To abolish that trade would be to shut the
gates of mercy on mankind.**”**[^8] The humanely regulated treatment and
mercy shows itself in the details and diagrams given above!

[^1]: Alpers, Edward A., East African Slave-Trade (Dar-es-salaam: The
Historical Association of Tanzania, 1967), p. (?)

[^2]: Rodney, Walter., West African and the Atlantic Slave-Trade
(Dar-es-salaam: The Historical Association of Tanzania, 1967) p. (?)

[^3]: Newsweek (March 15, 1965) p. 106.

[^4]: Rodney, op. cit., pp. 4-5.

[^5]: Ibid, p. 7f.

[^6]: Ibid, p. 22.

[^7]: Lloyd's List, 250th Anniversary Special (1734-1984), April 17,
1984, London, p.149.

[^8]: Boswell, J., Life of Johnson (N.Y.: Modern Library Edition, 1965)
p. 365.


