Cooperation (Muwasaat) In Islam
===============================

"*Muwasaat* "means helping brethren in Islam and extending material
support to them. It has a great importance in religion due to the reason
that it plays a vital role in the betterment of depressed classes and
creates feeling of love amongst Muslims. It is considered as an
essential virtue of every Muslim and brings divine blessings in return.

Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a. s.) said:  
 Seek nearness to Almighty Allah through helping your (Muslim)
brothers.[^1]

The Holy Prophet in one of his testaments to \`Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
said:

The most commendable are three deeds:-First is being just to the people
even against yourself. Secondly, cooperation and material help to
(Muslim) brothers. Thirdly, remembrance of Allah in all
circumstances.[^2]

Al-Imam \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) said:  
 Helping the brothers-in-Allah (fellow Muslims) increases
sustenance.[^3]

Al-Waqidi, the famous historian of al-Mamun's period, narrates: "I had
two very close friends, one of whom was a Hashimite. Truly speaking, we
were one spirit in three bodies. Once, on the occasion of *\`id*
(Islamic festival), I was reduced to poverty. My wife told me that we
could face together all the hardships boldly, but her heart was burning
for the children. They were looking at other children wearing new
dresses and making jubilant preparation for \`id; whereas their lot was
worn and torn clothes. She asked me, if possible, to arrange some money
for buying dresses for them.

I thought and thought but could not find any way of obtaining money. At
last, I wrote a letter to my Hashimite friend for help. My friend sent
me a sealed packet containing one thousand Dirhams. Before I could open
the packet, a message came from my second friend with a request of help,
I sent him the same packet intact and went to the mosque, heart-broken
and depressed, I passed the whole night in the mosque as I could not
bring myself to face my wife. But when I went home next morning, to my
great surprise, my wife welcomed me with a smiling face and expressed
her unbounded pleasure for the help I had rendered to my friend.

It was then that my Hashimite friend came to me and asked me what I had
done with the money he had sent me the day before. I narrated to him the
whole story. He bent his head for a moment, then told me that on receipt
of my message, he had sent me whatever he had, but then to meet his own
requirements he wrote to the third friend for help. The third friend
sent him the same sealed packet. My first friend was extremely puzzled
by this mystery, till I solved it."

Al-Waqidi further adds: "Then we divided that amount equally amongst us
at the rate of three hundred Dirhams each, and the remaining one hundred
Dirhams was the share of my wife. Caliph al-Ma'mun hearing this unique
story called me, and I narrated the whole event. Al-Ma'mun awarded us
two thousand Dirhams each and one thousand to my wife."[^4]

This historical event describes the feeling of a few Muslims who had
learnt their lessons from the Qur'an. See how the spirit of cooperation
and fraternity had enlivened their lives as a result of Islamic
teachings.

The early history of Islam is full of such events that clearly show the
spirit of fraternity and brotherhood that governed the whole life of the
Muslims.

In the battle of Uhud, which was one of the most hard-fought battles of
Islam, the Muslims set high examples of self-sacrifice and many of them
were martyred, fighting bravely.

Many of them fell in the battlefield half alive amongst them were seven
stalwarts, fatally injured every breath seemed the last breath. All of
them were feeling the pangs of thirst. Someone came to them with a small
quantity of water, hardly sufficient for a single soul.

The water-bearer offered drink to one of them but he directed him
towards the next Muslim brother lying by his side. This second soldier
sent him to the third one who directed him to the fourth; and so it went
on till he reached the seventh soldier. When the seventh soldier was
approached, he told him that since the first soldier was very thirsty,
he should be given water first.

The water-bearer then returned to the first soldier and found that he
had died. Then he went to the second and third who also had expired.
This happened with each of them, till approaching the last soldier he
found that meanwhile he also had died. All of them died thirsty setting
excellent practical example of Islamic brotherhood and self-sacrifice.

This is a lesson from the school of the Holy Prophet that was followed
by his true followers in every walk of life even under the most
difficult circumstances.

It is an irony of fate that we have abandoned such spiritual teachings
and golden principles and drifting with the current of non-cooperation
and selfishness which are undoubtedly the gift of un-Islamic societies.
Let us keep in mind that this trend is a violation of Islamic ideology,
and Muslims should never turn deaf ears to the hardships and problems of
their fellow-Muslims.

The Holy Prophet said:

One who starts his day without caring (about) the affairs of the
Muslims, is not a Muslim.[^5]

Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

The best amongst you are those who are generous and the worst are the
misers; one of the most desired deeds is to do good to Muslim brethren
and try to fulfil their needs. This deed weakens Satan, safeguards
against the Fire (of Hell) and leads one to Paradise.[^6]

A man approached the Holy Prophet of Islam and complained of hunger. The
Holy Prophet sent someone to the houses of his families but,
unfortunately, none of the families had any food.

The Holy Prophet then turned to those who were in his presence and
asked, "Who can host this man tonight?" al-Imam \`Ali (a.s.) offered his
services, took his hand and left for his house.

Then he asked his wife, Sayyidah Fatimah (a.s.), "What food do we have?"
She replied, "A little provision enough for children only." \`Ali (a.s.)
told her, "The guest must be considered first before ourselves and the
children." Fatimah (a.s.) had to make a great effort to put her children
to sleep since they were hungry. \`Ali (a.s.) offered the guest whatever
he had, and, pretending to set the lamp right, put it out; he invited
the guest to the food in the darkness of the room and himself sat there
pretending he was also eating, though, in fact, he did not take a single
morsel. 'Ali, Fatimah and their children fed the guest for the pleasure
of Allah and remained hungry themselves.

Allah praises their sacrifice in these words:

***. . . And they give (others) preference over themselves, even though
poverty be their own lot . . . (Qur'an, 59:9)***

Of course, this type of self-denial is not possible for every one; and
only a man like 'Ali (a.s.) could perform such deeds. Islam, therefore,
does not compel its followers to do similar deeds.

What actually Islam has made compulsory is brotherhood and cooperation,
which means that a Muslim must help his Muslim brother if he is in
hardship and trouble. A part of his resources should be reserved for the
benefit of needy persons. He must visit sick persons and sympathize with
them, should be like a father to orphans, and should participate in all
works of general welfare, and should be helpful to those in distress.

A Greek remained with \`Ali (a.s.) for a considerable period, making
inquiries about Islam. Once he was convinced of the truth of Islam, he
embraced Islam at the hands of \`Ali (a.s.). Then, \`Ali (a.s.) informed
him about his duties as a Muslim. During that discourse, he said:

I direct you to help your brethren who are the followers of Muhammad
(peace be upon him and his progeny) and mine, assist them from the
wealth which Allah has given you, fulfil their needs, redress their
troubles and behave with them, with friendship and love.[^7]

Al-Imam \`Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (a.s.) said:

It is the duty of a believer towards another believer to have his love
in his heart, to assist him with his wealth, and to stand by his side
against one who does injustice to him . . . He should never trouble,
deceive, cheat, abandon or backbite him, nor tell a lie to him . . . One
who presents a dress to his Muslim brother, Allah will reward him with a
robe of paradise; and one who lends money to his Muslim brother for the
pleasure of Allah, gets the reward of charity in return; and one who
relieves his religious brother from pain and distress, Allah will
relieve him of the pain of the next world.[^8]

Safwan al-Jammal narrates: "While I was sitting with al-Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) a Meccan arrived and told him that he had no money to
return to his home. The Imam directed me to help that person. After
great efforts, I arranged the fare for him and returned to the Imam. The
Imam asked, \`What did you do about your brother?' 'By the grace of
Allah his need was fulfilled,' I replied. The Imam said, 'Know that
helping a Muslim brother is more liked by me than doing *tawaf*
(circumambulation) of the House of Allah for seven times.' The Imam then
added:

" 'A man approached al-Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) with the request of help.
The Imam at once put on his shoes and went with him. They passed on the
way a place where al-Imam al-Husayn (a. s.) was engaged in prayers.
al-Imam al -Hasan asked the person, "Why did you not approach al-Husayn
to alleviate your troubles?' He replied, 'O son of the Messenger of
Allah, I wanted to go to him; but I was informed that he was in i'tikaf
(meditation), therefore, I did not go to him.' The Imam said, \`Had he
got the opportunity to help you it would have been far better for him
than one month's i'tikaf.' [^9]"

Al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a. s.) said:  
 Whenever a Muslim fulfils the needs of a Muslim brother, Allah says,
"Your reward is upon me, and I will not be happy with less than Paradise
for you."[^10]

A Shi'ah of Kufah (Iraq) named 'Abdu 'lA'la left for Medina. The
followers of al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) gave him their problems in
writing and asked him to bring the replies from the Imam. Also they
asked him to request the Imam to explain the rights which a Muslim has
upon other Muslim brethren.

'Abdu'l-A'la says that when he reached the Imam, he replied to all the
questions but did not say anything about the rights of Muslims upon each
other. He went to the Imam several times, but still there was silence.
At the end of his stay he went to take leave of the Imam and said that
that particular question of that day was still unanswered.

The Imam said: "I deliberately avoided this issue." 'Abdu'l-A'la asked,
"Why?" The Imam said, "Because I am afraid that if I tell you the same
and you do not follow it faithfully, you will go against the religion of
Allah." Then, the Imam explained: "Verily, the most difficult of the
things which Allah has obliged his servants to do, are three things:

"First, doing justice between himself and others; it means that he
should do to others as he wants done to himself.

"Second, he should help his Muslim brethren by assisting them with his
wealth.

"Third, he should always remember Allah. And when I say \`should
remember Allah,' I do not mean that he should always recite subhana
'llah (Glory to Allah) and al-hamdu li'llah (Praise belongs to Allah).
But I mean that if he intends to do an unlawful deed, he must remember
Allah and refrain from that sin."[^11]

These teachings had such an influence on the lives of the followers of
Islam that their noble behaviour could not be compared with any other
nation, as we have seen some examples in the preceding pages; history is
full of stories of such brotherhood and cooperation.

Centuries have passed since the dawn of Islam and the world has achieved
what is called technical and scientific development; but these human
virtues are conspicuous by their absence in those so-called advanced
countries.

One of the writers, writes about mutual relationship of the Europeans:
"Relationship between the people is cold and devoid of deep-rooted
affection. Sincere and heart-felt love, which is one of the noble
emotions and brightens the life, appears to be lost in the
machine-wheels of industries. They are not aware of sympathy, let alone
self-sacrifice, and probably the friends of an individual may be counted
on fingers.

When I was admitted to a hospital in Germany the number of my visitors
was not great; still it could be said that I had more visitors than all
the patients in that hospital. This was a matter of wonder and interest
to the staff of the hospital, because it was extremely rare that a
German came to visit any sick person even of his own family. It will be
pertinent to mention an interesting incident which is a living example
of "love" and "fraternity" in civilized nations.

"A few years ago, a professor of a German University, embraced Islam at
the hands of the President of Islamic Community at Hamburg. After
sometime, he became sick and was admitted in a hospital for treatment.
The President of Islamic Community came to know of his illness and went
to see him at the hospital. He found the professor in a sad and pathetic
mood, and asked him to explain the cause of so much sorrow.

The professor, who had not said a single word yet and seemed lost in his
forebodings, now narrated this incredible story: “Today my wife and son
came to see me. They were informed by the officials of the hospital that
I was suffering from cancer. While departing they told me that since
cancer had brought me at the verge of death and I could not survive more
than a few days, they bid me good-bye and wished to be excused from
visiting me again.' Then the patient continued. ' My spiritual torture
and apparent sorrow is not because the door of hope is shut before me
and I am expecting to die soon; but it is because of the unjust and
inhumane attitude of my wife and son which is more torturing than the
warrant of death.'

The President of Islamic Community was greatly touched by his pitiable
condition and told him: 'Islam has emphasized on visiting the patients;
and I will keep on visiting you whenever I get some free time, and will
perform my religious duties.' These words consoled the tortured
professor to a great extent.

His condition was fast deteriorating and he died after a few days. The
President of Islamic Community made arrangement for his burial according
to Islam and some Muslims went to the hospital and brought the dead body
to the graveyard. While burial was in progress, a young man in a furious
mood came rushing and enquired about the dead body of the professor.

“But what relation do you have with the deceased?' People asked him.
\`Well, he was my father and I have come to hand over his dead body to
the hospital, because just before his death, I had sold his body to the
hospital for thirty Marks.'

Though he tried to create much trouble, as the Muslims did not yield, he
had to surrender. When asked of his occupation, the young man said that
he worked in a factory in the mornings and decorated dogs in the
afternoons."

This bitter incident shows how much the so-called civilized world has
become devoid of human affection and love.

Today, retrogression of humanity from the viewpoint of moral values and
the overwhelming evils of society cannot be glossed over. Great
thinkers, while admitting this bitter fact, are looking to find a
remedy; and are very much worried because of this undesirable condition.
They realize the malady and appreciate that a new world can only be
created if the present day lawlessness and permissiveness are removed
and the foundation of the new society is laid upon faith and virtues.

The people surrounded by this type of society admit that their life is
an empty one; and that this kind of living cannot bring humanity to any
good. It will be better for you to hear this confession from General
Dwight D. Eisenhower, as U.S.A. President, when he was taking the oath
of his office:  
 "Our affluent society rests on shaky moral grounds. We reach the moon
and pollute the earth. We long for peace and go to war. An age that has
split the atom must heal the splits in humanity. Empty hands must be
filled with work, empty stomachs with food, and empty hearts with
satisfaction. To cure the moral crisis that blights our world, each of
us need only look to ourselves. If we each listen to the still small
voice of conscience we shall soon perceive that simple basic things,
like goodness, purity, unselfishness, love, integrity, are our greatest
and most priceless treasure."

When one looks at these facts, one is bound to stand respectfully before
the Law-giver of Islam.

The Lawgiver, giving full consideration to all materials, spiritual and
natural requirements of human beings, has brought the excellent laws
that are in complete harmony with basic human nature and fulfil all its
needs. These laws have been acted upon for centuries and have produced
happy results.

The laws were not just some letters in books; but were enforced both in
letter and spirit, and their enforcement did not create any problem.

In the end, it should be remembered that all Muslims are duty-bound to
propagate the teachings of Islam in their pristine purity. Especially,
they must acquaint their youths with these divine teachings, so that the
spirit of brotherhood and cooperation (which is a living factor of
Muslim society) becomes stronger and stronger; and under the protection
of that brotherhood and cooperation we march forward to prosperity and
happiness.

[^1]: al-Khisal, by ash-Shaykh as-Saduq, vol. l, p.8.

[^2]: al-Khisal, vol. l, p.l25

[^3]: al-Khisal, vol. 2, p.505

[^4]: Muruju 'dh-dhahab by Mas'udi, Beirut l966, vol.3, p.446

[^5]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p.l63

[^6]: Amali, ash-Shaykh at-Tusi, vol. l, p.66

[^7]: al-Ihtijaj, at-Tabarsi, vol.l, p. 354

[^8]: Biharu 'l- anwar, vol. 74, pp.232-233

[^9]: al-Kafi, vol.2, p.l98

[^10]: Qurbu 'l-isnad, p. l9

[^11]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p.l70; Biharu 'l-anwar, vol. 74, p. 242


