"Being Careful with the Goddess: Yoginis in Persian and Arabic Texts”
=====================================================================

When the Italian traveler Pietro della Valle stopped at the western
Indian city of Cambay in 1624, he took the opportunity to visit a temple
outside of town which was the resort of many yogis. He was fascinated
with their appearance and practices, and he continually sought them out
during his tour of western and southern India. After describing them in
detail in his memoirs, he added a long account of their practices:

They have spiritual Exercises after their way, and also some exercise of
Learning, but (by what I gather from a Book of theirs translated
into*Persian* , and intitl'd,*Damerdbigiaska* , and, as the Translator
saith, a rare piece) both their exercises of wit and their Learning
consist onely in Arts of Divination, Secrets of Herbs, and other natural
things, and also in Magick and Inchantments, whereunto they are much
addicted, and boast of doing great wonders. I include their spiritual
exercises herein because, according to the aforesaid Book, they think
that by the means of those exercises, Prayers, Fastings and the like
superstitious things, they come to Revelations; which indeed are nothing
else but correspondence with the Devil, who appears to and deludes them
in sundry shapes, forewarning them sometimes of things to come. Yea
sometimes they have carnal commerce with him, not believing, or at least
not professing, that 'tis the Devil; but that there are certain
Immortal, Spiritual, Invisible Women, to the number of forty [*sic* ],
known to them and distinguisht by various forms, names and operations,
whom they reverence as Deities, and adore in many places with strange
worship. . And of the Sciences of the*Gioghi* [jogi or yogi], and their
spiritual exercises, especially of a curious way, rather superstitious
than natural, of Divining by the breathing of a Man, wherein they have
indeed many curious and subtle observations, which I upon tryal have
found true, if any would know more, I refer him to the Book above
mention'd, which I intend to carry with me for a Rarity into*Italy* ;
and, if I shall find convenience, I shall one day gratifie the Curious
with a sight of it in a Translation.[^1]

Della Valle's account of a Persian text on yoga, containing techniques
for summoning feminine deities, and for divination by observation of
breathing, is a striking curiosity. What Indian traditions of yoga does
this book represent? Under what circumstances would books have been
written in Persian on yogic techniques that include summoning female
spirits? How would a translator prepare a Persian-reading audience for
this kind of subject, and what kind of Islamicate categories would be
used to present material such as yoga and feminine deities?

Della Valle was fluent in Turkish, Arabic, and Persian, so his plan to
translate the work from Persian into his native Italian might have
yielded the first European study of an Islamic interpretation of yoga.
It is remarkable that, despite his theological criticism of the yogis,
he found their divination and breathing practices to be effective; in
this respect his ambivalence matches that of several Muslim students of
yoga. Unfortunately della Valle seems not to have fulfilled this
translation project, for he only briefly discussed his collection of
Oriental manuscripts in correspondence with European savants.[^2] The
Persian text just described was among the codices that he brought back
with him to Italy; the list of his oriental manuscripts, donated to the
Vatican in 1718 by della Valle's heir Rinaldo de Bufalo, it was
described as "a book on magic, translated from the Indian into the
Persian language."[^3] This work is still preserved in the Vatican
library.[^4]

What was the origin of della Valle's text? The title that he gave
appears to be quite garbled.[^5] Nevertheless, it is possible to
reconstruct the title of this text, from comparison of the six
occurrences of the title in the manuscript with the description of
another copy preserved in Islamabad:  the original name must have
been*Kamru bijaksa* , or*The Kamarupa* *Seed Syllables* .[^6] What is
especially striking is that della Valle's copy appears to have been
copied for his personal use in June 1622, two years**before** he arrived
in India. This copy was made in the southern Persian city of Lar, where
della Valle lingered for some months, engaging in scientific discussion
and theological polemics with Persian Shi\`i scholars.[^7] In other
words, this Persian treatise on yogic breathing and divination
techniques was circulating independently in intellectual circles in
Iran, from which della Valle learned of it and acquired a copy for
himself. He was ready for the yogis before he arrived in India.

On the basis of content, it is more than tempting to connect this
treatise to the yogic text most widely known in Islamicate circles,
the*Amrtakunda* or*The Pool of Nectar* , a lost hatha yoga text known
from an Arabic version which was twice translated into Persian, as well
as into Ottoman Turkish and Urdu.[^8] In fact,*The Kamarupa* *Seed
Syllables* was circulating independently in Iran, prior to the
translation of*The Pool of Nectar* , since it was quoted in a
fourteenth-century Persian encyclopedia (the*Nafa'is al-funun* of
Amuli).[^9] The practices described in della Valle's book, particularly
divination by breath control, and the forty-odd female deities (clearly
an inaccurate recollection of the sixty-four Yoginis) overlap
significantly in content with chapters II and IX of*The Pool of Nectar*
. An examination of della Valle's Persian manuscript bears out some of
these assumptions. The text in fact contains a description of sixty-four
female magicians (not forty, as he recalled in his memoirs)
corresponding to the cult of sixty-four yoginis; their leader is called
Kamak Dev, in whom we can recognize Kamakhya (Sanskrit Kamaksa) Devi,
the fierce Tantric goddess of Assam, who is mentioned by Muhammad Ghawth
Gwaliyari as a source of yogic teaching in his Persian translation
of*The Pool of Nectar* . Other similarities include frequent reference
to the water of life (8b, 18b, 19a, 20b, 23a, 28a), the rituals of
oblation (*homa* ) and mantra recitation (*japa* ) (37b, 38a, 41b), the
use of mandalas (38a, 40b), visualization of diagrams associated with
the cakras, the sun and moon breaths (10b), five kinds of breath
associated with the elements (11a), and the summoning of the yoginis,
some of whose names are the same as those found in*The Pool of Nectar* .
The main difference is that*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* provides at
least ten times the number of examples, making it something like a large
recipe-book for occultists.

An explicit link with*The Pool of Nectar* is suggested by a partial
though untitled version of*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* , found in a
single manuscript.[^10] This copy contains only material on divination
by breath, corresponding to chapter II of the Arabic text of*The Pool of
Nectar* , and it closely matches a section in della Valle's manuscript
(11a-14a). It differs in being further subdivided into six sections: 1)
incantations, 2) answering questioners, 3) predicting good outcomes, 4)
the signs of death, 5) love and hate, and 6) breath and positions. The
first line of the manuscript begins abruptly by stating, "This is a copy
of*The Ocean of Life* from the Indian (*hindawi* ) language, and it was
put into Persian. In the Indian language they call it*Ahrat*
[i.e.,*Amrtakunda* ).” This comment suggests that the editor of this
version recognized that*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* was closely related
to*The Ocean of Life* , which was the title of the Persian translation
of*The Pool of Nectar* by Muhammad Ghawth. While it is not possible at
this point to be any firmer about the historical relationship between
the different Persian translations, it seems likely that*The Kamarupa
Seed Syllables* represents some of the same yogic and divination
traditions that are found in*The Pool of Nectar* , but here they are
presented with considerable elaboration.

We do not, however, know the origin of this*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables*
. The title suggests a focus on the seed syllables, the fundamental
units of the mantra, which play such an important part in yogic and
tantric traditions. The allusion to Kamarupa in the title solidifies its
connection with the mythical origin of esoteric knowledge, nominally
associated with the region of Assam. Little information is provided by
the author, except a constant refrain on the book's great importance.

Thus says the translator of the book: In India I saw many books with
complete information about every science. Most of their books are in
verse, because they memorize verse better, and one's nature inclines to
it more. I found a book which they call*Kamru bijaksa* , which is one of
their choicest books; they have great faith in this. It contains two
types of science. One is the science of magical imagination (*wahm* )
and discipline (*riyadat* ); they have no kind of science that is
greater or more powerful than this. On the basis of this science they
affirm things that intellect does not accept, but they believe in it,
and among them it is customary. For each of these things they adduce and
show a thousand proofs and demonstrations. Regarding the subject of this
science, this is a summary, which they have affirmed.

The other is a science that they call*s[v]aroda* [i.e., divination].
Their scholars and sages observe their breath; if their breath goes
well, they perform their tasks, but if the breath goes ill, they do no
work, but strenuously avoid it. They have taken this subject to the
height of perfection. The common people of India know nothing of this,
and they are not privy to this secret, nor do they know anything. They
call this the science of [reading] thought (Arabic*damir* ) (fols.
2a-2b).

As with*The Pool of Nectar* , here we are confronted with a powerful
book, alleged to be of the highest authority in India, though in the
same breath we are told that it is secret and known only to a few. The
translator frequently returns to both the themes of the book's
scriptural authority and its hidden esoteric character throughout the
work. Thus in another passage he writes,

This book is known throughout India, and among the Hindus no book is
nobler than this. Whoever learns this book and knows its explanation is
counted as a great scholar and wise man. They serve him, and whoever is
occupied with the theory and practice of this they call a jogi and
respect him greatly. They serve him just like we respect the saints and
the masters of struggle and discipline (15b).

The translator speaks of information gathered from Brahmin informants,
regarding practices such as employing the "greatest name (Persian*ism-i
a\`zam* )" of God (40b) and summoning the goddess Lakshmi for sexual
relations (43b), and he testifies to his own success in employing these
techniques. In addition, on several occasions the translator cites
another text, which he refers to "the thirty-two verses of Kamak Dev,"
which may have been a separately circulating text with similar
contents.[^11] He frequently emphasizes the verse character of the
original, and several Hindi*doha* verses are quoted in Persian script
(26b, 27a, 29a). The translator stresses the difficulty of the task of
translation. "Then I rendered it from the Indian language to the Persian
language, taking many pains, and it was read to a group of brahmins and
scholars, and it was compared, corrected, and clarified (16a)." Despite
this advertisement of scholarly authority, which makes suspicious use of
the terminology of Arabic literary production, on other occasions the
translator confesses that the material he is dealing with is more than
obscure. After giving a lengthy Hindi passage in Arabic script, he
remarks, "I presented these verses to a group of the scholars of India,
brahmins, and jogis, and they could not explain it, but were incapable
of understanding it, for the words are strange and difficult" (27a).
Thus it is not clear to what extent*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables*
represents a single text or a selection from yogic verses available from
oral sources but represented as scripture. The organization of the book
is not entirely clear. The first part of the book is divided into four
sections, on procedures for asking questions (4a), on reading thoughts
(5b), on detecting the signs of death (6b), and on love and hate (8b).
Then comes what appears to be a major division or iteration, a heading
that reads in large letters "The Book of Magical Imagination, from the
Writings of the Sages of India" (14b). Only two other section headings
follow: one on breath and magical imagination (16a), and another on the
yogini cult (30b), which occupies nearly the last half of the book.

How does this text relate to Islamic themes?*The Pool of Nectar*
postulates that famous Indian yogis are the equivalents for Elijah,
Jonah, and Khidr.*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* in contrast merely
records the Hindi mantras transmitted by these three Muslim prophets,
adding one more from Abraham. This text does, however, provide a new
equivalence: the Sanskrit seed mantra*hrim* (invariably represented in
Arabic script as*rhin* ) now becomes identified with the Arabic name of
God*rahim* , "the merciful." This is an interesting esoteric variant on
the common pun on the Hindu and Muslim names for God, Ram and Rahim. The
minor spiritual beings called "digit of the moon" (*indu-rekha* ) in
Hindi are rendered by the Persian term for angel (*firishta* ) (53b).
The text demonstrates an unselfconscious domestication of yogic
practices in an Islamicate society. Among the breath prognostications,
for instance, one learns to approach "the*qadi* [Islamic judge] or
the*amir* [prince]" for judgment or litigation only when the breath from
the right nostril is favorable. Casual references mention Muslim
magicians, or practices that may be performed either in a Muslim or a
Hindu graveyard (47b), or else in an empty temple or mosque (49b), and
occasionally one is told to recite a Qur'anic passage such as the Throne
Verse (Qur. 2:255), or to perform a certain action after the Muslim
evening prayer. We even hear of a Muslim from Broach who successfully
summoned a yogini and participated in the rites of her devotees (37a).
The text is provided with an overall Islamic frame, through a standard
invocation of God and praise of the Prophet at the beginning:

Praise and adoration to that God who brought so many thousands of arts
and wonders from the secrecy of non-existence into the courtyard of
existence, and who adorned the sublime court with luminous bodies, who
made the abodes of spiritual beings, and who commanded the manifestation
of the sublunar world with varieties of plants and minerals, and who
made the residence and resort of animals, and who chose from all the
animals humanity, creating it in the best of forms, giving the cry: "We
have created humanity in the finest of stations" (Qur. 95:4), "so bless
God, the finest of creators" (Qur. 23:14). Many blessings and countless
salutations on the pure and holy essence of the leader of the world, the
best of the children of Adam, the blessings of God and peace be upon
him, and upon them all.

Likewise at the end, a quotation of a hadith saying and some mystical
allusions furnish a religious coloring for the magical practices (55a).
These practices remain fundamentally ambiguous, however. "If one to whom
this door is opened makes the claim, he will be a prophet; if he is
good, he will be a saint; and if he is evil, he will be a magician"
(55a). As a generalization I would like to observe that for the average
Persian reader, the contents of*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* fell into
the category of the occult sciences, and its Indic origin would have
only enhanced its esoteric allure. The text employs standard Arabic
terms for astral magic (*tanjim* ), the summoning of spirits (*ihdar* )
(30b, 37b), and the subjugation (*taskhir* ) of demons, fairies, and
magicians.[^12] Thus there would be a familiar quality about the text,
even when these techniques are employed for summoning the spirits known
in India as yoginis. The chants or mantras of the yogis are repeatedly
referred to as spells (*afsun* ), a term of magical significance. We
also read of recognizably magical techniques such as one using a nail
made from bone (51a) that is employed nefariously with a voodoo-type
doll (51b). Another recipe uses a comb made from the right paw of a mad
dog killed with iron, in rituals performed at a cremation ground
(48b-49a).

The portrait of Indian wisdom or religion that emerges from the pages of
this manuscript is eccentric. It rests first of all on the authority of
Kamakhya, a goddess from Assam (Kamarupa) who is the stuff of legend.
Here is an account of her:

Kamak is a spiritual woman who is long-lived, and the Hindus call
spiritual beings*dev* . This Kamak Dev is in the city of Kamru, in a
cave which is in the middle of the mountains. Her followers go into that
cave, and some of them see her. Every day they send much food from that
city, and they leave it by the door of the cave and go back. Another
time when they go, they see nothing [remaining]. They say that the
servants of Kamak have taken it, and this is true. I have seen many
people who have gone to that place, and heard them confirm this. This
much explanation is sufficient, so that this science will not be deemed
worthless and viewed with contempt, because this is a great science. Now
I, the expert, am engaged in clarifying it, and I will explain this
whole science (10a).

Elsewhere he describes this cave as only accessible to magicians, and he
gives its dimensions as one*farsang* by one*farsang* . "When someone
enters that cave, he goes in darkness until he reaches the end of that
cave. He sees lamps and a clean, fragrant, beautiful place (15a)." Kamru
is described as a faraway land, "in an island at the end of India and in
the midst of the China Sea," and it is the source of many exotic items
of trade. The cave of Kamakhya is said to have a stone nearby that emits
a white fluid (34b-35a).[^13] Kamakhya herself is cited as a source for
various details of yogic practice. But the real point of her narrative
is to get to the sixty-four yoginis.

The worship of the female deities known as yoginis seems to have been at
its height in India from the 9th to the 12th centuries, but it continued
in various places until at least the 18th century.[^14] Vidya Dehejia
has described at length the open-air yogini temples found at remote
sites where these deities were honored.[^15] *The Kamarupa Seed
Syllables* describes the yoginis as the key to knowledge of all things.
At the beginning of the section on breath, we are told,

So say those sixty-four women, "By the command of God (who is great and
majestic), who one day gave us this science, we shall not speak of this
science. By the God by whose command the 18,000 worlds exist, this is an
oath, that this is the science of magical imagination, for whatever is
in the earth and heaven is in the grasp of the children of Adam. We tell
everything, for everything that goes on in all the world is all known
and clear by the science of magical imagination" (16a).

Furthermore, they say,

By the command of God most high, and the masterful teaching they have
taught us, between the moon and the sun one can know whatever goes on in
all the world. We teach a science of who comes, and from where, and what
he asks. Also know that this science lengthens life and makes one near
immortal (17a).

The knowledge the yoginis confer makes poison harmless, cures the sick,
removes desire, and enables one to control all persons and things in the
world. These "spiritual beings" (Persian*ruhaniyan* ) are invulnerable
to injury by sword or fire, their hair and nails cannot be cut, they
hear from a distance and travel anywhere in an instant (23b). Each of
the sixty-four yoginis has a particular spot in India, and they go to
delightful places to enjoy themselves at feasts, dressed in gold and
jewels, wearing crowns and wreaths, revered by the*dev* s; they will
never die, grow old, or get sick before the day of judgment, but all
appear to be twenty years of age (30b-31a). These beings are in fact the
principal objects of worship among the Hindus, who carve idols of them.
"Just as we have prophets, saints, and miracle workers, so the Hindus
have faith in them" (31a). Many of their names are given, though the
Persian script leaves many ambiguities: Tutla, Karkala, Tera, Tara,
Chalab, Kamak, Kalika, Diba, Darbu (31b), Antarakati (44b, 46b),
Chitraki (56a), Ganga Mati (45a), Sri Manohar (45a), Katiri (30a),
Parvati (49b), Suramati (44b), Susandari (44b), Talu (30a). Of course,
as Vidya Dehejia has pointed out, no two lists of names of yoginis are
the same. The essential thing is the canonical number of the groupings
of yoginis into 7, 8, 9, or 64.[^16] Sometimes adepts may have sexual
relations with the yoginis (39a), at other times they regard them as
sister and mother (46b). "She is the yogini and you are the yogi" (48a).
Benefits of association with them include money (44b) and food (48b).

As a comprehensive description of Indian religious practices, a
narrative limited to Kamakhya and the yoginis might seem a bit
eccentric. Brahmins are mentioned, but only as occasional sources
about*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* and its interpretation. This is
clearly a narrow sample, but what is it based on? In terms of the
categories that are available today, we could probably say that this
text reflects practices of the yogini temple cult that are associated
with Kaula tantrism.[^17] There is also some connection with the Nath or
Kanphata yogis, as indeed Matsyendranath is usually considered the
introducer of the yogini cult among the Kaulas, and the name of
Gorakhnath is invoked once (51a) in the text.[^18] Beyond that general
indication, we find multiple strands of Hindu tradition popping up in an
incidental fashion. The text assumes a system of nine cakras (yogic
subtle centers) rather than the seven cakras current in many Nath yoga
writings (19b, 20a, 25a).[^19] Meditative exercises are given that
concentrate on raising the*shakti* from the navel up the spinal column
(17b, 18a, 28a). A standard list of supernormal powers (*siddhis* ) is
provided (54a).[^20] Occasional mantras appear to contain the phrase
"Krishna avatar" (48b, 53a). We are told of the temple of Mahakala in
Ujjain where many*siddhas* or magicians are said to live (24b, 37a). The
story of Shiva (Mahadev) and the churning of the ocean is related at
length (31b-32b). Nothing is said about the animal sacrifices associated
with the Assamese shrine of Kamakhya today. The basic teachings of*The
Kamarupa Seed Syllables* , however, are use of breath for divination and
the summoning of yoginis to obtain various goals; hatha yoga meditation
is certainly linked to these practices.

From the point of view of the study of yoga, one of the most striking
aspects of the text is the presence of numerous apparent representations
of the Sanskrit alphabet, evidently made by a Persian copyist who
attempted to draw these unfamiliar characters. Some of these are words
and phrases that appear to be marginal notes incorporated into the main
text, and by default they tend to resemble Arabic numerals in style.
Others are Sanskrit letters intended for visualization, and these are
painstakingly drawn in a large format. Instructions for visualization
are as follows:

One takes this letter in the middle, and you draw this other letter,
which they call*shakti* , up from the navel with magical imagination and
thought, and bring it up, in such as a way that this letter and the
first letter are in the same place.  Imagine them in the center of the
head and gaze at them with the heart (16b).

The copying of Indic script here stands in contrast with*The Pool of
Nectar* tradition, in which Sanskrit mantras are only transliterated
(with varying degrees of success) in Arabic script.

*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* is certainly rich in the use of Indian
terminology, but one term in particular presents a riddle. This is the
Arabic-Persian term*wahm* , usually rendered as "imagination," which I
have here translated as "magical imagination." This term is also crucial
in*The Pool of Nectar* , where "magical imagination" forms the main
topic of chapter VII. There it becomes a generic term for mental and
magical powers. "It is called belief, certainty, opinion, magical
imagination, thought, fantasy, and fancy, as a single thing is named by
various words. . Answered prayer, the influence of charms, talismans,
the [divine] names, enchantment, soothsaying, and sainthood, all are
[activated] by magical imagination, and that is the work of the heart"
(VII.1). Normal Islamic discourse gives*wahm* the pejorative meaning of
"illusion" or "prejudice," and*wahm* also has various technical meanings
in Aristotelian philosophy as the "estimative faculty" (Lat.*aestimatio*
, Gk.*sunesis, phronesis* ) and "compositive imagination" (Gk.*phantasia
logistike* ). But*wahm* in the sense of "magical imagination" seems to
presuppose a correspondence with some unstated Indic term,
possibly*bhavana* ,*dharana* , or*kalpana* . It is defined in*The
Kamarupa Seed Syllables* as "the knowledge of breaths" (16a), and in the
translator's introduction magical imagination is also linked with the
term "discipline" (*riyadat* ), which is the standard Arabic-Persian
translation for yoga.

As for the larger question of the religious significance of*The Kamarupa
Seed Syllables* , this remains ambiguous. The presence of Hindu
goddesses in a text circulating in Muslim circles confounds one's
expectations.  Any acquaintance with the history of Islamic theology
would lead one to conclude that spiritual practices involving goddesses
would be anathema to Sufis whose religious loyalties lie with Islam. The
celebrated incident of the so-called "Satanic verses," memorialized in
the Salman Rushdie novel of the same name, refers to a reported incident
where the Prophet Muhammad mistakenly allowed an invocation of the three
principal goddesses of the Meccan pagans into the text of the Qur'an,
although in the report this was later expunged. Regardless of the
veracity of that account, it remains clear that multiple deities are not
tolerable in any standard Islamic theology. Yet the sophisticated
Neoplatonism of the Muslim Illuminationists in Iran (comparable to that
of, say, the Christian Platonist Marsilio Ficino in Renaissance Italy)
permitted the translation and assimilation of "pagan" themes, deities,
and practices, without a sense of radical difference.[^21] The same
process of translation evidently took place among Muslims in India as
well, with practical considerations being uppermost. Knowledge of
divination and access to the female spirits called*joginis* (yoginis)
was considered useful by Muslim rulers on military expeditions in
Gujarat in the late sixteenth century.[^22] In fact, there was probably
more interest and engagement with yoga and divination on the part of
Muslim rulers in any other sector of society, and in this respect the
cultivation of feminine spirits held a place alongside astrology and
other occult arts that might prove useful on the political and military
scene.[^23]

It is extremely difficult to make a firm line to divide religious
practice from magic. The translator of*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* drew
freely upon Islamicate vocabularies related to magic, but for him there
was no clear division between the status of the sorcerer and the saint.
It is equally difficult to resolve the text into separate Hindu and
Muslim elements. In this respect it may be compared with a Devanagari
text on omens that Simon Digby has discussed; in his view, the text
circulated in Muslim circles in western India, and was based on a
Persian original, which was in turn derived from an earlier Jain work on
omens. Based on the character of the omen predictions, Digby relates the
text to "a non-courtly environment in which men were worried about
questions of cultivation and undertaking improvements, about entering
into business partnerships and circumventing the wiles of their rivals,
about the pursuing of legal claims and the outcome of journeys, about
whether they should enter into marriages and whether their sons would
grow up and turn out well."[^24] *The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* has an
equally complicated ancestry, but there is a certain overlap in terms of
the kinds of concerns that it addresses. The translator of the text
clearly had long experience with this ensemble of practices, which he
regarded as being of great practical benefit. The divination practices
by breath given here are just as terse and unpoetic as the omens in
Digby's texts, e.g., "If someone comes and says, ‘I'm going to war,' or
‘I'm going on a journey,' if his breath goes [from] the left [nostril],
tell him to go, it is good" (4a). These practically oriented questions
relate to sickness, death, war, social status, and the perennial
uncertainties of life, and the text also provides practical methods to
influence people and events, particularly in the first sections of the
work. The methods of concentration and visualization provided
particularly in the second half of the text imperceptibly move beyond
generic magic to link with highly specialized esoteric traditions
related to the yogini cult and hatha yoga. In this respect it could also
be compared with the numerous handbooks of Arabic prayers compiled by
Sufi masters and circulated among their disciples in 17th- and
18th-century India, which contained a similarly mixed array of
objectives, ranging from the alleviation of illness to the attainment of
advanced spiritual states. In both the yogic texts and the Sufi works,
the mantric repetition of certain formulas a specific number of times is
linked with the attainment of results. It would be worthwhile to
translate some of these manuals, to bring out the range of practices and
the particular sets of goals in different instances. In some cases, the
large number of repetitions required of the practitioner indicates that
one needed to make a serious commitment of long periods of time to
perform these exercises. One might even suggest that this kind of
meditative practice functioned for these readers much as computers and
the Internet do for us today.

The translator of*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* surrounded this
presentation with repeated impressive announcements about the secrecy
and the supreme authority of the text. He did not, however, find that
the content of the text in any way prevented him from writing in the
Islamic religious conventions that permeate Persian literature. Nor, we
may suppose, did the text present any ideological problems to the Shi\`i
scholars in southern Persia who had*The Kamarupa Seed Syllables* copied
out for their Christian interlocutor Pietro della Valle. A text of this
kind eludes the standard categories, perhaps because the religious
concept that underlies it is practical and not concerned with doctrinal
purity. The translator observed the parallelism between the function of
"spiritual beings" such as the yoginis on the one hand and Sufi saints
on the other. As his preface indicates, it is a larger natural theology
that makes possible the science of yoga and "magical imagination" as a
special revelation from God to the yoginis, for "whatever is in the
earth and heaven is in the grasp of the children of Adam."


