Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] The Travels of Pietro della Valle in India, from the Old English
Translation of 1664 by G. Havers, ed. Edward Grey (London:  Hakluyt
Society, 1892), I, 106-[^8]:

[^2] C. Micocci, "Della Valle, Pietro," Dizionario Biografico degli
Itiliani (Rome:  Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, 1989), vol. 39,
pp. 764-[^68]:

[^3] Ignazio Ciampi, Della vita e delle opere de Pietro Della Valle il
pellegrino (Rome:  Tipografia Berbèra, 1880), p. 181, no. [^52]:

[^4] Ettore Rosse, Elenco dei manoscritti persiani della biblioteca
Vaticana, Studi e Testi, 136 (Vatican City:  Biblioteca Apostolica
Vaticana, 1948), pp. 47-[^49]:

[^5] The title Damerdbigiaska given in the passage above is elsewhere
transliterated as Kamardinjaska.  The Italian edition of della Valle
gives an alternate reading of the title as Kamerdbigiaska, "for thus the
Persian copy has it, not being accurate in consonants or vowels" (ibid.,
I, 108, n. 2).  The valiant effort of Lach and van Kley to see in della
Valle's text a Jain treatise (Damerdbigiaska as a corruption of
Digambara) is not convincing, though I am indebted to them for this
reference to della Valle; see Donald F. Lach and Edwin J. van Kley, Asia
in the Making of Europe, vol. III, A Century of Advance (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. [^658]:

[^6] Kamak Dev, Kamar deni maka [sic], MS 1957-1060/18-1, National
Museum, Islamabad, containing six chapters, so cited by Munzawi, IV,
2178, title no. 3944, MS no. [^11777]:  I owe the reconstruction of the
term bijaksa to David White of the University of California at Santa
Barbara.  The similarity of the letters K, D, and U in a hastily
scribbled Persian script helps to explain the confusion, along with the
typical metathesis of S and K (bijaska in place of bijaksa) in the
representation of Hindi words in Persian script.

[^7] See Rossi, pp. 33-38, 44, 67-68, for della Valle's Persian texts on
astronomy and religious disputation.  These include (pp. 35-36) della
Valle's own Persian translation of a Latin work on the astronomical
theories of Tycho Brahe, composed by him in Goa in [^1624]:

[^8] See my articles "The Islamization of Yoga in the Amrtakunda
Translations," Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, 13:2
(2003), pp. 199-226; and “Situating Sufism and Yoga,” Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, 15:1 (2005), pp. 15-[^43]:

[^9] References are provided in Ernst, "Islamization."

[^10] India Office, Ashburner 258, fols. 7a-10b. See E. Denison Ross and
Edward G. Browne, Catalogue of Two Collections of Persian and Arabic
Manuscripts Preserved in the India Office Library (London:  Eyre and
Spottiswode), 1902), p. [^157]:

[^11] In one place (26a) the translator says, "Know that thirty-two
verses in the Indian language have been transmitted from the sayings of
Kamak.  Now Kamak chose a certain kind from those, and added something
else to it, and this poem is called Kamak baray tajanka (?)."  Elsewhere
he adds, "This is all a commentary on the thirty-two verses, which
someone has written in the Indian language, in which many practices are
mentioned, and in which are strange and wonderful sciences which all the
practitioners of imagination (wahm) and magicians are agreed upon and
pleased with" (29a).  Once (15b) he says, "Now they put this book into
85 verses, and versified it in the Indian language."

[^12] Prior to the 12th century, the terms yogin and yogini primarily
designated sorcerers, according to David Gordon White, Kiss of the
Yogini: "Tantric Sex" in Its South Asian Contexts (Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 2003) and, p. [^221]:

[^13] In actuality, the shrine of Kamakhya in Assam is characterized by
a red arsenic flow that is identified in tantric thought with the
menstrual blood of the goddess; see David Gordon White, The Alchemical
Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India (Chicago: The University Of
Chicago Press, 1996) pp. 195-[^6]:

[^14] White, Kiss, p. [^8]:

[^15] Vidya Dehejia, Yogini Cult and Temples:  A Tantric Tradition (New
Delhi:  National Museum, 1986).

[^16] White, Kiss, p. [^60]:

[^17] Dehejia, pp. 30, 36; White, Kiss, p. [^22]:

[^18] Dehejia, pp. 74-[^75]:

[^19] It should be emphasized that there was no universal standard
system of numbered cakras; see White, Kiss, p. [^222]:

[^20] See Eliade, Yoga, p. 88, n.

[^21] The Persian scholar Mulla Zayn al-Din of Lar, from whom Pietro
della Valle obtained his manuscript of The Kamarupa Seed Syllables in
1622, belonged to a sect "which attributed intelligences to the sun,
moon and stars, and venerated them as angels of a superior order who
would intercede with God and seek his protection" (J. D. Gurney, "Pietro
della Valle: The Limits of Perception," BSOAS XLIX [1986], p. 113).

[^22] al-Ulughkhani, Zafar ul Walih, trans. Lokhandwala, I:333 (Arabic
text, p. 417), and I:377 (Arabic text, p. 470), where a Deccani Muslim
named Hasan, a specialist in these arts, is called in.

[^23] See my article, "“Accounts of Yogis in Arabic and Persian
Historical and Travel Texts,” forthcoming in Jerusalem Studies in Arabic
and Islam, vol. 32, Yohanon Friedmann Festschrift Volume (2007).

[^24] Simon Digby, "Illustrated Muslim books of omens from Gujarat or
Rajasthan," in Indian Art and Connoisseurship:  Essays in Honour of
Douglas Barrett, ed. John Guy (Middleton NJ:  Indira Gandhi National
Centre for the Arts and Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd., 1995), pp.
342-[^60]:
