


Chapter 15 - Mukhtar's Second Imprisonment and Release
Meanwhile, after getting permission from Mohamed Hanafiya on behalf of
Imam Zainul Abideen (as), Mukhtar leaves Mecca for Kufa; at the
crossroads of Qadisiya, he makes a detour to Kerbala for Ziyarat, where
he pledges to Imam Husein (as) to avenge the perpetrators of Kerbala.

Mukhtar then comes to Kufa, publicly proclaiming his entry so that the
population, the governor (Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree) and the local Kerbala
perpetrators are all aware of his presence.

It was while Sulayman Surad Khuzai was recruiting in Kufa, that Mukhtar
arrives from Kerbala; they meet to discuss tactics; the Tawwabun first
aim is to hunt down Ubaydallah Ziyad, while Mukhtar's first aim is to
seek avenge from the perpetrators of Kerbala who are in Kufa, as the
majority of them were still living in Kufa.

With Mukhtar's arrival in Kufa, the local Kerbala perpetrators feel
threatened with his declared aim, whereas they were under no immediate
threat from the Tawwabun; these local killers are in powerful positions
and are of influence in Kufa; they therefore advise the governor,
Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree, to imprison Mukhtar least he causes any troubles
for them; so under pressure from these powerful and prominent Kufians,
Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree imprisons Mukhtar; Mukhtar is now serving his
second imprisonment term in Kufa.

Rufa' Shadad (from the Tawwabun) reaches Kufa and hears of Mukhtar's
imprisonment; unlike his first imprisonment under Ubaydallah Ziyad,
Mukhtar is now able to have visitors, he is not chained and letters are
allowedin and out; on hearing of Tawwabun’s crushing defeat, and of
Rufa's return, Mukhtar writes to him not to loose courage and to wait
for Mukhtar's release to come up with a plan.

Rufa' comes to prison and offers to break out Mukhtar from prison;
Mukhtar refuses any illegal moves but assures Rufa' of his impending
release by legal means; Mukhtar sends one of his man to go to Medina and
inform Abdulla Omar (his brother­-in-law) of the situation.

Abdulla Omar writes to Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree in Kufa explaining of his
relationship to Mukhtar and demanding his immediate release; Abdulla
Yazeed Ansaree gets the letter and is aware of Abdulla Omar's influence;
Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree reasons that the imprisonment of Mukhtar was not
a decree from his master Abdulla Zobayr in Mecca, but was due to intense
local pressure; so releasing Mukhtar was not a violation of any decree
from Abdulla Zobayr.

The local perpetrators of Kerbala are against Mukhtar's release for fear
of their own lives; Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree is torn between the order
from Abdulla Omar and the protests of these locals; he finally decides
to release Mukhtar with some conditions for his freedom.

Abdulla Yazeed Ansaree sends for Mukhtar and makes him promise that he
will not try stirring up any opposition against himself (Abdulla Yazeed
Ansaree), or the penalty will be the sacrifice of a thousand livestock
and the freeing of all Mukhtar's slaves.

Mukhtar promises in front of witnesses to agree to the conditions and he
is released; on giving the promise in order to be released, Mukhtar was
confident that the sacrifice of a thousand livestock and the freeing of
his salves was of little material significance to him compared to the
pursuit of the Kerbala perpetrators.

One source says that Mukhtar was imprisoned again for the third time and
manages to obtain his freedom once more.


