


Chapter 17 - Mukhtar Teams With Ibrahim Malik Ashtar
Mukhtar let it be known throughout Kufa and beyond that he is looking
for a person to team up with to avenge the killers of Imam Husein (as);
such a person should be strong, courageous, brave, a Shia, and with a
dedicated desire to see the perpetrators of Kerbala avenged; such a
person with these qualities was needed to counteract the power,
influence and positions of the Kerbala perpetrators living in Kufa.

Such a person is Ibrahim Malik Ashtar, the son of Malik Ashtar who was a
staunch Shia and a firm supporter of Imam Ali (as); Mukhtar goes to
Ibrahim saying it is the first time he has gone to one's house to
recruit for this cause, for usually people come to him to join up.

Ibrahim accepts to team up with Mukhtar on the condition that he
(Ibrahim) is made the Chief Commander; this is not with the intention of
being power hungry, but to ensure that his bravery and talents would not
be exploited to bring someone else in power; for with the army under his
direct command, he can assure that abuse does not happen.

Mukhtar shows Ibrahim the authorisation of Mohamed Hanafiya as an
attorney of Imam Zainul Abideen (as); one report says that on seeing the
written authority, Ibrahim and his whole clan immediately swear
allegiance to Mukhtar; another report says that Ibrahim asks for a few
days to decide, for he sends his people to Medina to check the
authenticity of the letter and to see Mohamed Hanafiya in order to
verify Mukhtar's version.

These people then go back to Kufa to Ibrahim; one source says that when
the group reaches Qadisiya (about 20/25 miles from Kufa), they meet
Khayr from the household of Mukhtar who asks of their answer from
Medina; Khayr immediately rushes back to Mukhtar to tell him of Mohamed
Hanafiya’s confirmation and blessings, to which Mukhtar offers prayers
of thanks.

Another report says that the group returns directly to Ibrahim to inform
him of Mohamed Hanafiya’s confirmation, and Ibrahim does not give his
answer immediately to Mukhtar; when there is no immediate reply from
Ibrahim, Mukhtar assumes that Mohamed Hanafiya did not sanction the
mission and Ibrahim has therefore refused; after a few days Mukhtar
comes to know it is otherwise and immediately goes to Ibrahim who agrees
to team up with Mukhtar.


