


Chapter 23 - Attempt on Mukhtar's Life
With Mukhtar left unguarded, Shabath Rabi (who was one of the army unit
commanders at Kerbala, and also sent by Abdulla Muti to fight Mukhtar's
men on the night of the revolution in Kufa), goes to Umar Saad saying
now is the best time to kill Mukhtar, for he is unguarded; they realise
that if Ibrahim were to return victorious, then Mukhtar would become
even more powerful, and hence more difficult to kill him then.

Umar Saad calls all the other army unit leaders who were in Kerbala and
asks of their opinions; they all go to Mohamed Ashath (who is in Kufa)
for consultation and approval; Mohamed Ashath does not approve for he
thinks Mukhtar must have an undeclared reserve unit for his defence.

Mohamed Ashath also thinks that they should not attack Mukhtar for he
has enough powerful enemies who are after his life: Ubaydallah Ziyad,
Abdulla Zobayr, Abdul Malik, Masa'b Zobayr, and that it is only a matter
of time before these people get Mukhtar.

Umar Saad and his group decide to check out if Mukhtar has an undeclared
reserve unit; the plan is for one of them to go to Mukhtar telling him
that his governorship is illegal and not sanctioned by Abdulla Zobayr
and the Kufians want to swear allegiance to Abdulla Zobayr; if Mukhtar
answers humbly, then he is afraid to antagonise anyone at the moment
implying he has no reserves; if he answers uncompromisingly, then he
does indeed have reserves.

Three days after Ibrahim has left Kufa (purposely waited for three days
to allow Ibrahim and his men to be well away from Kufa so that Mukhtar
cannot recall Ibrahim back in a hurry), Shabath Rabi goes to Mukhtar's
palace; he tells Mukhtar that the Kufians do not want his governorship
and that he should leave office; Mukhtar asks what is it that they are
objecting to; Shabath Rabi says for example, that they are not happy
with Mukhtar keeping their household help in his palace; Mukhtar says
that they are most welcome to recall their people, and Mukhtar would
willingly let them go.

Shabath Rabi reports back to his group that Mukhtar's answer was humble
and accommodating, implying there are no reserves for his protection.

Mohamed Ashath is now also convinced that Mukhtar has no hidden
reserves, and agrees with the killers that now is the time to launch an
attack on Mukhtar; the same night, Umar Saad and his group call on their
supporters to assemble outside Mukhtar's palace, and are also hoping
that their people in the palace will side with them.

Meanwhile, Mukhtar in the palace calls for the helpers and tells them
their masters want them back and he is ready to let them go; the people
refuse saying now that they have managed to get out of the grips of
their masters, they will not return to them, but will only remain with
Mukhtar; Mukhtar tells them that might mean fighting to death, which
they readily accept.

Mukhtar sends his help Khayr to Ibrahim with the message: wherever you
are, whatever you are doing, whatever the circumstances, leave
everything and come directly back to Kufa in a hurry, for the situation
here

has worsened and my life is in danger; I fear that should I be killed,
Imam Husein's (as) killers will not be avenged.

When Ibrahim gets the letter, he immediately heads back with his army;
he has the minimal of rest for himself, his army and the horses, and
makes the outward three days journey back in one day.

Mohamed Ashath, Umar Saad and his group have surrounded Mukhtar's palace
and Mukhtar tries hard to hold back the assault; Mukhtar himself comes
out fighting but is greatly outnumbered

At this point, Ibrahim and his men arrive; they were not expected to be
back for another two days by the enemies (for the outward journey was
three days before Shabath Rabi came to Mukhtar) and this sudden arrival
too takes the opposite side by surprise.

Ibrahim and his men are exhausted by the quick journey home, but they
immediately do battle with the enemies; Ibrahim asks Mohamed Ashath for
one-to-one battle but Mohamed Ashath is fearful of this and refuses; out
of fear, none else is willing to face Ibrahim alone.

Mohamed Ashath and a few men manage to escape and retreat to Qadisiya,
with Ibrahim and some of his men giving chase; Mohamed Ashath takes
refuge in one of the houses where he is put under house arrest for the
moment, whilst Ibrahim rushes back to Mukhtar in Kufa.

At night, Mohamed Ashath disguises as a woman, mounts a donkey and
leaves unchallenged by the back door to escape to Basra.


