


Chapter 3 - Imprisonment and Release of Kumayl Hamadani
Kumayl Hamadani (other sources name him as Kathir Hamadani) was 70-80
years old in 60 AH; he was a madressa teacher in Kufa, a Maalim who
taught Quran to many people since the time of Imam Ali (as); he was a
staunch supporter of Ahlal-bayt, but he was hiding his faith, like many
others, due to the political climate at the time.

(Note that this is not the same man as Kumayl Ziyad, after the famous
Dua-e-Kumayl.)

Once, when conducting his class, Kumayl feels thirsty (considering his
age, the heat in Kufa and his job requiring him to continually use his
voice), when a water seller passes by; Kumayl buys some water and before
drinking, remembers the Martyrs in Kerbala and loudly curses Imam
Husein's (as) killers.

Amongst the children present in Kumayl's class is Sinan's son; he
challenges the Maalim that the killers did Yazeed and his government a
favour; Sinan's son finishes his class, and then on his way home, beats
himself with a stone to bleed and tears his clothes.

At home, his mother enquires to the bloody state, and the son says that
the Maalim beat him up because he objected to the Maalim cursing his
father and Yazeed; the mother gets angry, and when Sinan returns home,
she demands an immediate retaliation of the Maalim, saying that he lives
under our government but harbours animosity against us.

Sinan immediately goes to Ubaydallah Ziyad who sends for Kumayl; Kumayl
protests that he did not harm the boy, but Ubaydallah Ziyad chooses to
believe Sinan's son, and imprisons Kumayl in the same dungeon where the
rest of the Shias and Mukhtar were kept.

Kumayl meets with Mukhtar; Mukhtar tells Kumayl that he was awaiting
Kumayl's coming as foretold by Maythame Tammar; Kumayl is very
apprehensive of his imprisonment, but Mukhtar assures him of his freedom
and his help in getting Mukhtar out, again as predicted by Maythame
Tammar.

Now, one of Kumayl's niece, Bostan, was a nanny to the grand-son of
Ubaydallah Ziyad (his daughter's son) and the nanny implores Ubaydallah
Ziyad's daughter to use her influence to get her uncle (Kumayl) released
for the alleged beating on Sinan's son.

In the evening, the daughter goes to Ubaydallah Ziyad and explains that
Kumayl is an uncle of the nanny and that Kumayl is an old, feeble and
honest man whom Kufa owes a gratitude for his teachings; Ubaydallah
Ziyad agrees to free Kumayl the next day, but she insists it be done the
same evening and she herself would go to the prison to convey the order.

At the dungeon, the guards change for the evening shift, on the eve of
the day Kumayl was to be released (as told to him by Mukhtar on Maythame
Tammar's predictions); Kumayl looses any hope of release that day
because an evening change of guards meant the prison doors do not get
opened until the day shift arrives; Mukhtar reassures Kumayl to have
faith on Maythame Tammar's prediction; it is the same evening that
Ubaydallah Ziyad's daughter arrives with the order to get Kumayl
released.

Kumayl bids Mukhtar farewell, upon which Mukhtar requests him to find
means of getting to him pen and paper; Kumayl promises to do so.


