


Chapter 4 - Kumayl Smuggles Pen and Paper to Mukhtar
On his release, Kumayl is warned by Ubaydallah Ziyad not to repeat the
crime of cursing Yazeed or his government; Kumayl promises to lead a
quiet life and to teach no more at the madressa.

Kumayl thinks of a plan to smuggle pen and paper into the prison and
realises that secrecy is of utmost importance should Ubaydallah Ziyad
suspect anything; he explains the plan to his wife, who is also a
staunch Shia, and she helps him (other sources say he divorces his wife
so as to maintain complete secrecy of his movements).

The plan involves befriending the warden and at night he takes money and
good food to the warden's home; the warden is on night duty, so Kumayl
explains to the warden's wife that it was his vow to give such gifts to
the warden upon being released; the wife accepts it and gives them to
her husband in the morning; the warden immediately realises that Kumayl
is seeking a favour.

Same thing happens on the second night; on the third night the warden is
in; he questions Kumayl of his motive and does not believe the vow
story; finally, the warden pleads on behalf of the Panjatan that if
Kumayl somehow wants to help Mukhtar, the warden was willing; Kumayl is
now at ease knowing that the warden has sympathy for Mukhtar, and tells
the warden of his intention to smuggle pen and paper to Mukhtar.

The warden comes up with a plan:

he says that there are total of forty guards with him as the chief, but
all the guards are chosen carefully, each having animosity to each
other, so that there is no lax in security due to bribes, influence etc,
and all guards report directly to Ubaydallah Ziyad.the warden advises
Kumayl to prepare the best and delicious of food (as per the Arab custom
at time), to buy fruits and almonds; in one fruit hide a pen in it; in
another fruit hide some thin small paper; and in selected almonds,
insert ink; these should be marked from others so the warden would know
which should go to Mukhtar.

the warden tells Kumayl: come to the prison when I am on duty and tell
of your vow to feed the prisoners on your release; I will get extremely
angry at your gesture, and beat you up violently and harshly, so as to
get the other guards take pity on you (who will then act against my
apparent wish, for as always, we all oppose each other) as an old,
feeble, honest Maalim with an apparent innocent vow to bring in good
food.

when the other guards then permit you to send in the food, I will ensure
Mukhtar gets the marked foods.

The next day, Kumayl prepares and goes to the prison where the scheme
goes into action as planned; the warden warns his subordinates that
Ubaydallah Ziyad may not like it, but they see no harm in letting the
food through especially after the warden's beating to Kumayl.

The food gets into prison and Mukhtar gets the marked ones, which he
hides successfully for Ubaydallah Ziyad arrives suddenly with about
thirty personal guards (other sources say that Ubaydallah Ziyad arrives
with the personal guards just before the food gets into the prison).

Ubaydallah Ziyad orders all the forty prison guards to be beaten up
severely, after which the guards (including the warden who knew of the
misdeed) ask as to the reason for Ubaydallah Ziyad's sudden arrival and
punishment.

Ubaydallah Ziyad says he knows of the plot to smuggle pen and paper to
Mukhtar, whereupon the warden, hoping for the best with prayers,
challenges Ubaydallah Ziyad to find any pen/paper in the food; his
personal guards perform a through search in all the foods but are unable
to find any pen or paper, for Mukhtar had by then successfully hidden
away the marked food (other sources say they did not think of looking
into the fruits/almonds).

With the warden's prayers answered, and no trace of pen/paper found, he
enquires of Ubaydallah Ziyad as to how he got the "false" information;
Ubaydallah Ziyad says it was the warden's son who came to report of the
plot (the son was eavesdropping on the conversation between Kumayl and
his father, but did not overhear the last part about hiding the
pen/paper/ink etc as the two were then whispering so as not to be
overheard by passers-by going for the Fajr prayers).

The warden explains that the boy is not his real son, but adopted him
from the streets where he was abandoned, and in trying to discipline the
child, the child bore grudge against him and hence falsely reported and
wasted Ubaydallah Ziyad time; Ubaydallah Ziyad gets very angry and
orders the immediate execution of the boy.

Ubaydallah Ziyad and his personal guards go away, Kumayl goes home, and
Mukhtar gets the pen/paper/ink.


