


Chapter 5 - Kumayl Meets Abdulla Omar
From the prison in Kufa, Mukhtar writes two letters: one to his sister
Safiya, and another to Safiya's husband Abdulla Omar, who are both in
Medina; the letter explains his imprisonment and its harsh conditions,
and asks Abdulla Omar to use his influence to get him released (Abdulla
Omar was a very prominent and influential person, the son of "Khalifa"
Omar, respected by Meccans, Syrians and Kufians).

Mukhtar gives the letters to the warden who forwards them to Kumayl.

Kumayl thinks of a way to reach Medina without incurring the suspicion
of Ubaydallah Ziyad, for Ubaydallah Ziyad is well aware of Abdulla
Omar's (Mukhtar's brother in-law) influence on Yazeed to order Mukhtar's
freedom; so Ubaydallah Ziyad wants a news blackout on Mukhtar's
imprisonment.

Kumayl decides it is best to leave with the blessings of Ubaydallah
Ziyad least he be caught when he is out of Kufa, is forced back and
imprisoned again; also, a state of emergency was in force in Kufa and an
exit visa was required.

Kumayl dresses up in Ehram and goes to Ubaydallah Ziyad's court, where
he recites the Talbiya (Labek, labek, Allahuma laka labek) loudly;
Ubaydallah Ziyad enquires of this Talbiya in the Hajj off-season and is
told that it is Kumayl, who also wishes to see Ubaydallah Ziyad.

Kumayl explains to Ubaydallah Ziyad that he vowed to perform Umra on
release but Ubaydallah Ziyad is suspicious, recalling the vow to feed
the prisoners, and asks how many vows were there, and whether Kumayl
intends to go to Mecca only, or also to Medina; Kumayl could not say
Medina for he would surely not be given permission to leave; he answers
that he is to perform "Mukkamal Hajj" implying the visiting of Prophet's
tomb in Medina; Ubaydallah Ziyad does not catch the significance of
Kumayl's reply and allows him to go with his blessings, being under the
impression that Kumayl is to visit Mecca only.

Kumayl leaves Kufa but instead of going to Mecca, he heads straight for
Medina to Abdulla Omar's house; he arrives there at lunch time with
Abdulla Omar serving good food (as befits his position); Safiya refuses
to partake in such good lunches for any lack of news of his brother
Mukhtar.

On hearing of a traveller's arrival from Kufa, Safiya urges her husband
Abdulla Omar to meet with him to get any news of Mukhtar; Kumayl
introduces himself to Abdulla Omar and produces the two letters from
Mukhtar; on reading the letter, Safiya is distressed and asks for
details directly from Kumayl and he relates the miserable condition of
Mukhtar and how Mukhtar hopes for imminent release to avenge Imam
Husein's (as) killers.

Due to her sorrow and distress, Safiya gets hysterical and shaves some
of her head hair (as custom at the time to indicate deep grief); her
daughters also do the same on seeing their mother's grief; Safiya asks
her husband Abdulla Omar to write a letter to Yazeed in Damascus to
decree the release of Mukhtar; Abdulla Omar agrees, and Kumayl
volunteers to travel immediately to Damascus and hand deliver the letter
to Yazeed.

Abdulla Omar gives Kumayl the letter and a wallet containing Safiya's
lock of hair as evidence of his wife's grief; the letter says: release
Mukhtar

in Kufa, or Abdulla Omar will use his influence to destabilise the
government of Yazeed in all areas, which Abdulla Omar was capable of
doing.


