


Chapter 7 - Mukhtar's Release
Kumayl travels from Medina to Kufa; on his way he wonders if Ubaydallah
Ziyad has got wind of the developments and has sent soldiers to
intercept him and kill him, thereby not receiving Yazeed's decree for
freeing Mukhtar.

Near the gates of Kufa (boundary into Kufa), Kumayl covers his face (as
was the customary dress to protect against the desert winds) and rides
through in an energetic manner, to give the impression of a young rider
so as to fool any soldiers looking for an old person.

Kumayl finally reaches Ubaydallah Ziyad's court and says that he has got
message to deliver to Ubaydallah Ziyad; Ubaydallah Ziyad reads the
decree and recognises that Mukhtar's freedom will finally be the cause
of his downfall and death, but dare not oppose Yazeed's order.

A blacksmith is ordered to cut off Mukhtar's chains, his wounds are
attended to by a doctor, then he is brought to Ubaydallah Ziyad; (one
source says that Mukhtar's one eye turned blind during the imprisonment
and it was the eye damaged by the guards when Mukhtar did not salute
Ubaydallah Ziyad in the presence of all the other Chiefs); Ubaydallah
Ziyad orders Mukhtar to leave Kufa within three days, or he will be
imprisoned again.

Mukhtar advises Kumayl that it is best for Kumayl also to leave Kufa,
and they both leave Kufa the next day; Mukhtar tells Kumayl of his plan
to raise an army to avenge the perpetrators of Kerbala; they part
company just outside Kufa; Kumayl goes to his tribe of Bani Kanda and
Mukhtar heads for Medina.

Mukhtar arrives at Abdulla Omar's house and meets his sister Safiya (my
deduction: Mukhtar is released in late 61 AH/very early 62 AH, for if
Kerbala survivors were in Medina after Chehlum of 62 AH, surely Mukhtar
would have visited them); brother and sister are both very happy at the
reunion and Safiya is overcome with joy to an unconscious state; Safiya
does not regain conscious and dies.

Mukhtar now sets out to start his planning for avenging the perpetrators
of Kerbala; he goes to Mecca to meet Abdulla Zobayr:

Abdulla Zobayr was one of the three prominent people who refused Bayat
to Yazeed (Imam Husein (as), Abdulla Zobayr, Abdulla Omar)

Abdulla Zobayr was in Mecca, ambitious to assume power and was inciting
people in Medina/Mecca to rebel against Yazeed in the guise of sympathy
of Imam Husein (as), saying that he (Abdulla Zobayr) was related to
Prophet Muhammad (saww) (he was actually related through Lady Khadija:
Abdulla Zobayr's grandfather's sister was Lady Khadija).

Mukhtar sees that Abdulla Zobayr also appears to want to avenge Imam
Husein's (as) killers, so he goes to Abdulla Zobayr and asks him to join
forces to avenge Imam Husein's (as) killers; Abdulla Zobayr does not
commit himself positively and Mukhtar seeing no support forthcoming,
leaves Mecca for Taif to his tribesmen where he spends one year (my
deduction: most of 62/63 AH) trying to materialise a plan.


