Preface
=======

Different schools' theories on the issue of 'woman' are not devoid of
extremes, just as other human intellectual achievements are. Though some
facts have been found, the overall attempt of scholars in this respect
has gone to extremes. Thus, the subject of woman should be reconsidered
deeply.

The subject of woman, as a body in the human society, can be studied as
deeply as human being deserves to be appreciated. Any analysis of
woman's life, regardless of her vocation and gender, would in fact be
the analysis of the human life. The appreciating of woman and
acknowledging her status and position is actually the knowing of the
human being and acknowledging the human dignity.

It is doubtless that knowing oneself, one's society and position is
essential for knowing other things. Hence, as the first step in getting
information, human being should explore his own ego to acquire a
relative knowledge of his infinite essence. Therefore, studying woman,
as a part of the human society, is a step toward the knowing of humanity
in general.

Among the extremist ideas about woman is a theory that tries to deny
femininity of woman, separate her from her own original essence, and
reject her undeniable inborn characteristics. The opponents of this
theory deny a being, who is liked by the opposite sex, who can be a
wife, and fulfill certain needs; or a being who can become a mother,
give birth to another being, and help continue human race. They deny the
existence of a being that can be the family axis, and soothe the stormy
ocean of human society, like a calm beach. To them, the characteristics
of wifehood, motherhood, the forming of a family and the educating of
generations are incongruent with woman's personality.

These ideas are held by some western thinkers who try to free woman
from pregnancy and motherhood. They recommend that babies be made by
artificial wombs via artificial fertilization. They also support the
tendency to the same gender in sexual relationships, so that the
traditional family be removed.

Such theories are reactions to the limitations and oppressions imposed
upon women due to the male enjoyments. However, this reactionary view
cannot be true, because it is in fact accepting female deficiency.
Nothing is more contemptuous for a woman than belittling her creation.
This viewpoint also ignores Woman's natural necessities, such as
delivery and its physical and mental effects, motherhood, wifehood,
training of children in the family, and many other physical and
psychological factors that exist in woman's life and necessitates
certain conditions for her.

The necessities of woman's creation have been introduced by the
heavenly religions, and especially Islam. Human knowledge and experience
has also proved them. Thus, the ignoring of woman's specific
characteristics is really denying the undeniable scientific findings.

It has scientifically been proved that motherhood is a necessity for
women's body and mind. Psychologically, motherhood is the most enjoyable
experience of a woman, which makes her life meaningful. Motherhood love
is the origin of other kinds of love. Therefore, depriving woman of this
love means the denying of a part of her existence.

It has also been demonstrated that children who have not grown by their
mothers lack self-esteem and are not efficient enough in the society.
Moreover, their economic capability decreases. Another finding of
scientific research is the constructive effects of family life on men,
women and children, that is why the efforts of modernism for
annihilating the traditional family structure have been in vein, facing
terrible social consequences. So, postmodernism hastily turned to the
traditional family, considering it as the solution for reorganizing the
human societies.

In general, the theory that resembles woman to man deprives woman of
her original character and true value; that is as an improver of human
being.

The holy Quran states:

"I will not waste the work of a worker among you; whether male or
female, the one of you being from the other ..."1

"Surely the men who submit and the women who submit, and the believing
men and the believing women, and the obeying men and the obeying women,
and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the patient men and the
patient women, and the humble men and the humble

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Qur'an, 3:195.
women, and the almsgiving men and the almsgiving women, and the fasting
men and the fasting women, and the men who guard their private parts and
the women who guard, and the men who remember Allah much and the women
who remember, Allah has prepared for them forgiveness and a mighty
reward."1

A believing man and a believing woman both seek the same way and the
same final end. Great goals and wishes may have different paths, but the
important point is the goal itself, which is achievable for both man and
woman.

In Islam, woman is woman and man is man and they are individuals of the
same essence; as emphasized by the holy Qur'an:

"O you men! Surely We have created you of a male and a female, and made
you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the most righteous of you."2

In Islamic teachings, man and woman are one and this oneness is rooted
in their essence. Creation has linked these two beings in a way that
they are never divisible.

The holy Quran states:

"And one of his signs is that He created mates for you from your selves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion; most surely there are signs in this for people who reflect."
3

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ I Qur'an, 33: 35.
2 Qur'an, 49: 13.
3 Qur'an, 30: 21.

In fact, this is a major Islamic teaching that: "Everyone should seek
his perfection from within himself. 1" One should develop within his own
self, gradually remove his deficiencies and idiocy, and finally reach
the desired perfection and lasting prosperity.

It is totally insane for woman to lose or belittle her own self, so
that she feels inferior in creation and tries to resemble man; wear and
make up like him and imitate his behavior. This viewpoint is the outset
of the denying of woman's personality and its result is as misleading as
its beginning.

Woman should seek herself within her own self and beware that the
existence of two human types -man and woman- is not acknowledging one
and refuting the other.

Today, among the plethora of biased theories on woman, woman should
return to her principles. She should ignore the aliens' contempt and
discover her natural and cultural values with self-esteem. She should
not lose her originality and not follow others blindly. Rather, woman
should develop her own life via her cultural richness.

Our sincere scholars, who have studied the western culture deeply, have
understood well that true salvation from tyrant systems lies in
religious and cultural originality; that is the renewing of the precious
Islamic and national values.

Knowledge is in monopoly of no one. One should benefit from others'
knowledge, based on this lasting Islamic teaching, quoted from the
Prophet Muhammad (a.s.):

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Imam Ali's
tradition, Nahjol Balaghah, 607. There are also other traditions with
the same meaning, such as, 'One's value is as much as his attempt.
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated, 'Take advantage of your own being to build
up yourself before you get sick... and before you die'. Wasa'il
ash-Shi'a, 11/ 382.

"Seek knowledge, even if it is far away in China, because seeking
knowledge is an obligation on every Muslim man and Muslim woman." 1

This does not mean inferiority before the superficial greatness of the
west. Some Asian nations have sought knowledge by benefiting from
western science and technology, combining it with their own cultural
values, and not becoming extremely fascinated by the west.

The most valuable perfection and true independence is, in fact, the
knowing of oneself and one's own identity and nature, as well as knowing
the flaws and declines of an alien culture. An alien culture leads
nations to dependence, absurdity and unoriginality. The resulting
dependence and captivity imprisons not only human body, but also his
inner self and mind.

Surprisingly, some want to forget the attempts of determined thinkers
and their warnings during the past centuries and make the youths forget
them too. They intend to remove our self-reliance and thinking power,
and make us culturally dependent, in order to pave the way for economic,
military, and political assaults.

In this era of deviant viewpoints and false criteria, the youth should
be awakened and informed by the authors, thinkers, and all cultural
centers, so that our generation is immunized against any cultural
assault.

In the last few decades, anytime the Islamic principles and beliefs
were attacked, the question of 'woman' was assaulted too. This issue is
still being exploited at present.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Bihar al-Anwar,
vol.1 p. 180.

Not very long ago, the Materialist and Marxist ideologies entered
societies for some time, which resulted in the weakening of some beliefs
and the drain of some brains. Now, that those ideologies have been
proved worthless in explaining the philosophy of the world and human
being, the capitalist ideology is trying to destroy the youth's beliefs,
and would probably destroy other resources as well. Working against this
cultural assault is at the first stage is the demanding duty of the
knowledgeable. They should spare no effort to make the new deviant
beliefs known throughout the society (in order to be resisted).

The introduction of western feminism is an instrument of this cultural
assault, which attacks a half of the major body of the society, to
destroy our religious and national unity.

The present book is written for the same excellent purpose. I hope this
cursory evaluation of the different viewpoints on woman be useful for
our younger generation, so that they become more familiar with the
preferred view of Islam and the value it puts on woman. Of course, there
is much research to be done on woman's rights to lighten the dark sides
of it.

Mashhad, 3/1/1378 (March 1999)


