Chapter Four : Woman's Social Status
====================================

Islam has given equal positions to man and woman in most social
activities. Woman has responsibilities in all group social activities,
except Jihad (the holy war) and only Jihad; women have duties in
defense, preceding and following the stages of Jihad.

The Holy Qur'an says: (And as for the believing men and the believing
women, they are guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid
evil and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His
Messenger. As for these, Allah will show Mercy to them; surely Allah is
Mighty, Wise) 1

As to these words of Allah, women have the great responsibility of
guardianship as men do, so they enjoin to good and forbid from evil.

Woman's social status is as vast as the concept of good and evil in
Islam. Therefore, women can engage in all social activities that men do,
including the most important social field that is politics and
government.

That is why women were active in political scenes in the early Islamic
era and had leading roles in government. Prophet Mohammad (a.s.) took an
oath of allegiance with women, according to the Qur'anic order, so that
this half of

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Qur'an, 9:71.

the Islamic society becomes familiar with its socio-political
responsibilities.

The Holy Qur'an states: (0 Prophet! When believing women come to you,
giving you a pledge that they will not associate aught with Allah and
will not steal and will not commit fornication and will not kill their
children and will not bring calumny with what they have forged of
themselves and will not disobey you in what is good, accept their pledge
and ask forgiveness for them from Allah, surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful) 1

This verse is about paying of allegiance with the newly-established
Islamic government in the Prophet's age, which happened on the Day of
the Conquest of Mecca. After the men's allegiance with the Prophet
(a.s.), women came to him and asked to pay allegiance too. Then the
mentioned Qur'anic verse was revealed and it mentioned the
qualifications for being the prophet's allegiant, emphasizing women's
engagement in the political activities.

It is narrated that the Prophet (a.s.), on that day, took the women's
allegiance verbally. Women could also do so by putting their hands
inside a bowl of water in which the Prophet (a.s.) had put his own hand.
This way, the allegiance between individuals and the government was
established. It is also narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) took women's
oath, shaking hands with their hands covered. 2

It is narrated that on the day of al-Ghadir women paid allegiance to
Imam Ali (a.s.) by putting their hands in the same bowl of water as his
hand was.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Qur'an, 60: 12.
2 Majrna' al-Bayan, 9/276.

Moreover, women participated in the great socio-political movement of
Hijra and their immigration to Medina was accepted along with men's.
This is especially important at a time when women were deprived of most
of their individual rights and could not engage in social issues.

The Holy Qur'an states: (0 you who believe! When believing women come
to you migrating, then examine them. Allah knows best their faith. Then
if you find them to be believing women, do not send them back to the
unbelievers.) 1

As it is mentioned in exegesis books, the examination of emigrant
(Muhajir) women was to ensure that their departure has not been due to
family disputes. This was done by asking those women to swear that their
emigration had not been because of disliking their husbands, tiredness
of their city or other worldly problems. 2

Women can participate in other social movements and have a leading role
in them. The Ashura movement is the best sample of this kind of
participation. In recent times, women's role in Iran's tobacco movement
led the monarch government to accept the verdict of the great Ayatollah
Shirazi. Contemporary women's heroic role in the Islamic revolution of
Iran is also clear.

Women can also take part in social positions. In fact, the only social
positions in which women cannot participate are Imamate and prophethood.
Of course, reaching the position of infallibility and guardianship
(wilayah), which are the essence of prophethood and imamate, is possible
for them; the great Lady Fatima az-Zahra (a.s.) had possessed this

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Qur'an, 60: 10.
2 Majma' al-Bayan, 9/273.

position. Women, however, have not been given the demanding prophethood
or Imamate positions in the society because they are too difficult and
very heavy tasks.

For the Islamic authority (marji'iyyah), some do not consider
masculinity as a prerequisite, provided a woman or some women have other
qualifications.

In the future, after Imam Mandi's reappearance and international
revolution, women shall have key social roles and some of them shall be
disciples of the Imam (a.s).

Imam Baqir (a.s) stated: (By Allah, that three hundred and thirteen men
will come to him (Imam Mandi (a.s)) along with fifty women ...) 1

This shows the women's future social role, especially because the first
group of Imam Mandi's disciples has deep understanding and faith. They
are exceptional characters with especial intellectual and spiritual
power.

Abu Basir narrated, "Once, I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s): 'May I be
sacrificed for you! Shall be there other believers besides Imam Mandi's
disciples on that time?' The Imam answered: 'There shall be other
believers too, but those who shall work with him after his revolution
shall be elites, Islamic authorities, the knowledgeable, agents, and
judges."' 2

Preparation for the twelfth Imam's era necessitates, at least for the
waiting women, studying Islamic jurisprudence and knowing social
management issues, to be able to participate in that great international
revolution.

There are also various viewpoints concerning women's judgment. Some
Islamic jurisprudents do not permit

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Al-Ayyashi's
exegesis, 1/65, Asr-i Zendegi, p.75.
2 Asr-i Zendegi, p.104; Muntakhab al-Athar, 485

woman's being a judge, some others believe that this issue should be
solved by consensus, and still other jurisprudents, both in the past and
today, allow woman's being a judge. Among the late jurisprudents, the
late Ayatollah Muqaddas Ardabili rejected the total abandonment of
woman's judgment. 1 The argument of the opponents is not much grounded.
Proving the consensus is also not easy. One of the arguments of the
opponents is a tradition of Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrated by Abu Khadija who
said, "Once, Imam Sadiq (a.s) sent me to the Shia with this message:
'Never go to corrupted judges in case of financial disputes! Identify a
man among yourself who knows halal (lawful) and haram (unlawful) so that
I appoint him as your judge. Never refer to an oppressor judge.'" 2

It is doubtless that (man) does not mean a male person; rather it means
a person who has an insight in Islamic rules and traditions to
differentiate between the lawful and the unlawful. The criterion here is
not femininity or masculinity at all.

As it was mentioned in the preface, most of the statements containing
masculine references or pronouns are in fact general addresses to all
human beings. Such statements address men, because men's roles were
clearer and they were more at hand then. So, gender is not specified in
these traditions and rules; they only reflect the conversational
practices of the past.

It is also inferred from Imam Sadiq's tradition that he is denouncing
the oppressive judges. Two points deserve being underlined in the
mentioned tradition; that the judge should

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Majma' al-Fa'ida
wel-Borhan fi Sharh Irshad al-Athhan, 2/15.
2 Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, 18/100.

be a righteous and Muslim person, and that the judge should be
conscious of the judgment issues. The emphasis of the tradition is after
all on the judge's practical and scientific qualifications and the
avoidance of tyrant courts, and not on the gender of the judge.

In sum, anyone who has the necessary qualifications of knowledge,
piety, preciseness, and the power of decision-making away from passions
and desires can be a judge. Therefore, woman's judgment does not add an
especial condition to the general judgment issue.

Another tradition is used as an argument against woman's judgment.
Sheikh al-Hurr al-Aamili has written a chapter in his Wasa'il Al-Shi'a
with only this tradition that the Prophet (a.s.) in his will had told
Imam Ali (a.s): "The Friday Prayer is not required from women ... and
they are not to be entrusted with judgment." 1

The former part of this tradition is not followed and the Friday Prayer
is considered true for both man and woman. It seems unjust to accept one
part of the tradition and reject the other part, so the argument by this
tradition is completely wrong.

The matter of woman's judgment, in sum, requires more scholarly
scrutinizing. Of course, some contemporary jurisprudents have researched
about this and approved woman's judgment.

It should be pointed out that judgment is one of the difficult jobs.
The courts with criminals, wrongdoers, claimants, and complainants on
the one hand, and the conscience's concern about knowing the very fact,
fair

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a,
18/6.

verdict, and the hereafter account on the other hand, are truly
distressing. Therefore, judgment is a demanding work. Many strict
Islamic teachings have been mentioned in this regard that prevent most
of the learned from entering the judgment profession. One of these
traditions comes here as an instance :

Imam Sadiq says, "Judges are four groups (kinds); three groups go to
the Hell and only one to the Paradise. One, who judges unjustly and
knows that his judgment is unjust, goes to the Fire, one, who judges
unjustly but does not know that his judgment is unjust, goes to the
Fire, and one, who judges justly but does not know that his judgment is
just, goes to the Fire. One, who judges justly and with knowledge, goes
to the Paradise." 1

In some traditions, judgment is considered the job of the prophets
(a.s.) and the Imams (a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.) considers judgment as
difficult as the ruling over the society.

One day, some children brought their writings to Imam Ali (a.s.) to
choose the best one. Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "Surely, it is a kind of
judgment; oppression in this judgment is like oppression in the
rule."2

Considering the difficulties of the judgment profession, is the
removing of this burden from a certain group or class a service and
consideration or it is a disservice and ignoring of their personality?
It seems that detesting the burdensome judgment responsibility for
woman, if it is proved at all, indicates a great service to woman, just
as eliminating other hard jobs such as Jihad. Another consideration is
that woman's delicate sensations might spoil just judgment.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Al-Kafi, 7/407.
2 At-Tahthib, 10/150, Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 18/582.

However, this is only the author's view and the arguments against
woman's judgment are not much grounded.

Two aspects of woman's social activities are briefly mentioned here for
their importance :

a. Cultural and scientific activities : One of the most supported
issues in Islam is the scientific and educational growth throughout the
society; without the slightest differences among people or classes. The
Qur'anic verses are quite clear in this regard. The traditions
necessitate cognitive growth too, to an extent that the religion is
defined as reason.

Imam Ali (a.s.) says, "Reason is one's inner religious laws, and the
religious laws is his outer reason."1

Prophet Muhammad's statement, which is narrated and accepted by the
different Muslim sects, is very famous in this regard. The Prophet
(a.s.) says, "Seeking knowledge is obligatory on every Muslim man and
Muslim woman."2

In some versions of this tradition, the phrase 'Muslim woman' is not
narrated. Scholars say that 'Muslim man' is a general noun including
both man and woman. This view is undoubtedly true.

For many kinds of education such as learning Islamic fundamentals,
woman does not even need her husband's permission, just as other
obligatory deeds for which the dissent of the husband is not
important.

That is why after the dominance of Islam and the eradication of the
obstacles of learning, everyone, especially women, started acquiring
knowledge. Not long afterwards,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Majma' A1-Bahrayn,
2/224, Daftar Nashr Farhang Islami Publication.
2 Al-Hayat, 1/70, Persian translation.

some learned religious scholars among women were well-educated and they
reached high scientific ranks. A story about one of Muslim learned women
deserves to be mentioned here.

Burayrah was one of the women of the early Islamic era. One day, her
husband came to the Prophet (a.s.), complaining that she had left home
and gone away. Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) called Burayrah and asked her to
go back to her husband's house. Burayrah said, "Are you ordering me?"
The Prophet (a.s.) answered, "No! There is no obligation, but I am the
mediator." 1

The conversation between the Prophet (a.s.) and that woman shows that
she had reached a religious cognition to differentiate the criteria of
the Islamic rules. She analyzed the speech of the Messenger of Allah
(a.s.) and asked if he gave an order as the Islamic jurisprudent or only
an advice to her. The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) in return confirmed her
view and said, "I am the mediator." The conversation in this tradition
is widely used by the jurisprudents and scholars of Usool when
discussing whether an order without necessary evidence is an obligation
or not.

Anyway, this one and other traditions indicate that once pagan women,
who were worlds apart from culture and knowledge, got very enlightened
after the advent of Islam.

Such women are numerous throughout Islamic history up to the present
day. It is highly expected from Muslim intellectual women to review the
history and record the accounts of enlightened women to be presented to
the new generations. Some books have been surely written on the life

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Kifayat Al-Osul,
vol. 1 Section of "Amr".

of great Muslim women; however, not enough eloquent works, especially
by scholar women, have been produced.

b. Economic activities : Women have the right to participate in
economic and commercial fields, exactly as men do. In Europe, women were
given the right of commercial activities only after centuries, not for
their own sake, but for the capitalism purposes. "... The industrial
revolution industrialized woman too...Women were cheaper workers, thus
the employers preferred them to tough high-wage men ... The first law
for freedom of our mothers was the 1882 law. According to this law,
British women got extraordinary privileges. They could keep their wages
for themselves. Factory owners in the House of Commons ratified this law
to absorb women to their factories ..." 1

Centuries before Europe's giving privilege to women, Islam had granted
rights to Muslim women, not for materialistic but for humane purposes.
Islam permits women to work outside home and possess their own salary.
Women can make a will and inherit from others. They can make any
economic attempt, invest, and establish farms and factories. These
issues are derived from the Islamic teachings and explicitly defined in
our Islamic law (Fiqh).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1 Will Du Rant,
Philosophy Enjoyment, p. 158.


