Chapter Six : Violence Against Woman
====================================

In Islamic teachings, all kinds of violence against all people have
been banned. Gentleness, however, has been emphasized in social
relations. The Holy Prophet (a.s.) said: "Nothing is more beloved to
Allah and his Messenger than faith and gentleness with people. And
nothing is more hateful to Allah and His Messenger than polytheism and
violence against people." 1

The subject of violence is sometimes misused and misinterpreted. To
understand the concept of violence truly, it should be born in mind that
the Islamic reprisal of the criminals, Jihad with the unfaithful, and
using war instruments against violators of human rights are vital issues
recommended to Muslims throughout the Qur'an. Reprisal is sometimes a
vital tool, because violators and oppressors do any oppression, kill and
torture cruelly for their interests, and use the highest levels of
violence.

Before such people, non-violence has an inhumane meaning. It is in fact
like gentleness to a rapacious leopard. The behavior of the holy Qur'an
toward these violent individuals is for the interest of humanity :

(Whoever then acts aggressively against you, inflict injury on him
according to the injury he has inflicted

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 72/457, quoted from Nawadir ar-Rawandi.

on you, and be careful of your duty to Allah and know that Allah is
with those who guard against evil.) 1 The only way for facing these
human-like savages is violence and not logic. Some simple-minded
proponents of western liberal-democratic school think that the
oppressors can be confronted with logic and ethics, without any
violence. All the past and present realities and instances nullify this
false imagination. This is also rejected in the overall history of the
prophets.

The Prophet of Islam, who is (Mercy for the worlds) and whose motto is
"I have been sent (as prophet) for completing the nobilities of
character" went to 83 wars. He battled even with inner opponents and had
a decisive behavior with Muslims who did not accept some Islamic rules.
This statement of the Prophet (a.s.) manifests the true way for Muslims
:

"Goodness, all the goodness is maintained by (the force of) the sword.
People are directed to goodness only by the sword. And the swords are
keys to the Paradise and the Hell." 2

The same tradition 3 is also narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.), the fifth
infallible Imam. Prophet Muhammad (a.s.), the great leader of humanity
and the best teacher of ethics and divine principles, thinks that all
the goodness is materialized by the power of the swords. He considers
the instruments of power as the only way for gaining peaceful and humane
goals. The Prophet (a.s.) knows that the cruel and voracious people do
not leave

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

I Qur'an, 2: 194.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a 11/5.
3 Ibid 11/9.

murder, crime, oppression, and disloyalty and do not accept
righteousness except by the force of the sword. In the present era, we
see clear instances of these criminals who oppress the third world
nations. They oppress the nations concerning oil price. They suppress
national movements. Food and drug companies use their power to force and
dominate nations. They spread viruses so that their products be sold,
making the vital foods and drugs the most violent instruments for
reaching their goal.

The weapon producers start wars among innocent people to sell their
products, beside many other inhumane methods. After this much violence
that is unprecedented in history, they now speak of non-violence. They
suggest logical and humane behavior toward oppression to make the youth
away from the principles of Jihad, martyrdom, and sacrifice. They want
to abolish revolutionary bases and pave the way for inhumane rulers.

As was mentioned, according to the Prophet (a.s.), violence is the
worst thing and it is equal to polytheism. Of course, this prohibited
violence is the one against Allah's servants; these Allah's servants
means trustworthy, faithful, and responsible people, not the oppressive
criminals. So, one should be aware of propagandas and be careful of
usage and aim of apparently beautiful words.

Surely, Islam has condemned violence and aggression. Even the annoying
of any living being is forbidden in Islam. Imam Sadiq (a.s) said: "By
Allah, the pious are prosperous. Do you know them? Those who do not
annoy a very small ant that is hardly seen." 1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
I Bihar al-Anwar 75/152.
Furthermore, any kind of trivial annoyance that makes others unhappy is
considered a devilish doing in Islam. The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) said,
"One, who annoys a faithful, annoys me and one, who annoys me, annoys
the Almighty Allah. One, who annoys Allah, is cursed in the Torah, the
Bible, the Zabur (the Psalms), and the Qur'an." 1

Imam Sadiq (a.s) stated, "The Almighty says: Let him, who harms My
faithful servant, expect a war from Me." 2 Insulting and disrespecting
others is also forbidden in Islam. The Prophet (a.s.) said, "The meanest
of people is he who insults people." 3 Scaring and distressing others is
considered away from true belief, as the Holy Prophet (a.s.) stated,
"One, who distresses a faithful and then he gives him all the world,
shall not ransom himself by that nor shall he be rewarded for it." 4

Finally, any kind of unpleasant and unkind behavior is not acceptable.
The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) said, "Whoever pushes a faithful to demean
him by it, slaps him on the face, or does something to him that he
hates, the angels curse him until he shall satisfy him (the faithful)
against himself, repent, and ask Allah to forgive him." 5

It was mentioned that a faithful means a faithful man and a faithful
woman, who are both included in all these rulings. These rulings have
been given more importance in family relationships.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar 75/ 150.
2 Al-Kafi, 2/350.
3 Bihar al-Anwar, 78/ 192.
4 Ibid., 75/150.
5 Ilal al-Sharayi', 2/ 210.

What was stated is the general Islamic teaching. The Qur'anic verses
and traditions of the Prophet's household (a.s), however, emphasize the
avoiding of violence more deeply about woman (This issue will be
discussed in details in the last chapter).

The Holy Qur'an states: and treat them kindly ...) 1

Even in talking about the divorcing of woman, the Holy Qur'an stresses
kindtreatment: (And when you divorce women and they reach their
prescribed term, then either retain them in kindness or release them in
kindness, and do not retain them for injury, so that you exceed the
limits, and whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul; and
do not take Allah's communications for a mockery ...) 2

Divorce and separation often go with harms, hatred, and unwanted
reactions. The Qur'an prevents these issues, saying that if a man wants
to divorce his wife, he should not annoy or harm her or behave violently
toward her, observing the principle of 'kindness'. Therefore, even in
quarrels, the principle of 'kindness' should be observed in dealing with
women.

In another Qur'anic verse about the breastfeeding period, the principle
of 'kindness' and the providing of mothers' needs are emphasized : (...
and their maintenance and their clothing must be borne by the father of
the child according to usage ...) 3

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Qur'an, 4: 19.
2 Qur'an, 2: 231.
3 Qur'an, 2: 233.

The criteria for providing the mother's needs should be "kindness"; not
the necessary amount, but more than that. Considering the Qur'an's
emphasis on the "kindness" criteria in treating women, the concept of
'kindness' should be studied carefully to see if it is the same as the
legal criteria or something more than justice and law.

The concept of "kindness", which defines the social verdict of
'enjoining good' (al-Amr bil Ma'ruf) in the Islamic teachings, has a
deeper meaning than the mere lawfulness and justice. It includes the
legal and just rights, plus ethical and humane ones. Such a humane
behavior deserves human high values. So treating woman legally or justly
is treating her in a way determined by the law, but treating woman with
"kindness" means treating her beyond her (only) legal rights; treating
her also as ethics and Islamic values determine. In other words, it
means observing the obligatory deeds and the recommended deeds as
well.

In the book Majma' al-Bahrayn, we read: "'kindness' is a general term
for anything that is Allah's obedience, His pleasure, doing good to
people, and any action that is considered good by the Sharia (laws) or
logic ..." 1

Aminul Islam Tabarsi says, "Behaving with 'kindness' is the behaving
according to Allah's commands, observing woman's rights, satisfying her
needs, and having good temper and good behavior with her. It is also
said that 'kindness' means not to beat woman, not to speak badly with
her, but to speak with good humor ..." 2

Attention should be paid that in addition to observing the right and
justice, kind and humorous behavior and following

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Majma' Al-Bahrayn, 3/159
2 Ibid 3/ 25

ethical criteria are considered as 'kind treatment'. It should also be
borne in mind that the "kindness" mentioned in the Qur'anic verses
refers to a general rule, rather than an exception or specified
situation. In other words, it cannot be said that women should be dealt
with kindly in some specific situations and not in others. Such a
meaning is in full contrast with the verses containing the principle of
'kindness'. Therefore, this principle is the general Islamic rule in
dealing with woman. The peak of forgiveness toward women is stated in
this Qur'anic verse :

(... Then if you hate them (wives) it may be that you dislike a thing
while Allah has pledged abundant good in it ...) 1

Aminul Islam Tabarsi says, "... There is abundant good in keeping wives
who are not much beloved... and this verse encourages the husbands, who
do not like their wives, to have patience and not to divorce them. This
patience is encouraged as far as there is no harm to one's life,
religion, or property ..." 2

This is recommended to men who have ethical, behavioral, or other
problems with their wives and who rush to divorce them, not behaving
patiently or ignoring some of their desires.

The Holy Qur'an has also warned seriously against the annoying of women
: (And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the
believing women without their having

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Qur'an, 4: 19.
2 Majma' al-Bayan, 3/25.

earned it, they are guilty indeed of a false accusation and a manifest
sin.) 1 This verse follows another one that mentions the annoying of
Allah and His Messenger (a.s.), thus the immorality of the annoying of
believing women becomes more manifest. These were examples of verses
that explicitly prohibited any violence against women. The same concept
has been mentioned in traditions too. Imam Baqir (a.s) has quoted from
the Prophet (a.s.): "Does one of you beat his wife and then he still
wants to embrace her?!" 2

Considering these discussions, it may be asked that why the Holy Qur'an
has mentioned the beating of women in this holy verse: (And as to those
on whose part you fear desertion, admonish them, and leave them alone in
the sleeping places, and beat them. Then if they obey you, do not seek a
way against them.) 3

Islam has obliged woman to obey her husband in marital issues as a
right of the husband. The importance of such needs and fulfilling them
is certain. If conjugal needs are not responded to, the disobedient wife
may face violence from the husband, since man is naturally more
powerful. The Holy Qur'an in this case has limited such violent
behavior, setting specific stages for the husband to enforce his wife to
obey him and fulfill his desires. (Slightly) Beating a wife is only
allowed in case of her disobedience of matrimonial concerns. The amount
and quality of this beating is

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Qur'an, 33: 58.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 14/119
3 Qur'an, 4: 34.

determined in traditions and Qur'anic exegesis. It is defined as a
gentle beating that leaves no scar. 1 To avoid any kind of extreme
violence in this regard, Imam Sadiq (a.s) has defined this beating as:
"It is the beating with a toothbrush." 2

This beating in fact declares an ethical opposition, not physical
punishment. It should also be kept in mind that the beating itself
follows two ethical and educational stages, as specified in the same
Qur'anic verse : (... admonish them ... leave them alone in the sleeping
places.)

To avoid going to extremes in leaving a disobedient wife alone, such as
long-time leaving, sleeping in another room, or leaving the house, it is
being determined as its least amount. Imam Baqir (a.s) said, "The verse
means sleeping with his back toward the woman." 3

Even in leaving women in their sleeping places, any kind of
mistreatment is forbidden. So if women abandon the most necessary and
primary relations with their husbands, they first face an ethical, then
an educational reaction, and later a punitive one, in the same way as
determined by Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and not more than that. Some
jurisprudents believe that woman's obedience to her husband is only
obligatory in case of the ordinary matrimonial relationship. Even if
some other kinds of pleasures are lawful in Islam, women are not forced
to obey their husbands in them. As her obedience is not compulsory

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Majma' Al-Bayan 3/44.
2 Ibid.
3 Majma' al-Bayan, 3/44.

in all desires of the husband, disobedience of them is not regarded as
'desertion'. 1 'Obedience' and 'desertion', which are set principles in
matrimonial issues, should not accompany violence and harm. They are in
fact assessed with 'la dharar' (no harm) principle, i.e. obedience of
woman to man's request should not cause any harm to woman in any way.
Imam Sadiq (a.s) was asked about Allah's saying in the verse (Neither
shall a mother be made to suffer harm on account of her child, nor a
father on account of his child), 2 and he answered: 'Some breastfeeding
women deserted their husbands' desires ... so Allah prohibited man to
harm his wife and woman to harm her husband.' 3

Even if this specific tradition had not been narrated about 'not to
harm woman', the general 'La dharar' (no harm) rule involves any kind of
harm. According to this rule, any kind of harm in social, family, and
individual relations is banned.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Ayatollah Sayyid Mohsen al-Hakim (peace be upon him), Mustamsak
alUrwatul Wothqa, 14/64.
2 Qur'an, 2: 233.
3 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 14/137.


**Chapter Seven : Differential Psychology**

Woman psychology is very complex and vast, especially with regard to
the different states of mind of man and woman. Assessment of identical
and different aspects of woman and man is very crucial because though
man and woman are both human beings, they have fundamental differences.
Examining the woman's mind for finding her diverse aspects needs patient
work of expert psychologists.

Some research has been done and books written in this regard. Muslim
scholars should continue this line of research in accord with the
Islamic teachings to prevent jurists and sociologists from going astray
in defining the woman's position. The first issue is the knowing of the
undoubted differences and variations shown in the outer appearance of
the two genders and proved in scientific studies :

"Biologists believe that man and woman have fundamental differences,
which are more caused by nature than by environment. They believe that
any cell in woman's body differs from its like cell in man's body.
Before being borne and affected by the society, the cells develop into
different beings; man and woman. Doctor Mahmud Behzad

says that if social conditions make man and woman different, they only
make the natural differences deeper." 1

"In spite of all the claims made by extremist supporters of equal
rights of man and woman, man and woman have different biological and
ideological functions and diverse states of mind. As a result, present
psychologists have defined two distinct states of mind; female and male,
just as biologists have divided the body into female and male." 2

Even the societies that have followed the equality principle of female
and male in all areas of life could not ignore the natural distinctions
between male and female that are so concrete in daily life.

"In countries like the United States of America where women can promote
to higher social positions, usually boys and girls engage in all
educational issues. Most teachers, though, accept the differences
between schoolboys and schoolgirls, without having an exact definition
of it. The teachers, who teach in both girls and boys' classes, or the
investigators, who visit both classes, often speak of the conflict of
the two categories and the necessity to conform them again. However, in
rural coeducational classes, the distinction between the two genders is
very evident... Physical and mental differences between most men and
women and their different social roles have led to the idea of 'male and
female samples', which is really an abstract, but useful notion.
Moreover, everybody finds out to belong to one of these groups. This
plays a crucial role in the social,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Dr. Hamzeh Ganji, Ravan Shenasi Tafavot have p. 190, sixth edition,
Bi'that Publications, 1375.
2 Va Nemidanand Chera?, p. 88.

family, educational, and vocational roles, as well as the behavior of
individuals ..." 1 The gender is not only evident in physical
manifestations, but also in all areas of woman or man's life. It brings
about some distinctions, the most obvious type of which is the physical
distinctions. According to Truman, "Every body cell carries the signal
of its gender ..." 2, "... All body cells, as well as body organs and
the nervous system have the specific sign of body gender." 3

Undoubtedly, there are relations and mutual effects between the human
physical and mental aspects. Countenance, height, weight, skull and bone
sizes, muscle, brain, and other organs are not only physiologically
different in the two genders, but have mutual mental effects. In fact,
physical differences manifest or at least introduce differences in
personality.

It is totally accepted in psychology that the body status affects the
mental position. Thus in psychology, people are divided into various
types according to their physical form. Boney, muscular, tall, or short
types, for example, are defined to have different mentalities. These
personality types affect crime committing, education capability,
artistic talent, and other inclinations. Introvert and extrovert
individuals are also defined using these physical attributes.

"... Our outside appearance shows our physiologic habits and even our
regular viewpoint ... Even deeper issues can be predicted from one's
face; not only the virtues or the vices

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Henry Piren & Morris Daubes, Differential Psychology, p. 197, 202,
translated by Dr. Muhammad Hossein Soruri, 1362.
2 Differential Psychology, pp. 197& 202.
3 Man; the Unknown Being, p. 100.

but also smartness or stupidity; one's secret feelings and habits;
one's tendency to get certain physical or mental diseases ...
Researchers can give a complete description of one's inner and outer
attributes by only looking at his/her face ... One should not change
her/his natural body organs because any small change in body size
creates deep changes in physiologic and mental activities. Very
sensitive, hardworking, or tolerant people do not have heavy bodies,
neither do the genius ... The face and gestures ... reveal body
characteristics and mental power ... Mental characteristics are
certainly in relation with physiologic activities ..." 1

Some differences between the genders are briefly mentioned here :


**Boy and girl's Growth**

Experts say, "... Girls grow up faster than boys that their skeleton,
teeth, and genital glands mature faster than boys'. The girls' average
of one or two-year lead over the boys continues throughout childhood and
maturity ... 2"

**Physical Power and Strength**

The human or animal male gender is certainly stronger than the female
one; therefore, it is more ready and efficient for hard works. "... Boys
are superior to girls in regard to life capacity and muscular power in
all ages... (Except between 11 and 14 years old in which girls are
slightly superior). Finally, the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Man; Unknown Being, pp. 74& 152.
2 Differential Psychology, p. 202.

boys' physical activity is more than the girls' throughout life." 1 "In
childhood, girls have larger buttocks than boys have. This difference
becomes more evident during puberty. The boys' bones become larger and
thicker, their muscular tissues become more and their shoulders wider.
Because of the same differences, boys become stronger than girls and
continue to be so. Another reason for men's strength is that their heart
and lungs are larger than women's. Therefore, their blood pressure is
higher, they are more able in carrying oxygen to the blood, and their
heart's beating is slower than women's when at rest. Moreover, men are
chemically more tolerant of tiredness after sport exercises, in
comparison to women ..." 2

**Genital Glands**

The genital glands in man and woman have different roles in the
reproduction process and work at different times. The genetic effects
and hereditary attributes are also very wonderful. This important
masterpiece of creation does not end here; it has great effects on the
body and mind of woman and man, making them two entirely different
beings. The genital functions affect not only the mental and sensational
aspects, but also intelligent, taste, and artistic talents. Finally, the
genital aspect forms the personality of man and woman with two different
sets of characteristics.

It is better here to see what biology experts say in this regard :

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Differential Psychology, p. 203.
2 Powel Henri Mason et al., Child Growth and Personality, p. 535,
translated by Mahshid Yasa'i, first edition, Nashr Markaz Publications,
1368.

"The reason why women have more fluctuating mood than men have is that
their hormonical changes are more than those of man. Women's estrogen
increases from about zero to its higher amount and then again reaches
zero one time every thirty days...Most women tolerate such a frightening
change with an admirable patience. If men's genital hormone was taken
from them twice a month and then again given to them, the world would
become much worse than what it is today; it is now being managed by men
whose genital hormone is unchanged. 1"

"... The genital glands not only help the continuation of generation,
but also affect our physiologic, mental, and spiritual activities. No
great philosopher, scientist, or even criminal has ever been eunuch.
Men's testicles and women's ovary have various functions; they make male
or female cells...They also leak substances into the blood that manifest
male or female attributes in our tissues, organs, and senses. They
highlight all our bodily actions as well.

The substance leaked by the testicles causes bravery, violence, and
excitement, and these are the features that distinguish a war-like cow
from the one working in a farm. The ovary affects woman in the same way,
but not throughout her lifetime; its size decreases after menopause and
then stops working. Because of this short period of ovary activity women
look much broken down than men in old age. The testicles, however,
remain active throughout life.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 David, Ruben, George Riley Scot, and Eric V. Johnson, Genital
Information, p. 284, translated by Kiyumarth DaneshVar, Second Edition,
Kushesh Publications, 1377.

The difference between man and woman is not only in their genital
organs and woman's womb and delivery; rather it is caused by a more
important factor that is the chemicals leaked by genital glands into the
blood.

The proponents of feminism, who think that the two genders can be
educated in the same way and they occupy the same social
responsibilities and positions, are unaware of these natural
differences. Woman is in fact very different from man in many ways ...

Throughout man's life, the testicle cells are producing the primary
core from which all new cells of the fetus are developed. Woman however
makes not only a half of the primary core of the fetus, but also all the
protoplasm that surrounds this core. Woman's role is therefore more
important than the man's in creating the fetus... Moreover, man's role
is short-time in the reproduction process, while woman's role lasts
about nine months. During this time, the fetus is fed with substances
from the mother's blood that is filtered inside the placenta.

In addition to getting the necessary material from the mother to grow
new tissues, the fetus leaks some tissue materials back...Throughout
pregnancy, the mother is affected and sometimes poisoned by the fetus.
In short, because of its different tissues, the fetus in the womb
influences its mother much. Finally, it changes the mother's physiologic
and mental state during delivery ..." 1

"... The body cells leak out materials into the blood that certainly
influence the human mental and spiritual activities. Among all the inner
glands leaking out materials, the testicles are the most influential on
one's mental power and

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Man, the Unknown Being, pp. 100-102.

state. Great artists, poets, saints, and conquerors have generally had
extreme sexual tendency. Removing the genital glands even after puberty
causes some mental changes.

After removing the ovary, women become broken down, losing some of
their intellectual or creative power. The men, who remove testicles by
operation, somehow lose their original personality ... Great artists
have mostly been great lovers. It is as if the activity of the genital
glands is necessary for getting artistically inspired. When one cannot
reach his/her desired love, the soul is stimulated and excited. If
Beatrix had married Dante, he might not be able to compose his
masterpiece 'Divine Comedy' ... 1"

"... if we suppose that the body glands affect the human behavior, then
it is clear that the two genders not only are mentally distinct, but
also have 'distinct tendencies', affected by important individual
changes... However, regardless of psycho-physiologic manifestations of
the gender, this distinctiveness has a special effect on the personality
development ..." 2

**The Emotional Aspect**

It is quite clear that man and woman have many emotional differences.
Women are more sentimental and quickly affected by romantic and exciting
scenes. "Because of their sincere feelings, girls are more quickly
affected by training programs and more easily reformed. According to
Morris Debs, girls should be educated differently from boys, because of
their future role of motherhood in the family." 3

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Man, the Unknown Being, pp. 152-153.
2 Differential Psychology, p.199.
3 Dr. Ali Qa'emi, Donyaye Noujavanie Dokhtaran, p. 386, Amiri
Publications.

Motherhood plays an important role in developing woman's emotions. That
is why psychologists consider this aspect as the origin of many mental
and emotional states in women and an inseparable part of woman's life.

"... Douche has highly emphasized women's motherhood instinct as the
developer of their mental growth. In short, he considered the before-
and after-puberty periods as a prelude to motherhood. This way,
acceptance becomes part of her essential physiologic and anatomic
essence. She waits to get fruitful; her life becomes meaningful only by
becoming a mother. 1"

"Men mostly tend to help in heroic situations, while women more like to
pity others." 2

"Men and women react against losses and calamities differently. Women
get depressed mostly after a cut in their relationship. Men, however,
get depressed because of losing an ideal or a great goal. This
difference shows that women are much dependent on their personal
relationships and have little individual independence. This is still a
proved viewpoint used by some psychiatrists in facing women depression."
3

Men and women also look at daily life, emotional issues, and other
people differently; one with a male view and the other with a female
view. The human being in evaluating issues is both a viewer and an
actor; giving to anything from her/his own personal attributes, though
the issues are

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Janet Hide, Women's Psychology, p. 21, 19, translated by Behzad
Rahmati, Ladan Publications, 1377.
2 Women's Psychology, p. 91.
3 Ravanshenasi A fsordegi Zanan, p.13, translated by Behzad Rahmati,
First Edition, Zaryab Publications, 1375.

certain enough. If this is true, then people's gender characteristics
are the most determining factors in their viewpoint. This is a great
quality of the system of creation in which woman's emotion helps in
making generations and forming families.

**Resistance against Diseases**

One of the differences between man and woman is their different
physical power and resistance against diseases. The amount of this
resistance affects the quality as well as the quantity of each person's
life.

"Men live about seven years less than women. The question is that: is
this because of physiologic or environmental causes? Researches show
that females are more resistant against infections than males are. Maybe
this is because of the female genes on their especial chromosome that
increases their resistance. "Another point is that males not only have
more heart attacks, but also have heart attacks earlier in life.
Moreover, women are somehow immune against these attacks because of
their 'estrogen'." 1

**Mental Aspect**

Some traditions were mentioned in this regard in previous chapters.
Here the difference between the mental power of man and of woman is
discussed. The first important point is the different brain weights of
man and woman. In all human races, the size of woman's skull and spinal
column are less than those of man. Women

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Women's Psychology, p. 246.

are also shorter than men are in all races. Woman's brain weighs
comparatively 100 to 200 grams less than that of man. This is a fact
that two seemingly similar genders are this much different; a fact that
implies a real wisdom, because in addition to many similar
responsibilities and missions, the two genders have special distinct
responsibilities in the system of creation. These especial
responsibilities necessitate some differences in the bodily and anatomic
systems; an undeniable fact.

Experts have said that a human being thinks, understands, and acquires
wisdom wholeheartedly. Though the immediate thinking tool is the brain,
it is never free from the effects of the body's various organs. The
hormones, genital glands, tissues, organs, brain size, height,
pregnancy, and a dozen more of physiologic and mental activities are
related to the physical state and the affect the human understanding;
some known to us and many others still unknown. "... In brief, a human
being thinks, makes love, is hurt, admires, and worships with his/her
brain as well as all other organs ..." 1

Therefore, the mental aspect should certainly be different in man and
woman; especially because of the effect of the genital glands on the
brain.

As a result, it can be said that if a mother behaves in a rigid
concrete manner, her children may have emotional shortages and be raised
as an ill-treated generation. And maybe this different state of the
brain in women helps develop emotional aspects of the children; the
human-making role of motherhood. Exactly due to the same reason, the
male and female genders have slightly different trends

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Man; the Unknown Being, p. 134.

and interests. "... More women are engaged in musical jobs, but male
musicians have created deeper more durable music." 1 This is also true
about science, philosophy, and inventions. Except a few instances, men
have founded great schools of philosophy and invented important
inventions.

Undoubtedly, the mental growth necessary for a perfect prosperous life
exists in women, so men and women are equal in issues that need mental
growth and its resulting true understanding. Man and woman are also
equal when thinking about the wonderful signs of the creation that leads
to the finding of the source of creation. The Holy Qur'an equally
mentions believing woman and believing man, worshipping woman and
worshipping man, humble woman and humble man ...etc .. Man and woman are
hence equal in belief and religious progress, as was mentioned earlier.
Two points are worth mentioning here :

a. Islam has necessitated mental growth for economic and financial
decisions. This is stated in verdicts about genital and social puberty.
Mental and social puberty is of course above the genital puberty. The
Holy Qur'an emphasizes economic issues. Hence, it requires mental growth
for it. Man and woman are not different in this regard. Both genders can
possess their own capital and participate in economic activities after
their mental growth.

These issues should be discussed more deeply. The mentioned criteria
show that some Islamic verdicts reflect women's normal position in the
past. If in a society women differ from (the women of) the past, getting
higher mental and cultural positions, those criteria may also change.
Since

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Philosophy Enjoyment, p. 149.

Islam belongs to all ages and all societies, these changes of criteria
arc discussed and their conditions determined. b. Another related point
is about deputyship in the Hajj ritual. If some people do not have the
necessary financial or physical conditions for this ritual, they can
appoint another person as their deputy. The question now is if a woman
can be the deputy of a man, especially in his first obligatory Hajj
(sarura).

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about a woman who was the deputy of a man
and he said, "If that woman has performed the Hajj before and she is
faithful and understanding (in religion), (she can be the deputy of a
man). There maybe a woman is more knowledgeable than a man." 1

The closing phrase of Imam Sadiq's statement determines woman's
probable high position in fiqh and that so many women may acquire higher
positions than men in this filed by their attempt, as we see many
instances of such women today.

The mentioned statement generally implies woman's jurisprudence in fiqh
as well, because if women can be more knowledgeable than men in the Hajj
issues, which are very complicated, they can be more knowledgeable in
other areas of fiqh too. Such women can be jurisprudents, provided they
have other necessary characteristics.

It is also said that if there were no men for the lawful slaughtering
of animals (due to Islam), but some women knew how to do it, the wisest
of them should be selected for it.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a 8/ 124.

Once, Imam Sadiq (a.s) was asked: "Can a woman slaughter an animal when
there are no men?" He replied, "The wisest of the women should do it."
1

The then conditions and women's social position caused some viewpoints
reflecting the realities of the time, not women's intelligence and
capabilities. Women are also mentioned as great jurisprudents and hadith
narrators of the utopia after the Imam Mandi's reappearance : Imam Baqir
(a.s) said, "In Imam Mandi's era, all people are taught knowledge and
wisdom to the extent that women judge according to Allah's Book and the
Prophet's sunna inside their homes." 2

Because the necessary qualification for judgment is jurisprudence and
true knowledge of the divine verdicts, this tradition shows women's
scholarly position in the future.

At the end of this chapter, some findings out of researches about the
differential psychology of the two genders are mentioned :

**The Cognitive Capabilities**

"In the area of cognition, reviewing hundreds of researches show only a
few differences between males and females. First, girls get higher
scores in the verbal section of IQ tests. Their intellectual growth
begins with language learning,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Wafi, 19/ 237.
2 Ghaybat an-No'mani, 239; Bihar al-Anwar, 52/ 352; Asr-e Zendegi,
191.

while boys' intellectual growth takes place in practical skills ...
Second, men are better in mathematics tests. Girls have equal
performance with boys in verbal mathematics questions, but boys are
better than girls in dealing with numbers and forms.

Third, boys are relatively better than girls are in spatial-visual
tests ... such as recognizing a form from various angels, reading maps,
or finding a simple form inside a complex form. A wonderful ability of
girls and women is that they can keep totally irrelevant details in
their minds for a short time, but boys and men can remember things that
are related to themselves or related to each other. That is why women
can be better secretaries. Girls can memorize lessons with or without
understanding them, but boys first try to make a logical relationship
among the issues and then memorize them ..." 1

**Social Behavior**

"Regarding the social behavior, researches show some gender differences
... A 32-year research (from 1933 to 1965) in the United States showed
that men are always more violent than women. Women, however, are more
verbally violent. In other words, women use obscene language when they
are angry, while angry men show angry behavior and involve in beating
and kicking ..." 2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Psychology: Themes and Variations, Wayne Weiten, 1989, Brooks Cole
Publishing Company, pp. 421-422, translated by Hamid Nejati.
2 Psychology of Individual Differences, p.209, quoted from 'Are Men
Really better than Women?'

The words of Corrine Hut, a woman psychologist, are worth mentioning
here : "Corrine Hut has impartially and logically found out that a woman
is physically, physiologically, and psychologically different from a man
and these differences bring about different social roles for them." 1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Corrine Hut's 'Are Men Really Better Than Women?' , p.3, translated
by Dr. Mahmud Behzad, Rudaki Publications, 1361, Tehran.


