Chapter Seven : Differential Psychology
=======================================

Woman psychology is very complex and vast, especially with regard to
the different states of mind of man and woman. Assessment of identical
and different aspects of woman and man is very crucial because though
man and woman are both human beings, they have fundamental differences.
Examining the woman's mind for finding her diverse aspects needs patient
work of expert psychologists.

Some research has been done and books written in this regard. Muslim
scholars should continue this line of research in accord with the
Islamic teachings to prevent jurists and sociologists from going astray
in defining the woman's position.

The first issue is the knowing of the undoubted differences and
variations shown in the outer appearance of the two genders and proved
in scientific studies :

"Biologists believe that man and woman have fundamental differences,
which are more caused by nature than by environment. They believe that
any cell in woman's body differs from its like cell in man's body.
Before being borne and affected by the society, the cells develop into
different beings; man and woman. Doctor Mahmud Behzad says that if
social conditions make man and woman different, they only make the
natural differences deeper." 1

"In spite of all the claims made by extremist supporters of equal
rights of man and woman, man and woman have different biological and
ideological functions and diverse states of mind. As a result, present
psychologists have defined two distinct states of mind; female and male,
just as biologists have divided the body into female and male." 2

Even the societies that have followed the equality principle of female
and male in all areas of life could not ignore the natural distinctions
between male and female that are so concrete in daily life.

"In countries like the United States of America where women can promote
to higher social positions, usually boys and girls engage in all
educational issues. Most teachers, though, accept the differences
between schoolboys and schoolgirls, without having an exact definition
of it. The teachers, who teach in both girls and boys' classes, or the
investigators, who visit both classes, often speak of the conflict of
the two categories and the necessity to conform them again. However, in
rural coeducational classes, the distinction between the two genders is
very evident... Physical and mental differences between most men and
women and their different social roles have led to the idea of 'male and
female samples', which is really an abstract, but useful notion.
Moreover, everybody finds out to belong to one of these groups. This
plays a crucial role in the social,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 Dr. Hamzeh Ganji, Ravan Shenasi Tafavot have p. 190, sixth edition,
Bi'that Publications, 1375.
2 Va Nemidanand Chera?, p. 88.
