Chapter Twelve : Additional Advocacy
====================================

In this last chapter of 'supporting woman's rights' it is worth
mentioning that the Islamic teachings have widely advocated woman, more
than her legal rights and far better than the feminism movements. In
fact, these teachings are 'in addition to the rights'. All the cases of
such rights are innumerable; only some are mentioned here :

**Equality between children**

Equality is a doubtless Islamic principle, which is applicable to all
fields of life and all people. According to some traditions, equality
should be considered even in paying attention to and looking at
people.

Equality in the family and among the children is emphasized too : One
day, Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) saw a man with two kids. The man kissed one
of his children and left the other. Then, the Prophet (a.s.) said to
him, "Would it not be better to treat them equally?" 1

The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) has emphasized the treating of family
members equally :

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 21/ 487.

The Prophet (a.s.) said a man who had granted something to one of his
children, "Did you give the same to all your children?" That man
replied, "No!" The Prophet (a.s.) said, "Fear Allah and treat your
children justly!" 1 Though equality is emphasized in Islam, the Islamic
teachings sometimes permit to overlook the origin of equality in dealing
with daughters and sons :

The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, "When one of you goes to the
bazaar, buys something, and brings it to his children, let him first
begin (in distributing it) with the daughters ..." 2

We understand from this Prophetic speech that girls are more preferred.
It is also narrated in some traditions :

The Prophet (a.s.) said, "Treat your children equally in giving. If I
wanted to prefer, I would prefer women." That is why the great author of
wasail al-Shi'a has called this chapter of his book : "The Chapter of
the recommendation of buying gifts for wife and children and beginning
(in distributing them) with daughters".

Sentimental Treatment towards Daughters The parents' kind treatment to
their children is recommended in Islam, but it is more recommended
towards girls : Imam Ridha (a.s) narrated from the Prophet (a.s.) his
saying, "Allah the Almighty is kinder to females than He is

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Hayat, 6/ 409.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 21/ 514.

to males ... no one delights a woman of his near kin, except that Allah
will delight him on the Day of Judgment." 1 As a result, this chapter of
Wasa'il al-Shia is entitled: "The Chapter of the Recommendation of being
more kind and compassionate to girls (than to boys)". And this is an
evident privilege for woman and an exception to the law of equality.

**Woman and the Position of Motherhood**

In the Islamic teachings, father and mother have very high positions
and should be honored. As for mother, this attention is more emphasized
and that she has a higher position than the father's.

The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) said, "If you are offering a recommendable
(not obligatory) prayer and your father calls for you, do not cut it
(the prayer), but you can cut it if your mother calls for you." 2

The Prophet (a.s.) said, "The Paradise is beneath the feet of mothers."
3 Imam Baqir (a.s) narrated, "Prophet Moses (a.s) begged Allah saying,
'0 my Lord, advise me!' ... Allah said to him, 'I recommend you about
(being kind to) your mother.' Moses (a.s) asked again, '0 my Lord,
advise me!' Allah said to him, I recommend you about your mother.' The
third time Moses (a.s.) asked, '0 my Lord advise me!' Allah said to him,
"I recommend you about your father!' Imam Baqir (a.s) stated, "That is
why two thirds of kindness and

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a,., 21/ 367.
2 Mustadrak A1-Wasa'il 15/ 181.
3 Ibid 15/ 180.

dutifulness should be for the mother and one third for the father." 1

Imam Ridha (a.s) said, "Know well that the right of mother is the most
essential and most obligatory right on you, because she bears the
hardships of pregnancy like no one else. She delightfully and
wholeheartedly cares for her child and resists all the problems that no
one can ever be patient with. She is satisfied to remain hungry but her
child satiate and thirsty but he is quenched. She remains without
clothes, but her child clothed. She puts him in the shadow and she
remains under the sun. So let gratefulness, dutifulness, and kindness be
to her as much as that; though you cannot satisfy the least of her due
right except with the assistance of Allah." 2

Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrated that one day a man came to the Prophet
Muhammad (a.s.) and said, "I had a daughter whom I brought up until she
became adolescent. Then I dressed and adorned her with fine clothes and
ornaments and took her to a well. I threw her to the bottom of the well.
The last word I heard from her was 'O father!' What is the ransom of
that?" The Prophet (a.s.) asked him, "Is your mother alive?" The man
said, "No!" "Do you have a maternal aunt alive?" the Prophet asked. The
man said, "Yes!" The Prophet (a.s.) then said, "Be dutiful to your aunt,
because she is like your mother and this can ransom what you had done."
3

Allama Majlisi says, "This tradition shows the preference of the mother
and her relatives to father and paternal

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Mustadrak A1-Wasa'il. 15/180.
2 Ibid., 15/ 18.
3 Al-Kafi, 2/ 162; Bihar al-Anwar, 74/ 58.

relatives. It also indicates the importance of dutifulness to maternal
aunt among other relatives of the mother." 1

This statement of the Prophet (a.s.) shows the greatness of motherhood
and the most remarkable Divine position of woman. The major sin of
killing one's child, which seems too cruel and obscene to be forgiven,
is forgivable only by doing good to the mother or the maternal aunt.
Making them happy is the compensation of this major sin. This shows the
importance of the mother and then the aunt. if the mother is not
available, the aunt replaces her, but not even the father, the paternal
uncle, or any other male relative.

Another worthy point is that the only reparation for such a major sin
is kindness and dutifulness to the mother or the aunt, and not their
prayer. In other words, only their happiness makes up for this cruel sin
and brings about Allah's forgiveness.

Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrated, "One day, someone came to the Prophet (a.s.)
and asked, 'O messenger of Allah, to whom should I be pious?' The
Prophet (a.s.) said, 'To your mother.' The man asked, "then to whom?'
The Prophet (a.s.) said, To your mother.' The man asked again, 'then to
whom?' The Prophet (a.s.) said, 'to your mother.' Then the man asked,
'then to whom?' The Prophet (a.s.) said, 'To your father." 1

Allama Majlisi says, "Due to this tradition, it is derived that three
fourths of kindness and piety should be for the mother. It is also said
that it is to exaggerate in being kind to the mother. The reason behind
that is clear, because the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 74/ 58.
2 Al-Kafi, 2/ 159.

mother tries and tolerates hardships for her children more than the
father. Some verses in the sura of Luqman confirm this fact." 1 Imam
Ridha (a.s) narrated from his father from Imam Sadiq (a.s) his saying,
"If Allah knew something less than (ugh), in order to give up the
undutifulness to parents, He would surely mention it." 2

As it is clear, the holy Qur'an mentions the mother's rights more than
the father's. (And We have enjoined on man doing of good to his parents;
with trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she bring him
forth; and the bearing of him and weaning of him was thirty months.) 3

"Doing of good to the parents is not dependent on their belief or
religion; even if the parents do not follow the true religion, serving
and respecting them is necessary according to the clear commands of the
Qur'an." 4

This advocacy of woman, as mother, is an Islamic principle. Now,
compare it with the claims of the western feminists and their method of
supporting woman in the western society! The western society treats old
men and old women in a bad way and teaches this to the society at large
: "... Today's society is very indifferent to old people. To me, this is
the first civil society in which old parents are not available in their
grown-up children's homes. Surprisingly, they do not condemn it. If we
look at such bad and immoral

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 74/ 49, 42.
2 Ibid.
3 Qur'an, 46: 15.
4 Bihar al-Anwar, 74/ 38.

behavior from a non-western point of view, we would find it so obscene
..." 1

The outcome of the western capitalism's behavior toward the old is
their sadness and loneliness in the aging process, which may lead to
horrible suicides, leaving a stigma on the face of the present century's
humanism of the western capitalist systems. "... The suicide rate among
old people is the lowest rate in Iran, compared to the same statistics
of the West. The reason for this may be the strong family ties and the
great respect to the old in the Iranian culture." 2

The western capitalism is based on capital and profit, and not on the
human and spiritual values, and still boasts of defending the human
rights. Therefore, it is evident that a mother woman has more rights
than the father man does. The question here is that: have the extremist
supporters of woman's rights really defined such rights for her? Or
could women have reached the high position that Islam has taken them
to?

'Treating women kindly and taking much care of them' is an Islamic
advocacy, in addition to the original rights. The Holy Qur'an states :

(... And treat them (women) kindly.) 3

As we have mentioned earlier, 'goodness' (or kindness) includes
observing not only the legal rights, but also the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The Future of Capitalism and 12 Other Articles, p. 108, the Article
'Why I don't like Western Civilization" by Arnold Twinbee.
2 Ali Islami Nasab Bojnurdi, Bohran-e Khodkoshi, p. 94, First edition,
Ferdows Publications, 1371.
3 Qur'an, 4: 19.

humane-ethical values. If some people treat woman only as far as her
legal rights, they do not follow the Qur'anic command, because
'goodness' is more than the usual and specified legal rights.

**The Last Will**

Great men mention their best and most valuable experience at their last
moments of life and recommend of the most important principles and most
necessary matters of life. Therefore, it is very interesting that
according to Imam Ali (a.s) the last will of Prophet Mohammad (a.s.) was
about women.

Imam Kadhim (a.s) narrated from Imam Ali (a.s) his saying, "Fear Allah!
Fear Allah as to women! Because the last word of your Prophet (a.s.)
was: 'I recommend you to be kind to women ..." 1

Following the prophet's way, Imam Ali (a.s) emphasized advocating
women's rights and safety, using important phrases, especially the name
of the Almighty 'Allah', which is above any other word. It means
remember Allah or fear Allah in your behavior towards women and in
observing their rights. These two unique and divine figures mention the
woman's rights in their last wills. It shows the importance of the
woman's rights in Islam that are much more than the positive laws of
defending the rights of woman of nowadays.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, 14/ 255.

**The Cause of Blessing**

Women and girls are the cause of Allah's blessing and mercy. Imam Sadiq
(a.s) said, "When a girl is born for a man, Allah sends an angel who
spreads his wings over the girl's head and chest... and one who spends
on her is helped (by Allah)." 1

Some families, especially in the past, considered daughters a burden,
because they could not work and earn money. Sons then worked and
daughters remained at home. The Infallible Imams (a.s), however,
stressed that though women or daughters remain at home and do not do
economic activities, they bring about Allah's blessing and mercy.

Once, Ishaq bin Ammar asked Imam Sadiq (a.s): "Is the tradition
narrated by people true that someone came to the Prophet (a.s.)
complaining of his poverty and the Prophet (a.s.) recommended him to get
married... until he ordered him of that for three times?" Imam Sadiq
(a.s) said, "Yes, it is true. Livelihood comes when there are women
(wives) and children (in one's house)." 2

**Better than Jihad**

The Prophet of Islam (a.s.) often declared that the serving of mother
would be better than jihad (the holy war). Jihad and its value in Islam
is beyond any doubt. It is the most valuable activity according to some
traditions. Every worthy

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 15/ 104.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 14/ 26.

activity may have less value than another worthier one, except jihad
and the martyrdom in the way of Allah, which is the best activity.
However, one night of being with one's mother and serving her is
considered worthier than one year of jihad along with the Prophet
(a.s.).

One day, a man came to the Prophet (a.s.) and said, "I am an active
young man and I like to go to jihad, but I have a mother who hates
that." The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, "Go back home and stay with your
mother. By Allah Who has sent me with the truth as prophet, her (the
mother) delight with you one night is better than your jihad in the way
of Allah for one year." 1

**Gabriel and Women**

Gabriel (a.s.), the Revelation Angel, always recommended about women.
This is mentioned in this Prophet's tradition :

The Prophet (a.s.) said, "Gabriel often and always recommended me about
woman, until I thought that divorcing her would not be allowed at all,
except because of a proved sin (adultery)." 2

The word 'always' in this tradition is very clear; it means that
Gabriel recommended about women's rights any time he came down to the
Prophet (a.s.), advocated them, and reminded the Prophet (a.s.) of their
concerns. This was so much repeated and stressed that Prophet Muhammad
(a.s.) thought that the divorcing of women was forbidden, except in case
of an obvious adultery. And this is another case of the Islamic advocacy
of women more than their usual rights.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Kafi, 2/ 163; Bihar al-Anwar, 71/ 59.
2 Uddat al-Da'i, 62; Bihar al-Anwar, 103/ 253.

**The Criterion of Preference**

The criterion of preference, value, and nearness to the position of the
Prophet (a.s.) in the Hereafter is the doing of good to women and wives.
The Prophet (a.s.) said, "The nearest of you to me in my sitting place
on the Day of Judgment is the best of you to his wife." 1 Prophet
Muhammad (a.s.) also said, "The best of people in faith are those who
are the kindest to their wives, and I am the kindest of you to my wife
(wives)."

This behavior of the Prophet (a.s.) is the criterion for superiority
and preference in Islamic.

**The Great Reward**

In the Islamic teachings, great reward is promised to be given in the
afterlife to those who tolerate their wives' anger and bad-temperedness,
do not seek to avenge on them, and do not separate the family by
divorce.

Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrated from the Prophet (a.s.) his saying: "One, who
is patient with his wife's bad temper seeking the reward of Allah, Allah
will give him (as) the reward of the grateful servants." 2

Imam Ali (a.s) mentions some behavioral, conversational, and thinking
faults of some women in a sermon of Nahjol Balagha. He stresses the
doing of good to such women :

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 8/ 507.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 7/ 124.

He said, "Humor them (women) in any case and speak to them kindly that
they may improve their behaviors." 1 As we see, kind and courteous
treating is recommended even towards women with bad behavior and
conduct, but not violence and revenge. The statements of the Commander
of the Believers (Imam Ali) (a.s) also indicate that ethical and humane
treatment is an educational principle. This is a delicate point in the
family relations for changing a bad behavior with logical speech and
conduct.

**Women's Artistic Feelings**

Husbands should respect their wives' artistic feelings, not imposing
their own mood on the family life.

Sheikh Kulayni in his book al-Kafi 2 narrates a tradition from Imam
Baqir (a.s) under the chapter "make up and ornament". This constructive
tradition is about the behavior of Imam Husayn (a.s) towards his wife
:

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said, "One day, some people came to (Imam) Husayn bin
Ali and said to him, 'O son of the messenger of Allah! We see some
things in your house that we hate.' There were simple carpets and
cushions in his house. He (Imam Husayn) said, 'We get married to women
and pay them their dowries by which they buy whatever they like that we
have nothing to do with it."' 3

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 7/ 130.
2 Al-Kafi, 6/ 476.
3 Musnad al-Imam al-Shahid, 3/ 245.

It is clear that according to the Islamic criteria this kind of life is
not luxurious extravagance, which is forbidden and not allowed for any
Muslim. The phrase 'simple carpets' in the tradition implies the same
thing, too.

Keeping away from the forbidden extravagance, the rest of lawful and
moderate furniture is up to women's taste and artistic feelings. They
can decorate the house as they like and feel beauty. This is the most
amount of respect to women's thought, understanding, and taste in the
family, denying any imposition and superiority of men.

When two different tastes exist in the family, sometimes men's tastes
and feelings overcome the women's. This is in fact a non-Islamic moral,
contrary to what was mentioned about the life of Imam Husayn (a.s).
Woman's opinions should also be taken into account concerning food and
men should follow their family's taste. This has been stated in the
following Prophet's tradition.

The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, "A faithful man eats as his wife
likes, but as for a hypocrite, his wife eats as he likes." 1 This is
another moral of true Muslims, who regard their wives' artistic feelings
and tastes, contrary to hypocrite people. Can we find such importance
and value given to women in the western feminist movements? Do they
really advocate women?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 62/ 291.

**Love of Women and its Position in Faith**

Imam Sadiq (a.s) said, "Whenever one loves his wife more, his faith
increases." 1

Imam Sadiq (a.s) in another tradition has compared the love of the
Divine leaders with the love of women. He said, "... whenever he (an
adherent) loves us more, he loves women more." 2

Keeping in mind that Islam denies excessive lust as the only goal of
marriage, the meaning of such traditions becomes clearer, proving the
value of compassion to women. Loving women approaches people to the
position of the Prophet (a.s.) in the Hereafter, too.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, "The nearest of you to me in my sitting place
on the Day of Judgment is the best of you to his wife." 3 It was pointed
out that one's faith depends on the kind of one's behavior toward women;
serving and treating them kindly promotes one's position. As was
mentioned in part (the Criterion of Preference) of the same chapter, the
Prophet (a.s.), the ever-best one in ethics, was the kindest of all to
his family, and this is the criterion of the Islamic beliefs.

One's religious perfection depends on marriage, too. The Islamic
teachings emphasize marriage and the marital relations as perfection of
one's belief. Abandoning the marital relationship, on the other hand, is
a destructive

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa;il al-Shi'a, 14/ 11.
2 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 8/ 507.
3 Ibid.
factor and a non-Islamic moral. In other words, leaving the society and
living a life of loneliness is incongruous with the Islamic teachings.
Only one tradition is sufficient in this regard :

Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrated from the Prophet (a.s.) his saying: "One, who
gets married, preserves a half of his religion...let him fear Allah in
the other half ..." 1

Thus, the true faith is guaranteed by marriage and marital relations,
while deserting marriage is a lack in faith. This completing role is a
great position given to woman in Islam, and not in any other school of
thought or other religion. The playing of this role is possible in two
ways; either the woman completes her husband's faith, or the marital
relations develop and maintain the faith. Anyhow, the value of woman and
her vital role in maintaining and strengthening the religious beliefs
become manifest.

**A Half of the Martyrs' Reward**

The human activities and attempts have different values and hence
require different rewards. The highest value and reward belongs to the
martyrs' sacrifice of their lives. So few activities may have as a half
of the reward of martyrdom. The Prophet (a.s.) has set such a reward for
women's work at home :

One day, some man came to the Prophet (a.s.) and said, "I have a wife
who welcomes me when I come home, and escorts me when I leave. When I am
sad, she asks me, Why are you sad? If you are worried about your
livelihood, know that our sustenance is not in your hands. And if you
are

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Al-Kafi, 5/329.

worried about your Hereafter, may Allah increase your sadness.' Prophet
Muhammad (a.s.) said to him, 'Surely, Allah has laborers, and this
(wife) is one of His laborers. She shall get like the half of the reward
of martyrs." 1

Woman's work at home and her kind behavior to her husband is as working
for Allah and it equals a half of the reward of martyrdom; a position
far above the specified rights of women.

Instances of valuing and advocating women are numerous in the Islamic
teachings, only some of which were mentioned in this cursory research.
In these last lines, a tradition of the great Prophet of Islam (a.s.)
deserves to be pointed out :

The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) was informed of Sa'd Ibn Ma'ath's death.
Hearing this, the Prophet (a.s.) hastened to Sa'd's house along with his
companions. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered to wash Sa'd's body while he (the
Prophet) was leaning to the door (looking sadly). Sa'd's body was
washed, embalmed with camphor, enshrouded, and put in a coffin. Then the
Prophet (a.s.) followed Sa'd's body (to the graveyard with others)
without his shoes and cloak.

He sometimes carried the right side of the coffin and sometimes the
left side, until they reached the graveyard. The Prophet (a.s.) then
came down in the grave, put the body inside it, placed bricks, and
frequently said, 'Give me some bricks! Give me some mud!' He leveled the
bricks by putting mud between them. Then, he poured soil on it and
smoothed its surface. He said, "I know that this grave would become old
and ruined, but Allah likes His servants when doing something to
complete it properly ...'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Wasa'il al-Shi'a, 14/ 17.

Then Sa'd's mother said, '0 Sa'd! May you enjoy the Paradise!' The
Prophet (a.s.) told her, 'Be quiet! Do not judge on your Lord's
verdicts! Sa'd is being afflicted by the pressing (of the grave) ...'
Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) returned and people followed him, asking, 'O
messenger of Allah! We saw that you did to Sa'd what you have never done
to anyone else; you followed his dead body with no shoes or cloak,
ordered to wash his body, offered the prayer on him, and put him in the
grave yourself. Then, you said that Sa'd was afflicted by the grave
pressing! The Prophet (a.s.) said, 'Yes, that is right, because there
was something bad in his treatment toward his wife." 1

Such respect and valuation from the Prophet (a.s.) implies that Sa'd
was certainly not sinful, disobedient, or oppressor servant, not
violating the obligatory rights of his wife and family. If he was so,
the Prophet (a.s.) would undoubtedly not regard him so highly or behave
so respectfully in his funerals, but would behave normally as toward
others. Sa'd was very pious Muslim and he certainly observed the rights
of his wife and family. The words of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.), however,
are about something more than the normal rights; it was the observing of
ethical values in treating women. In fact, Sa'd was pressed in the grave
because he was not good-tempered and humorous with his wife.

These delicate criteria exist in no other school, but in Islam. In the
end, it would be fit to mention a high and valuable saying of Sheikh
Saduq, whose deep knowledge of Islamic sciences is manifest to everyone.
The nearness of his age to the age of the infallible Imams (a.s) makes
his narrations still more authentic. In defining the obligations

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 6/220; quoted from Ilal al-Sharayi' and Amali of
Sheikh Toosi.

and criteria of Shiism, he says, "... from the conditions of the
Twelver Shia are 'certainty' (absolute faith in the oneness of Allah)
... 'trustworthiness to good and bad people (giving back deposits to
their faithful and unfaithful owners)' ... 'and being kind to women'." 1
Those who claim to be Shi'a should follow the principles of Shiism
principles and treat women accordingly.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Bihar al-Anwar, 10/ 405.

**Note from the Translator**

"Fatima is a part from me ..."

These are the words of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) about his daughter
Fatima az-Zahra (a.s), in the Arabian pagan era of burying the daughters
alive! It is the tribute of a father to his daughter in the same age and
place as the Arab fathers got dark faces from the news of their
daughters' birth! In fact, this is the praise and value Islam has given
to Muslim women, which is not observed in any other religion or school
of thought.

The present book seeks to review the Islamic support of woman's rights,
away from going to extremes, in order to manifest the woman's high
status and enlighten the opinion of the existing generation, and
especially women.

Being my third translation effort in the Islamic topics, this work is
hoped to be a little more successful than the other two, namely 'Shiism
in Sunnism' and 'Commentary on Du'a Kumayl'. However, I still need the
readers' probable suggestions and criticisms regarding my translation.
You can communicate with me at... haminia@gmail.com.


Qom, Birthday anniversary of Fatima al-Ma'suma (a.s).
November, 2007.


