Opinions Expressed By Distinguished Non-Muslims on The Martyrdom of Husayn Ibn Ali (A.S)
========================================================================================

A reminder of the blood-stained field of Karbala, where the grandson of
the Apostle of God fell at length tortured by thirst and surrounded by
the bodies of his murdered kinsmen, has been at anytime since then
sufficient to evoke, even in the most lukewarm and heedless, the deepest
emotions, the most frantic grief and an exaltation of spirit before
which pain, danger and death shrink to unconsidered trifles."  
 - E.G. Browne (A Literary History of Persia)

"In a distant age and clime the tragic scene of the death of Husayn will
awaken the sympathy of the coldest reader." "In the history of Islam,
especially the life of Imam Husayn stand unique, unapproached and
unapproachable by anyone. Without his martyrdom, Islam would have
extinguished long ago. He was the saviour of Islam and it was due to his
martyrdom that Islam took such a deep root, which it is neither possible
nor even imaginable to destroy now."  
 - Edward Gibbon (Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire)

"The best lesson which we get from the tragedy of Karbala is that Husayn
and his followers were the rigid believers of God, they illustrated that
numerical superiority does not count when it comes to truth and
falsehood. The victory of Husayn despite his minority marvels me."  
 - Thomas Carlyle (Hero and Hero-worship)

"If Husayn fought to quench his worldly desires, (as alleged by certain
Christian critics) then I do not understand why his sisters, wives and
children accompanied him. It stands to reason therefore that he
sacrificed purely for Islam."  
 - Charles Dickens

"It was possible for Husayn to save his life by submitting himself to
the will of Yazid. But his responsibility as a reformer did not allow
him to accept Yazid's Caliphate. He therefore prepared to embrace all
sorts of discomfort and inconvenience in order to deliver Islam from the
hands of the Omayyads. Under the blazing sun, on the parched land and
against the stifling heat of Arabia, stood the immortal Husayn."  
 - Washington Irving


