Foreword
========

1. We are pleased to announce, thanks due to the Almighty Allah for his
guidance, the publication of a complete English translation of the first
volume of the Arabic book entitled ‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ and Other Myths
written by the great scholar as-Sayyid Murtadha al-’Askari. Brother
Jawad Muqqadas undertook the translation.

2. The research in this book centers around those historical narrations
compiled by Sayf ibn ‘Umar al-Tamimi al-Usayyid, who lived in the second
century after Hijrah. These narrations are to be found in his books
covering the early Islamic events.

The contents of the two volumes of the book ‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ merely
represents one part of a series dealing with Sayf ibn ‘Umar's
narrations, stories and quotations. The second book in the series “One
Hundred and Fifty Fictitious Companions of the Prophet” has also been
published in Arabic and also consists of two volumes.

3. In this book, the author begins by describing both the Saba’iyyah
legend and its originator (Saif ibn ‘Umar). Further, he throws some
light on the narrations and the researchers who relied on such forgery
in their historical and ideological research. The opinions of the great
scholars of Islam about the in authenticity and the unreliability of
Sayf ibn ‘Umar are also given.

4. The author elaborated on the evaluation of Sayf's narrations which
cover events that took place between 11 A.H. and 40 A.H. (cf.
at-Tabari's History. In his critical evaluation, he plotted the
suspicious movements of this strange personality indicating those areas
where Sayf fabricated fictitious ahadith (traditions), stories and
events. Not only that, but the author points out the role of this
character in distorting, deforming and annulment of great Islamic
events, such events being of great significance in the structure of the
Islamic history. The timing of the events in question coincided with
that very critical period of the four Caliphs.

It is not an exaggeration to consider Sayf as being one of the most
characters who willfully endeavored to, and succeeded in, distorting the
early Islamic history.

The author started his research and critical evaluation by considering
the very first narration of Sayf, namely the event of the sickness and
death of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and the
events that took place at Saqifah (during which Abu Bakr was chosen as
the Caliph). The events that took place between Saqifah and the eventful
assassination of Imam ‘Ali are very well documented and critically
analyzed. The last narration by Sayf as documented by at-Tabari is in
fact the martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali (peace be upon him).

5. This is a brief resume of the researches in the two volumes of the
book. The first volume covered the majority of the researches in
question. The second volume, yet to be translated, completes the
researches and additionally, has conclusive remarks and some
afterthoughts pertaining to many of the researches in the first volume.
In the second volume, the author elaborates a great deal on the
Saba'iyyah legend.

6. The Saba'iyyah legend - as explained in the introduction of the
book - can be summarized thus:

A Yemenite Jew from San‘a declared his Islam at the time of ‘Uthman. He
willfully associated himself with Muslims and travelled in their cities
and towns: Sham (Damascus), Kufa, Basrah, Egypt, propagating among
Muslims that Prophet Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.f.) will be resurrected like
Jesus (p.b.u.h.). (It is the origin of the idea of resurrection in
Islam?!) He further taught that ‘Ali (p.b.u.h.) is Muhammad's vicegerent
since every prophet had a vicegerent.

Moreover, ‘Ali is the last vicegerent in the same way that Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.f.) was the last prophet. (This is how the belief in Imamah
or vicegerency has started?!) Moreover, he taught that ‘Uthman assumed
the caliphate illegally and thus violated ‘Ali's rights and hence
‘Uthman should be revolted against in order to restore the rights of
Imam ‘Ali (and this is the basis for the concept of the violation of
Khilafah?

The fictitious ‘Abdullah ibn Saba was also given a nickname: the son of
the negro slave. It was claimed that the historical events stretching
from ‘Uthman's time till the assassination of Imam ‘Ali (p.b.u.h.) were
influenced directly or indirectly by this Jew - as you will read in the
text of this book.

7. Naturally then, the book has been entitled ‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ and
Other Legendary Figures or Myths, since this heresy - a fabrication and
forgery by Sayf - has been used destructively more so than any other
heresy. Besides the willful exploitation of such a heresy, some people
could have used it with good faith but without bothering to authenticate
the narrators.

Ideological studies indicate that a lot of people opposing the Shi‘ah
School of Thought - a lot of whom being enemies of Islam anyway -
justify their enmity on this obvious heresy which they would exploit
rather excessively to back-up their attack on the Shi‘ahs, which
approach resembles very much the approach adopted by Sayf ibn ‘Umar
himself.

8. We will refrain from introducing either the author or the translator.
Suffice it to say that the reader himself would be able to appreciate
the great analytical ability of the author from the contents of the book
itself. Comparison of the English and Arabic versions of the
introduction would undoubtedly reveal the competency of the translator.

9. As far as our involvement is concerned, we have been able through
Allah's grace and conciliation, to contribute towards the propagation of
Islam. We have published a number of books and pamphlets dealing with
the true, original ideological and judicial aspect of Islam. Through the
literature published by our organization we have managed to rectify some
false notions about Islam.

This book is yet another publication that conforms with our basic aims
and concepts. It is no wonder then that we have endeavored to translate
it and print the English version accordingly.

Again the aim of such endeavor is merely to seek Allah's blessings, His
forgiveness, His bounties and His pleasure in this World and in the
World to come.

**World Organization For Islamic Services**  
 (Board of Writing, Translation and Publication)  
 1st November, 1977  
 18th Dhil qa‘da, 1397  
 Tehran — Iran.


