2. Saqifah
==========

Saif and Saqifah
----------------

The story of preliminary discussion and arguments at Saqifah surrounding
the succession of Abu Bakr as Caliph, (successor of the Prophet) is one
of the attractive stories told by Saif which needs careful
investigation. Saif says,

1) Es abah (vol.2, p.230). "They tell that Qa‘qa‘ Bin ‘Omar said, ‘When
the Prophet of God was going to die, I was present. A man came into the
Mosque at mid-day prayer time, and told some people that the Helpers
(Ansar) were going to elect Sa‘d Bin ‘Obaidah unanimously, as Caliph,
and ignore the covenant of the Prophet of God. The Mohajirs were very
concerned about this."

2) Tabari (vol.3, p.201). Events of the year eleven. "The narrator asked
‘Amr Bin Horaith, ‘Were you present when the Prophet of God died?' The
answer was yes. The second question was, ‘On which day was Abu Bakr
elected?' and the answer, ‘On the very day that the Prophet died,
because the people did not want to be unorganized even for half a day.'
Then he asked, ‘Was there any opposition?' ‘No, only from heretics or
those who were almost heretics.' ‘Did any member of the Immigrant party
oppose him?' was next asked, and the answer was, ‘No, they all gave
their allegiance to Abu Bakr freely, one after the other.'

3) Tabari, regarding the Helpers support for Sa‘d Bin ‘Obaidah, and
their rejection of Abu Bakr, says, "Dahhak Bin Khalifah said that Hobab
Bin Mondher stood with sword in hand saying, ‘(I am but a crutch to be
leaned upon). I am the wood upon which the camels scratch themselves at
the place where they do sleep; I am that big tree under which they do
seek shade and shelter. I fear harm from no wind. I am the father of the
lion cubs in their den.'

"‘Omar jumped quickly forward and knocked the sword from the hand of
Hobab. ‘Omar picked up the sword and attacked Sa‘d Bin Hobab, and other
people who were against Sa‘d, gave their support to Abu Bakr, helping
him to win the election.

"The support of the Helpers (Ansar) in favor of Sa‘d was a mistake like
that in Jaheliyyah (the age of ignorance before Islam). Fortunately Abu
Bakr firmly opposed Sa‘d and swayed people's support in his own favor.
When the people attacked Sa‘d, someone cried that he was killed.

‘Omar said, ‘May God kill him, he is a hypocrite.' Then ‘Omar took the
sword and broke it against a rock."

4) (Tabari, after the above story). Mobashsher said that Jaber related
thus — "Sa‘d said to Abu Bakr, ‘O you Immigrants you were jealous of my
position as the head of the state, and as for you Abu Bakr, you forced
me to comply with you, with the help of your own tribe.' The Immigrant
replied, ‘If we forced you to leave the mass you had the right to oppose
us, but we are forcing you to keep within the mass. Now if you oppose
the general body of the Muslims you will be beheaded.'

5) Tabari. "‘Ali was in his house when the news reached him that the
people had given their allegiance to Abu Bakr. Still in his night shirt,
he rushed out, going at once to Abu Bakr, and shook hands with him.
Later on, his clothes were brought to him and he dressed."

6) Tabari, "Abu Bakr delivered two long speeches on the day following
the death of the Prophet of God. He spoke mostly of the uncertainty of
the world, of the destruction of mankind, and the day of the hereafter.
He strongly stressed the devil which was within him saying, ‘There is a
spirit of evil invested in me. Avoid me when this evil power overcomes
me, in case I usurp not only your possession, but your souls.' "

7) Tabari, Mobashshir Bin Fodail related that Jobair (the bodyguard of
the Prophet) said that his father said, "Khalid Bin Sa‘eed Bin ‘As came
to Medina from Yemen, a month after the Prophet of Islam died. He was
wearing a coat of silk when he met ‘Omar and ‘Ali. ‘Omar shouted, ‘Tear
Khalid's coat to pieces for he is wearing silk in peace time.' Khalid
turned and spoke to ‘Ali saying,

‘O Abul Hasan, O’ children of ‘Abd Manaf — you gave up the succession to
the Prophet, so you have been vanquished. O children of ‘Abd Manaf only
you deserve to be the Prophet's successor.' ‘Omar said, ‘O Khalid — may
God cut out your tongue; Liars will forever use your words against
Islam, and this will eventually be against themselves.' ‘Omar later
reported to Abu Bakr this meeting with Khalid. A long time afterwards
‘Omar prevented Abu Bakr from making Khalid the Commander of an army
fighting against the heretics.

‘Omar told Abu Bakr that Khalid was despicable, who had told a lie which
had caused to gossip forever — and so his help should not be sought. Abu
Bakr sent Khalid to Syria as the assistant to the Army Commander at
Tima; for Abu Bakr had only half listened to ‘Omar."

An investigation into the truth of the stories concerning Saqifah recorded by Saif
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) The integrity and the character of the narrators.

2) The content of Saif's stories.

a) Saif has recorded his first story from Qa‘qa‘ Bin ‘Amr al-Tamimi. But
Qa‘qa‘ is but a fictitious character invented by Saif, and it is only in
Saif's book that he appears.

There is no trace of Qa‘qa‘ anywhere else except in the books whose
authors quote from Saif. After Saif, unfortunately, other historians and
writers have named places, battlefields, poems and social activities
concerning Qa‘qa‘, and have named him as one of the companions of the
Prophet (see fictional companions). Saif recorded his fourth story from
Mobashshir, whose name cannot be found anywhere, except in the stories
of Saif.

Sakhr is another fictitious character invented by Saif, and he appeared
in the last of Saif's stories. Saif introduced him as the bodyguard of
the Prophet, and yet his name does not appear in any "Who's who."

b) The content of Saif's stories. Saif was an expert at presenting
fiction as truth and at distorting true stories to suit his purpose. One
instance is when he says, "The day that the Prophet of God died, a man
came into the Mosque and said,

‘People are going to elect Sa‘d as the successor of the Prophet and
break the conversant of the Prophet.' On reading this, one gets the
impression that the Prophet had appointed a successor before he died,
and that Ansar (The Helpers Party) were betraying the Prophet." Saif
also says that Osama had sent

‘Omar to Abu Bakr after he heard the news of the Prophet's death. By
saying this he wants to convey that Abu Bakr was already appointed as
Caliph before the Prophet died.

The story teller
----------------

The crucial meeting at Saqifah, which led to the appointment of Abu Bakr
as Caliph, was the corner stone of authority for the Caliphs and
Mo'awiah. Saif the story teller, twisted the results of this meeting to
suit his own views. We will study the events of that meeting, written by
some learned Sunni historians before examining Saif's record of it.

Saqifah and other historians apart from Saif — Saqifah and Abu Bakr
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Preparations for the meeting at Saqifah began before the death of the
Prophet. On his deathbed, the Prophet attempted to clear the Islamic
state Capital of the Party leaders, and keep ‘Ali alone in Medina. He
repeatedly commanded the leaders to leave Medina and join the troops
going to the Syria Battlefield.

They disregarded the Prophet's orders and deliberately delayed' the
armies departure until the Prophet died. During this period of delay, a
very strange event took place which changed the course of history.

Did the Prophet express his wishes in writing?

The last moments of the Prophet were approaching. Medina was in a state
of panic. Everyone felt that the leader of man, was leaving the world
forever. The Prophet had a plan for this moment in time; it was in his
mind to clear Medina of Party Leaders, but they refused to go.

They also had a plan, and were watching events closely. They prevented
the Prophet from leaving a document with the Muslims for the guidance of
man.

According to Tabaqat by Bin Sa‘d vol.2, pp.243-244, ‘Omar Khattab
himself says, "We were at the side of the Prophet and the ladies were
sitting behind the curtain, then the Prophet of God said, ‘Wash me with
seven skin-fills of water, and bring me ink and paper in order that I
may write a note for you to prevent you from ever going astray.'

The women said, ‘Fetch the Prophet of God that which he needs."'
Maghrizi says\_ that this was said by Zainab daughter of Jahash, the
wife of the Prophet, and the women who were with her. ‘Omar said, " I
told the women to be quiet, that they were the women who closed their
eyes and pretended t a cry when the Prophet was sick, but who put
pressure on his throat when he was well." At that moment the Prophet of
God said to the men, "Women are better than you."

In Tabaqat, vol.2, p.242, Ibn Sa‘d has recorded that Jaber said, "The
Prophet, at his deathbed, asked for paper and pen in order that he may
write a note for his people, giving them instructions what to do, in
order that they would not go or be led astray. But the people gathered
there made such a fuss that the Prophet gave up his idea."

In Mosnad Hanbal, vol.1, p.293, (commentary by Ahmed Shaker, Hadith
2676) Ibn ‘Abbas said, when the Prophet's death was near he said, "Fetch
me a sheep's shoulder blade, and I will write you a note. Then after my
death, no two persons will disagree one with the other." Those present
made a lot of noise and a lady asked, "Do you not see that the Prophet
is going to make a will?"

Ibn ‘Abbas in another place has said; the Prophet during his final
illness, said, "Fetch me paper and ink to write you a note, so that you
will not go astray after my death." ‘Omar Khattab said that there were
still cities, such as so and so, to be captured, and that the Prophet
would not die until he had taken them. In case he died they would wait
for his return as the Israelites waited for Moses. Zainab, the wife of
the Prophet at this moment said, "Can you not see that the Prophet is
going to make a will?"

Then there was a great noise and unrest and the Prophet said, "Get out;
all of you," then at once he passed away.

From the events we have mentioned, and those about which we are going to
write, it becomes clear that despite the weakness of the Prophet before
his death, he did ask for the ink and paper, but those present caused so
much confusion that the Prophet gave up his request. Our explanation
which follows shows that because of deliberate and irrelevant arguments,
the Prophet had no alternative but to give up his idea.

In the book Sahih Bukhari, Ibn ‘Abbas said, "Oh Thursday, what a day,"
and so sad was he that his tears ran on the pebbles beneath. "When the
illness of the Prophet of God worsened," the Prophet said, "Fetch me
paper and ink that I may write a note, to save you from going astray
when I am gone."

Then there were more arguments and discussions amongst those present,
although there should be no argument in the presence of a Prophet. Some
said that the Prophet was speaking deliriously. Then the Prophet said,

"Leave me alone, I would like solitude at the moment."

In another place Ibn ‘Abbas has introduced the man who uttered that
sentence. He tells us in the book of Sahih Bukhari that the Prophet on
his deathbed said, "Do not waste time. Let me write something to save
you from going astray." ‘Omar who was among the gathering said,
"Sickness has clouded the mind of the man, the Qur'an the Book of God,
is with us, and it is sufficient." Then there started an uproar and
arguments. The Prophet was annoyed and said, "Get out, you should not
argue and contradict one another in my presence."

In the book Musnad Hanbal and Tabaqat it is told as follows:- "They
talked so much nonsense that it made the Prophet unhappy." Later Ibn
‘Abbas used to say, " I t was an instant of great misfortune that when
they talked nonsense they prevented the Prophet from writing the
message."

In all the above narrations, no one but ‘Omar has been named as the one
who prevented the Prophet from writing the note. ‘Omar was who told the
women, "You are mistresses."

‘Omar it was who seriously rebuked the wives of the Prophet, speaking to
them in a very impolite manner. ‘Omar made this rude remark to the
women. when they said "Fetch paper and ink, the Prophet wishes to
write." ‘Omar was the person who said, "If the Prophet dies who will
conquer the Roman cities?" ‘Omar was the person, who after finding the
majority in favor of granting the Prophet's request and bringing him
paper and ink, said, "The sickness has overcome the man. He talks
deliriously. The Holy Qur’an the Book of God is with us — it is
sufficient." ‘Omar it was who said that the Prophet talked deliriously.

With such talks he achieved his goals because even if some say, why
didn't the Prophet insisted on nominating someone in writing? We should
note however that even a written document would have had no much value,
because with ‘Omar's accusation they would have said that writing was
done when he was delirious and not knowing what he is doing. This has
also been cited by Ibn ‘Abbas.

According to a narration from Ibn ‘Abbas, a man approached the Prophet
and asked him if he still needed the paper and the ink. The Prophet
replied, "After this then what?" Meaning that after someone had said he
was talking deliriously it would be assumed that anything he wrote would
be invalid, because it was written during delirium.

It can be seen that ‘Omar worked his mischievous plan very cunningly by
making that statement; and that he prevented the Prophet from writing a
note to save Muslims from going astray after his death.

After the above explanation perhaps ‘Omar should have been asked the
following question, "You dared to accuse the Prophet of speaking
deliriously — why then did you not object to the will of Abu Bakr which
he dictated during delirium?"

In Tabari vol.4, p.52, Abu Bakr on his deathbed, received ‘Othman alone.
He told him to write, "In the name of the Most Merciful, this is my
will. A recommendation to Muslims from me — Abu Bakr Bin Abi Qahafa."
Just at this moment he fell unconscious so ‘Othman continued the will,
in the same vain, as follows, " I have decided to make ‘Omar my
successor my Caliph. I have done my best for you."

At this point Abu Bakr recovered and said, "Read back to me that which
is written." ‘Othman did so, and Abu Bakr then said, "God is Great. You
were afraid that I died without recovering my senses, the Muslims would
have been without a Caliph, and would have gone astray." ‘Othman agreed,
and Abu Bakr said, "May God reward you well for the help you have given
to Muslims and Islam."

‘Omar should have been asked, "What is your reaction to the will of Abu
Bakr?" ‘Omar was at his home, surrounded by his friends, dressed up and
awaiting the arrival of Abu- bakr's slave bringing the will, the
contents of which then would be made official. ‘Omar received the
letter, and thus addressed the audience, "Listen O people; obey that
which the Caliph of God has said. The Caliph says that he has done his
best for you.

" This same ‘Omar, who prevented the Prophet from writing a note during
his last sickness and said, "This man is speaking deliriously — The Book
of God is sufficient for us," now agreed with Abu Bakr's letter, which
was written on his deathbed during delirium. Ibn ‘Abbas was indeed right
to weep, so that the pebbles on the ground were wet with tears.

The Prophet's Death
-------------------

At mid-day on Monday, the Prophet of God passed away in his room at
Medina. ‘Omar was there, and Abu Bakr, was at his residence, Sanh, which
was one mile away from Medina. ‘Omar and Moghairah were given permission
to enter the room where the Prophet was lying. ‘Omar drew back the cloth
covering the face of the Prophet saying,

"The Prophet is in a deep coma." Moghairah said to ‘Omar as they were
leaving the room, "But you knew that the Prophet of God was dead." ‘Omar
said to him, "You are lying, the Prophet is not dead. You are a trouble
maker. The Prophet of God will never die until he destroys all
hypocrites." ‘Omar threatened those who said that the Prophet was dead,
with their own death. He announced —

"Some hypocrites think that the Prophet of God has passed away, he has
not. He has gone to God just as Moses did for forty days. People thought
that Moses had died but he came back — and so will the Prophet of God
return, and he will cut the hands and feet of those who thought he was
dead."

‘Omar said, " I will behead whosoever says that the Prophet is dead —
the Prophet of God has ascended into the Heaven." Ibn Maktum ‘Amr Bin
Qais then recited a passage of the Qur'an which says, "Muhammad is a
Prophet like those who died before him. Will you return to your former
ways because he is dead?

Whoever turns back does not harm God, but God will reward the faithful."
‘Abbas the uncle of the Prophet said, "The Prophet of God is definitely
dead, I saw his face and it looked like the faces of Abdul Muttalib's
dead sons."

Then he asked the people, "Did the Prophet of God say anything to you at
all concerning his death? If so, please let us know." The people
answered that they knew nothing. Then he asked ‘Omar, "Do you know
anything?" But ‘Omar knew nothing also.

‘Abbas then addressed the people saying, "Bear witness, that no one
knows anything that the Prophet has said concerning his death. I swear
to God, who is the only God and no one is like Him, that the Prophet of
God has passed away." ‘Omar was still angry — roaring and making
threats, but ‘Abbas continued saying,

"The Prophet of God, like any other human being is subject to death and
to disease; and he has died. Bury him without delay. Does God kill us
once, and kill his Prophet twice? If what you say be true, God can raise
him from the grave. The Prophet of God has shown to man the right path
to prosperity and salvation in his life time."

‘Omar continued to shout, and was now foaming at the mouth in his anger.
Salim Bin ‘Obaid then went to Abu Bakr and told him what was happening.
He came to Medina and saw ‘Omar standing there threatening the people,
saying, "The Prophet of God is alive.

He is not dead. He will come out of his room and cut off the hands of
those who spread lies about him — he will behead them — he will hang
them." When ‘Omar saw Abu Bakr he calmed down; Abu Bakr praised God
saying, "For those who worship God, God is alive, but for those who
worship Muhammad, Muhammad is dead."

He then recited from Qur'an, "Muhammad was a prophet. Before him many
prophets passed away." ‘Omar asked if that was a passage from the Qur'an
and Abu Bakr confirmed that it was. But the speech of Moghaira, the
reciting from the Qur'an by ‘Amr Bin Qais, and ‘Abbas's, the uncle
reasoning, failed to convince ‘Omar that the Prophet was dead, but he
did listen quietly to Abu Bakr.

Let us hear the story from ‘Omar himself. " I swear by God, when I heard
Abu Bakr reciting the verse my knees gave way so that I fell on the
floor, unable to rise, and I realized that the Prophet of God was dead."
Was ‘Omar that day, so much upset by losing the Prophet of God, that he
lost control of himself; and is it true that he became mad on that day
as some historians have written? We do not believe these ideas, as we
know the reasons behind his distortion of the truth.

Ibn Abil Hadid says, "When ‘Omar learned of the death of the Prophet, he
became anxious in case there was any argument concerning the successor
to the Prophet. He was afraid that the Ansar Party or some others would
gain power, so he created doubts and displayed a reluctance to accept
the death of the Prophet, as a safeguard to the Faith until the arrival
of Abu Bakr."

Ibn Abil Hadid is correct, because ‘Omar was afraid that if ‘Ali won the
election, there were only three candidates for the succession, and ‘Omar
gave his support to the third one — that is, Abu Bakr. The three
candidates were:-

1 ) ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, who was supported by the following:-

a) Banu Hashim, the family of the Prophet.

b) Abu Sufyan, the chief of the opposition before his conversion to
Islam.

c) Khalid Bin Sa‘eed Amawi, Bara Ibn Azib Ansari, Salman, Abu Dharr,
Meqdad and other eminent companions of the Prophet of God.

2) Sa'd Bin ‘Obaidah Ansari who was the candidate of Khazraj Tribe
(Helpers Party).

3) Abu Bakr whose supporters were ‘Omar, Moghaira Bin Sho‘ba, and Abdur
Rahman Bin ‘Auf. ‘Ali and Abu Bakr stood the best chance to win the
election, as the second candidate was from the Ansar's Party and had no
support from the immigrants. If ‘Ali had been present at the election

after the Prophet's funeral, he would have gained more votes than Abu
Bakr, because the immigrants, the Ansars and all of the ‘Abd Manaf tribe
were on his side. So that all that ‘Omar (Abu Hafs) did, before and
after the death of the Prophet, was caused by his fear that ‘Ali would
be brought to power.

The truth is this: If the death of the Prophet had so much upset ‘Omar,
he would have stayed and helped with the funeral preparations, instead
of saying that the Prophet was not dead, and running off to Saqifah to
elect the successor to the Prophet.

Ibn Hesham says, "When ‘Omar and Abu Bakr (the two Sheikhs) learned of
the death of the Prophet, ‘Omar told Abu Bakr, "Let us go and see what
the Ansars are doing?" The body of the Prophet was lying in his room and
according to Tabari, ‘Omar and Abu Bakr left ‘Ali at the bedside of the
Prophet, preparing him for the burial, and went off to Saqifah. On the
way there they met Abu ‘Obaidah Jarrah and he went with them to Saqifah.

The Ansars were at Saqifah and they were joined by the immigrants. No
one, but his family, helped in the preparation for the burial of the
Prophet.

Abu Dhowaib Hodhali says, " I arrived at Medina to find people were
crying and weeping as though at the beginning of the pilgrimage. I asked
the reason, they told me that the Prophet had died. I hurried off to the
mosque but found no one there.

The door of the Prophet's room was closed, and I was told that he was in
his room with his family around him. I asked where had all the people
gone, and was told that they had gone to Saqifah to join the Ansars. The
only people who stayed at the Prophet's house to prepare him for burial
were, his uncle ‘Abbas, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Fadhl Bin ‘Abbas, Qathm Bin
‘Abbas, Osama Bin Hareth and his slave Saleh. ‘Ali wearing only a
shirt', lifted the Prophet on to his chest.

‘Abbas, Fadhl and Qathm helped ‘Ali to turn the Prophet over. Osama and
Saleh poured out the water, and ‘Ali washed the Prophet. Aus Bin Khawali
Ansari stood by, looking on."

The candidates before the burial of the Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

Canvassing for a successor to the Prophet began before his burial. ‘Ali
was one of the candidates. Ibn Sa‘d has written in Tabaqat that ‘Abbas
said to ‘Ali, " I will shake hands with you publicly, as a sign of
allegiance, and to encourage others to do the same."

Mas‘oudi says that ‘Abbas said to ‘Ali, "Let me shake the hand of
allegiance — O son of my brother, in order that there will be no dispute
about you being the successor of the Prophet." Dhahabi and others say
that ‘Abbas said, "Let me shake the hand of allegiance with you, so that
people say that the uncle and his family have shaken the hand of the
nephew; and once the election is over it cannot be dissolved."

Jowhari says that ‘Abbas blamed ‘Ali later, saying to him, "When the
Prophet died, Abu Sufyan and I came to you, wanting you to let the chief
of the clan and myself shake hands with you. The tribe of Bani Hashim
would have done likewise.

Once the ‘Abd Manaf and Bani Hashim tribes were on your side, your
succession would have been firmly established. But you told us to
postpone this matter until after the funeral of the Prophet."

Tabari says that ‘Abbas told ‘Ali not to waste time, but ‘Ali refused to
listen to him. ‘Ali was not short of supporters, but to him the funeral
of the Prophet was of greater importance at that time than the need to
seize power. He was most reluctant to take part in any pre-election
activities for a successor to the Prophet whilst the Prophet lay dead
and unattended. ‘Ali's reluctance to grab power caused ‘Abbas to blame
him for his delay. But in fact the proposal and accusation were
irrelevant because:-

a) The Prophet had already appointed ‘Ali as his successor as some
Muslims believe; and if Muslims wanted to accept that which the Prophet
had said, they would not say he had spoken in delirium.

b) If Muslim affairs had been left in their own hands by the Prophet,
the interference of ‘Abbas would rob Muslims of their right to elect
anyone as leader.

Second candidate for the succession to the Prophet
--------------------------------------------------

The second candidate was Sa‘d Bin ‘Obaidah who, in spite of his illness,
was brought to Saqifah. He was given a vote of confidence by the Ansars.
He began his speech by praising God, and reminding the people how good
and helpful the Ansars were to Islam and to the Prophet, also that they
held the respect of the Prophet — that he had confidence in them right
up to the day of his death.

Then he said to the Ansars, "You must see to this matter of the
succession." He won the unanimous vote of the Ansars Party, but some
people wondered what the solution would be if they were opposed by the
immigrant party, because they came from Mecca with the Prophet, and were
his relatives. Some replied that one leader would be elected by the
Ansars, and one by the immigrants, those two leaders would work jointly.
Sa‘d condemned this saying, it would be a failure.

The Successful Candidate
------------------------

On hearing that the people had gathered together at Saqifah, Abu Bakr
and ‘Omar went there. They were joined on the way by some of their
friends namely, — Osaid Bin Hodhair, Owaim Bin Saedeh, ‘Asem Bin ‘Adi
who was from the al-‘Ajlan tribe from the Ansars, Moghaira Bin Sho‘bah
and Abdur Rahman Bin ‘Auf. (When Abu Bakr and ‘Omar came to power, these
men who joined them on the journey, were well favored.)

Abu Bakr like Osaid Ibn Hozair more than other Ansars and ‘Omar used to
call him his brother. Abu Bakr showed his affection to him after he
died.

When ‘Owaim died, ‘Omar sat on his grave and said, "No one on earth can
say that he is better than the man resting in this grave." Abu ‘Obaidah
was nominated as the chief of army sent to fight with the Roman Empire.
When ‘Omar wanted to nominate a successor for himself, he regretted that
Abu ‘Obaidah is not alive, to name him the next Caliph to the Muslims.

As for Moghaira Ibn Sho‘bah, ‘Omar waved the punishment of adultery
about him and he was always among the chiefs when ‘Omar was a Caliph.
‘Omar also helped Abdur Rahman Bin ‘Auf a lot, and choose him as the key
man in choosing the third Caliph.

These men were the ones who left the body of the Prophet and did not
participate in his funeral, instead they rushed to Saqifah to choose the
first Caliph, and clashed with Ansars in ruling the Muslims.

After subduing ‘Omar at Saqifah, Abu Bakr praised God and said, "Islam
was pioneered by the immigrants, and they were the first people on earth
to worship God and believe in the Prophet. They were the friends and
relatives of the Prophet, so they deserve to succeed him. None but an
unjust person would argue with them." Then Abu Bakr praised the Ansars,
saying, "No one but the first immigrants are closer to us than you. They
will be the leaders and you will be the Ministers."

Hobab Bin Monzar said, " O Ansars, be firm and united in order that
others will serve you, and no one will dare to contradict you. Otherwise
these people (the immigrants) will act in accordance with Abu Bakr's
plan which you have just heard, we choose a ruler for ourselves and let
them, choose one for themselves.

‘Omar said, "By God, two rulers cannot rule at the same time, in one
place. The Arabs will not submit to you (the Ansars) because the Prophet
was an immigrant — of this we have clear proof. Only those who have
forsaken Islam will argue about the succession to the authority of
Muhammad." Hobab Bin Monzar again stood up and addressed, the gathering
saying; “ O Ansars do not listen to these men,

‘Omar and his friends. They will usurp your rights and rob you of
freedom of choice. If they disagree with you send them home, and form
the Government you wish to have. By God, you deserve to be the ruler
more than anyone else. These people (the immigrants) are same people who
disbelieved the Prophet before; and if it was not for the fear they have
for your swords, they would never have submitted to Islam.

Then he continued to express his support for the Ansars should they need
it — as the log of wood against which the camels scratch themselves, or
as a huge tree under which people take refuge during a storm. Then he
said: "We will make war if necessary, and impose our will on those who
oppose us." ‘Omar said: "May God kill you," knocking him down on to the
ground, kicking him, and ramming earth into his mouth.

Abu ‘Obaidah then said: " O Ansars Party, you were the first helpers of
Islam, do not be the first betrayers."

Then Bashir Bin Sa‘d of the tribe of Khazraj and of the Ansar Party
spoke in favor of the Immigrants Party in op- position to Sa‘d Bin
‘Obaidah. These two leaders of the Ansar Party had been rivals before
they embraced Islam. Bashir Bin Sa‘d said: “ O people of the Ansars
Party, we the Ansars fought pagans, and helped Islam, not for worldly
honor but only to please God.

We should not seek superiority. Muhammad was from Quraish, the
immigrants, and one of his relations deserves to be his successor more
than any of us. I swear by God, that I will not argue with them. I hope
you will not either."

Abu Bakr then said: "‘Omar and Abu ‘Obaidah are at your disposal,
acknowledge either one of them as your leader." But ‘Omar and Abu
‘Obaidah replied that as long as Abu Bakr was there, they would not
agree to this selection.

Abdur Rahman Bin ‘Auf said: “ O Ansars, it is agreed that you are
superior, but there is none among you like unto Abu Bakr, ‘Omar and
‘Ali.

Mundher Bin Arqam said: "We do not deny the superiority of those you
have mentioned, especially one whom no one would deny." He was speaking
of ‘Ali. At this moment Ansars and some other people shouted, "We want
no one but ‘Ali."

According to Tabari and Ibn Athir, when the Ansars realized that Abu
Bakr was about to win the election with the help of ‘Omar's support they
said that ‘Ali was the only one they wanted.

Zobair Bin Bakkar said that after the Ansars lost the election they
joined together and chanted, "We want ‘Ali . "

It is recorded that later ‘Omar said: "There was so much noise and
confusion that I was afraid there would be a rift, so I shook the hand
of Abu Bakr as Caliph." It is also recorded that afterwards ‘Omar also
said, " I was afraid that if the people dispersed without choosing a
successor, then later they might choose a person which whom we would
disagree thus causing a rift, or that they may give that person their
support unwillingly."

‘Omar and Abu ‘Obaidah walked towards Abu Bakr, but Bashir Bin Sa‘d of
the Khazraj Tribe, moved more quickly, shaking the hand of Abu Bakr
first, thus recognizing him as the successor of the Prophet.

Hobab Bin Monzar shouted at Bashir saying: “ O Bashir Bin Sa‘d, O
misfortunate one, even your parents were displeased with you. You have
ignored the family bond, you could not bear to see your cousin (Sa‘d)
become Ruler." Bashir said, "No, you are wrong, I did not want to
disagree with the choice of the people. God has given them that right."

The Oas Tribe saw that the Khazraj tribe were solidly in favor of their
chief — their candidate Sa‘d. Therefore, they decided to support Abu
Bakr, thinking that if Sa‘d was elected, the Oas Tribe would have no
voice in future matters. When Sa‘d's cousin, Bashir, openly gave his
support to Abu Bakr in disregard of his tribesmen's decision, then the
Oas Tribe were further encouraged to support Abu Bakr and Osaid Bin
Hozair, one of the chiefs of the Oas Tribe, quickly shook Abu Bakr's
hand.

When the people saw that the Khazraj Tribe had many opponents, they
stood up and gave their support to Abu Bakr, and according to Ya‘qoubi,
they shook his hand. It was during this time that Sa‘d Bin ‘Obaidah was
almost crushed under the feet of the people as they jumped over the rug
on which he as sitting. Sa‘d guards were yelling — "Keep clear, give
Sa‘d some room to breathe." It was then that ‘Omar shouted, "Kill Sa‘d —
may God kill him." Then approached Sa‘d saying, " I want to crush you
under my feet."

At this, Qais Bin Sa‘d said to ‘Omar, "If you harm but one hair of
Sa‘d's head it will cost you all your teeth."

Abu Bakr shouted, "‘Omar, be quiet. In these delicate circumstances we
need calmness above all." ‘Omar moved away from Sa‘d, but Sa‘d shouted
out after him, "If I was able to rise, I would create such an uproar in
Medina, that you and your friends would hide in fear.

Then I would send you back to the people as their servant, and not as
their ruler." Then turning to his people he said, "Take me from this
place." This they did.

Jouhari has recorded that on that day, ‘Omar who was suitably dressed
for the occasion, ran in front of Abu Bakr and shouted, "Pay attention,
people have shaken the hand of Abu Bakr in allegiance — you too, must do
likewise."

Abu Bakr was then taken to the Mosque by the people, so that others
could shake his hand. At this time ‘Ali and ‘Abbas were still busy
washing the body of the Prophet, when they heard the call “Allaho Akbar”
coming from the Mosque. ‘Ali asked what was happening, ‘Abbas said it
was strange, but he had expected it.

Warning
-------

Bara' Bin Azeb went to the house of Bani Hashim's family shouting, “ O
Bani Hashim many people have shaken the hand of Abu Bakr in allegiance."
The family of Bath Hashim said to one another, "Previously Muslims did
not act like this without first consulting us, the close relatives of
Muhammad." ‘Abbas replied, "By God of Ka‘ba, all is over."

According to Bar Bin Azeb, as Ya‘qoubi has recorded, ‘Abbas then said to
the Bani Hashim family, "You have lost your power forever. I advised you
to take precautions, but you ignored my warnings."

Tabari has records that the tribe of Aslam came to Medina, crowding the
alley ways, shaking the hand of Abu Bakr in allegiance. Later ‘Omar used
to say, "By God, after I had seen the tribe of Aslam giving their
support to Abu Bakr, I was convinced that we had won."

Sheikh Mufid, in his book al-Jamal says that it was only by chance that
the tribe of Aslam was that day in Medina, as they had come to buy
provisions. They were told that they must support the successor of the
Prophet of God before they would be sold the provisions, so they did.
Abu Bakr's supporters took them to the Mosque where Abu Bakr sat in the
pulpit until the evening, shaking the hand of anyone who came forward.

The Public Allegiance
---------------------

The day following the events of Saqifah, Abu Bakr sat on the pulpit
steps of the Mosque. ‘Omar stood up, praised God and then said, "The
words I said yesterday were not from the Qur'an — nor were they the
words of the Prophet. I thought that the Prophet would see to everything
that concerned the people, and that he would be the last person to die.

He has left the Qur'an in your midst, and if you follow its
instructions, it will guide you as it guided the Prophet. Now your
guidance is in the hands of the best man amongst you — a Companion of
the Prophet, who was with him in the cave. Stand up and shake his hand."
Bokhari says that some agreed with the succession of Abu Bakr at
Saqifah, but that the greatest public show of allegiance took place at
the Mosque.

It is said by Anas Bin Malik, that Abu Bakr had to be persuaded by
‘Omar, to go and sit on the steps of the pulpit where people went to
shake his hand. After praising God Abu Bakr said, “ O people, your
allegiance is now pledged to me. I am not the best amongst you, but if I
am right then follow me. If I am wrong then guide me. If I obey God and
His Prophet, then obey me. If I do not obey God, and His Prophet, do not
obey me. Now stand up for the Prayer. May God forgive you."

After the Allegiance
--------------------

On the Monday that the Prophet of God — peace be upon him and his
progeny — passed away, instead of attending the funeral, the people took
part in three events lasting until the afternoon of the next day —
Tuesday.

1) Demonstrations.

2) Initial show of allegiance at Saqifah.

3) Final declaration of public allegiance at the Mosque which ended in
‘Omar's speech and by Abu Bakr leading the prayer for the multitude.

After the third series of events was over on the Tuesday, people then
visited the house of the Prophet to perform the prayer for the dead. One
by one, and group by group.

The Burial of the Prophet
-------------------------

The companions of the Prophet left him in the hands of his family. One
version states that ‘Abbas, ‘Ali, Fadhl and Saleh, the slave of the
Prophet, and they prepared his body for burial and they buried him.
Another report that ‘Ali, Fadhl, Qosam, the two sons of ‘Abbas and
Shoqran the slave of the Prophet, were in charge of the Prophet's
burial.

After the event when the public gave their allegiance, Jouhari in his
book Saqifa, says that Abu Bakr asked ‘Omar, Abu ‘Obaidah and Mughairah
to give their opinion regarding this event. They unanimously advised him
to obtain the consent of ‘Abbas, by allocating a reward to him. Then
after ‘Abbas had given his consent, ‘Ali could do nothing to oppose
them.

The four men went to ‘Abbas at night, and Abu Bakr, after praising God
said, "God sent His revelation, through Muhammad to guide us, and
Muhammad fulfilled his mission until God took him to Himself and gave
him his reward. Muhammad left the people to choose their own way, and
the people have chosen me as their leader. I have no fear. My success is
allowed by God, I trust in Him, and will return to Him.

Now the news comes that certain people have taken advantage of your
position, and criticize me in spite of the support of the public. We
have come to ask you to join us as the others have done, or to ask the
opposition to stop their activities. In return, we will reward you.
People know your position, and that of your friend, but they have put
you aside. O Bani Hashim be calm, the Prophet of God was as much ours as
he was yours." ‘Omar added, "Our coming to you does not mean we need
you. We just want you to join the others for your own sake, or else you
will be faced with unpleasant consequences, so think it over."

‘Abbas then, after praising God, said, "God chose Muhammad as a Prophet,
and helper to his friends, companions and faithful followers. God
favored Muslims by sending the Prophet Muhammad. Now God has taken him
to Himself, and left Muslims to manage their own affairs, to choose the
right leader to prevent them from going astray.

Now, Abu Bakr, if you have occupied this seat because of your
relationship to the Prophet, we are closer to him than you, and if you
have taken this seat by the authority of his followers, we are also his
followers whom you never consulted. If you have taken it as a duty on
behalf of the Muslims we have never given this right to you. You are
contradicting yourself by saying people have chosen you, and at the same
time saying that people do not give consent to your succession.

On the one hand you say that you are the Prophet's successor. On the
other hand you say that people have elected you. If what you are giving
me that which belongs to the faithful, you have no right to use it; and
if it is ours by right we want it in full — not in parts. We are the
branch of the Prophet's tree, you are but those who shelter in the
foliage. So be calm." Abu Bakr and his friends left ‘Abbas without
gaining their objectives.

Refuge in the house of Fatimah
------------------------------

‘Omar says, "After the death of the Prophet we learned that some people
had gathered at Fatimah's house to oppose us." These were ‘Ali, Zubair,
‘Abbas, ‘Ammar Bin Yasir, Otbah Bin Abi Lahab, Salman Farsi, Abu Dharr,
Migdad Bin Aswad, Bara’ Bin ‘Azeb, Obai Bin Ka‘b, Sa‘d Bin Waqqas and
Talha Bin ‘Obaidullah.

Others from the Muhajir and Ansar parties were named. As Muslims were
reluctant to name the differences, they only wrote that some people had
gathered together at Fatimah's house in opposition. By chance a few
sentences about the opposition are recorded in the history book of
Baladhori. Baladhori says that Abu Bakr, after being opposed by ‘Ali,
ordered ‘Omar to bring ‘Ali to him.

‘Omar met ‘Ali discussed the matter with him. ‘Ali said, to ‘Omar, "You
are milking the cow of succession, half being for Abu Bakr, and the
other half for yourself. So he is making you his successor." He also
said that Abu Bakr on his death-bed made this statement. "There are only
three things which I regret — I wish I had not searched Fatimah's house,
though they were preparing to fight us…."

Ya‘qoubi records in vol.2, p.115 of his book that Abu Bakr said, " I
wish I had not searched Fatimah's house, and had not sent men to harass
her; though if her house was being used as a shelter that would have
caused a war."

The historians named the following as those who went to the house of
Fatima to disperse people who sheltered there.

1) ‘Omar Bin Khattab

2) Khalid Bin Walid

3) Abdur Rahman Bin ‘Auf

4) Thabet Bin Shammas

5) Ziad Bin Labid

6) Muhammad Bin Maslamah

7) Salamah Bin Salem Bin Waqash

8) Salamah Bin Aslam

9) Osaid Bin Hodair

10) Zaid Bin Thabet

‘Ali, Zubair and some Muhajirs who opposed Abu Bakr's succession,
gathered in Fatimah's house, with some arms. A report reached Abu Bakr
that the opposition were gathered to give their allegiance to ‘Ali, so
he sent ‘Omar with some men to disperse them by force or otherwise.
‘Omar took some burning torches with him to Fatimah's house, and on
seeing the flames Fatima asked ‘Omar if he intended to burn down her
house, ‘Omar said, "Yes if you do not follow other Muslims and give your
allegiance to Abu Bakr."

It is written in the book of al-Imamah wa al-siyasah that ‘Omar ordered
the people out of the house, but they disregarded him. ‘Omar asked for
wood and told those inside the house, " If you do not come out, I will
burn the house. I swear by God who has my soul in his hands." Someone
told ‘Omar that Fatima was in the house and he said, " It is of no
consequence to me who is in the house."

In the book of Ansabul Ashraf, vol.l, p.586, it is written that Abu Bakr
asked ‘Ali to support him, but ‘Ali refused, then ‘Omar went towards
‘Ali's house with a burning torch. At the door he met Fatima who said to
him, "Do you intend to burn the door of my house?" ‘Omar said, "Yes,
because this strengthens the faith brought to us by your father."

Jouhari in his book says, "‘Omar and a few Muslims went to the house of
Fatima to burn it down and also burn those who were in opposition.

Ibn Shahna says, "To burn the house and inhabitants." It is written in
Kanz al-Ommal, vol.3, p.140 that ‘Omar said to Fatima, " I know that the
Prophet of God loved no one more than you, but this will not stop, me
carrying out my decision, if these people stay in your house, I will
burn down the door in front of you.

When Abdullah Bin Zubair was fighting for power, Bani Hashim's escaped
from him in a mountain pass. Abdullah gave an order for wood to be
brought to burn them.

‘Orwah, brother of Abdullah, made an excuse for his brother's inhumane
deed saying, "My brother threatened them, as they had been threatened on
a previous occasion when they would not give their allegiance." He meant
when the Bani Hashim's denied Abu Bakr's authority.

Hafiz Ibrahim (an Egyptian poet) has composed the following poem
concerning the story:-

‘Omar the great said to honorable ‘Ali,

I will burn your house down eventually,

If you do not recognize Abu Bakr's succession

To the throne of the Prophet and his mission, With Fatima inside. ‘Omar
was the only one

Who could say so to ‘Ali, the hero of ‘Adnan. (Abu Bakr on his deathbed
refuted the raid,

on Fatimah's house he had ordered to be made.)

Ya‘qoubi says: "They came in group and attacked the house of ‘Ali .....
and he (‘Omar) broke his (‘Ali's) sword, then (the group) entered the
house."

Tabari says, "‘Omar Bin Khattab came to ‘Ali's house whilst Talha and
Zubair and some Muhajirs were inside. Zubair came out and attacked
‘Omar, but he slipped and the sword fell from his hand. ‘Omar's
followers caught him and also caught ‘Ali whilst he was saying, " I am
the servant of God and the brother of the Prophet." They brought him to
Abu Bakr and told him to shake Abu Bakr's hand. ‘Ali said, " I am more
deserving of the position than him. You should shake the hand of
allegiance with me. Your argument with the Ansars concerning your
relationship with the Prophet, I can use the same argument as I am
closer to the Prophet than you. The Ansars accepted your reasoning, you
must also accept mine, or else you are transgressors."

‘Omar said, "We will not leave you until you agree with us." ‘Ali
replied, "Milk this cow and halve it with Abu Bakr. Do his work for him
today, and tomorrow he will make you his successor. I swear by God that
I will not listen to you ‘Omar, and I will not shake the hand of Abu
Bakr."

Abu Bakr said to ‘Ali, " I will not force you to agree with me." Abu
‘Obaidah said to ‘Ali, "You are young now, O Abul Hassan, these are the
elders and they know how to manage the successorship; follow them now,
and if you are spared you will succeed them, because of your advantages
and because you are closer to the Prophet; and the pioneer of Islam for
which you have fought holy wars."

‘Ali answered, “ O the Muhajir's party, fear God, do not rob Muhammad
and his family of their authority. Do not shift the focal point of Islam
to your house, from its original proper place. By God, as long as there
are men learned in the Qur'an, Islamic jurisprudence, and the traditions
of the Prophet, among us — the Prophet's family, we are more deserving
to succeed the Prophet. By God, our family have what you want. Do not
follow your desires, or else you will go further astray."

Bashir Bin Sa‘d said, " O ‘Ali, had the Ansars heard what you said just
now, no one would argue with you, but all is over, we have shaken hand
of Abu Bakr." Without shaking Abu Bakr's hand ‘Ali returned home.

Ibn Abil Hadid recorded from Jouhari that when Fatima saw how badly ‘Ali
and Zubair were treated, she came to the door and said, “ O Abu Bakr,
how soon you have deceived the family of the Prophet of God. I will
never talk to ‘Omar again as long as I live."

Another report says that Fatima whilst crying, came out and sent the
people away. Ya‘qoubi says that Fatima came out and said, "Get away from
my house, or else by God, I will uncover my head, and will lament to God
with unruffled hair." So the people dispersed from her house -. even
those who had sheltered there.

Nezam also says, "On this day ‘Omar hit Fatima on the stomach that
caused her drop her child, while shouting burn the house (when others
had left and only ‘Ali and his sons Hassan and Hossein were inside).

Mas‘oudi said that after the allegiance of Monday and Tuesday, ‘Ali came
to Abu Bakr and said to him, "You have ruined our position, you did not
consider us." Abu Bakr replied, "That is true, but I feared there would
be rioting and disturbance."

Ya‘qoubi also says that some people came to ‘Ali to shake the hand of
allegiance, but ‘Ali told them to come the next day, with shaved head,
but only three of them returned.

After the events of the allegiance, ‘Ali used to go with Fatima, mounted
on a donkey, canvassing for votes. But the people told Fatima, “ O
daughter of the Prophet of God, had your cousin asked us for our
support, we would not have chosen anyone else but him; but we have
already shaken hands with Abu Bakr.

‘Ali's answer was this, "Shame, did you expect me to leave the body of
the Prophet, and concern myself with fighting for power?" Fatima used to
say that ‘Ali had done what he should have done, and they did things
which God would question them about. Mo'awiah in his letter to ‘Ali,
mentioned the above story saying, " It seems that it was only yesterday
that you mounted your wife on the donkey, whom you should have kept
inside your home, holding the hands of your sons, Hassan and Hossein,
knocking on the doors of the houses of those persons who were present at
the Battle of Badr, and asking them not to support Abu Bakr, the friend
of the Prophet, but to give you their support.

However, only four or five persons agreed. I swear by my own soul, that
if you had been in the right they would have supported you. You claimed
that which was not yours. You said things unheard of before. I may have
a bad memory, but never will I forget the words you said to Abu Sufyan,
"Had I forty men I would go and obtain my rights from these people by
force."

In the Battle of Siffin, ‘Amr Bin ‘As reminded Mo'awiah that ‘Ali had
said, "If I had forty men. " etc. ‘Amr Bin ‘As meant that ‘Ali said this
on the day they raided Fatimah's house.

The end of the Events at the Allegiance
---------------------------------------

Osdulghabah, vol.3, p.222 writes: "The opposition agreed to accept Abu
Bakr six months after the public demonstration of allegiance to him."
Yaqubi vol.2, p.105, "‘Ali shook hands with Abu Bakr six months after
the public show of allegiance." Estiah vol.2, p.244 and Tanbih al-
Ashraf, p.250. "‘Ali did not shake hands with Abu Bakr until after
Fatima died." In al-Imamah Wal Siyasah it is recorded that ‘Ali gave his
allegiance to Abu Bakr after Fatima died, which was seventy-five days
after the death of the Prophet. According to Zubair, Fatima, after the
argument she had had with Abu Bakr about the heritage of the Prophet,
never spoke to him again.

‘Ali buried Fatima at dark without Abu Bakr's knowledge. As long as
Fatima was alive people respected ‘Ali, and after she died they deserted
him. Fatima lived only six months after the Prophet died. Zohari also
says that ‘Ali did not shake Abu Bakr's hand until six months after the
public show of allegiance and Banu Hashim's followed suit.

In Taysier al-Wosool, vol.2, p.46, Zohari says, "By God, ‘Ali did not
agree with Abu Bakr until six months had passed and the Banu Hashim's
followed suit. When ‘Ali saw that people were deserting him he allied
himself with Abu Bakr."

Belazori in Ansabul Ashraf, vol.1, p.587, says, "When the Arabs rejected
Islam and changed to heresy, ‘Othman went to ‘Ali and persuaded him to
support Abu Bakr, to en-courage the Muslims to fight the heretics under
Abu Bakr. ‘Ali shook the hand of allegiance with Abu Bakr, and the
unrest between Muslims was settled. Then the Muslim troops were prepared
to fight the heretics."

After the death of Fatima, and loss of interest in people, Muslims were
divided, Abu Bakr's position was firm, so ‘Ali was reconciled with him.
However, ‘Ali never forgot these events, even when he held the office of
successor to the Prophet.

In his sermon called Shaq-Shaqiah he says, "I had to be patient by
virtue of common sense, I patiently waited though it was as hard as
having thorn in my eyes, and a bone stuck in my throat. I saw my right
of inheritance to the Prophet being wrongly taken away from me, when the
days of the first one (Abu Bakr) expired, anal the light of his life
extinguished.

He passed the prize of succession of the Prophet to the hands of Bin
Khattab. Oh what a difference between riding on a camel, (to face
difficulties alone) and sitting in an armchair by Hayan, leading a happy
and care free life in the palace of his brother Jabir. It is surprising
that Abu Bakr was asking people to withdraw their allegiance from him as
successor to the Prophet, but before his death Abu Bakr firmly fixed
‘Omar to be successor. Those two plunderers divided the succession
between them-selves, as dividing two milk filled breasts of a camel."

Comments made by various people about the Allegiance
----------------------------------------------------

### A — Fadl Bin ‘Abbas

According to Ya‘qoubi, when the Bani Hashim family learned the news
about the appointment of Abu Bakr as the successor of the Prophet, Fadhl
Bin ‘Abbas said to Quraish Tribe, "You will never succeed the Prophet by
deceit, we deserve the position not you, we are the rightful ones,
specially our friend ‘Ali." Then ‘Otba Bin Abi Lahab read the following
poem:-

I never thought people would let Banu Hashim's down

Nor would they leave Abul Hasan on his own, He was the first man to
follow Muhammad,

And the last to leave his body — very sad.

To help and console ‘Ali, the angels descended

From Heaven to the Holy Prophet's deathbed.

‘Otba then received a message from ‘Ali asking him to stop, because it
was ‘Ali's wish that all Muslims should be of the same persuasion.

### B — Abdullah Bin Abbas

Had recorded this conversation with ‘Omar:-

‘Omar, "Do you know, Bin ‘Abbas, why the people did not support your
family, the relatives of Muhammad, to make them his successors?"

Abdullah, " If I do not know, then the Prince of the Faithful will
inform me."

‘Omar, "Bani Hashim's wished the Prophet, and all his successors to be
from their family, but we, the Quraish, successfully elected his
successor."

Abdullah, "May I be allowed to say something?"

‘Omar, "If you must, Bin ‘Abbas."

Abdullah, "It would have been better for the Quraish if they had been
satisfied with that which had been given to them by God; then there
would have been no envy. You said that this was not so, that the Quraish
did not like that which God had bestowed upon them. People such as this
are spoken of in the Qur'an, ‘Because they disliked God's revelations,
orders, their works came to nothing.' "

‘Omar, " I did not want to believe that which I heard about you, because
it would make me lose my respect of you forever."

Abdullah, " I f everything I have said is true I should not fear
disrespect, and if what I have said is wrong, then a person like me
should correct himself."

‘Omar, " I have heard that you had said we seized power by oppressing
the people whom we were jealous of?"

Abdullah, "Everyone knows how you used oppression, and also about your
jealousy, Satan envied Adam and we are the children of Adam who was
subject of jealousy."

### C — Salman Farsi

Jowhari has recorded that Salman, Zubair and Ansars wanted to shake the
hand of allegiance with ‘Ali, and when Abu Bakr became Caliph, Salman
said, "You obtained a little gold but you missed the mother lode. You
chose the old man and forgot the Prophet's family. Had you let them
succeed the Prophet you would have benefited more, and there would have
been no disagreement between Muslims."

### D — Umm Mestah

"Disagreement between ‘Ali and Abu Bakr has irritated Muslims." Umm
Mestah daughter of ‘Othathah, went to the grave of the Prophet and read
the following poem:

Disagreement between Muslims started Dear Prophet, soon after you
departed, Without you, we lost our spirit again Like flowers and grass
without the rain.

### E — Abu Dhar

He was not in Medina when the Prophet died, but when he heard Abu Bakr
had succeeded the Prophet he said, "You have received a small reward for
your efforts. Had you given your support to the Prophet's relatives'
claim to hold the position, you would have benefited greatly, and there
would have been no disagreement between Muslims."

### F — Miqdad

Ya‘qoubi has recorded in his book a story from a narrator who saw a man
in the mosque of Medina, in great distress as he had been robbed of his
great wealth. The man was saying, " I t is very strange that the
position has been taken out of the hands of the right 'people."

### G — A Lady From Bani Najjar

After Abu Bakr took the throne of the Khilafat, he sent some money to
each of the women of the Muhajirs and the Ansars, Zaid Bin Thabet
carried the share of a lady of Bani Najjar to her, but she refused to
accept it saying, "Abu Bakr wants to buy our religion with bribery."

### H — Abu Sufyan

He was Sakhr son of Harb, son of Umayyah, son of ‘Abd Shams, son of ‘Abd
Manaf. He fought the Prophet up to the time when the Prophet captured
Mecca and granted him pardon. At the time of the death of the Prophet he
was not in Medina. On his way back there, Abu Sufyan learned of the
Prophet's death and of Abu Bakr becoming of successor.

He asked, "What was the reaction of ‘Abbas and ‘Ali, the two oppressed?"
He was informed that they remained inactive at their homes. Abu Sufyan
swore saying, " If I am spared I will help them to fill their rightful
place. I see a cloud of dust in the air which needs blood to clear it .
" When he entered Medina he started to read the following poem:-

O Bani Hashim, don't give anybody the opportunity To be envious,
specially the Teem and the ‘Adi [^1]. The Islamic Sovereignty was
started by you, Let Abul Hasan (‘Ali) reign, if you wish to continue.

According to Tabari, Abu Sufyan said, "There is some dust in the air, by
God, a rain of blood only will clear it. O children of ‘Abd Manaf, why
was Abu Bakr allowed to become the successor of the Prophet? Where are
‘Ali and ‘Abbas who were oppressed?" Then he wanted to shake the hand of
allegiance with ‘Ali, but ‘Ali refused. Abu Sufyan then read the
following poem.

A donkey — not a freeman, bears humility, There are only two symbols of
inferiority — The tent peg under the heavy hammer, and The nomad's camel
under the burden.

#### Abu Sufyan slogan — " O children of ‘Abd Manaf"

This would have changed the course of Islamic history if ‘Ali had been
unruly, and had been persuaded by Abu Sufyan to riot against the Caliph.
It is surprising to find out that Abu Sufyan, the absolute enemy of
Islam, who fought the Prophet until he found it was impossible for him
to continue fighting, offered his help to ‘Ali. Did he really mean to
help? Or to stir up trouble?

More surprising is ‘Ali's refusal to accept help from Abu Sufyan and
‘Abbas, the chiefs of two powerful tribes, when he was seeking aid from
every possible quarter. After investigating the aims of Abu Sufyan and
‘Ali we are left with no doubts as to the nature of their schemes.

The Prophet and Abu Sufyan's forefathers were cousins who had had family
disputes. The fighting between these two families ended with the
Prophet's family winning the position as head of the Tribe. Abu Sufyan
was the rival of the Prophet for the position as headman, and his
attitude towards the Prophet as a religious leader was that of complete
indifference. For this reason, when the Prophet captured Mecca,

Abu Sufyan said to ‘Abbas, "Your nephew has established a vast Kingdom."
‘Abbas said, "This is an apostleship — not a Kingship." Abu Sufyan
accepted this statement without comment. Although Abu Sufyan was
defeated by his relatives, he did not want strangers to have power, and
leave his tribe empty handed.

The Prophet tried to prevent family ties from interfering with the cause
of justice but he was not very successful. We see, when we study the
events which took place between families in the Prophet's life time,
that the story of how ‘Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet, protected Abu
Sufyan, is a good example of the strength of family ties.

Ibn Hesham recorded that the night before the capture of Mecca, the
camps of the Muslims surrounded the city.

‘Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet, mounted on the Prophet's mule, was
wandering about hoping to see some of the enemy. He wanted to inform
them of the coming attack by the Muslims, to give any enemy a chance to
seek pardon. He met Abu Sufyan who was spying on the Muslims, ‘Abbas
said to him, "Thank God I saw you Abu Sufyan. Jump on the mule, and I
will take you to the Prophet, so that you may seek asylum, or else
tomorrow if you are captured, you may be beheaded."

‘Abbas mounted the mule with Abu Sufyan behind him. They passed many
groups of Muslims who had lit many fires to frighten the enemy, and in
order to watch for any possible danger. The Muslims said, "Look; the
Prophet's uncle on his mule."

‘Omar, by chance, saw Abu Sufyan and shouted, "The enemy of God. Thank
God you are in our hands and you have no one's promise to protect you."
‘Omar then ran to the Prophet to get permission to kill Abu Sufyan. But
‘Abbas, on the mule, overtook ‘Omar and reached the Prophet first.

‘Omar then came up and said, “ O Prophet of God, we have Abu Sufyan with
us, without any guarantee of safety. Grant me permission to behead him."
But ‘Abbas said, " I have given him sanctuary." ‘Omar insisted, but
‘Abbas said, "Be calm ‘Omar, had Abu Sufyan been from your ‘Adi tribe,
you would not insist on killing him. But as he is from the ‘Abd Manafs
you say harsh words."

This story proves that family ties were strong at that time. It also
shows that the motive of ‘Abbas sprang from his love for his tribe. The
cause of Abu Sufyan's demonstration against Abu Bakr was also the result
of tribal importance.

The supremacy of the ‘Abd Manaf clan, from which the Banu Hashim's
(Muhammad's family) and the Bani Umayyah (Abu Sufyan's family) came, was
known to everybody. So when the father of Abu Bakr learned that his son
had become Caliph he said, "Did Banu Hashim and Bani Umayyah agree?"
When he was answered in the affirmative he said, "That which God wants,
no one can prevent."

Abu Sufyan's sympathy towards Muhammad's family, after his death, was
due to the feelings of tribal unity. For Abu Sufyan fought the Prophet
every time he had the opportunity. His saying, " I f I am spared I will
help ‘Ali and ‘Abbas to regain their position," had no motive except
tribal sentiment; as is the custom of Arabs — to help near relatives
against distant strangers.

Abu Sufyan, ‘Abbas and ‘Ali had the same tribal origin, the Qussai tribe
which was very large and influential. This was why Abu Sufyan said, "Who
has the Qusai as his support will win." Abu Bakr and ‘Omar were from
minor tribes which could never challenge the Qussai. (Qussai, the
Quraish tribe origin was the main root of ‘Abd Manaf's tribe, the tribe
of Banu Hashim and Abu Sufyan.)

It was the custom of those days for a tribe to be biased in favor of one
of its own members. ‘Ali, .supported by Abu Sufyan and ‘Abbas, would
have undoubtedly beaten Abu Bakr. But ‘Ali, the hero, the son of Abi
Talib, refused the help of his influential tribe, because this custom
was against the teachings of Islam. So he was beaten by Abu Bakr. In
fact, after the death of the Prophet, all events were influenced by the
prejudice of other tribes towards his tribe or family.

The Ansars proposed that Sa‘d should be the successor to the Prophet
merely in opposition to the Mohajirs. They knew some of the Mohajirs
were great believers in Islam and therefore more deserving of
recognition. The Aus tribe supported Abu Bakr to oppose Sa‘d, the
candidate of the Khazraj tribe. ‘Omar's speech in Saqifah is veritable
evidence of tribal bias.

Abu Sufyan's support of ‘Ali was also due to tribal prejudice. Only
‘Ali, who was brought up in the lap of the Prophet since childhood,
wanted to upheld Islam, hence wanted the support of those Muslims who
were not moved by tribal prejudice, and who had no family bond, people
like Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Salman, whose only motive was their belief in
the faith of Islam.

The conclusion of the above stories, relating to Abu Sufyan's support of
‘Ali, is that, although Abu Sufyan's motive was not religious, but
because he strongly believed in the supremacy of his tribe of which ‘Ali
was member — for this reason alone he supported ‘Ali against Abu Bakr.

Abu Sufyan was true to ‘Ali in opposition to Abu Bakr because of family
prejudice, but as frequently happens incorrect facts were recorded, and
Abu Sufyan and all others who opposed Abu Bakr, were accused of heresy
and were called trouble makers.

The previous events concerning Abu Sufyan make the following story
easier to believe. It is recorded that Abu Sufyan asked ‘Ali, "Why did
you allow Abu Bakr to succeed the Prophet? If you wish I will fill all
Medina's streets with horse and foot soldiers." The story continues as
‘Ali replies, "Abu Sufyan, you have been long enough the enemy of Islam.
You cannot cause any more harm now. I must admit that Abu Bakr deserve
the position."

The story does not seem to be authentic because the narrator did not
live at the time of the event. Also some of these false stories are
narrated by Awanah, who was known to be unreliable. The text does not
run true because if ‘Ali had said, " I admit Abu Bakr deserves the
position," then Abu Sufyan could have asked him, "Why do you not shake
the hand of allegiance with him?"

What ‘Ali had surely said was, " If I had forty believers of the right
temper I would fight him."

‘Ali in his letter to Mo'awiah writes, "Your father (Abu Sufyan)
appreciated my right more than you do. Had you known me as your father
did, you would have been wiser."

The government was afraid of Abu Sufyan, ‘Omar said to Abu Bakr, "Give
him some money to keep him quiet; The Prophet used to be nice to him and
keep him quiet." Abu Sufyan, disappointed with ‘Ali, accepted the
allowance. Tabari records that Abu Sufyan did not stop agitating until
his son Yazid was nominated as the Commander of the army, which was
dispatched to Syria.

### I — Mo‘awia

Mo'awiah writes to Muhammad, the son of Abu Bakr, "You father knew and
we know that ‘Ali deserved to be the successor of the Prophet. We
respected ‘Ali very dearly. When the Prophet of God, peace be upon him,
fulfilled his mission and his soul went to God, your father (Abu Bakr)
and his right hand ‘Omar, were the two persons who trespassed ‘Ali's
right.

They planned together and asked ‘Ali to co-operate with them. ‘Ali
refused and they plotted against him until ‘Ali submitted.

They never allowed ‘Ali to share their secret until God took their souls
away. Now we are on the path that your father paved. If he was on the
right path, we will follow him. If he was on the wrong path, blame your
father — not us for opposing him and not releasing the Caliphate to him.
Peace be upon those who repent."

### J — Khalid bin Sa‘eed

Khalid, son of Sa‘eed, son of Aas, was one of the first men to embrace
Islam. Ibn Qotaibah in Ma‘arif page 128 writes, "Khalid became Muslim
before Abu Bakr did." Khalid immigrated to Ethiopia and when Islam grew
in strength he returned from there. He and his two brothers, ‘Amr and
Aban, became, by the order of the Prophet, Tax Collector who collected
from Madhaj Tribe. Then they were transferred to San‘a’ in Yemen.

When the Prophet passed away they returned to Medina, Abu Bakr had asked
them why they had abandoned their posts, and they replied, "We were
appointed by the Prophet to this position, and we will not work for
anyone else now that he is dead." They made other excuses, and would not
shake the hand of Abu Bakr in allegiance, until two months had passed.
Khalid said to the Bani Hashim's, "You are the honorable, fruitful tree
and I will follow you."

He went to ‘Ali and ‘Othman one day and said to them, "You, the
descendents of ‘Abd Manaf, have not taken your position seriously until
others have taken over." He admired ‘Ali, and asked to shake his hand,
but it was too late because Abu Bakr was already Caliph. So Khalid
submitted to him as had the Bani Hashim's, Abu Bakr did not mind
Khalid's mildly rebellious behavior, but ‘Omar took it seriously.

Later Abu Bakr appointed Khalid the Commandant of a quarter of the army
dispatched to the Syrian front. ‘Omar argued with Abu Bakr and insisted
that he remove Khalid from his position. Abu Bakr then dismissed Khalid
and appointed Yazid son of Abu Sufyan in his place. Khalid did not mind
if he was either soldier or commandant, and he fought as a soldier on
the Syrian front until he was martyred in the 13th year of Hijri, two
nights before the end of the month of Jamadi, the first.

### K — Sa‘d bin ‘Obadah

Sa‘d Bin ‘Obadah was the chief of the Khazraj tribe. He was present at
‘Aqabah (as one of the representatives who came from Medina to express
their willingness to support the Prophet if he wished to immigrate from
Mecca to Medina).

Sa‘d participated in all the battles the Prophet fought, except possibly
the Battle of Badr. On the day of the conquest of Mecca, he exhibited
belligerent tendencies saying, "This is the day for fighting, the day
when women shall be taken into captivity." So the Prophet gave the
standard flag to Sa‘d's son, Qais, and reduced Sa‘d's position to that
of an ordinary pilgrim.

Sa‘d, defeated in his efforts to succeed the Prophet, was left alone
during the swearing of allegiance, but a few days after Abu Bakr became
Caliph, Sa‘d was asked to shake his hand, as a part of his tribe had
done, but Sa‘d refused and said, "By God, as long as I have arrows in my
quiver to shoot you, a spear to dye in your blood, and a sword, and
strength in my arm, I will fight you with the support of those in my
tribe who are still obedient to me. I will not shake the hand of
allegiance with you, even if men and jin declare war against me in your
favor, until I die and take my case to the divine court."

‘Omar urged Abu Bakr to force Sa‘d to submit, but Bashir Bin Sa‘d said
he knew that Sa‘d was stubborn and would not agree. Also he still had
influence among his men and he could not be assassinated until many
people of his tribe, and his relatives were also killed. Sa‘d therefore
was left alone ,at Bashir's suggestion. (Bashir the first person to
shake hands with Abu Bakr was the rival of Sa‘d.)

Sa‘d never attended the congregational service conducted by the official
men, and performed Haj separately from the parties led by the
government. In this manner he passed his days until Abu Bakr passed
away.

When ‘Omar succeeded Abu Bakr he met Sa‘d and unpleasant remarks were
exchanged. Sa‘d said, "Abu Bakr was more gracious than you, I do not
like your company." ‘Omar said, " I f one does not like to be near one
person, he will keep away."

Then Sa‘d left Medina for Damascus. ‘Omar sent some- one to obtain Sa‘d
agreement or to get rid of him if he did not agree.

The envoy met Sa‘d in an orchard and invited him to agree with ‘Omar.
Sa‘d refused and the man threatened him without result. Then he killed
him.

Mas‘oudi recorded that Sa‘d did not shake the hand of allegiance, and
immigrated to Syria where he was killed. Ibn ‘Abd Rabbeh recorded that
Sa‘d was killed by an unknown assailant, and that the jin wailed for him
as is told in the following verse:-

"We killed Sa‘d, head of the Khazraj tribe, today, Our two shots at his
heart did not go astray."

In Tabari it is. recorded that Sa‘d was answering the call of nature
when someone attacked and killed him. When his body was found later, his
skin had turned green.

In Osdolghabah it is recorded that Sa‘d did not submit to Abu Bakr, nor
to ‘Omar. He emigrated to Syria where he was killed. Then a voice came
from a pit and informed the people of Sa‘d's murder. His body was found
near his house at Hooran in Damascus, and it had turned green.

Abdulfattah, in his book al-Imam ‘Ali Bin Abi Talib has recorded that
simple people say that Sa‘d was killed by jin, but in fact Khalid Bin
Walid and one of his colleagues murdered Sa‘d, and threw him in a pit.
The voice saying that Sa‘d had been killed was that of Khalid's friend —
not the jins.

Belazori recorded that ‘Omar ordered Khalid and Muhammad Bin Muslimah to
murder Sa‘d and they did so.

One of the members of the Ansars Party has composed the following verse
concerning Sa‘d's death:-

Sa‘d had been killed by jin they say, How crafty; that's most unusual,
way,

Sa‘d did not commit the smallest sin in the land, But neither did he
shake Abu Bakr's hand.

The historians did not like to record the cause of the death of Sa‘d.
Some have totally neglected this event, and others have accused jins. If
those who did say jins murdered Sa‘d had said, "The faithful jins did
not like Sa‘d to oppose Abu Bakr, so they killed him." Then the story
would have been more easily believed.

### L — ‘Omar

We have mentioned his activities in favor of Abu Bakr during the
swearing of allegiance. ‘Omar said, "Some foresee my death, and guess my
successor. Let me clarify this to you; the allegiance with Abu Bakr was
a mistake, but God saved us from its outcome."

The evaluation of Saif's recording
----------------------------------

We have written previously of the events of allegiance to Saif and
others. We now make comparison between their recordings. Saif has
recorded that:-

a) No one refused to swear allegiance with Abu Bakr except heretics or
near heretics; and that all the immigrant party shook hands with Abu
Bakr willingly.

b) ‘Ali ran out of his house in his night shirt to save time, after he
had heard that people had shaken the hand of allegiance with Abu Bakr,
and that he shook hands with him too. They brought him his clothes
later, and he dressed.

c) Qa‘qa‘ said, " I was in the Mosque for midday prayer, when a man
brought the news of the death of the Prophet; and of the gathering of
the Ansar party at Saqifa, to make Sa‘d his successor against the order
of the Prophet. This news caused the Muhajir party a great deal of
anxiety."

d) Hobab Bin Monzir was about to attack Abu Bakr with his sword, but
‘Omar knocked the sword from his hand. Then the Ansars rushed to shake
Abu Bakr's hand, jumping over the head of Sa‘d, who was unwell, and
sitting in their way. This mistake by the Ansars was the same as the
mistakes which took place during the time of ignorance, but Abu Bakr
firmly prevented the same result.

e) Sa‘d said to Abu Bakr, "You and my tribe, forced me to submit to
you." They had told him, "Had we forced you to leave the community you
might have had some excuse. But we made you join in with everyone else.
If you go against the public, or cause a rift, we will behead you."

f) Two long speeches were delivered by Abu Bakr.

g) Khalid Sa‘eed Amawi wore a silk coat in peace time, and ‘Omar ordered
him to tear it. For this reason Khalid said to ‘Ali, “ O the descendants
of Abdi Manaf, have you lost your case?" ‘Ali told Khalid, "Do you
consider it a game?" Then ‘Omar said to Khalid, "May God put a gag in
your mouth. You have said something which would be seized upon by liars
(to make false stories)."

When we compare the way Saif has recorded an event, with that which the
others have recorded, we see that Saif has very cleverly manipulated
events to suit his own ends. For instance:-

A) He says that ‘Ali and Sa‘d shook the hand of allegiance with Abu Bakr
on the very first day he succeeded the Prophet. Yet other historians
have told us about the postponement of the agreement of ‘Ali and Sa‘d
with Abu Bakr. Despite that with Saif says,

‘Ali openly asked for the position, and the Muhajirs and the Bani
Hashim's, in agreement with ‘Ali, refused allegiance with Abu Bakr. All
of these people wanted to shake the hand of allegiance with ‘Ali, and as
long as the daughter of the Prophet was alive, they (lid not agree with
Abu Bakr. If that which Saif says is true, and ‘Ali went to Abu Bakr
that first day, then who was engaged in the funeral preparations of the
Prophet?

B) Sa‘d did not agree with Abu Bakr. He resided in Damascus and jins
killed him with two shots, because he did not shake Abu Bakr's hand.

C) By saying that the Ansars wanted to break the covenant of the
Prophet, and make allegiance with Sa‘d, Saif wants to say that the
Prophet appointed Abu Bakr.

D) Saif wanted to confirm the appointment of Abu Bakr by the Prophet,
when he said, "Osama sent ‘Omar to the Caliph Abu Bakr when he learnt of
the Prophet's death." Saif is implying that Abu Bakr was appointed by
the Prophet.

E) Saif invented some words by Qa‘qa‘ as follows: "People one after the
other willingly shook Abu Bakr's hand." Yet Qa‘qa‘ never lived. He
existed only in Saif's stories.

F) To prove that some of the Ansars oppose Abu Bakr, he says that Hobab
— a member of the Ansars party, attacked with his sword. In fact it was
Zubair, the Prophet's second cousin, who was one of the Muhajirs
(Immigrants Party — The party of ‘Ali) who attacked with his sword.

G) ‘Omar remarked that the election of Abu Bakr's was a mistake. Saif
also called the Ansar's opposition a mistake to cover up ‘Omar and to
confirm the remark made by ‘Omar, was against Ansars.

H) Saif says that two long inaugural sermons were made by Abu Bakr after
the public show of allegiance. The style and the context of those two
speeches show that they are counterfeit; and the true inaugural sermon
of Abu Bakr is quite different.

The style of the counterfeit sermons is not the same as that of the
speeches of the three Caliphs immediately after the Prophet. Also they
are not as well written as other works by Saif — it seems that Saif was
not skilled at composing religious speeches.

Again, long speeches were not usual in Muhammad's and Abu Bakr's time.
These long speeches began in ‘Omar's Caliphate, and reached a climax
during ‘Ali's era. The first speech of any ruler is usually short —
outlining the new program.

I) The expression used by Abu Bakr that the devil resided in him, is
rather amusing and degrading. Saif wanted to express the idea that after
the Prophet, the people no longer wanted to be concerned with piety and
holiness. These words from the first Caliph, Abu Bakr, were similar to
his prayer after Osama's army caused Islam to fall into disrepute.

J) The peculiar thing about Abu Bakr's alleged sermon is that they
introduced into the Islamic religion a facetious spirit, so that the
people would gather, from the speech of the Muslim's leader, that Islam
was not a true religion, or even worse that there was no divinity. The
reason for this misrepresentation of Islam, by Saif, is because it is
recorded that Saif was an atheist (non-believer in God).

K) Saif says about Khalid Bin Sa‘d Amawi that Khalid wore a silk
garment, and ‘Omar ordered that the garment to be torn. As a result of
this, Khalid's feelings towards Abu Bakr and ‘Omar were revengeful.
Khalid said to ‘Ali, "Your tribe (Abdi Manaf) was beaten by Abu Bakr's
tribe (Tim)." ‘Ali answered, "The position of the successor to the
Prophet, has nothing to do with the tribal influence.

It is a divine position." Khalid again said to ‘Ali, "Your tribe is more
deserving of this position." Then ‘Omar said to Khalid, "May God silence
you, you have said something that will cause liars to invent stories."
Here again Saif wishes to say that only Khalid believed that Tribal
influence was the motive of the people to support the candidates,
otherwise the Muhajirs and the Ansars were too innocent to attempt to
mix party politics with religion.

Hence ‘Ali and ‘Omar both defied Khalid. Saif here again tries to prove
that there was no opposition to Abu Bakr being Caliph.

L) Saif tells us that there was no difference between ‘Ali and ‘Omar,
and in case any difference was observed later, people would think the
cause was Khalid. ‘Omar therefore said to Khalid, "Later the liars will
make stories of that which you have said." This is an important and note
worthy point.

M) Finally we must not forget that Saif has narrated the above story
from Sakhr who was a bodyguard of the Prophet; but the Prophet did not
have a bodyguard of that name.

N) Saif's strongest attack on the opposition is in his saying, "No one
opposed Abu Bakr except he who was heretic, or intended to neglect
Islam." Saif's allegations provided grounds to make the reader believe
that Muslim unanimously admitted Abu Bakr as Caliph, except those who
turned away from Islam.

Here we will introduce those who opposed Abu Bakr and supported ‘Ali
whole heartedly; no one could possibly suspect any one of them of being
involved in Saif's accusations of ‘Heresy.’

1. Zubair Bin ‘Awam, cousin of the Prophet.

2. ‘Abbas, uncle of the Prophet.

3. Sa‘d Waqqas, the conqueror of Iraq.

4. Talha Bin ‘Obaidullah.

5. Miqdad Bin Aswad.

The followings gathered in Fatimah's house in op- position to Abu Bakr.

6. Abu Dharr Ghafari.

7. Salman.

8. ‘Ammar Yaser.

9. Bara’ Bin ‘Azeb Ansari.

10. Obbay Bin Ka‘b Ansari.

11. Fadhl Bin ‘Abbas, the cousin of the Prophet.

12. Abu Sofyan Harb Amawi.

13. Khalid Bin Sa‘eed Amawi.

14. Aban Bin Sa‘eed Amawi.

In addition to the above fourteen, none of the Bani Hashim's shook the
hand of allegiance with Abu Bakr until the daughter of the Prophet
passed away. Their opposition was only because of their support for
‘Ali. Apart from these people, Sa‘d Bin ‘Obaidah opposed Abu Bakr, since
he himself was a candidate.

Could anyone believe that any of the above turned away from the faith of
Islam? Or that they became heretics? These were the opposition in
Medina. We now refer to those who were outside Medina. Some of them were
killed because they opposed the government such as Malik Bin Nowayrah,
whom Saif named as a heretic. The fight against them was called by Saif
the Holy War against heretics.

Conclusion
----------

Saif has so skillfully manipulated Islamic history in his fictitious
stories, so that historians, orientalists, and even the Muslims world
have accepted the imaginary heroes of Saif's book as true Sahabis
(companions of the Prophet) and Islamic personalities. We believe the
time has come to disclose, by research and discussion, the truth, about
the history of Islam; and introduce the Holy Prophet of Islam and his
honorable family, to the world in their true colors, rather than to
defend Saif's stories under the name of Islam.

[^1]: The tribes of Abubakr and ‘Omar.


