3. Reddah (Heresy)
==================

The opponents of Abu Bakr, outside the capital, were called ‘Heretics,'
and the wars fought against them were camouflaged as holy.

Heresy in Islam
---------------

Heresy is Irtidad in Arabic meaning ‘turn.’ The Holy Qur’an says,

***"When the errand boy laid Joseph's shirt Jacob's face, his sight
returned (Irtadda) to him."***

The word ‘Radda’ is also used in the Qur'an to mean ‘turn away from
religion' as in the following verse;

***"Believers, if you listen to a group of those to whom the Scriptures
were given in the past, they will turn you (Yaruddoukom) into
unbelievers despite your faith."***

Again in this verse : "Believers, if any of you turns away (Yartadda)
from his religion, God will bring forth people whom He loves and who
love Him. They are lenient towards believers and strict with
unbelievers."

We also read in the Qur'an: "They fight with you so as to turn you away
(Yaroddukom) from your religion, and if you give up your faith, and then
die, your work will come to nothing." But the word ‘Irtadda’ has been
associated so often with heresy, that nothing but heresy comes to mind
when it is used.

Heretics in the Prophet's time
------------------------------

Some Muslims turned away from Islam during Muhammad's time such as the
following: Abdullah Bin Abi Sarh.

Abdullah was one of the scribers of the ‘Inspired' Qur'an, who ran back
to Mecca from Medina. He used to tell Quraish, that he wrote different
words, to those which Muhammad dictated. For instance when Muhammad
said, "God is all knowing and wise," Abdullah asked if he could write —
"God is almighty and wise." Muhammad would say "That is just as
applicable."

On the day he conquered Mecca, Muhammad said, "The blood of Abdullah is
worthless, and if even he sought sanctuary at the Ka‘ba, he must be
killed." ‘Othman hid him, and later took him to the Prophet asking
pardon, which was granted.

Another heretic was ‘Obaidullah Bin Jahsh the husband of Umm Habiba, who
emigrated to Ethiopia. He was converted to Christianity, and died there
as a Christian.

Abdullah Bin Khatal was another heretic who was murdered whilst holding
the cover of the Holy Shrine of Ka‘ba, seeking sanctuary.

Heresy in Abu Bakr's time
-------------------------

The soul searing news of the death of the Prophet, spread swiftly
throughout the Arabian peninsula. Those tribes who,. so far, had not
embraced Islam, rejoiced, and continued their activities against Islam.
The Muslims tribes also became restless because they had heard that some
of the companions of the Prophet, because of party politics, were
fighting one another for the position of the Caliphate.

The disapproval of the relatives of the Prophet, Bani Hashim's, and the
opposition of Sa‘d, the chief of the Khazraj tribe, to Abu Bakr as
Caliph, caused some Muslim tribes to suspect the Caliphate office. They
did not renounce their faith, nor did they reject prayer, or object to
paying tax, they only refused to pay the due tax to Abu Bakr's
government. These opponents were called heretics and they were to be
eliminated by wars, camouflaged as holy.

After the destruction of their Muslim opponents, the government fought
the pagan tribes and the false prophets and their organizations.
Finally, expeditions were sent outside Arabia. All those battles fought
in Abu Bakr's time, were called Reddah, (war against heretics). So the
Muslim opponents of Abu Bakr outside Medina, were called ‘Mortaddin'
(Heretics).

Dr. Hassan Ebrahim supported this idea in his book The History of
Islamic Politics page 251 reads — "After the Prophet of God passed away
and his death was confirmed, some Muslims hesitated about the truth of
Islam, and some were afraid that the Quraish, or indeed any other tribe,
could come to power and form a dictator state.

They had realized that only the Prophet of God was infallible, and any
other person who succeeded him, would not have the characteristic, which
allowed him to treat all men, like the teeth of a comb, as equals.
Therefore they suspected, that if the successor of the Prophet favored
his own family and tribe, and under- estimated the other tribes, it
would destroy Islamic social justice.

We guess this because we see that, after the Prophet, each Arab
selfishly supported his own family tribe, and the Arab's old natural
way, returned. In Medina the Ansars (Helpers) were afraid that the
Muhajirs (Immigrants) and the Quraish tribe would come to power. These
two were suspicious of each other. The Ansars wanted a coalition
government.

The Muhajirs wanted the chief to be from their tribe, and the assistant
chief from the Ansars. The Aws and Khazraj — sub-divisions of the
Ansars, betrayed each other during the election of the Caliph.

"Mecca was no better than Medina as the election caused tribal conflict
there as well. Banu Hashim's disagreed with Abu Bakr .as Caliph, ‘Ali
refused to support Abu Bakr and Abu Sufyan tried to persuade ‘Ali to
arrange a coup d'etat.

"Finally the Muhajirs, Ansars and Quraish, who were pioneers in Islam
and supporters of Islam, and relatives of the Prophet, could not unite
to form a government peacefully. This made other Arab tribes
disillusioned, and finally they gave up hope of having any vote, or
chance in the government.

Hence most of them objected to Abu Bakr as Caliph and refused to pay him
the due alms tax. Some foreign scholars take this as heresy, and as
evidence of the advance of Islam by the sword in Arabia. That is not
true however, because those people whom Abu Bakr fought as heretics, had
remained faithful to Islam. They were of two groups.

1. The group who believed that the alms tax was the Prophet's levy, and
after his death no one was entitled to ask for it; so they refused to
pay it to Abu Bakr — and for this he fought them. ‘Omar pleaded on
behalf of those people saying, "The Prophet used to say, ‘I fight people
until they believe in one God, and anybody who believes in God, his
blood and belongings will be protected."

2. The group who did not believe in the faith. In fact they were not
Muslims. The Islamic state at Abu Bakr's time cared about only carrying
out death sentences, and was not concerned about heretics returning to
Islam."

Yet, according to Islam, as pointed out by Dr. Hassan Ebrahim, "Any
heretic must have three days to discuss his views with the religious
authorities. Hence — ‘Let accusations be proved before he perishes, and
he who remains safe does so by proof."

To clear up the matter, we refer to some views by Sunnis leaders. "Imam
Abu Hanifah says: ‘The shortest time allowed for a person to make up his
mind is three days. If the heretic asks for grace, give him three days
to discuss points.”

"Imam Malik says: ‘A heretic, be he slave or free, man or woman, give
him three days from the day proven to be heretic. He can have food and
must not be tortured.”

"Imam Shafe‘i says: ‘Heretic, man or woman, must be respected because he
or she was a Muslim sometime. Some say give him or her, three days
grace.’

"Imam Hanbal says: ‘Heretics, men or women, adult and if not insane must
be invited to Islam for three days.’

"As well as the above views, it is not right to say that a Muslim has
renounced his faith just by guess work, unless every Muslim says he is a
heretic. Some Muslim scholars have said that if a man is one percent
Muslim, it is not right to hold that man as a heretic unless it is
proven that he is."

This is the end of Dr. Hassan Ebrahim's saying in the book of History of
Islamic Politics.

Ibn Kathir in his book Albedaya Wannehaya, vol.6, p.311 says, "All the
narrators, except Ibn Majah have recorded that according to Abi Horayra,
‘Omar objected to Abu Bakr fighting people, saying that the Prophet
protected the soul and belongings of anyone who confessed to the oneness
of God and the apostleship of Muhammad, unless they were found guilty.

Abu Bakr replied, ‘By God, I will fight those who do not pay me the tax
which were paying to the Prophet of God. Let it be a camel or a
foot-tether of a camel. By God, I will fight anybody who differs between
paying tax and saying prayers. I will fight until they give me the due
tax which they gave to the Prophet.' ‘Omar said, ‘When I saw Abu Bakr's
determination to fight, I understood that he was right.' "

According to Tabari (vol.2, p.474) heretics called on Abu Bakr in
groups, agreeing to the prayers, but against paying tax. Abu Bakr would
not accept their views and sent them away. Ibn Kathir in Albedaya
Wannehaya (vol.6, p.311) says that groups of Arabs were coming to Medina
who accepted the prayers but rejected the tax. There were some who did
not want to pay tax to Abu Bakr, some of them were reciting this verse:

When the Prophet was among us we were obedient, But Abu Bakr's reign is
a peculiar incident, Which has broken our back. We will rise, Yet, he
may make his son Caliph when he dies.

In Tabari (vol.2, p.48) Saif has recorded from Abi Makhnaf that the
horsemen of the Tay Tribe made remarks about the horsemen of the Asad
and Fazareh tribes, when they passed one another. But there were no
clashes between them. Asads and Fazarehs men used to say, "We will not
agree with Abul-Fasil" (Nickname of Abu Bakr, meaning the father of the
baby camel). The horsemen of the Tay Tribe would reply,

"We are sure you will agree with Abul-Fahl al-Akbar." (Meaning the
father of the big camel, the great man).

From the above story it is understood that the heresy in Abu Bakr's time
was not rejecting the faith, but in abstaining from paying tax to Abu
Bakr.

Since the defeated parties were Badouins and Nomads, they had no chance
to rule; but their opponents, the then rulers, had power in their hands
for a long time, including the period in which the history of this time
was written.

Also the history of the events which has reached us are recorded by
their authority. It is up to us to investigate the truth of those
stories written about the defeated people.

Tabari in his book (vol.6, p.461) has recorded from Saif that Arabs
rejected their faith after Abu Bakr became Caliph. Heresy was the
general trend of the day, but there were tribes where only a part became
heretical. Only the tribes of Quraish and Thaqif remained faithful.

Saif has surpassed ‘Antara Bin Shaddad and other fiction writers in
imagination. The heroes of Saif's stories walk on the waters without
wetting their feet. They converse with wild animals — angels communicate
with them — they bring forth fountains from stones in the desert.
Moreover, Saif has told his stories in such a way as to please the then
rulers, and to conceal the fact they were unpopular.

To show in what manner Saif has written his stories, we shall reproduce
some of them from his book al-Fotouh Wal- Reddah recorded in Tabari’s
book.


