5. ‘Ala΄ Bin Hazrami
====================

‘Ala΄ Bin Hazrami son of Abdullah son of ‘Ebad son of Akbar son of
Rabi‘a son of Malik son of ‘Owaif Hazrami. His father Abdullah was a
citizen of Mecca and very close friend of Harb Bin Umayya. The Prophet
appointed him as Governor of Bahrain. Abu Bakr and ‘Omar allowed him to
hold his position until he died in the year 14 or 21 Hejir. (al-Esti‘ab,
3rd Edition, pp.146-148 and al-Esaba, 2nd Edition, p.491).

Saif tells us about ‘Ala΄ Bin Hazrami.

In Tabari 2 — 522, 528 Saif records from Menjab Bin Rashed that Abu Bakr
ordered ‘Ala΄ to fight the heretics of Bahrain. Menjab was of that army.
He says, "We arrived at the plain of Dahna, where God had decided to
show us a miracle. ‘Ala΄ and we were all dismounted from our mounts.
Suddenly our camels took fright and ran away with all our provisions,
and left us with nothing in the middle of that stony desert.

Also before we had had time to put up our tents. We were most distressed
and bewildered, and made our will to one another. A call came from ‘Ala΄
to go to him — all of us. So we joined him. He asked the reason for our
dismay and we replied: "What do you expect of a group of whom nothing
will be left tomorrow, except their place in history." He consoled us
saying, "Muslims put their trust in God, surely God will not forsake
those who are in a position like ours." The next day after dawn prayer,
‘Ala΄ knelt down and we did the same and we prayed to God for water,
‘Ala΄ then noticed some ripples. He sent a man to see if it was water,
but it was only a mirage. The same mirage was observed later.

The third time the messenger returned with the news that there was
water, so the troops drunk and washed, then suddenly our camels were
sighted, and they had returned of their own accord with our provisions
intact just the same as when they disappeared.

After we left that place my friend Abu Horayra asked me if I would know
the place again, where the water was found. I replied that I knew the
place better than anybody else. He asked me to take him to the water
again. I did so; but there was no water, no pond, yet we found a jug
filled with water. Abu Horayra said that it was his jug which he had
left by the pond purposely to find out whether there was a pond there or
whether a miracle had occurred.

Menjab swore that he had not seen water there before and Abu Horayra
thanked God for this miracle. Then Saif says ‘Ala΄ won the war (against
heretics) during a night when they all (heretics) were drunk.

After ‘Ala΄ was certain of the destruction of the heretics he set out
with his troops for Darin; but before his departure he delivered a
sermon to his soldiers. He said that God manifested a miracle in the
land to encourage them with the water. (in their next assault on the
heretics). He then ordered the attack saying, "Let us advance and cross
the sea, God has encompassed the enemy in one place for you." The
soldiers shouted, "By God we will never be afraid again since we saw the
miracle in the desert of Dahna." ‘Ala΄ mounted and with his soldiers
arrived at the sea.

They went in the sea some mounted and some on foot. They were reciting,
" O Merciful, the Benevolent, the Patient, the Eternal, the Living, the
Giver of Life, the Self-Supported, there is no God but You. O, our
Lord." The water appeared to them to be shallow, to the depth only of a
camel's ankle, although the distance of that island was one ,day's
journey by boat from the shore. They reached the island and a pitched
battle took place there (between

‘Ala's soldiers and the heretics) and the enemy was entirely destroyed.

None of the heretics were left behind to take their news back. Their
wealth and families were captured and distributed. A mounted man
received six thousand and a foot soldier had two thousand. ‘Afif Bin
Mondher composed the following verse on that occasion:

God the almighty brought the sea under our control — An event more
miraculous than the role Played by Moses on Red Sea and Nile River. The
Divine wrath fell upon each unbeliever A spring gushed forth from
beneath the pebbles, And we again, heard the ringing of our camel bells.

A monk was travelling with ‘Ala's army who embraced Islam after the
troops returned victoriously to Bahrain and the land cleared of
heretics. People asked the monk why he had converted. He said he had
observed three Divine Signs, and he was afraid of being changed to an
animal if he did not convert to Islam. He was asked about the three
signs and he named them thus:-

1) The Spring which appeared from beneath the pebbles,

2) The turning of the rough sea.

3) The prayer recited by the soldiers, as follows, “O God you are the
most Merciful. No one is God except You, Self-created; nothing was prior
to You, Eternal, Conscious, Living who never dies, the Creator of the
Invisible and the visible. You are in constant control. You know without
learning."

The monk said that those soldiers were in the right so the angels were
on their side. The story of the monk has been repeated often afterwards.
‘Ala΄ wrote a letter to Abu Bakr telling him that after experiencing
some difficulties God has helped them by causing a spring to gush from
beneath the pebbles.

‘Ala΄ in his letter asked Abu Bakr to pray for the Muslims troops
fighting in the cause of God, and Abu Bakr did so, and said that the
Bedouins used to say, "Loqman, the wise, stopped people digging a water
well in the desert of Dahna, because no rope was long enough to reach
the water which would be so far below the ground." Abu Bakr then said
that the appearance of water was one of the biggest signs of God and he
had never been heard before by any nation, and he added “ O God do not
take the bliss of Muhammad away from us.

Ibn Kathir in his book (vol.6, pp.328-329) has recorded the above story
from Saif. Abulfaraj in his book al-Aghani has quoted from Tabari who
has in turn recorded from Saif. Other scholars have recorded that story
from Saif.

The origin of Saif's story
--------------------------

Saif has narrated ‘Ala's story from Sa‘b son of ‘Atyya son of Bilal,
that is, passed down from grandfather to father and to son. We have
shown when discussing the story of Malik that the above family line of
narrators has been invented by Saif.

‘Ala's story by other than Saif
-------------------------------

Baladhori in Fotoohol Boldan (pp.92-93) says that during ‘Omar's rule
‘Ala΄ was sent to Zara and Darain. He made a treaty with the people of
Zara to take one third of the gold, silver and other wealth of the town
plus half of the wealth from outside of the town. Akhnas Bin ‘Amery the
representative of the town said to ‘Ala΄ that the treaty applied only to
the people of the town of Zara and did not apply to their relations who
live in the neighboring town of Darin.

‘Ala΄ took Karaz al-Nokri as his guide, and crossed the sea on a strip
of land to Darin. There he attacked the inhabitants, killed their
fighting men and captured their families.

Wars against Heretics - Comparison and Conclusion
-------------------------------------------------

Saif writes that:-

1) A miraculous fountain appeared where even Luqman, the wise, did not
expect water.

2) The camels returned of their own accord.

3) The soldiers walked in the sea, as in the land, even more miraculous
than the miracle of Moses. He then supported the truth of these
miracles, by telling of a monk embracing Islam seeing those signs. He
emphasizes that his miracles occurred by the letter of ‘Ala΄ to Abu Bakr
asking for blessing.

Tabari, Hamawi, Ibn Athir, Ibn Kathir and some other writers repeat
Saif's saying in their books, and Muslims have accepted it as an Islamic
History. Yet there was no miracle, the city had access to the mainland
by a strip across which the soldiers marched. Also the event did not
happen in Abu Bakr's time, but during ‘Omar's rule.

Saif is alone responsible for the inventing of these stories as he is
alone presenting them, just as he is alone saying that none of the enemy
was spared to take the news home.


