6. Barking of Hawa’b's dogs
===========================

Tabari in vol.3, pp.490-497 has recorded from Saif that Umm Zemal Salma,
a girl prisoner of war, was given to ‘Ayesha (The Prophet's wife) as her
share of war spoils. ‘Ayesha gave her freedom, but she stayed in
‘Ayesha's house.

One day the Prophet came home and found women gathered together. The
Prophet pointed to them and said, "One of you makes the dogs bark in the
land of Haw’ab." After the Prophet passed away Umm Zemal Salma gathered
an army to take her revenge upon the Muslims who had killed her
relations.

While she was collecting her army from Zafr and Haw’ab the dogs barked
at her camel in Haw’ab (fulfilling the Prophet's prophecy). Khalid (The
General) learned of Umm Zemal Salma and fought against her. Khalid's
soldiers cut off her camel's feet and killed her.

Hamawi in his book Mo‘jamul Boldan has recorded the above story from
Saif. Bin Hajar in Esaba vol.2, p.325 has briefly recorded without
mentioning the source.

The source of Saif's story
--------------------------

Saif has narrated the above story from Sahl son of Yusuf and Abu Ya‘qub
whose identities are not documented. Bin Hajar and Bin Abdul Berr have
said, "Neither Sahl nor his father Yusuf is known to anybody." Abu
Ya‘qub in Saif's stories is "Sa‘eed Bin Obaid" that Dhahabi says, "He is
un- known." Some other biographers say, "There is one Sa‘eed Bin Obaid
but not known as Abu Ya‘qub."

At whom did the dogs bark in Haw’ab?
------------------------------------

Saif in his story of Haw’ab has combined two events together. First, the
event of Umm Qerfa, the second, Haw’ab's dogs.

1) Umm Qerfa.  
 According to Bin Sa‘d and Bin Hesham a merchant caravan belonging to
Muslims on their way to Damascus was looted by the Fazara tribe at
Wadilqora. The Muslims in charge of the caravan, Zaid, was badly
wounded.

Ya‘qoubi says that the Prophet was going to send an expeditionary army
under Zaid's command to discipline the Fazara tribe. Umm Qerfa the wife
of the tribal chief on learning of the Prophet's intention sent an army
under the command of forty of her own children to meet the Muslim army
near Medina. A pitched battle took place and all the men of the Fazara
tribe were killed and their women were taken into captivity.

Except for Umm Qerfa and one daughter called Jariah the whole family was
killed. These two were captured unhurt. Zaid ordered Umm Qerfa to be
executed and took the daughter Jariah to the Prophet who gave her to his
own uncle, and son was later born to them and named Abdul Rahman.

This event took place in the year six of Hejrah during the Prophet's
life time.

2) Haw’ab's dogs.  
 Haw’ab is a place near Basrah. According to Bin ‘Abbas the Prophet said
to his wives, "One of you will ride a hairy camel, the dogs will bark at
her in Haw’ab, many people will be killed at your right side, and at
your left death will threaten you, but you will remain safe."

According to Umm Salama (one of the Prophet's wife) the Prophet
mentioned the revolt of one of his wives, the mothers of the believers,
(as they are called) ‘Ayesha (one of the Prophet's wives) laughed. The
Prophet made a remark to her saying, " It seems to me that the dogs bark
at you in Haw’ab while you are rioting unjustly against ‘Ali . " Then
the Prophet look at ‘Ali saying," If ‘Ayesha's affair comes into your
hands be tolerant with her."[^1]

According to Tabari vol.3, p.475 and some other historians the story is
as follows:-  
 ‘Orani the man who sold his camel to ‘Ayesha was on a journey riding on
his camel. A man approached him, and wanted to buy his camel. " A
thousand Dirhams is the price," said Orani. "Are you mad?" said the man,
"Who pays a thousand Dirhams for a camel?" ‘Orani said, "This camel is
worth a thousand Dirhams because when I race with my rider I overtake
him, and no one can catch me when I am riding the camel." The man said,
"You will deal better with me if you know for whom I want your camel."

‘Orani : For whom do you want it? Arab : For your mother:

‘Orani : I left my mother an invalid at home.

Arab : I want your camel for the mother of believers, ‘Ayesha.

‘Orani : Then take it as a present from me.

Arab : No, come with me, I will give you a camel and some money as well.

‘Orani : I went with the man, he gave me a she-camel which belonged to
‘Ayesha and her baby camel and four hundred or six hundred Dirhams as
well. Then the man asked me if I knew the roads there, and I replied in
the affirmative. He asked me to guide them, and I told them the name of
every desert and river we passed. We were passing through Haw’ab water
when the dogs barked. They asked me "What was the name of that water?" I
answered "Haw’ab." Then ‘Ayesha screamed and made her camel sit and
said, "By God, I am the one at whom the dogs barked in Haw’ab, take me
back." Other people made their camels sit around ‘Ayesha. ‘Ayesha never
moved from that place until the next day. Her nephew Ibn Zubair came and
told her, "Move on quickly," because ‘Ali was after them, and he would
reach them soon. Orani then said, "they left that place and cursed me."

According to Musnad of Hanbal (vol.6, p.97) Ibn Zubair told ‘Ayesha,
"This is not the time to let us down, perhaps God wishes you intercede
between Muslims to and make peace amongst them.

In Ibn Kathir (vol.7, p.230) is written that Shaykhain have not recorded
this narration in their books although it has all the necessary
conditions to be accepted as authentic to them.

In Tabari (vol.3, p.485) is recorded from Zohri that when ‘Ayesha heard
the dogs barking she asked, "What is the name of that place?" After they
told her ‘Haw’ab' she regretted and said, "We belong to God and we
return to Him." Then she continued saying, "I am surely the one the
Prophet spoke of to his wives saying he wished to know at whom the dogs
would bark in Haw’ab." ‘Ayesha wanted to return from that place, but Ibn
Zubair persuaded her to march forward.

In another place Ibn Kathir (vol.7, p.230) and Abulfaraj (p.173), it is
written that ‘Ayesha regretted saying, "I am that woman," but Ibn Zubair
betrayed her saying that the place was not Haw’ab.

In Morujudh-Dhahab (vol.2, p.248), it is written that Ibn Zubair and
Talha swore by God that the place was not Haw’ab, and brought fifty
Arabs to swear the same and that was the first lie sworn in Islam.

In Yaqubi (vol.2, p.1 57) and Kanzol-‘ummal (vol.6, pp. 83-84) it is
written that ‘Ayesha said, "Let me go back. This is the same water that
the Prophet spoke of, warning me about the barking dogs." They brought
forty Arabs to swear by God that the place was not Haw’ab. In al-Imamah
wal-Siasa (vol.l, pp.59-60), it is written that when ‘Ayesha heard the
dogs barking she asked Muhammad Bin Talha about the place and so on.
Muhammad told her "Blessed be your soul. Forget about these tales."
Abdullah Bin Zubair witnessed falsely, and they brought lying witnesses.
That was the first false witness in Islam.

Other historians have also narrated the above story from the Prophet of
God such as Ibn Athir in al-Nehaya, Hamawi in Mo‘jamul-Boldan,
Zamakhshari in al-Fa’eq, Ibn Taqtaqi in al-Fakhri (p.71) Cairo volumes,
Zobaidi (vol.l, p.195) under the word Haw’ab, Musnad Ahmad (vol.6, pp.
52,97), A‘tham (pp.168—169), Sam‘ani in al-Ansab, Sira Halabiyya (vol.3,
pp.320—321) and Muntakhab Kanz (vol.5, pp.444-445).

Conclusion
----------

The historians unanimously have recorded that (the wife of the Prophet)
‘Ayesha was the only person at whom the dogs barked in Haw’ab, as
prophesied by the Prophet and have taken the event as one of the signs
of the apostleship of the Prophet Muhammad.

Only Saif has attributed the event of the dogs to Umm Zemal Salma, a
fictitious woman to please those, who for one reason or other, loved
Saif's fictions.

Tabari in this case fortunately, has recorded the story by other
narrators as well as Saif. Therefore, the intention of Saif to subvert
stories is disclosed. By recording the stories of Orani, the previous
owner of the camel rode by the mother of the believers, and Zohri's
saying about the dogs, Tabari has

shown the true face of Saif to his readers, despite other occasions when
Tabari has recorded from Saif only and has hidden the truth.

So far we have written some stories told by Saif in the time of Abu
Bakr, now follows some of his stories in the time of ‘Omar.

[^1]: Salati in Khasais (vol.2, p.137) and Ibn ‘Abd Ber in the al-
Esti‘ab


