8. Moghairah Bin Sho‘ba
=======================

Moghaira was of the Immigrant party. ‘Omar made him Governor of Basra
and dismissed him after he was accused of adultery. He was the Governor
of Kufa when he died. Saif in the following story intended to show that
the charge of adultery was unfounded.

Tabari in vol.3, pp.170-171 has recorded from Saif that the reason that
Moghaira was accused of adultery was some differences between him and
Abu Bakra[^1], one of the witnesses against him. Abu Bakra and Moghaira
lived in two rooms opposite each other.

One day the wind blew open the window of Abu Bakra's room, he was
closing it when he saw, through the opposite window Moghaira with a
strange woman. Abu Bakra had some visitors and called them to see what
was going on between Moghaira and that woman.

Abu Bakra said to his visitors that she was Umm-Jamil, a maid of the
officials and civil servants. Abu Bakra's visitors saw something, but
waited until they saw the woman clearly before making up their minds
about the scene.

Saif then referring to the proceedings of the case in the court says
that Moghaira pleaded to ‘Omar to cross examine these four witnesses who
were slaves, and said to them, "What have you seen of me, either I had
no privacy or you had peeped in my house without permission.

Yet I was with my wife who looks like Umm-Jamil." Two witnesses told the
same story, the third different to those two, and the fourth, Ziad, said
he had seen something different altogether. The three witnesses were
flogged for bearing false witness.

‘Omar (the Caliph) said to Moghaira, "By God, if you had been guilty, I
would have stoned you to death."

Other Historians
----------------

The story told by others apart from Saif as is recorded in
Fotoohol-Boldan by Baladhori page 423, Kitabul Ahkam by Mawardi page
280, Ya‘qoubi vol.2, p.124. Tabari and Ibn Athir amongst the events of
the year 17 Hejri was that Moghaira had an association with a woman
called Umma- Jamil, the daughter of Afqam Bin Mehjan Bin Abi ‘Amr Bin
Sho‘ba. She was the wife of Hajaj Bin Atik of the Thaqif tribe. Now the
rest of the story according to al-Aghani by Abulfaraj, vol.14,
pp.139—142.

Moghaira the Governor of Basra at the time of ‘Omar, used to visit
Raqta, a woman of the Thaqif tribe, secretly in her house. Her husband
was Hajaj Bin ‘Atik from the Thaqif tribe. One day Abu Bakra met
Moghaira in the street and asked his destination. Moghaira said that he
was going to see someone. Abu Bakra said, "The Governor has to stay at
home and people have to visit him." Abu Bakra often said to Moghaira
when he saw him outside during the day. The historians have said that
the woman Moghaira used to visit was Abu Bakra's neighbor.

One day, Abu Bakra, his two brothers Naafe and Ziad and another person
named Shebl Bin Ma‘bad met together to talk, suddenly the wind blew and
opened the window and the men saw Moghaira in the room opposite with a
woman. Abu Bakra asked his visitors to confirm this. Abu Bakra waited
until Moghaira left the woman's house and told him,

"You cannot be our Governor anymore, we saw you." [^2] At mid-day Abu
Bakra wanted to prevent Moghaira from leading the prayer but the people
intervened and told Abu Bakra to write to ‘Omar (the Caliph) about
Moghaira. They wrote to ‘Omar who ordered Moghaira and the witnesses to
go to Medina. Moghaira prepared for departure, and sent an Arab slave
girl with her maid as present to Abu Musa (‘Omar's representative).

At the court ‘Omar asked Abu Bakra if he has seen Moghaira making love
to the woman and Abu Bakra gave details. Moghaira said, "You have been
spying on me." Abu Bakra said, " I did not miss that with which God will
humiliate you." ‘Omar wanted more details, so Abu Bakra described what
he had seen.

When the second witness explained the same as the first, ‘Omar said,
"Moghaira half of you is gone." The third witness made the same as the
other two, then, ‘Omar said "Moghaira, three quarter of you is gone."
(Moghaira was desperate and sought help from everybody).

Moghaira met the Immigrants and the mothers of the faithful (The
Prophet's wives) and pleaded with them for help, they sympathized with
him. ‘Omar ordered the three witnesses to be isolated, until the fourth
witness Ziad arrived from Basra.

The heads of the Immigrants and the companions parties gathered in the
mosque when Ziad arrived there. Moghaira had prepared a defense. When
‘Omar saw Ziad coming he said, " I see a man who will not let a member
of the Immigrant party down, and God has decreed." He also said, " I see
a lad who will not witness anything but the truth," according to
Montakhab, vol.2, p.413. According to Abulfada, vol.1, p.171, ‘Omar said
to Ziad, " I see a man who, I expect, will not disgrace any companion of
the Prophet of God."

In al-Aghani it is written that ‘Othman al-Nahdi said that ‘Omar's face
changed color after the first witness and his face was as long as a
fiddle after the second witness, and his face was ashen after the third
witness, and when ‘Omar saw Ziad was coming dressed in white cloth he
shouted at him "What do you know O, eagle's shed." Abu ‘Othman shouted
so loudly to imitate ‘Omar that the narrator was extremely frightened.

Moghaira said, “ O Ziad, remember God and the day of Judgment. God, His
Prophet, His book and the prince of Believers (‘Omar the Caliph) have
saved my soul. Do not waste it by describing what you have not seen."
Ziad said, "I have not seen what they have described. O prince of
believers, but I have seen a disgraceful scene, and I saw that Moghaira
was breathless after associating with the woman." Ziad denied what the
other three witnesses described.

‘Omar then said, "God is Great. Arise Moghaira and flog them." Moghaira
gave Abu Bakra and the other two eighty lashes each. Hakim in Mostadrak
and Dhahabi, vol.3, p.448 say, "‘Omar said God is Great, and he greatly
rejoiced and flogged the three witnesses, but not Ziad." It is recorded
in Fotoohol-Boldan that Shebl the third said, "The honest witness gets
lashes despite God's order."

Abu Bakra after he was flogged, said again, " I bear witness that
Moghaira has committed adultery." ‘Omar ordered him to be punished again
for bearing false witness. ‘Ali objected saying to ‘Omar, "If you flog
him, I will stone your companion (Moghaira) to death." ‘Ali meant that
if Abu Bakra's second statement was allowed, then the four statements
would prove Moghaira's guilt.

Hence he must be stoned to death. ‘Omar asked Abu Bakra to repent. Abu
Bakra asked if he wanted to take the responsibility of false testimony
from him so as to purify him, for his next statement, ‘Omar replied in
the affirmative. Abu Bakra said that he did not want to give any more
evidence. When the punishment was over Moghaira said to the witnesses,
"Praise God who has humiliated .you."

‘Omar said to Moghaira, "Silence. May God make the place unclean where
they saw you."

Abu Bakra left the place saying, "By God, I cannot forget the scene."
The other two witnesses repented so their evidence was accepted later.
Abu Bakra was asked to give his testimony for some other incident and he
said, "Ask someone else. Abu Moghaira has ruined my reputation."

It is recorded in al-Aghani and commentary of Nahj that Ratqa, the woman
in Moghaira's case in Basra used to visit him in Kufa as well. ‘Omar
once saw Raqta during a pilgrimage in Mecca. Moghaira was also there.
‘Omar asked Moghaira if he knew the woman. Moghaira said that she was
Umm Kulthoom, (The wife of ‘Omar). ‘Omar said to Moghaira, "Woe to you,
you are fooling me. By God I am sure Abu Bakra was right. I am afraid
when I see you, a stone falls on me from heaven." Hassan Bin Thabet has
composed the following verse:-

Talking of meanness, I have a strong belief, That real meanness comes
from the tribe Thaqif That one-eyed man who gave up Islam and fell, One
morning, in to the trope of a veiled damsel. He thought that he was in
the prime of manhood. Playing with slave girls in courting mood.

Baladhori in Fotooul-Boldan, page 343 has recorded that when ‘Omar
wanted to make Moghaira the Governor of Kufa he asked him if he would
repeat that which was said about him. Moghaira said "No." Hamawi in
vol.1, p.642, Mostadrak, vol.3, p.449, Wafaiat, vol.2, p.455 and vol.5,
p.406 and Bin Kathir, vol.7, p.281 have mentioned Moghaira's adultery.

Origin of Saif's Story
----------------------

Saif has recorded from Muhammad, Talha, Mohallab and Amr. We have
discussed the unreality of the first three in the previous story. Saif
has narrated six stories from ‘Amr Bin Zian or ‘Amr Bin Rayyan who was a
Saif made fictitious character according to Mizanol-E‘tedal.

Conclusion
----------

Saif wanted to free Moghaira from the blame of adultery because he was
the appointed Governor of the Caliph. He then manipulated the true event
of adultery which is recorded by so many other historians. He says Abu
Bakra lived in a room opposite to Moghaira's and he saw through- the
window

Ummal-Jamil under Moghaira then he asked his visitors to witness it.
They decided to accuse Moghaira but Moghaira and ‘Omar crossed examined
the witnesses and proved that their evidence differed. Saif also says
that ‘Omar said to Moghaira ‘"If your guilt was proved I would stone you
to death." Historians other than Saif have recorded the story
differently as we have written. To manipulate the story in favor of
Moghaira the Governor, Saif has created the narrators and Tabari has
recorded from Saif.

[^1]: Abubakra; his name is Nafe‘ son of Masruh Habashi and it is said
that his father was called Harith bin Kelda bin ‘Amr bin ‘Alaj bin Abi
Salma bin ‘Abd al-‘Uzza bin Qais

[^2]: The story of Moghaira's adultery is told by Ibn Jarir, Ibn Athir
and Abul Fida in the events of 17 Hejri


