11. Consultation and ‘Othman
============================

According to Saif it is recorded in Tabari, vol.3, p.292 among the
events of the year 23 Hejri from Saif that ‘Omar said, " I am sure that
the most popular men amongst the Muslims are these two (‘Ali and
‘Othman) — The Prophet of God used to dictate to them, that which
Gabriel revealed from God to Him." On pages 266 and 305, about the
events of the year 24 Hejri it reads, "On the third day of Moharram
‘Othman won the votes of the consultants in the afternoon.

While the call for prayer went on, ‘Othman came out of the conference
room and led the prayer." Tabari records from Saif also on page 305 that
when the consultant members voted in favor of ‘Othman, he came out of
the conference room looking- most sad and climbed the pulpit of the
Prophet, and" delivered a sermon.

After praising God and paying homage to the Prophet he said, “ O people,
you are in a house which has a very weak foundation, passing the
remainder of your lifetime. Before death befalls you, do good work,
because death comes suddenly in daytime or at night. Let not Satan
deceive you, do not take life for granted. Take heed from those who
passed away before you. Do not pass your time in vain. Try your best.
You will not be forgotten (in the sight of God). Where are your fathers
and brothers who cultivated the land before you, and left it? Your aim
must be your salvation. God has given an example for this present life
and said, "Give them an example about this life, it is like rain that
the green herbs flourish as a result of rain." He then recited to the
end of the verse. Then the people came forward to shake his hand as his
supporters.

The story of consultation by others apart from Saif
---------------------------------------------------

(‘Omar the second Caliph nominated six persons to consult and elect the
third Caliph amongst themselves).

Ibn Hesham in his book Alsirah, vol.4, pp.334-337 has recorded from
Abdulrahman Bin ‘Auf that during the pilgrim- age at Mena a man said to
‘Omar that someone told him, " If ‘Omar dies he would 'vote for such and
such person as Caliph, also the election of Abu Bakr was hasty and a
mistake although successful." ‘Omar replied angrily, " I will see about
this matter tonight, and warn those who want to usurp the successorship
of the Prophet, God willing." Abdul Rahman advised ‘Omar to postpone his
decision until they returned to Medina, because there were all sorts of
people at the pilgrimage, but the dignitaries and scholars lived in
Medina.

‘Omar agreed and when they arrived at Medina on the first Friday ‘Omar
delivered a sermon and said, " I understood that someone said that if
‘Omar dies he will vote for such and such a person as Caliph. Do not let
the saying ‘Abu Bakr's election was hasty and a mistake but successful'
deceive you. Yes it was so, but God protected us. Remember there is no
one as popular among you as Abu Bakr. Anyone who shakes the hand of
allegiance with someone else without first consulting the Muslims, shows
his allegiance to be of no value, and both persons must be killed."

A part of the above story, and ‘Omar's opinion, have been mentioned
previously where we described, "The people sought refuge at Fatimah's
house." Ibn Abil Hadid, vol.2, p.123, recorded from Jahez that ‘Ammar
Bin Yasir said that after ‘Omar he will vote for ‘Ali. This caused ‘Omar
to address the people in Medina.

Some people say Talha Bin ‘Obaidullah was the candidate. It makes no
difference who the candidate was, but what matters is that the Prophet
did not order his people to elect the Caliph, and the first Caliph too,
according to ‘Omar came to power through a hasty ill considered
occasion. Abu Bakr nominated ‘Omar. In one word the election of a Caliph
was not customary in Islam. Only ‘Omar decided to select six persons who
elected the third Caliph amongst themselves.

‘Omar's decision was planned prior to his being stabbed, as a result of
which he died later. We shall see later if ‘Omar had someone in mind as
his successor or not.

Consultation and ‘Omar
----------------------

It is written in Ansabul Ashraf by Baladhori, pp.15-16 and Tabaqat by
Ibn Sa‘d, vol.3, p.243, that ‘Omar delivered a sermon on a Friday, and
after praising God, and making homage to the Prophet said: " I have
dreamed about a cockerel pecking me. I think my death is drawing near.
People ask me to nominate a successor. God will not neglect his
religion, or the Caliph and the purpose of His sending the Prophet.
After I die the Caliph will be chosen by six consulting members.

The Prophet was pleased with them before he passed away. I know some
people will blame me for taking this decision. They will be those whom I
persuaded to embrace Islam. Those who object are the enemy of God.

It is written in ‘‘Eqdolfarid, vol.3, p.73, that when ‘Omar was stabbed,
people asked him to nominate a successor. He said, "Someone better than
me did not nominate one and another one better than me did nominate one
(He meant the Prophet and Abu Bakr). Had Abu‘obaidah not died, I would
have nominated him for he was a man to be trusted as the Prophet said.
Also if Salem the freed slave of Abu Hodhaifa, was alive I would
nominate him because he loved God so much that he never thought of
committing a sin, even without fear from God."

‘Omar was asked to nominate his son. He said that it is enough that one
of Khattab is responsible to God. He wished if he could be free in the
presence of God, breaking even with goods and bads. Then he said that he
wanted to nominate someone to guide them along the right path and he
pointed at ‘Ali, but he said that he had better not, because he did not
want to take the responsibility in this life, and the next.

Baladhori has recorded in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.16, that ‘Amr Bin
Maimoun said that he actually saw ‘Omar being stabbed, and heard Omar
saying, "Fetch me ‘Ali, ‘Othman, Talha, Zubair, Abdul Rahman Bin ‘Auf
and Sa‘d Bin Abi Waqqas." He said to ‘Ali, "People may realize that you
are a cousin of the Prophet, and his son-in-law, and you are as
knowledgeable in Islam. Should you rule these people have fear of God."
He said to ‘Othman, "People may realize that you are the son-in-law of
the Prophet, and you are an old man. Should you rule these people fear
God, and do not let (your relatives) the Moait family master the
people."

Then he called Sohaib, and said to him that he should lead the prayer
for three days and let these (six) persons be locked in a conference
room for consultation. If they unanimously elect a Caliph, anyone who
did not support him must be beheaded. When they (the six, and Sohaib)
left, ‘Omar said, that if they let the bald (he meant ‘Ali who had no
hair on the front of his head) rule he would guide the people properly.
His son (Bin ‘Omar) said to him, "Then nominate him." He replied but Ire
did not want to take the responsibility.

In Riadolnadera, vol.2, p.72, after the above saying of ‘Omar about
‘Ali, it is written that ‘Omar said, "If people let the one with the
long forehead (he meant ‘Ali) lead them on the right path, he would do
so even by the sword." He was asked, "Why do you not nominate him." He
said, "The one who was better than I did not nominate (his successor)."
Baladhori has recorded in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.17, that Waqedi has
said that when ‘Omar was speaking of a successor, the people suggested
‘Othman, Zubair, Talha, Sa‘d or Abdul Rahman. He said that ‘Othman would
give high position to his relatives,

Zubair was a believer when at peace and an unbeliever when angry. Talha
was an extremist, Sa‘d is good to head the arms but could not even rule
a village, and Abdul Rahman might only just manage his house. Bin
Maimoon said that ‘Omar left his successor to be elected from amongst
six persons, and asked that his son Abdullah Bin ‘Omar be with the six,
but should not be elected. Baladhori has recorded in Ansabol Ashraf that
Abi Mekhnaf said that when ‘Omar was stabbed, he ordered Sohaib Bin
Abdullah Jod‘an to fetch the leading front Muhajirs and Ansars.

When they came ‘Omar said, "I have left your affairs in the hands of six
people who were pioneers in Islam, and the Prophet was pleased with them
when he passed away. They will elect one amongst them-selves to be your
leader (Caliph)." Then he named these six people. He ordered Abi-Talha
Ziad Bin Sahl Khazraji to have fifty soldiers ready to press the matter
to support the new Caliph. He ordered that the election should be
finished in three days. He told Sohaib to lead the prayers until the
Caliph was elected. Talha, one of the six nominees was not in Medina,
‘Omar said that they should not wait for him after three days, and that
whoever was elected was to be the Caliph, and anyone who rejected him
was to be beheaded. Then ‘Omar sent someone to inform Talha. But when
Talha came to Medina the Caliph ‘Omar was dead, and ‘Othman was elected
as the new . Caliph. Talha remained in his house in protest.

‘Othman went to him, Talha said, "Would you give up the Caliphate should
I not agree." ‘Othman replied in the affirmative, then Talha also shook
‘Othman's hand as Caliph. It is written in ‘Eqdolfarid page 20 that
Talha said to ‘Othman that he was prepared to shake his hand, in the
mosque or in public.

Abdullah Bin Saad Abisarh has said that before Talha gave his pledge
people were worried in case he disagreed. ‘Othman always respected
Talha, until he was besieged in his house before he was murdered. Then
Talha showed more opposition to ‘Othman than anybody else. Baladhori has
written in Ansabol Ashraf page 18 that ‘Omar said, "The minority should
obey the majority, and anyone who opposes you, behead him."

It is also written on page 19 that ‘Omar ordered the consultant members
to confer for three days, and if two people voted in favor of someone,
and two others voted in favor of someone else, then the vote must be
taken again. If four people were on the side of one person, and only one
against, then the four were in the right. If three and three, the three
agreeing with Abdul Rahman would be in the right, because what he
chooses for Muslims is safer.

Baladhori in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.15 has written that ‘Omar said,
"Some people say Abu Bakr's election was a hasty error, God saved us the
harm of it, and ‘Omar did not come to power by voting, but I have
decided that my successor will be chosen by discussion. If four are on
one side, and one on the other side, side with the four. If there was
three against three, agree with the three that has Abdul Rahman among
them. If Abdul Rahman (shook his two hands) together follow him."
Mottaqi also has recorded in Kanzol-Ommal, vol.3, p.160 that ‘Omar said,
"Should Abdul Rahman shake his two hands together you will then take him
as Caliph." Mottaqi has also recorded from Aslam that ‘Omar said,
"Should Abdul Rahman name any of them as Caliph you will have to obey
him, and any- body who refrains from allegiance must be beheaded."

The above stories explain that ‘Omar left the affairs of Muslims in the
hands of Abdul Rahman, and the discussion of the six whom he nominated
to elect as Caliph was only as a security measure to ensure that his
heir came to the throne. ‘Ali was aware of ‘Omar's plan as is recorded
in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.19 that ‘Ali heard ‘Omar recommending Abdul
Rahman's approval for the election to Caliph. He said to his uncle
‘Abbas "By God, we have lost the election." ‘Abbas asked him "How did
you know?" ‘Ali said, "Saad is in favor of Abdul Rahman because they are
cousins. Abdul Rahman is ‘Othman's son-in-law, and his friend. These
three are on one side, even if Zubair and Talha do vote for me they will
win, and we shall loose because Abdul Rahman is among them." Almost the
same conversation is recorded in Eqdulfarid, vol.13, p.74.

Baladhori has recorded in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.20 from Abi Mekhnaf
that ‘Ali was concerned in case Sa‘d Abdul Rahman and ‘Othman agreed
together. Therefore he took Hasan and Husain with him to Sa‘d and said
to Sa‘d, “ O Aba Is’haq, I did not come to ask you to vote for me in
spite of Abdul Rahman. But if Abdul Rahman asked you to take ‘Othman's
part please do not, because I am a nearer relative to you than ‘Othman."

‘Ali mentioned this to Sa‘d and reminded him of his relation, Hasan and
Hosein's relation and Amena the Prophet's mother's relation with Sa‘d.
Sa‘d said to ‘Ali "You are given what you asked for." When Abdul Rahman
asked Sa‘d for consultation, Sa‘d said, " I vote in your favor, but not
in ‘Othman's favor, because ‘Ali deserves this position more than
‘Othman." Abu Talha (the chief guard) came to the conference room to
urge them to reach a decision and said to the consulting members, "You
show avidity for discussion, but you delay the discussion.

It seems that each of you is yearning to be the Caliph." Abu Talha
seeing the situation shed tears and said, " I expected them not to have
desire for the position, and I was afraid that none of them would accept
the responsibility of being the Caliph, and each would trig to pass it
to another." ‘Omar appointed his son as a member of the consultation
without having a vote, but his son did not join the conference as
recorded in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.21.

Abi Mekhnaf said that ‘Omar was buried on Sunday and Sohaib led the
funeral prayer, and Abu Talha led the daily congregational prayer. The
consultants did not start their work that evening, and the following
morning they supervised the treasury at Abu Talha, the chief guard's
request. Abdul Rahman realized that the consultants were whispering to
one another to discourage candidates then he said, "Sa‘d and I withdrew
our claims as candidates provided I choose the Caliph, because the
people were waiting for the result and they wanted to return to their
home towns.

All the candidates agreed except ‘Ali who said, "I will think about it."
Abu Talha met them and Abdul Rahman told him what he proposed, and of
‘Ali's disagreement. Abu Talha said to ‘Ali, "You trust Abdul Rahman as
well as other Muslims. He is not himself a candidate because he does not
like the responsibility, why do you not agree with him?" Then ‘Ali asked
Abdul Rahman to swear that he would be impartial and would give the
welfare of Muslims priority to his own fancy desires, Abdul Rahman gave
his word. Then Abdul Rahman said to ‘Ali, "Do not be in doubt."

This happened either in the treasury house or in the house of Meswar Bin
Makhrama. By request of Abdul Rahman all members gave their word that
anybody he chooses would be accepted. Abdul Rahman took ‘Ali's hand and
said, "Swear by God that should I choose you as Caliph you would not
favor Bani Abdulmottaleb, and act according to the Prophet's
instructions thoroughly." ‘Ali said, "Who can agree to do exactly as the
Prophet did? I can only agree to do my best."

Then Abdul Rahman took ‘Othman's hand and said, "Swear by God that
should I choose you as Caliph you would not favor Bani Omayya and follow
the Prophet, Abu Bakr and ‘Omar." ‘Othman swore to act accordingly, and
gave his word. ‘Ali said to ‘Othman, "You got what you wanted." Then
Abdul Rahman said the kind of thing to ‘Ali. ‘Ali said " I promise to
follow the Prophet's instructions and to do that which I think is right
according to Islamic Laws." Meanwhile ‘Othman Kept saving, " I give my
word, as the prophets gave their words to God, to act according to the
instructions of the Prophet, Abu Bakr and ‘Omar."

Then Abdul Rahman shook the hand of ‘Othman and announced him as Caliph.
All members of the consultation shook ‘Othman's hand, to show their
acceptance of him as Caliph, except ‘Ali who remained sitting after the
others had stood to acknowledge ‘Othman. Abdul Rahman said to ‘Ali,
"Agree or else I will behead you." None of the members carried a sword
except Abdul Rahman. It was said that ‘Ali left the conference room
angrily.

Other members went after him to agree or else they would fight him. Then
‘Ali returned and shook the hand of allegiance with ‘Othman. Baladhori
has recorded in Ansabol Ashraf, vol.5, p.24 from Waqedi that after
‘Othman came out of the conference room being Caliph, he went into the
pulpit. He praised God, and paid homage to the Prophet, and said, “ O
people, the first mount is hard. We have plenty of time ahead. If I am
spared I will prepare a sermon for you. I was not a speaker before, but
God will teach me how to deliver a speech."

It is written in ‘Eqdulfarid, vol.2, p.140 that ‘Othman was one of those
people who found it difficult to deliver speeches. It is also written in
Albayan-Wat-Tabyeen that

‘Othman made some mistakes in the pulpit when he said “ O people, Abu
Bakr and ‘Omar used to prepare their speeches in advance." Abi Mekhnaf
says that ‘Othman in the pulpit said, " I have not prepared a speech and
have never delivered one. By the will of God I shall return soon and
speak to you." It is also narrated that ‘Othman went into the pulpit and
said, "We are not familiar with addressing people, if we are spared, God
willing, you will hear a good speech. I have to tell you now that by
God's decree, ‘Obaidullah son of ‘Omar has killed Hormozan.

Hormozan was a Muslim but he had no heir, I the leader and the Caliph
will forgive the murderer. Do you forgive him?" All answered in the
affirmative, except ‘Ali who suggested capital punishment for the
murderer and pointed to ‘Obaidullah, saying “ O you hypocrite, if I got
hold of you I would kill you in retaliation for killing Hormozan."

Tabari in his book vol.3, pp.292-302, has made one story from all the
above narratives, and has condensed some parts of it so much that the
events are not properly described. He has recorded the speech of ‘Othman
from Saif only. We have written here a little about the ‘Consultation'
to show the difference between Saif and others in recording the events.
We shall 3xplain more about the discussion of consulting members in the
conference room later. Saif has not manipulated the above event, but he
has invented hundreds of narratives to defend the then rulers, and
influential men. Tabari has shown a special desire to record from Saif.
Should anybody read the events of the years 11—37 Hejri from Tabari's
book, he would realize how much the events have been invented and/or
converted.


