12. Qummadhban
==============

Abi Mansur had heard Qummadhban saying, "The Persians living in Medina
used to visit one another — once my father met Firouz carrying a dagger
with a blade at each end. My father asked Firouz ‘Why do you want this
dagger?' Firouz said 'I shall cut.' After ‘Omar was wounded, someone
said that he had seen Hormozan giving that dagger to Firouz. ‘Obaidullah
then went and killed Hormozan (my father).

When ‘Othman became Caliph, he told me to take my revenge on ‘Obaidullah
and kill him. Everybody wanted ‘Obaidullah killed except a few who asked
me to forgive him. I asked them if I had the right to kill him
(‘Obaidullah), they answered in the affirmative. Then I asked them, ‘Can
you stop me executing the murderer of my father?' They answered in the
negative, and swore at ‘Obaidullah. Yet I forgave ‘Obaidullah, all to
please God and those people. Then the people picked me up and took me to
my house carrying me on their shoulders." (End of Qummadhban's saying.)

Saif in a second narrative has recorded that Abdul Rahman Bin Abu Bakr
said, "Last night I saw Abu Lolo (Firouz) talking to Jofaina and
Hormozan. When they saw me they scattered hurriedly. A double bladed
dagger was dropped by them. It was the weapon used in stabbing ‘Omar.
Only a few people were allowed to remain in the Mosque after the
stabbing.

"One of them a man from the Tamim tribe, ran after Abu Lolo, caught him,
killed him, and brought the dagger back with him. It was the described
dagger. ‘Obaidullah son of ‘Omar waited until his father died, then he
killed Hormozan and Jofaina who was a Christian teacher. Sohaib the
(provisional regent) Governor of Medina sent ‘Amr ‘As to arrest
‘Obaidullah. ‘Amr ‘As tried several times until he recovered the dagger
and arrested ‘Obaidullah."

Story told by others apart from Saif
------------------------------------

Tabari has recorded from Meswar Bin Makhrama that after ‘Obaidullah (son
of ‘Omar) killed Hormozan, Jofaina and Abu Lolo's daughter he said, "By
God, I shall kill those who were responsible for the murder of my
father." Sa‘d took the sword from ‘Obaidullah and imprisoned him in his
house until ‘Othman came out of his house and told some of Ansars and
Muhajirs about their opinion of ‘Obaidullah as the murderer of innocent
people. ‘Ali said that he must be killed. Some Muhajirs said, "‘Omar was
murdered yesterday, should his son be killed today?" ‘Amr ‘As said to
‘Othman, "You are lucky that blood was shed before you were Caliph."

We have previously mentioned that Baladhori in the story of consultation
has said that ‘Othman the Caliph at his first appearance in public said,
"By decree of God, ‘Obaidullah has killed Hormozan. I forgive
‘Obaidullah on behalf of all Muslims because, Hormozan has no heir."
Then ‘Othman asked for the Muslims' approval. All agreed except ‘Ali who
said, "This hypocrite must be killed, because he has murdered an
innocent Muslim." He then pointed to ‘Obaidullah and said, " I will kill
you in revenge for Hormozan.

‘Othman said, " I will pay Hormozan's blood money." Ziad Bin Labid
Bayadi composed the following verse regarding the murder of Hormozan:-
‘Obaidullah, it was evil of you to kill Hormozan, An innocent Muslim,
without good reason. ‘Othman protected you, and saved your blood, But no
one will protect you from the vengeance of God.

‘Obaidullah complained to ‘Othman and he ordered Ziad to stop. Then Ziad
composed the following verse against ‘Othman:- Aba ‘Amr when ‘Obaidullah
drew his sword, He was going to commit an offence, By God. To forgive a
criminal and to commit a crime. Are two horses reaching the end at the
same time. You have no right to forgive the murderer, And if you do, I
am sure you err.

Conclusion
----------

Saif says that Hormozan had a son, Qummadhban. He also records a
narrative from that son. Other historians say that because Hormozan had
no heir, Caliph ‘Othman forgave ‘Obaidullah on behalf of Muslims in
spite of his retaliation for Hormozan's blood. Saif also says a man from
the Tamim tribe killed Abu Lolo to prove honor for one of his unknown
fellow tribesmen.


