13. Cities invented by Saif
===========================

Dolouth, Tawous, Je‘rana and No‘man, Qordouda, River Ott, Altheni,
Thanyat al-Rekab, Qodais, Maqr, Waya khord, al-Walaja and Alhawafi.

Saif has invented some cities such as Dolouth, Tawous, Alje‘rana and
Na‘man of Iraq, Alqordouda, Nahr-att, Thanyya Thanyyatol Rekab, Qodais,
Wayakhord, Alwalaja and Alha- wafi, which are named by Hamawi in the
Mo‘jamul-Boldan, by Tabari and others. Yaqut Hamawi was very keen to
record rare and peculiar stories in his book Mo‘jamul-Boldan.

He has written many of Saif's stories in his book when describing
strange things about a place or a town. Apparently Hamawi possessed a
manuscript of Saif's book as it can be noticed when he refers to Jobar,
Ja‘rana, Sharja and Sahid in his geography book Mo‘jamul-Boldan. The
manuscript was hand written by Abi Bak'. Muhammad Bin Ahmad Bin
Abdulbaqi Albaghdadi Hafez (d. 489 Hijri)[^1].

He was called Bin Khazeba and has written some comments in the margins
as well, and had narrated from Abibakr Alkhatie. In the margins there
were comments by Abu Bakr Bin Saif. He was either Abu Bakr Ahmad Bin
Bakr Bin Saif Jessaini, whose biography is written by Hamawi and
Sam'ani, under the name Jessaini, or Abu Bakr Ahmad Bin Abdullah Bin
Saif Bin Sa‘eed Sajestani from whom Bin ‘Asaker has recorded all Saif's
stories, and Bin Nadim has written his name in his book Alfehrest, page
119 under the name ‘Obaidullah Sajestani. Hamawi has written some of
Saif's stories in his book in the same manner as Tabari, but there is
one difference between them.

Tabari has recorded events such that a few events make a whole story. He
also usually gives the sources of his information. But Hamawi sometimes
recorded a part of an event because he liked the styli of the poetry or
prose in which it was written. He does not even mention Saif's name in
most of them. We can find some of Saif's stories in Hamawi which are not
written in Tabari and vice versa. Each of these two historians have
chosen those of Saif's inventions which suit his own purpose. Hamawi has
recorded pieces from Saif under the names of towns as follows:-

1. Dolouth
----------

A man from the tribe Abdulqais called Sohara says, "At the battle of
Hormozan, which took place at Ahwaz, a town in between Dolouth and
Dojail, I met Harem Bin Hayan and took a bunch of dates to him…etc."

Tabari has recorded in vol.1, p.2537, the year 13 Hejri the above story
as far as "A bunch of dates." While Hamawi proceeds in his recording
beyond Tabari. Therefore Hamawi could have not recorded from Tabari and
he must have had excess to Saif's manuscript.

2. Tawous
---------

Hamawi says that it is a place in the province of Fars (in Persia). Saif
has said that "‘Ala΄ Bin Hazrami dispatched a troop by sea to Tawous
without ‘Omar's approval." Hamawi has recorded this story which has also
been recorded by Tabari from Saif in vol.1, pp.2545—2551, year 17 Hejri,
but Hamawi has also recorded a poem composed by Khalid Bin Mondher which
Tabari has ignored.

3. Je‘rana and No‘man
---------------------

They are two places in Iraq according to Saif, as has been recorded by
Hamawi. Hamawi has mentioned Saif's name in ten or more places. But
there are many towns about which he has written in his book without
mentioning Saif's name. The reader of the latter case would think that
Hamawi has expressed his own opinion, an example is Qordouda.

4. Qordouda
-----------

When Tolaiha the false prophet arrived at Samiera, he received a message
from Thamama Bin Oas Bin Lam Alta’i saying, " I have about five hundred
men, if you want any help. We are at Qordouda and Ansor by the sands."

Hamawi has taken the above story from Tabari Ibn Hajar has also used
information taken from Tabari while writing the biography of Thamama.
There is no trace of Qordouda and Thamama anywhere except in Saif's
stories.

5. River Ott
------------

Khalid Bin Walid sent one of his generals called Ott Bin Abi-Ott, who
was from the tribe Bani Sa‘d, to Dowraqestan. The general camped by a
river there and later the river was called River Ott after that general.
Again the reader may think that Hamawi had written that of his own
accord, yet he borrowed the story from Tabari. Ibn Hajar also recorded
that same story which describing the word Ott (from Tabari).[^2]

6. Ermath, Aghwath and Emas
---------------------------

These names described by Hamawi are borrowed from Tabari as we have
explained previously at the battle of Qadesyya.[^3]

7. Altheni, Thanyat al-Rekab, Qodais, Maqr, Wayakhord Walaja and Alhawafi.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Are some of the names Hamawi has borrowed from Tabari, vol.1,
pp.2026,2648,2230-33,43,65,88,94,2326-38, 2037-8 and 2618-25 and also
2169 respectively without mentioning their inventors name, Saif. Hamawi
has written of other places and towns in his book Mo‘jamul-Boldan. He
has obtained them from Saif's work, and we are unable to find in any
other geography or history books, viz:-  
 1. Sifat Jaziratul Arab by Abi Muhammad Alhasan Bin Ahmad Bin Ya‘qub
Bin Yusof Bin Dawoud known as Bin Ha’ek (d. 334 H. — 945/6 A.D.)

2. Fotoohol Boldan by Baladhori.

3. Mukhtasarul-Boldan by Abibakr Ahmed Bin Muhammad Hamdani known as Bin
Faqih lived third century Hijri.

4. al-Atharol Baqia ‘Anel Qorounel Khaliah by Abu- raihan Muhammad Bin
Ahmad al-Birouni Kharazmi (d. 440 H.).

5. Mo‘jam Masto‘jem by Abi Obaid Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz Bin Mas‘ab
Albakri Alwazir (d.478 H.).

6. Taqwimul Boldan by Ismail Saheb Hama (d. 432 H)

Two contemporary geographers have not trusted Hamawi and have not
mentioned those places in their books.

1. Lestyrenj, his book: Cities of East Caliphate.

2. ‘Omar Reza Kehala, his book: Geography of Arabian Peninsula.

[^1]: Tarikhol Kamel, vo1.10, p.178; Shadharat-o-Dhahab, events of 489
H.; Lesanol Mizan, vol.6, pp.57,479; and Tadhkeratol Hoffaz al-Dhahabi,
p.1224

[^2]: Tabari, vol.1, p.1892, Ertedad Ghetphan, year 11 Hejri

[^3]: T abari, vol.1, p.2052, news following H eyrah.


