Truth Behind The Fiction
========================

Comments by Doctor Hamid Hafni Dawood, Professor in Arabic Language in Cairo University.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The above article was written by a learned Sunni man, who has broken
the barrier of fanaticism and quarrelling for the sake of quarrelling.*

The 1300th Birthday of Islam has been celebrated. During this time some
of our learned writers have accused Shi‘ahs of not having Islamic views.
Those writers influenced public opinion against Shi‘ahs and created deep
gaps between Muslims. In spite of wisdom and learning, the enemies of
the Shi‘ah followed their self chosen beliefs and partiality, covering
the truth, and accusing Shi‘ahs of being superstitious etc. Hence
Islamic Science suffered much, as Shi‘ah views were suppressed.

As a result of these accusations, the loss to Islamic Science was
greater than the loss suffered by the Shi‘ah themselves because the
source of this jurisprudence, though rich and fruitful, was neglected,
resulting in limited knowledge.

Alas, in the past our learned men were prejudiced, otherwise we would
have benefited from many Shi‘ah views. Anyone who wishes to do research
in Islamic Jurisprudence must consider Shi‘ah sources an s well as those
of Sunni.

Was not the Shi‘ah's leader. al-Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq (d.148 H.L.), the
teacher of two Sunni Imams? i.e. Abu Hanifah al-No'man Bin al-Thabet (d.
150 H.L.) and-Abu ‘ Abdullah Malik Bin Anas (d. 179 H.L.).

Abu Hanifah said, "Except for the two years No‘man would have starved,"
referring to the two years he had benefited from the knowledge of
al-Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq.

Malik also confessed straight forwardly, that he had not met anyone
learned in Islamic Jurisprudence than al-Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq.

Yet so called learned men, unfortunately disregard t h e rules for
research to suit their own ends. Hence knowledge is not fully disclosed
to them, and they create a wider gap between Muslims. Ahmed Ameen was
one of those deprived of the light of knowledge, remaining in darkness,
even though the candle of Shi‘ah was always shining and there was no
other light.

History has recorded this stain on the robe of Ahmed Ameen and his
friends, who blindly followed one special sect- Madhhab. Of the many
mistakes made by him, the biggest is told in the story of ‘Abdullah Bin
Saba΄. This is one of the tales told in order to accuse Shi‘ahs of
heresy and foregoing events.

The great contemporary researcher, the Reverend al- Sayyid Murtada
al-‘Askari, in his book ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄, has proved with substantial
evidence, that ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ was fictitious, and it is therefore a
greater lie to say he was the founder of Shi‘ism.

Al-Sayyid Murtada al-‘Askari has been deeply involved in history and has
proved from Sunni sources that the enemies of Shi‘ah are false.

From the early days of Islam up to the present, stories like those about
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ told by Saif Bin ‘Omar, were believed as being from
reliable sources, but in this book extensive research has been made
concerning these stories. in order to facilitate the finding of the
truth about them.

God has decreed that some learned men disclose the truth regardless of
the blame they may get. The pioneer in this field is the honorable
author of this book, who has made the Sunni learned men of research
revise the history book of Tabari, (History of Nations and Kings) and to
sift out the authentic stories from the false. The stories which
remained unchanged and unaltered for centuries like God's Revelations.

The honorable writer, with much evidence, has stripped the veil or
ambiguity from those historical events. and in the best way disclosed
the truth, to such an extent that some facts seem frightful. Of course
some of. them appear to be incredible, for they contradict the beliefs
of a lifetime, and our religious legacy — centuries old. But we have to
obey the truth no matter how difficult they appear. "The truth is the
best to be followed."

To know what it is all about, one has to read this book and scrutinize
the events of which there are different opinions; such as:

"The Army of Osama."  
 "The death of the honored Prophet."  
 "The story of Saqifa."

All of which have been examined by the author.

When the messenger of God was on his deathbed, some men left the Army of
Osama without permission, and went back to Medina with the hope of
gaining some privileged office. The author introduces these people to
us. On his deathbed the Prophet wanted to make a will, but some people
ignored this wish, and called it the ravings of a dying man. Perhaps
they were afraid of the possibility of his introducing al-Imam ‘Ali as
his successor.

The author discloses the truth about these events. What ‘Omar had in his
mind to deny the death of the Holy Prophet? Why was he threatening to
put to death, those who were spreading the news of the Prophet's death?

During the time when al-Imam ‘Ali and the cousins of the Prophet, his
uncle ‘Abbas and the elders were washing the corpse of the Prophet,
‘Omar and Abu ‘Obeydah hurriedly came to Saqifa (a room with a roofed
veranda) and demanded the people to give their allegiance to Abu Bakr.
Yet if they had waited until the burial of the Prophet was over, ‘Ali
was the only candidate for the successor of the Prophet, and Bani-Hashim
knew not anyone else.

The author, under the three titles previously mentioned, has sifted
truth from falsehood, good from bad, until he has reached the obvious
reality; and because of his research, the doors of deception and fraud
are closed for ever-more to the plotters.

Other subjects in this book show the truth so clearly, that in the very
near future, a vast reform in the history of Islam will come about.

I would like to put three questions to the readers before ending my
article.

1. Can a close companion of the Prophet make a mistake?

2. Can we criticize his work?

3. Can we say that the respected companion of the

Prophet is a hypocrite or an unbeliever?

The answers to the first two are positive, but the answer to the third
is in the negative — not because I am biased and am saying something
against logic — no I have a rational reason and a logical one, for
unbelief and hypocrisy are from the heart, and no one except God, knows
the contents of our hearts and the secrets of people. I am pleased to
pay great respect to this book and its honorable author, the very
learned researcher Sayyid Murtada Askari. I am also pleased with Mr.
Murtada Rizvi Kashmiri (The publisher) who has produced this book in a
pleasing form. He has fulfilled his duty, a service to Islam. This
responsibility will carry much weight in the revival of true Islamic
history.

12th October, 1961  
 Cairo — Egypt  
 Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawood

Comments By Al-Sheikh Jawad Mughniah - A Shi‘ah Scholar
-------------------------------------------------------

"Everything in this world is changing, except the writings against
Shi‘ah. To every beginning there is an end, except the accusations
against Shi‘ah. Every verdict is supported by evidence, except the one
against Shi‘ah. Why? Are Shi‘ahs trouble makers or violent agitators,
who only want to disturb people?"

Here is the answer.

In the second century of the Islamic Era (H.L.) lived a man called Saif
Bin ‘Omar al-Tamimi.

He wrote two books:-

1. al-Fatooh Wal Reddah.

2. al-Jamal Wa Maseeri ‘Ayeshah Wa ‘Ali.

He served two purposes in his two books:-

1. Inventing stories without foundation.

2. Recording events in such a way that truth appeared to be false, and
false appeared to be truth.

He invented Companions (Sahabi) for the Prophet such as So‘eer, Hazhaz,
Ott, Homaiza, etc. He recorded his stories in such a way that they
appeared to have been told by the people who met these Sahabies.

Among his fictional heroes is ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄, who was supposed to
have related tales about Shi‘ah; all stories against Shi‘ahs, recorded
by all historians originate from Saif.

After Saif, the historians accepted his books as the gospel truth.
Tabari was the first historian who relied upon Saif.

Other historians, Ibn Athir and Ibn ‘Asaker, among them, followed Tabari
blindly.

Saif invented stories and muddled authentic events but the only source
of all his stories is his own books ‘al-Fatooh' and 'al-Jamal.'

The book ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ proves that the above statement is true and
its knowledgeable author's task, is to show the truth as it was, without
gilding the lily. Not a single learned man can deny, or doubt, anything
which Sayyid Murtada al-’Askari has written because the book is based on
logical proofs and no one can deny logic and axioms.

I have discussed ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ with many people, but I answered
them as previous learned men have done, except that I made it easier for
them to understand, that I believed in the existence of ‘Abdullah Bin
Saba΄. Now, the very learned al-Sayyid Murtada al-’Askari, has changed
the story completely, and proved that ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ is fictitious.
I may say that this is the first Arabic book to have examined history
scientifically.

The author has done a great service not only for religion, knowledge and
Shi‘ahs but for Islam. He has closed the door to those who wanted to
disturb Muslim unity, and to those Sunnis who get courage from their
false stories. Today their first and only evidence, the stories of Bin
Saba and Bin Sauda invented by Saif, have been proved to be false.

Finally, may I point out that this book is to be published

and sold at a low price, in order that all Muslims can know the story.
It is to be translated into many languages.

Lebanon,  
 Muhammad Jawad Mughniah

Comments By Professor James Robinson - D.Litt., D.D.Glasgow, U.K.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Dear Sayyid Murtada al-‘Askari,

It was in the middle of last August that I received from you the copies
of your two works, ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ wa- Asatir ukhra ,and Khamsun
wa-mi'at Sahabi mukhtalq, al- Qism al-awwal. At the time I wrote to you
to say that I am now aged and not in perfect health, therefore I would
need time to study these books.

It has taken me even longer than I had imagined; but I have read the
books twice with great interest, and although I should have like to
write at some length, I feel I must write to express my admiration of
the methods adopted and the careful scholarship shown in the two books.
At my age I cannot look forward with confidence to being able to write
and so I feel I must delay no longer in case I find I am unable to
write.

In the first book I liked the detailed account of the conventional story
of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ and the Sabaiyya, followed by a valuable
discussion of writers (ancient and modern) in East and West and the
sources on which they depended. The table on p.57 is very helpful in
showing the main sources of information about Saif and his traditions
and how later writers depended on one or other of these.

Then comes a list of a number of authorities who expressed opinions on
the worth of Saif's traditions, from Abu Dawud (d. 275 — the text
wrongly says 316) to Ibn Hajar (d. 852). As they all speak critically,
using such words and "weak," "his traditions are abandoned,"
"Worthless," "liar," "suspected of being Zindiq," etc., they agree in
asserting the unreliability, or even falseness of the traditions.

This is an overwhelming argument. In studying the opinions of
authorities on different traditionists, I have noted that all do not
agree. But here there is no disagreement which makes one wonder why
later writers have been so ready to accept Saif's material.

But I should like to make a remark about Tabari who has no hesitation in
quoting Saif. His history is not a historical work in the manner of
modern writing, for his main purpose seems to have been to record all
the information in his possession without necessarily expressing an
opinion on its value.

One is, therefore, prepared to find that some of his material is less
reliable than others. So, perhaps we can excuse him for using a method
not approved nowadays. He has at least provided a mass of information.
It remains for acute scholars like yourself to distinguish between the
genuine and the false.

In discussing a number of topics mentioned by Saif, the argument is
conducted in a very effective manner, first giving Saif's account and
then comparing it with accounts given by others. This careful comparison
deals both with the material and the sanad, and it is shown that Saif
often quotes men who are unknown.

This raises the question why none of them should have been quoted by
other transmitters, and leads one further to suggest that Saif has
invented them. This serious accusation is a reasonable assumption by
comparing Saif with others.

It is pointed out that Saif has stories miraculous of happenings which
are difficult to believe, such as desert sands becoming water for Muslim
armies, seas becoming sand, cattle speaking and informing the Muslim
army where they were hidden, etc.

In Saif's time it was possible for him to succeed in passing off such
stories as history, but nowadays the critical student naturally finds
such stories quite impossible. Effective arguments are also used to show
how Saif's information about Ibn Saba and the Saba'iyya is quite
unreliable.

The author suggests that some orientalists have based their studies on
Saif's information, matters such as the huge number of people killed in
the early Muslim wars, the idea that an unknown Jew, Ibn Saba΄, could
have been the influence to lead astray companions of the Prophet from
their faith, and have been the leading influence in stirring up the
people to revolt against ‘Uthman and cause his murder, and stir up the
fighting engaged in by ‘Ali with Talha and al- Zubayr.

This may be true of some, but it has not been true of all. This is
apparent from the articles on ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ in the first and
second editions of the Encyclopedia of Islam. Saif spends much time
manufacturing heroes from Tamim, the tribe to which Saif traced his
genealogy, but Sir William Muir long ago told how Tamim had to submit to
the forces of the early Caliphate at the time of what is called the
Apostasy.

Sir Thomas Arnold may also be noted as drawing attention to the fact
that the early conquests were not so much for the purpose of spreading
the faith as for extending the sphere of Muslim rule.

In the second book attention is drawn to the fact that Saif who lived in
the first quarter of the second century belonged to Tamim, one of the
Mudar tribes who live in Kufa. This helps one to study his tendencies
and the influences leading to these legends. There is discussion of
Zindiq and of Manichaeanism. Party spirit is said to have continued from
the Prophet's time, till that of the ‘Abbasids.'

Saif upholds the northern tribes, inventing heroes, poets praising the
tribe's heroes, companions of the Prophet from Tamim, wars and battles
which had no reality, millions killed and large numbers of prisoners
with the purpose glorifying the heroes he invented. Poems attributed to
imaginary heroes were in praise of Mudar, then Tamim, then B. ‘Amr, the
subtribe to which Saif traced his origin.

Saif mentioned men of Mudar as leaders of battles which were led by men
of other tribes, his fictitious leaders some-times being real people,
sometimes names produced by his imagination. It is argued that the
falseness of his information was partly to upset the faith of many and
partly to give non-Muslims a wrong conception. He was so skilful in his
forgeries that they were accepted as genuine history.

This is a brief summary of some of the wrongs of which Saif was guilty.
The aim part of the book goes into details about twenty three men,
giving examples of Saif's material and showing how he differed from
genuine authorities not only in material but also in sanad by using
names of non- existing people.

The work is done with great detail presenting overwhelming argument
against Saif's reliability in spite of the notable writers who include
information in their writings. Two of Saif's books are discussed showing
that they are as unreliable as other material later authors have quoted
from him.

This is a most penetrating study undertaken with keen perception and a
high quality of criticism. I am very grateful for having had the
opportunity of spending quite a considerable time in studying the
arguments which appeal to me as fully convincing, and I am sure that all
who study these books with an open mind will readily appreciate the
force of the arguments.

With many thanks for sending me these books, and

apologize for having, on account of age and other infirmities, been so
long in replying.

Yours sincerely,

James Robinson


