The Tale of ‘Abdullah bin Saba’
===============================

***In the Name of the Most Merciful God***

For one thousand years historians have been recording astonishing
stories about ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄, and his followers — Sabaian.

a) Who was Abdullah and who were Sabaian, his followers?

b) What did Abdullah say, and what has he done?

Summary of what is known from the Historians
--------------------------------------------

A Jew from Sana in Yemen posed as convert to Islam in the time of
‘Othman the third Caliph, and plotted against Islam and Muslims. He
travelled abroad to large cities such as Kufa, Basra, Damascus and
Egypt, preaching a belief in the resurrection of the Prophet Muhammad as
being like the return again of Jesus to this world, before Doomsday.

He also preached the idea of apostleship, and claimed that al-Imam ‘Ali
was the true successor of the Prophet Muhammad — accusing ‘Othman of
unjustly usurping al-Imam ‘Ali's place. He strongly urged the people to
murder Caliph ‘Othman, who was later assassinated.

The historians named this Jew, ‘Abdullah bin Saba΄ as the hero of the
stories. He was known as Ibn Amatus-Sawda, meaning son of a negro slave.
Abdullah sent his missions to many cities pretending to preach true
Islamic faith — enjoining good, and denouncing bad, encouraging the
people to revolt against their governors and even to kill them. On the
list of the followers of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ are some good S ah abis
(companions of the Prophet) — for example Abu Dharr also some Tabe'in
such as Malik Ashtar.

In the time of al-Imam ‘Ali, two men Talha and Zubair, revolted against
al-Imam ‘Ali demanding the persecution of the murderers of ‘Othman.
Because of this the battle of Jamal was planned. al-Imam ‘Ali and his
two opponents agreed to a settlement, but some Sabaian, namely those who
were guilty of murdering ‘Othman, did not want the quarrel to be settled
because their names had been disclosed.

So, those Sabaians secretly enrolled in both armies — the army of al-
Imam ‘Ali and the rebellious army. During the night while everyone was
dreaming of the peace treaty to be agreed upon the next day, the
plotters started shooting at both sides. As a result of this the Battle
of Jamal started without the permission or knowledge of the commanders
of either side.

Before discussing the story of Ibn Saba in detail, it is worthwhile
examining those personalities whose names are on the lists of Sabaian.

1) Abu Dharr.

2) ‘Ammar Bin Yasir.

3) Abdur-Rahman Adis.

4) Sa‘sa‘a Bin Souhan.

5) Muhammad Bin Abi Hodhaifah.

6) Muhammad Bin Abibakr, son of the first Caliph.

7) Malik Ashtar.

### 1) Abu Dharr (Jondob Ibn Jonadeh) Ghafary

He is the third person in the list of the four pioneers who first
embraced Islam. He was a monotheist even before his con-version. He
declared his faith in Islam at Mecca in the Holy Mosque Beitul Haram.
The Quraishite beat him almost to death but he survived, and on the
instruction of the Prophet Muhammad he returned to his tribe.

After the Battles of Badr and Uhud he came to Medina and stayed there
until the death of the Prophet. Then Abu Dharr was sent to Sham
(Damascus) where he could not agree with Mo'awiah. Later Mo'awiah
complained about Abu Dharr to ‘Othman, the third Caliph, and he sent Abu
Dharr into exile at Rabaza where he later died.

Many narratives have been recorded about Abu Dharr from the Prophet. He
once said: "Under the blue sky, and on the earth, there is none more
straight forward than Abu Dharr."

### 2) ‘Ammar Bin Yasir

He was known as Abuyaqzan. He was one of the Bani Tha'laba tribe and was
allied with Bani Makhzoom. His mother's name was Somayyah. He and his
parents were pioneers in embracing Islam, and he was the seventh to
declare his faith. His parents were executed after the torture of the
Quraish Tribe, because of the conversion to Islam. There are authentic
narrations told by the Prophet about ‘Ammar, such as "‘Ammar is full of
faith." He fought on al-Imam ‘Ali's side at wars of Jamal and Siffin and
was killed on the battle-field at the age of ninety-three.

### 3) Muhammad Bin Abu Hodhaifa called Abulqasim

His father was ‘Otba Bin Rabi‘a al-Abshami and his mother was Sahlah —
the daughter of Sohail Bin ‘‘Amr Ameryyah. He was born in Ethiopia in
the Prophet's time.

His father was martyred at Yamama, so, ‘Othman adopted him. ‘Othman,
during his rule, gave him permission to go to Egypt where he revolted
against Oqba Bin Amer, the deputy of Medina Abdullah Bin Abi Sarh (10th
Man's Governor to Egypt) who had gone to Medina, and was not allowed to
re- enter Egypt. Muhammad Ibn Hodhaifa succeeded and became the new
Governor, then he mobilized six hundred troops under Abdur-Rahman Bin
Adis, to fight ‘Othman in Medina. After al-Imam ‘Ali became Caliph he
allowed Muhammad to remain as Governor of Egypt. When Mo'awiah, on his
way to Siffin went .to Egypt, Muhammad stopped him from entering Fostat.
But Mo'awiah made a treaty with Muhammad. Under this treaty Muhammad Bin
Hodhaifa and Abdur-Rahman Bin Adis with twenty-nine men left Cairo in
order to be safe from Mo'awiah, but later Mo'awiah captured and
imprisoned them. Muhammad was murdered in prison at Damascus by
Mo‘awia's own slave Roshdain. Muhammad had met the Prophet.

### 4) Abdur-Rahman Bin Adis Balavi

He was one of the men who attended the treaty of Shajara. He took part
in the conquest of Egypt, and some lands in Egypt were under his
protection. He was the commander of the army sent from Egypt to fight
‘Othman. He was captured by Mo'awiah, and imprisoned in Palestine. After
managing to escape he was recaptured and executed. He had the privilege
of meeting the prophet.

### 5) Muhammad Bin Abu Bakr

His mother was Asma, the daughter of Omais Khathamyiah, the wife of
Ja‘far Bin Abi Talib. After Ja‘far was martyred Asma married Abu Bakr
and Muhammad was born to her. al-Imam ‘Ali adopted him after Abu Bakr
died. Muhammad was the commander of the infantry in the battle of Jamal.
He was also present at the battle of Siffin.

al-Imam ‘Ali appointed him the Governor of Egypt, and he took his office
15.9.37 H.L. Mo'awiah sent an army under the leadership of ‘Amr Bin ‘As
to Egypt in the year of 38, who fought and captured Muhammad then killed
him. His body was placed in the belly of a dead donkey and burnt.

### 6) Abdi

This man was a good speaker and was converted to Islam in the Prophet's
time. He attended the Battle of Siffin when Mo'awiah captured Kufa.
Mo'awiah exiled Sa'Sa'a to Bahrain where he died.

### 7) Malik Ashtar al-Nakha‘i

He met the Prophet and was one of the trustworthy Tabe'in (The
Followers). He was the chief of his tribe, and after receiving an injury
to one of his eyes at the Battle of Yarmook he became known as Ashtar.
In the Battles of Jamal and Siffin he was with ‘Ali and won great
victories. At the age of thirty eight he was appointed Governor of
Egypt, but on his way there, near the Red Sea, he died after eating
honey mixed with poison which had been planned by Mo'awiah.

The above are short biographies of some of the eminent Muslims. It is
regrettable that some historians allege that they followed an unknown
Jew. Having known this, we should now try to analyze the motives for
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄s stories.


