The Origin of the Tale and of the Story-tellers
===============================================

It is twelve centuries ago since historians first wrote about ‘Abdullah
Bin Saba΄. One can rarely find a writer who does not talk about him if
he is writing about Sahabis, Muslims who met the Prophet.

The difference between the writings of the old and recent Islam
historians while talking about ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ tales is that the
latter has chosen the modern analytical method of writing, while the old
ones told the story in the language of Hadith (record of the sayings of
the Prophet). To study and examine this story properly we have to find
the narrators who have spoken and, or written about it.

1) Muhammad Rashid Reza
-----------------------

Among recent writers is Muhammad Rashid Reza, who in his book al-Sunna
wal Shi‘a (pp.4-6) says: "Shi‘ism was invented by ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄.
He claimed that he had renounced his Jewish faith and had been converted
to a Muslim. He exaggerated grossly about ‘Ali, the fourth successor of
the Prophet Muhammad and invented Shi‘ism in ‘Ali's name.

The invention of Shi‘ism was the beginning of the corruption in the
religious and worldly affairs of Muhammad's nation, by creating
differences between Muslims." Then Reza twisted the story to suit
him-self, and if one wishes to know the beginning of the story Muhammad
Rashid Reza confesses saying,

"Anyone referring to the stories concerning the Battle of Jamal in the
history book of Ibn Athir for example, will discover the extent of the
evil influence of Sabaian in the armies of both sides, when the
settlement was expected (refer vol.3, pp.96,103)." Hence al-Sayyid
Rashid's source of information was the history book of Ibn Athir.

2) Abul Feda (d. 732 H.L. 1331 A.D.)
------------------------------------

Abul Feda in his book Al-Mukhtasar says: " I have summarized in my book
that which Sheikh Ezzed Din ‘Ali, known as Ibn Athir Jazari, has written
in his complete book." Hence the sources of the above two writers was
Ibn Athir.

3) Ibn Athir (d. 630 H.L. 1229 A.D.)
------------------------------------

He has mentioned the story among the events which took place' during the
years 30—36 H.L. He does not state the sources of these stories except
in the preface of his book Tarikh al-Kamel (printed in Egypt, 1348 H.L.)
saying: " I have found these stories in the book of Abu Ja‘far,
al-Tabari." The complete history book of Tabari (17) is the Muslims
historical Bible — the only reliable book amongst Muslims who refer to
it when any disputable subject is to be examined.

Tabari has written many hadiths (traditions) in different parts of his
book, regarding one event; but I have rearranged these stories under a
proper title and have chosen the most complete story for each event.
With regard to the S ah abis I have quoted their stories exactly as
Tabari (17) has written them in his book, and except for the explanatory
notes not interfering with the quotations.

This is Ibn Athir ( 3 ) from whom Muhammad Rashid ( 1 ) and Abul Feda
(2) have borrowed their stories. This Ibn Athir (3) had recorded exactly
what al-Tabari (17) had written.

4) Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H.L. 1289 A.D.)
-------------------------------------

Ibn Kathir in his book 'Al Bedaia wal Nehaia vol.7, citing Tabari says:
"Saif Bin ‘Omar has said that the cause of the revolt against ‘Othman
was ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ who pretended to be a Muslim and went to Egypt
spreading false stories."

Then Ibn Kathir writes the complete story of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄,
including the Battle of Jamal. He says on p.246 "This is the summary of
what Abu Ja‘far Bin Jarir Tabari (17) may God bless him, has written."

5) Ibn Khaldoon
---------------

The philosopher of the historians in his book 'al-Mobtada wal Khabar has
mentioned Sabaian in the Events of House (martyrdom of ‘Othman) and
Jamal. Then on p.425 vol.2 of his book he says: "This is the summary of
the events of Jamal from the book of Abu Ja‘far Tabari (17) because he
is more reliable and more trust-worthy than other historians including
Ibn Qotaybah."

Also on p.457 he says: "This is the last word about Islamic succession,
and of heretics conquerors and fights. After this there will be
agreement and Assembly (al-Jamaat) amongst Muslims. I have taken these
extracts from the book of Muhammad Bin Jarir al-Tabari (17) as it is the
most reliable, and does not criticize Sahabis and Tabe ‘in."

6) Muhammad Farid Wajdi
-----------------------

Farid Wajdi in his book Encyclopedia' under the word Atham and under
Jamal fight, also in the biography of ‘Ali Bin Abi Talib has mentioned
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄s story and on pp.160, 168 and 169 tells us that his
source of information is from Tabari (17).

7) al-Bostani
-------------

In his Encyclopedia under the name ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ says: "‘Abdullah
Bin Saba΄ says Ibn  
 Kathir. . . ."

8) Ahmed Amin
-------------

One of today's historians who has used the analytical method of
recording the stories is Ahmed Amin. In his book Fajrol Is lam
concerning Persians\* and their effect on Islam he writes, "The main
difference between the Mazdak's religion and other religions was its
socialistic idea. Mazdak believed in the equality of man by birth and
stated that they must, therefore, have equal opportunities for their
livelihood.

He saw the most important issues in the equality of man as being wealth
and women, these being the cause of all disagreements. Hence he said
women and wealth were equally for all. Men of lower classes took
advantage of Mazdak's teaching and caused much trouble. His followers
broke into houses, sharing amongst themselves the women and the goods.

This went on for so long that children did not know who had fathered
them, and fathers could not recognize their sons." Ahmed Amin continues
saying "This way of life was adopted by some, even after the advent of
Islam. There were villages in Kerman (Southern Persia) where this
religion was still practiced in the reign of Amawys Dynasty."

"From this" says Ahmed Amin, "we see the similarity of the ideas of Abu
Dharr and Mazdak as far as the distribution of wealth is concerned."
"Abu Dharr," says Tabari "rose up in Damascus (Shaam) saying " O men of
wealth, share your money with the poor people," and he recited this
verse of the Holy Qur’an:

***"Proclaim a woeful punishment to those that hoard up gold and silver
and do not spend it in God's cause. The day surely comes when their
treasures shall be heated in the fire of Hell, and their foreheads,
sides and backs, branded with them."*** ***(The Holy Qur’an,*** ***Surah
At-Tawbah (9): Verse 34).***

Abu Dharr repeated this quotation so often that poor men took it as an
obligation for wealthy men to distribute their money, and pestered rich
people so much that they complained about Abu Dharr to Mo'awiah, the
governor.

Before Ahmed Amin, Rashid Reza has written the story in his book
al-Sunna wal Shi‘a of Syria, and he sent Abu Dharr to Medina to the
Caliph ‘Othman.

"Citizen of Damascus, why does your tongue make much complain?" Said
‘Othman. "The wealthy people are not supposed to keep their money
entirely for themselves," said Abu Dharr.

"We see from the above," says Ahmed Amin, "that Abu Dharr's idea was
very close to that of Mazdak concerning wealth." But where did Abu Dharr
get this view? Tabari answers: "Ibn al-Souda met Abu Dharr and suggested
this socialistic idea, at the meeting with Abu Darda[^1] and ‘Obada Bin
Samet, but the latter men were not deceived and they took Ibn al-Souda
to Mo'awiah and said this was the man who had prompted Abu Dharr to make
you so tiresome.”[^2]

Ahmed Amin continues: "We also know that Ibn al- Souda was known as
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ who was a Jew from San‘a’ (Yemen). He pretended to
be a Muslim in ‘Othman's time, and tried to ruin the religion of the
Muslims by spreading harmful ideas." This, we will discuss later.

"‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄," continues Ahmed Amin, "travelled to many cities
in Arabia, Basra, Kufa, Damascus and to Egypt. He may have got this
socialistic idea from the followers of Mazdak in Iraq or Yemen. So, Abu
Dharr learned it from him."

Ahmed Amin wrote in the margin of his book: "Refer to Tabari vol.5, p.66
onwards." On p.112 Ahmed concludes that: "The Shi‘a regarded ‘Ali and
his sons divine, as did their Persian ancestors and the Pagans regard
their Kings of the Sasanid dynasty.”

Ahmed Amin was faithful to his promise when he said, "we will discuss
the harmful ideas of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ later."

Ahmed Amin on p.254, talking about different de- nominations says; "At
the end of ‘Othman's reign, some secret groups, scattered far and wide,
rioted against ‘Othman, trying to rob him of power and give it to
someone else. Amongst these groups some were soliciting support for
‘Ali, the strongest force behind this movement in Basra, Kufa and
Damascus was ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄. He said; "Every prophet has a
successor. ‘Ali is the successor of Muhammad who is more unjust than the
man who unjustly has usurped the place of ‘Ali?" He insisted on this
until ‘Othman was killed.

"We are bound," says Ahmed Amin, "to discuss this story as three Muslim
denominations came into being as a result of it. They are Shia, etc.

In the chapter concerning Shi‘a on pp.266-278 he says that the idea of a
second coming of the Prophet Elijah belongs to the Jews. ‘Abdullah Bin
Saba΄ learned of it from the Jews. Shias adopted it from ‘Abdullah Bin
Saba΄ to agree with their ideas concerning Mandi who was supposed to
come and fill the world with justice.

Shiaism is a refuge to shelter those who wish to destroy Islam under the
camouflage of love of the Prophet's family. Any Jew or Christian can
state his views about Islam through Shiaism, like the Jewish idea
concerning the second coming of Elijah.l On p.277 he says: "According to
Wellhouzen, Shi‘a derives more from Jewish than from Persian beliefs,
'because ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ was Jewish." In other words, Ahmed Amin
that Shias derived their belief in the successor- ship of ‘Ali, and the
second coming of the Saints and Mahdi, from Ibn Saba, that is, from
Jews.

It is unfortunate that Ahmed Amin's book Fajrol Islam and the Islamic
Political History by Hassan E. Hassan are the only books about Shi‘a
thought at Western universities.

Abu Dharr got his communistic notions from Ibn Saba, Ibn Saba learned
communism from Mazdaki people who lived in the time of the Amawid
Dynasty. Mazdak was Persian, and Persians revere their Kings. So do
Shias revere their Imams. Shiaism is a cloak for those who wish to
des-troy Islam by hatred and jealousy.

It is also a shelter for any who wish to introduce Judaism, Christianity
or the Zoroaster faith to Islam. We note that all these ideas come from
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄, which Ahmed Amin took from Tabari and Wellhouzen.
We shall see that Wellhouzen too, has recorded it from Tabari (17).

9) Hassan Ibrahim.
------------------

Another contemporary historian who has adopted the analytical method in
his book Islamic Political History, is Dr. Hasan Ibrahim. After
considering the Muslim situation at the end of ‘Othman's Caliphate he
says, "The atmosphere was ready to accept the Sabaians movements.

One of the companions of the Prophet well known for his piety and
righteousness, was one of the narrators' leaders, called Abu Dharr
Ghafari. It was this man who caused trouble, as he was affected by
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄s rousing propaganda, and he opposed ‘Othman and his
Governor in Syria, Mo'awiah.

‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ was a Jew who pretended to be a Muslim and travelled
to Hijaz, Kufa, Syria and Egypt.

Dr. Hassan Ibrahim has taken this story from vol.1, p.2859 Tabari (17).
On p.349 he says,"' Abdullah Bin Saba΄ was the first person to lead
people against ‘Othman, causing him to be overthrown.

In the margin of his book he has referred to Tabari four times
concerning the story of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄. He also refers to Tabari
twelve times about this story in his book. Yet he has refrained from
quoting what Tabari has written in his book concerning Sabaians, even
though the hero in both stories is the same — ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄.

Up to now we have seen how Muslim historians have quoted from the
history book of Tabari (17) concerning Sabaian.

10) Van Flotten (Volten) (Johannes 1818—1883).
----------------------------------------------

In his book Arabian rule and Shi‘a and Israilyat in Amawid Time,
translated by Dr. Hassan Ibrahim and Muhammad Zaki Ibrahim (1st edition
Egypt, p.79) says concerning Shia: "The Sabaians, the followers of
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ regarded ‘Ali as the rightful person for the
successorship of the Prophet during the time of ‘Othman." Then he refers
to Tabari (17) on the margin of p.80 in his book.

11) Nicholson, Reynold Alleyne (1868 1945).
-------------------------------------------

In his book The History of Arabian Literature (Cam- bridge, p.215) he
says, "‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ founded the Sabaian's Society. He was from
San‘a in Yemen. It is said that he was a Jew who, in ‘Othman's time,
embraced Islam.

He was in fact a wicked, travelling missionary, who tried to lead
Muslims astray. He started from Hijaz, and went to Basra, Kufa and
Syria. Finally he lived in Egypt. He believed in the second coming of
the Prophet." He said, "People believed in the second coming of Jesus,
but denied the second

coming of the Prophet Muhammad, even though this is mentioned in the
Qur'an. Moreover, God has sent over one thousand messengers, and each of
them had a deputy — a successor. ‘Ali is the successor of the Prophet
Muhammad — the last one." Then in the margin of his book he refers to
Tabari (17) and indicates the page.

12) The Islamic Encyclopedia
----------------------------

In this Encyclopedia, written by some orientalists, the story is written
as follows:-

"If we want to consider only what Tabari and Maghrizi have recorded, we
say that one of the subjects Bin Saba was preaching was the second
coming of Muhammad. This was the theory — that to every Prophet there is
a successor, and ‘Ali is the successor of Muhammad. So, every Muslim,
therefore, must help ‘Ali by his words and deeds. It is said that
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ sent missionaries all over the country to propagate
his theory. He himself was among those who set off from Egypt towards
Medina in Shawwal 35 H.L., April, 656 A.D." The Encyclopedia refers to
Tabari and Maghrizi,

Tabari lived 300 years after the story, and Maghrizi 800 years. Tabari
mentions the names of those he has quoted but Maghrizi does not. Hence
the writings of Maghrizi are not thought to be as reliable as those of
Tabari, who lived 500 years before Maghrizi. We will write about
Maghrizi later.

13) Donaldson, M. Dewight.
--------------------------

In his book The Shi‘ah Articles of Faith Arabic translation p.85 he
says: "The earliest references show us that the claim of the followers
of ‘Ali, regarding his succession was not just political, but they
believed that the succession of ‘Ali was divinely inspired. Yet a
mysterious man can be held greatly responsible for that belief. During
the time of the succession of ‘Othman, ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ started a
movement to bring Muslims to ruin, as is said by Tabari."

Donaldson has not quoted directly from Tabari, but according to the
margin of p.59 in his book, he has quoted from the Islamic Encyclopedia
previously mentioned and from the book History of Arabian Literature. We
have stated earlier that they themselves have quoted from Tabari (17).

14) Wellhousen Julius (1844 — 1918).
------------------------------------

On p.56—57 in his book Sabaian and the Spirit of Prophethood, he says :
" A party was formed in Kufa, called Sabaian, and this party made many
drastic changes in Islam. Despite the teaching of the Qur'an, they
preached the divinity of the Prophet Muhammad. Sabaians believe that
Muhammad died bodily but not spiritually, that his spirit is a divine
one, and is alive for all eternity."

As in the, theory of incarnation, they say that the spirit of God has
been incarnated in his Messengers and passed through all the prophets,
one to the other, and that after Muhammad, it was passed on to ‘Ali and
then to his descendents.

They did not consider that ‘Ali was equal to the Caliphs who preceded
him and were the successors of Muhammad, but they regarded those Caliphs
as illegal. They proclaimed ‘Ali as the sole, divine, legal successor of
the Prophet Muhammad, and obedience to him was to be regarded as
obedience to God.

Wellhousen also said that it is understood that the Sabaians derive
their name from Bin Saba — a Yemenese Jew, and under a title ‘Sabaian
extremist and Believers of Reincarnation.' He says: "The extremists have
different names not worthy of mention, but all the names proved that
they had gone astray." Saif Bin ‘Omar Tamimi says, "Sabaian right from
the start were trouble makers, killing ‘Othman, and starting Civil war
……Most of them were non- Arabic slaves.

They believed in the passing of the soul from one person to another,
especially the spirit of Muhammad incarnated in ‘Ali, Then the
descendants of ‘Ali, by Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet, rejected
the Sabaians, so they followed Muhammad al-Hanafiyah, a son of ‘Ali but
not by Fatimah. The 'Sabaian followed Aba Hashim the son of Muhammad
al-Hanafiyah, an unworthy man like his father. Aba Hashim nominated his
son Muhammad Bin ‘Ali ‘Abbasy. Hence the successorship of ‘Ali went from
him to ‘Abbassids dynasty. ‘Abbassids, like the Sabaians, originated in
Kufa. Both parties rioted against Arabian Muslims and their supporters
were Iranian 46 slaves."

Wellhouzen refers to Saif twice in this story in the margin of his book.
Hence it is clear to us that he has taken the story from Tabari (17) —
the first historian to mention Saif.

So, we have written about historians who have mentioned Tabari, directly
or otherwise, when writing the story of Bin Saba. There are other
writers who have not mentioned the original writer of the story of Bin
Saba. But in other places in their books they have named Tabari or the
books which have quoted from Tabari such as:-

15) Mirkhand
------------

In-his book Rawzatus-Safa.

16) Ghiathud Din (d. 940 H.L. — 1455 A.D.)
------------------------------------------

The son of Mir Khand, in his book Habibus Siyar, has quoted from his
father as is mentioned in the preface of his book. All the above
historians have quoted from Tabari (17).

17) Tabari and his source
-------------------------

Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Bin Jarir Tabari Amoli, (d. 310 H.L. — 825 A.D.). In
his book Tarikhol Omam wal Mulook (The History of Nations and Kings),
Tabari has quoted the story of the Sabaians exclusively from Saif Bin
‘Omar Tamimi. He refers only to some of the events of the year 30 H.L.
as follows:-

In the same year (i.e. year 30 H.L.) the events concerning Abu Dharr
took place. Mo'awiah sent Abu Dharr from (Damascus) Shaam to Medina.
Many things are told of that event, but I do not like to record them.

Sari has written to me about the stories told by those who find excuses
for Mo'awiah, regarding the incidents concerning Abu Dharr. Shoaib has
told Sari that Saif said, "When Bin Sawda reached (Damascus) Shaam he
met Abu Dharr and reported to him the things which Mo'awiah was doing.
And Tabari narrates the story of Sabaians as told by Saif, and finishes
the story of Abu Dharr with the following sentence, "Others have said
much concerning this story (the exile of Abu Dharr), but I am reluctant
to relate them."

Regarding the events of the years (30-36 ,H.L.), Tabari records the
story of Bin Saba and the Sabaians, the murder of ‘Othman (The third
Caliph) and the Battle of Jamal from Saif — Saif being the only one from
whom he could quote.

Tabari narrates his story from Saif through two persons, 1) ‘Obaidullah
Bin Said Zohari from his uncle Ya'qub Bin Ibrahim and then from Saif.
From this channel the stories begin "narrated to me" or "narrated to
us." 2) Sari Bin Yahya from Shoaib Bin Ibrahim from Saif. Tabari
recording from two books, al-Fotuh and al-Jamal from Saif, has begun
with "He wrote to me," "He narrated to me," and "In his letter to me."
So far we have dealt with Tabari's source.

18) Ibn ‘Asaker (d. 571 H.L. — 1086 A.D.)
-----------------------------------------

'Ibn ‘Asaker records from another source. In his book The History of
Damascus whilst writing the biographies of Talha and ‘Abdullah Bin
Saba΄, he has recorded parts of the story of Sabaians, through Abul
Qasim Samarqand from Abul Husain Naqqoor from Abu Taher Mokhallas from
Abu Bakr Bin Saif from Sari from Shoaib Bin Ibrahim from Saif.

Therefore, the origin is Sari, one of the two channels from which Tabari
has recorded.

19) Ibn Badran (d. 1346 H.L. — 1851 A.D.)
-----------------------------------------

Ibn Badran, has recorded stories in his book Tahzib without mentioning
the names of the persons from whom he has quoted. He has written some of
the story of Ibn Saba in his book without naming the originators. But in
the biography of Ziad Bin Abih he has mentioned Tabari in connection
with Saif's stories (vol.5, p.406).

20) Ibn Abibakr (d.741 H.L. — 1256 A.D.)
----------------------------------------

Ibn Abibakr has a book called al-Tamhid, from which some writers have
quoted. The book concerns the killing of Caliph ‘Othman and in its
preface the name of al-Fotuh, the book of Saif is mentioned, as is also
the name of Ibn Athir. Ibn Athir has quoted from Tabari and Tabari from
Saif. So far the tales of Saif have three principles sources:-

1) Tabari (d. 310 H.L. — 825 A.D.);

2) Ibn ‘Asaker (d. 571 H.L. — 1086 A.D.);

3) Ibn Abibakr (d. 741 H.L. — 1256 A.D.).

Some writers have quoted from one source, some from two, and some from
all three.

21) Sa'id Afghani
-----------------

In his book Aisha and Politics, Sa'id Afghani has written some of the
stories of the Sabaians under the following titles.

"Prophet against ‘Othman And The Consequence."  
 "Bin Saba The Secret Dreadful Hero."  
 "Observation of the Reconciliation," and "The Plot."

He also mentions the Sabaians in other chapter of his book. His
principle source is Tabari, followed by Ibn’Asaker, then Tamhid of Ibn
Abibakr. He relies on Tabari more than anyone else, giving as his reason
the trust he has in Tabari, saying that Tabari is more dependable, and
that all previous historians have trusted him. He then says "As far as I
could, I have quoted from Tabari's book exactly as it was."

22) Dhahabi (d. 748 H.L. — 1263 A.D.)
-------------------------------------

There is another channel for the tale of Ibn Saba namely Dhahabi's
recording. He has written some parts of the story in his book The
History of Islam (vol.2, pp.122-128) where he has recorded the killing
of ‘Othman among the events of the year 35 H.L. He begins as follows:-

"And Saif Bin ‘Omar said that ‘Atyya said, that Yazid al-Faq'asi said
when Bin Sawda went to Egypt..........." Dhahabi has also written
another story told by Saif in more detail than Tabari. Later he has
recorded a summary of what Tabari has written. The original of the
stories written by Dhahabi concerning Sabaians and others, can be found
in the preface to his book.

1) Books such as al-Fotuh by Saif, from which Dhahabi has obtained the
most important material for his book.

2) Books from which he has obtained that which he has recorded as the
summary.

3) Books he refers to frequently to, such as Tabari.

Since Dhahabi has mentioned the book al-Fotuh by Saif and he lived in
8th Century of Muslim era then the book al-Fotuh must have been
available until then.

In summary we can say that all these historians referred to have taken
their stories and tale of ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ from Saif. Four of these
historians: Tabari, Ibn ‘Asaker, Ibn Abibakr and Dhahabi have taken
their stories directly from Saif, while others have got their stories
indirectly from Saif.

The chart on the next page indicates the channels through which the
Sabaians tale has been recorded from its original story teller Saif.

[^1]: They were known followers of Prophet (Sahabis).

[^2]: This story is false and made up by ‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄, Abu Dharr
never preached against the wealthy people, his talks were aimed at
Mo'awiah and his dynasty, who had captured peoples' wealth by force and
‘Abdullah Bin Saba΄ tried to cover up the matter by making up these
tales.


