1. Osama army
=============

Tabari (vol.3, p.212; vol.l, pp.1849-1850 EUR), and Ibn ‘Asaker ( v o l
. l , p.427), with regard to the events of year eleven of Hijra, the
recorded history of Osama's Army told by Saif is as follows:-

Story by Saif
-------------

"The Prophet of God, before his death, gathered together an army under
the command of Osama. ‘Omar Bin Khattab was in that army. Before the
army was even clear of the moat of Medina, the Prophet of God died.
Osama sent

‘Omar to the successor of the Prophet (the Caliph) to obtain permission
for the return of the army to Medina. The companions of the Prophet, who
were in that army, told

‘Omar to ask Abu Bakr to dismiss Osama and appoint another commander."
Abu Bakr jumped forward and grasped ‘Omar by his beard saying, “ O Bin
Khattab let your mother weep at your death bed. It was the Prophet who
appointed Osama to be the commander, yet you want me to dismiss him and
appoint someone else in his place."

Abu Bakr then ordered the army to proceed and he saw them leave, bidding
them farewell saying, "March on, May God destroy you by murder and
plague."

The foregoing was related by Saif concerning Osama's army. But others
have said that the story is as follows:-

Story by other than Saif
------------------------

In the year 11 Hijra, on a Monday, when four days remained in the month
of Safar, the Prophet ordered the people to be prepared for the war with
the Romans. Next day he ordered Osama to command the army saying to him,
"Go to the place where your father was martyred, and attack them." On
the Wednesday the Prophet developed a temperature and a headache. The
next day, the Thursday, the Prophet himself made the Battle standard and
handed it to Osama. Osama took the flag and left Medina, choosing Jorf
as the camp site.

The senior members of the Muhajir and Ansar parties, Abu Bakr, ‘Omar Bin
Khattab, Abu ‘Obaydah Jarrah, Sa‘d Waqqas, Sa‘eed Bin Zaid and others
were ordered to form an army under the leadership of Osama. As Osama was
a very young man, there were objections to his being made the army
commander in preference to those elder Immigrant Muslims.

The Prophet of God heard these objections and came from his house, his
head covered with a handkerchief, and a towel over his shoulder, as he
was ill. Mounting the pulpit he addressed the people saying, "What are
these reports I have heard concerning Osama, who has been appointed
commander.

You objected to his father — now you object to him. By God Osama is
capable of holding this position, as his father was." The Prophet then
came down from the pulpit, and the Muslims who were going to the camp
site at Jorf said good-bye.

The Prophet's health deteriorated, and Osama visited him when the
Prophet was unable to speak — he could only kiss Osama good-bye. The
next Monday the Prophet was better, and he received Osama saying, "Go,
good luck to you." Osama returned to the camp and ordered the march.
Just as he was going to mount his horse, a message came from his mother
saying that the Prophet was critically ill.

Osama, ‘Omar and Abu ‘Obaydah returned to Medina, and that same day the
Prophet passed away. After the death of the Prophet, when Abu Bakr
became Caliph, he ordered Osama to undertake the same mission as ordered
by the Prophet, (Ibn ‘Asaker vol.l, p.433). On page 438 Ibn ‘Asaker also
says, “Abu Bakr told Osama that the Prophet had given all necessary
instructions, and he was not adding anything to them. Abu Bakr did not
listen to those who advised him that expedition be postponed.”

Comparison
----------

Comparison between the above two ways of recording. There are some
points worth mentioning about Saif's recording. He says:

1) The army was crossing the moat of Medina when the Prophet died. Saif
included this sentence in his book to conceal the fact that there were
delays which prevented the army from setting out; and there were no
disruptions by the trouble makers who caused the delays. Yet in his more
lucid moments Muhammad was annoyed that the army was delayed, and
repeated his original order, "Osama's army must march."

2) Saif says, "When Osama heard that the Prophet had passed away he sent
‘Omar to the successor of the Prophet of God to obtain his permission
for the return of the army to Medina." Other instructions say, "Osama
heard that the Prophet's condition was serious, so he went to Medina
with ‘Omar, Abu Bakr and Abu ‘Obaydah. (Some say that Abu ‘Obaydah was
not with them.) After the death of the Prophet, and after Abu Bakr's
nomination at Saqifa, and his final election at the Mosque, he dealt
with Osama's army.

Here again Saif back dates the successorship of Abu Bakr, making it
appear that he was appointed Caliph (successor) before the death of the
Prophet.

3) Saif says, "Ansar (helpers) asked Abu Bakr to dismiss Osama and
appoint another commander to the army. Ibn ‘Asaker (vol.I, p.438) and
other historians say: Early Muhajirs (Immigrants) asked the Prophet to
change Osama.

Here again Saif altered the name of proposers from Muhajirs to Ansar to
please the then Government who were of Muhajirs (Immigrants) party.

Saif says: "Abu Bakr gave Osama ten instructions." Other historians say:
"Abu Bakr said that the Prophet had given the necessary instructions and
he did not need to add anything to them." Saif says: "Abu Bakr held
‘Omar by his beard because he brought the message of the Helpers,"
though a messenger cannot be blamed. Saif says, "Abu Bakr cursed the
army and hoped they would be destroyed by plague." Saif being a heretic
wanted to make a mockery of Islam as a religion, as well as to please
the Caliph of his time. The stories invented by Saif have no foundation,
and the heroes mentioned in them never existed for they were but
figments of his imagination. We will explain more clearly later.

Some Sahabis Introduced
-----------------------

The time is now ripe for us to briefly introduce the Sahabis we have
mentioned so far 1 and 2. There is, of course, no need to say anything
about Abu Bakr and ‘Omar, the well-known first and second Caliphs.

3) Abu ‘Obaydah Jarrah Amer, son of Abdullah Bin Jarrah and Omaymah, a
daughter of Ghonm Bin Jabir. Abu ‘Obaydah was one of the pioneer
converts to Islam from the Quraish tribe, and he emigrated twice from
Mecca. Abu Bakr made him the commander of an army sent to Syria. He died
of the plague and was buried in Jordan.

4) Sa‘d Waqqas, Abu Eshaq, son of Malik, from the Zuhra family of the
Quraish tribe. He was the seventh man to embrace Islam. He attended the
Battle of Badr and all later battles launched by the Prophet. He was the
first Muslim to fire at the enemy, the chief commander of the armies
which conquered Iraq. ‘Omar appointed him Governor of Kufa.

Sa‘d was one of the six nominated committee members to be Caliph after
‘Omar. (It was ‘Omar who ordered that the committee to be established
directly after he was fatally stabbed by Abu Lobo). Sa‘d retired to his
residence Aqiq — near Medina, after ‘Othman was murdered. He died during
the reign of Mo'awiah and was buried in Baqi — the cemetery of Medina.

5) Sa‘eed Bin Zaid. He is from the ‘Adi family of the Quraish tribe, and
a cousin of ‘Omar Bin Khattab. ‘Omar married Atekah, the sister of
Sa‘eed, and Sa‘eed married Fatima, the sister of ‘Omar. Sa‘eed and
Fatima embraced Islam before ‘Omar.

When ‘Omar heard that his sister had become a Muslim, he went to her
house, and slapped her face so hard that it began to bleed. ‘Omar felt
very sorry for his hasty action, and on the spot he himself accepted
Islam. Sa‘eed died in the year 50 or 51 H.L. and he was buried in
Medina.

6) Osama. The father of Osama was Harethah, a slave freed by Muhammad.
His mother was Umm Ayman, a servant o£ Muhammad who had been freed by
him. Osama was born at the dawn of Islam, and died in the reign of
Mo'awiah.

Muhammad's policy on his death bed
----------------------------------

In the last moments of his life the Prophet acted very strangely, he
sent away all the elders and kept only ‘Ali in Medina. He insisted on
sending the Party Leaders to Syria — far from the heart of Islam, and he
put a man whose parents were slaves, in charge of the elders.

(This will be discussed after examining the events which took place when
the Prophet of God passed away).


