Foreword
========

The monthly English magazine the "Peace Maker", published from Madras,
had a vast circulation. It was read by many in India and also abroad.
Its articles were greatly appreciated by many great religionists.

It was this magazine that successfully answered Dr. Zwemer's mischievous
article in the journal "Me Muslim World" attacking the Holy Qur'an as
the \`Word of Man' and glorifying the Bible as the \`Word of God'. The
reply to Dr. Zwemer, given by this Muslim magazine from Madras, led many
dispassionate scholars of the Christian religion into the Islamic fold.

One Mr. T. Swaminathan, a Christian missionary at Trichinopoly in South
India, who regularly followed the treatment of different religious
topics in the "Peace Maker", had embraced Islam and had adopted the
Muslim name Muhammad \`Ali.

When this Mr. Muhammad \`Ali embraced Islam he was thrown out of his
church, and Mr. Anwaru 'd-Din Khan, who was then an agent of some Oil
Company at Trichy, kindly financed him to start the manufacture of
aerated waters so that he could make an independent living for himself
and his family.

Having joined the Muslim ranks Mr. Muhammad \`Ali arranged through the
Young Men's Muslim Association of Trichinopoly a few talks on Islam and
the Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny.

I myself had to go to Trichinopoly in this connection and deliver a few
talks on this topic. It was at this time that I came in contact with Mr.
Joseph and his teacher Professor Viswanathan, a mathematics lecturer.

The mathematician, who requested me to keep his name unknown, and Mr.
Joseph his student both had very frank talks with me about the basic
doctrines of Christianity as well as about Islam. At the end of our talk
Mr. Joseph brought detailed minutes of our talks and had them signed by
me.

I also took a copy of the minutes signed by Mr. Joseph and his
mathematics teacher, and preserved it in my file along with the
declarations I had received from others who had embraced Islam after
discussing at length their own doubts.

A few weeks ago some Christian friends of mine had a long discussion
with me about certain basic doctrines of their faith. I handed over the
copy of the minutes drawn up by Mr. Joseph which served very useful
purpose of sparing me the labor of once again repeating my arguments
about the points to convince them of the Islamic point of view in these
matters.

A few days ago it was brought to my notice that attempts had been made
upon some Muslim students in a Christian institution to mislead them
against their religion and some of these young men even came over to me
to clear up some doubts, and I gave them the same minutes of my
discourse with my friends at Trichy.

After going through the matter the young men copied down some of the
arguments and the very next day they came to report to me that they had
successfully convinced the critics against Islam and desired the matter
in the minutes to be published for the benefit of our own young men who
very often had to meet unreasonable criticism against Islam and the Holy
Prophet. I had to agree to their reasonable proposal.

One thing I would like to be made clear is that the sole object of this
publication is to arm young Muslim minds with the truth, and nothing
else. If anyone does not want to read or hear anything against his own
personal views, he need not pursue this matter or hear it pursued by
anyone.

I wish it to be known that what is said in this small booklet is
exclusively for those who are sincerely interested in knowing the truth
irrespective of the source or the quarter from which it comes. By this I
mean only those sincere seekers after truths who are tempera- mentally
and purposefully earnest in seeking to know the various points of view
about one and the same problem.

It is a universally acknowledged fact that, except for those who have
been divinely inspired to guide humanity towards the truth, no mortal
can ever be sensibly deemed to be perfect in his knowledge. It is
according to this native want in man that Islam ordains man to seek
knowledge from the cradle to the grave.

It needs also to be known that Islam never accepts any belief which is
professed in the blind following of someone else's views or any
hereditary concepts, no matter from whose parents they are inherited.

Islam invites each sincere adherent to reflect, to think, to ponder, and
then to judge independently for himself. Nothing which is not one's own
is ever acceptable in Islam, even one's own faith in God. Every Muslim
is ordained by the Holy Qur'an to profess his faith by his own personal
and individual scrutiny of his own belief.

To know or to acknowledge the truth or the reasonableness in arguments
advanced by the opposite side is a task which never appeals to the
ordinary slavish mentality of the blind followers of a crowd.
It needs an intellectual independence opposed to the mental congestion
in ordinary minds to establish and assert one's own views against the
views of a crowd; it needs a tempered individuality in an integrated
personality. The essence or the spirit of such unique individuality is
the latent native capability of the individual for leadership against
the common slavish tendency of following the crowd.

There are two kinds of mentality in a human being. The one is the
individual's endeavor to stand on his own and the other is being content
to be controlled by someone else.

One who wants to stand on his own, in his faith has the genuinely
independent mind, and the goodness possessed by such individuals really
deserves its reward, according to personal or individual merits. The
treasuries of goodness and virtues presented by anyone can never
reasonably or justly claim the least appreciation, if they are not his
own.

Let everyone of us dispassionately and impartially analyze our own
views, testing them from various points of view or reasoning, and let us
accept only those views which successfully stand up to cross-examination
by the side opposed to us.

One thing which every sincere seeker of truth should know and must
remember is that he should first remove any colored spectacles. He must
view everything without the least pride or prejudice for or against
anything, and must readily acknowledge and own for himself whatever he
finds to be genuinely true and reasonable.

Without this essential condition first fulfilled nothing profitable can
ever be gained by any amount of endeavor. One who sits to judge should
not, and must not, belong or even be the slightest bit inclined towards
any one of the contesting sides, for it is only then the verdict will be
just, truly a reliable and acceptable.

Correctness in religious belief and the faithful translation of belief
into proper action must be the first concern of every sensible man and
woman. The aim of a true religion is nothing but the disciplining of the
human self to prepare it to have as much divinity as possible reflected
into it or to manifest divinity through it. Discipline varies a great
deal.

Unless it is complete discipline will do more harm than good, both to
the individual as well as to the society to which the individual
belongs. The quality or usefulness of a discipline is to be judged by
the degree of perfection and integration of the human personality, and
its awakening or enlightening through the consciousness of commitment or
its responsibility to its self and beyond its self.

The first and the foremost fundamental of a true or the true faith or
religion is the belief in God. Belief in the One God, the only Lord, of
the Universe can never be equal to that in several imaginary partner
lords of the world who derive their existence through the straying of
human minds in their bewildered search for a protector which the native
will to live seeks.

The faith in the One True Lord of the Universe as a whole will naturally
have all the godly qualities integrated in it and the belief in the
several partner gods will necessarily be the collection of distracted
component parts of variant qualities opposing or contrasting each other
according to the varying nature of the different partners.

Besides the degree of the merit of the faithfulness in the service
exclusively to one supreme, Lord will naturally differ from the service
to many masters of variant authorities. There are many other points
which demand serious consideration in this regard.

It is another separate question by itself, whether there can be the One
Supreme Lord of the universe Who with the manifest ownership, integrity
of his authority and the perfection of his control, runs the successful
working of the whole universe since its coming into being or there can
ever be more than one owner of the world.

Falsehood is not easily swallowed by everyone. The cleaner the inside of
a human body the more repulsive will be every dirty thing to it. A
cleanly maintained stomach will immediately vomit the least dirty thing
trying to enter even its threshold, that is, the throat.

Similarly a clear conscience of any human being with the quality of
wholesomeness in it, will never at all relish the least falsehood. It is
this latent factor in the human personality that makes a human being
content with falsehood or makes it restless to put it in the search for
truth.

Therefore, the seekers after truth are only those who have the native
cleanliness in them which longs to reflect in it or to manifest through
it the goodness of the All-good Creator, Lord, but the ego in man
completely over-shadowed by the devilish spirit makes one content or
enjoy himself with delusion of falsehood.

Man, a creature along with other creatures of the Creator Lord, left to
himself could by himself never have gathered anything to be correctly
called knowledge about anything in the universe, and more so about his
knowing the Creator Lord of the universe unless the Lord Himself
mercifully arrange for his education and training.

Hence the Lord's mercy in this regard manifested in the long line of the
divinely inspired guides called the apostles or the prophets, the last
of whom was the Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him and his
progeny, to abide in his guidance for ever:

**I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter that
he may abide with you forever. (John, 14:16)**

And even with the conclusion of the apostleship the infinite mercy of
the All-merciful did not leave man to stray, deluded by the false guides
and the selfish leaders of the world, but started the line of the
divinely conditioned minds, the Twelve Holy Imams to immediately succeed
the conclusion of the apostleship in the Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be
upon him and his progeny, to keep humanity duly guided upon the royal
road to salvation shown by Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny,
the last Apostle of God through the last or final heavenly word, that
is, the Holy Qur'an and declared:

***There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error (2:256)***

***Let anyone now know the Truth and accept it thankfully or
unthankfully (76:3).***

Prof. S.V. Mir Ahmad Ali
(of Madras)


