PREFACE
=======

A Short History of Ethics was first published in the United States by
Collier Books, a division of Macmillan Publishing Company, in 1966 and
then in Britain by what was then Routledge & Kegan Paul. It has since
been translated into Spanish, Dutch, Norwegian, German, Slovenian, and,
most recently in 1995, into Polish. The translator of the Polish
edition, Professor Adam Chmielewski, invited me to write a preface for
Polish readers and I gratefully used this opportunity to consider some
of the respects in which the original text needs to be corrected or
modified and some of the ways in which my perspectives on the history of
ethics have changed. First of all I need to note that the title is
misleading: this is a short history of Western ethics, not of ethics.
And I now have an opportunity to take account of the pertinent
criticisms on particular issues made by others, to whom I am most
grateful, and at least to recognize the fact that Western moral
philosophy has continued to have a history since 1966. But I have not
attempted to bring the story up to date.

My own most fundamental dissatisfactions with this book derive from
changes in my own philosophical and moral standpoint. I do of course
still endorse a great deal of what I then asserted. But, when I now read
the story that I told then, I see it as a story in need of revision, one
in a succession of genuinely instructive stories about the history of
moral philosophy which have been told by philosophers-for example,
Hegel’s, Marx’s, and Sidgwick’s (although I am well aware that my work
does not rank with theirs)-each of which could later be improved upon.
And in my own later writings- especially After Virtue (Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, second edition, 1982), Whose Justice?
Which Rationality? (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988),
and Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry (Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1990)-I have tried on various topics to improve upon A
Short History of Ethics.

I am, however, conscious both of how much there is in the Short History
with which I still agree and that it was only by first writing that book
and then reflecting upon it that I learned how to do better. And since
many contemporary readers may well find themselves more at home with the
standpoint which was mine in 1966 rather than that which is now mine, it
seems important still to invite readers to make the story told in the
Short History their own starting-point for learning about and then
reflecting upon the history of ethics. What I hope to do in this preface
is to explain why I think this story needs nonetheless to be challenged.
But, before I subject myself and the story that I then told to some
radical questioning, I need to attend not to my own view of the overall
narrative, but to the more important of the criticisms that have been
leveled at the book by others.

Those criticisms have mostly concerned inadequacies in my treatments of
particular authors, a type of criticism which I predicted and welcomed
in advance in my original Preface. I too have become highly critical of
such inadequacies, quite as much as other critics have been, in those
areas where what I wrote plainly needs to be corrected or supplemented.
Let me therefore try to supply something of what is needed by way of
correction and supplement, noting however that just as it was an attempt
to summarize large and complex theses and arguments all too briefly,
which was a major source of defects and omissions in the original text,
so what I have to say now will necessarily once again be compressed and
perhaps too compressed. This is a difficulty that I shall be able to
overcome only when I finally do write that as yet nonexistent book that
I think of as “A Very Long History of Ethics.”

Four of the chapters where particular corrections are needed are chapter
9 on Christianity, chapter 12 on the British Eighteenth-Century
Argument, chapter 14 on Kant, and chapter 18 on Modern Moral Philosophy.
Let me deal with these in turn:

Chapter 9: Christianity. This chapter is the most striking example in
the book of a kind of defect which I pointed out in the Preface when I
wrote that “This book is inevitably the victim of the author’s
overnumerous intentions.” Between 109 pages on Greek ethics and 149
pages on Western European ethics from the Renaissance to 1964 I
sandwiched ten pages within which I attempted to identify the
distinctive moral outlook of the Christian religion and to bridge the
historical gap of 1300 years between Marcus Aurelius and Machiavelli and
to give some account of the importance of medieval moral philosophy.
What an absurdity! But it was not only my absurdity. This error of mine
reflected a widespread, even if far from universal, practice in the then
English-speaking world-which still unfortunately persists in numerous
colleges and universities-of ignoring the place both of the earlier
Christian eras and of the high middle ages in the history of philosophy.
So, for example, in the then Oxford undergraduate curriculum there had
been for a very long time a large place assigned to the study of ancient
philosophy, and also to that of modern philosophy, but almost no place
at all to medieval philosophy.

What is needed to repair my own errors and omissions is of two different
kinds. First the account of Christianity which I then gave needs not
only to be expanded, but to be radically revised. The core of that
account imputes to distinctively Christian ethics an, as I then thought,
unresolvable paradox, that it “tried to devise a code for society as a
whole from pronouncements” originally addressed to individuals or small
communities who were to separate themselves off from the rest of society
in expectation of a Second Coming of Christ, which did not in fact occur
(pp. 115-116). What I failed to recognize was that this paradox had
already been resolved within the New Testament itself through the
Pauline doctrines of the church and of the mission of the church to the
world. Those doctrines successfully define a life for Christians
informed both by the hope of the Second Coming and by a commitment to
this-worldly activity in and through which human beings rediscover the
true nature of their natural ends and of those natural virtues required
to achieve those ends, as a result of coming to understand them in the
light of the theological virtues identified in the New Testament. Those
virtues are, on a Christian view, the qualities necessary for obedience
to God’s law, that obedience which constitutes community, whether it is
that obedience to God’s law apprehended by reason which constitutes
natural community or that obedience to revelation which constitutes the
church. (My earlier failure to recognize this was due to my having been
overimpressed by biblical critics who falsely thought that they had
discovered a large and incoherent eclecticism in the New Testament. What
corrected my earlier view was in part a larger knowledge of that same
criticism. I learned especially from the work of Heinrich Schlier.)

What Christianity therefore presented to those who encountered it was a
conception of law and the virtues which stood in a problematic
relationship to the various philosophical conceptions of human good and
virtue encountered in the ancient world. Because I had not understood
this adequately, I was unable to pose the right questions about that
relationship. I noticed, for example, how New Testament conceptions
differed from Platonic, Aristotelian, and Stoic conceptions. But I
failed to enquire systematically whether or not it was possible to
integrate one or more of these philosophical views with Christianity so
as to present at once a more adequate moral philosophy and a
philosophically defensible account of Christian moral views. Hence what
I had to say about Augustine and Aquinas was misleading, because I had
failed to ask the right questions. But my failure was not only about
Christianity.

A second set of omissions concerns Judaic and Islamic ethics. Judaism’s
ethics of divine law raised philosophical questions which anticipate and
generally parallel those of Christianity, but Jewish contributions to
the answering of those questions have an independent importance for the
history of ethics. When in chapter 10 I discussed Spinoza as one of
those who inaugurated distinctively modern ethical debate, I
characterized him only as an atheist, failing to recognize that he was
one heir, even if a deviant one, of the traditions of medieval Jewish
moral philosophy and especially of the greatest of medieval Jewish
philosophers, Moses Maimonides. There is no name whose absence from the
index of A Short History of Ethics is more regretted by me now than that
of Maimonides (see for a first account and a bibliography Colette Sirat,
A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985).

It was as great a mistake to have made no mention of such Islamic
philosophers as ibn Sina (Avicenna), al-Ghazali, and above all ibn Rushd
(Averroes). And these absences were responsible for a further inadequacy
in my treatment of Aquinas’ moral thought, since Aquinas’ synthesis of
theology with Aristotle was deeply and importantly indebted to
Maimonides, Avicenna, and Averroes (for a first account of Islamic
philosophy see Oliver Leaman, An Introduction to Medieval Islamic
Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).

Chapter 12: The British Eighteenth-Century Argument. There are two
English philosophers whose views are discussed in this chapter where on
central matters something more or different needs to be said. With
Bishop Butler (pp. 164-166) it is in part a matter of an unjust
treatment of the theological element in his thought, one stemming from
the inadequacy of my treatment of Christianity in general. But also, and
as importantly, I failed to emphasize Butler’s seminal importance for
subsequent debate as the first philosopher to state compellingly the
thesis that there are two distinct and independent sets of principles
governing human conduct, on the one hand, those of reasonable self-love
and, on the other, those of conscience. Henry Sidgwick in his Outlines
of the History of Ethics (London: Macmillan, fifth edition, 1902) takes
this recognition to be the source of a major, perhaps the major contrast
between ancient Greek ethics, for which generally there is only one set
of principles governing human conduct, those of reason variously
conceived, and modern ethics. And certainly from the eighteenth century
onwards the question of what the relationship is between the principles
of reasonable self-love and the impersonal requirements of morality
becomes a central one for moral philosophers.

One philosopher whom Sidgwick names as having to some degree anticipated
Butler in recognizing this dualism is William Wollaston. My treatment of
Wollaston (pp. 170-171) failed to distinguish sufficiently between what
Wollaston actually held and Hume’s presentation of Wollaston’s views for
the purpose of criticism. Wollaston did indeed assert “that the
distinction between vice and virtue which reason apprehends is simply
the distinction between the true and the false” (p. 170). The actions of
a wrongdoer always, on his view, give expression to a judgment which is
false and which thus misrepresents some reality. And Wollaston asks
whether we may not say of someone who lives and acts as what he is not
“that he lives a lie?” (The Religion of Nature Delineated I, iii). I
followed Hume in imputing to Wollaston the view that every wrong action
is a lie. It might perhaps be argued that Hume is right in judging that
this does follow from what Wollaston says. But I have been persuaded by
Joel Feinberg (“Wollaston and His Critics” in Rights, Justice and the
Bounds of Liberty, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980) that I,
like Hume, had misread Wollaston. And that Wollaston’s view, as he
himself stated it, may be open to criticism, but not to that particular
criticism by Hume.

Chapter 14: Kant. In a review of A Short History of Ethics in The
Journal of Philosophy (LXVI, 9, May 8, 1969) Hans Oberdiek declared that
“What is worst about this book may be found in the incredibly brief
chapter on Kant.” Oberdiek then lists a number of topics which it would
have been desirable to discuss or to discuss at greater length and in
particular accuses me of being misleading in asserting that “Kant takes
the existence of an ordinary moral consciousness for granted” (p. 191).

I have a good deal of sympathy for Oberdiek’s accusations. Short
accounts are likely to do least justice to the greatest and most complex
philosophers and, while Kant receives more attention than any other
modern philosopher except for Hobbes and Hegel, the space allocated to
his ethics is less than half of that allocated to Aristotle. So what
needs most to be emended or added?

Oberdiek was right in pointing out that, although Kant thinks that the
ordinary moral agent, innocent of philosophy, is well able to grasp the
requirements of the categorical moral imperative, the actual moral
consciousness of such ordinary persons may always have become infected
by error and confusion and must be evaluated by the standards of
practical reason. Insofar as what I said suggested otherwise I was at
fault. Even more importantly however I omitted to remark upon Kant’s
identification of one of the distinguishing marks of any morality that
has a claim upon the attention of rational persons.

I did of course discuss Kant’s conception of the categorical imperative
as enjoining that we act only on maxims which we are able to treat as
universalizable laws. But I omitted to notice his second formulation of
the categorical imperative: “Act so that you treat humanity, whether in
your own person or that of another, always at the same time as an end
and never just as a means.” What this formulation brings out is that in
appealing to any authentically moral standard as providing a sufficient
reason for some person to act in one way rather than another, I invite
that person to evaluate the rational justification for accepting the
authority of that standard for her or himself. I treat that
person-whether someone else or myself-as a rational person, not as
someone whom I am attempting to manipulate by some type of nonrational
persuasion, some appeal to their inclinations. What Kant has captured
here is a feature of rational moral discourse as such, one evident in
the practice of Socrates and in all his philosophical heirs.

My doubts about Kant therefore were not and are not about his injunction
to treat persons as in this sense autonomous. And I should have made
this clear. My doubts were and are about Kant’s account of the type of
rational justification which appeals to moral standards need to have and
can have. If in fact Kant’s universalizability arguments fail, as I held
and hold that they do-although I willingly grant that there is a great
deal more to be said on that issue than I was able to say in chapter
14-then central Kantian concepts, such as that of duty, conceived as
Kant conceived it, do not deserve the respect that Kant and Kantians
have accorded to them. And any widespread belief that such concepts are
in fact rationally defensible may permit them to play a part in social
life that gives a false and harmful authority to certain types of claim.

Chapter 18: Modern Moral Philosophy. There is one serious mistake in my
treatment of the views of R. M. Hare. I wrote that “on Hare’s view .
what I hold I ought to do depends upon my choice of fundamental
evaluations, and that there is no logical limit to what evaluations I
may choose” (p. 262). Here I had mixed together a criticism of Hare
advanced both by others and by myself and the statement of Hare’s own
views and I did so in a way that resulted in a misrepresentation, for
which I owe Hare an apology. It was and is Hare’s view, if I now
understand it correctly, that anyone who uses the idiom of morality, and
more particularly the word “ought” in its primary moral sense, is
constrained in her or his judgments by the meaning of the key moral
words and by logic in such a way that genuinely universalizable
judgments must embody a summing of the preferences of everyone
relevantly affected by the proposed course of action about which she or
he is judging. The content of one’s moral judgments is therefore fully
determined by the requirements of universality and prescriptivity, if
these are rightly understood. And what I wrote does not convey this.

What I had intended by way of criticism however still stands. First,
what Hare understands as the language of morals still seems to me only
one moral idiom among several. Underlying any use of moral language
which conforms to Hare’s account of the meaning of moral terms there
therefore has to be a choice-characteristically an unacknowledged
choice- to understand morality in one way rather than in a number of
other rival ways. And this choice because it is prior to the moral
reasoning which issues from it is, in this sense, arbitrary. Second,
Hare himself allows that it is possible without irrationality to be an
amoralist (Moral Thinking, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981). But
this entails that underlying all moral judgments there is a nonrational,
prerational choice of morality rather than of amoralism. What at first
sight therefore seemed to be a position with a strong claim to have
reformulated more adequately Kant’s identification of the requirements
of morality with the categorical requirements of practical reason turns
out to be-quite contrary to Hare’s intentions and claims-much closer in
its unintended implications to Kierkegaard’s Either-Or. I should add
however that Kierkegaardians have usually been as dissatisfied with my
account of Kierkegaard as Kantians have been with my account of Kant
(for an excellent recent statement of their case see Edward Mooney,
Selves in Discord and Resolve: Kierkegaard’s moral-religious psychology
from Either-Or to Sickness unto Death, London: Routledge, 1996).

It is in the same last chapter that there emerge most strongly some of
the presuppositions of a point of view which underlies the narrative
structure of the whole book. Throughout the book I had stressed both how
rival moral philosophies articulate the rational claims of different
types of moral concept and judgment and how those different types of
moral concept and judgment are themselves rooted in and give expression
to different actual and possible forms of social order. And I had
correspondingly denied from the outset that there is only one “language
of morals” (p. 1). Some of my critics, including Hans Oberdiek in the
review from which I have already quoted, supposed that this committed me
to what Oberdiek described as “MacIntyre’s social-historical relativism”
(op. cit., p. 268). It seemed to Oberdiek that on my account there could
be no way in which the claims of any one set of moral beliefs,
articulating the norms and values of one particular mode of social life,
could be evaluated as rationally superior to those of another. Each
would have to be judged in its own terms. And I may unintentionally have
lent support to Oberdiek’s interpretation of my views by what I wrote in
chapter 18 about the individual’s choice between different and
incompatible moral vocabularies and moral judgments. For I may well have
appeared to have ruled out the possibility of an appeal to any standards
beyond those of the forms of life of particular cultures, when, for
example, I wrote that it is not possible to “look to human nature as a
neutral standard, asking which form of social and moral life will give
to it the most adequate expression. For each form of life carries with
it its own picture of human nature” (p. 268).

Nonetheless I was very far from being any sort of consistent relativist,
as Peter Winch acutely noted in a critical discussion of A Short History
of Ethics in which he accused me not of relativism, but, and more
justly, of incoherence (“Human Nature” in Ethics and Action, London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972). Winch said of me, quite rightly, that “He
follows his argument for the illegitimacy of saying that any particular
form constitutes the logical form of moral argument with a discussion
designed to show the ‘superiority’ of the Aristotelian view of human
nature and of its relation to morality” (op. cit., p. 81). Had I then
simply contradicted myself?

What I had certainly been unable to do was to reconcile two positions,
to each of which I was committed. The first was that which gave the
appearance of relativism. Each fundamental standpoint in moral
philosophy not only has its own mode of conceptualizing and
understanding the moral life, which gives expression to the claims of
some actual or possible type of social order, but each also has its own
set of first principles, to which its adherents appeal to vindicate the
claims of their own standpoint to universality and to rational
superiority over its rivals. What I had failed to stress adequately was
that it was indeed a claim to universality and to rational
superiority-indeed a claim to possess the truth about the nature of
morality-that had been advanced from the standpoint of each particular
culture and each major moral philosophy. And what I had not therefore
taken account of was that these philosophical attempts to present
rationally justifiable universal claims to moral allegiance, claims upon
human beings as such, claims about human nature as such, in the local
and particular terms which each culture provides for its moral
philosophers as their starting-point, had generated for each major moral
philosophy its own particular difficulties and problems, difficulties
and problems sometimes acknowledged and sometimes not. The subsequent
history of each such moral philosophy revealed the extent to which each
possessed or lacked the resources necessary to become aware of and to
resolve those difficulties and problems-each by its own particular
standards. And by this standard the major claimants in modern moral
philosophy seemed to me then and seem to me now to fail.

The conception of choice between standpoints that I presented in chapter
18 was therefore misleading, and this in two ways. First, the
alternatives between which I then believed that we had to choose-the
emotivist or prescriptivist or existentialist theories expressive of an
individualist social order or those particular local versions of
Catholic theology or of Marxist dialectics by which these had been
opposed in post-1945 French debates-had all failed and continued to fail
to deal adequately with their own difficulties and problems. So that
none of them could in fact have been chosen as a standpoint by a
rational person. And indeed my own account of choice, as Winch
perceived, exhibited some of these difficulties. For I spoke of the
choice of fundamental moral standards as at once prior to the adoption
of any particular moral standpoint and yet as itself expressive of one
particular type of moral standpoint, that of moral individualism.

Should the story then have ended merely as an account of the failure of
the projects of moral philosophy? Both I and most of my contemporary
critics would answer this question with an unhesitating “No,” but for
two very different kinds of reason. They from their various standpoints
would each claim that their own particular ongoing project in modern
moral philosophy has so far vindicated itself in rational terms. And
since 1966 there has been a body of highly distinguished philosophical
work from a variety of differing and rival modern standpoints in moral
philosophy: contractarian, utilitarian, post-Lockean, post-Kantian,
prescriptivist, and emotivist. The problem from my point of view is that
the adherents of every one of these standpoints find in the unresolved
difficulties and unsolved problems of their opponents’ positions
sufficient reason to reject those rival positions. And so do I. It is by
attending to the debates between the adherents of rival positions within
modern moral philosophy that we find sufficient reason for rejecting
each of the positions defended in those debates.

So why are my own present conclusions not merely negative? Winch had the
insight to recognize a strong, if inadequately formulated, Aristotelian
allegiance coexisting uneasily in the Short History with other
allegiances. I had been justifiably anxious in my discussion of
Aristotle to criticize that which had tied his ethics too closely to the
structures of the fourth-century Greek polis and more especially to
reject his ill-founded exclusion of women, slaves, and ordinary
productive working people from the possibility of the virtues of rule
and self-rule and of the achievement of the human good. What I had not
at that time recognized was how much had already been achieved within
later Aristotelian tradition by way of purging Aristotle’s ethics of
these inessential and objectionable elements and how Aristotle’s central
theses and arguments are in no way harmed by their complete excision.
This recognition, when I finally achieved it, was accompanied by
another.

Aristotle’s ethics, in its central account of the virtues, of goods as
the ends of human practices, of the human good as that end to which all
other goods are ordered, and of the rules of justice required for a
community of ordered practices, captures essential features not only of
human practice within Greek city-states but of human practice as such.
And because this is so, whenever such practices as those of the arts and
sciences, of such productive and practical activities as those of
farming, fishing, and architecture, of physics laboratories and string
quartets and chess clubs, types of activity whose practitioners cannot
but recognize the goods internal to them and the virtues and rules
necessary to achieve those goods, are in a flourishing state, then
Aristotelian conceptions of goods, virtues, and rules are regenerated
and reembodied in practice. This is not to say that those who practice
them are aware that they have become to some significant degree, in
their practice, although commonly not in their theory, Aristotelians. It
is to say that Aristotelianism always has possibilities of revival in
new forms in different cultures.

This, even if true, would not be sufficient to vindicate the claims to
rational superiority of Aristotle’s ethics against its rivals, whether
ancient, medieval, or modern. How those claims are to be evaluated
depends, as I have already suggested, on the answers to such questions
as: Does Aristotelian ethics possess the resources to resolve the
difficulties and problems internal to it? How far have its adherents
been successful in making use of those resources? Is Aristotelianism
superior to its major rivals in this respect? Is it able to provide
explanations of why those rivals should confront the particular sets of
difficulties and problems which arise for each of them? Is it able to
show that the resources of those rivals for so doing are inadequate and
to explain why?

These are the key tests to which contemporary protagonists of
Aristotle’s ethics must subject both their own and Aristotle’s theses
and arguments. Whether they can do so in such a way as to vindicate
Aristotle’s ethics or not is a matter of contention. In my later books I
have tried to argue that there are sufficient grounds for reasserting
central Aristotelian positions. If I and those who agree with me in this
conclusion are in the right, then the story told in A Short History of
Ethics ought to be rewritten so as to end in a way that shows this. If
those who disagree-the large majority of contemporary moral
philosophers-are in the right, then the story should be rewritten so as
to end in quite another way. The story in fact ends therefore by posing
to the reader a set of further questions. It is up to the reader her- or
himself to carry this enquiry further.

Every philosopher is indebted to her or his critics, and I more perhaps
than most. Let me conclude therefore by emphasizing how very grateful I
am to all the critics of the Short History, whether named or unnamed.

ALASDAIR MACINTYRE

Duke University, 1997


