CHAPTER 8: POSTSCRIPT TO GREEK ETHICS
=====================================

THE DIVISION of labor and the differentiation of function in early
societies produces a vocabulary in which men are described in terms of
the roles they fulfill. The use of evaluative words follows hard upon
this, since any role can be filled well or ill, and any customary mode
of behavior conformed to or broken away from. But evaluation with a
wider scope is only possible when traditional role behavior is seen in
contrast with other possibilities, and the necessity of choice between
old and new ways becomes a fact of social life. It is not surprising
therefore that it is in the transition from the society which was the
bearer of the Homeric poems to the society of the fifth-century
city-state that good and its cognates acquired a variety of uses, and
that it is in the following decades that men reflect self-consciously
about those uses. Greek philosophical ethics differs from later moral
philosophy in ways that reflect the difference between Greek society and
modern society. The concepts of duty and responsibility in the modern
sense appear only in germ or marginally; those of goodness, virtue, and
prudence are central. The respective roles of these concepts hinge upon
a central difference. In general, Greek ethics asks, What am I to do if
I am to fare well? Modern ethics asks, What ought I to do if I am to do
right? and it asks this question in such a way that doing right is made
something quite independent of faring well. A writer thoroughly imbued
with the modern spirit in ethics, the Oxford philosopher H. A.
Prichard20 could accuse Plato of falling into error simply by attempting
to justify justice at all. For to justify justice is to show that it is
more profitable than injustice, that it is to our interest to be just.
But if we do what is just and right because it is

to our interest, then, so Prichard takes almost for granted, we are not
doing it because it is just and right at all. Morality indeed cannot
have any justification external to itself; if we do not do what is right
for its own sake, and whether it is to our interest or not, then we are
not doing what is right.

The assumption made by Prichard is that the notion of what is to our
interest, of what is profitable to us, is logically independent of the
concept of what it is just and right for us to do. If what is profitable
is also just, this, so far as ethics is concerned, is merely
coincidental, a happy accident. Doing what we want and getting what we
want is one thing; doing what we ought is another. But Prichard here
misses the point not only of Plato but of the implications of the Greek
moral vocabulary which Plato uses. The Greek moral vocabulary is not so
framed that the objects of our desires and our moral aims are
necessarily independent. To do well and to fare well are found together
in a word like εὐδαίμων. From such purely linguistic considerations, of
course, little of substance follows. It still remains to ask whether it
is modern ethics which is clarifying a valid distinction that the Greek
moral vocabulary fails to observe or Greek ethics which is refusing to
make a false and confusing distinction. One way of answering this
question would be as follows.

Ethics is concerned with human actions. Human actions are not simply
bodily movements. We can identify as instances of the same human action
deeds which are executed by means of quite different bodily movements-as
the movements involved in shaking a hand and those involved in putting
out a flag may both be examples of welcoming somebody. And we can
identify as the same bodily movements those which exemplify very
different actions-as a movement of the legs may be part of running a
race or of fleeing in battle. How, then, do I exhibit a piece of
behavior as an action or part of a sequence of actions rather than as
mere bodily movement? The answer can only be that it is by showing that
it serves a purpose which constitutes part or the whole of the agent’s
intention in doing what he does. What is more, the agent’s purpose is
only to be made intelligible as the expression of his desires and aims.

Consider now how modern post-Kantian ethics emphasizes the contrast
between duty and inclination. If what I do is made intelligible in terms
of the pursuit of my desires, if my desires are cited as affording me
reasons for doing what I do, it cannot be that in doing what I do I am
doing my duty. Hence when I am doing my duty what I do cannot be
exhibited as a human action, intelligible in the way that ordinary human
actions are. So the pursuit of duty becomes a realm of its own,
unconnected with anything else in human life. To this the reply of a
writer like Prichard would be that indeed this is so, and that to
suppose it could be otherwise would be an error. But we can now more
fruitfully approach Prichard’s position in another way, and exhibit its
historical roots. If we do so, we shall see a gradual attenuation of the
concept of duty and of kindred concepts, in which there is a progress
from a notion of a duty as consisting in the requirement to fulfill a
specific role, the fulfillment of which serves a purpose which is
entirely intelligible as the expression of normal human desires
(consider the duties of a father, seaman, or doctor as examples); the
next step is perhaps the concept of duty as something to be done by the
individual whatever his private desires; finally, we reach the concept
of duty as divorced from desire altogether. If we could not explain
Prichard’s concept of duty historically, I think we should be very much
in the position of anthropologists who come across a new and
incomprehensible word, such as, for example, tabu, a word which is
puzzling because it appears not simply to mean “prohibited” but to give
a reason for the prohibition, without its being clear what reason. So
when someone like Prichard says it is our “duty” to do something, he
does not just tell us to do it, as though he uttered an injunction “Do
that,” but he appears to give us a reason. Consequently, just as we may
ask of Polynesians why we should refrain from doing something because it
is tabu, so we shall want to ask Prichard why we should do something
because it is our duty. And in each case the answer will be similar, and
similarly incomprehensible: “Because it is tabu,” “Because it is your
duty.” The lack of connection with other aims, purposes, and desires
produces in the end unintelligibility. Yet the concept which Prichard
elucidates is one in common use. “‘Why ought I to do that?’ ‘You just
ought’” is not uncommon as a form of moral dialogue in modern society.

Thus the philosophical elucidation raises interesting problems about the
role of the concept in our social life. But rather than pursuing these
at this stage, we must instead return to the Greeks. The crucial point
for the immediate discussion is that it may now be clearer why we could
not use the moral words which express the modern concept of duty in
translating Greek moral words; for these retain the connection with the
vocabulary of desire in terms of which they can be made intelligible.

The function of evaluative terms in Greek is, then, to grade different
possibilities of conduct in terms of our desires; but in terms of which
of our desires? Both Plato and Aristotle criticize the simple sophistic
picture of human desires. We have to ask not only what we do now in fact
happen to want, but what in the long run and fundamentally we want to
want. And this implies a picture of man, made explicit, in different
ways, in both Plato and Aristotle, in which certain satisfactions are
objectively higher than others. The use of the word objectively implies
the existence of an impersonal, unchosen criterion. What is it? That
there is some such criterion follows from treating the question, What is
the good for man? or even just, What is good for man? as an intelligible
question at all. For unless there is some criterion by which to judge
between possible answers, all possible replies are on a level and the
question ceases to have point. It does not, of course, follow that there
must be such a criterion (or criteria), but only that the question and
the criterion stand or fall together. Plato’s transcendentalism springs
in part from his grasp of this point. He believes that there must be a
criterion. It cannot be derived from existing social structure and
institutions, for we use our evaluative concepts to criticize these. It
cannot be derived either from our desires just as they are, for we use
our evaluative concepts to criticize and to grade our desires. Hence it
is easy to conclude that it must be derived from an order existing apart
from human life as it is. Where Plato sees the criterion as
transcendent, Aristotle sees it as embedded in one particular sort of
practice and social arrangement. Both assume that if the chain of
justifications which are constituted by answers to questions about the
good for men is to be a chain of rational arguments, there must be
essentially only one such chain and there must be one essential point at
which it reaches a final conclusion (the vision of the Form of the Good
or eudaemonistic contemplation). This is of course a mistake, and it is
a mistake which both Plato and Aristotle make because they do not
understand the conditions which have to be satisfied for there to be
available the kind of criteria the existence of which they take for
granted-even if they are sometimes in doubt as to their precise nature.

If I treat any form of inquiry as rational, I presuppose that there is
some criterion by which to determine whether the answers to its
questions are correct or incorrect. In speaking of a criterion I speak
of a standard which the individual is not free to accept or reject as he
wills or chooses. He may reject a given criterion on rational grounds,
such as that its falsity is entailed by some more fundamental or more
generally applicable criterion; or he may find a proposed criterion
unintelligible upon closer scrutiny. Consider two quite different kinds
of example.

Arithmetic is a rational, because rule-governed, discipline. The rules
which govern simple arithmetical operations enable us to determine
whether the answer to a given sum is correct or incorrect. Anyone who
understands the meaning of the words one, two, plus, equals, and three
has no choice over whether to admit the truth of “One plus two equals
three.” But a condition of there being an agreed meaning for the words
in question is that there should be a socially established practice of
counting. We can imagine a tribe lacking number concepts because they
lack the practice of counting. I do not mean by this that counting as a
social, teachable practice is logically prior to the possession of
number concepts, for counting itself in turn presupposes such
possession. But I can only appeal to a rule to settle a disputed
arithmetical question in a community where number concepts are
intelligible, and they will only be intelligible where counting is an
established and recognized practice.

Consider now how similar evaluative terms are, in this one respect at
least, to arithmetical. We are more accustomed to think of arithmetic as
a rational discipline than we are of the criticism of cricket and
football, chess and bridge. (This is partly because in our study of
Greek culture we usually overrate Plato and underrate the Olympic games
about which we could learn from Lucian. Plato thinks of “gymnastic,” of
games playing, as merely a means to an end, as part of an educational
discipline whose point lies in a final end-product of a quite different
kind. This is also the doctrine of the English public schools, for whom
the point of games is that they produce “character.”) But a study of the
concepts used in the criticism of games for their own sake is
philosophically revealing, even about Plato. Consider the concept of a
good batsman. The questions of whether a batsman is a good batsman and
how good a batsman he is are intelligible because there are established
criteria: variety of strokes, ability to improvise, moral stamina in
crises. We have these criteria because we have criteria of success or
failure in cricket in general, and in the role of a batsman in
particular; and the winning of matches is not, of course, the sole
criterion. How you win them also enters into it. But these criteria can
only be appealed to because there is an established practice of games
playing and can only be appealed to by those who share the social life
in which this practice is established. Imagine a people who did not
share the concept of a game and therefore could not acquire the relevant
criteria. All that they would and could grasp would be that the word
good was generally being used in contexts where approval of some sort
was being indicated. Their philosophers would naturally enough construct
theories about the meaning of good to the effect that its use is to
express approval. And these theories would necessarily miss a large part
of the point.

In Greek ethics something analogous to this imagined situation actually
occurs. We begin with a society in which the use of evaluative words is
tied to the notion of the fulfillment of a socially established role. We
can indeed imagine a society of which this is true in a far stronger
sense than it is of the imaginary society depicted in or the real
societies reflected in the Homeric poems. Here the nouns and verbs to
which evaluative adjectives and adverbs are attached would always
invariably be those which name roles and role-fulfilling activities. In
consequence, all the uses of good will belong with that class of
adjectives whose meaning and force are dependent upon the meaning of the
noun or noun-phrase to which they are attached. We can understand this
class by contrasting it with the class of adjectives whose meaning and
force is not so dependent. Such are, for example, color words. We can
render them meaningless by attaching them to a noun or noun-phrase which
cannot allow them any sense if it is used with its normal meaning
(consider “pink rational number”), but when they are attached to any
noun in such a way as to form a meaningful phrase their meaning is
independent of that of the noun. Because of this, I can in such cases
validly deduce from “This is an XY,” both “This is an X” and “This is a
Y.” (So from “This is a red book” it follows that “This is red” and
“This is a book.”) But there are also the adjectives of which this is
not true, where the force of the adjective is dependent upon the meaning
of the particular noun to which it is attached, because the criteria for
the correct application of the adjective vary with and are determined by
the meaning of the noun. Such is good in those uses which connect with
role-fulfillment. The criteria for the correct application of the
expressions “good shepherd” and “good general” and “good flautist” are
determined by the criteria for the application of the expressions
shepherd, general, and flautist. In learning how to describe social life
one also learns how to evaluate it. Moreover there are a variety of uses
of good where such impersonal and objective criteria can be found: “good
at” used of skills and “good for” used of medicines or instruments, of
means efficient for given ends, are two examples. In a society
restricted to these uses, all evaluation would be a matter of the
application of criteria about which the individual was not free to
exercise choice.

Such a society’s evaluative usage resembles the usage of those who
criticize performances in a game. In both cases there are accepted
standards; in both cases to acquire the vocabulary necessary to describe
and to understand the game is logically inseparable from acquiring these
standards. In both cases the fact that the standards are objective and
impersonal is consistent with evaluative disagreements and even with
disagreements which are incapable of resolution. This is because there
are a number of criteria in terms of which we judge performances or
exercises of ability and not just one single criterion for each role or
skill. So we may in evaluating a batsman differ in the weight that we
give to ability to improvise as against the possession of a particular
stroke, and in evaluating a general differ in the weight we give to
ability to organize supply lines as against tactical brilliance on the
field.

Just as in the case of the criticisms of games we could imagine a social
group in which the use of evaluative words was lost, so we can imagine a
society in which traditional roles no longer exist and the consequent
evaluative criteria are no longer used, but the evaluative words
survive. In both cases all that remains of evaluation is the sense of
approval attached to the words. The words become used as signs that the
individual speaker is indicating his tastes, preferences, and choices.
If we conceived of philosophical analysis as an analysis of how
different concepts are in fact used in common speech, as a study of the
logical features of usage, then we might well fall into an interesting
trap at this point. For if we were to insist upon treating as the
meaning of the word good only features of its use which were present on
every occasion of its use, then we should naturally conclude that the
essential meaning of the word is given by laying down its function of
commending or expressing approval or indicating choice or preference,
and so on; and that its association with criteria of an impersonal and
objective kind is secondary, contingent, and accidental. Or we might
fall into the opposite trap of supposing that since the word good is in
many standard cases only used intelligibly if it is applied in
accordance with impersonal and objective criteria, all uses in which it
is divorced from such criteria are too unimportant to be taken
seriously. In fact however, unless we see these two uses as constituting
two successive phases in a historical narrative, we shall miss a large
part of the point about the word good. When I speak of a historical
narrative I mean one in which the later part is unintelligible until the
former is supplied, and in which we have not understood the former until
we see that what followed it was a possible sequel to what had gone
before. The use of the word good when it is used only or primarily as an
expression of approval or choice is unintelligible except as a survival
from a period when criteria of an impersonal, unchosen kind governed its
use, because it has no distinctive use or function to distinguish it
from a simple imperative or expression of approval. What would be being
said when something is called good would be no more or other than would
be said by someone who said, “Choose one of that kind,” or, “That is the
kind I prefer.” This apparent redundancy of good might be explained away
by pointing to its propagandistic possibilities. The use of the word
good actually says no more than is said by the man who straightforwardly
announces his choice or preference, but a man may contrive to give the
impression of saying more, and by so doing attach prestige to his
announcement by the use of good. Good is a status symbol for expressions
of choice, on this view. But this theory, in fact, discloses its own
weakness, for why should good have this kind of status? why should it
carry this type of prestige? The answer can only be that it carries with
it a distinction derived from its past, that it suggests a connection
between the speaker’s individual choices and preferences and what anyone
would choose, between my choice and the choice which the relevant
criteria dictate.

It would be equally mistaken however to suppose that the word good could
not become detached from the particular criteria which have governed its
use, and still remain intelligible. What gives the word good its
generality is partly the fact that a connection with choice and
preference is present from the outset. To call something good is to say
that anyone who wanted something of that kind would be satisfied with
this particular specimen. We bring into the picture more than our own
individual choice and preference; we point to more than our own
individual choice and preference: we point to a norm for choice. And in
a society where traditional roles and the corresponding traditional
evaluation of behavior have broken down or disappeared, the sequel to
unsuccessful attempts to use the word good as a simple expression of
choice or preference may well be an attempt to reestablish norms for
choice. And there is no reason at all why good should not acquire new
criteria of application.

I have tried to delineate in the argument so far an ideal historical
sequence. Such a sequence is useful for two different types of reason.
It brings out the connection between historical intelligibility and
logical relationships. I cannot understand the logical structure of a
given philosophical theory, for example, unless I understand the
problems to which it is intended to be a solution.

But in a great many instances I cannot hope to understand what those
problems are unless I know what problems were posed by the philosophical
predecessors of the theory and how the historical context imposes limits
upon solutions to their problems. It is always possible and usually
useful to abstract both problem and solution, question and answer, from
their particular context and to examine matters of logic without too
much reference to their actual history. (This is what idealist
philosophers, and particularly R. G. Collingwood, sometimes failed to
see; but what they succeeded in seeing and saying on this point is more
illuminating than most later writing.) But more than this, the concepts
which furnish the materials for philosophical investigation are, as we
have already noticed, liable to change. Thus what may appear at first
misleadingly as two rival elucidations of the same concept, between
which we have to choose, may be envisaged more usefully as two
successive analyses of a concept in process of transformation, between
which there is no question of a choice. Both are needed and so is their
interrelationship, so that we may not lose sight both of the continuity
and of the change in the concept.

Moreover, to analyze concepts in terms of ideal historical sequences may
be useful for another reason. In abstracting certain characteristics of
the sequence, and thus lending it an ideal character, we acquire a
method for noting similar sequences embedded in quite different
historical processes. And in noting similarity we may also note
differences. Consider both the resemblances and the differences between
what happened to ἀγαθός in Greek usage and what happened to duty in
English. Just as ἀγαθός is originally tied to performance of a role, so
is duty. We still talk of the duties of a policeman or a probation
officer, and in a society where the moral life is exhaustively conceived
in terms of role description, the duties of a father or a king may be as
vigorously delimited by custom as those are which are now defined by
statute. It is when we detach a man from his roles, but still leave him
with the concept of “duty,” that the concept is necessarily transformed.
This detachment is a consequence of a sufficiently radical change in
established social structure and does not have to occur to a whole
society all at once in a once-for-all kind of way. It can occur for part
of a society, and it will occur in such a way as to be modified by other
moral beliefs. So for part of English society in the eighteenth century
the concept of duty became generalized in association with the concept
of vocation. Originally we have a society of well-defined occupational
roles and functions, hierarchically arranged, and to this arrangement
there corresponds a belief in different stations in life to which God is
pleased to call men. When the occupational roles become more important,
the notion of a calling by God, but not to any one particular “station,”
remains. The duties which were tied to a particular office are replaced
by the duty one owes to God simply as a man. In such a situation the
content of duty will be blurred. This kind of situation provides part of
the background to the kind of moral dilemma which is examined in some of
Jane Austen’s novels. Her characters cannot simply conceive of morality
in terms of the adequate fulfillment of a well-established role. Edmund
Bertram in Mansfield Park can be open to Mary Crawford’s criticism of
his intention to become a clergyman: he can be forced to ask himself
whether it will make him more or less of “a man.” Being a landowner and
being “in trade” no longer carry a sense of clearly defined status in
the heirarchy of duties. That this is so is highlighted by one
remarkable exception. The person of the naval officer provides a
touchstone of virtue in Jane Austen precisely because of his
professionalized sense of duty. And she is able to speak of duty in this
context far more clearly than elsewhere because the link between duty
and duties has not been broken.

The history of ἀγαθός in Greek and of duty in English (or German) are of
course as different as the history of the breakdown of traditional Greek
society is from the history of the transformations of preindustrial
England. But in both cases we get a move from the well-defined
simplicities of the morality of role fulfillment, where we judge a man
as farmer, as king, as father, to the point at which evaluation has
become detached, both in the vocabulary and in practice, from roles, and
we ask not what it is to be good at or for this or that role or skill,
but just what it is to be “a good man”; not what it is to do one’s duty
as clergyman or landowner, but as “a man.” The notion of norms for man
emerges as the natural sequel to this process, and opens new
possibilities and new dangers.

At this point, however, does not the argument involve us in apparent
paradox? We can understand why Plato and Aristotle (and why, in the
later context, Price and Kant) look for norms independent of the
structure of this or that particular social framework. But the cost of
doing this is to suggest the truth of exactly the kind of relativism
which they were seeking to overcome. If the kind of evaluative question
we can raise about ourselves and our actions depends upon the kind of
social structure of which we are part and the consequent range of
possibilities for the descriptions of ourselves and others, does this
not entail that there are no evaluative truths about “men,” about human
life as such? Are we not doomed to historical and social relativism?

The answer to this is complex. The first part of the answer has already
been suggested in the course of discussing Aristotle. It is that there
are certain features of human life which are necessarily or almost
inevitably the same in all societies, and that, as a consequence of
this, there are certain evaluative truths which cannot be escaped. But,
put simply like this, this point can be misleading. We cannot, as I have
already argued, conceive of a group of beings who would satisfy the
minimal conceptual conditions necessary for us to characterize them
correctly as a human group where there was not rule-governed behavior,
and where the norms which governed that behavior did not entail a norm
of truth telling, a norm of ownership and justice and the like. In any
human group some notions of truth and justice necessarily find some
foothold. Moreover, as I have also argued, in any human group it is
almost inconceivable that certain qualities such as friendliness,
courage, and truthfulness will not be valued, simply because the range
of ends possible for the activities of those who do not value such
qualities is far too restricted. But this kind of argument might be
quite wrongly held to provide us with a kind of transcendental deduction
of norms for all times and all places; it might be held to provide a
guide to conduct for men, irrespective of the nature of the society in
which they find themselves. Not only is this a mistaken conclusion, but
it derives from a misunderstanding of the import of the premises from
which it is derived. Just because human society as such either has to
have or will usually have certain norms as part of the ineliminable
logical framework of its actions and its discourse, so all choices of
different evaluative possibilities arise within this framework and
within the context of the norms in question. It follows that these norms
cannot provide us with reasons for choosing one out of the set of
possibilities rather than another. To put this concretely, human society
presupposes language; language presupposes rule following; and such rule
following presupposes a norm of truth telling. Lying as a form of human
action, it is often pointed out, logically presupposes a norm of truth
telling. But although the liar therefore vindicates in his practice the
existence of the very norm which his practice violates, he thereby shows
that the existence of the norm opens up possibilities both of lying and
of truth telling; the existence of the norm entails nothing in the way
of guidance on any particular occasion of perplexity as to whether we
should lie or whether we should tell the truth. And not only different
individual choices but very different codes of honesty lie within the
range of possibilities open to us. Thus anyone who claims that the
elucidation of the norms governing human activity as such provides a
guide to how to live is making a fundamental mistake.

It is in outlining the concrete personal and social alternatives in a
particular situation and the possibilities of good or evil inherent in
them that we in fact frame practical questions and answers. In this task
the alleged alternatives of “historical relativism” and “norms for men
as such” scarcely arise. For certainly in asking for criteria to govern
my choices I am asking for criteria and not for something else; I am
asking for guidance of an impersonal kind, not just for me, but for
anyone-anyone, that is, in my situation. But the more that I
particularize my stiuation the more I ask for guidance for people who
belong specifically to my time and place -or to other times and places
of a sufficiently and relevantly similar sort. I am always going to be
faced with two dangers. If I abstract sufficiently, I shall be able to
characterize my situation in terms quite apart from any specific time
and place, but by so doing I shall not solve my problem but relocate it.
For the highly general form of problem and solution then has to be
translated back into concrete terms, and the real problem becomes how to
do this. If I do not abstract sufficiently, I shall always be in danger
of making myself the victim of what is taken for granted in a particular
situation. I shall be in danger of presenting what is merely the outlook
of one social group or part of the conceptual framework for men as such.

Both Plato and Aristotle suppose that from the elucidation of the
necessary conceptual framework for human life they can draw practical
guidance; and this mistake is both camouflaged and reinforced by their
adapting forms of description at once used in and well-suited to
characterizing the social life of the Greek πόλις to serve as forms of
description for human life as such. This is not only a weakness. Some
later writers on moral philosophy have supposed that the problems can be
posed in a vocabulary which is somehow independent of any social
structure. This supposition is one of the roots of the belief that there
are two distinct spheres of life, one for “morals,” the other for
“politics.” But, in fact, every set of moral evaluations involves either
neutrality toward or assent to or dissent from the social and political
structure within which it is made. And insofar as dissent is concerned,
the moral evaluations will involve some degree of commitment to an
alternative. What is striking about Plato and Aristotle is the unity of
morals and politics in their writings. Yet this very unity in the end
betrays their ideals.

Both Plato and Aristotle take for granted, naturally enough, the social
structure of the πόλις, with the slaves excluded from the political
structure, the artisans and farmers coming out at the bottom, a richer
class above them, and some kind of elite ruling. Because the questions
they pose, and sometimes the concepts they employ, presuppose the πόλις
and its social unity, neither of them faces up to the actual decline of
the πόλις. Because they are spokesmen for its unity, they ignore or
dislike the heterogeneity of Greek society. The concept of a common
interest is taken for granted. The conservatism of Aristotle is of
course quite different from that of Plato. Plato’s idealization of a
πόλις utterly different from that of fourth-century reality means that
politics becomes a hit-or-miss affair of the philosopher king happening
to turn up at the right time and the right place. Those modern critics
of Plato who have castigated him as a fascist have missed the point very
badly. For the essence of fascism is that it glorifies and upholds some
existing ruling class: the essence of political Platonism was that it
excoriated every actual political possibility. Plato’s own political
failure at Syracuse, where successive visits met a blank wall in
political reality, was grounded not merely in the conditions of Syracuse
in particular or in the city-state in general, but in Plato’s own
doctrine. Plato may be conceded the title of either reactionary or
conservative, but if all reactionaries were Platonists, revolutionaries
would have an easy time.

With Aristotle it is different. We are much closer to actual states and
constitutions in Aristotle’s empirically based Politics. But in two
respects Aristotle faces up to the realities of the πόλις even less than
Plato does. The , the mass of ordinary people, appear in Plato as
governed by desires which have no room for expression in the just state;
in the Republic the desires are to be repressed, in the Laws they are to
be remolded. But throughout Plato the natural clash of desires between
rulers and ruled figures prominently in the political picture. Both
Plato and Aristotle see the desires of the rulers as the characteristic
of “man,” those of the ruled as nearer the merely animal. But in the
Nicomachean Ethics the baser passions, characteristic of the ruled,
appear merely as sources of error and distraction. There is nothing of
Plato’s at times nearly hysterical picture of what he takes to be the
anarchy of desire. Since all norms belong within the just state, and
desire of an untrammeled kind has no place in it, this picture of desire
as anarchic is inevitable. But by recognizing that there are desires
which cannot be legitimated and allowed expression within his form of
ideal state, Plato also recognizes implicitly that those whose desires
they are would find in them a criterion for criticizing his state and
life in it as “less profitable” than the pursuit of what his state would
characterize as injustice. Plato is at times a candid partisan of a
ruling class, even if only of an imaginary ruling class.

Aristotle is in this respect uncandid. The Aristotelian ideal of the
leisured and perfected life of abstract contemplation is only accessible
to an elite; and it presupposes a class structure which excluded the
mass of ordinary men both from political power and from the moral idea.
But every desire is allowed expression in a form that will either
satisfy it or purge it. This explains the difference between Plato and
Aristotle on the subject of tragedy. The values of Greek tragedy express
the conflicts of Greek society as much as the values of Plato and
Aristotle express or attempt to depict Greek society as a unified
structure. In the Oresteia tribal and urban values conflict; in Antigone
those of the family and those of the state; in The Bacchae those of
reason with those of the passions. They present to the mass audience of
the πόλις rival allegiances for their desires in an aesthetic mode
calculated to arouse passion. Plato rightly sees that they do not
present the kind of consistent, single moral ideal he believes in and
that they run contrary to his attempt to suppress the desires of the
mass audience. Hence his consistent advocacy of censorship and
repression. But Aristotle sees that the aesthetic evocation of pity and
terror may purge us of them. Far from providing us with motives for
action, the drama may evacuate us of otherwise dangerous desires and
emotions, and in so doing, it will stabilize the existing social order.
Hence Aristotle has none of Plato’s enthusiasm for censorship.

In fact, Aristotle is much more of a quietist in relation to political
activity. Provided only that there is room for the contemplative elite,
the Nicomachean Ethics does not provide for a condemnation or an
endorsement of any social structure; and the Politics uses criteria of
stability to judge between types of state which have only this negative
connection-of making room for an elite-with the arguments of the Ethics.
In fact, by his own practice as the tutor of the young Alexander, and by
his advocacy of the life of contemplation, Aristotle, as Kelsen pointed
out, sided with the powers which were about to destroy the πόλις as a
political entity. For the exaltation of the contemplative life is an
exaltation of it as a form of life for those men who have hitherto
composed the political elite. It provides a rationale for their
withdrawal to the status of citizen, “good citizens” in Aristotle’s
sense, but not rulers. And this is just what the absolutism of Macedon,
the first of the new large-scale states, required the rulers of what had
hitherto been city-states to become. As Kelsen puts it, “the
glorification of the contemplative life, which has renounced all
activity and more especially all political activity, has at all times
constituted a typical element of the political morality set up by the
ideologies of absolute monarchy. For the essential tendency of this form
of state consists in excluding the subjects from all share in public
affairs.”21

The facts of the decline of the πόλις and the rise of the large-scale
state have immensely more important consequences for the history of
moral philosophy than any gravitational pull that they may have exerted
upon Aristotle’s analyses. The milieu of the moral life is transformed;
it now becomes a matter not of the evaluations of men living in the
forms of immediate community in which the interrelated character of
moral and political evaluation is a matter of daily experience, but of
the evaluations of men often governed from far off, living private lives
in communities which are politically powerless. In Greek society the
focus of the moral life was the city-state; in the Hellenistic kingdoms
and the Roman empire the sharp antithesis between the individual and the
state is inescapable. The question now is not, In what forms of social
life can justice express itself? or, What virtues have to be practiced
to produce a communal life in which certain ends can be accepted and
achieved? but, What must I do to be happy? or, What goods can I achieve
as a private person? The human situation is such that the individual
finds his moral environment in his place in the universe rather than in
any social or political framework. It is salutary to observe that in
many ways the universe is a more parochial and narrow moral environment
than Athens was. The reason for this is very simple. The individual who
is situated in a well-organized and complex community, and who cannot
but think of himself in terms of the life of that community, will have a
rich stock of descriptions available to characterize himself, his wants,
and his deprivations. The individual who asks, What do I desire, as a
man, apart from all social ties, in the frame of the universe? is
necessarily working with a meager stock of description, with an
impoverished view of his own nature, for he has had to strip away from
himself all the attributes that belong to his social existence. Consider
in this light the doctrines of Stoicism and Epicureanism.

The remote ancestor of both is Socrates, the Socrates who is essentially
the critic, the outsider, the private foe of public confusions and
hypocrisies. Plato sees that if one asks seriously for answers to the
Socratic questions, one necessarily becomes the partisan of one sort of
social order against others, and in so doing, one has to abandon the
role of the merely private person and critic. But among Socrates’
disciples there were some who retained this mode, who stylized the
Socratic way of life and drew their moral code from this style of life
rather than from reflection on the character of definition. Independence
and self-sufficiency become for them the supreme values; the only way to
avoid injury from changing circumstance is to make oneself radically
independent of circumstance. Antisthenes, the logician, rejects as goods
not merely wealth and honors, but anything that might provide the
satisfaction for a desire. Virtue consists in the absence of desire and
is sufficient by itself for happiness. The man who is virtuous in the
sense of desiring nothing has nothing of which to fear the loss; he is
able to bear even slavery without injury. Antisthenes sees conventional
politics and conventional religion only as sources of illusion. Not the
state, but the universe is the habitation of the virtuous man; not the
local gods of the state, but the one good is his god, and the only
service of god is the practice of virtue. What independence of this sort
could mean is shown in Diogenes’ life in his tub and in his reply to
Alexander’s question of whether there was anything that Alexander could
do for him: “Yes, get out of the light.” It is Diogenes’ expressed wish
to live with the simplicity of an animal and his chosen self-title, “The
dog” (ὁ κύων), that won for moralists of this school the title “Cynics.”
(The link with the English word cynicism lies in the Cynic claim to see
through all conventional values.)

Aristippus of Cyrene begins from the assumption of the identity of the
pursuit of virtue and the pursuit of εὐδαιμονία. He identifies
εὐδαιμονία with pleasure; but holds that excess of pleasure leads to
pain and that the limitation of desires is a condition of their
satisfaction. Among Aristippus’ disciples, called Cyrenaics, perhaps the
most significant figure was Hegesias, who stressed this latter point to
the extent of holding that the absence of pain rather than the promotion
of pleasure is the aim of life. What is more, he believed that
abstention from actual pleasure was a condition of such absence. When
Hegesias lectured atAlexandria, it is said that the effect was such on
his hearers that many of them committed suicide, and in the end he was
not allowed to give lectures.

Even in the thought of the Cynics and Cyrenaics we can discern a
tendency which will be much more strongly exemplified in Stoics and
Epicureans. For both Plato and Aristotle, although the relation of
virtue to happiness may constitute a problem, that there is a connection
between them waiting to be elucidated is a fundamental assumption.
Unless virtue somehow leads to happiness, it lacks a τέλος, it becomes
pointless; unless happiness is somehow bound up with the practice of
virtue, it cannot be happiness for the kind of beings men are, it cannot
constitute a satisfaction for a moralized human nature. Happiness and
virtue are neither simply identical nor utterly independent of each
other. But in the case of both Cynics and Cyrenaics we see the tendency
to reduce one to the other, and to in fact operate either with the
concept of virtue alone or with that of happiness alone. This separation
of virtue and happiness is interestingly accompanied by a large stress
upon self-sufficiency, upon avoiding disappointment rather than seeking
for positive goods and gratifications, upon independence from contingent
bad fortune, and this stress perhaps provides the very clue which we
need to understand their separation. The sense one gets in reading the
records of post-Socratic philosophy which survive in writers such as
Diogenes Laërtius and Cicero is of a disintegrated social world in which
there are more puzzled rulers than ever before, in which the lot of the
slaves and the propertyless is very much what it was, but in which for
many more middle-class people insecurity and an absence of hope are
central features of life.

This suggests interestingly that the possibilities of connecting virtue
and happiness are dependent not solely upon the features of two concepts
which remain unchanged and hence have an unchanging relation, but upon
the forms of social life in terms of which these concepts are
understood. Let me suggest two extreme models. The first is of a form of
community in which the rules which constitute social life and make it
possible and the ends which members of the community in question pursue
are such that it is relatively easy to both abide by the rules
andachieve the ends. A well-integrated traditional form of society will
answer to this description. To achieve the personal ideals of the
Homeric hero or the feudal knight or the contemplative and to follow the
social rules (which themselves invoke a respect for rank and religion)
cannot involve fundamental conflict. At the other end of the scale, we
might cite as an example the kind of society which still sustains
traditional rules of honesty and fairness, but into which the
competitive and acquisitive ideals of capitalism have been introduced,
so that virtue and success are not easily brought together. Or there may
well be intermediate types of society in which for some groups only is
it true that their ends and the rules of the society are discrepant.
From the vantage point of each of the different kinds of society the
relation between virtue and happiness will look very different. At the
one extreme we shall find virtue and happiness regarded as so intimately
related that the one is at least a partial means to or even constitutive
of the latter. At the other extreme we shall find a total divorce,
accompanied by injunctions by the would-be moralists to regard virtue
rather than happiness, and by the would-be realists (illuminatingly
called “cynics” by the moralists) to regard happiness rather than
virtue. Even though both words remain, the one will come to be defined
in terms of the other. But inevitably in such a situation both the
concept of virtue and the concept of happiness will become impoverished
and will lose their point to a certain extent. To understand this
situation we must look at the relationship between rules and ends, and
to do this we must first make clear the distinction between them.

There are rules without which human life recognizable as such could not
exist at all, and there are other rules without which it could not be
carried on in even a minimally civilized form. These are the rules
connected with truth telling, promise keeping, and elementary fairness.
Without them there would not be an arena in which distinctively human
ends could be pursued, but these rules by themselves in no way provide
us with ends. They tell us how to behave in the sense of telling us what
not to do, but they provide us with no positive aims. They provide norms
to which any action we may perform is required to conform, but they do
not tell us which actions to perform. Which actions we shouldperform
depends upon what ends we pursue, what our goods are. In general
happiness is a rubric relating to ends, virtue one dominating rules. It
would be a mistake to suppose that in identifying this distinction
between rules and ends we are also demarcating the public and the
private domains in morality. For while it is true that ends may admit of
private choices in a way that rules do not, it is also true that there
are societies in which there are publicly established and agreed or
imposed ends, as well as societies which leave alternative ends open to
a great degree to individual preference. Moreover, there may be private
innovations in the realm of rules as well as in that of ends. What does
remain true, however, is that the dissociation of rules and ends will
inevitably have repercussions on the relationship between private and
public life. For where the observance of rules has no or relatively
little connection at all with the achievement of ends, the observance of
rules will become either pointless or an end in itself. If it becomes an
end in itself, then the observance of rules may become a private ideal
for the individual as well as a requirement of social morality. If the
achievement of ends is in the same type of situation, as it will be,
relatively independent of the observance of rules, then ends become
dissociated from the requirements of the public domain. They provide
other and rival private ideals. It will be natural in this situation to
conceive of the pursuit of pleasure and the pursuit of virtue as
mutually exclusive alternatives. Moreover, in each case, long-term
projects, which tend to depend upon the possibility of relying on a
widespread public congruence of rules and ends, will appear far less
viable than short-term. Moral advice will most naturally be either of
the “Gather ye rosebuds while ye may” kind or of the “Do what is right
regardless of the consequences” kind. “Fiat justitia, ruat coelum” is a
slogan that is pointless rhetoric except when it seems quite possible
that the heavens will crumble. We can see these alternatives embodied in
private moralities by the Cynics and the Cyrenaics. They rise to the
level of universal codes in Stoicism and Epicureanism.

For the successive founders and refounders of Stoicism, Zeno, Cleanthes,
and Chrysippus, morals become unintelligible apart from cosmology. The
universe is at once material and divine. Theprimary material of the
universe, fire, is transmuted into various physical states by the
activity of a universal rational principle, the Logos, which is the
deity. In the transmutation of the universe a regular cycle recurs,
returning again and again to a cosmic conflagration in which the
original fire brings to an end one period and begins another. Each of
these cyclical periods is identical, and every event in the universe
therefore recurs indefinitely. Since man is an integral part of the
universe, this eternal recurrence is also true of human history.
Indefinitely often in the past and indefinitely often in the future I
have written and shall write these words, and you have read and will
read them, just as you do at this present moment.

Since human nature is part of cosmic nature, the law which governs the
cosmos, that of the divine Logos, provides the law to which human action
ought to be conformed. At once an obvious question arises. Since human
life proceeds eternally through an eternally predetermined cycle, how
can human beings fail to conform to the cosmic law? What alternatives
have they? The Stoic answer is that men as rational beings can become
conscious of the laws to which they necessarily conform, and that virtue
consists in conscious assent to, vice in dissent from, the inevitable
order of things. What this answer means can be better understood by
considering the Stoic answer to the problem of evil.

Since everything is formed by the action of the divine principle, and
that principle is entirely and unquestionably good, it follows that no
evil can occur in the world. But evil does occur. How so? The Stoic
rejoinder is, in effect, that evil does not really occur. A variety of
arguments, which later on are to reappear in Christian theology, take
the stage for the first time in Stoic costume. Chrysippus argued that of
a pair of contraries, neither could be conceived to exist without the
other, so that good and evil each require the existence of the other.
Evil, being therefore a necessary condition for the occurrence of good,
is in terms of a larger scheme not really evil at all. From this,
Chrysippus deduces the impossibility of pleasure without pain and of
virtue without vice. Courage could not occur did not cowardice; justice,
did not injustice. Indeed we call actions cowardly or unjust not with
reference to the act itself, but with reference to the agent’sintention.
The same action, in the sense of the same physical behavior, can be
cowardly if done with one intention (the agent aims only to save
himself) and courageous if done with another (the agent aims to prevent
a struggle, even at the cost of his own reputation for courage).

We can now understand why the Stoics think it possible to combine
determinism with a belief that men can either assent to or dissent from
the divine law. What is determined is the entire physical world,
including human beings insofar as they are part of that world; what
apparently escapes determination is human assent or dissent to the
course of things expressed in the form of intention. Even if I dissent
from and rebel against the predetermined course of nature, my physical
behavior will still conform to it. “Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem
trahunt,” wrote Seneca later on.

In what form does the divine law to which my assent is invited present
itself? As the law of nature and of reason. Nature now becomes a term
quite other than what it was in either Plato or Aristotle. It refers to
the cosmic status of the moral law; as such, it still contrasts with
convention in the sense of what is merely established for local
observance. But somehow the moral law and the physical universe now
share a source, a prefiguring again of Christianity. What nature and
reason invite us to is the observance of the four traditional virtues,
prudence, courage, temperance, and justice. But one cannot, for the
Stoics, possess one of these without possessing all. Virtue is single
and indivisible. One cannot possess it in part; either one is virtuous,
or one is not. There is a single dividing line among men. Above all,
virtue is to be sought only for its own sake. “Virtue,” as Diogenes
Laërtius regards it, “is a rational disposition, to be desired in and
for itself and not for the sake of any hope, fear, or ulterior
motive.”22 Pleasure, by contrast, is not to be sought at all. Cleanthes
thought that it was positively to be shunned; most of the Stoics that it
was merely to be disregarded. Desire, hope and fear, pleasure and pain
are against reason and nature; one should cultivate a passionless
absence of desire and disregard of pleasure and pain. This the Stoics
called apathy.

What then does one do? How does one actually behave? Onedisregards all
attractions of external goods; one is therefore not exposed to the pain
of their loss. Peace of mind is thereby secured. (Hence the later use of
the adjective stoical.) In the world at large, one disregards those
differences between men which are merely a consequence of externals.
There is one divine universe, one rational human nature, and therefore
one appropriate attitude to all men. The Stoic is a citizen of the
κόσμος, not of the πόλις It we turn not to Epicureanism expecting a
sharp contrast, we find that what is striking about Epicureanism is in
the end not the contrast with, but the resemblance to Stoicism.
Superficially the differences are what stand out. Morality exists in a
universe which is alien to it, and not, as with the Stoics, in a
universe of which it is the highest expression. The atomism which
Epicurus inherits from Democritus and bequeaths to Lucretius is a theory
of blind physical determination. The moral consequences of atomism are
negative; the gods do not control or interest themselves in human life.
They dwell apart and indifferent, and natural phenomena have physical,
not theological explanations. Plagues are not punishments, and
thunderbolts are not warnings. Morality is concerned with the pursuit of
pleasure, and not, as with the Stoics, with the pursuit of virtue
independently of pleasure. Indeed, for Epicurus, virtue is simply the
art of pleasure. But Epicurus then proceeds to argue that many
pleasures, if heedlessly pursued, bring great pains in their wake, while
some pains are worth tolerating for the ensuing or accompanying
pleasures. He argues further, as the Cynics did, that the absence of
pain is a greater good than positive pleasures; he argues, moreover,
that a moderation in external goods is the only guarantee of not being
pained by their loss; and he argues finally that freedom from intense
desire is a condition of pleasure. All the conventional virtues are
reinstated as means to pleasure and the gulf between Stoic apathy and
Epicurean tranquillity (ἀταραƷιἀ), verbally wide, is practically narrow.
Epicurus’ practical atheism makes him less pompous than the Stoics, and
his high valuation of friendship makes him attractive as a person, but
the regard for a quiet life, and detachment of the individual from the
Platonic-Aristotelian morality of social life is as complete as it is in
the Stoics.

Both Epicureanism and Stoicism are convenient and consoling doctrines
for private citizens of the large impersonal kingdoms and empires of the
Hellenistic and Roman worlds. Stoicism provides a better rationale for
participation in public life, Epicureanism for withdrawal from it. Both
place the individual in the context of a cosmos, not of a local
community. Both have a function in a world in which pain is to be
avoided rather than pleasure sought. In the Roman world especially, each
has a function which is left unfulfilled by Roman religion. Roman
religion is essentially an integrative cult in which the gods of the
hearth, the gods of the formerly independent nations, and the gods of
the empire express by their unity the single hierarchy of familial and
imperial deities. The earliest Roman rulers speak from within their
roles as fathers and consuls; if they use a religion to manipulate the
plebeians, it is at least a religion which they share. But relatively
early this ceases to be so. Polybius could write that “it is the very
thing which among other peoples is an object of reproach, I mean
superstition, which maintains the cohesion of the Roman state. These
matters are clothed in such pomp and introduced to such an extent into
their public and private life that nothing could exceed it, a fact which
will surprise many. My own view at least is that they have adopted this
course for the sake of the common people. It is a course which perhaps
would not have been necessary had it been possible to form a state
composed of wise men, but as every multitude is fickle, full of lawless
desires, unreasoned passion, and violent anger, the multitude must be
held in by invisible terrors and suchlike pageantry.”23

Where religion is thus manipulative, the members of the middle and upper
classes become unable to share the religion which they use for political
purposes. They need beliefs which are rational by their own standards
and will justify what Romanitas itself once justified or which will
justify the withdrawal from public duty. These needs were admirably met
by Stoicism and Epicureanism. Seneca and Marcus Aurelius exemplify the
public side of Stoicism; Lucretius the liberating qualities of
Epicureanism.

The doctrines of the Roman upper classes are, however, vulnerable in one
crucial respect. The doctrines of apathy and ataraxia are useless as
advice to those who already are propertyless and in no position to
become hedonists. Exposed to poverty, disease, death, and to the will of
those who are their rulers and often enough their owners, they still
question how they are to live and what virtue and what happiness might
be in their case. For some of these the mystery religions provided an
answer. For even more an answer was to be given with the coming of
Christianity.


