CHAPTER 11 NEW VALUES
=====================

BOTH HOBBES and Spinoza struck their contemporaries as outrageous
innovators; to both the label of “atheist”-which was used in
seventeenth-century Europe with almost as much accuracy as the label
“communist” is used in twentieth-century America-was attached. Spinoza
was expelled from the synagogue; Hobbes was attacked by the Anglican
clergy. And just because they stand so far from their contemporaries, it
is only in a relatively indirect way that they give expression to the
common and shared dilemmas of their society. But the questions which
they ask, and the values which they embody-different as these are-soon
become questions and values which inform a whole way of social life. And
in a variety of ways philosophical questions and practical questions
come into a closer relationship. In a variety of ways, for differing
social circumstances provide relevantly different contexts for the
relationship. In France, for example, philosophy in analyzing the
concepts of the existing social and political order, those of
sovereignty, law, property and the like, becomes critical of those
concepts, and so an instrument for criticism of the established order.
In England philosophy, in analyzing the concepts of the existing order,
often provides a justification for these concepts. The differences
between France and England are partly to be explained by the fact that
the English social order provides many French writers in the eighteenth
century with a model in terms of which to criticize their own society;
whereas within England no such model as yet exists, although by the end
of the century the French Revolution had enabled France to return the
compliment.

Nonetheless, in England we can mark the stages by which one moral scheme
was transformed into a largely different one. We can use this history to
partially explain how philosophical criticism can have quite different
relations to social change in different types of period. There may be
forms of society in which a variety of criteria are employed to justify
and explain moral, social, and political standards. Do we obey the
current rules and seek the current ideals because God authorizes them?
Or because they are prescribed by a sovereign with legitimate authority?
Or because obeying them is in fact a means to the most satisfying forms
of human life? Or because, if we do not, we shall be punished or
otherwise harmed by those in power? At a practical level it may be
unnecessary and irrelevant to decide between these alternatives. For if
the standards which are in the end held to be justified seem to be
equally justified no matter what criteria we employ in judging them,
then the argument about the appropriate way of justifying our standards
will seem to be of purely theoretical import, matter for sharpening wits
in the schools, but irrelevant in the field or the market place.

Social change, however, may bring theory out of the schools and not only
into the market place but even onto the battle field. For consider what
may happen in a social order where sacred and secular, church and state,
king and parliament, or rich and poor fall apart. The criteria that used
to return the same answers to the questions, What standards ought I to
accept and, What ought I to do? now provide several answers derived from
the new competition between rival criteria. What God commands or is
alleged to command, what has the sanctions of power behind it, what is
endorsed by legitimate authority, and what appears to lead to the
satisfaction of contemporary wants and needs are no longer the same.
That the argument is no longer the same as before may be concealed by
the fact that the partisans of different criteria will naturally enough
attempt to redefine their rivals out of the field by trying to show with
Hobbes that legitimate authority just is victorious power, or with the
puritans that what God commands is what we would recognize as satisfying
our wants and needs if we were not so totally depraved by sin, or with
the royalists that obedience to the king’s legitimate authority is what
God commands. Nonetheless, we can recognize that the criteria have
fallen apart; and in recognizing this, we recognize the relevance of a
class of question which is at once moral and philosophical.

What kind of backing is logically appropriate to moral rules? What kind
of warrant do they require? So far we have encountered in the history of
ethics at least three main types of answer. The backing of being part of
a form of human life in which our desires and dispositions would be
formed and trained toward a recognition and pursuit of certain goods
(Plato and Aristotle); the backing of being part of a set of divine
commandments, obedience to which will be rewarded and disobedience to
which will be punished (Christianity); and the backing of being
instructed as to what action will produce for us most of what we now
want (the sophists and Hobbes). Each of these answers specifies a
different morality; and each of them specifies a different logical form
and status for moral judgments. For the first, the key concept is
“good,” used functionally; and the key judgments are that certain
things, sections, or people are good-that is, are well fitted for
certain roles or functions in the background picture of social life
which this view always has to presuppose. For the second, the key
concept is expressed by “Thou shalt,” and the key judgments express
consequences of reward and punishment. For the third, the key concepts
are those of means to a given end, of our desires as they are; and the
key judgments are of corresponding form. It is of course obvious, and
has already been stressed, that it is possible to combine and vary these
three in all sorts of ways: Aquinas’ blend of Greek and Christian is the
most important. But how do we decide between them? Clearly to lay down
some logical form as the form of the moral judgment and to rule out
others as illegitimate would itself be an arbitrary and illegitimate
procedure. But what we can do is to note the theory of human nature and
of the physical universe presupposed by each different view; and if we
do so the superiority of the Greek view -at least in its Aristotelian
form-to either of its rivals appears plain-on at least two counts in
respect of Christianity, and on at least one as regards the “actions
whose consequences will be most desirable” view. Begin with the latter:
quite clearly our desires as they are stand in need of criticism and
correction. Those who speak blandly of moral rules as designed to
maximize pleasure and minimize pain have apparently never reflected on
such questions as whether the pleasure afforded to medieval Christians
or modern Germans by persecuting Jews did not perhaps outweigh the pain
caused to Jews and therefore justify the persecution. That they did not
weigh the merits of this argument is perhaps to their credit morally;
but intellectually it means that they have ignored both the possibility
of transforming human nature and the means available for criticizing it
in the ideals which are implicit not only in the private heroic dreams
of individuals, but in the very way actions may be envisaged in a given
society. For we do not have to see Aristotle’s ideal life or the ideal
of a Christian saint or the ideals of chivalry as private intentions:
they are the ideals implicit in the way of life of Greek gentlemen or in
that of the early church in its pagan environment or in the institutions
of knighthood and war. To detach these ideals from their social
environment is to evacuate them of significant content; it was Karl Marx
who remarked that what Don Quixote had to learn was that not every
economic order is equally compatible with knight errantry. But within
their natural social environment these ideals may be used to criticize
not only our actions, but our actual aims and desires.

Christianity shares with the Aristotelian view the advantage of not
taking our actual desires as given; and it incarnates one moral ideal
which is foreign to both the other views, the ideal expressed by saying
that somehow or other all men are equal in the sight of God. The
dividing line between all moralities which are moralities for a group
and all moralities which are moralities for men as such is historically
drawn by Christianity. This doctrine in secular form, as a demand for
minimum equal rights for all men and hence for a minimum of freedom, is
Christianity’s chief seventeenth-century achievement, expressed
centrally in the manifesto of the Diggers and in some of the claims of
some of the Levellers. The left-wing movements in the parliamentary army
in the English civil war express for the first time secular concepts of
freedom and equality which break with all traditional forms of social
hierarchy. But before we examine these new concepts we must look at what
happened to Christianity.

Christianity’s greatest moral weaknesses are two: first, the sheer
extent of its metaphysical commitments; and second, the fact that it has
to assert that the point and purpose of this life and this world is in
the end to be found in another world. As long as men find this life
inherently unsatisfactory, so long are they therefore likely to be
interested in the Christian claims; but insofar as they do find adequate
projects and purposes, their interest is likely to be weakened. And with
the expansion of life which is made possible by economic growth,
other-worldly religions are, in fact, universally eroded. But even more
importantly, belief in a God of any specific kind becomes increasingly a
formality-when it is not actually abandoned. There occur side by side a
process of intellectual criticism of religious beliefs and a process of
social abandonment.

Intellectually, first deists and then skeptics question the possibility
of miracles, the truth of the historical narratives in which
Christianity is alleged to rest, the traditional proofs of the existence
of God, and the intolerance of ecclesiastical morality. Socially, what
was a religious morality becomes increasingly a religious form and frame
disguising or merely decorating purely secular ideals and pursuits. As a
matter of history, the culmination of this process in the eighteenth
century is a victory for the morality whose ancestry includes Hobbes and
the sophists.

In both England and New England in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries puritanism is transformed from a critique of the established
order in the name of King Jesus to an endorsement of the new economic
activities of the middle classes. At the end of this process economic
man emerges fully fledged; throughout, human nature appears as given,
and human need or what is useful to supply it as a single, uncomplicated
standard for action. Utility and advantage are treated as clear and
perspicuous notions which stand in no further need of justification. We
can see this process most clearly exemplified in the writings of Defoe,
who was unusually self-aware, and unusually aware, too, of the nature of
the times. He sees that the Christianity of the Commonwealth period has
evaporated: “. . no such zeal for the Christian religion will be found
in our days, or perhaps in any region of the world, till Heaven beats
the drums itself, and the glorious legions from above come down on
purpose to propagate the work, and reduce the whole world to the
obedience of King Jesus-a time which some tell us is not far off, but of
which I heard nothing in all my travels and illuminations, no, not one
word.”32 Moreover, all Defoe’s heroes are moved by the values of
double-entry bookkeeping and human feelings are allowed to enter only
into the interstices left by profitability. As Moll Flanders puts it,
“with money in the pocket one is at home anywhere.” The little Moor
without whom Crusoe could not have escaped from slavery and whom Crusoe
had decided “to love ever after” is sold into slavery himself by Crusoe
for sixty pieces of eight (admittedly with a promise from the purchaser
to free the slave after ten years; provided, of course, that he has been
converted to Christianity). The wives of the colonists in The Farther
Adventures of Robinson Crusoe are assessed wholly in economic terms. Of
Defoe’s characters it is often true that “enjoyment is subordinated to
capital; and the individual who enjoys to the individual who
capitalizes.” Marx, who wrote this about capitalist human nature, would
have appreciated Defoe’s conclusion that usefulness is “the great
pleasure, and justly deemed by all good men the truest and noblest end
of life, in which men come nearest to the character of our B. Saviour,
who went about doing good.”

But the assertion of economic values and the absorption of religious
values into them is only one side of the story. I have already noticed
the increasing importance in the preceding period of the concept of “the
individual.” The individual is now on the scene with a vengeance.
Robinson Crusoe becomes the bible of a generation which includes both
Rousseau and Adam Smith. The novel with its stress on individual
experience and its value is about to emerge as the dominant literary
form. Social life becomes essentially an arena for the struggles and
conflicts of individual wills. The first ancestor of all these
individuals is perhaps Milton’s Satan, who brought Blake over to the
devil’s party and has been seen as the first Whig. For Satan’s motto,
Non Serviam, marks not merely a personal revolt against God, but a
revolt against the concept of an ordained and unchangeable hierarchy.
The complexity and interest of Satan lies in the fact that he both has
to and cannot reject this hierarchy: the only alternative to service is
monarchy; but monarchy implies the hierarchy which revolt rejects.
Equally, Satan’s spiritual descendant, Tom Jones, is caught in the same
dilemma. Tom Jones wins his Sophia in the end because a mixture of
personal quality and sheer good luck enable him to make his way. But at
the end, if he is in fact to have his Sophia, it has to be shown that he
is really of good birth, that he, too, really belongs by right to the
squirearchy. The values of the traditional social hierarchy are only
half challenged.

We thus find a form of social life in which a traditional order is
challenged by forms of innovation in which liberty and property are twin
sides of the same coin. To make one’s way is to make one’s way
economically, at least in the first instance. But the badge of success
remains acceptance by those already on top in the established order of
things. Yet this very mobility in society and this very encounter of two
orders breeds questioning of a radical kind. Perhaps the utopian claims
for freedom made by the Diggers and Levellers had declined into the
freedom of the puritan and ever less puritan merchant. But they remain a
specter to haunt the eighteenth century. Hume is appalled by the
suggestion of a law which apportions property to those best able to make
use of it or to men as men. “But were mankind to execute such a law; so
great is the uncertainty of merit, both from its natural obscurity, and
from the self-conceit of each individual, that no determinate rule of
conduct would ever result from it; and the total dissolution of society
must be the immediate consequence. Fanatics may suppose, that dominion
is founded on grace, and that saints alone inherit the earth; but the
civil magistrate very justly puts these sublime theorists on the same
footing with common robbers, and teaches them by the severest
discipline, that a rule, which, in speculation, may seem the most
advantageous to society, may yet be found, in practice, totally
pernicious and destructive. That there were religious fanatics of this
kind in England, who claimed an equal distribution of property, were a
kind of political fanatic, which arose from the religious species and
more openly answered their pretensions. . .”33

Who then were the Levellers and the Diggers? and why do they mark a
turning point in the history of morality and produce consequences for
philosophical ethics? What is the doctrine of freedom that in the early
eighteenth century was temporarily lost or transformed? It is the
doctrine that every man has a natural right to certain freedoms simply
because he is a man. Diggers and Levellers give different
interpretations to this doctrine at the economic level; the Diggers
believed in a community of goods, and especially in common ownership of
land, the Levellers in private property. The Levellers themselves at
different times gave different and inconsistent expressions to this
belief at a political level; sometimes they claimed universal manhood
suffrage, and sometimes they were prepared to exclude servants and
beggars (who in the seventeenth century were probably more than half the
male population of England). But always behind their specific claims was
the doctrine expressed by Colonel Thomas Rainborough in the Putney
debates: “For really I think that the poorest he that is in England hath
a life to live as the greatest he; and therefore truly, sir, I think
it’s clear, that every man that is to live under a government ought
first by his own consent to put himself under that government.”34
Rainborough said this in a debate between the representatives of the
Leveller rank and file in the Cromwellian army and Cromwell, Ireton, and
other leading officers on Putney Heath in October 1647. The debate was
over the political stand that the army should take in settling affairs
after the King’s defeat. Ireton and Cromwell wished for a restricted
property franchise; to this the reply of Rainborough and others was that
in that case the poor men who fought in the parliamentary army were to
get nothing for their pains. Instead of exchanging tyranny for liberty
they would have exchanged tyranny for tyranny. But had they known this
in advance, they would never have fought. The case that Rainborough
advanced at Putney in 1647 had a year earlier been expressed in
theoretical terms by Richard Overton in his An Arrow Against All
Tyrants. “To every Individuall in nature is given an individual property
by nature, not to be invaded or usurped by any: for every one as he is
himselfe, so he hath a selfe propriety, else could he not be himselfe,
and on this no second may presume to deprive any of, without manifest
violation and affront to the very principles of nature, and of the Rules
of equity and justice between man and man; mine and thine cannot be,
except this be; No man hath power over my rights and liberties and I
over no mans; I may be but an Individuall, enjoy my selfe, and my selfe
propriety, and may write my selfe no more than my selfe, or presume any
further; if I doe, I am an encroacher & an invader upon an other mans
Right, to which I have no Right.”35

So came the doctrine of natural rights in its revolutionary form into
the modern world. Overton’s nature is very different from Hobbes’: the
principles of nature as much constrain me from invading the domain of
others as they entitle me to resist others who invade my domain. What is
my domain? my “selfe”? my “selfe propriety”? The latter word is the
immediate ancestor of, but not the same word as property. Overton
understood, as Locke was to understand, that I am only able to act as a
person insofar as I have a minimal control over things. My knife or my
hammer or my pen may not be quite as necessary to me as my hand is, but
are necessary in a comparable kind of way. But now what entitles this
“selfe” to rights? The attack upon the concept of natural rights
normally takes the following form.

A right can only be claimed or exercised in virtue of a rule which
entitles a certain class of people to claim or exercise the right. Such
rules are intelligible when embodied in some system of positive law,
enacted by a sovereign legislature. But outside ordinary positive law
the notion of a right appears only to make sense if we suppose a divine
lawgiver who has enacted a system of law for the universe. Yet the claim
that there are natural rights does not rest on an appeal to divine law,
and it does not rest, ex hypothesi it cannot rest, on any appeal to
positive law. For the particular legal system does not concede to some
individual or class within the community the rights to which he or they
are entitled. So, it is argued, alleged “natural rights” do not satisfy
the minimal condition necessary for a right to exist and to be
recognized. Critics of this kind therefore conclude either that the
doctrine of natural rights is inherently confused or that it is just is
a way of expressing a moral principle that all men ought to have certain
rights recognized and protected by positive law and its sanctions. The
latter alternative is certainly mistaken; for when men appeal to the
doctrine of natural rights they are never just saying that they ought to
enjoy certain rights, they are always attempting to give a reason for
holding this. So if this line of criticism is correct, it appears that
we ought to conclude that the claim to natural rights is nonsensical.
But is it?

If another claims something from me, and does not or cannot invoke
positive law to justify his claim, then I can ask him in virtue of what
it is that he makes this claim. He might provide such a sufficient
justification for his claim if he could establish, first, that I had
explicitly or tacitly conceded his right by agreeing to some contract or
promise of the form “If you do this, then I will do that,” and if he
could establish, second, that he had done for his part whatever it was
that the contract specified. That is, anyone who wishes to establish
that he has a claim against me as of right may do this is if he is able
to show that I have acknowledged a certain contractual obligation and
that he has performed whatever is laid down by the contract in question.
From this general argument we can now move once more to the doctrine of
natural rights.

The essence of the claim to natural rights is that no one has a right
against me unless he can cite some contract, my consent to it, and his
performance of his obligations under it. To say that I have a right on
some point is simply to say that no one may legitimately interfere with
me unless he can establish a specific right against me in this way. Thus
the function of the doctrine of natural right is to lay down conditions
to which anyone who wishes to establish a right against me must conform.
And “anyone” here includes the state. It follows that any state which
claims rights against me, that is, legitimate authority over me- and my
property-must establish the existence of a contract whose form we have
already specified in outline, my consent to it, and the state’s
performance of its part under the contract. This apparently trivial
conclusion throws much light on seventeenth-century-and later-political
theory. It explains why the social contract is necessary for anyone who
wishes to defend the legitimacy of state power; Hobbes misplaced the
role of the contract. It does not and cannot underlie or explain social
life as such, for contracts presuppose, as I have already argued, the
existence of social life and indeed of some fairly high degree of
civilization. But some doctrine of social contract must underlie any
claim to legitimacy. In the seventeenth century this claim becomes
crucial for state power. In the Middle Ages the legitimacy of the final
authority, the sovereign prince, was bound up with all the other ties of
obligation and duty binding superiors and inferiors. These ties are by
the seventeenth century fatally loosened. Man and man confront one
another in an arena where the cash nexus of the free-market economy and
the power of the centralizing state have together helped to destroy the
social bonds on which traditional claims to legitimacy were founded. But
how to legitimate the new order and especially the sovereign power?
Claims to divine right and scriptural authority founder on
arbitrariness. So the state must fall back on appeal, implicit or
explicit, to social contract. But at once two points. The very claims of
the state imply and allow a prepolitical (and such is the force of
natural) right of the individual over whom authority is asserted to be
satisfied that there is a contract, that he has consented to it, and
that the state has performed its part. But, of course, normally there is
no such contract, for there is no such consent. Individuals have no
opportunity for expression of either consent or dissent. Thus the
doctrine of natural rights is in this form a key doctrine of liberty.
For it shows that most claims of most states to exercise legitimate
authority over us are and must be unfounded. That radical consequences
for both morals and politics ensue are obvious. It is thus the case that
a great step forward in moral and political philosophy was taken by
half-forgotten thinkers like Rainborough, Winstanley the Digger, and
Overton and other Levellers. That they are forgotten is due to the
various ways their doctrine was transmuted in the following generations.
Morally, as I have already noticed, the rights of the individual were
increasingly connected with the right of freedom in the market economy.
Politically, the doctrine of John Locke displaced theirs. But because
Locke’s doctrine is as important for morals as for politics, to it we
must now turn.


