CHAPTER 14: KANT
================

KANT STANDS at one of the great dividing points in the history of
ethics. For perhaps the majority of later philosophical writers,
including many who are self-consciously anti-Kantian, ethics is defined
as a subject in Kantian terms. For many who have never heard of
philosophy, let alone of Kant, morality is roughly what Kant said it
was. Why this is so can only be suggested when what Kant said has been
understood. But at the outset we have to note one very general point
about Kant. He was in one sense both a typical and supreme
representative of the Enlightenment; typical because of his belief in
the power of courageous reasoning and in the effectiveness of the reform
of institutions (when all states are republics there will be no more
war); supreme because in what he thought he either solved the recurrent
problems of the Enlightenment or reformulated them in a much more
fruitful way. The greatest example of this is his synthesis of those two
idols of the Enlightenment, Newton’s physics and the empiricism of
Helvétius and Hume, in the Critique of Pure Reason. The empiricists had
argued that we have rational grounds for belief in nothing beyond what
our senses have already encountered; Newton’s physics offered us laws
applicable to all events in space and time. How to reconcile them? We
can, Kant argues, be assured a priori that all our experience will turn
out to be law governed and to be law governed after the manner of
Newtonian causality, not because of the character of the external world,
but because of the character of the concepts through which we grasp that
world. Experience is not a mere passive reception of impressions; it is
the active grasping and comprehension of perceptions, and without the
concepts and categories by means of which we order and understand
perceptions, it would be formless and meaningless. “Concepts without
perceptions are empty; perceptions without concepts are blind.”

Kant’s theory of knowledge, even as so very briefly adumbrated, is
important for his theory of morals in at least two ways. Because causal
relations are discovered only when we apply the categories to
experience, we have no way of inferring causal relationships beyond and
outside experience; we cannot, therefore, validly infer from the causal
order of nature to a God who is the author of nature. Nature is entirely
impersonal and nonmoral; it may be viewed as if it were the product of a
great and benevolent designer, but we cannot affirm that it is such. We
have, therefore, to look for the realm of morals outside the realm of
nature. Morals must be independent of how the world goes, for how the
world goes is nonmoral. Moreover, Kant never proceeds, as Descartes and
some of the empiricists did, by looking for a basis for knowledge, for
some set of first principles or hard data, in order to vindicate our
claims to knowledge against some hypothetical skeptic. Kant takes the
existence of arithmetic and that of Newtonian mechanics for granted and
inquires what must be the case with our concepts for these sciences to
be possible. So also with morals. Kant takes the existence of an
ordinary moral consiousness for granted; his own parents, whose
sacrifices had made his education possible, and whose intellectual gifts
were notably less than his own, seemed to him models of simple goodness.
When Kant read Rousseau, Rousseau’s remarks on the dignity of ordinary
human nature struck home at once. It is the moral consciousness of this
ordinary human nature which provides the philosopher with an object for
analysis; as in the theory of knowledge, the philosopher’s task is not
to seek for a basis or a vindication, but to ask what character our
moral concepts and precepts must have to make morality as it is
possible.

Kant therefore is among those philosophers who see their task as one of
post eventum analysis; science is what it is, morality is what it is,
and there’s an end on’t. This essentially conservative view is all the
more surprising when we recall that Kant’s lifetime (1724-1804) was a
period of rapid social change. Part of the explanation of Kant’s
attitudes is perhaps biographical; Königsberg, near Prussia’s eastern
limits, was no metropolis, and Kant led an isolated academic existence.
But much more important is the fact that Kant conceived his task as the
isolation of the a priori, and therefore unchanging, elements of
morality. In different societies there might be different moral schemes;
Kant insisted on his own students coming to terms with the empirical
study of human nature. But what is it that makes these schemes moral?
What form must a precept have if it is to be recognized as a moral
precept?

Kant approaches this question from an initial assertion that nothing is
unconditionally good-except a good will. Health, wealth, intellect, are
good only insofar as they are used well. But the good will is good; it
“shines forth like a precious jewel,” even if “through the niggardly
provision of a stepmotherly nature,” the agent is insufficiently strong,
rich, or clever to bring about desirable states of affairs. Attention is
thus focused from the outset on the agent’s will, on his motives and
intentions, rather than upon what he actually does. What motives or
intentions make the good will good?

The good will’s only motive is to do its duty for the sake of doing its
duty. Whatever it intends to do, it intends because it is its duty. A
man may do what is, in fact, his duty from quite other motives. A
shopkeeper giving the correct change may be honest not because it is his
duty to be honest but because honesty pays off by bringing him custom
and increasing his profits. But it is important to note here that a will
can fail to be good not only because duty may be done from
self-interested motives but also because duty may be done from
altruistic motives which nonetheless spring from inclination. If I am a
friendly, cheerful, kind person by nature, who enjoys helping others, my
altruistic acts, which may be what duty in fact demands from me, may be
done not because duty demands them but just because I have an
inclination to behave in this way-I enjoy it. If so, my will fails to be
decisively good, just as if I had acted from self-interest. Kant rarely
mentions and never dwells upon the difference between inclinations to
act in one way rather than another; the whole contrast is between duty
upon the one hand and inclination of every kind upon the other. For
inclination belongs to our determined physical and psychological nature;
we cannot in Kant’s view choose our inclinations. What we can do is to
choose between our inclination and our duty. How, then, does duty
present itself to me? It presents itself as obedience to a law that is
universally binding on all rational beings. What is the content of this
law? and how do I become aware of it?

I become aware of it as a set of precepts which in prescribing to myself
I can consistently will should be obeyed by all rational beings. The
test of a genuine moral imperative is that I can universalize it-that
is, that I can will that it should be a universal law, or, as Kant puts
it in another formulation, that I can will that it should be a law of
nature. The point of this latter formulation is to stress that not only
must I be able to will that the precept in question should be recognized
as a law universally, but I must also be able to will that it should be
acted on universally- in the appropriate circumstances. The sense of “be
able to” and “can” in these formulations is equivalent to “can without
inconsistency,” the demand for consistency being part of the demand for
rationality in a law that men prescribe to themselves as rational
beings. Kant’s most helpful example is that of promise keeping. Suppose
that I am tempted to break a promise. The precept upon which I am
considering acting may be formulated as: “I may always break a promise
when it is in my interest to do so.” Can I consistently will that this
precept should be universally acknowledged and acted upon? If all men
acted upon this precept, and broke their promises whenever it suited
them, clearly the practices of making and of relying upon promises would
break down, for nobody would be able to trust the promises of others,
and consequently, utterances of the form “I promise to . .” would cease
to have point. Hence to will that this precept should be universalized
is to will that promise keeping should no longer be possible. But to
will that I should be able to act on this precept (which I must will as
part of willing that the precept should be universalized) is to will
that I should be able to make promises and break them, and this is to
will that the practice of promise keeping should continue, so that I can
take advantage of it. Hence to will that this precept should be
universalized is to will both that promise keeping as a practice should
continue and also that it should not. So I cannot universalize this
precept consistently, and thus it cannot be a true moral imperative, or
as Kant calls it, a categorical imperative.

In calling moral imperatives categorical Kant contrasts them with
hypothetical imperatives. A hypothetical imperative is of the form “You
ought to do such and such if . .” The if may introduce either of two
types of condition. There are hypothetical imperatives of skill-“You
ought to do such and such [or, Do such and such] if you wish to produce
this sort of result” (e.g., “Press the switch if you wish to ring the
bell”); and hypothetical imperatives of prudence-“You ought to do such
and such if you wish to be happy [or, for your advantage].” The
categorical imperative is limited by no conditions. It is simply of the
form “You ought to do such and such.” A version of Kant’s categorical
imperative certainly appears in ordinary moral utterance in our society.
“You ought to do it.” “Why?” “There’s no reason. You just ought.” The
force of “There’s no reason” is to draw a contrast with the cases where
you ought to do something because it will be to your pleasure or
advantage or will bring about some result you want. Thus, the
distinction between categorical and hypothetical imperatives is at this
level a familiar one. What is unfamiliar is the Kantian test of ability
to univarsalize the precept consistently. For what is not present in our
everyday moral discourse is the concept of a rational-and because
rational, objective-criterion for deciding which are the authentic moral
imperatives. The historical importance of Kant is partly that his
criterion is designed to replace two alternative criteria.

According to Kant, the rational being utters the commands of morality to
himself. He obeys no one but himself. Obedience is not automatic because
we are not wholly rational beings but are compounded of reason and of
what Kant calls sensibility, in which is included all our physiological
and psychological make-up. Kant contrasts what he calls “pathological
love,” by which he means not morbid or unnatural love but natural
affection, the love that springs up in us spontaneously, with “the love
that can be commanded,” which is obedience to the categorical
imperative, and which he equates with the love for our neighbor that
Jesus commanded. But Jesus cannot be for us a moral authority; or
rather, he is only insofar as our rational nature recognizes him as such
and accords him authority; and if that is the authority which we accept,
it is in fact our own reason, and not Jesus, which we are taking to be
ultimately authoritative. We can put the same point in another way.
Suppose that a divine being, real or alleged, commands me to do
something. I only ought to do what he commands if what he commands is
right. But if I am in a position to judge for myself whether what he
commands is right or not, then I have no need of the divine being to
instruct me in what I ought to do. Inescapably, each of us is his own
moral authority. To recognize this, which Kant calls the autonomy of the
moral agent, is to recognize also that external authority, even if
divine, can provide no criterion for morality. To suppose that it could
would be to be guilty of heteronomy, of the attempt to subject the agent
to a law outside himself, alien to his nature as a rational being. But
belief in a divine law as the source of morality is not the only kind of
heteronomy. If we attempt to find a criterion for assessing moral
precepts in the concept of happiness or of what would satisfy human
wants and needs, we shall be equally wrongheaded. The realm of
inclination is as alien to our rational natures as any divine
commandments are. Hence Aristotle’s εὐδαιμονία is as useless for
morality as Christ’s law.

It is useless, in any case, because it can provide no fixed guide. The
notion of happiness is indefinitely variable, depending upon variations
in psychological make-up. But the moral law must be entirely unvarying.
When I have discerned a categorical imperative I have discerned a rule
which has no exceptions. In a short essay called “On the Supposed Right
of Telling a Lie from Benevolent Motives,” Kant replied to Benjamin
Constant, who had criticized him on this point. Suppose that a would-be
murderer inquires from me the whereabouts of his intended victim. And
suppose that I lie in order to save the victim. The murderer then
proceeds to follow my directions, but, unknown to me, the victim has in
fact removed himself to precisely the place to which I have directed the
murderer. Consequently, the murder is effected as a consequence of my
lie, and I am responsible precisely because I lied. But had I told the
truth, I could not have been held responsible, no matter what happened.
For it is my duty to obey the imperative and not to look to the
consequences. The resemblance of Kant’s view to that of Butler is
striking; and it is no accident that for Kant, as for Butler, the
insistence upon the irrelevant consequences is balanced by an invocation
of theology. Kant argues that my duty is my duty irrespective of the
consequences, whether in this world or the next. He has none of the
crudity and insensitivity of the theological utilitarians. But he still
argues, or rather asserts, that it would be intolerable if in fact duty
were not in the end crowned with happiness. The odd thing is that if
happiness is as indeterminate a notion as he suggests elsewhere- and as
he suggests rightly elsewhere, for the Kantian notion of happiness has
been detached from any notion of socially established ends and the
satisfaction to be gained from achieving them -he can scarcely be
consistent here in introducing happiness as the reward of virtue which
though unsought, being indeed the reward of virtue only if it is
unsought, is that without which the whole enterprise of morality would
scarcely make sense. What this amounts to is a tacit admission that
without some such notion, not morality itself, but the Kantian
interpretation of it scarcely makes sense.

Practical reason presupposes on Kant’s view a belief in God, freedom,
and immortality. God is required as a power capable of realizing the
summum bonum, of crowning virtue with happiness; immortality is required
because virtue and happiness manifestly do not coincide in this life;
and freedom is the presupposition of the categorical imperative. For it
is only in acts of obedience to the categorical imperative that we are
delivered from the bondage of our own inclinations. The ought of the
categorical imperative can only have application to an agent capable of
obedience. In this sense ought implies can. And to be capable of
obedience implies that one has evaded the determination of one’s actions
by one’s inclinations, simply because the imperative which guides action
determined by inclination is always a hypothetical one. This is the
content of moral freedom.

The power of this Kantian picture is undeniable, and its power is
increased rather than diminished when the doctrine of the categorical
imperative is detached from the dubious support offered by the Kantian
forms of belief in God and immortality. Whence does this power derive?
In the course of the discussion of Hume I described the emergence of the
moral ought in the modern sense. Although we can discuss the first signs
of philosophical recognition for this ought in a writer like Hume, his
utilitarianism does not allow him to give it a central place. But with
Kant this ought is not only central but all absorbing. The word duty is
detached altogether from its root connection with the fulfillment of a
particular role or the carrying out of the functions of a particular
office. It becomes singular rather than plural, and it is defined in
terms of obedience to categorical moral imperatives- that is, in terms
of injunctions containing the new ought. The very detachment of the
categorical imperative from contingent events and needs and from social
circumstances makes it in at least two ways an acceptable form of moral
precept for emerging liberal individualist society.

It makes the individual morally sovereign; it enables him to reject all
external authorities. And it leaves the individual free to pursue
whatever it is that he does, without suggesting that he ought to do
something else. This latter point is perhaps less obvious than the
first. The typical examples of alleged categorical imperatives given by
Kant tell us what not to do; not to break promises, tell lies, commit
suicide, and so on. But as to what activities we ought to engage in,
what ends we should pursue, the categorical imperative seems to be
silent. Morality sets limits to the ways in which and the means by which
we conduct our lives; it does not give them direction. Thus morality
apparently sanctions any way of life which is compatible with keeping
our promises, telling the truth, and so on.

A closely related point moves nearer to matters of directly
philosophical interest. The doctrine of the categorical imperative
provides me with a test for rejecting proposed maxims; it does not tell
me whence I am to derive the maxims which first provide the need for a
test. Thus the Kantian doctrine is parasitic upon some already existing
morality, within which it allows us to sift-or rather, within which it
would allow us to sift if the test it provided were a reliable test. But
in fact it is not, even on its own terms. For the Kantian test of a true
moral precept is that it is one that I can consistently universalize. In
fact, however, with sufficient ingenuity almost every precept can be
consistently universalized. For all that I need to do is to characterize
the proposed action in such a way that the maxim will permit me to do
what I want while prohibiting others from doing what would nullify the
maxim if universalized. Kant asks if I can consistently universalize the
maxim that I may break my promises whenever it suits me. Suppose,
however, that he had inquired whether I can consistently universalize
the maxim “I may break my promises only when. . .” The gap is filled by
a description devised so that it will apply to my present circumstances
but to very few others, and to none such that if someone else obeyed the
maxim, it would inconvenience me, let alone show the maxim incapable of
consistent universality. It follows that in practice the test of the
categorical imperative imposes restrictions only on those insufficiently
equipped with ingenuity. And this surely is scarcely what Kant intended.

The logical emptiness of the test of the categorical imperative is.
itself of social importance. Because the Kantian notion of duty is so
formal that it can be given almost any content, it becomes available to
provide a sanction and a motive for the specific duties which any
particular social and moral tradition may propose. Because it detaches
the notion of duty from the notions of ends, purposes, wants, and needs
it suggests that, given a proposed course of action, I may only ask
whether, in doing it, I can consistently will that it shall be
universally done, and not ask what ends or purposes it serves. Anyone
educated into the Kantian notion of duty will, so far, have been
educated into easy conformism with authority.

Nothing, of course, could be further from the intentions or from the
spirit of Kant himself. His wish is to exhibit the moral individual as
being a standpoint and a criterion superior to and outside any actual
social order. He sympathizes with the French Revolution. He hated
servility and valued independence of mind. Paternalism, so he held, was
the grossest form of despotism.52 But the consequences of his doctrines,
in German history at least, suggest that the attempt to find a moral
standpoint completely independent of the social order may be a quest for
an illusion, a quest that renders one a mere conformist servant of the
social order much more than does the morality of those who recognize the
impossibility of a code which does not to some extent as least express
the wants and needs of men in particular social circumstances.


