CHAPTER 16: KIERKEGAARD TO NIETZSCHE
====================================

THE KANTIAN individual finds the test for his maxims in the objective
test of the categorical imperative; the Hegelian individual finds his
criteria in the norms of the free and rational society. The fundamental
doctrine of Sören Kierkegaard is that not only are there no genuine
objective tests in morality; but that doctrines which assert that there
are function as devices to disguise the fact that our moral standards
are, and can only be, chosen. The individual utters his moral precepts
to himself in a far stronger sense than the Kantian individual did; for
their only sanction and authority is that he has chosen to utter them.

Kierkegaard was born in Copenhagen in 1813. The radical form of
Protestant Christianity which he embraced and his rejection of Hegel’s
doctrines both spring from the same source; the fundamental role which
he allots to the act of choice. It is not just in morals, but in every
sphere which touches on human existence that the relevant criteria lack
objective justification. Such justification may be in place in
mathematics and in the natural sciences; but elsewhere rational argument
can do no more than to present us with alternatives between which we
must make our own choices. Some of Kierkegaard’s own writings take the
form of such a presentation, various literary devices such as the use of
pseudonyms being employed to conceal the fact that it is one and the
same man who is advancing the rival claims of contrasting and
conflicting positions. But this is not mere irrationalism, an arbitrary
exaltation of arbitrary choice. For Kierkegaard believes that rational
argument itself shows us that in the end the choice of the individual
must be sovereign.

Suppose that one believes that one’s moral position can be rationally
justified, that it is a conclusion which can be validly derived from
certain premises. Then these premises in turn must be vindicated, and if
their vindication consists in deriving them from conclusions based on
more fundamental premises, the same problem will arise. But the chain of
reasons must have an ending, and we must reach a point where we simply
choose to stand by certain premises. At this point decision has replaced
argument; and in all arguments on human existence there will be some
such point. This argument is applied to moral questions in Kierkegaard’s
early work Either/Or.

Here Kierkegaard contrasts two ways of life which he calls “the ethical”
and “the aesthetic.” The aesthetic life is that of the man whose only
goal is his own satisfaction. What he must avoid are pain and boredom.
Romantic love, which exists only to satisfy the passion of the moment
and is ever flying to new satisfactions, is his characteristic sexual
relationship. Marriage, with its lifelong and inescapable duties, is
characteristic of the ethical, which is the sphere of obligations, of
rules which admit of no exception. The arguments in favor of the ethical
mode of life are put into the mouth of Judge Wilhelm; those in favor of
the aesthetic are taken ostensibly from the papers of a younger,
anonymous figure, “A.” The two arguments cannot meet, for Judge Wilhelm
uses ethical criteria to judge between the ethical and the aesthetic,
while “A” uses aesthetic criteria. The argument of each depends upon a
prior choice, and the prior choice settles what the conclusion of each’s
argument will be. And the reader, too, must choose. But the careful
reader may well begin to have doubts here of at least two kinds.

The first is drawn from the nature of Kierkegaard’s own presentation.
For while Kierkegaard claims to be neutral between the two positions,
one can have no doubt which he favors. He describes the aesthetic state
of mind as one of permanent and ever renewed dissatisfaction, of
traveling hopefully so as not to arrive. The ethical by contrast appears
as a realm of quiet satisfaction in the obligation fulfilled, the
limited task well done. The very disclaimer of partisanship by
Kierkegaard itself has a partisan effect-in favor of the ethical. But is
this just perhaps a flaw in the literary achievement? Could not
Kierkegaard have presented a genuinely neutral account of the two
standpoints?

Only if we suppose it possible to address an individual who is devoid of
desires, goals, and needs prior to the presentation of the two cases. As
such, the individual would be almost a man without characteristics. He
acquires them only through his choices. But who is this “I” who chooses?
And for such a being what can hang in any case upon choosing in one way
rather than in another? These questions never receive an answer in
Kierkegaard, partly because he treats “the individual” as an ultimate
category and partly because he understands the real existence of the
individual as being what the individual is “before God.” For Kierkegaard
the ethical is only a prologue to the religious, and the religious is
necessarily offensive to human reason. One of Hegel’s key faults in
Kierkegaard’s eyes was that he tried to present religion in rational
terms. But from an authentically Christian point of view Christianity
must be seen as bringing the truth to a human reason which does not
possess it, which prior to the Christian revelation is alien to the
truth. So it is that from the standpoint of a self-sufficient human
reason, Christianity necessarily appears as paradoxical and irrational.
Christian faith depends not on argument, but on choice, both for the
more general reasons cited by Kierkegaard, which I have already
mentioned, and for these special reasons. Skeptical objections to
Christianity are not in reality grounded on intellectual doubt; they
arise from “insubordination, unwillingness to obey, rebellion against
all authority.” Hence the important decision is either to do or not to
do what God commands in his self-revelation.

The example Kierkegaard invokes is that of Abraham and Isaac. Abraham is
commanded by God to sacrifice his son. This command is contrary, not
merely to inclination but also to duty. What God commands is, from the
standpoint of the ethical, simple murder. There is thus a break between
the highest merely human consciousness and the divine intrusion of the
apparently scandalous and absurd. It is important to note that there is
not a hint in Kierkegaard of the view taken by some Old Testament
critics that the function of this story was to preach the abolition of
human sacrifice and to educate the Hebrews into a belief that such a
killing was in fact, not what God willed, but murder. The notion of
revelation as progressive, as always suited to-but always slightly above
the moral level of-those to whom it is addressed, is alien to
Kierkegaard.

Kierkegaard, then, stands at an extreme point, both in the development
of Christianity and in the development of individualism. So far as
Christianity is concerned, he poses one horn of a dilemma which had been
arising for Christianity ever since the revival of Aristotle in the
Middle Ages. Either Christianity accepts the terms of secular reason and
argues on these, or it insists on being judged by no criteria but its
own. The first alternative leads, as Kierkegaard saw it lead in Hegel’s
writings, to the reduction of Christianity to something other than
itself; the second leads to Christianity becoming self-enclosed and
unintelligible. Theologians who recognize this have sometimes been
dismayed by Kierkegaard’s candor. But Kierkegaard’s type of Christianity
is in some ways a natural counterpart to his individualism. For it is
only when writing from within a Christian position that Kierkegaard can
find any reasons for answering the question, How shall I live? in one
way rather than another. One may suspect that the need to be able to
answer this question is one of the unavowed sources of his Christianity.
The choices made by the individual confronting the alternatives of the
ethical and the aesthetic, or the ethical and the religious, are
according to Kierkegaard criterionless. But if this were genuinely so,
how could it be right to choose one rather than the other? Yet the whole
point of such choices, and of the pain that the making of them involves,
is that one may choose wrongly. Kierkegaard’s conceptual framework makes
it impossible to say this, although sometimes Kierkegaard himself is
inconsistent enough to use this kind of language. He moves uneasily
between speaking from within an order in which God’s will provides
criteria for action and speaking as the lonely individual outside all
criteria.

Of Kierkegaard’s themes, at least one, that of the irrationality of
Christianity, reappears in the strange, ironical pages of Heinrich
Heine’s History of Philosophy and Religion in Germany. But here the
unintelligibility and unacceptability of Christianity are taken
seriously: “Can you hear the ringing of the bell? Kneel down-they are
bringing the sacraments to a dying God.” Writing in 1832, Heine connects
the intellectual past of Germany with prophecies of a coming
catastrophe. The argument is two-sided. On the one hand, there has been
a continuous secularization of German life. Catholicism overcomes Nordic
heathenism, but at the cost of taking a good deal of it into herself;
Luther creates a new German consciousness, partly through the German
Bible, but leaves Germany a prey to Protestant spirituality; Spinoza,
Wolff, Kant, and Hegel secularize religion finally and replace the
supernatural by the natural. But all this took place only in the realm
of ideas. Heine says sardonically, “It seems to me that a methodical
people, such as we are, must begin with the reformation, must then
occupy itself with systems of philosophy, and that only after their
completion could it pass to the political revolution. I find this
sequence quite rational. The heads that have first served for the
speculations of philosophy can afterwards be struck off by the
revolution for whatever object it pleases; but philosophy would not have
been able to utilize the heads struck off by the revolution that
preceded it.”55 But what in fact has happened is that only the surface
of life has been touched by these intellectual changes. Christianity is
the only bar to the old paganism of the Germans; and critical
philosophy, especially Kantian philosophy, has destroyed it.
“Christianity-and this is its fairest merit- subdued to a certain extent
the brutal warrior ardor of the Germans, but it could not entirely
quench it; and when the cross, that remaining talisman, falls to pieces,
then will break forth again the ferocity of the old combatants. . There
will be played in Germany a drama compared to which the French
Revolution will seem but an innocent idyll.”56

The prophecy came true one hundred years later. What is its relevance to
the history of philosophy? British moral philosophers of the nineteenth
century, as we shall see in the next chapter, essentially found
themselves at home in their society. This is not to say that they were
passive conformists. Both utilitarians and idealists found themselves
among at least the moderate reformers. But the criteria for reform which
they proposed were such as they could expect to find echoed by their
fellow countrymen. Not so with German philosophers. As with Hegel in his
old age, or with his right-wing followers, the German philosophers
provided a justification of the status quo-or else they found themselves
outside the academic establishment, shunned as critics. Thus German
nineteenth-century moral philosophers cannot hope to represent
themselves as merely analyzing what is already present in ordering moral
consciousness; they see the moral as something they are bound to
condemn. Equally, from the other side, ordinary morality finds its
sources in romantic rationalism or in the ideals of the Prussian
bureaucracy and requires a hostility to the purely critical intellect.
Hence the great moral philosophers of the nineteenth century are all
anti-German Germans, constructing systems against the moral status quo.
Heine is their forerunner, but the great names among them are
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche.

Schopenhauer stands in sharp contrast to both Hegel and Kierkegaard.
Against Hegel’s view of every part of the universe having meaning
insofar as it stands in relation to a systematic rational whole, and
Kierkegaard’s stress on the value of the individual, Schopenhauer sees
the universe as meaningless and the individual as having no value. He
admired Plato and Kant because they did not attempt to find a rational
order in the merely phenomenal; he hated and despised Hegel, whom he
thought of as a timeserver. And professional academic philosophers in
general he thought committed to supplying metaphysical consolation in
return for payment. “By the Greeks they were called sophists, by the
moderns they are called professors of philosophy.” But his dislike of
Hegel has to be set beside the fact that he attempted to rival Hegel as
a lecturer in Berlin by putting on his lectures at the same hour as
Hegel’s; Hegel’s lectures remained crowded, Schopenhauer’s were empty.

What is Schopenhauer’s message? The world is the expression of blind
striving or Will. We know our own inner nature as Will in direct
experience; thought is but one of the outward forms or disguises taken
by Will. Life is blind, cruel, meaningless; but we disguise this fact in
our theorizing, and in our actions we cling to life through extremes of
pain and suffering. The natural world bears witness to the continuous
reproduction of the species, and the continuous destruction of the
individual. The forms remain the same; the individuals who exemplify
them continually perish. (In this we get a hint of Schopenhauer’s
relation to Plato and Kant.) Thus experience testifies to the way in
which the world is pervaded by pain and destruction, while religion and
philosophy try to construct justifications for the universe which will
show that pain and destruction have not the last word, and in so doing,
they themselves testify to the force of Cosmic Will, which has as its
aim the continuing of existence on any terms. Schopenhauer explains
religion as the human expression of this desire for continued existence.
Were we totally certain of our survival after death, or of our
extinction at death, religion would be functionless. Moreover, it is not
only in our anxiety to continue existing that we exhibit ourselves as
manifestations of Will. We also do so in the way that we devote
ourselves to continuing the species; sexual passion overrides all our
impulses to avoid suffering and responsibility. Yet the pleasures of
passionate love are momentary and vanishing compared with the troubles
it brings upon us. We may rationalize our pursuit of various ends and
claim to find good in achieving them; the truth is, we are what we are
constituted by the blind strivings of Will, and our thinking cannot
alter anything about us.

So seriously does Schopenhauer take this that he treats our entire
personality as given from the outset. What we are essentially is Will,
and unalterable Will. No experience, no reflection, no learning, can
alter what we are. Our character is fixed, our motives are determined.
It follows that traditional morality and traditional moral philosophy
are founded on a mistake, the mistake of supposing that moral precepts
can alter conduct, whether our own or that of others. What, then, can
moral philosophy do? It can explain the moral valuations which we do in
fact make by an analysis of human nature.

If we carry through such an analysis, we discover three basic motives in
human nature. The first is our old friend self-interest. On this
Schopenhauer has little original to say. The second, however, is the
fruit of acute observation. It is malice. Schopenhauer observed, as
perhaps no previous philosopher or psychologist had done, the gratuitous
character of malice. We do not harm others only when and in order that
we may benefit ourselves. And when others undergo misfortunes our
pleasure in their misfortunes is unconnected with any thought of our own
self-interest. It is pure pleasure: “For man is the only animal which
causes pain to others without any further purpose than just to cause it.
Other animals never do it except to satisfy their hunger, or in the rage
of combat.” The appalling record of human life, of the suffering and
infliction of pain, is relieved only when the third motive, sympathy or
compassion, appears. To feel compassion is to put oneself imaginatively
in the place of the sufferer and to alter one’s actions appropriately
either by desisting from what would have caused pain or by devoting
oneself to its relief. But the exhibiting of compassion has yet a
further significance.

In a moment of compassion we extinguish self-will. We cease to strive
for our own existence; we are relieved from the burden of individuality
and we cease to be the plaything of Will. The same relief is granted to
us in the contemplation of works of art. And in the life of a Christ or
of a Buddha we find a systematic disciplining of self and exercising of
compassion in which self-hood and striving approach the goal of final
extinction. Thus Schopenhauer’s message is in the end an injunction to
return to the sources of Buddhist teaching.

A first reaction to Schopenhauer must always be perhaps to note the
contrast between the brilliance of his observations of human nature
(which go far beyond anything I have suggested) and the arbitrary
system-building in which those observations are embedded. He stands out
among philosophers by his insistence upon the all-pervasive character of
pain and suffering in human life to date. But his general pessimism is
as unilluminating as it is striking. Because for him these evils arise
from existence as such, he is unable to give any accurate account of
them in their historical context; all epochs and states of affairs, all
societies, and all projects are equally infected by evil. But he
provides an important corrective to the easy liberal optimism of so much
of nineteenth-century life; and those who reacted against that optimism
find Schopenhauer a seminal influence. Certainly he was this upon
Nietzsche.

Nietzsche in fact stands at the point at which all the contradictory
influences of the nineteenth century are brought to bear. He was himself
only too conscious of this and sought isolation; part of what he admired
in Schopenhauer was his ability to cast off academic and conformist
ambitions. His loneliness as a character is matched by his resistance to
the spirit of the age. He intensely disliked the crude imperialist
politics of the German Empire of 1871. He hated Pan-Germanism in all
forms and especially in its racialist, anti-Semitic ones. But he equally
disliked modern socialism, which he saw as a new incarnation of the
Christian values he most despised. Christianity is for Nietzsche at the
core of the modern sickness. Why? Because Christianity has led to a
systematic devaluation of this world in favor of the next, and thus to a
false spirituality. Above all, because Christianity has embodied values
that were destructive of all moral values, including its own. Nietzsche
sees himself as writing in an age of moral vacuum. He has three tasks:
to exhibit the historical and psychological causes of the vacuum; to
unmask false candidates for the role of the new morality; and finally,
to transcend the limitations of all hitherto existing systems of
morality, and by a “transvaluation of values,” to prophetically
introduce a new way of life.

The historical background to the present malaise is rooted in
Christianity’s victory over the Greeks. Nietzsche in the Genealogy of
Morals begins by attacking “English psychologists” who have argued that
the word good was first applied to altruistic actions because these were
socially useful. (Nietzsche seems to be referring to the whole
utilitarian tradition and to Herbert Spencer: “People tell me,” he
writes “that those men are simply dull old frogs.”) In fact, he replies,
the egoistic-altruistic contrast is not primitive; for in the earliest
uses of good it does not arise. Good was the word used by “the noble,
mighty, highly-placed and high-minded”; its earliest uses were “in
contradistinction to all that was base, low-minded and plebeian.” As we
saw in discussing the history of ‘ἀγαθος’ in Greek, Nietzsche is
fundamentally in the right. He is right too when he relates how the word
good is in due time used in conjunction with altered criteria; but in
place of the actual complexities of Greek and Hebrew history he puts a
sharp contrast between the original Greek aristocrat and “the” Jew. The
Jew substitutes for the aristocratic morality of self-affirmation the
slave morality of envy. The Christian finally exalts the virtues of the
weak, the humble, the poor, the oppressed; not in fact because of love
of these, but because of a hidden rancor and hate of strength, of pride
in life, of self-affirmation. About Jesus, Nietzsche seems to have been
ambivalent; on Paul or Luther he feels free to unleash his rage. “Faith
was at all times, for example in Luther, only a cloak, a pretext, a
screen behind which the instincts played their game-a shrewd blindness
about the dominance of certain instincts.”57

Yet now God is dead. The sanction of traditional slave morality has
gone. And all the contemporary attempts to replace Christianity are
forms of self-deception in one way or another. Kantian ethics pretends
to give the endorsement of universal law to the individualist’s moral
attitudes. “Kant wanted to prove in a way that would dumbfound the
‘common man’ that the ‘common man’ was right.” But Nietzsche’s
accusation is that in fact Kant assumes what he sets out to prove. He
takes it for granted that we are entitled to make moral judgments and
inquires what must be the case if that is so; he never asks, as
Nietzsche does, whether we are so entitled. Nietzsche’s reply is that
we, in trying to bind others by universal moral judgments, pretend to be
speaking in the name of pure practical reason, but are in fact using
these judgments as a weapon against those of whom we are jealous. The
utilitarians are also attacked on grounds drawn from psychology. “Man
does not seek happiness; only the Englishman does that.”58 Not happiness
but power is the fundamental human goal. Sympathetic interpreters of the
Nietzschean “will to power” have insisted that by power Nietzsche does
not mean power over others; he saw the ideal expression of power in the
type of personality in which the limitations of self-love have been
overcome, but which nonetheless affirms itself. It is when the will to
power is not allowed expression, but is hidden and repressed, that it
turns into a drive against others, summoning up ideals in the name of
which such oppression can be carried out. But Nietzsche’s examples of
the type of personality of which he thought well are highly dubious; in
what he is condemning he is far more clearly justified. The emasculated
asceticism of Wagner’s romantic-Christian Parsifal he abhors; even
Cesare Borgia is far healthier than that. (Health and sickness are key
words in Nietzsche.) Napoleon is a synthesis of the human and the
brutish. Julius Caesar and Spinoza are greatly admired. And in a most
vivid and telling phrase Nietzsche speaks of his ideal as “the Roman
Caesar with Christ’s soul.” Yet, from all this, does one get a clear
picture of the Superman (a bad, but by now unavoidable, translation of
Ubermensch-“the man who transcends”)?

The conventional charge against Nietzsche has been that he was the
forerunner of Nazism, the prophet of “the blond beast” of later
anti-Semitic glorification. The conventional answer has fallen into two
parts. The first, which is unassailable, is that while he was the critic
of Judaism as religion and as morality, he was equally the critic of
Christianity; and that racialism, most of all German racialism (he
thought Slavs on the whole superior to Germans, and preferred Poles most
of all), was condemned by him in the frankest terms. The second is that
the Superman is a morally unambiguous and praiseworthy character. But
the difficulty here is to know just what content the notion of the
Superman had for Nietzsche. The multiplication of reservations renders
everything more obscure. What worries us in Nietzsche is perhaps like
what worries us in Kant.

We have already noticed Hegel’s criticism of Kant, that the
conscientious moral agent dominated by the form of the categorical
imperative is in fact licensed to do anything at all-provided he does it
conscientiously. What looked like a restrictive guide to conduct is in
fact empty of restriction. So likewise, and more crudely, with the
notion of the Superman. In the name of the Will to Power what might one
not do? In what does the superiority of the superior type of human being
manifest itself in late nineteenth-century terms? Nietzsche was
flagrantly misrepresented by his nationalist, anti-Semitic, and finally
Nazi sister. But what one must insist upon is that both the violence of
Nietzsche’s language and the emptiness of the Nietzschean ideal provided
an excellent scaffolding for Frau Förster-Nietzsche to build around.
There is a deep historical irresponsibility in Nietzsche. The
explanation of it is in part that he believed the mass of men to be
beyond redemption anyway. “Not to the people let Zarathustra speak. . To
lure many away from the herd, therefore I came.”

We thus end the nineteenth century with the most perceptive of German
moralists turning his back upon his own society. It would not be absurd
to try to understand this attitude in the light of a society which was
about to turn its back upon the whole human tradition of morality.
Thomas Mann once spoke of the artist as a seismograph in whose work
tremors as yet unobserved are registered. The German philosophers of the
nineteenth century signal tremors far beneath the surface of their
society; they signal catastrophe to come.


