CHAPTER 17: REFORMERS, UTILITARIANS, IDEALISTS
==============================================

A STRIKING FEATURE of moral and political argument in the modern world
is the extent to which it is innovators, radicals, and revolutionaries
who revive old doctrines, while their conservative and reactionary
opponents are the inventors of new ones. So the contract theorists and
the believers in natural rights in the seventeenth century were reviving
features of medieval doctrines, while the doctrine of the divine right
of kings was essentially a sixteenth- and seventeenth-century invention.
So also, at the time of the French Revolution, it is Tom Paine who
revives Locke, and it is Burke who invents a quite new form of the
appeal to tradition. Paine is not a source of philosophical argument in
himself; his importance lies in the way in which he, and more
especially, his French associates helped to force the moral traditions
of the English ruling oligarchy away from the doctrine of natural
rights. How did they do this?

The danger of all appeals to general principles on one’s own behalf on a
particular occasion is that one renders oneself liable to have the same
principles invoked against one on some subsequent occasion. Precisely
this is what happened to the English ruling class; the principles of
1688 were invoked against them by the Americans in 1776 and by the
revolutionaries against their French colleagues in 1789. It was this
fact which underpinned Tom Paine’s appeal to the rights of man; and it
was this fact that Richard Price, whom we have already noticed in his
role as a believer in the rational intuition of moral first principles,
emphasized in his sermon at the dissenting meetinghouse in Old Jewry in
November, 1789. Price emphasized the assertion in 1689 of the right to
choose and to dismiss sovereigns, and above all, of the right to frame
anew the constitution, and reiterated the correctness of this assertion.
In so doing, he played his part in goading both to fury and to reply
Edmund Burke. Burke’s attitude to the mass of men is well conveyed by
his phrase “a swinish multitude”; his attitude to the rights of man is
entirely coherent with this. He denies, first as a matter of history,
that the Whig Revolution of 1688 did involve the kind of assertion of
rights that Price claimed. The displacement of James II was due to a
fear lest his critics should weaken the throne and the hereditary
principle; hence the preference for the next line in succession, even
though it was the German line of Hanover, in order that that principle
might not be discredited. But Burke was not merely concerned with
history. Not only was 1689 not an appeal to natural rights, there are no
such rights. They are metaphysical fictions.

Burke says of the writers of the French Revolution that they are “so
taken up with their theories about the rights of man, that they have
totally forgotten his nature.” By nature Burke does not mean a state
prior to a social contract, but society as it is, and above all, as it
has grown to be. Theoretically based plans for the reform of society are
violations of a divinely ordained history of social growth, so that
Burke can speak of social development as “the known march of the
ordinary Providence of God.” Established institutions are thus rated as
high by Burke as they are low by Rousseau. Both invoke “nature,” but
while for Rousseau nature is contrasted with society, for Burke nature
includes society. Burke however does not view nature simply as all that
is; for if nature were all-inclusive, one could not war against it, as
revolutionaries do. Nature is in fact equated by Burke with certain
established norms and procedures, including the procedure of relying on
prevailing habit rather than on argument. “Politics ought to be
adjusted, not to human reasonings, but to human nature, of which the
reason is but a part, and by no means the greatest part.”59 This is not
just a doctrine about politics, but about the moral life in general.
Hence Burke’s defense of what he calls “prejudice.” “Prejudice is of
ready application in the emergency; it previously engages the mind in a
steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave the man
hesitating in the moment of decision, skeptical, puzzled, and
unresolved. Prejudice renders a man’s virtue his habit, and not a series
of unconnected acts.”60

Burke’s positions are of importance, if only because of their subsequent
influence. The assessment of them confronts one initial difficulty,
namely that if Burke is right, rational argument upon these topics is
misplaced. Hence by even venturing to argue with him we appear to
presuppose the truth of what we are trying to establish. But this
difficulty is not in fact ours, but Burke’s. For to deny the possibility
of rational argument playing the role of arbiter means that in advancing
one’s views one cannot be appealing to any criterion by which they may
be established. But if this is so, then not only can one not argue in
one’s own favor, but one has made it difficult to understand what it
could mean to call one’s views “true” or “false.” For the application of
these predicates always involves an appeal to some criterion. Suppose,
however, that at this point we look to Burke’s practice of arguing
rather than to his principle of condemning argument. We shall then find
in his arguments two mistakes, both diagnosed by William Godwin, the
anarchist, in what is in effect a reply to Burke’s Reflections on the
Revolution in France, Political Justice.

First of all, Burke confuses society and the state. He assimilates
particular forms of political institution to institutions in general.
From premises which assert merely the need for stable and established
social arrangements he tries to derive the conclusion that Louis XVI’s
head should not be cut off. The roots of this confusion are more
interesting than the confusion itself. Burke understands that appeal to
moral and other norms presupposes an established form of social life. He
tries to picture the revolutionary theorist as a man who wishes to
destroy the very social life which is necessary to give meaning to the
norms in the name of which he intends to carry out his act of
destruction. But in so doing, he equates the notion of an established
form of social life with the notion of an established set of
institutional arrangements. In fact, the institutions of a society may
well be at odds with its norms. To maintain these institutions may be
fatally destructive. Burke never noticed the fact that revolutions are
extremely difficult to make. Theorists become revolutionaries only when
their theories are able to articulate a deep dissatisfaction which the
theorists did not invent. And at this point it is the refusal to destroy
and recreate social institutions which is destructive of social life
itself. The true nihilists in history were all kings: Charles I, Louis
XVI, and Tsar Nicholas. The revolutionaries in their societies had to
save social life from their rulers’ destructive maintenance of the
existing order.

Secondly, Burke’s defense of prejudice and habit against reflective
criticism rests on an inadequate analysis of the notion of following a
rule. I may in my conduct follow and abide by rules which I have never
made explicit; breaches of such rules may shame or shock me without my
articulating any formula adequately expressive of the rule. But such
unreflective behavior is as much rule governed as is the behavior of the
man who consciously invokes an expressly formulated maxim. And it is
clearly the kind of behavior which Burke wants to exalt; we use words
like habit and prejudice to bring out not that such conduct is not
governed by rules, but that our attitude to the rules is unreflecrive.
Burke is right to suppose that the moral life would be destroyed by our
reflecting upon our rules of conduct prior to each and every action.
Action must for the most part rely on our habitual dispositions to do
this rather than that. But if for this reason, reflection can only be
occasional, the importance of such occasions is heightened, not
lessened. Because we are right not to be continually re-scrutinizing our
principles, it does not follow that we are wrong ever to scrutinize
them. So Godwin speaks rightly of a need to articulate and examine them,
“to cast away the coat of prejudice and to leave nothing but the naked
reason.”

Godwin, who was married to the mother of female emancipation, Mary
Wollstonecraft, and who was the father of Shelley’s second wife, was the
prototype of the innovating moralist in the modern world. The kind of
abuse which was later to be hurled at a Bertrand Russell or a Wilhelm
Reich was showered on Godwin. De Quincey recalled in his reminiscences
that “most people felt of Mr. Godwin with the same alienation and horror
as of a ghoul, or a bloodless vampyre, or the monster created by
Frankenstein.”

Godwin in fact was a humane and sensitive man who applied himself to the
classical problem of eighteenth-century moral theory. He accepted from
Hume the view that we are moved to action by feelings not by reason and
from Locke the view that it is reason which discerns moral distinctions.
He thus has a more complex position than most eighteenth-century
writers. Our feelings move us to action, but they will only move us to
right action if we have a clear and rational view of the facts. Such a
view includes taking into account the consequences of our actions; it
must also include the application to them of principles such as that of
impartiality, of not making exceptions to general rules in our own or in
anyone else’s favor. Godwin’s view that there are rational moral
principles of an inescapable kind is never developed with sufficient
clarity. But he is as much as anyone since Aristotle the father of the
notion that at the foundation of morals lies the principle that if
morality is to be argued about at all, then the onus of justification
lies upon those who propose to treat men differently. The very process
of moral argument presupposes the principle that everyone is to be
treated the same until reason to the contrary is shown. This principle
is formal in the sense that it does not prescribe how in fact anyone is
to be treated. But it has important practical consequences. For it
forces into the open the justification of treating people differently
because of their age, sex, intelligence, or color. Equality in its most
minimal form is embodied in a society in which this is the case.

Godwin himself extended the scope of principles of reason far beyond
this. He thought that reason showed me that there is more value in the
happiness of a number of men than in that of one, and that this is true
irrespective of whether that one is myself, my friend or relative, or a
total stranger. Hence I ought to prefer the general happiness to my own.
To the rejoinder that if I do so, it is only because I am so
psychologically constituted that I will feel unhappier if I disregard
the general happiness of others than if I disregard my own, Godwin’s
reply is that the pain which I feel at disregarding the unhappiness of
others is felt only because I recognize that I ought to be benevolent.
The pain cannot be the reason for my action, for it is only because I
have quite a different sort of reason for it that I am liable to feel
the characteristic pain. It is only in the light of my rational
principles, for example, that my own actions will inspire in me
satisfaction or guilt.

If men have within themselves rational principles prescribing the
general good, why do men disregard that good? Godwin’s answer is that we
are corrupted by the social environment, and above all, by the influence
of government. For government claims an authority which belongs only to
right reason. And right reason is only grasped by individuals, assisted
by the rational persuasion of other individuals. The hope for man lies
in the perfectability of human nature. Godwin’s belief is that the
influences of social and governmental forms can be overcome and replaced
by a free community of rational beings in which it is the opinions of
those who are informed and objective that will carry weight.

Godwin is a figure curiously akin to and curiously at odds with Bentham.
Where Godwin is utopian in his political proposals, Bentham is the
careful reformer, anxious to escape accusations of utopianism by being
prepared to suggest the exact size of the beds to be used in prisons or
the precise reforms needed in the laws of evidence. Where Godwin
believes human nature to be committed au fond to disinterestedness,
Bentham believes that private interest always needs to be weighted and
guided if it is to serve public interest. Yet Bentham’s criterion of the
greatest happiness of the greatest number is essentially the same as
Godwin’s; both were in limited sympathy with the French Revolution; both
represent the future rather than the past. It can be put like this: if
one takes the stock of characteristically modern liberal clichés and
banalities, one is in a world of which both Godwin and Bentham are
ancestors. For both, society is nothing but a collection of individuals;
for both, the good of individuals is a matter of their happiness; for
both, that happiness can be summed and calculated. In Godwin the notions
of good and evil still retain some of their traditional force; in
Bentham they are to be redefined in terms of pleasure and pain.

Bentham’s thesis was not of course that words such as good and right
were or had been used by most people to mean “productive of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number” or some equivalent phrase. It is not
even the case that Bentham always propounded the same thesis. Sometimes
he seems to be concerned not with the meaning of terms in the moral
vocabulary, but only with the statement of a moral-and
political-criterion. Sometimes he does indeed offer us a definition, but
in the form of a proposal rather than of an elucidation. He says in
effect that we may define good and right in terms of the concept of the
greatest happiness of the greatest number or we may not; but that unless
we do, shall talk nonsense. And sometimes he seems not to distinguish
these tasks. Nor for his purposes does he need to distinguish them. For
his central proposal amounts to the contention that the only rational
and consistent criterion available for the guidance of action is the
assessment of the pleasurable and painful consequences of any particular
action, and that the meaning of evaluative expressions can only be
understood in this context. There is no alternative rational criterion
for at least two kinds of reason.

The first is that theories, such as those based on a belief in natural
law or natural rights, which suppose that there are rights, duties, and
obligations apart from and prior to those embodied in positive law are
thought by Bentham to rest on a basis of logical error. For they are, on
his view, the product of a belief that words like duty and obligation
are names which have a sense and a reference quite independent of their
use in any particular context. Bentham’s own logical views on this point
are a mixture of truth and error. On the one hand, he grasped correctly
that only in the context of a sentence, does a naming, describing, or
referring expression have meaning-a point that was to be made a
commonplace only by Frege and Wittgenstein. On the other hand, it is in
no way clear that adherents of natural-law and natural-rights theories
are necessarily committed to the logical error of supposing otherwise. A
more serious criticism of such theories is intimately connected with one
of Bentham’s most important motives in attacking them. Suppose that
anyone asserts that men possess natural rights or are bound by natural
laws: invite him, then, to make a list of such rights or laws. It is
notorious that adherents of such theories offer lists which differ in
substance from each other. Is there, then, any criterion for the correct
inclusion of an item on such a test? Bentham’s conviction that there is
not was directed in the first instance at the reactionary sanctification
of the legal and penal status quo that Blackstone, in his Commentaries
on the Law of England, accomplished by the use of the theory of natural
law. But Bentham was completely impartial in the application of his
skeptical doubts, and in spite of his sympathy for the American
Revolution and for at least the initial phases of the French Revolution,
he is trenchant in his criticism of the revolutionary doctrine of the
rights of man, a doctrine which he declares to be nonsense, and in his
criticism of the doctrine of imprescriptible natural rights-“nonsense on
stilts.”

If, then, a first reason for holding that only the principle of utility,
the principle of the greatest happiness of the greatest number,
furnishes us with a criterion for action is the alleged logical
impossibility of any metaphysical theory of morals, a second is the
foundation laid for the principle in human psychology. Men are made so
that they are placed under the dominion of “two sovereign masters,” pain
and pleasure. Bentham’s psychology, whose source is in Hartley, is
mechanical and associationist. We cannot but pursue pleasure and flee
pain, and the association of the prospect of either with something else
will draw us to or repel us from whatever pleasure or pain is associated
with. Bentham takes it for granted that pleasure and pain are
correlative terms, and that both are equally simple and unitary
concepts. He gives fifty-eight synonyms for pleasure, and his logical
sophistication about naming on other occasions does not prevent him from
behaving as if happiness, enjoyment, and pleasure all name or
characterize the same sensation. Different sources of pleasure can be
measured and compared in respect of the intensity and duration of the
sensation derived from them, the certainty or otherwise of having the
sensation, and the propinquity or remoteness of the pleasure. In
choosing between alternatives, quantity of pleasure is the only
criterion: “Quantity of pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as
poetry.”61 Moreover, in summing up the pleasures of a number of people
everybody is to count for one and nobody as more than one.

If each individual is in fact moved by the prospects of his own pleasure
or pain, what becomes of altruism? Bentham’s thought is not entirely
coherent here: on the one hand, in his political and legislative
proposals he recognizes the conflict between public and private interest
and the need for molding human nature. His wish to construct a society
in which a man’s pursuit of his private pleasure and his pursuit of the
greatest happiness of the greatest number will coincide clearly rests on
the assumption that society is not at present so organized. But
elsewhere, and especially in the Deontology, Bentham implicitly
identifies the greatest happiness of the individual with that to be
found in the pursuit of the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
The only motive for obeying the rules necessary to social life is the
pleasure to be found in obedience or the pain resulting from disobeying
them.

There is no problem which Benthamite utilitarianism raises which was not
raised within the utilitarian tradition itself, and the burden of these
problems fell upon John Stuart Mill. His father, James Mill, was an
enthusiastic collaborator of Bentham’s, himself a psychologist in the
tradition of Hartley, who once wrote that he aspired to make the human
mind as plain as the road from St. Paul’s to Charing Cross. This spirit
of self-confidence was scarcely inherited by his son. In late
adolescence, after an education which had laid adult burdens upon him
from the earliest possible age, he turned from his absorption in schemes
of social reform to inquire whether, if all such projects were to be
accomplished, this would render him happy. The sinking heart with which
he answered, No presaged a nervous breakdown from which he was rescued
to an important extent by the poetry of Wordsworth and Coleridge. But it
was to be significant for more than Mill’s personal life that the
coincidence between private happiness and that of the greatest number
should have failed the utilitarians themselves so early. Mill’s whole
tenor of thought is that of a utilitarian who cannot avoid any of the
difficulties which this doctrine raises, but who cannot conceive of
abandoning his doctrine either. What are the difficulties?

First, Mill abandons the view that the comparison between pleasures is
or can be purely quantitative. He introduces a qualitative distinction
between “higher” and “lower” pleasures. The higher pleasures are to be
preferred: better Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. How can
we be sure of this? Only he who has experienced both is qualified to
judge, and only the wise man who prefers the Socratic classification has
this experience. Yet here doubt necessarily arises: how could a Mill
know what it was like to be a satisfied fool, any more than the fool
could know what it was like to be Mill? The point of this question
extends further than to cast doubt upon a single contention of Mill’s.
For what it brings out is that Mill is still engaged, as Bentham was, in
trying to bring all the objects and goals of human desire under a single
concept, that of pleasure, and trying to show them as all commensurable
with each other in a single scale of evaluation. Moreover, he, like
Bentham, treats pleasure as a unitary concept.

He is able to do so because the concept of pleasure has tended to
degenerate, just as the concept of duty has. I have already suggested
that in the case of duty, a highly specific concept associated with the
notion of the duties of an office holder evaporates into a generalized
notion of “what a man ought to do.” So pleasure as the concept of one
specific kind of goal is transformed into the concept of any goal at
all. Both hedonists and puritans contribute to the history of this
degeneration. Hedonists, who begin by commending pleasure, against other
goals, then become defensive and insist that they are not merely
commending wine, women, and song, but also the higher pleasures, such as
reading the Critique of Pure Reason. Puritans insist that they are not
against pleasure as such, but only low or false pleasures. They, too,
are for true and lasting pleasures, such as only Zion’s children know.
So concepts like “pleasure” and “happiness” are stretched and extended
in all directions until they are used simply to name whatever men aim
at. By this extension they become useless for evaluative and moral
purposes. For in evaluation, and especially in moral evaluation, we are
not only engaged in grading and in choosing between alternative objects
which we already desire; we are also engaged in grading and choosing
between the cultivation of alternative dispositions and desires. The
injunction “Pursue happiness!” when happiness has been given the broad,
undifferentiated sense which Bentham and Mill give to it is merely the
injunction “Try to achieve what you desire.” But as to any question
about rival objects of desire, or about alternative and competing
desires, this injunction is silent and empty. And this is equally true
whether the happiness which I am to cultivate is to be my own or that of
the greatest number.

Mill, faced with the objection that there are many cases in which one
cannot assess which out of the alternative possible courses of action
will produce the greatest happiness of the greatest number, asserts that
utilitarianism enjoins no more than that in cases where one can so
assess the consequences of action one ought to use the principle of
utility as a criterion. But this concession is more deadly than he
perceives: for he is forced to allow implicitly that there are other
evaluative criteria. What they are and what their relationship to the
principle of utility may be he never makes clear. But we may accept
Mill’s concession in the spirit in which it is offered, if we recognize
that when utilitarians speak of the greatest happiness they are often in
practice speaking of a quite specific goal for action rather than of the
generalized concept of their theoretical appetites. This goal is that of
the public welfare, and it is a goal peculiarly relevant to those areas
of life in which Bentham was especially interested. Prisons and
hospitals, penal codes and constitutional processes-in these areas it is
possible to ask and to answer adequately, even if only crudely, the
question of how many people’s lot will be bettered, how many people’s
lot will be worsened, by such and such a measure. For we have obvious
and established criteria for faring well or ill in these areas. Will
ill-health be increased or diminished? Will the attaching of this rather
than that penalty to this crime diminish or increase the frequency of
its occurrence? Even in these cases there are choices to be made on
which no version of the principle of utility can guide us: an example is
the choice between devoting resources to health services or devoting
them to penal reform. But it is necessary to emphasize that the
utilitarian advocacy of the criterion of public happiness is not only a
mistake. That it seems so obviously the criterion to be considered in
certain areas of life is something we owe to Bentham and Mill.

The concept of happiness is, however, morally dangerous in another way;
for we are by now well aware of the malleability of human beings, of the
fact that they can be conditioned in a variety of ways into the
acceptance of, and satisfaction with, almost anything. That men are
happy with their lot never entails that their lot is what it ought to
be. For the question can always be raised of how great the price is that
is being paid for the happiness. So the concept of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number could be used to defend any
paternalistic or totalitarian society in which the price paid for
happiness is the freedom of the individuals in that society to make
their own choices. Freedom and happiness can in certain circumstances be
radically incompatible values. We can trace one legitimate offspring of
utilitarianism for whom freedom was sacrificed to happiness in the
history of Fabian socialism. For Fabianism socialism was a matter of
schemes of reform initiated from above by the enlightened few for the
welfare of the unenlightened many. Fabianism stands at the opposite pole
in the history of socialism from the revolutionary democracy of Rosa
Luxemburg or the I.W.W., for whom socialism consisted in workers
becoming free from the domination of others, and owners and directors of
their work and their lives.

Moreover, the concept of the greatest happiness of the greatest number
is only applicable with any kind of moral legitimacy in a society in
which it is assumed that nonutilitarian norms of decent behavior are
upheld. The concept of the public happiness has obviously legitimate
application in a society where the consensus is that the public
happiness consists in more and better hospitals and schools; but what
application has it in a society where the public happiness is found by
the public itself to consist in the mass murder of Jews? If in a society
of twelve people, ten are sadists who will get great pleasure from
torturing the remaining two, does the principle of utility enjoin that
the two should be tortured? Nothing could have been further from the
thought of Bentham and Mill. But this only makes it clearer that they
are not consistent utilitarians, that they rely on an implicit appeal to
other norms, which they covertly use to define the greatest happiness.

It is this sievelike nature of the utilitarian concept of pleasure or
happiness which makes Mill’s proof of the principle of utility so
unimpressive. Mill’s proof runs as follows. He begins by allowing that
in any strict sense, proof on matters concerning ultimate ends is not to
be obtained. But, nonetheless, we may adduce considerations capable of
influencing the intellect. The argument then proceeds from the assertion
that just as the only way to show that something is visible is to show
that men can see it, so the only way to show that something is desirable
is to show that men desire it. But all men desire pleasure. So pleasure
is universally desirable. Mill has no problem about the transition from
the desire for my own pleasure to that for the greatest happiness of the
greatest number, which he makes by means of the bald assertion that the
pleasure of another is naturally pleasurable to me. When Mill comes to
show that only pleasure is desired his method is to take apparent
alternative goals and show that originally they are desired for the
pleasure which accompanies them, and only secondarily do they become
desired for their own sake. This method of argument is of course
necessarily ineffective. If anything, it shows that there are goals
other than pleasure. But criticism of Mill has centered on that part of
his argument where he passes from the assertion that pleasure is desired
to the assertion that it is desirable. What Mill’s critics, beginning
with G. E. Moore, have in effect said is that Mill illegitimately tries
to deduce the conclusion that pleasure ought to be desired from the
premise that it is in fact desired. But this, so it is alleged, is
necessarily a fallacious inference. For an is cannot by itself entail an
ought. One does not have to enter on any general discussion of fact and
value to deal with such critics. They are of course right that the
inference in question is fallacious if it is intended as an entailment.
But they are simply mistaken in their reading of Mill.

For what Mill says about proof makes it clear that he does not intend to
use the assertion that all men do in fact desire pleasure as a premise
which entails the conclusion that they ought to desire it. What the form
of his argument is, is not perhaps entirely clear. But one way of
reading him, more consonant with the text of Utilitarianism, would be
this. He treats the thesis that all men desire pleasure as a factual
assertion which guarantees the success of an ad hominem appeal to anyone
who denies his conclusion. If anyone denies that pleasure is desirable,
then we can ask him, But don’t you desire it? and we know in advance
that he must answer yes, and consequently must admit that pleasure is
desirable. But this reading of Mill, and indeed any reading, has to
interpret him as treating the assertion that all men desire pleasure as
a contingent factual assertion. Now it can only be such if pleasure is
being treated as the name of one possible object of desire among others;
for if it is simply an expression equivalent to “whatever men desire,”
then the assertion is a vacuous tautology and will not serve Mill’s
argumentative purposes. Yet if pleasure is the name of one specific
object of desire (the wine, women, and song sense)-as it often is-then
it is certainly false that all men desire it (puritans do not) or that
it is the only desired goal. It is thus on the haziness of his central
concept that Mill founders and not on the transition from is to ought.

In the course of the previous discussion another difficulty has come
into view. Clearly, even on the best and most charitable interpretation
of the concept of the greatest happiness of the greatest number, there
are occasions where its use as a criterion would lead us to recommend
courses of action which conflict sharply with what ordinarily we think
we ought to do. A typical case was propounded by a later critic of
utiliarianism, E. F. Carritt. The hanging of an innocent man may well
redound to the public happiness if certain conditions are satisfied:
that he is publicly believed, although not by us, his would-be
executioners, to be guilty of murder, let us say, and that his execution
will act as a deterrent, preventing the deaths of sundry innocent people
in the future. Surely on a utilitarian view, we ought therefore to hang
him. There are two possible types of utilitarian response to this
criticism. The first is simply to deny that there is anything abhorrent
in the situation. Certainly, a tough-minded utilitarian might say that
this is the sort of thing that we ought sometimes to do. There is
nothing philosophically criticizable in this response when it is taken
in isolation from the rest of the case against utilitarianism. But when
this response is combined with the protean utilitarian concept of
pleasure one understands its danger. For by allowing the principle of
utility to override our existing principles-such as that a man ought not
to be hanged for a crime which he has not committed-we remove one more
barrier to using the concept of the general happiness to license any
enormity. That it can be so used has been amply demonstrated in this
century; in particular the high-minded are apt to use totalitarianism as
a justification to excuse their responsibility for involvement in the
large-scale crimes of their societies, such as Auschwitz or Hiroshima.
But, it may be objected, this is surely a moral and not a philosophical
objection to utilitarianism. To which the reply is plain: utilitarianism
which appears under the pretext of offering a criterion, among other
things, for distinguishing good and evil, is in fact offering us a
revision of those concepts, such that if we accepted it, we could allow
that no action, however vile, was evil in itself or prohibited as such.
For all actions are to be assessed in terms of their consequences, and
if the consequences of an action are going to be productive of the
general happiness, then that action, whether it is the execution of the
innocent or the murder or rape of children, would be justified. Thus
utilitarianism is a revisionary analysis of our attitudes and concepts;
and it is relevant to ask whether it would preserve what we value in
those attitudes and concepts.

A second type of response, that of Mill himself, is to argue that
utilitarianism, rightly understood, does not license actions which we
would ordinarily abhor. So Mill argues that only the maintenance of an
impartial system of justice, in which innocent and guilty receive their
deserts, could serve the general happiness; and more generally, he
argues that to allow exceptions to generally beneficial rules is to
weaken their authority and so is always to have harmful consequences.
Later utilitarians have also argued that the principle of utility is not
in all cases a criterion for judging of particular actions; rather, it
is often a criterion for judging of principles. This contention has been
argued in its most sophisticated form in terms of a distinction between
two logically distinct types of rule: summary rules, which are logically
subsequent to the actions which they prescribe or prohibit; and rules of
practice, which define classes of action and are logically prior to the
actions in question. An example of the first type of rule would be one
forbidding walking on the grass. The actions, walking or not walking on
the grass, are logically prior to any rule about so walking. An example
of the second type of rule would be that which specifies the ways in
which a batsman may be out at cricket. The concept of “being out” and
the associated actions are specifiable only in terms of the rules
defining the practices which constitute the game of cricket. The first
type of rule may be represented as a summary or generalization about
what is enjoined or prohibited in terms of some general criterion on
many particular occasions. The second type of rule cannot be so
understood. Its application on particular occasions must-logically
must-be subsequent to its general formulation. It has been argued that
if we apply this distinction to the problem posed for utilitarianism, we
see that it is only in the case of the former type of rule that the
problem can arise, but that in this case it is easily soluble. If on
many particular occasions we find that doing or refraining from doing
some particular action is productive of the greatest happiness, then we
may summarize our discovery in a general rule prescribing or prohibiting
that action. If subsequently we find a case where to do what the rule
enjoins would not be productive of the greatest happiness, then we need
have no hesitation about abandoning the rule for this occasion, because
the rule has no force or authority except that which derives from the
greatest happiness principle. But this only applies to the first type of
rule.

The second type of rule constitutes or partly constitutes a practice
which as a whole and in the long run may be justified by appeal to the
greatest happiness principle; but one cannot ask for a particular rule
to be set aside because on a particular occasion its application
violates that principle. For the rule is adhered to because of its
connection with the practice, not because directly and in itself it
promotes the greatest happiness principle. Thus it is logically
inappropriate to ask whether a particular rule in a game should be
waived on a particular occasion because its application violates the
greatest happiness principle; and it is logically inappropriate to ask
for the waiving of a particular rule of justice on a particular occasion
because the application of that rule violates the greatest happiness
principle. It is a whole system of justice which stands or falls at the
bar of the principle of utility, and not the detail of particular cases.
So the hanging of the innocent man on a particular occasion to secure a
particular deterrent is not sanctioned by a utilitarian justification of
justice after all. It is the whole practice of justice with its
systematic protection of innocence, and nothing less than that, which
receives a utilitarian justification.

Will this defense suffice? Does it succeed in showing that
utilitarianism is compatible with our ordinary belief in justice? What
it ignores is the fact that we often do waive, and regard ourselves as
justified in waiving, principles of justice in the interests of human
happiness. So someone may fail to report a crime or fail to punish a
criminal because of the effects on his family. The fact that justice is
a systematic body of practices, justifiable as a whole in utilitarian
terms, is not incompatible with there being clashes between particular
applications of the principles of justice and the application of the
greatest happiness principle. We then have to decide what weight to give
to the principles of justice, and we should not have to make such a
decision if it were entirely a matter of applying a single ultimate
principle. The value we set upon justice is not, therefore, entirely
derived from our adherence to the principle of utility.

Thus the attempt to shore up utilitarianism in this way is itself a
misconceived attempt to give a false unity to our values. That such an
attempt should be made is easily understood. The individualism of modern
society and the increasingly rapid and disruptive rate of social change
brings about a situation in which for increasing numbers there is no
over-all shape to the moral life but only a set of apparently arbitrary
principles inherited from a variety of sources. In such circumstances
the need for a public criterion for use in settling moral and evaluative
disagreements and conflicts becomes ever more urgent and ever more
difficult to meet. The utilitarian criterion, which appears to embody
the liberal ideal of happiness, is apparently without rivals, and the
fact that the concept of happiness which it embodies is so amorphous and
so adaptable makes it not less but more welcome to those who look for a
court of appeal on evaluative questions which they can be assured will
decide in their own favor.

No philosopher expressed the moral situation of nineteenth-century
England-and to some extent we are all still in the nineteenth
century-better than Henry Sidgwick. Sidgwick is a touching figure whose
defects are usually the defects of his age. He was preoccupied with the
loss of his own Christian faith in a way that is foreign to us. His
moral psychology is crude because the psychology of his time was crude.
And in his moral philosophy he mirrors his age also. For Sidgwick the
history of moral philosophy in the preceding century had centered on the
clash between utilitarianism and what he called intuitionism. By this he
meant the doctrine that moral first principles are intuitively known,
the doctrine of Price, and earlier, of Locke. Within utilitarianism
further there is the argument about the relationship between the pursuit
of my own happiness and the pursuit of the greatest happiness of the
greatest number. Sidgwick painstakingly examined all the possible ways
of assimilating intuitionism to utilitarianism, or of bridging the gap
between the goals of private and public happiness. But in the end there
remain three distinct sources of morality. Sidgwick’s account of the
methods of ethics misses questions beyond those which he explicitly
discusses. The background to his account is the moral consciousness of
his day, taken as given. Philosophy appears as essentially a clarifying
rather than a critical activity. In this respect Sidgwick’s is a ghost
that haunts much recent writing. In his acceptance of the utilitarian
consciousness of his own age he contrasts sharply with his
contemporaries T. H. Green and F. H. Bradley.

Green and Bradley are often classed together as Oxford idealists; it is
important however to remember that the classing of them together in this
way is the work of their later critics. They themselves worked
independently, and the similarities in their writings are the result of
the similarity of their self-set tasks. Both were keen students of Kant
and Hegel; both wish to find materials in Kant and Hegel with which to
carry through a criticism of Hume and Mill. Both draw on Greek
philosophy as well as on German. But Green was perhaps influenced by
Rousseau as much as by any other author, while there is little trace of
Rousseau in Bradley. And Green’s philosophical preoccupations were
intimately related to his commitments to social and educational reform
whereas Bradley was a philosophical recluse.

Both Green and Bradley break with the individualism of utilitarianism.
The utilitarian picture of society is of a collection of individuals,
each with his own determinate desires and his consequent goals. The
shared aims and norms of society are a product of the compromises and
agreements of individuals: the public good is a sum total of private
goods. Both Green and Bradley break with this picture, whether in its
utilitarian or its social contract forms. Both recognize that the
individual discovers his aims and his desires from within a set of
rule-governed relationships to others. He finds himself through, he
identifies himself by means of, a set of relationships through which
goals are partly specified for him. The individual then has his choices
to make; he can appraise his own desires in a variety of ways. But his
nature, including his desires, is not presocial.

If this argument were pursued, it would have to press the question of
the relationship of morality to the social framework more seriously and
in detail. Both Green and Bradley, however, place the individual not
merely in a social, but in a metaphysical context. Or rather, they
appear to perform social analysis in a highly metaphysical style. To
make clear what this means, it is necessary to follow through the key
themes of each in turn. Bradley, for example, poses the question, Why
should I be moral?, a question which he uses as the title of one of his
Ethical Studies, only to reply that, as it stands, the question is
improper. For it suggests that there is an end beyond morality, to which
the exercise of moral virtue is only a means. But from within the moral
consciousness we can discern that morality does have an end, an end not
beyond morality but constituted by morality itself in its highest
achievement, the realization of the self as a whole. I realize my self
as a whole through actions which express the stirring of the self to be
something better and higher than it is already, so that the principles
to which I aspire to conform come to be the principles expressed in my
actual behavior. In any situation of choice between alternatives, I
realize my self, first, insofar as I am aware of myself independently of
the two alternatives and confronting them; and second, in
self-consciously choosing one alternative and identifying myself with
it, whereby I bring the whole self into being in concrete form. This
Bradley calls “the concrete universal,” the judgment of universal import
made concrete in the realized activity of the concrete individual.

The self develops to the point at which it realizes itself completely by
identifying itself as a part in an infinite whole and so transcending
its own finite bounds. “The difficulty is being limited and so not a
whole, how to extend myself so as to be a whole? The answer is, be a
member in a whole. Here your private self, your finitude ceases as such
to exist; it becomes the function of an organism. You must be, not a
mere piece of, but a member in, a whole; and as this, must know and will
yourself.”

What is the whole in which the individual self must realize itself? We
get, not a completely coherent answer to this question, but at least
part of an answer in a later chapter of Ethical Studies, “My Station and
Its Duties.” Bradley had already, in previous essays, attacked the view
that the end which the moral consciousness places before us can be
either pleasure or duty for its own sake. His grounds for breaking with
Benthamite utilitarianism and with Kantianism are partly different and
partly the same. He argues, for example, that pleasure supervenes upon a
desired end, and so cannot be the end; and he argues that on the Kantian
view duty is proposed as an end for a self which is constituted by
desires and inclinations such that duty can have no interest for it,
cannot be an end for it. But in both cases he argues that the end
proposed is too general and abstract; the formulas of Kant and Bentham
alike try to bring the multifarious ends which men in different
circumstances and at different times pursue under a single
characterization, and in so doing, they present a formula which is in
effect contentless. Because it includes anything which a man might
pursue, it identifies nothing which he must pursue, if he is to be true
to the deliverances of his moral consciousness.

The end which Bradley lays down is that of finding my station and
carrying out its duties. These duties will be specific and concrete.
Bradley allows that I may have some choice of what station in life to
fill; but once I have chosen some station, the question of what duties
attach to it is not a matter of choice. That this is so is of some
importance, for it is only insofar as the end is an objective end, and
not one chosen by me, that I can hope to realize my individuality
through it. What Bradley means by this is not entirely clear, but he is
partly making the substantial point that any criteria by which I am to
judge of my own moral progress must be criteria whose authority derives
from something other than my own choices. For if my own choice is all
that is authoritative, I am in the end playing an arbitrary
self-enclosed game, a variety of spiritual patience in which if the
cards will not come out the first time, I can, if I choose, allow myself
a indefinitely large number of reshufflings. Moreover, to fill my
station in life, I can utilize every part of my nature; the Kantian
divide between duty and inclination is overcome.

What Bradley is presupposing rather than asserting here is that the
moral vocabulary can only be given a coherent sense in the context of a
form of social life with well-defined roles and functions, and one,
moreover, in which men live out the substance of their lives in terms of
those roles and functions. But is there such a society any more?
Sociologists have often emphasized the difference between a modern
individualist society in which a man’s life and status can be distinct
from his various roles and functions and earlier more integrated forms
of society in which a man might fill his station in life in much the way
that Bradley envisages. That Bradley is able not to raise this type of
question is perhaps due to his ability to pass into a metaphysical style
of speech in which it is the nature of reality as such, and nothing
less, that guarantees his thesis about morality.

This is less true, but it is still true, of T. H. Green. Green is more
self-consciously aware that his moral views require a certain kind of
society. But his metaphysical mode enables him to pass from the view
that society ought to be the locus of a rational general will of a
Rousseauesque kind to the view that at bottom this is what society
really is. Green is more socially aware than Bradley because of his own
political involvement. He came on the philosophical scene as an educator
in a period when liberal young men of the ruling class, morally earnest
as a result of their training in evangelical homes and by Arnoldian
schoolmasters, who could not imbibe the romantic Toryism of Disraeli,
were looking for a frame that would lend meaning to their lives. Green’s
Balliol pupils carried into the civil service, the church, politics,
into the cabinet itself-one of them was a Liberal prime minister-a
belief that liberal individualism could be overcome within a liberal
framework. Green was the apostle of state intervention in matters of
social welfare and of education; he was able to be so because he could
see in the state an embodiment of that higher self the realization of
which is our moral aim.

Green’s Prolegomena to Ethics rests its argument on an extended analysis
of human nature, designed to show that human existence is not wholly
explicable in terms of the laws of nature. Reflection on the purposive
and self-conscious character of human existence reveals to us the
awareness of ourselves as intelligent beings, and members of a society
of intelligent beings, whose final satisfaction cannot be anything
merely physical or perishable. What, then, is the human good? We know it
only in part, because our faculties for realizing it are themselves only
partly realized. But the contemporary moral consciousness is a record of
our highest achievement of it to date. Kant was right in thinking that
the one unconditional good is the good will; but wrong in his too
abstract characterization of it. The good will is manifested in the
desire to transcend the existing moral consciousness in the creation of
a greater good; and every expression of the good will is the creation of
a form of life specifiable along the lines of “the Greek classification
on the virtues.” The good will is defined as “the will to know what is
true, to make what is beautiful, to endure pain and fear, to resist the
allurements of pleasure, in the interest of some form of human society.”

Green’s specification of the good in terms of a form of social life,
even if his own specification is a highly abstract one, enables him at
least to avoid the individualist puzzles over egoism and altruism. “The
idea of a true good does not admit of the distinction between good for
self and good for others,” precisely because it consists of a form of
social life in which different individuals play out their parts. The
individual finds his good through a form of life which exists prior to
himself.

Yet is Green describing at this point what actually happens? Clearly
not. Is he specifying an ideal state of affairs which ought to be
brought into existence? Only partly, for he believes the ideal to be
implicit in the actual. Like Bradley, he makes it clear that the moral
vocabulary cannot be understood except against the background of a
certain kind of social life; like Bradley, his metaphysical style
enables him to evade the question of the relation between that form of
social life and social life as it actually is lived out in
nineteenth-century western Europe. But at least Bradley and Green force
these questions upon us. Their immediate twentieth-century successors
were to write as if morality, and with it, moral philosophy existed
apart from all specific social forms.

CHAPTER 18: MODERN MORAL PHILOSOPHY
===================================

MODERN MORAL PHILOSOPHY opens on a quietly apocalyptic note. Moral
philosophers, it is explained, have hitherto failed to answer the
questions which they posed satisfactorily, because they have failed to
be clear about the questions themselves. In particular they have failed
to distinguish between the questions, What kind of actions ought we to
perform? and, What kind of things ought to exist for their own sake? The
distinction is made at last, or so it is proclaimed, in the preface to
G. E. Moore’s Principia Ethica. The implication is that the problems
will now be solved. The date is 1903.

The answer to the question, What kind of actions ought we to perform? is
those “which will cause more good to exist in the universe than any
possible kind of alternative. We are thus brought to ask what states of
affairs are good, what kind of things ought to exist for their own sake.
Moore takes it that the things which ought to exist for their own sake
are those which we call intrinsically good. How do we know what is
intrinsically good? The answer is that we cannot fail to recognize the
property of intrinsic goodness when confronted with it. Propositions
concerning what is intrinsically good-as contrasted with what is good
only because it is a means to something intrinsically good-are
susceptible neither of proof nor of disproof. This is because good is
the name of a simple, unanalyzable property, which Moore calls
“non-natural” because it cannot be identified with any natural property.
Moore holds that good is indefinable, partly in virtue of an analogy
which he propounds between good and yellow, and partly by reason of an
argument about the consequences of holding good to be definable. But
both the analogy and the argument depend in part on the curious sense
which he assigns to definition. To define, he holds, is to break up a
complex whole into its constituent parts. So the definition of horse
will be a statement to the effect that it has four legs, a head, a
heart, a liver, etc., all of them arranged in definite relations to one
another. (Moore recognizes other senses of definition, but deliberately
puts them on one side.) Now if this is what is meant by definition, it
is not difficult to agree that good is indefinable, but this sense of
definition is so idiosyncratic that nothing has been gained. Moore also
tries to reinforce his case by an appeal to what we allegedly must
recognize when we hold a given notion “before” our minds. He says that
if we consider good and, let us say, pleasant, or any other notion with
which we might be tempted to confuse good, we can see that we “have two
different notions before our minds.” This technique of holding one’s
concepts up to the light, as it were, is reinforced by Moore’s method of
calm assertion. More unwarranted and unwarrantable assertions are
perhaps made in Principia Ethica than in any other single book of moral
philosophy, but they are made with such well-mannered, although slightly
browbeating certitude, that it seems almost gross to disagree. But what,
then, is Moore’s case?

Moore originally rests his analogy between yellow and good on his notion
of definition. “Yellow and good, we say, are not complex: they are
nations out of which definitions are composed and with which the power
of further defining comes.” Moreover, just as we cannot identify the
meaning of yellow with the physical properties of the light which
produces the effect of seeing yellow, so we cannot identify the meaning
of good with the particular natural properties which are associated with
good. It might be the case that anything “good” was pleasant, just as
all yellow light is of a certain wavelength, but it does not follow that
good means what pleasant means, any more than it follows that yellow
means the same as “light of a certain wave length.”

Moore’s one genuine argument is used to show that good cannot be the
name of any complex whole. Of any such whole, however defined, we can
always significantly ask whether it is itself good. This argument can be
deployed not only against the attempt to define good as the name of a
complex, but also against the attempt to define it at all. Suppose that
I do identify good with pleasant. My mistake can be exhibited by showing
that I can always significantly ask of pleasure or of anything pleasant,
Is it good? But if good named the same property that pleasant names, to
ask, Is what is pleasant good? would be equivalent to asking, Is what is
pleasant pleasant?-that is, it would be vacuously tautologous.

Moore frames this argument in order to refute hedonists, whom he
conceives to hold two incompatible positions: they hold that pleasure is
good, indeed the good, in a significant, nontautological sense; and they
claim to demonstrate this by urging that good means nothing other than
what pleasant means. But the first position requires that “pleasure is
good” be taken to be analytic. Yet it cannot be both. So the hedonist
position collapses. But, of course, it only collapses for those
hedonists unwise enough to attempt to hold both these positions.

The philosophers whom Moore chiefly criticizes are J. S. Mill and
Herbert Spencer. In the case of Mill, Moore’s criticisms are
misdirected, if only because he reads into Mill a definition of good as
meaning pleasant, whereas all that Mill at the most says is that
pleasure provides us with our only criterion of goodness. It is by now
almost a commonplace to recognize that Moore misrepresented Mill; it is
a measure of the extent to which contemporary philosophers read Mill,
but do not read Spencer, that it goes unrecognized that Moore also
misrepresented Spencer. Moore accuses Spencer of having thought that
good meant the same as “more evolved.” Spencer’s however was a far more
complex, if quite implausible, position. Spencer held, first, that human
society has evolved, just as the human species evolved, and indeed that
the evolution of species and of society can be placed on a single
continuous scale. Secondly, he believed that the higher a society is
upon this scale the more ideal its morality; and thirdly, that conduct
tends more and more toward the end of preserving life, it being assumed
that in life there is, especially as one ascends toward the ideal, more
pleasure than pain. As with Mill, Spencer may in unguarded moments have
given the impression that he was defining the moral vocabulary. But the
real Herbert Spencer is as far from being Moore’s straw man as is the
real J. S. Mill.62

To the doctrine that good was the name of a natural property Moore gave
the name “the naturalistic fallacy.” For Moore this fallacy is committed
in the course of any attempt to treat good as the name of a property
identifiable under any other description. Good cannot mean “commanded by
God,” any more than it can mean pleasant, and for the same reasons the
expression “the naturalistic fallacy” has since been adopted by the
adherents of the view that one cannot logically derive an ought from an
is; but although this latter doctrine is a consequence of Moore’s, it is
not identical with it.

Is good, then, the name of a simple, unanalyzable property? To the
doctrine that it is, there are at least two conclusive objections. The
first is that we can only use the name of a simple property intelligibly
where we are acquainted with some standard example of the property by
reference to which we are to recognize whether it is present or absent
in other cases. In the case of a simple property like yellow we can use
standard examples of the color to recognize other cases of yellow. But
how could having learned to recognize a good friend help us to recognize
a good watch? Yet if Moore is right, the same simple property is present
in both cases. To this, a disciple of Moore might reply that we are
confusing the question by our example. A good watch is not
“intrinsically” good. But how, then, do we recognize the intrinsically
good? The only answer Moore offers is that we just do. Or put this point
another way: Moore’s account could only reach the level of
intelligibility if it were supplemented by an account of how the meaning
of good is learned, and an account of the relation between learning it
in connection with some cases, and knowing how to apply it in others.

The second objection is that Moore’s account leaves it entirely
unexplained and inexplicable why something’s being good should ever
furnish us with a reason for action. The analogy with yellow is as much
a difficulty for his thesis at this point as it is an aid to him
elsewhere. One can imagine a connoisseur with a special taste for yellow
objects to whom something’s being yellow would furnish him with a reason
for acquiring it; but something’s being “good” can hardly be supposed to
furnish a reason for action only to those with a connoisseur’s interest
in goodness. Any account of good that is to be adequate must connect it
intimately with action, and explain why to call something good is always
to provide a reason for acting in respect of it in one way rather than
another.

That it does connect good with action is the chief virtue of the other
seminal moral philosophy of the twentieth century, that of John Dewey.
For Dewey the chief trap in all epistemology is the tendency to abstract
our knowledge both from the methods by which we acquired it and from the
uses to which we may put it. We only acquired whatever knowledge we have
now because we had certain purposes, and the point of that knowledge is
for us inseparable from our future purposes. All reason is practical
reason. Moral knowledge is not a separate branch of knowledge; it is
simply the knowledge we have-in physics, biology, history, or what you
will-considered in relation to those purposes. To characterize something
as good is to say that it will provide us with satisfaction in our
purposes. As means or as end? As both, and Dewey is concerned to
emphasize what he takes to be the interrelated character of
good-as-a-means and good-as-an-end. We are as far as it is possible to
be from Moore’s concept of the “intrinsically good” with its sharp
separation of means and ends. Dewey concentrates on the agent, while
Moore concentrates on the spectator. Dewey almost obliterates the
distinction between fact and value, between is and ought, while Moore
emphasizes it. Dewey thinks that in making choices we are guided by
considerations which we express in statements of an ordinary empirical
kind, statements which presuppose the direction of the agent’s purposes
and interests, but which do not differ from, which in fact are the
statements of our empirical studies. That Dewey has not been more
influential, particularly in England, is perhaps explicable by the fact
that he so seldom attends explicitly to the problem which has been at
the center of Anglo-Saxon moral philosophy in this century, that of the
meaning of moral predicates And where Dewey did exert a major influence
it was indirectly, in a discussion that stemmed from Moore.

Moore’s immediate heirs were of two kinds. There were those who carried
on moral philosophy of the same type as Moore’s, the so-called
intuitionists, such as Prichard, Ross, and Carritt. It ought to be
emphasized both that these writers did not in fact acquire their views
from Moore, but independently, and that the value of their writings is
not only a matter of how cogently they presented their own views.
Carritt, for example, will be remembered for his power as a critic of
utilitarianism (as well as for his writings on aesthetics). This
particular succession of writers was ushered in by a text as dramatic in
its way as Principia Ethica: a paper by H. A. Prichard in 1912, entitled
“Does Moral Philosophy Rest upon a Mistake?” Prichard takes the task
which moral philosophy has set itself to be that of providing a reason
or justification for holding that something which we take to be our duty
is indeed our duty. But he argues that the demand for such a reason or
justification is utterly misconceived. In defense of this position he
offers in effect two sorts of reason. I may try to justify the view that
something is my duty by showing that it is to my interest or would lead
to my happiness. But if this is what provides me with a reason, then I
am not treating whatever I take my duty to be as a duty at all. For what
I do because it is to my interest, I thereby do not do as a duty. Or I
may try to justify the view that something is my duty by showing that to
perform it would be to produce some good. But-so Prichard says-that
something is good does not entail that it is obligatory on me to bring
it about. This first kind of argument starts from a list of what
Prichard presumably takes to be the only possible types of alleged
justification. His second consists in appeals to that of which we are
all alleged to be conscious. The apprehension of duty is said to be
immediate and unquestionable, and therefore not to be supported by
reasons.

Prichard’s outstanding characteristic, and one which he shares with
Moore as well as with other intuitionists, is the treatment of good,
right, duty, obligatory, and the rest of the moral vocabulary as though
it was a coinage of permanently fixed values and simple scrutiny. It is
doubtless because of this that the proportion of assertion to argument
is so high in Prichard. In other intuitionist writers, such as Sir David
Ross, who holds that we have independent intuitions of “rightness” and
“goodness,” the standards of argument are much higher. But all
intuitionist writers suffer from one difficulty: they are, on their own
view, telling us only about what we all know already. That they
sometimes disagree about what it is that we all know already only makes
them less boring at the cost of making them even less convincing.

The two most powerful critics of intuitionism were R. G. Collingwood and
A. J. Ayer. Collingwood, whose attack extended to many other recent
writers in ethics, attacked them for their lack of historical sense, for
their tendency to treat Plato, Kant, and themselves as contributors to a
single discussion with a single subject matter and a permanent and
unchanging vocabulary. They are, he says in his Autobiography, like men
who translate the Greek word τριήρης by steamship, and when it is
pointed out to them that the characteristics which Greek writers assign
to the τριήρης are not at all the characteristics of a steamship, they
reply that this just shows what odd and mistaken ideas about steamships
Greek writers held. We ought rather, according to Collingwood in the
Autobiography, to understand moral and other concepts in terms of a
developing historical sequence. What this might entail I shall consider
later in this chapter.

Ayer’s critique of intuitionism has quite different roots. In Language,
Truth, and Logic he revived some of Hume’s positions, but did so in the
context of a logical-positivist theory of knowledge. So moral judgments
are understood in terms of a threefold classification of judgments:
logical, factual, and emotive. In the first class come the truths of
logic and mathematics, which are held to be analytic; in the second come
the empirically verifiable or falsifiable truths of the sciences and of
common-sense knowledge of fact. The third class necessarily appears as a
residual category, a rag-bag to which whatever is not logic or science
is consigned. Both ethics and theology find themselves in this category,
a fact in itself sufficient to make us suspicious of the classification.
For on the face of it, statements about the intentions and deeds of an
omnipotent being and judgments about duty or about what is good do not
obviously belong together. We can, however, easily detach the emotive
theory of moral judgment from this dubious classification; all that we
need retain from it is the contrast between the factual and the emotive.
In this form the most powerful exponent of emotivism has been C. L.
Stevenson. Stevenson’s writing exhibits many influences, above all,
those of both Moore and Dewey, and his position can perhaps be most
easily expounded by returning to Moore.

I said earlier that Moore had two kinds of heirs, the first of whom were
the intuitionists. What the intuitionists continue is the philosophical
appeal to what we all are alleged to recognize in moral matters. But
Moore himself was, above all, anxious to clear up the philosophical
confusions over the concept of goodness so that he could proceed to a
second task, that of saying which things are, in fact, good. In his
chapter on conduct he makes it clear that right action is valuable only
as a means to what is good. In his chapter on The Ideal, Moore tells us
what is good. “Once the meaning of the question is clearly understood
the answer to it, in its main outlines, appears to be so obvious, that
it runs the risk of seeming to be a platitude. By far the most valuable
things which we know or can imagine, are certain states of consciousness
which may be roughly described as the pleasures of human intercourse and
the enjoyment of beautiful objects.” J. M. Keynes has described for us
how this view of the supremacy of personal relationships and of the
beautiful broke upon the generation immediately younger than Moore with
all the force of a revelation. Almost half a century later Keynes could
write: “I see no reason to shift from the fundamental intuitions of
Principia Ethica; though they are much too few and too narrow to fit
actual experience. That they furnish a justification of experience
wholly independent of outside events has become an added comfort, even
though one cannot live today secure in the undisturbed individualism
which was the extraordinary achievement of the early Edwardian days.” It
all depended, of course, on who “one” was and to which social class one
belonged. The values which Moore exalts belong to the realm of private
rather than public life; and, supremely important as they are, they
exclude all the values connected with intellectual inquiry and with
work. Moore’s values are those of a protected leisure, though it is in
what he excludes rather than in what he does value that the parochial
and classbound character of his attitudes appears. It is worth
commenting on this feature of Moore’s views simply to emphasize the fact
that they are not, as he apparently supposed, beyond controversy. For
Moore combines highly controversial moral views with an appeal to the
evidence of simple recognition in order to establish them. Keynes, in
the memoir, quoted earlier, My Early Beliefs, gives us a penetrating
account of the consequent behavior of Moore’s disciples. They would
compare alternative possible situations and solemnly inquire in which
there was most good, inspecting each in turn and comparing them. They
would then announce what they “saw.”

In an extremely homogeneous group, like that of Moore’s immediate
disciples, the congruence between what different people “see” is likely
to be fairly high. But the arrival of D. H. Lawrence on the scene, who
reacted against the attitudes of this group with all the passion at his
disposal, might have made them aware that if challenged on their
valuations, their own position allowed them no use for argument, but
only for reinspection and reassertion. Since there is in fact no simple,
nonnatural property which good names, the whole process is merely an
elaborate game of bluff. And it would not be unfair to remark that what
this group did was to invoke Moore’s philosophical theory in order to
endow their own expressions of attitude with an authority which those
expressions would not otherwise have possessed.

“But if there is no such property as Moore supposes, then all they can
be doing is to express their own feelings.” Perhaps in some such
reaction to Moore lies one of the seeds of emotivism. Moore himself
staked everything on the appeal to objectivity. In an argument which he
used in an essay written after Principia Ethica he contended that moral
judgments cannot be reports of our feelings, for if they were, two men
who uttered apparently contradictory judgments upon a moral issue would
not in fact be disagreeing. A man who said, “You ought to do X” would no
more be disagreeing with a man who said, “You ought not to do X” than
would someone who said, “I stacked my hay yesterday” be disagreeing with
someone else who said, “I didn’t stack my hay yesterday.” To which
argument Stevenson’s reply was that two men who disagree on a moral
question need not be involved in any factual disagreement; they need
only be involved in disagreement on the facts of the case; the issue
between them at this level can be settled by an empirical inquiry. But
they may further disagree in their attitudes; and this disagreement can
only be resolved by one party changing his attitude. The primary
function of moral words, according to Stevenson, is to redirect the
attitudes of others so that they accord more fully with our own.

In concentrating on the dynamic function of moral words, Stevenson shows
the influence of Dewey, and it is through Stevenson mainly that Dewey
influenced later moral philosophers.

Moral words are able to have this dynamic function of which Stevenson
speaks because they are emotive. “The emotive meaning of a word is the
tendency of a word, arising through the history of its usage to produce
(result from) affective responses in people.” Ayer, in his version of
the emotive theory, concentrated upon my expression of my own feelings
and attitudes; Stevenson, in his, concentrates upon my attempt to
influence your feelings and attitudes. As to what the key moral words
mean, Stevenson offers two models, stressing in each case that the
nature of emotive meaning is such that we cannot hope to arrive at more
than a rough approximation. His first model is one in which “This is
good” is elucidated as roughly equivalent to “I like this. Do so as
well.” In his second model he attends to those expressions which embody
what he names “persuasive definitions.” Such expressions have a
descriptive meaning, and they associate with that meaning an emotive
one; we can thus always analyze them into two component elements. Two
men in controversy may, for example, use just in such a way that each
associates different descriptive meanings with the emotive element in
the meaning of that word.

Stevenson’s view of moral expressions leads to a number of other
positions. It follows from his view, for example, that for good and for
other evaluative expressions no complete definition in descriptive terms
can ever be given. Thus Stevenson agrees with Moore that good cannot
function as the name of a natural (empirically descriptive) property.
The facts are logically divorced from the evaluations for Stevenson as
much as for Moore. Secondly, Stevenson commits himself to the view that
philosophical ethics is a morally neutral activity. The doctrines that
we hold about the meaning of moral expressions cannot commit us to any
particular moral view. Clearly the emotive theory itself, if true, does
appear, at least on the surface, to be morally neutral. For presumably
we can use emotive words to commend any class of actions whatsoever.
Moreover, if Stevenson is right, evaluative disagreement may always be
interminable. There is no limit to the possibilities of disagreement,
and there is and can be no set of procedures for the resolution of
disagreements. It is not surprising that this should be a consequence of
Stevenson’s position, since he himself initially laid it down as one of
the prerequisites for a successful theory that it should provide for
disagreement to be interminable. Finally, on Stevenson’s view, the
reasons which we cite to support our evaluative, and more specifically,
our moral judgments cannot stand in any logical relationship to the
conclusions which we derive from them. They can only be psychological
reinforcements. It follows that words like because and therefore do not
function as they do in other parts of discourse.

The difficulties which can be raised about emotivism are of several
different kinds. The notion of “emotive meaning” is itself not clear.
What makes certain statements guides to, or directives of, action is not
that they have any meaning over and above a factual or descriptive one.
It is that their utterance on a specific occasion has import for, or
relevance to, the speaker or hearer’s interests, desires, or needs. “The
White House is on fire” does not have any more or less meaning when
uttered in a news broadcast in London than it does when uttered as a
warning to the President in bed, but its function as a guide to action
is quite different. Emotivism, that is, does not attend sufficiently to
the distinction between the meaning of a statement which remains
constant between different uses, and the variety of uses to which one
and the same statement can be put. (Of course, meaning and possible
range of use are intimately related; but they are not the same.)

Moreover, not only does Stevenson tend to conflate meaning and use, but,
the primary use which he assigns to moral expressions is not, and cannot
be, their primary use. For the use to which he attends is the
second-person use in which we try to move other people to adopt our own
views. Stevenson’s examples all picture a thoroughly unpleasant world in
which everyone is always trying to get at everyone else. But in fact one
is only in a position to try to convert others to one’s own moral views
when one has formed views of one’s own; yet none of those uses of moral
language which are necessary to the formation and expression of one’s
views with an eye to one’s own actions figure in Stevenson’s initial
account.

Finally, one can justifiably complain of the emotive theory not only
that it is mistaken, but also that it is opaque. For its proponents seek
to elucidate moral expressions in terms of the notions of attitudes and
feelings, and it is relevant to ask for further characterization of the
attitudes and feelings in question. How, for example, are we to identify
these attitudes and feelings so that we may distinguish them from other
attitudes and feelings? Emotivist writers are, in fact, largely silent
on this point; but the suspicion is strong that they would be compelled
to characterize the attitudes and feelings under discussion as just
those attitudes and feelings which are given their definitive expression
in acts of moral judgment. Yet if this is so, the whole theory is
imprisoned in uninformative circularity.

Nonetheless, some of its central features are preserved by its immediate
successors. The moral neutrality of philosophical analysis, the logical
gap between fact and value, the interminality of disagreement all remain
upon the scene. What is altered in later writers is the attention paid
to two intimately related topics, the question of the criteria which are
employed in calling things, acts, or people good or bad, and the
question in the nature of moral reasoning. If I call something good or
commend it in some other way, I can always be asked upon what criterion
I am relying. If I say that I ought to do something, I can always be
asked, And what if you do not? and, On account of what ought you to do
it? What is the relation between my answers to these questions and my
beliefs as to what is good and as to what I ought to do?

One systematic answer to these questions is to be found in R. M. Hare’s
The Language of Morals, and his views are added to and further
elucidated in Freedom and Reason. Hare specifies the nature of moral
language by means of an initial distinction between prescriptive and
descriptive language. Prescriptive language is imperatival, in that it
tells us to do this or that. It is itself subdivided into two classes,
that comprising imperatives in the ordinary sense, and that comprising
properly evaluative expressions. All value judgments are practical, but
in different ways. Ought sentences, for example, if they are genuinely
evaluative, entail imperatives addressed to anyone in the relevant
situation, and anyone here includes the person who utters the sentence.
The criterion of uttering the ought sentence sincerely is that, on the
relevant occasion and if the speaker can, he does in fact act in
obedience to the imperative entailed by the ought which he utters to
himself. Good, by contrast, is used to commend; to call X good is to say
that it is the kind of X we should choose if we wanted an X. The
criteria which I employ in calling something good are criteria which, if
I am engaged in genuine evaluations, I have chosen, and which I endorse
by my very use of them. Evaluative expressions and moral rules are thus
both expressions of the agent’s fundamental choices. But the role of
choice in Hare’s prescriptivism is far clearer and far less
objectionable than the role of attitudes or feelings was in emotivism.
Unlike the latter, it does not preclude the use of argument in morals.

Hare was, in fact, a pioneer in the logical investigation of
imperatives. He pointed out that in imperatival discourse, conclusions
can follow from premises in a perfectly straightforward way, violating
none of the ordinary rules of entailment. Because and therefore carry
their usual meanings, and genuine moral argument is possible. But, so
Hare further holds, the meaning of evaluative prescriptive expressions
is such that no evaluative or prescriptive conclusion can follow from
premises which do not include at least one evaluative or prescriptive
premise. In other words, Hare reiterates the thesis that no ought
follows merely from is. So far as the doctrine of The Language of Morals
goes, it seemed to follow that the pattern of moral argument is a
transition from a moral major premise and a factual minor premise to a
moral conclusion. Wherever I appear to pass from fact to value (“I ought
to help this man because he is starving”), there is a gap in the
argument, a concealed major premise (“I ought to help the starving”).
This major premise itself may figure as the conclusion of some other
syllogism, but at some point the chain of reasoning must terminate in a
principle which I cannot justify by further argument, but to which I
must simply commit myself by choice. Once more it seems to follow, as it
did with emotivism, that on matters of ultimate principle, assertion
cannot be met by argument but only by counterassertion.

In Freedom and Reason, Hare argued that this was not entailed by his
view; that the universalizability of moral judgments provides an
argumentative weapon against those who hold unacceptable moral
principles. For of a man who holds, for example, that other men ought to
be treated in certain unpleasant ways merely because their skins are
black, we can always ask, Are you then prepared to allow that you should
be treated in the same way if your skin were black? And Hare believes
that only a minority, whom he denominates fanatics, would be prepared to
accept the consequences of replying Yes to this. This last contention is
a question of fact on which I believe that recent social history does
not bear Hare out. But I do not want to quarrel with this part of Hare’s
view so much as to emphasize that it still remains true on Hare’s view
that, as a matter of logic and of the concepts involved, what I call
good and what I hold I ought to do depend upon my choice of fundamental
evaluations, and that there is no logical limit to what evaluations I
may choose. In other words, Hare’s prescriptivism is, in the end, a
reissue of the view that behind my moral evaluations there is not and
cannot be any greater authority than that of my own choices. To
understand evaluative concepts is to understand that our use of these
concepts does not of itself commit us to any particular set of moral
beliefs. The criteria for true belief in matters of fact are independent
of our choices; but our evaluations are governed by no criteria but
those which we ourselves choose to impose upon them. This is a
repetition of Kant’s view of the moral subject as lawgiver; but it makes
him an arbitrary sovereign who is the author of the law that he utters,
and who constitutes it law by uttering it in the form of a universal
prescription.

An ambiguity in Hare’s whole enterprise, an ambiguity pointed out by
Mary Warnock,63 becomes important here. When Hare characterizes
evaluation and prescription, is he in fact defining these terms in such
a way as to protect his thesis against possible counterexamples? If we
produce an example of ought which does not entail a first-person
imperative, or an example of good in which the criteria are not a matter
of choice, will Hare be able to reply that these are simply
nonprescriptive and nonevaluative uses of ought and good? Hare certainly
recognizes that there are some nonprescriptive and nonevaluative uses.
But if he has simply legislated so that evaluation and prescription
shall be what he says they are, why should we assent to his legislation?
If he is not legislating, then we must have the class of evaluative and
prescriptive expressions delimited for us independently of Hare’s
characterization, in a way that Hare himself never delimits it. He seems
indeed to rely on an almost intuitive understanding of what is to be
included or left out of the class of evaluative expressions.

Why is this important? It is important partly because Philippa Foot64
and Peter Geach65 have challenged Hare with primafacie convincing
counterexamples. Philippa Foot’s attention has been concentrated on
evaluative expressions connected with the virtues and vices, such as
rude and courageous; Geach’s on good and evil. The criteria for the
correct application of rude and courageous are, so Mrs. Foot argues,
factual. If certain factual conditions are fulfilled, this is sufficient
to show that these epithets apply and their application could only be
withheld by someone who failed to understand their meaning. So if a man
at a concert spits in the face of an acquaintance whom he knows slightly
and who has done nothing hostile to him, then he is certainly rude.
Equally, if a man with a reasonable prospect of saving the lives of
others by sacrificing his own does sacrifice his own life, he is
certainly courageous. But in each of these cases, when we show that the
necessary and sufficient conditions apply to justify the epithet, we
could rewrite what we say so that the necessary and sufficient
conditions appear as premises which in virtue of the meaning of rude or
courageous entail the conclusion “So he was rude” or “So he was
courageous.” But if any conclusions are evaluative, these are. Thus some
factual premises do appear to entail evaluative conclusions.

Equally, it is clear that in many cases at least where I call something
or someone good, the appropriate criteria are determined by the kind of
case it is and are not open to choice. The criteria for calling
something “a good X” depend, as Geach has pointed out, on the nature of
X. “A good watch,” “a good farmer,” “a good horse,” are cases in point.
But what about “a good man”? Here surely, it might be argued, we do use
a variety of criteria and we have to choose between them. Here surely,
an argument like Hare’s is the convincing one. I do not want to pursue
this as yet unfinished argument further; I want rather to inquire what
sort of argument it is, and why it arises.

It is important to see that a whole range of interconnected differences
of view are involved here. On the one side, it is held that facts can
never entail evaluations, that philosophical inquiry is neutral between
evaluations, that the only authority which moral views possess is that
which we as individual agents give to them. This view is the final
conceptualization of the individualism which has had recurrent mention
in this history: the individual becomes his own final authority in the
most extreme possible sense. On the alternative view, to understand our
central evaluative and moral concepts is to recognize that there are
certain criteria we cannot but acknowledge. The authority of those
standards is one that we have to recognize, but of which we are in no
way the originators. Philosophical inquiry, which reveals this, is
therefore not morally neutral. And factual premises do on occasion
entail evaluative conclusions.

Each view systematically insulates itself from the other by its choice
of examples. And neither will allow that the issue between them could be
settled by an empirical inquiry into the way in which evaluative
concepts are actually used. For each is quite prepared to allow that the
ordinary usage in morals may on occasion be confused, or indeed
perverted, through the influence of misleading philosophical theory.
Perhaps, however, this controversy is one that cannot be settled, and
perhaps the reason why it cannot be settled can be seen if we try to
place in historical perspective the concepts which generate it. But
before we can do that we must consider certain very unsophisticated
points which locate this controversy as one not merely for philosophers,
but for all contemporary moral agents.

Emotivism and prescriptivism initially alienate us because their
explanations of evaluative language in terms of the notions of feelings,
liking, choice, and imperatives leave us asking why there should exist
any specifically evaluative language over and above the ordinary
language of feelings, liking, choice, and imperatives. When I say, “You
ought to do this,” or when I say, “This is good,” I want to protest that
I say more and other than, “You or anyone else-do this!” or, “I like
this. Do so as well.” For if that is what I mean, that is what I could
and would say. If that is what I do say, then certainly what I say will
have no authority but that which I confer upon it by uttering it. My
attitudes and my imperatives have authority for me just because they are
mine. But when I invoke words such as ought and good I at least seek to
appeal to a standard which has other and more authority. If I use these
words to you, I seek to appeal to you in the name of those standards and
not in my own name. Yet even though this may be what I seek to do, it
does not necessarily follow that I succeed. Under what conditions might
I succeed? Under what conditions must I fail?

Suppose a society of the kind which I tried to characterize when I
discussed Greek society, in which the form of life presupposes agreement
on ends. Here there are agreed criteria for the use of good, not only
when we speak of “good horse” and “good farmer” but also when we speak
of “good man.” In this society there is a recognized list of virtues, an
established set of moral rules, an institutionalized connection between
obedience to rules, the practice of virtues, and the attainment of ends.
In such a society the contrast between evaluative language and the
language of liking or of choice will be quite clear. I may tell you what
I like or choose, and I may tell you what you ought to do; but the
second makes a claim upon you which the first does not. You may
disregard what you ought to do through annoyance or negligence; but you
cannot use the moral vocabulary and consistently deny the force of
ought, and you cannot remain within the social commerce of the
community, and abandon the moral vocabulary.

Is moral criticism in such a society impossible? By no means; but it
must proceed by an extension of, and not by a total break with, the
established moral vocabulary. Does this mean that the authority of the
morality does not extend beyond the community whose social practices are
in question? One is tempted to reply, Does the authority of arithmetical
rules extend beyond the community in which the practice of counting is
established? This is intended as a genuine, and not as a rhetorical
question, which deserves a fuller answer; but at the least, to connect
rules and social practice in this way is not obviously to give moral
rules less of a hold on us than mathematical, except that no society
could advance far without the same type of simple counting, whereas
there can be wide variations in the social practice to which moral rules
are relevant.

In discussing Greek society, I suggested what might happen when such a
well-integrated form of moral life broke down. In our society the acids
of individualism have for four centuries eaten into our moral
structures, for both good and ill. But not only this: we live with the
inheritance of not only one, but of a number of well-integrated
moralities. Aristotelianism, primitive Christian simplicity, the puritan
ethic, the aristocratic ethic of consumption, and the traditions of
democracy and socialism have all left their mark upon our moral
vocabulary. Within each of these moralities there is a proposed end or
ends, a set of rules, a list of virtues. But the ends, the rules, the
virtues, differ. For Aristotelianism, to sell all you have and give to
the poor would be absurd and meanspirited; for primitive Christianity,
the great-souled man is unlikely to pass through that eye of the needle
which is the gateway to heaven. A conservative Catholicism would treat
obedience to established authority as a virtue; a democratic socialism
such as Marx’s labels the same attitude servility and sees it as the
worst of vices. For puritanism, thrift is a major virtue, laziness a
major vice; for the traditional aristocrat, thrift is a vice; and so on.

It follows that we are liable to find two kinds of people in our
society: those who speak from within one of these surviving moralities,
and those who stand outside all of them. Between the adherents of rival
moralities and between the adherents of one morality and the adherents
of none there exists no court of appeal, no impersonal neutral standard.
For those who speak from within a given morality, the connection between
fact and valuation is established in virtue of the meanings of the words
they use. To those who speak from without, those who speak from within
appear merely to be uttering imperatives which express their own liking
and their private choices. The controversy between emotivism and
prescriptivism on the one hand and their critics on the other thus
expresses the fundamental moral situation of our own society.

We can in the history of moral philosophy situate certain writers
usefully in terms of this account. Kant, for example, stands at the
point at which the loss of moral unity means that morality can be
specified only in terms of the form of its rules, and not of any end
which the rules may serve. Hence his attempt to derive the content of
moral rules from their form.

Kant also stands at the point at which moral rules and the goals of
human life have become divorced to such a degree that it appears both
that the connection between abiding by the rules and achieving the goals
is merely a contingent one and that, if this is so, it is intolerable.
It is Kant’s grasp of the former point, as well as of the vagueness
about goals which had led to the notion of happiness becoming vague and
indefinite, that leads him to enjoin us to seek not to be happy, but to
be deserving of happiness. It is his grasp of the latter point that
leads him to invoke God as a power that will crown virtue with happiness
after all. Kant seeks to hold together an earlier and a later view of
morals; the tension between them is apparent.

Eighteenth-century English moralists and nineteenth-century utilitarians
write from within a society in which individualism has conquered. Hence
they present the social order not as a framework within which the
individual has to live out his moral life, but as the mere sum of
individual wills and interests. A crude moral psychology makes of moral
rules instructions as to effective means for gaining the ends of private
satisfaction. Hegel, Green, and to a lesser extent, Bradley are not only
critics of this view of morals, they try to specify the type of
community within which the moral vocabulary, can have a specific and
distinctive set of uses. But the philosophical analysis of the necessary
form of such community is no substitute for the deed of re-creating it;
and their natural successors are the emotivists and the prescriptivists,
who give us a false account of what authentic moral discourse was, but a
true account of the impoverished meanings which evaluative expressions
have come to have in a society where a moral vocabulary is increasingly
emptied of content. Marx resembles Hegel and the English idealists in
seeing a communal framework as presupposed by morality; unlike them, he
sees that it no longer exists; and he proceeds to characterize the whole
situation as one in which moralizing can no longer play a genuine role
in settling social differences. It can only be an attempt to invoke an
authority which no longer exists and to mask the sanctions of social
coercion.

All this of course does not entail that the traditional moral vocabulary
cannot still be used. It does entail that we cannot expect to find in
our society a single set of moral concepts, a shared interpretation of
the vocabulary. Conceptual conflict is endemic in our situation, because
of the depth of our moral conflicts. Each of us therefore has to choose
both with whom we wish to be morally bound and by what ends, rules, and
virtues we wish to be guided. These two choices are inextricably linked.
In choosing to regard this end or that virtue highly, I make certain
moral relationships with some other people, and other moral
relationships with others impossible. Speaking from within my own moral
vocabulary, I shall find myself bound by the criteria embodied in it.
These criteria will be shared with those who speak the same moral
language. And I must adopt some moral vocabulary if I am to have any
social relationships. For without rules, without the cultivation of
virtues, I cannot share ends with anyone else. I am doomed to social
solipsism. Yet I must choose for myself with whom I am to be morally
bound. I must choose between alternative forms of social and moral
practice. Not that I stand morally naked until I have chosen. For our
social past determines that each of us has some vocabulary with which to
frame and to make his choice. Nor can I look to human nature as a
neutral standard, asking which form of social and moral life will give
to it the most adequate expression. For each form of life carries with
it its own picture of human nature. The choice of a form of life and the
choice of a view of human nature go together.

To this view, each side in the contemporary philosophical controversy
will reply in its own terms. The emotivists and prescriptivists will
stress the role of choice in my account. Their critics will stress the
way that the agent must come to the act of choice with an already
existing evaluative vocabulary. Each will try by their choice of
examples to redefine their opponent’s case away. And the same attempt is
already being made in other controversies elsewhere. Indeed, it is a
reinforcement for the view that this philosophical controversy is an
expression of our social and moral situation that it should have
occurred in quite a different context in the arguments that have
proceeded in France between Catholic moralists, Stalinists, Marxists,
and Sartrian existentialists.

For both Catholics and Stalinists the moral vocabulary is defined in
terms of certain alleged facts. Each has their own characteristic list
of virtues. For Sartre, by contrast, at least for the Sartre of the
immediate postwar period, to live within a readymade moral vocabulary is
necessarily an abdication of responsibility, an act of bad faith.
Authentic existence is to be found only in a self-conscious awareness of
an absolute freedom of choice. Kierkegaard’s view of the act of choice
is detached from its theological context, and made by Sartre the basis
for political as well as for moral decision. Sartre does not locate the
source of the necessity of the act of choice in the moral history of our
society, any more than Kierkegaard did. He locates it in the nature of
man: a conscious being, être-pour-soi, differs from a thing,
être-en-soi, in his freedom and his consciousness of freedom. Hence
men’s characteristic experiences of anxiety before the gulf of the
unmade future, and their characteristic attempts to pretend that they
are not responsible. Thus Sartre locates the basis of his moral view in
a metaphysics of human nature, just as much as the Catholic or the
Marxist does.

Like Sartre, the prescriptivist and emotivist do not trace the source of
the necessity of choice, or of taking up one’s own attitudes, to the
moral history of our society. They ascribe it to the nature of moral
concepts as such. And in so doing, like Sartre, they try to absolutize
their own individualist morality, and that of the age, by means of an
appeal to concepts, just as much as their critics try to absolutize
their own moralities by means of an appeal to conceptual considerations.
But these attempts could only succeed if moral concepts were indeed
timeless and unhistorical, and if there were only one available set of
moral concepts. One virtue of the history of moral philosophy is that it
shows us that this is not true and that moral concepts themselves have a
history. To understand this is to be liberated from any false absolutist
claims.


