PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
============================

THIS BOOK is inevitably the victim of the author’s over-numerous
intentions. The most workaday of these is simply to provide some
historical background and perspective for the reading of those selected
texts which form the core of the study of moral philosophy in most
British and American universities. In particular I wanted to give some
account of Greek thought for those undergraduate students restricted to
the treadmill of Hume, Kant, Mill, and Moore. But this apparently simple
intention is complicated by my views of the nature of moral philosophy.
A discussion limited to an account of philosophical themes, omitting all
reference to the moral concepts for the elucidation and reconstruction
of which the theories were elaborated, would be absurd; a history not
only of moral philosophies but also of moral concepts and of the
moralities embodying and defined by these concepts would fill thirty
volumes and thirty years. I have therefore continually compromised, and
nobody will be satisfied with the result. I certainly am not.

No one could write in English on the history of moral philosophy and not
feel awed by the example of Henry Sidgwick’s Outlines of the History of
Ethics, published in 1886 as a revision of his Encyclopaedia Britannica
article, and intended primarily for the benefit of ordinands of the
Church of Scotland. The perspective of my book is necessarily very
different from that of Sidgwick, but the experience of writing has
increased my admiration for him. In his journal he wrote, “Went up to
London yesterday to see Macmillan about a stupid blunder in my outlines.
I have represented a man whom I ought to have known all about-Sir James
Mackintosh-as publishing a book in 1836, four years after he was dead!
The cause of the blunder is simple carelessness-of a kind that now seems
incredible.” Somewhere in this book I am sure that there must be more
than one example of an equally simple carelessness. It will not,
however, be about Sir James Mackintosh-who does not appear. For, like
Sidgwick, I have had not only to compress but also to select. I am
unhappily aware, too, that on very many points of disputed
interpretation, I have had to take a point of view without being able to
justify it. I could not be more certain that students of particular
authors and periods will be able to find many faults.

My debts are many: in general, to philosophical colleagues and pupils at
Leeds, Oxford, Princeton, and elsewhere; in particular, to Mr. P. F.
Strawson, Mrs. Amélie Rorty, and Professor H. L. A. Hart, who read
either the whole or parts of the manuscript and made of this a better
book than it would otherwise have been. To them I am profoundly
grateful. I am especially conscious of how much in general I owe to
Princeton University and to the members of its Department of Philosophy,
where I was Senior Fellow to the Council of the Humanities in 1962-63
and Visiting Professor in 1965-66. This book is in no way adequate to
any of these debts. I must also thank Miss M. P. Thomas for all her
secretarial help.

ALASDAIR MACINTYRE


