CHAPTER 1: THE PHILOSOPHICAL POINT OF THE HISTORY OF ETHICS
===========================================================

MORAL PHILOSOPHY is often written as though the history of the subject
were only of secondary and incidental importance. This attitude seems to
be the outcome of a belief that moral concepts can be examined and
understood apart from their history. Some philosophers have even written
as if moral concepts were a timeless, limited, unchanging, determinate
species of concept, necessarily having the same features throughout
their history, so that there is a part of language waiting to be
philosophically investigated which deserves the title “the language of
morals” (with a definite article and a singular noun). In a less
sophisticated way, historians of morals are all too apt to allow that
moral practices and the content of moral judgments may vary from society
to society and from person to person, but at the same time these
historians have subtly assimilated different moral concepts-and so they
end up by suggesting that although what is held to be right or good is
not always the same, roughly the same concepts of right and good are
universal.

In fact, of course, moral concepts change as social life changes. I
deliberately do not write “because social life changes,” for this might
suggest that social life is one thing, morality another, and that there
is merely an external, contingent causal relationship between them. This
is obviously false. Moral concepts are embodied in and are partially
constitutive of forms of social life. One key way in which we may
identify one form of social life as distinct from another is by
identifying differences in moral concepts. So it is an elementary
commonplace to point out that there is no precise English equivalent for
the Greek word δικαιοσύνη, usually translated justice. And this is not a
mere linguistic defect, so that what Greek achieves by a single word
English needs a periphrasis to achieve. It is rather that the occurrence
of certain concepts in ancient Greek discourse and of others in modern
English marks a difference between two forms of social life. To
understand a concept, to grasp the meaning of the words which express
it, is always at least to learn what the rules are which govern the use
of such words and so to grasp the role of the concept in language and
social life. This in itself would suggest strongly that different forms
of social life will provide different roles for concepts to play. Or at
least for some concepts this seems likely to be the case. There
certainly are concepts which are unchanging over long periods, and which
must be unchanging for one of two reasons. Either they are highly
specialized concepts belonging within stable and continuing disciplines,
such as geometry; or else they are highly general concepts necessary to
any language of any complexity. I have in mind here the family of
concepts expressed by such words as and, or, and if. But moral concepts
do not fall into either of these two classes.

So it would be a fatal mistake to write as if, in the history of moral
philosophy, there had been one single task of analyzing the concept of,
for example, justice, to the performance of which Plato, Hobbes, and
Bentham all set themselves, and for their achievement at which they can
be awarded higher or lower marks. It does not of course follow, and it
is in fact untrue, that what Plato says about δικαιοσύνη and what Hobbes
or Bentham says about justice are totally irrelevant to one another.
There are continuities as well as breaks in the history of moral
concepts. Just here lies the complexity of the history.

The complexity is increased because philosophical inquiry itself plays a
part in changing moral concepts. It is not that we have first a
straightforward history of moral concepts and then a separate and
secondary history of philosophical comment. For to analyze a concept
philosophically may often be to assist in its transformation by
suggesting that it needs revision, or that it is discredited in some
way, or that it has a certain kind of prestige. Philosophy leaves
everything as it is-except concepts. And since to possess a concept
involves behaving or being able to behave in certain ways in certain
circumstances, to alter concepts, whether by modifying existing concepts
or by making new concepts available or by destroying old ones, is to
alter behavior. So the Athenians who condemned Socrates to death, the
English parliament which condemned Hobbes’ Leviathan in 1666, and the
Nazis who burned philosophical books were correct at least in their
apprehension that philosophy can be subversive of established ways of
behaving. Understanding the world of morality and changing it are far
from incompatible tasks. The moral concepts which are objects for
analysis to the philosophers of one age may sometimes be what they are
partly because of the discussions by philosophers of a previous age.

A history which takes this point seriously, which is concerned with the
role of philosophy in relation to actual conduct, cannot be
philosophically neutral. For it cannot but be at odds with the view of
all those recent philosophers who have wanted sharply to distinguish
philosophical ethics as a second-order activity of comment from the
first-order discourse which is part of the conduct of life, where moral
utterances themselves are in place. In drawing this distinction such
philosophers have tried so to define the realm of philosophy that it
would be a conceptual truth that philosophy could not impinge upon
practice. A. J. Ayer, for instance, has written about one particular
ethical theory that it “. . is entirely on the level of analysis; it is
an attempt to show what people are doing when they make moral judgments;
it is not a set of suggestions as to what moral judgments they are to
make. And this is true of all moral philosophy as I understand it. All
moral theories . in so far as they are philosophical theories, are
neutral as regards actual conduct.”1

My quarrel with this view will emerge from time to time in these essays.
But what I hope will emerge even more clearly is the function of history
in relation to conceptual analysis, for it is here that Santayana’s
epigram that he who is ignorant of the history of philosophy is doomed
to repeat it finds its point. It is all too easy for philosophical
analysis, divorced from historical inquiry, to insulate itself from
correction. In ethics it can happen in the following way. A certain
unsystematically selected class of moral concepts and judgments is made
the subject of attention. From the study of these it is concluded that
specifically moral discourse possesses certain characteristics. When
counterexamples are adduced to show that this is not always so, these
counterexamples are dismissed as irrelevant, because not examples of
moral discourse; and they are shown to be nonmoral by exhibiting their
lack of the necessary characteristics. From this kind of circularity we
can be saved only by an adequate historical view of the varieties of
moral and evaluative discourse. This is why it would be dangerous, and
not just pointless, to begin these studies with a definition which would
carefully delimit the field of inquiry. We cannot, of course, completely
avoid viewing past moralists and past philosophers in terms of present
distinctions. To set out to write the history of moral philosophy at all
involves us in selecting from the past what falls under the heading of
moral philosophy as we now conceive it. But it is important that we
should, as far as it is possible, allow the history of philosophy to
break down our present-day preconceptions, so that our too narrow views
of what can and cannot be thought, said, and done are discarded in face
of the record of what has been thought, said, and done. We have to steer
between the danger of a dead antiquarianism, which enjoys the illusion
that we can approach the past without preconceptions, and that other
danger, so apparent in such philosophical historians as Aristotle and
Hegel, of believing that the whole point of the past was that it should
culminate with us. History is neither a prison nor a museum, nor is it a
set of materials for self-congratulation.


