CHAPTER 2: THE PREPHILOSOPHICAL HISTORY OF “GOOD” AND THE TRANSITION TO PHILOSOPHY
==================================================================================

THE SUGGESTION that asking and answering moral questions is one thing,
and asking and answering philosophical questions about morality quite
another thing, may conceal from us the fact that in asking moral
questions of a certain kind with sufficient persistence we may discover
that we cannot answer them until we have asked and answered certain
philosophical questions. A discovery of this kind provided the initial
impulse for philosophical ethics in Greek society. For at a certain
period, when moral questions were asked, it became clear that the
meaning of some of the key words involved in the framing of those
questions was no longer clear and unambiguous. Social changes had not
only made certain types of conduct, once socially accepted, problematic,
but had also rendered problematic the concepts which had defined the
moral framework of an earlier world. The social changes in question are
those reflected in Greek literature in the transition from the Homeric
writers through the Theognid corpus to the sophists.

The society reflected in the Homeric poems is one in which the most
important judgments that can be passed upon a man concern the way in
which he discharges his allotted social function. It is because certain
qualities are necessary to discharge the function of a king or a
warrior, a judge or a shepherd, that there is a use for such expressions
as authoritative and courageous and just. The word ἀγαθός, ancestor of
our good, is originally a predicate specifically attached to the role of
a Homeric nobleman. “To be agathos,” says W. H. Adkins, “one must be
brave, skilful and successful in war and in peace; and one must possess
the wealth and (in peace) the leisure which are at once the necessary
conditions for the development of these skills and the natural reward of
their successful employment.”2 Ἀγαθός is not like our word good in many
of its Homeric contexts, for it is not used to say that it is “good” to
be kingly, courageous, and clever-that is, it is not used to commend
these qualities in a man, as our word good might be used by a
contemporary admirer of the Homeric ideal. It is rather that ἀγαθός is a
commendatory word because it is interchangeable with the words which
characterize the qualities of the Homeric ideal. So in our ordinary
English use of good, “good, but not kingly, courageous, or cunning”
makes perfectly good sense; but in Homer, “ἀγαθός, but not kingly,
courageous, or clever” would not even be a morally eccentric form of
judgment, but as it stands simply an unintelligible contradiction.

How do adjectives of appraisal, such as ἀγαθός and others, function in
Homer? First of all, to ascribe the qualities for which they stand to
someone is to make a factual statement, in the sense that whether what
you have said is true or false is settled by the man’s performances and
settled simply and solely by his performances. The question, Is he
ἀγαθός? is the same as the question, Is he courageous, clever, and
kingly? And this is answered by answering the question, Does he, and has
he, fought, plotted, and ruled with success? The point of such
ascriptions is in part predictive. To call a man ἀγαθός is to tell your
hearers what sort of conduct they can expect from him. We ascribe
dispositions to the agent in the light of his behavior in past episodes.

From this alone it is strikingly plain that the Homeric use of ἀγαθός
does not square at all with what many recent philosophers have thought
to be the characteristic properties of moral, and indeed of evaluative,
predicates. For it has often been held3 to be an essential feature of
such predicates that any judgments in which one is ascribed to a subject
cannot follow logically as a conclusion from premises which are merely
factual. No matter what factual conditions are satisfied, these by
themselves can never provide sufficient conditions for asserting that an
evaluative predicate holds of a subject. But in the Homeric poems, that
a man has behaved in certain ways is sufficient to entitle him to be
called ἀγαθός. Now, assertions as to how a man has behaved are certainly
in the ordinary sense factual; and the Homeric use of ἀγαθός is
certainly in the ordinary sense evaluative. The alleged logical gulf
between fact and appraisal is not so much one that has been bridged in
Homer. It has never been dug. Nor is it clear that there is any ground
in which to dig.

Moreover, I fail to be ἀγαθός if and only if I fail to bring off the
requisite performances; and the function of expressions of praise and
blame is to invoke and to justify the rewards of success and the
penalties of failure. You cannot avoid blame and penalty by pointing out
that you could not help doing what you did, that failure was
unavoidable. You may, of course, certainly point this out; but if your
performance failed to satisfy the appropriate criteria, then you simply
cannot prevent the withdrawal of the ascription of kingliness, courage,
and cleverness or cunning. And this is to say that Homeric moral
predicates are not applied, as moral predicates have been applied in our
society, only where the agent could have done other than he did.
Excuses, praise, and blame must all play different parts. We cannot even
inquire whether (in the Kantian sense) ought implies can for Homer, for
in Homer we cannot find ought (in the Kantian sense). So Odysseus blames
the suitors, when he returns to Ithaca, for having had a false belief:
“Dogs, you did not think that I would return home from Troy; for you
have consumed my possessions, lain with my maidservants by force, and
wooed my wife while I was yet alive, fearing neither the gods who
inhabit the broad heaven, nor yet that there would be any retaliation
from men hereafter; but now the doom of death in upon you all.”4 The
suitors are blamed precisely for having a false belief; but this is what
in a modern sense we would feel we could not blame people for. For to
believe is not to perform an avoidable action. And it is not that Homer
thinks that beliefs are voluntary; he is engaged in an assessment to
which what the agent could or could not have done otherwise is
irrelevant.

It will be useful now to look at a cognate of ἀγαθός in Homer, the noun
ἀρετή, usually and perhaps misleadingly translated virtue. A man who
performs his socially allotted function possesses ἀρετή. The ἀρετή of
one function or role is quite different from that of another. The ἀρετή
of a king lies in ability to command, of a warrior in courage, of a wife
in fidelity, and so on. A man is ἀγαθός if he has the ἀρετή of his
particular and specific function. And this brings out the divorce of
ἀγαθός in the Homeric poems from later uses of good (including later
uses of ἀγαθός). When Agamemnon intends to steal the slave girl Briseis
from Achilles, Nestor says to him, “Do not, ἀγαθός though you be, take
the girl from him.”5 It is not that, being ἀγαθός, Agamemnon can be
expected not to take the girl, nor that he will cease to be ἀγαθός if he
does take her. He will be ἀγαθός whether he takes her or not. The way in
which “ἀγαθός” is tied so completely to fulfillment of function is also
brought out in its links with other concepts. Shame, αἰδώς, is what is
felt by a man who fails to perform his allotted role. To feel shame is
simply to be aware that you have entitled people to accuse you of having
fallen short of that which the socially established description both you
and others had applied to yourself had led them to expect. It is to be
aware that one is liable to reproach.

This whole family of concepts, then, presupposes a certain sort of
social order, characterized by a recognized hierarchy of functions. It
is noteworthy that the value predicates can only be applied to those men
who fall under the descriptions which taken together constitute the
social vocabulary of the system. Those who fall outside the system fall
outside the moral order. And this is indeed the fate of slaves; the
slave becomes a chattel, a thing, rather than a person. It would miss
the point to comment upon this that the Homeric poems are not a
historically accurate picture of early Greek society or that no society
as rigorously functional in fact existed. What we get in Homer is rather
an idealization of one form of social life; we are presented with a
social order and its concepts in a fairly pure form, rather than in the
kind of admixture of several forms which a total society often presents.
But for our conceptual purposes this is none the worse. For we have
other literary documents in which we can see how the breakdown of a
social hierarchy and of a system of recognized functions deprives the
traditional moral terms and concepts of their social anchorage. In the
body of poems which pass under the name of Theognis of Megara,6 and
which were written in post-Homeric and preclassical Greece, we find
startling changes in the uses of ἀγαθος and ἀρετή. They can no longer be
defined in terms of the fulfillment in a recognized way of a recognized
function; for there is no longer a single and unified society in which
evaluation can depend on established criteria of this kind. Words like
ἀγαθός and κακός (bad) become sometimes merely neutrally descriptive of
social position. Or they may acquire an even more radical extension of
meaning. Both processes are seen at once in a passage which runs: “Many
κακοι are rich and many ἀγαθοί are poor, but we will not take the wealth
in exchange for our ἀρετή for the one remains with a man always, but
possessions pass from one man to another.” Here ἀγαθός and κακός seem to
mean nobleborn and baseborn or some such equivalents. They have lost
their old meaning and been transformed into one of the key identifying
descriptions under which those to whom the terms applied in their old
sense now fall. But they are no longer evaluative in the same way.
Whereas in Homer one would have said of a chieftain that he was ἀγαθός
if and only ff he exercised his true function, now ἀγαθός describes
someone who comes of a chieftain’s line, whatever function he may
exercise or fail to exercise or whatever his personal qualities may be.
But the transformation of ἀρετή in the same passage is quite different.
For ἀρετή now denotes not those qualities by means of which a particular
function may be discharged, but certain human qualities which may be
divorced from function altogether. A man’s ἀρετή is now personal to
himself; it has become far more like what modern writers think of as a
moral quality.

Thus evaluative predicates come to refer to dispositions to behave in
certain ways relatively independent of social function. With this change
comes another. In Homeric society the dominant hierarchy of functional
roles determines which are the dominant qualities; skill, cunning, and
courage of various sorts. When this hierarchy collapses, the question
can be opened in a far more general way of what the qualities are which
we would wish to see in a man. “The whole of ἀρετή is summed up in
δικαιοσύνη,” writes one Theognid author. “Every man, Cyrnus, is ἀγαθός
if he has δικαιοσύνη.” Here anybody can be ἀγαθός by exercising the
quality of justice, δικαιοσύνη. But what does this consist in? The
pressures of the time not only make ἀγαθός unstable in meaning, they
also raise doubts about the nature of δικαιοσύνη. For the idea of a
single moral order has broken down.

It has broken down partly because of the breakdown of formerly unified
social forms. These were reinforced by a mythology with the status of a
sacred writing, including the Homeric poems, which suggested a single
cosmic order. In Homer the order of necessity reigns over gods as well
as over men. Ὓβρις, willful pride, is the sin of overstepping the moral
order of the universe. Νέμεσις awaits whoever commits it. The moral
order and the natural order are not sharply distinguished. “The sun will
not go beyond his measures; otherwise the Ἐρινύες, the handmaids of
justice, will find him out,” said Heraclitus. But this mythological
assertion of order changes its function too, as Greek society changes.
Anthropologists very commonly assert that myths express social
structure. And myths can do this in more than one way. Between Homer and
writers five centuries later there is a great change in Greek myths
about the order in the universe. The Homeric myth does reflect, though
with much distortion, the workings of an actual society in which a close
form of functional organization is presupposed by the moral and
evaluative forms of appraisal which are in use. The later assertions of
order in the universe reflect not a structure that is, but one that was,
or one that is struggling to survive. They are conservative protests
against the disintegration of the older forms and the transition to the
city-state. The myths themselves cannot but open up the question of the
difference between the order of the universe and the order of society.
But above all, this question is sharpened by a widening awareness of
radically different social orders.

The impact of the Persian invasions, of colonization, of increase in
trade and therefore in travel, all these bring home the fact of
different cultures. The result is that the distinction between what
holds good in Egypt but not in Persia, or in Athens but not in Megara,
on the one hand, and what is the case universally as part of the order
of things becomes overwhelmingly important. The question asked about any
moral rule or social practice is, Is is part of the essentially local
realm of νόμος (convention, custom) or of the essentially universal
realm of ϕύσις (nature)? Linked to this is of course the question, Is it
open to me to choose what rules I shall make my own or what restraints I
shall observe (as it may be open to me to choose which city I shall live
in and what therefore shall be the νομος by which I live)? or does the
nature of the universe set limits upon what I may legitimately choose?
To the task of answering these questions there came in the fifth century
B.C. a new class of teachers and a new class of pupils. Books on moral
philosophy commonly concentrated on the teachers, the sophists, whom we
see mainly through the antagonistic eyes of Plato. But the activities of
the sophists as suppliers are unintelligible apart from the demand which
they met. So let us try to specify this demand still more precisely.

We have seen how the word ἀγαθός had become unstable in its attachments
and so had its cognate words, especially ἀρετή. “Virtue” is what the
good man possesses and exercises. It is his skill. But what virtue is
and what constitutes a good man, these have become matters of
conflicting opinion in which the Homeric concept of the ἀγαθός has been
divided up between rival inheritances. There is, on the one hand, the
good man conceived as the good citizen. The values of the conservative
Athenian whom Aristophanes portrays are loyalty to the city and more
especially to the older forms of social order. In this there is
certainly an element of the Homeric ἀγαθός. But equally, the Homeric
chieftain’s personal values, the values of the courageous, cunning, and
aggressive king, are now, if exercised by the individual in the
city-state, antisocial. Self-aggrandizement, the use of the state as
something to be preyed upon, these are the only courses open to the
individual who wants in the fifth century to behave like a Homeric hero.
The social order in which his qualities were an essential part of a
stable society has given way to one in which the same qualities are
necessarily disruptive. So the relationship of the ἀγαθός to the social
values and especially to justice has become a crucial issue. But
δικαιοσύνη (which though very inadequately translated as justice, is as
inadequately translated by any other word, for it has a flavor all its
own and combines the notion of fairness in externals with that of
personal integrity in a way that no English word does) is of all notions
the one that appears most to be put in question by the discovery of
rival social orders. Different cities observe different customs and
different laws. Does and should justice differ from city to city? Does
justice hold only within a given community between citizens? or should
it hold also between cities? The Athenians condemn the character of
Alcibiades because he did not observe the restraints of δικαιοσύνη in
his behavior within the Athenian state. But their own envoys behave just
like Alcibiades in their attitude to other states. That is, they equate
what is morally permissible with what the agent has the power to do.
Their envoys can say to the representative of Melos, an island which
wished to remain neutral in the Peloponnesian War, “For of the gods we
believe, and of men we know, that by a law of their nature whenever they
can rule they will. This law was not made by us, and we are not the
first who have acted upon it; we did but inherit it, and shall bequeath
it to all time, and we know that you and all mankind, if you were as
strong as we are, would do as we do.”7

Thus the redefinition of evaluative predicates creates a problem for
those who wish to use them, even in formulating their own intentions.
The terms ἀγαθός and ἀρετή have become genuinely problematic, as has
their relation to καλός, the predicate characterizing what is well
thought of, and as has their relationship to δικαιοσύνη. The moral and
political conservative still feels able to give the words a fixed
connotation. He uses texts and tags from Homer or Simonides to provide
him with definitions. But, in general, slides in the meanings of words
become appallingly easy and frequent. It is often impossible to
distinguish two separate phenomena, moral uncertainty and uncertainty as
to the meaning of evaluative predicates. In the moments of greatest
perplexity in fifth-century Greece these two uncertainties are one.
Thucydides has recorded the corruption of language in describing the
revolution at Corfu: “The meaning of words no longer had the same
relation to things, but was changed by them as they thought fit.
Reckless doing was held to be loyal courage; prudent delay was the
excuse of a coward; moderation was the disguise of unmanly weakness; to
know everything was to do nothing.”8

How does Ayer’s conception of the distinction between moral philosophy
and moral judgment or practice apply in this situation? Can we
distinguish two separate activities, “the activity of a moralist, who
sets out to elaborate a moral code, or to encourage its observance, and
that of a moral philosopher, whose concern is not primarily to make
moral judgments but to analyse their nature”?9 It must at once be
conceded to Ayer that there are some questions involved in moral
philosophy which are purely philosophical and others which are entirely
independent of philosophy. There are many cases where what is important
is to emphasize that to commit oneself to a particular philosophical
analysis of moral judgments does not entail committing oneself to making
a particular specified set of moral judgments. In a contemporary context
two utilitarian philosophers might agree in their analysis of the
expression wrong and without a shadow of inconsistency disagree as to
whether it is the case that all wars are wrong or that only some wars
are wrong. Equally, two pacifists might agree on this latter issue, but
one might be a philosophical intuitionist, the other an emotivist. When
Ayer argues that philosophical theories of moral concepts and judgments
are neutral as regards conduct this is clearly the type of case he has
in mind. But the point at which Greek moral philosophy begins suggests
that there is also a quite different type of case.

In Ayer’s type of case the moral vocabulary is taken as given and
determinate. There are then two problems, How shall I use it? (morals)
and, How shall I understand it? (philosophy). Philosophy, it should be
noted, becomes an essentially after-the-event activity. But in the cases
where the meaning of the moral vocabulary is itself in doubt, the answer
to the question, How shall I use the moral vocabulary? will consist in
formulating rules, no doubt partly already implicit in the previous uses
of the word, but partly perhaps also designed to avoid incoherences and
ambiguities in previous uses. These rules will set the limits upon the
possible uses of the moral predicates, and so philosophical elaboration
of the concept will partly determine the moral uses of those predicates.
Thus the question of the criteria which are to be employed in moral
evaluation cannot be clearly demarcated as moral but not philosophical,
or as philosophical but not moral. Of course, to clear up the conceptual
problems is not of itself to determine completely how we ought to act or
to judge, but it does determine the limits of moral possibility in part.
The task of the moralist and the task of the philosopher are not
identical; but they are not entirely distinct either.


