CHAPTER 3: THE SOPHISTS AND SOCRATES
====================================

THE PECULIAR cultural relativism of the sophists is an attempt to meet
the simultaneous demands of two tasks: that of assigning a coherent set
of meanings to the evaluative vocabulary, and that of explaining how to
live well-that is, effectively-in a city-state. They begin from a
situation in which the prerequisite of a successful social career is
success in the public forums of the city, the assembly, and the law
courts. To succeed in that milieu it was necessary to convince and to
please. But what would convince and please in one place might fail to
convince and please in another. Individual sophists, men such as
Protagoras and Gorgias and their disciples, all had their own doctrines
and theories in the face of this problem. But we can pick out a general
amalgam of sophistic theory, which is what Plato objected to and
Socrates earlier criticized and rivaled. This amalgam would run as
follows:

The ἀρετή of a man is his functioning well as a man. To function well as
a man in the city-state is to be a successful citizen. To be a
successful citizen is to impress in the assembly and the law courts. To
succeed there it is necessary to conform to the prevailing conventions
as to what is just, right, and fitting. Each state has its conventions
on these matters. What one must do therefore is to study prevailing
usages and learn to adapt oneself to them, so as to mold one’s hearers
successfully. This is the τέχνη, the craft, the skill, which it is at
once the business and the virtue of a sophist to teach. It is a
presupposition of this teaching that there is no criterion of virtue as
such, apart from success, and no criterion of justice as such, apart
from the dominant practice of each particular city. In the Theatetus
Plato outlines a doctrine which he puts into the mouth of the sophist
Protagoras. This links moral relativism with a general relativism in the
theory of knowledge. Protagoras’ most famous saying was that “Man is the
measure of all things; of the things which are, that they are, and of
the things which are not, that they are not.” Plato interprets this as
referring to sense perception, and as meaning that as things seem to be
to an individual percipient, so they are (to him). There is no “being
hot” or “being cold” as such; there is simply “seeming hot to this man”
or “seeming cold to that man.” So it makes no sense to ask of a wind
which feels warm to one man but chilly to another, Is it really hot or
cold? The wind is nothing really; it is to each whatever it appears to
each.

Is it the same with moral values? Protagoras is in difficulty here over
his own standing as a teacher. For if Protagoras concedes that
everything is as it seems to be to the individual subject, then he seems
to allow that no one can ever judge falsely, and Plato does in fact put
this admission into the mouth of Protagoras. But if no one judges
falsely, then all are equal in respect of the truth, and nobody can be
in the superior position of a teacher or in the inferior position of a
pupil. So it seems to follow that if Protagoras’ doctrine is true, then
he has no right to teach it. For nobody’s doctrine is or can be truer
than anyone else’s. Protagoras attempts to avoid this difficulty by
arguing that although nobody’s judgment can be false, some men by their
judgments produce better effects than others do. This of course only
involves him in the same paradox in a different way; for the assertion
that Protagoras’ judgments produce better effects than those of others
is now treated as a truth such that, if a man denied it, he would judge
falsely. But on the original premises nobody ever judges falsely. So the
paradox would be unresolved. Protagoras however is allowed by Plato to
ignore this and consequently to argue that “the wise and good orators
make good things seem just to their cities instead of pernicious ones.
Whatever in any city is regarded as just and admirable is just and
admirable in that city for so long as it is thought to be so.”10 Thus
the criteria of justice are held to differ from state to state. It does
not of course follow that the criteria either must or can be entirely
different in different states, and in another dialogue, the Protagoras,
Plato appears to credit Protagoras with the view that there are some
qualities necessary for the continuing social life of any city. But this
is quite consistent with maintaining that there are no sufficient
criteria for determining what is just or unjust, independent of the
particular conventions of each particular city.

So what the sophist has to teach is what is held to be just in each
different state. You cannot ask or answer the question, What is justice?
but only the questions, What is justice-at-Athens? and, What is
justice-at-Corinth? From this there seems to follow an important
consequence, which both reinforces and is reinforced by a new twist that
was lent to the distinction between nature and convention. For an
individual is offered no criteria by which to guide his own actions if
he is merely asked to note that the prevailing criteria vary from state
to state. From this he can draw nothing to answer the questions, What am
I do to? How am I to live? For he has to choose for himself between the
differing criteria of different states (Where and how shall I choose to
live?) and also whether to regard with any serious respect the standards
which prevail where he does happen to live. But since the whole moral
vocabulary is defined by the sophists in terms of the prevailing usage
in different states, and since this usage ex hypothesi cannot provide an
answer to these crucial questions, both the questions and the possible
answers to the questions, What am I to do? How shall I live? have to be
treated as nonmoral and premoral. It is at this point that a new use is
found for the distinction between nature (ϕύσις) and convention (νόμος).

A man who lives in a given state and conforms to its required standards
is a creature of convention; a man who is equally at home in any state
or none, depending upon his own personal and private purposes, is a
creature of nature. Within every conventional man there hides a natural
man. This doctrine rests squarely on a separation of the standpoint of
the individual agent from that of the socially established conventions
which it is up to him to accept or reject. When to that is added an
identification of the moral with the conventional, the identification of
the premoral and nonmoral agent with the natural man is complete. The
natural man has no moral standards of his own. He is therefore free from
all constraints upon him by others. All men are by nature either wolves
or sheep; they prey or are preyed upon.

The natural man, conceived thus by the sophist, has a long history in
European ethics in front of him. The details of his psychology will vary
from writer to writer, but he is almost always-though not always-going
to be aggressive and lustful. Morality is then explicable as a necessary
compromise between the desire of natural men to aggress upon others and
the fear of natural men that others will aggress upon them with fatal
consequences. Mutual self-interest leads men to combine in setting up
constraining rules to forbid aggression and lust, and powerful agencies
to inflict sanctions on those who break the rules. Some of these rules
constitute morality; others law. A good deal of variation is possible in
the way that this intellectual fairy tale is told, but its central
themes, like those of all good fairy tales, are remarkably constant. And
above all, at the heart of the account there remains the idea that
social life is perhaps chronologically and certainly logically secondary
to a form of unconstrained non-social human life in which what men do is
a matter of their individual natural psychology. Can we make sense of
this notion of the natural, presocial man?

At this early stage in the argument it is worth making one factual and
one conceptual point about this particular Greek version of the doctrine
of natural man. The factual point is that the character who appears in
the guise of man devoid of social conventions (in, for example, the
account which Plato puts into the mouth of Thrasymachus) is not a child
of nature at all. Nor is he in fact devoid of social conventions. What
he is devoid of is any genuine adherence to the conventions of the
fifth-century city-state. What he expresses is not nature, but the
social attitudes of the Homeric hero. He is a man transposed from a
social order where his attitudes and actions are accepted forms of move
in the social game, and have accepted forms of response, into a quite
different social order where he can appear only as an aggressive
outsider. But this does not mean that he is a social impossibility.
“Scratch Thrasymachus,” writes Adkins, “and you find Agamemnon.” Give
him more of a veneer, we may add, and you find Alcibiades.

The factual point is, then, that the so-called natural man is merely a
man from another and earlier culture. The conceptual point is that this
is no accident. For the character of the natural presocial man is
described in terms of certain traits which he possesses: selfishness,
aggressiveness, and the like. But these traits, or rather the words
which name and characterize them and enabled them to be socially
recognized traits, belong to a vocabulary which presupposes an
established web of social and moral relationships. Words like selfish,
unselfish, aggressive, mild, and the like are defined in terms of
established norms of behavior and established expectations about
behavior. Where there are no normal standards there is no possibility of
failing to come up to them, of doing more or less than is expected of
one, or of elaborating and using names and descriptions of the traits
and dispositions of those who so behave. Thus the description of the
so-called natural man is formed in a vocabulary drawn from social life;
what was alleged to be presocial turns out to presuppose the existence
of some social order. Thus the concept of the natural man suffers from a
fatal internal incoherence.

What the sophists, and the long tradition which was later to follow
them, failed to distinguish was the difference between the concept of a
man who stands outside and is able to question the conventions of some
one given social order and the concept of a man who stands outside
social life as such. And this error sprang from their attempt to bring
the distinction between the natural and the conventional into play at
points at which it necessarily lacked application. What follows from
this error? Natural man portrayed in Thrasymachean guise has two main
characteristics. His psychological make-up is simple: he is out to get
what he wants, and what he wants is narrowly circumscribed. Power and
pleasure are his exclusive interests. But to get what he wants this wolf
has to wear the sheep’s clothing of the conventional moral values. His
masquerade can only be carried through by putting the conventional moral
vocabulary to the service of his private purposes. He must say in the
law courts and the assembly what people want to hear, so that they will
put power into his hands. Thus the ἀρετή of such a man is to learn the
craft, the τέχνη, of molding people by rhetoric. He must take them by
the ear before he takes them by the throat. It is to this doctrine that
Socrates seeks to present an alternative.

Socrates found himself confronted both by moral conservatives using an
incoherent moral vocabulary as if they were sure of its meaning and by
sophists whose innovations he found equally suspect. It is therefore
scarcely surprising that he appears different from different points of
view. It has been said that in Xenophon’s writings he appears as merely
a fifth-century Dr. Johnson; in Aristophanes’ he can appear as a
particularly distressing sophist; in Plato he is many things, and above
all, Plato’s mouthpiece. It is clear, then, that the task of delineating
the historical Socrates is inherently controversial. But one may perhaps
not solve, but avoid the problem by trying to paint a composite portrait
from two palettes. The first is Aristotle’s account of Socrates in the
Metaphysics,11 where Aristotle, unlike Plato, Xenophon, or Aristophanes,
seems to have no ax of personal interest to grind. The second is the set
of dialogues by Plato which are accepted as chronologically early and in
which Plato’s own metaphysical doctrines of the soul and of the forms
are not yet elaborated. For we learn from Aristotle that Socrates “did
not make the universals or the definitions exist apart” as Plato does in
the dialogues of the middle period. Aristotle ascribes to Socrates what
he calls universal definitions and what he calls inductive arguments,
and he makes two statements about Socrates’ intentions which are of
peculiar interest in the light of Plato’s portrait. He says that
“Socrates was occupying himself with the excellences of character, and
in connection with them became the first to raise the problem of
universal definition”; a few lines farther on Aristotle remarks that it
was natural that Socrates should be seeking the essence, for he was
seeking to syllogize, and “‘what a thing is’ is the starting point of
syllogisms.” What I wish to fasten upon here is Aristotle’s remark that
Socrates was preoccupied with the search for definitions because he
wished to syllogize when we might have expected him to say that he
syllogized in the interest of discovering definitions. What Aristotle is
pointing to can be clearly seen in the early Platonic dialogues.

Socrates repeatedly puts such questions as, What is piety? what is
courage? what is justice? We see him use what Aristotle calls inductive
arguments (arguments which invoke examples and generalize from them),
and we see him syllogizing (that is, drawing conclusions deductively
from various premises). But he does this with the apparent intention of
convicting his interlocutors of inability to answer the question rather
than with the intention of supplying an answer. In scarcely one of the
dialogues up to and including Book I of the Republic (if, as some
scholars assert, this was originally composed separately) does Socrates
answer his own original question; he always leaves the interlocutor in a
fury. How are we to understand this procedure? When the Delphic oracle
described Socrates as the wisest of the Athenians he concluded that he
deserved this title because only he, among them all, knew that he knew
nothing. So it would not be surprising if Socrates envisaged his duty as
a teacher as that of making his pupils wiser by making them discover
their own ignorance. To this it may be objected that Socrates is too
often pictured by Plato as driving his interlocutors into an exasperated
fury, and that this is scarcely a convincing method of moral education.
But infuriating someone may indeed be the only method of disturbing him
sufficiently to force him into philosophical reflection upon moral
matters. Of course, for the majority of those so assaulted there will be
no admirable consequences of this kind. But there is no evidence that
Socrates expected the activity of an intellectual gadfly to benefit more
than a tiny minority. Moreover Socrates’ method is both more
intelligible and more justifiable if it is understood as aimed at
securing a particular sort of change in the hearers rather than arriving
at a particular conclusion. It is not just that he does not arrive at
conclusions; it is rather that his arguments are ad hominem in this
sense, that they derive contradictory or otherwise absurd consequences
from admissions secured from his interlocutor, and induce the
interlocutor to retract. This desire to secure conviction in the
interlocutor is underlined in the Gorgias, where Plato makes Socrates
say to Polus that he will have achieved nothing unless he can convince
him. It is therefore a mistake to complain12 of the particularity of the
Socratic method. The whole point lies in its particularity. But why does
Socrates have the aims which he has?

His dissatisfaction with someone such as Euthyphro, who wrongly believes
that he has a clear concept of piety, is complex; he thinks and shows
that Euthyphro does not know what piety is, although Euthyphro invokes
established usage. But he does this not because he has a more radical
moral judgment to make than Euthyphro, but indeed to produce scepticism
in Euthyphro about his own dissent from an older and more conservative
order of things. Euthyphro is engaged in prosecuting his own father for
the murder of a family dependent, a slave. Both Euthyphro’s relatives
and Socrates are more shocked at a man’s prosecuting his father than
they are at allowing a slave to be murdered. Likewise, Socrates is very
gentle with Cephalus at the beginning of Republic I. He honors moral
conservatism, and mocks moral innovation. (This is one of the points at
which Xenophon’s Boswellian portrait fits well with what Plato says.)
And this is in part because he cannot get clear from the sophists and
the innovators any more than he can from established usage what sense
moral expressions can have. So the discovery of one’s own ignorance
survives as the one well-founded moral aim.

Socrates’ positive doctrines are at first sight perhaps not easy to
square with this. His great point of agreement with sophists is his
acceptance of the thesis that ἀρετή is teachable. But paradoxically he
denies that there are teachers. The resolution of the paradox is found
only later in Plato, in the thesis that the knowledge is already present
in us and has only to be brought to birth by a philosophical midwife.
Its statement depends on the Socratic thesis that virtue is knowledge
(ἐπιστήμη). The examples with which Socrates elucidates this thesis
leave it obscurer rather than clearer. Socrates breaks with the sophists
in not allowing that rhetoric can have the status of a τέχνη, but his
closely allied use of ἐπιστημη and τεχνη make it clear that to acquire
virtue is to acquire some τεχνη, even if not rhetoric. Rhetoric is
nonrational- a matter of knacks, hints, and dodges. The knowledge that
constitutes virtue involves not only beliefs that such and such is the
case but also a capacity for recognizing relevant distinctions and an
ability to act. These are all bound together by the Socratic uses of
ἐπιστήμη and τέχνη, and any attempt to separate them out inevitably
leads at once to a simplification and to a falsification of the Socratic
view.

Aristotle says of Socrates that “he believed that all the moral virtues
were forms of knowledge; in such a way that when we knew what justice
was, it followed that we would be just,” and Aristotle’s own comment on
this clarifies its meaning: “Yet where moral virtue is concerned,” he
says, “the most important thing is not to know what it is, but how it
arises; we do not wish to know what courage is, we wish to be
courageous.”13 That Socrates is all of the intellectualist that
Aristotle makes him out to be is clear from the parallel Socratic saying
to “Virtue is knowledge”; namely, “No one errs willingly.” No one
willingly goes wrong, for no one voluntarily chooses other than what
would be good for himself. There are two assumptions behind this
doctrine. One is that what is good for a man and what is good
simpliciter cannot be divorced. The sophists see no good that is not the
simple getting by some man of what he wants. In the Lysis, however,
Socrates points out that giving a child what is good for him is quite
different from giving him what he wants. So that “what is good for X”
and “what X wants” do not mean the same. At the same time how could a
man want what would be bad for himself? Very simply, we are tempted to
reply, in the way that a drug addict wants drugs, or an alcoholic wants
alcohol, or a sadist wants victims. But the Socratic answer would surely
be that for these men the object of desire apparently falls under the
concept of some genuine good-pleasure, the diminution of a craving, or
whatever it is. Their mistake is the intellectual one of misidentifying
an object, supposing it to be of some kind other than it is, or of not
noticing some of its properties, not remembering perhaps. On the
Socratic view an alcoholic does not say, “The whisky will rot my liver,
and I don’t care”; he says, “One more drink will steady my hand enough
to call up Alcoholics Anonymous.” To this we are strongly disposed to
reply that sometimes the alcoholic does just say, “The whisky will rot
my liver, but I want a drink, and I don’t care.” How does Socrates come
to ignore this kind of rejoinder? The answer is perhaps to be understood
by looking back to Aristotle’s accusation against Socrates.

When Aristotle says in criticism of Socrates that “where moral virtue is
concerned, the most important thing is not to know what it is, but how
it arises” he makes a distinction which Socrates, on his own premises,
cannot be expected to make. Precisely why Socrates was prepared to
equate virtue and knowledge so roundly is not entirely clear. For he is
quite explicit about the consequences: “No one errs willingly”; that is,
if men do what is wrong, it is intellectual error not moral weakness
that is the cause. And this, as Aristotle points out, is contrary to
what ordinary men take to be an obvious fact of moral experience. We can
put the best possible face upon the Socratic view by considering the
plausibility of the thesis that a man’s moral beliefs are evidenced in
his actions. If a man says that he believes that he ought to do
something, and when occasion arises neither performs the action in
question nor exhibits regret or remorse, we shall certinly conclude that
he did not really believe what he said. He was only talking. (Or he may
of course have changed his mind.) But there is still a striking
difference between the case where a man never does what he says he
believes he ought to do (when we should need the strongest reasons for
not supposing that his behavior gives the lie to his avowals) and the
case where a man occasionally does not do what he says he believes he
ought to do (which is what constitutes a moral lapse, in most circles a
commonplace occurrence). And this difference Socrates just does not
recognize: if a man really knows what he ought to do, what power could
be greater than knowledge and so prevent him from doing what he ought?
So Socrates is represented as arguing in the Protagoras.

One might try to argue again that since Socrates almost never answers
his own question, What is X? where X is the name of some moral
quality-piety, justice, or the like-the whole and only point of the
Socratic inquiry is to engender self-knowledge in the form of a
knowledge of one’s own ignorance. So that virtue is an aim rather than
an achievement. But the spirit of the Apology of Socrates at his trial
is inconsistent with this, in the light of his claim that he was
inspired by a daemon. Moreover, in the Laches the inquiry into the
nature of courage yields a partial answer in terms of knowledge of a
certain kind, and although the inquiry runs into difficulties which lead
to its suspension, the impression is not at all of an inquiry which is
necessarily bound to fail.

What remains unambiguously clear is that the Socratic position combined
the assertion of several bold and apparently paradoxical theses with a
good deal of ambiguity and uncertainty in his presentation of them. In
Plato’s Gorgias, for example, it is not at all clear whether Socrates is
advancing the view that pleasure is the good in order to discuss but
finally dismiss it or in order to defend it as at least a possible view,
and scholars have notoriously differed in their interpretations on this
point. But what is plainer than the contentions of either party is that
rival interpretations are in a way beside the point; what Socrates is
presented as saying simply is ambiguous. And it is in no way out of
character that Socrates should be concerned to puzzle his interlocutors
rather than to present them with a clear position of his own.

This ambiguity is perhaps more than a personal quirk of Socrates.
Socrates had raised the key philosophical questions in ethics. How do we
understand the concepts which we use in decision and appraisal? What is
the criterion for their correct application? Is established usage
consistent? and if not, how do we escape inconsistency? But to have
asked the philosophical questions about how we are to understand
concepts will only take Socrates part of the way. Clearly, if our moral
concepts are concepts at all, if our moral words are words, then there
must be criteria for their use. They could not be part of our language
unless there were rules for their use, rules which could be taught and
learned, rules which are socially established and socially shared. It
follows from this that the kind of sophist who thought that moral words
could simply be given a meaning, either by the philosopher or the ruler,
at will, is talking nonsense. For in order for the meaning to be a
meaning it would have to be teachable in terms of the existing criteria
which govern the use of the relevant expressions. So that Socrates is
right to present conceptual inquiry as a task which can yield correct
and incorrect results, as an activity in which there are objective
standards of success and failure. But it does not follow that the
investigation of how a concept is in fact employed will yield one clear
and consistent answer. Socrates’ questioning of his pupils relies upon
the examples of contemporary Greek moral usage which they produce. If I
am right, the problematic moral character of Greek life at the time of
Socrates arises from and partially consists in the fact that moral usage
has ceased to be clear and consistent. And so to discover unambiguous
and practically useful moral concepts, one will have to undertake a
different sort of inquiry.

Just this is what Socrates’ successors undertake, and they move in two
main directions. Plato accepts the fact that moral concepts are only
intelligible against the background of a certain sort of social order;
he then tries to delineate it, providing or attempting to provide at the
same time a justification in terms of the order of the universe. The
Cynics and Cyrenaics by contrast seek to provide a moral code
independent of society, tied only to the individual’s choices and
decisions, and attempting to make the individual moral life
self-sufficient. To them I shall return briefly later on, but the next
stage of the argument belongs to Plato. Yet it is worth remarking that
those philosophers, like Socrates, whose analyses of moral concepts
suggest defects in contemporary morality are not unlikely to be
unwelcome to authority, even if the lack of prestige of philosophers
usually makes it a waste of time to inflict the death penalty. It is a
mark of Socrates’ greatness that he was not surprised at his own fate.


