CHAPTER 4: PLATO: THE GORGIAS
=============================

I HAVE already said that it is impossible to produce more than a
plausible account of the historical Socrates; and the most obvious
reason for this is that it is impossible to say at what point in Plato’s
dialogues the character called Socrates became merely a mouthpiece for
the mature Plato. But so far as the philosophical import of what is said
in the dialogues is concerned, this need not trouble us. For a clear
pattern of argument can be discerned. In the Gorgias, which is certainly
a fairly early dialogue, we see Plato set most of his central problems
in ethics. In the Meno and the Phaedo a metaphysical background is being
constructed, which in the Republic provides an essential part of a
proposed solution to problems which are a restatement of those in the
Gorgias. In the dialogues after the Republic there is a sustained
critique of the metaphysics, but there are also two substantial
afterthoughts on the problems of ethics, the Philebus, on pleasure, and
the Laws.

The Gorgias falls into three sections, in each of which Socrates has a
different interlocutor, and each of which establishes certain positions
once and for all before passing on. The function of the first part is to
dispose of the claims of rhetoric to be the τέχνη whereby virtue is
taught and also to establish a distinction between two senses of
persuasion. Gorgias himself is the upholder of the view that rhetoric,
as the art of persuasion, is the means to man’s supreme good. For the
supreme good is freedom (ἐλενθερία), and by freedom is meant the freedom
to have one’s own way in everything. In order to have one’s own way in
the city-state, one must be able to sway one’s fellow citizens. Socrates
introduces a distinction between the kind of persuasion which produces
knowledge in the man who is persuaded and the kind that does not. In the
first case persuasion consists in offering reasons for holding a belief,
and if the belief is accepted, an account can be given to back it up in
terms of those reasons; in the second case persuasion consists in
subjecting the audience to a psychological pressure which produces an
ungrounded conviction. Now Gorgias makes it plain that rhetoric is
persuasion not of the former, but of the latter kind. One of the praises
of the orator is that he can persuade audiences upon topics on which he
himself is unskilled; Gorgias’ example is the success of Themistocles
and Pericles in persuading the Athenians to build the docks, harbors,
and defense works necessary for Athenian imperialism, although they
themselves were politicians and neither naval nor military engineers.
Socrates inquires whether the orator needs a knowledge of right and
wrong, any more than he needs a knowledge of engineering. Gorgias is not
entirely consistent on this point; he appears to suggest that an orator
will on occasion need to be a just man, but is vague as to how he may
become just. Rhetoric itself he presents as a morally neutral technique
which can be used for either right or wrong purposes: to blame a teacher
of rhetoric for its misuse by his pupils would be as silly as to blame a
teacher of boxing for the uses to which pupils may put their craft
afterwards.

The idea that techniques of persuasion are morally neutral is a
recurrent one in human society. But in order to hold that such
techniques are neutral, it is necessary also to hold that it is morally
irrelevant whether a man comes to a given belief by reasoning or in some
nonrational way. And in order to hold that this is morally irrelevant,
one would have to hold also that a man’s exercise of his rationality is
irrelevant to his standing as a moral agent, irrelevant, that is, to
deciding whether he is entitled to be called “responsible” and his
actions “voluntary.” Thus different elucidations of the concepts of
responsibility and voluntary actions are presupposed by different moral
attitudes to the standing of the techniques of persuasion. The
philosophical task of elucidation cannot therefore be morally
irrelevant. And one of the more obscurantist features of a sophist like
Gorgias-and indeed of his later successors among the electioneering
politicians of liberal democracy, the advertising executives, and other
open and hidden persuaders-is the willingness to assume a whole
philosophical psychology. It is this which leads Socrates to develop an
argument to show that rhetoric is not a genuine art at all but a mere
spurious imitation of an art.

By this time Gorgias has been replaced in the argument by his pupil
Polus. Polus reiterates that the moral point of the use of rhetoric is
the acquisition of power. The successful orator can do whatever he
wants. Socrates’ retort to this is that a man may do whatever he thinks
it good to do, and nonetheless not be doing what he desires. Here
Socrates’ point is that where a man does one thing for the sake of
another, if he is intellectually mistaken as to the character of the
connection between what he does and that for the sake of which he does
it, he may in fact be defeating his own ends. The despot who inflicts
injury and death upon others may be doing what appears to him to
minister to his own good, but he is mistaken. For, says Socrates, it is
worse for a man to inflict wrong than to suffer it.

Polus’ counterexample is the tyrant Archelaus of Macedon, who had
acquired power by successive episodes of treachery and assassination;
everybody, says Polus, would like to be Archelaus if he could. Socrates’
point is, however, that whether that is what people wish or not is
irrelevant. For if that is what they wish, it can only be because of a
mistake on their part as to what is for their own good. He now proceeds
to convict Polus of such a mistake, but he is able to do so only because
of the state of the moral vocabulary which has already been described.
Polus is not prepared to admit that it is worse (κακιόν) to inflict
injury without due cause than to suffer it, but he is prepared to
concede that it is more disgraceful (αἰσχιόν). In order to understand
this we must recall the contrast between the pairs of adjectives, good-
bad (ἀγαθός-κακός) and honorable-disgraceful (καλός-αἰσχρός). What is
καλός is what is well thought of. To be the Athenian ideal of a
gentleman (καλὸς κἀγαθός) one had both to be and to be thought good. The
reference of καλός and of αἰσχρός is to how a man appears. Polus is
prepared to redefine ἀγαθός because the customary sense has become
unclear. But because precisely of his commitment to winning popular
favor, he is committed to popular estimations of reputation. He cannot
commend his own valuations to his hearers unless at some point at least
he appears to accept theirs. (This is why Plato is able to observe later
in the dialogue that the man who seeks to master the people by
persuading them is forced in order to do this to accept their standards
and so is mastered by them.)

Polus therefore accepts the view that it is more disgraceful to inflict
injury undeservedly than it is to suffer it. But Socrates forces upon
him the recognition that the predicates καλός and αἰσχρός are not
criterionless. Socrates takes examples of these predicates applied
elsewhere (note that once again there is a translation difficulty; καλός
means both “beautiful” and “honorable,” αἰσχρός both “ugly” and
“disgraceful”)-namely, to sounds and colors, to ways of life, and to
sciences. From these examples he draws the conclusion that we are
entitled to call something καλός if it is useful or pleasant, or both,
in the eyes of a disinterested spectator. Thus if Polus agrees that to
suffer injury undeservedly is more honorable, it must be because it is
pleasanter and more beneficial. But for Polus these define the content
of “what a man wants,” so he can no longer consistently dissent from
Socrates’ view.

A further very simple conceptual point is at issue here which Plato does
not bring out explicitly. Anyone who tries to explain good as meaning
“what X thinks to be good” is involved in a vicious-because both vacuous
and interminable-regress. For in order to understand this elucidation,
we must already understand good in some other way; if not, we are
involved in writing out our definition as “what X thinks to be ‘what X
thinks to be “what X thinks to. . .”’” Now, to attempt to define moral
terms by reference to how people in general define them presupposes
likewise that if one is not to be involved in such a regress, one
already grasps the moral concepts possessed by people in general. And it
is this that traps Polus.

His successor in the dialogue, Callicles, is not prepared to be trapped.
He grasps that what betraved both Polus and Gorgias was their
insufficiently systematic redefinition of moral terms. For Callicles the
supreme good is power to satisfy all desires. Callicles’ position is
indeed a complex one. He is contemptuous of the life of theorizing and
contemptuous therefore of Socrates. He is involved at once in two
disagreements with Socrates. The first is over the concept of desire.
Socrates argues that the man of boundless desires is like a leaky sieve,
never filled, never satisfied; therefore, to have great and violent
desires is to make it certain that you will not get what you want.
Unless our desires are delimited, they are not satisfiable. Callicles
refuses to accept this. All that we need to do at this point is to
underline the fact that the concepts of desire and of satisfaction
present problems which Callicles’ analysis passes by.

Secondly, when Callicles at an earlier stage in the dialogue proclaimed
the right of the strong man to rule, he clearly intended by this to
glorify the despot. Socrates, however, points out that the populace are
in an obvious sense stronger than the tyrant, and therefore on
Callicles’ view ought to rule. Callicles has therefore to redefine the
concept of the “stronger” as meaning the “more intelligent.” And this at
once raises for him the problem of what intelligence in a ruler consists
in. Before Socrates can compare his answer on this point to that of
Callicles, he clarifies certain key philosophical differences between
them. The first of Socrates’ points is that the pair of concepts
“good-bad” differs from the concepts “pleasure-pain” in that the former
are contradictories, the latter not. If I assert that something is in
some respect good, then it follows that I am committed to the view that
the same thing is not bad in the same respect; but according to Socrates
if I assert that something is pleasant in some respect, it does not
follow that it is not painful or unpleasant in the same respect. This
unfortunate argument depends upon a thoroughly misleading example. If I
am taking pleasure in eating because I am not yet satisfied, my
discomfort at not yet being satisfied and my pleasure coexist. So I
enjoy pleasure and pain simultaneously. But of course the pleasure is
and derives from one thing, the pain is and derives from another.

The opposite point that Socrates makes is that good and bad cannot be
synonymous with pleasant and painful, for we use good and bad in
evaluating pleasures and pains. Callicles thinks the good man to be
intelligent and courageous. But a coward may feel more relief than a
courageous man when danger is avoided, and so more pleasure. Callicles
is therefore persuaded to concede a distinction between kinds of
pleasure, and this is just what the Platonic Socrates needs. Socrates
then develops his own positive view, and in so doing, gains certain
permanent ground in moral philosophy. Callicles’ ideal is of a good
which consists in the pursuit of one’s desires without limit. Socrates
had already suggested that limitless desire is unsatisfiable desire; now
he argues that the concept of good is necessarily bound up with the
concept of observing a limit. And anything that is to count as a “way of
living” will necessarily have some order or form, by which we can
distinguish it from other ways of living. So any good which we desire
can only be specified by specifying the rules which would govern the
behavior which would be or procure that particular good.

Toward the close of the Gorgias there are two other important moments.
One is when Socrates attacks bitterly the line of Athenian statesmen
from Miltiades to Pericles whose expansionist policies taught the
Athenians to have desires without teaching them the connection between
the goods they might desire and the rule-governed order within which
alone goods can be realized. The second is the discussion of the
religious myth of judgment and punishment in the after-life; with this
myth, Plato symbolizes what is at stake in the choice between different
fundamental moral attitudes. Both the political and the religious
attitudes exemplified here are recurrent features of Plato’s thought
which are treated very misleadingly if conceived of as external to his
moral analyses. But in order to understand why this is so, we should
have to examine the political and metaphysical background to the
dialogues more fully, and before doing this, it is perhaps worth
reiterating in summary form a number of conclusions toward which an
inspection of the arguments in the Gorgias tends to push us.

The first of these is that the advice “Do whatever you want to” is
necessarily useless except in a severely restricted context. When
Socrates says that unquenchable desire is unsatisfiable desire, this is
not just a matter of there being always something more that is desired.
Rather it is that a desire is only satisfiable if it is given a
specified object. When we say to people, “Do whatever you want,” this
makes sense where there are a number of clearly defined alternatives and
we do not wish our preferences to weigh with the agent. But to say to
the agent who asks the general moral questions, How shall I live? what
shall I do?, “Do whatever you want to,” specifies no goal to be pursued.
The problem is to know which wants to to pursue, which to discourage,
and so on. The correct retort to the injunction “Gather ye rosebuds
while ye may” is, Which rosebuds?

It is a companion error to suppose in any case that my wants are given,
fixed, and determinate, while my choices are free. My wants are not
simply determinative of my choices; they are often enough the material
on which choice has to be exercised. This is blurred by conceiving of
moral concepts as part of the realm of convention, but of desires as
part of nature. Socrates does not of course pursue any of these points,
and he does not answer his own question any more than Gorgias answered
it. What he does is to state one necessary condition for an answer to
the question, What does a good consist in? The answer is that if
anything is to be a good, and a possible object of desire, it must be
specifiable in terms of some set of rules which might govern behavior.
The Calliclean injunction to break all rules-if you want to, that is-
does not make sense. For a man whose behavior was not rule-governed in
any way would have ceased to participate as an intelligible agent in
human society.

This is brought out not only by the content of the Gorgias but also by
its form. Even Callicles and Socrates share certain concepts, and the
dialogue form brings out the way in which it is this sharing which
enables Socrates to bring home to Callicles the internal incoherence of
Callicles’ view. This suggests that badness consists in a breach with a
form of life in which certain goods can be attained, for to share
concepts is always to share a form of life to some degree. And indeed
Socrates affirms explicitly in the Gorgias that what the bad man lacks
is an ability to κοινωνειν, to share a common life (κοινωνειν). Thus a
necessary step forward in specifying what is good is to specify the kind
of common life necessary for the good to be realized. This is the task
of the Republic.


