CHAPTER 5: PLATO: THE REPUBLIC
==============================

THE Republic opens with a request for a definition of δικαιοσύνη, and
the first book clarifies the nature of this request. The definition of
justice as “telling the truth and paying one’s debts” is rejected, not
only because it may sometimes be right to withhold the truth or not to
return what one has borrowed, but because no list of types of action
could supply what Plato is demanding. What he wants to know is what it
is about an action or class of actions which leads us to call it just.
He wants not a list of just actions, but a criterion for inclusion in or
exclusion from such a list. Again, a definition of justice as “doing
good to one’s friends and harm to one’s enemies” is rejected not just
because of the argument that to harm someone would be to make him
worse -that is, more unjust-with the consequence that the just man would
be involved in making men less just, but because any definition of
justice in terms of “doing good” and the like is bound to be
unilluminating. When Thrasymachus comes upon the scene he tells Socrates
that Socrates is not to offer him a definition which tells him that
justice is “the same as what is obligatory or useful or advantageous or
profitable or expedient.” Socrates retorts that this is like asking what
12 is and refusing to accept any answer of the form that it is twice 6,
or 3 times 4, or 6 times 2, or 4 times 3. But Socrates does accept the
task of offering a quite different kind of elucidation; it would be a
mistake to suppose that when Socrates does offer us a formula, namely
that justice is that state of affairs in which everyone has regard to
his own concerns, this is in itself the answer that was being sought.
This formula is unintelligible apart from the rest of the Republic, and
Thrasymachus is right to suppose that the search for expressions
synonymous with δικαιοσύνη would not be to the point. For to be puzzled
about a concept is not like being puzzled about the meaning of an
expression in a foreign language. To offer a verbal equivalent to an
expression about whose meaning we are conceptually puzzled will not help
us, for if what we are offered is a genuinely synonymous expression,
then all that puzzled us originally will puzzle us in the translation.
To understand a concept, to grasp the meaning of an expression, is
partially, but crucially to grasp its functions, to understand what can
and cannot be done with and through it. Moreover, we cannot decide what
words are to mean, or what role concepts are to play, by fiat. We may on
occasion wish to introduce a new concept and so legislate as to the
meaning of a new expression; but what we can say in a given situation is
limited by the common stock of concepts and the common grasp of their
functions. No objection to the Republic is therefore more misconceived
than that which would have been made by Humpty Dumpty (“When I use a
word . it means just what I choose it to mean-neither more nor less”)14
and which was in fact made by Professor Karl Popper when he wrote, “But
was Plato perhaps right? Does ‘justice’ perhaps mean what he says? I do
not intend to discuss such a question. . I believe that nothing depends
upon words, and everything upon our practical demands or decisions.”15
The point I have tried to make is that only those demands and decisions
are open to us which there are concepts available to express, and that
therefore the investigation of what concepts we either must or may use
is crucial.

Thrasymachus’ own elucidation of the concept of justice is as follows.
He does not believe that “just” means “What is to the interest of the
stronger”; but he does believe that, as a matter of historical fact,
rulers and ruling classes invented the concept and the standards of
justice for their own purposes, and that it is in fact more profitable
to do what is unjust rather than just. Socrates’ initial probing of
Thrasymachus’ position is highly reminiscent of the Gorgias. He
questions the concept of “the stronger” just as he did before, and he
argues that the τέχνη of ruling, on the analogy of the τέχνη of
medicine, must, if it is true art, be practiced for the benefit of those
upon whom it is exercised. Medicine is for the benefit of patients, not
for that of doctors, and so ruling must be for the benefit of the
people, not of the rulers. But this thoroughly ineffectual analogy only
belongs to the preliminary, sparring. The position that Socrates had
finally restated in the Gorgias is one which can be strikingly attacked
from Thrasymachus’ premises, and is so attacked by Socrates’ own
disciples Glaucon and Adeimantus. But before Socrates completes the
reiteration of his earlier attack on unlimited self-assertion-that
restraint within the personality and between people is a condition of
their well-being-he invokes the concept of ἀρετή, and the notion that
there is a specifically human virtue, to exercise which will be to be in
a state of well-being or happiness. Ἀρετή belongs now not to a man’s
specific social function, but to his function as a man. The connection
between virtue and happiness is written into this concept in what
initially must seem an arbitrary way; the rest of the argument of the
Republic is an attempt to remove this arbitrariness.

The revival of Thrasymachus’ case by Glaucon and Adeimantus runs as
follows. Men in a state of nature are moved entirely by self-interest;
the origin of laws lies in the moment when men discovered and agreed
that clashes of self-interest were so damaging that it was more to their
interest to forego doing injury to others than to continue in their
natural way of life, so risking any injury that others might do to them.
And ever since, men have obeyed the law only from fear of consequences;
if men could avoid suffering the ill consequences of their actions,
unlimited self-love would manifest itself openly instead of in
law-abiding disguises. Suppose two men, one man now apparently just, the
other unjust, were given a magic ring such as Gyges had to make himself
invisible, so that both had complete liberty of action; then both would
behave in the same way. They would, like Gyges, who seduced his queen
and murdered his king, pursue the path of complete self-aggrandizement.
That is, everyone prefers injustice to justice if he can be unjust
successfully.

This example depends on that fallacious portrait of the presocial,
natural man which I have already criticized. For Plato’s suggestion is
that perhaps Gyges with his ring is natural man. The superiority of the
present case over that originally put into the mouth of Thrasymachus is
that Plato now turns sharply toward the identification of self-interest
as a trait in social and not merely in natural man. He makes Adeimantus
stress that the conventionally virtuous and just citizen is on the side
of Thrasymachus, not of Socrates. For the Greek equivalent of the
bourgeois father teaches his children to pursue virtue and to flee vice
precisely and only because virtue brings rewards and vice has
unfortunate consequences both in this world and in the next. But if
these are the only reasons for praising virtue, how can justice in
itself and apart from any rewards, be more profitable than injustice?

Plato’s answer is to try to show what justice is, first in the state,
and then in the soul. He outlines a state in which all basic needs are
met. Three classes of citizen are required: artisans and laborers to
produce the material needs of society; soldiers to defend the state; and
rulers to organize its social life. The key transition here is from
recognizing three functions which have to be discharged in social life
to asserting that three distinct and separate classes of citizens are
needed, one to discharge each function. Plato relies for this transition
upon two beliefs, one not certainly true, and one certainly false. The
belief which is not certainly true is that one man is better to stick to
one job, that this form of the division of labor is under all possible
circumstances the best form; the belief which is certainly false is that
men are by nature divided up into men best suited for each of these
functions. Of this belief it might just be noted that it is invoked most
often by those who believe that people like themselves are well suited
to rule, while others are not; and that it ignores the fact that most
people have different capacities which do not exclude one another, let
alone the fact that in existing societies most abilities of most people
are unrealized. But Plato’s beliefs on this point were powerfully
reinforced by his doctrine of the tripartite soul.

The arguments for the tripartite soul are independent of those for the
tripartite state, but it is necessary for the doctrine of the tripartite
state that at least something like the doctrine of the tripartite soul
should be true. That the soul has parts is shown, according to Plato, by
the fact that it has conflicts. If a given man desires to drink (because
he is thirsty) and does not desire to drink (because he suspects the
condition of the water) at one

and the same time, then, since the same predicate cannot both hold and
not hold of the same subject in the same respect at one and the same
time, there must be at least two different subjects, of one of which we
are predicating the desire to drink and of the other of which we are
predicating the desire not to drink. The assumption which underlies this
argument is that a man cannot simultaneously desire to do something and
desire not to do it, in the same sense in which a man cannot
simultaneously move in a given direction and not move in that direction.
But where desires are concerned a man may desire some end, envisaged
under a particular description, and not desire it under some other
description. So a man may want to drink the water, because he is
thirsty, but want not to drink, in case he risks an illness. It might
perhaps seem that the short way to escape Plato’s argument here is to
say that the man just does not have incompatible desires. He desires to
quench his thirst, and he desires not to be ill, and it is merely a
contingent fact that this water would both quench his thirst and make
him ill. But to this the rejoinder might be that his desires remain
incompatible: for what the man desires is to drink this particular water
and what he fears is to drink this same water. Yet Plato is only right
in a sense about these being incompatible desires, and that they are
does not have any of the consequences which he supposes to follow. And
this is because the incompatibility belongs to the possibility of
satisfying both desires, not of having both desires. This is important
because Plato uses his bad argument to expound a distinction between
that part of the soul which is the appetites and that part which is the
reason, a distinction which exerts enormous pressure upon some
subsequent moral philosophy.

Plato’s picture of the parts of the soul is not in fact coherent.
Sometimes he speaks as though the rational part of the soul had one set
of desires and the appetitive part another; at other times, as if the
appetites were the desires, and reason essentially a check and restraint
upon them. He speaks as though the desire to drink was a nonrational
craving, the apprehension of danger from drinking an insight of reason.
But in fact we do not first have desires and then afterwards reason
about them; we learn-and we use our reason in learning-to desire certain
things (Plato does not distinguish the biologically determined appetite
from the conscious human desire), and the desire to quench one’s thirst
is as rational as the desire not to be injured by poison in the water.
It is just not true that only our restraint upon ourselves derives from
reflection; it is often upon reflection that we decide that we need to
drink. An irrational fear of being poisoned might be checked by a
reasonable desire to quench one’s thirst, just as much as vice versa-an
irrational desire to quench one’s thirst might be inhibited by a
rational fear of poison. What makes a desire reasonable or unreasonable
is its relation to our other purposes and choices, possible as well as
actual. A man may behave unreasonably by not allowing his desires play,
and desire may on occasion correct an agent’s would-be rational
assessments. But these facts Plato, and a long tradition which is to
follow him, rule out of court in order to maintain that rigid division
between reason and the appetites in which reason is always to be in the
right.

The original source of this distinction is of course not in Plato’s own
arguments from the alleged facts of conflict, but in his inherited
Pythagorean and Orphic beliefs in the separation of an immortal soul
from a body that is a prison and a tomb. But later writers, who might
have been unimpressed by the religious doctrine, have still been content
with the philosophical distinction. Plato himself gives a far more
interesting and positive account of desire in the Symposium; but even
here desire leads us away from this world in the end.

Plato’s doctrinal allegiances lead him in the Republic not merely to
draw false conclusions from the facts of conflict but also, as I have
just suggested, to misdescribe them. The essence of conflict of desire
is that it provides an occasion for choice on my part between my
desires, even if I do not choose. But Plato’s division of the soul into
parts makes conflict a tug of war, which could not be an occasion for
choice. “I” am not confronted with my desires. “I” am split between two
autonomous parties, reason and appetite; or else “I” am reason,
struggling against appetite. Nor is Plato consistent here with his other
writings. The Greek word for soul, ψοχή, means originally simply that
which makes the difference between life and death, between a man and a
corpse. Some early Greek thinkers identify the soul with a material
substance; the Pythagoreans with a harmony between the elements of the
body, a balance. Plato argues against both in the Phaedo that the soul
is an immaterial simple substance; that to be destroyed is to be divided
up into parts; and that since the soul has no parts it must be immortal.
Appetite in the Phaedo belongs to the body, so that the distinction
between reason and appetite remains a constant element, pointing to the
continuity of the religious background. But the Phaedo offers us no
grounds for believing in the division into parts of the soul.

The division of the soul in the Republic is not just between reason and
appetite; there is also the “spirited” part, which is concerned neither
with rational standards of behavior nor with bodily desires, but with
standards of honorable behavior, and with anger and indignation. Plato
tells the story of Leontius, who, overcome with desire, stares at the
corpses of executed criminals, cursing himself as he does so. The
Platonic moral is that anger and appetite can conflict. The spirited
part of the soul acts, when “it is not corrupted by a bad upbringing,”
as an agent of reason, being indignant when reason is overborne. So a
man who has been wronged feels indignant, but a man who feels that he is
in the wrong cannot find it in his nature to be indignant if he is made
to suffer in turn. So Plato says.

Men therefore fall into three classes depending upon which part of the
soul is dominant; this division is that required by the tripartite
state. Into which class a man falls may in part be a matter of his early
training, but cannot fundamentally be so determined. Plato believes that
there are born shoemakers and born rulers. Justice in the state is a
matter of everyone knowing his place. Of the four traditional virtues,
courage belongs to the class of auxiliary guardians whose function is
defense, and wisdom to the ruling guardians. Temperance is a virtue not
of a class, but of the society as a whole because “the desires of the
inferior multitude will be controlled by the desires and wisdom of the
superior few.” Justice belongs not to this nor to that class, nor to
particular relationships between classes, but to the society’s
functioning as a whole.

Justice in the soul is likewise a matter of each part of the soul
performing its proper and allotted function. An individual is wise in
virtue of reason ruling in him and brave in virtue of the spirited part
playing its role; an individual is temperate if his inferior bodily
appetites are ruled by his reason. But justice belongs not to this or
that part or relationship of the soul, but to its total ordering. The
two questions then arise, What sort of man will be just? and, How could
the just state come about? These questions are asked and answered
together, and this is no accident. When, later on, Plato comes to
discuss the corruption of state and soul he treats them as belonging
together. Moreover, the just man will rarely exist except in the just
state, where at least some men-the future rulers-are systematically
educated in justice. But the just state cannot possibly exist except
where there are just men. So the questions of how the state can come to
be and of how the just man is to be educated have to be posed together.
And so we reach the point where Plato brings on stage the ideal of the
philosopher-king.

Plato defines a philosopher by setting out an account of knowledge and
belief and then contrasting the philosopher, who knows, with the
nonphilosophical man, who at best has only true belief or opinion. The
argument begins from considering the meaning of pairs of predicates, and
the examples used are beautiful and ugly, just and unjust, and good and
bad. Plato says that “Since beautiful and ugly are opposite, they are
two; and so each of them is one.”16 But many things exhibit beauty and
many things are ugly. So that there is a difference between those who
are aware of this or that object as beautiful and those who grasp what
“beautiful itself” is. I use this expression “beautiful itself” (“αὐτὸ
τὸ καλόν”) to translate Plato’s innovating use of itself to convert an
adjective into an expression that names what the adjective is supposed
to mean or stand for. And I use the expression “mean or stand for” not
because I want to mislead the reader into supposing that “meaning” and
“standing for” are the same, but because Plato makes just this mistake.
The identification comes about in this way. Plato contrasts the man who
uses the word beautiful in an ordinary, confused way with the man who
has really grasped what beautiful means, and he interprets this contrast
as the contrast between the man who happens to be acquainted with a
number of beautiful objects and the man who is acquainted with that
which beautiful stands for. The former man is in possession only of
“belief”; his judgments are not reinforced by a well-grounded
understanding of the meaning of the expression which he uses. The latter
is in possession of knowledge; for he really understands what he says.

Knowledge (ἐπιστήμη) and belief or opinion (δόξα) can then be defined in
terms of contrasting classes of objects. Belief is concerned with the
world of sense perception and of change. Of this fleeting and evanescent
realm we can have at best only true opinion. Knowledge is concerned with
unchanging objects, about which we can have secure, rationally founded
views. Plato’s distinction between knowledge and belief is a complex
one. In part it is a straightforward distinction between those
convictions which, because they are acquired by reasoning and backed up
by argument, are not at the mercy of clever orators (that is, knowledge)
and those convictions which, being a matter of nonrational conditioning
anyway, are liable to change whenever subject to the techniques of
nonrational persuasion (that is, belief). But clearly this distinction
has nothing to do with the subject matter of our beliefs. It concerns
rather the different ways in which individuals may acquire and hold
their beliefs. Why, then, should Plato suppose that his distinction is
one of subject matter? The reason is that Plato thought himself to have
independent grounds for believing that no secure, rationally grounded
judgments could be made about the subject matter afforded by sense
perception. Some of these grounds were derived from earlier
philosophers. Both Heraclitus and Protagoras had emphasized the
relativity of judgments of sense perception. But the point that Plato is
concerned to make can be detached from the detail of their particular
doctrines.

If I can say of quite different objects that they are beautiful, and of
the same object at one time or from one point of view that it is
beautiful and at another time or from another point of view that it is
ugly, then the meaning of the predicates beautiful and ugly cannot be
explained simply by referring to the objects to which they are applied.
This is not just because, as Plato pointed out in the passage cited
earlier, the objects are many and the

meaning single; it is also because the judgments are liable to
variation, and to contradiction by other judgments, whereas the one
thing that does not vary is the meaning. To put it in a much later mode
of speech, Plato is engaged in elucidating what is involved in
describing two or more uses of an expression as instances of the use of
one and the same predicate. The difference from Socrates is that
Socrates saw only that the use of ethical predicates must be governed by
criteria; whereas Plato supposed that if this is to be so, that if there
are to be objective standards for the use of such predicates, it must be
the case that such predicates are used to refer to objects, and objects
belonging not to the multifarious, changing world of sense, but to
another, unchanging world, apprehended by the intellect precisely
through its dialectical ascent, whereby it grasps the meaning of
abstract nouns, and of other general terms. These objects are the Forms,
through the imitation of which or participation in which the objects of
sense perception have the characters that they have.

The philosopher is the man who has learned through a training in
abstraction to acquaint himself with the Forms. He alone therefore
really understands the meaning of predicates, and he alone has genuinely
founded moral and political views. His training is primarily in geometry
and in dialectic. By dialectic Plato understands a process of rational
argument which is a development from the dialogue of the Socratic
interrogation. Beginning from some proposition which has been advanced
for consideration, one ascends in one’s search for justifications up a
deductive ladder until one reaches the indubitable certainties of the
Forms. What Plato presents in the Republic is a progress in rational
argument, culminating in a vision of the Form of the Good (that is, in a
vision of what the predicate good stands for-that in virtue of which it
has meaning). In the Republic there is, too, a strongly religious
attitude toward the supreme Form, the Form of the Good. The Form of the
Good is not one among the other Forms we contemplate: they belong to the
realm of unchanging existence-the Form of the Good dwells beyond
existence. Just as it is that by virtue of the sun’s light we see
everything else, but if we look into the sun itself we are dazzled, so
it is that in the intellectual light given out by the Form of the Good
we grasp the other Forms, but we cannot contemplate the Form of the Good
itself.

Good, then, for Plato-at least in the Republic-is only used properly
when it is used as the name of a transcendent entity or when it is used
to express the relation of other things to that entity. The difficulties
in Plato’s conception of Forms were first formulated by Plato himself in
later dialogues; at the moment we need only note that to suppose that
there are Forms does not in fact do anything to solve the problem which
Plato is posing in the Republic-that of how a predicate with a single
meaning can be applied in many different ways and to many different
subjects. For to say that a predicate derives its meaning from one
primary case leaves it entirely obscure as to how this predicate is then
capable of being applied in other cases. But just this was what we
wanted to know. Moreover, we are at once involved in logical oddity. For
if this is how we answer our problem, we are involved in saying that the
primary application of beautiful is to the Form of Beauty, that of high
to the Form of Height, and so on. But to say that “Beauty is beautiful”
or that “Height is high” is clearly not to speak with a clear meaning.
This fact Plato himself brought out in later criticisms of his own
position.

What is important is that the theory of meaning has been decisively
brought on the scene. The logician has entered moral philosophy for
good. But even though, from now on, the systematic and self-conscious
logical analysis of moral concepts will be at the heart of moral
philosophy, it can nonetheless never be the whole of moral philosophy.
For we have to understand not only the logical interrelations of moral
concepts, rules, and the like but also the point and purpose such rules
serve. This involves us both in the theory of human purposes and motives
and in the theory of society, since different kinds of wants and needs
are dominant in different social orders. We can see all three interests,
the epistemological, the psychological, and the political, meeting in
the central parts of the Republic. For Plato’s first theory, that we can
understand what goodness is, what justice is, what courage is, and so
on, by seeing them exhibited in a certain type of state and a certain
type of soul, now has to be reconciled with Plato’s second theory, that
we can only understand what goodness, justice, and the rest of them are
if we become acquainted with the relevant Forms. However, not only is a
reconciliation not difficult, but it enables Plato to make his earlier
contentions more cogent. The rulers of the just state, in whom the rule
of reason is present, are rational in virtue of an education which has
enabled them to apprehend the Forms. In the just state the philosopher
is king; only he can bring into being and maintain in being a state in
which justice is embodied both in the political arrangements and in the
soul. It follows that the class division of the just society can, as
Plato had earlier suggested, be maintained by educating some to be
rulers, others to be auxiliaries, most to be ruled; the use of eugenic
controls and selection methods is to insure that those fit for the
education of rulers receive it. To make the common people content they
will be told a story about the metals in the soul: precious in the souls
of rulers, base in the souls of the ruled. Plato does not believe in a
correlation between intelligence and some merely accidental property,
such as a color of the skin, in the way that racists in South Africa and
Mississippi believe; he does, however, believe in the occurrence of
inborn intelligence, or the lack of it, in the way that conservative
educationalists do; and he believes that ingenious propaganda-the
telling of what he calls “noble lies”-can insure that inferior people
will accept the fact of their own inferiority.

Those of superior intelligence proceed to the vision of the Forms in
ways that Plato delineates by means of two different parables, that of
the Line and that of the Cave. The Line is divided horizontally; below
the division lie the realms of imagining and perceiving, while above it
lie those of mathematical entities-which for Plato are closely related
to Forms-and of the Forms. The passages about the Cave picture men
chained so that they cannot see the daylight; behind them a fire and a
puppet show are so contrived that the prisoners see a procession of
shadows on the wall. They believe that the words in their language refer
to the shadows and that the shadows are the sole reality. A man who
escaped from the Cave would slowly accustom himself to the light of the
world outside. He would pick out, first, shadows and reflections; then
physical objects; and finally, the heavenly bodies and the sun. This is
for Plato a parable of the ascent to the Forms. The man who returns to
the Cave will be unaccustomed to the darkness; he will not for some time
identify the shadows in the Cave as well as do those of his former
companions who never left the darkness; and he will cause great
resentment by his subsequent claims that the shadows are devised and
unreal and that the true reality lies outside the Cave. So great will
the resentment be, that if the chained men could, they would kill this
man from the outer world-precisely as the Athenians killed Socrates.

What, then, is the philosopher who has ascended to the Forms to do? It
will only be at the rarest moments in history, and possibly it will
never happen at all, that he will have the possibility of intervening to
create the just state. Plato himself, first in his response to the
Athenians’ treatment of Socrates, and then in his own disillusionment
with the tyrannical rulers of Syracuse, has a deep pessimism about
political life. But if the ideal state can never become real, what was
the point of depicting it? Plato’s answer is that it provides a standard
against which we can judge actual states. This is part of what Plato
himself is doing when he pictures a series of stages of decline from the
ideal state and from the just soul; in so doing he brings out further
the intrinsic connection which he believes to hold between politics and
psychology.

The first stage in decline is the timocratic state; here the military
and the guardians have fallen out, and the state is based on the
military values of honor with some infusion of the values of private
property. The next stage, the oligarchical, is one in which the class
structure is maintained only in the interest of the ruling class, and
not at all in the interest of the whole state; the rich use the class
structure to exploit the poor. In the third phase the poor revolt and
create a democracy, in which every citizen is equally free to pursue his
will and his personal aggrandizement, while finally the would-be despot
is able to enlist from such a democracy enough dissatisfied malcontents
to create a tyranny. Plato’s aim here is at least twofold; he has placed
the actual forms of constitution of Greek city-states upon a moral
scale, so that even if we cannot have the ideal, we know that timocracy
(traditional Sparta) is best, oligarchy (Corinth) and democracy (Athens)
worse, and tyranny (Syracuse) worst of all. But his argument also brings
out that one reason why they can be morally evaluated is because to each
type of constitution a type of personality corresponds. In timocracy the
appetites are restrained and ordered, but not by reason. Honor instead
has this role. In oligarchy they are still disciplined, but only by the
love of wealth and a regard for stability which springs from a regard
for property. In democracy every taste, every inclination has equal sway
in the personality. And in tyranny-in the men with despotic souls-the
baser appetites, that is the bodily ones, exercise absolute and
irrational control. Plato now uses this classification of personality
types in order to return to the question of the justification of justice
in the form in which Glaucon and Adeimantus had raised it. To do this
Plato compares the external and opposed positions of the just man and
the despotic man, who now turns out to be the extreme personality type
of the unjust man.

Plato has three arguments to show that the just life is happier than the
unjust one. The first is that the unjust man sets no curb upon his
desires, and so his desires are without limit. But, being limitless, his
desires can never be satisfied, and so he will always be discontented.
The second argument is that only the philosopher is in a position to
contrast the pleasures of reason with those of limitless appetite and
sensuality, for he alone knows both sides. Finally, it is argued that
the pleasures of intellect are genuine, while what the man of appetite
takes to be pleasure is often merely a cessation of pain or discomfort
(as eating relieves hunger) and at best far less real (in terms of the
notion of the real as the unchanging and immaterial) than what the
intellect delights in. These are bad arguments. The third depends for
part of what it seeks to prove upon the arguments about the Forms, and
it in any case ignores-with Plato’s characteristic and utterly
deplorable puritanism-the many genuine bodily pleasures; the second is
simply false-even in Plato’s terms the philosopher is no more acquainted
with the pleasures of limitless desire than the sensualist is with the
delights of rational control; while the first argument fallaciously
infers from the premise that the sensualist will always have appetities
which have not yet been satisfied the conclusion that he will always be
and feel unsatisfied and dissatisfied. But it is not the badness of the
particular arguments that is so important. Given Plato’s psychology,
only bad arguments were available to him. For the complete divorce of
reason and desire in the soul entails that the contrast has to be
between reason on the one hand and senseless and uncontrolled appetite
on the other. These are the only alternatives available, given the
Platonic psychology; but in fact they are not, of course, the only or
even the most important alternatives. In order to vindicate justice
against injustice, Plato accepts the criterion implied by Thrasymachus’
exaltation of successful worldly, and especially, successful political
ambition-the vulgar criterion of pleasure-and argues that the unjust but
successful tyrant has less pleasure, is more discontented, than the just
man, even than the just man unjustly done to death. But to do this, he
has to equate the unjust man with the man who pursues pleasure
limitlessly and senselessly. And Plato has to make this equation, since
reason, in the Platonic scheme, can only dominate, not inform or guide,
appetite, and appetite of itself is essentially irrational. The man who
in fact threatens the prestige of justice is not the senseless
sensualist or the unchecked tyrant, but much more often l’homme moyen
sensuel, the man who is everything, including unjust and vicious, in
moderation, the man whose reason restrains his vice today in the
interests, not of virtue, but of vice tomorrow. This is the man who
praises virtue for what he can get out of it in the way of wealth,
office, and reputation, and this is the man whom Glaucon and Adeimantus
had in mind. This was why the case that Glaucon and Adeimantus
propounded was so much more of a threat to Plato than the case put by
Thrasymachus. But Plato’s conceptual scheme tempts him into considering
this man, whom he observes and describes with tolerable accuracy in the
oligarchical and democratic states, as merely a less extreme version of
despotic man. But despotic man is drawn so extremely that what is
described is no longer a possible moral type. I can be said to pursue
pleasure only if I am pursuing identifiable goals and making choices
between alternatives in terms of them. The man who can no longer make
choices but passes on heedlessly and inevitably from one action to the
next is not a possible normal human type, but rather a compulsive
neurotic. And this may have been what

Plato wished to describe, for he very strikingly connects the behavior
of this man with the pursuit of those fantasies of which most men are
conscious only in dreams, thus strikingly anticipating Freud. But any
classification which entails making the way of life of l’homme moyen
sensuel merely a moderate version of the compulsive behavior of the
neurotic, and lumps both together in contrast with rationality, is
thereby condemned as a classification. Nor does the myth with which the
Republic closes help Plato. For the suggestion that in the realm after
death the just will be rewarded and the unjust punished appropriately
depends for its force upon the notion that justice is indeed superior to
injustice, that the just man deserves his reward and the unjust his
punishment. So that the question of the justification of justice is
still left without a clear answer. A very brief reconsideration of the
central arguments of the Republic makes it clear why on Plato’s terms
this has to be so.

The argument begins from the need for an understanding of the meaning of
ethical predicates apart from their particular applications. This
starting point will recur in the history of philosophy in writers as
different from Plato as St. Augustine and Wittgenstein. When we inquire
about what it is for something to be just or red or equal, the rational
first move is to offer examples, to try and give a list of just actions
or red objects or cases of equality. But such a list misses the point of
the inquiry. What we want to know is not which actions are just, but
what it is in virtue of which actions are just. What is it that enables
us to mark off those cases which genuinely belong on our list from those
that do not? We need a criterion. Wittgenstein will suggest that the
criterion is embodied in a rule, and the rule in a socially established
practice. Augustine will suggest that the criterion is given by an
interior illumination which is a gift of God. Plato finds his criterion
in the knowledge of the Forms. But knowledge of the Forms is accessible
only to a few, and only to those few who have either enjoyed the
educational disciplines of the as yet nonexistent ideal state or are
among the very rare natures which are both philosophically capable and
inclined and also not corrupted by the social environment. It follows
not only that only these few will be able to perform the task of
justifying justice but also that only to them will the justification be
intelligible and convincing. Thus the social order which the Platonic
concept of justice enjoins could only be accepted by the majority of
mankind as a result of the use of nonrational persuasion (or force).

Everything therefore turns for Plato on the possibility of establishing,
first, that there are Forms and that knowledge of them has the role
which he claims, and second, that only a minority are capable of this
knowledge. The latter is merely asserted and never argued for. The
former depends upon arguments about which Plato himself, as we shall
see, came to have serious doubts. But behind all Plato’s explicit
statements there lies a further assumption which must now be brought
into the open.

We speak of justification in at least two radically different types of
context. Within a discipline like geometry the justification of a
theorem consists in showing how it follows validly from the axioms.
There is no question here of what counts as a justification for one
person not counting as a justification to another. Within the field of
conduct, however, this is not so. To justify one course of action as
against another is not only to show that it accords with some standard
or conduces to some end but also to show this to someone who accepts the
relevant standard or shares the particular end. In other words,
justifications of this type are always justifications to somebody.
Aristotle later tries to show how there are certain specifically human
ends in the light of which policies of action can be justified to
rational beings as such. But Plato restricts the class to whom his
justifications can be addressed to those who have acquired knowledge of
the Forms. When, subsequently, he discusses the justification of justice
in terms independent of this knowledge, that is in the passages where he
compares types of state and of soul, he in fact falls back on
comparisons, half a priori, half empirical, which are bound on his own
terms to founder-for they presumably belong to the world of opinion, of
δόƷα, not of ἐπιστήμη, of knowledge-except against the background of a
transcendental knowledge which has been pointed to but never brought on
the scene.

One root of Plato’s mistake here is his confusion of the kind of
justification which is in place in geometry with that which is in place
in matters of conduct. To treat justice and good as the

names of Forms is to miss at once one essential feature of justice and
goodness-namely, that they characterize not what is, but what ought to
be. Sometimes what ought to be is, but more often not. And it always
makes sense to ask of any existing object or state whether it is as it
ought to be. But justice and goodness could not be objects or states of
affairs about which it would make sense to inquire in this way.
Aristotle was to make very much this criticism of Plato; Plato’s own
blindness to it is one contributory factor to his curious combination of
an apparent total certitude as to what goodness and justice are, and a
willingness to impose his own certitudes upon others, with a use of
profoundly unsatisfactory arguments to support his convictions.


