CHAPTER 6: POSTSCRIPT TO PLATO
==============================

THE DIFFICULTY of the Republic lies in part in the fact that Plato tries
to achieve so much in so little space. The question, What is justice? is
originally put as a simple request for a definition; but it becomes an
attempt to characterize both a virtue which can be manifested in
individual lives and a form of political life in which virtuous men will
be at home, insofar as they can ever be at home in the world of change
and of unreality. Both have already been described in the course of
outlining the arguments of the Republic; what remains is to stress their
internal connection. For in fact Plato’s morals and Plato’s politics are
closely interdependent. Each logically requires to be completed by the
other. We can best understand that this is so by examining the structure
of two dialogues of Plato, one wholly devoted to the question of how the
individual should live, and the other entirely concerned with politics.
In each case we shall discover that the argument ends in mid-air, and
that we are forced to look elsewhere for a complementary argument. The
first of these dialogues is the Symposium, a work which belongs to the
same middle period of Plato’s life as the Republic does; the second is
the Laws, which was written at the very end of Plato’s life. Socrates is
the central character of the Symposium, and this is moreover the
pre-Platonic Socrates, the teacher of Alcibiades and the target for
Aristophanes. By the time of the Laws Socrates is no longer present in
the dialogue at all. This in itself emphasizes the sharp contrast: the
agnostic Socrates would never have set himself up as a legislator.

The Symposium is an account of a drinking party to celebrate Agathon’s
victory in a dramatic competition. The guests compete, too, in making
speeches about the nature of ἔρως, sometimes translated as “love.” But
if it is so translated, one must recall that ἔρως hovers halfway between
love and desire, and that the pre-Socratic philosophers had made it the
name for whatever impulses drive all beings in nature toward their goals
as well as for the specifically human impulses to grasp and to possess.
In the Symposium Aristophanes explains ἔρως by an extended joke, a myth
about human origins. Men originally had four arms, four legs, and so
on-were, indeed, like two of our present human beings fastened together.
Being far stronger and more adroit like this than they are now, they
threatened the hegemony of the gods, who overcame this threat by an act
of separation. Ever since, men, being but half-beings, have wandered
through the world searching for the being who will complete them. The
difference between heterosexual and homosexual love is explained with
reference to the sort of being which was originally divided in two, and
hence to the sort of being each individual needs to complete his nature.
(We may note that this is also used to explain what is taken for granted
by all the characters, the superiority of homosexual to heterosexual
love.)

Ἔρως is thus desire for what we do not possess. The lover is a man who
is unsatisfied. But is love in fact such that we can only love what we
do not have? Socrates in his speech recounts the doctrine into which he
was initiated by the priestess Diotima.

Ἔρως, according to her account, is a desire which will not be satisfied
by any particular object in the world. The lover ascends from the love
of particular beautiful objects and people to the love of αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν,
beauty itself, and at this point the lover’s search is accomplished,
because this is the good which the soul seeks. The object of desire is
what is good, but good does not mean, is not defined as, “what the soul
desires.” “There is certainly a doctrine by which lovers are men
searching for the other half of themselves; but on my view love is not
desire either of the half or of the whole, unless that half or whole
happens to be good.” Good therefore is not just that which we happen to
desire at any given moment; it is that which would satisfy us, and which
would continue to satisfy us once we had made the ascent of abstraction
from particulars to the Form of the Beautiful. This ascent has to be
learned; even Socrates had to receive this account from Diotima. In the
Symposium itself Plato draws no political morals from this; but what
morals could be drawn if we were to accept what is said in the
Symposium?

The good can be achieved only through an education of a particular kind,
and if this education is to be available to more than a random selection
of mankind, it will have to be institutionalized. What is more, the
institutions of the educational system will have to be directed and
controlled by those who have already made the prerequisite ascent from
the vision of particulars to the vision of the Forms. Thus, from the
Symposium with its entirely nonpolitical argument-the dialogue ends with
everyone else drunk and asleep while Socrates explains at dawn to a
barely awake Agathon and Aristophanes that the man with a genius for
tragedy must also have a genius for comedy and vice versa-we can infer a
picture of a society with an educational system directed from the top.

Everything of course depends upon the connection between good and the
Forms. Plato’s first correct insight is that we use the concept of good
in order to evaluate and grade possible objects of desire and
aspiration. Hence the also correct conclusion that good cannot simply
mean “what men desire.” His second correct insight is that the good must
therefore be what is worth pursuing and desiring; it must be a possible
and an outstanding object of desire. But his false conclusion is that
the good must therefore be found among the transcendental,
out-of-this-world objects, the Forms, and hence that the good is not
something that ordinary people can seek out for themselves in the daily
transactions of this life. Either knowledge of the good is communicated
by a special religious revelation (as it is by the priestess Diotima to
Socrates) or it is to be reached by a long intellectual discipline at
the hands of authoritative teachers (as in the Republic).

The Forms are important to Plato both for religious and for logical
reasons. They provide us both with an eternal world not subject to
change and decay and with an account of the meaning of predicative
expressions. Therefore, when Plato encountered radical difficulties in
the theory of Forms he reached a point of crisis in his philosophical
development. The most central of these difficulties appears in the
dialogue called the Parmenides and is presented in the so-called Third
Man argument. Where we have to (or more) objects to which the same
predicate applies, because they share a common characteristic, we apply
that predicate in virtue of the fact that both objects resemble a common
Form. But now we have a class of three objects, the two original objects
plus the Form, which must all resemble each other, and thus have a
common characteristic, and hence be such that the same predicate applies
to all three. To explain this we must posit a further Form; and so we
embark on a regress, in which nothing about common predication is
explained because a further explanation is always demanded, no matter
how far we may go. These and kindred difficulties led Plato toward a
series of logical inquiries which he himself never brought to a
conclusion; some of his later lines of thought prefigure modern
developments in logical analysis, while others anticipate Aristotle’s
published criticism of Platonic positions, and may even have resulted
from the young Aristotle’s spoken ciriticsms. Yet Plato himself quite
clearly never abandoned belief in the Forms. His puzzlement about them
may, however, explain a curious gap in the Laws.

The Laws is a work which reminds us that Plato has an independent
interest in political philosophy. The Laws concerns the nature of a
society in which virtue is universally inculcated. In the first parts of
this very long work the emphasis is upon the nature of inculcation; in
the later parts practical proposals for legislation to be enacted in the
(imaginary) about-to-be-founded Cretan city of Magnesia are discussed.
As with the society of the Republic, there is to be a hierarchical order
of rulers and ruled in the city. As with the society of the Republic,
true virtue is only possible for those who belong to the restricted
class of the rulers. But in the Republic the whole emphasis was upon the
education of the rulers. In the Laws there is nothing like this. The
education of the rulers is discussed only in the last book, and then not
at great length. And this can be understood in the light of Plato’s
mature puzzlement about the Forms. The rulers are certainly going to
have to grasp the nature of the Forms; but Plato does not and perhaps
cannot tell us just what it is that they are going to have to grasp.
Certainly the education of the rulers is represented as going further
and being more exacting than that of the mass of the citizens. But it is
in what Plato has to say about the mass of the citizens and their
education that the fascination of the Laws resides.

In the Republic the role of ordinary people in the state corresponds to
that of appetite in the soul. But the relation between reason and
appetite is depicted as a purely negative one; reason restrains and
checks the nonrational impulses of appetite. In the Laws the positive
development of desirable habits and traits takes the place of this
restraint. The common people are encouraged to live in accordance with
virtue, and both education and the laws are to nurture them in this way
of life. But when they live in accordance with the precepts of virtue,
it is because they have been conditioned into and habituated to such a
way of life, and not because they understand the point of it. That
understanding is still restricted to the rulers. This emerges most
clearly in discussion of the question of the existence of the gods or
god. (For sophisticated Greeks of Plato’s period singular and plural
expressions about the divine appear to be interchangeable.) In the
Republic explicit references to the divine are sporadic. Stories of the
traditional gods, purged of immoral and unworthy actions, will have
their part in education. But the only true divinity appears to be the
Form of the Good. In the Laws, however, the existence of the divine has
become the cornerstone of morals and politics. “The greatest question .
is whether we do or do not think rightly about the gods and so live
well.” The divine is important in the Laws because it is identified with
law; to be obedient before the law is to be obedient before god. The
divine also seems to represent the general primacy of spirit over
matter, soul over body; on this is founded the argument for the
existence of god introduced in Book X.

The ordinary people are to be induced to believe in gods, because it is
important that all men should believe in gods who attend to human
affairs, and who are not subject to human weakness in that attention.
But the rulers are to be men who have “toiled to acquire complete
confidence in the existence of the gods” by intellectual effort. What
others hold as a result of conditioning and tradition they have grasped
by the use of rational proof. Suppose, however, that a member of the
ruling group comes to think that he has found a flaw in the required
proof- what then? Plato gives a clear answer in Book XII. If this
doubter keeps his doubts to himself, then well and good. But if he
insists on disseminating them, then the Nocturnal Council, the supreme
authority in the hierarchy of Magnesia, will condemn him to death. The
absence of Socrates from the dialogue is underlined by this episode. His
prosecutors would have had an even easier task in Magnesia than they had
in Athens.

Plato’s determination to uphold a paternalistic and totalitarian
politics is clearly independent of any particular version of the theory
of Forms; for long after he has abandoned the version which in the
Republic helps to sustain such a politics, he is prepared to advocate
the political views which it sustained. But it is also clear that
Plato’s political philosophy is not merely only justifiable if, but is
only intelligible if, some theory of values as residing in a
transcendent realm to which there can be access only for an
intellectually trained elite can be shown to be plausible. This is the
connection between the nonpolitical vision of the Symposium and the
entirely political vision of the Laws. But what is the turn in Plato’s
thought which transformed Socrates from hero into potential victim? We
can distinguish at least two turning points.

The first is the rejection of the Socratic self-knowledge through the
discovery of one’s own ignorance; the second is the belief that to give
true answers to the Socratic questions somehow imposes an obligation to
incarnate these answers in social forms. This belief is a curious blend
of political realism with totalitarian fantasy. That the possibility of
living a virtuous life depends for most people upon the existence of the
right kind of social structure does not entail that we ought to create a
social structure in which virtue is imposed. Indeed, on Plato’s own view
virtue is not imposed: it is either rationally apprehended by the few,
or it is impossible, its place being taken by an externally conforming
obedience, for the many. But it does not follow that Plato did not
believe in imposing virtue; but rather that the confusion imbedded in
his beliefs obscured from him that this was what he believed in.


