CHAPTER 7: ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS
=============================

“EVERY CRAFT and every inquiry, and similarly every action and project,
seems to aim at some good; hence the good has been well defined as that
at which everything aims.” The book which Aristotle opens with this
trenchant sentence is traditionally known as the Nicomachean Ethics (it
was either dedicated to or edited by Aristotle’s son Nicomachus), but
its subject matter is declared to be “politics.” And the work which is
called the Politics is presented as the sequel to the Ethics. Both are
concerned with the practical science of human happiness in which we
study what happiness is, what activities it consists in, and how to
become happy. The Ethics shows us what form and style of life are
necessary to happiness, the Politics what particular form of
constitution, what set of institutions, are necessary to make this form
of life possible and to safeguard it. But to say only this is
misleading. For the word πολιτικός does not mean precisely what we mean
by political; Aristotle’s word covers both what we mean by political and
what we mean by social and does not discriminate between them. The
reason for this is obvious. In the small-scale Greek city-state, the
institutions of the πόλις are both those in which policy and the means
to execute it are determined and those in which the face-to-face
relationships of social life find their home. In the assembly a citizen
meets his friends; with his friends he will be among fellow members of
the assembly. There is a clue here to the understanding of parts of the
Ethics which later on we shall have to follow up. For the moment we must
return to the first sentence.

Good is defined at the outset in terms of the goal, purpose, or aim to
which something or somebody moves. To call something good is to say that
it is under certain conditions sought or aimed at. There are numerous
activities, numerous aims, and hence numerous goods. To see that
Aristotle is completely right in establishing this relationship between
being good and being that at which we aim, let us consider three points
about the use of the word good. First, if I aim at something, try to
bring about some state of affairs, that I so aim is certainly not
sufficient to justify my calling whatever I aim at good; but if I call
what I aim at good, I shall be indicating that what I seek is what is
sought in general by people who want what I want. If I call what I am
trying to get good-a good cricket bat or a good holiday, for example-by
using the word good, I invoke the criteria characteristically accepted
as a standard by those who want cricket bats or holidays. That this is
genuinely so is brought out by a second point: to call something good
and to allow that it is not a thing which anyone who wanted that sort of
thing would want would be to speak unintelligibly. In this good differs
from red. That people in general want or do not want red objects is a
contingent matter of fact; that people in general want what is good is a
matter of the internal relationship of the concept of being good and
being an object of desire. Or to make the same point in a third way: if
we were trying to learn the language of a strange tribe, and a linguist
asserted of one of their words that it was to be translated by good, but
this word was never applied to what they sought or pursued, although its
use was always accompanied, say, by smiles, we should know a priori that
the linguist was mistaken.

“If, then, there is some one goal among those which we pursue in our
actions, which we desire for its own sake, and if we desire other things
for its sake, and if we do not choose everything for the sake of
something else-in that case we should proceed to choose ad infinitum, so
that all desire would be empty and futile -it is plain that this would
be the good and the best of goods.”17 Aristotle’s definition of the
supreme good leaves it open for the moment whether there is or is not
such a good. Some medieval scholastic commentators, doubtless with an
eye to theological implications, rewrote Aristotle as if he had written
that everything is chosen for the sake of some good, and that therefore
there is (one) good for the sake of which everything is chosen. But this
fallacious inference is not in Aristotle. Aristotle’s procedure is to
inquire whether anything does in fact answer to his description of a
possible supreme good, and his method is to examine a number of opinions
which have been held on the topic. Before he does this, however, he
issues two warnings. The first is to remember that every sort of inquiry
has its own standards and possibilities of precision. In ethics we are
guided by general considerations to general conclusions, which
nonetheless admit of exceptions. Courage and wealth are good, for
example, but wealth sometimes causes harm and men have died as a result
of being brave. What is required is a kind of judgment altogether
different from that of mathematics. Moreover, young men will be no good
at “politics”: they lack experience and hence they lack judgment. I
mention these dicta of Aristotle only because they are so often quoted;
certainly there is something very middle-aged about the spirit which
Aristotle breathes. But we ought to remember that what we have now is
the text of lectures, and we ought not to treat what are clearly
lecturer’s asides as if they are developed arguments.

Aristotle’s next move is to give a name to his possible supreme good:
the name εὐδαιμονία is badly but inevitably translated by happiness,
badly because it includes both the notion of behaving well and the
notion of faring well. Aristotle’s use of this word reflects the strong
Greek sense that virtue and happiness, in the sense of prosperity,
cannot be entirely divorced. The Kantian injunction which a million
puritan parents have made their own, “Do not seek to be happy, seek to
be deserving of happiness,” makes no sense if εὐδαίμων and εὐδαιμονίa
are substituted for happy and happiness. Once again the change of
language is also a change of concepts. In what does εὐδαιμονία consist?
Some say in pleasure, some say in wealth, some say in honor and
reputation; and some have said that there is a supreme good over and
above all particular goods which is the cause of their being good.
Aristotle dismisses pleasure rather brusquely at this point-“The many in
choosing a life fit for cattle exhibit themselves as totally
slavish”-but later on he is to deal with it at great length. Wealth
cannot be the good, for it is only a means to an end; and men prize
honor and reputation not as such, but they prize being honored because
they are virtuous. So honor is envisaged as a desirable by-product of
virtue. Does happiness, then, consist in virtue? No, because to call a
man virtuous is to talk not of the state he is in, but of his
disposition. A man is virtuous if he would behave in such and such a way
if such and such a situation were to occur. Hence a man is no less
virtuous while asleep or on other occasions when he is not exercising
his virtues. More than this, however, a man can be virtuous and wretched
and such a man is certainly not εὐδαίμων.

Aristotle at this point challenges not merely the Kantians and the
puritans to come, but also the Platonists. Plato in both the Gorgias and
the Republic looked back to Socrates and asserted that “it is better to
suffer tortures on the rack than to have a soul burdened with the guilt
of doing evil.” Aristotle does not confront this position directly: he
merely emphasizes that it is better still both to be free from having
done evil and to be free from being tortured on the rack. The fact that,
strictly speaking, what Aristotle says and what Plato says are not
inconsistent could be misleading. The point is that if we begin by
asking for an account of goodness which is compatible with the good man
suffering any degree of torture and injustice, the whole perspective of
our ethics will be different from that of an ethics which begins from
asking in what form of life doing well and faring well may be found
together. The first perspective will end up wth an ethics which is
irrelevant to the task of creating such a form of life. Our choice
between these two perspectives is the choice between an ethics which is
engaged in telling us how to endure a society in which the just man is
crucified and an ethics which is concerned with how to create a society
in which this no longer happens. But to talk like this makes Aristotle
sound like a revolutionary beside Plato’s conservatism. And this is a
mistake. For, indeed, Plato’s memory of Socrates insures that even at
his worst he has a deep dissatisfaction with all actually existing
societies, while Aristotle is in fact always extremely complacent about
the existing order. And yet Aristotle is at this point in his argument
far more positive than Plato. “No one would call a man suffering
miseries and misfortunes happy, unless he were merely arguing a case.”

Plato’s making goodness independent of any this-worldly hap- piness
follows, of course, from his concept of the good as well as from his
memories of Socrates. It is this concept of the good which Aristotle now
proceeds to attack. For Plato the word good’s paradigmatic meaning is
given by considering it as the name of the Form of the Good;
consequently, good is a single and unitary notion. Of whatever we use
it, we ascribe the same relationship to the Form of the Good. But in
fact we use the word in judgments in all the categories-of some
subjects, such as god or intelligence, of the mode of a subject, how it
is, the excellence it has, its possession of the right amount of
something, its existence in the right time or place for something, and
so on. Moreover, on the Platonic view everything that falls under a
single Form should be the subject of a single science or inquiry; but
things that are good are dealt with by a number of sciences- such as,
for example, medicine and strategy. Thus Aristotle argues that Plato
cannot account for the diversity of uses of good. Moreover, the phrases
Plato uses to explain the concept of the Form of the Good are not in
fact explanatory. To speak of the good “itself” or “as such” does not
clearly add anything to good. To call the Form eternal is misleading:
that something lasts forever does not render it any the better, any more
than long-enduring whiteness is whiter than ephemeral whiteness.
Moreover, knowledge of Plato’s Form is of no use to those in fact
engaged in the sciences and crafts in which goods are achieved; they
appear to be able to do without this knowledge perfectly well. But the
heart of Aristotle’s criticism of Plato is in the sentence: “For even if
there is some unitary being which is the good, predicated of different
things in virtue of something they share or existing separated itself by
itself, plainly it would not be something to be done or attained by a
man; but it is something which is just that which we are now looking
for.” That is, good in the sense in which it appears in human language,
good in the sense of that which men seek or desire, cannot be the name
of a transcendental object. To call a state of affairs good is not
necessarily to say that it exists or to relate it to any object that
exists, whether transcendental or not; it is to place it as a proper
object of desire. And this brings us back to the identification of the
good with happiness in the sense of εὐδαιμονία.

That happiness is the final end or goal, the good (and that more than a
name is involved here), appears from considering two crucial properties
which anything which is to be the final end must possess, and which
happiness does in fact possess. The first of these is that it must be
something which is always chosen for its own sake and never merely as a
means to something else. There are many things which we can choose for
their own sake, but may choose for the sake of some further end. But
happiness is not among these. We may choose to pursue intelligence,
honor, pleasure, wealth, or what we will for the sake of happiness; we
could not choose to pursue happiness in order to secure intelligence,
honor, pleasure, or wealth. What sort of “could not” is this? Clearly,
Aristotle is saying that the concept of happiness is such that we could
not use it of anything but a final end. Equally, happiness is a
self-sufficient good; by self-sufficiency Aristotle intends that
happiness is not a component in some other state of affairs, nor is it
just one good among others. In a choice between goods, if happiness were
offered along with one but not the others, this would always and
necessarily tilt the scales of choice. Thus, to justify some action by
saying “Happiness is brought by this” or “Happiness consists in doing
this” is always to give a reason for acting which terminates argument.
No further why? can be raised. To have elucidated these logical
properties of the concept of happiness is not, of course, to have said
anything about what happiness consists in. To this Aristotle turns next.

In what does the final end of a man consist? The final end of a flute
player is to play well, of a shoemaker to make good shoes, and so on.
Each of these kinds of man has a function which he discharges by
performing a specific activity and which he discharges well by doing
whatever it may be well. Have men therefore a specific activity which
belongs to them as men, as members of a species, and not merely as kinds
of men? Men share some capacities, those of nutrition and growth, with
plants, and others, those of consciousness and feeling, with animals.
But rationality is exclusively human. In man’s exercise of his rational
powers therefore the specific human activity consists, and in the right
and able exercise of them lies the specific human excellence.

Aristotle advances this argument as though it were obvious, and against
the background of the general Aristotelian view of the universe it is
obvious. Nature is composed of well-marked and distinct kinds of being;
each of these moves and is moved from its potentiality to that state of
activity in which it achieves its end. At the top of the scale is the
Unmoved Mover, thought unchangingly thinking itself, to which all things
are moved. Man, like every other species, moves toward his end, and his
end can be determined simply by considering what distinguishes him from
other species. Given the general vision, the conclusion appears
unassailable; lacking it, the conclusion appears highly implausible. But
very little in Aristotle’s argument is affected by this. For when he
proceeds to his definition of the good, he depends only on the view that
rational behavior is the characteristic exercise of human beings, in the
light of which any characteristically human good has to be defined. The
good of man is defined as the activity of the soul in accordance with
virtue, or if there are a number of human excellences or virtues, in
accordance with the best and most perfect of them. “What is more, it is
this activity throughout a whole life. One swallow does not make a
summer, nor one fine day. So one good day or short period does not make
a man blessed and happy.”

Happy, that is, is a predicate to be used of a whole life. It is lives
that we are judging when we call someone happy or unhappy and not
particular states or actions. The individual actions and projects which
make up a life are judged as virtuous or not, and the whole as happy or
unhappy. We can see, says Aristotle, the connection between happiness
thus understood and all those things which are popularly thought to
constitute happiness: virtue, though not man’s final end, is an
essential part of the form of life that is; pleasure is taken by a good
man in virtuous activity, and hence pleasure rightly comes in; a modicum
of external goods is needed for characteristic human well-being and
well-doing; and so on.

We have two large questions on our agenda as a result of Aristotle’s
definition of the good for man. There is the question to be answered at
the end of the Ethics as to the activity in which the good man will be
chiefly employed. And there is the question of the excellences, of the
virtues, which he has to manifest in all his activities. When Aristotle
proceeds to the discussion of the virtues he subdivides them in
accordance with his division of the soul. Aristotle’s use of the
expression soul is quite different from Plato’s. For Plato soul and body
are two entities, contingently and perhaps unhappily united. For
Aristotle the soul is form to the body’s matter. When Aristotle speaks
of the soul we could very often retain his meaning by speaking of
personality. Thus nothing peculiar to the Aristotelian psychology turns
on his distinction between the rational and nonrational parts of the
soul. For this is simply a contrast between reasoning and other human
faculties. The nonrational part of the soul includes the merely
physiological as well as the realm of feelings and impulses. These
latter can be called rational or irrational insofar as they accord with
what reason enjoins, and their characteristic excellence is to so
accord. There is no necessary conflict between reason and desire, such
as Plato envisages, although Aristotle is fully aware of the facts of
such conflicts.

We therefore exhibit rationality in two kinds of activity: in thinking,
where reasoning is what constitutes the activity itself; and in such
activities other than thinking where we may succeed or fail in obeying
the precepts of reason. The excellences of the former Aristotle calls
the intellectual virtues; of the latter, the moral virtues. Examples of
the former are wisdom, intelligence, and prudence; of the latter,
liberality and temperance. Intellectual virtue is the consequence
usually of explicit instruction; moral, of habit. Virtue is not inborn,
but a consequence of training. The contrast with our natural capacities
is plain: first we have the natural capacity, and then we exercise it;
whereas with virtues we acquire the habit by first performing the acts.
We become just men by performing just actions, courageous by performing
courageous actions, and so on. There is no paradox here: one brave
action does not make a brave man. But continuing to perform brave
actions will inculcate the habit in respect of which we call not merely
the action but also the man brave.

Pleasures and pains are a useful guide here. Just as they can corrupt us
by distracting us from habits of virtue, so they can be used to
inculcate the virtues. For Aristotle one sign of a virtuous man is that
he gets pleasure from virtuous activity, and another is that he knows
how to choose among pleasures and pains. It is this matter of virtue as
involving choice that makes it clear that virtue cannot be either an
emotion or a capacity. We are not called good or bad, we are not praised
or blamed, by reason of our emotions or capacities. It is rather what we
choose to do with them that entitles us to be called virtuous or
vicious. Virtuous choice is choice in accordance with a mean.

This notion of the mean is perhaps the single most difficult concept in
the Ethics. It will be most conveniently introduced by an example. The
virtue of courage is said to be the mean between two vices-a vice of
excess, which is rashness, and a vice of deficiency, which is cowardice.
A mean is thus a rule or principle of choice between two extremes.
Extremes of what? Of emotion or of action. In the case of courage, I
give way too much to the impulses which danger arouses when I am a
coward, too little to them when I am foolhardy. Three obvious objections
at once arise. The first is that there are many emotions and actions for
which there cannot be a “too much” or a “too little.” Aristotle
specifically allows for this. He says that a man “can be afraid and be
bold and desire and be angry and pity and feel pleasure and pain in
general, too much or too little”; but he says also that malice,
shamelessness, and envy are such that their names imply that they are
evil. So also with actions such as adultery, theft, and murder. But
Aristotle states no principle which will enable us to recognize what
falls in one class, what in the other. We can, however, attempt to
interpret Aristotle at this point and try to state the principle
implicit in his examples.

If I merely ascribe anger or pity to a man, I thereby neither applaud
nor condemn him. If I ascribe envy, I do so condemn him. Those emotions
of which there can be a mean-and the actions which correspond to
them-are those which I can characterize without any moral commitment. It
is where I can characterize an emotion or action as a case of anger or
whatever it is, prior to and independently of asking whether there is
too much or too little of it, that I have a subject for the mean. But if
this is what Aristotle means, then he is committed to showing that every
virtue and vice are mean and extreme for some emotion or concern with
pleasure and pain characterizeable and identifiable in nonmoral terms.
Just this is what Aristotle sets out to show in the latter part of Book
II of the Ethics. Envy, for example, is one extreme, and malice another,
of a certain attitude to the fortunes of others. The virtue which is the
mean is righteous indignation. But this very example brings out a new
difficulty in the doctrine. The righteously indignant man is one who is
upset by the undeserved good fortune of others (this example is perhaps
the first indication that Aristotle was not a nice or a good man: the
words “supercilious prig” spring to mind very often in reading the
Ethics). The jealous man has an excess of this attitude-he is upset even
by the deserved good fortune of others; and the malicious man is alleged
to have a defect here in that he falls short of being pained-he takes
pleasure. But this is absurd. The malicious man rejoices in the
ill-fortune of others. The Greek word for malice, ἐπιχειρεκακία, means
this. Thus what he rejoices in is not the same as what the jealous and
the righteously indignant man are pained by. His attitude cannot be
placed on the same scale as theirs, and only a determination to make the
schematism of mean, excess, and defect work at all costs could have led
Aristotle to make this slip. Perhaps with a little ingenuity Aristotle
could be emended here so as to save his doctrine. But what of the virtue
of liberality? The vices here are prodigality and meanness. Prodigality
is excess in giving, deficiency in getting, and meanness is excess in
getting, deficiency in giving. So these are not after all excess or
defect of the same emotion or action. And Aristotle himself half admits
that to the virtue of temperance and the excess of profligacy there is
no corresponding defect. “Men deficient in the enjoyment of pleasures
scarcely occur.” Thus the doctrine finally appears as at best of varying
degrees of usefulness in exposition, but scarcely as picking out
something logically necessary to the character of a virtue.

Moreover, there is a falsely abstract air about the doctrine. For
Aristotle does not, as he might seem to, think that there is one and
only one right choice of emotion or action, independent of
circumstances. What is courage in one situation would in another be
rashness and in a third cowardice. Virtuous action cannot be specified
without reference to the judgment of a prudent man- that is, of one who
knows how to take account of circumstances. Consequently, knowledge of
the mean cannot just be knowledge of a formula, it must be knowledge of
how to apply the rules to choices. And here the notions of excess and
defect will not help us. A man who is suspicious of his own tendency to
indignation will rightly consider how much envy and malice there is in
it; but the connection of envy and malice with indignation is that in
the one case I evince a desire to possess the goods of others, and in
the other I evince a desire for the harm of others. What makes these
wrong is that I desire that what is not mine should be mine, without
thought for the deserts of others or myself, and that I desire harm. The
viciousness of these desires is in no way due to their being excess or
defect of the same desire, and therefore the doctrine of the mean is no
guide here. But if this classification in terms of the mean is no
practical help, what is its point? Aristotle relates it to no
theoretical account of, for example, the emotions, and it therefore
appears more and more as an arbitrary construction. But we can see how
Aristotle may have arrived at it. For he may have examined everything
commonly called a virtue, looked for a recurrent pattern, and thought
that he had found one in the mean. The list of virtues in the Ethics is
not a list resting on Aristotle’s own personal choices and evaluations.
It reflects what Aristotle takes to be “the code of a gentleman” in
contemporary Greek society. Aristotle himself endorses this code. Just
as in analyzing political constitutions he treats Greek society as
normative, so in explaining the virtues he treats upper-class Greek life
as normative. And what else could we have expected? To this there are
two answers. The first is that it would be purely unhistorical to look
in the Ethics for a moral virtue such as meekness, which enters only
with the Christian gospels, or thrift, which enters only with the
puritan ethics of work, or for an intellectual virtue such as curiosity,
which enters self-consciously with systematic experimental science.
(Aristotle himself, in fact, exhibited this virtue, but perhaps could
not have envisaged it as a virtue.) Yet this is not good enough as an
answer, for Aristotle was aware of alternative codes. There is in
Aristotle’s Ethics not merely a contempt for the morality of artisans or
of barbarians, but also a systematic repudiation of the morality of
Socrates. It is not just that the undeserved suffering of the good man
is never attended to. But when Aristotle considers justice he so defines
it that the enactments of a state are unlikely to be unjust provided
that they are properly enacted, without undue haste and in due form. It
cannot therefore-generally speaking-be just to break the law. Moreover,
in the discussion of the virtues, the defect of the virtue of
truthfulness is the vice of the self-deprecator which is named εἰρωνεία,
irony. This is a word closely associated with Socrates’ claim to
ignorance, and its use can scarcely have been accidental. Thus at every
point where a reference to Socrates occurs in Aristotle we find none of
Plato’s respect, although a deep respect for Plato himself is shown. It
is difficult to resist the conclusion that what we see here is
Aristotle’s class-bound conservatism silently and partisanly rewriting
the table of the virtues, and so from yet another point of view
suspicion is cast upon the doctrine of the mean.

The detail of Aristotle’s account of particular virtues is rendered with
brilliant analysis and perceptive insight, especially in the case of
courage. It is much more, as I have just suggested, the list of virtues
which raises questions. The virtues discussed are courage, temperance,
liberality, magnificence, greatness of soul, good temper or gentleness,
being agreeable in company, wittiness, and lastly, modesty, which is
treated as not a virtue, but akin to one. Of these, greatness of soul is
to do in part with how to behave to one’s social inferiors, and
liberality and magnificence concern one’s attitudes to one’s wealth.
Three of the other virtues have to do with what are sometimes called
manners in polite society. Aristotle’s social bias is thus unmistakable.
This bias would not matter philosophically but for the fact that it
prevents Aristotle from raising the questions, How do I decide what is
in fact included in the list of the virtues? could I invent a virtue? is
it logically open to me to consider a vice what others have considered a
virtue? And to beg these questions is to suggest strongly that there
just are so many virtues-in the same sense that at a given period there
just are so many Greek states.

Aristotle’s account of the particular virtues is preceded by an account
of the concept of voluntary action, necessary, as he says, because it is
only to voluntary actions that praise and blame are assigned. Hence, on
Aristotle’s own premise, only in voluntary actions are virtues and vices
manifested. Aristotle’s method here is to give criteria for holding an
action to be nonvoluntary. (The usual translation for ἀκούσιος is
involuntary, but this is a mistake. Involuntary in English usage is
contrasted with “deliberate” or “done on purpose,” not with
“voluntary.”) An action is nonvoluntary when it is done under compulsion
or in ignorance. Compulsion covers all cases when the agent is really
not an agent at all. The wind carries his ship somewhere, for example.
Actions can also be nonvoluntary where other people have the agent in
their power, but actions done under threat of one’s parents or one’s
children being put to death are borderline cases. They satisfy the
ordinary criteria of voluntary actions in that they are deliberately
chosen. But no one apart from such special circumstances would
deliberately choose to act as he would under such threats. In some cases
we allow the circumstances to be an excuse, in others not. As an example
of the latter, Aristotle cites our attitude to the character of Alcmaeon
in Euripides’ play, who murders his mother under threats.

Aristotle is careful to point out that the fact that I am motivated in
some particular way never entails that I am compelled. If I could allow
that my being moved by pleasure or for some noble end was enough to show
that I was compelled, then I could not conceive of an action which could
not be shown by this or a similar argument to be compulsory. But the
whole point of the concept of being compelled is to distinguish actions
which we have chosen on the basis of our own criteria, such as the
pleasure we shall get or the nobility of the object, from those things
we do in which our own choice was not part of the effective agency.
Thus, to include too much under the heading of compulsion would be to
destroy the point of the concept.

In the case of ignorance Aristotle distinguishes the nonvoluntary from
the merely not-voluntary. For an action to be nonvoluntary through
ignorance, the discovery of what he has done must cause the agent pain
and a wish that he had not so acted. The rationale of this is clear. A
man who, having discovered what he has unwittingly done, says, “But if I
had known, that is just what I would have chosen to do” thereby assumes
a kind of responsibility for the action, and so cannot use his ignorance
to disclaim such responsibility. Aristotle next distinguishes actions

done in a state of ignorance, such as when drunk or raging, from actions
done through ignorance, and points out that moral ignorance-ignorance of
what constitutes virtue and vice-is not exculpatory, but is indeed what
constitutes vice. The ignorance which is exculpatory is that through
which a particular action is done, which would otherwise not have been
done, and it is ignorance as to the particular circumstances of the
particular action. The examples of such ignorance are various. A man may
not know what he is doing, as when someone tells of a matter which he
does not know is a secret and so does not know that he is revealing
something hidden. A man may mistake one person for another (his son for
an enemy) or one thing for another (a harmless weapon for a deadly one).
A man may not realize that a medicine is in this type of case deadly, or
how hard he is hitting. All these types of ignorance are exculpatory,
for it is a necessary condition of an action being voluntary that the
agent knows what he is doing.

What is most worth remarking on here is Aristotle’s method. He does not
begin by looking for some characteristic of voluntary action which all
voluntary actions must have in common. He rather looks for a list of
characteristics any one of which would if present in an action, be
sufficient to withdraw the title “voluntary” from it. An action is
treated as voluntary unless done through compulsion or ignorance. Thus
Aristotle never gets involved in the riddles of later philosophers about
free will. He delineates the concepts of the voluntary and the
involuntary as we possess them, and brings out the point about them that
they enable us to contrast those cases where we admit the validity of
excuses and those cases where we do not. Because this is so, Aristotle
only raises marginally-in discussing our responsibility for our own
character formation-the question which has haunted modern free-will
discussions, Is it possible that all actions are determined by causes
independent of the agent’s deliberations and choices, so that no actions
are voluntary? For Aristotle, even if all actions were somehow thus
determined, there would still be a distinction between agents acting
under compulsion or through ignorance and agents not so acting. And
Aristotle would surely be right about this. We should not be able to
escape his distinction no matter what the causation of action might be.

What does emerge about voluntary action in a positive sense is that
choice and deliberation have a key role in it. The deliberation which
leads up to action always concerns means and not ends. This is yet
another Aristotelian saying which may mislead us if we read it
anachronistically. Some modern philosophers have contrasted reason and
emotion or desire in such a way that ends were merely the outcome of
nonrational passions, while reason could calculate only as to the means
to attain such ends. We shall see later on that Hume took such a view.
But this view is alien to Aristotle’s moral psychology. Aristotle’s
point is a conceptual one. If I in fact deliberate about something, it
must be about alternatives. Deliberation can only be as to things which
are not necessarily and inevitably what they are, and as to things which
are within my power to alter. Otherwise there is no room for
deliberation. But if I choose between two alternatives, then I must
envisage something beyond these alternatives in the light of which I
make my choice, that for the sake of which I shall choose one rather
than another, that which provides me with a criterion in my
deliberation. This will in fact be what in that particular case I am
treating as an end. It follows that if I can deliberate about whether or
not to do something, it will always be about means that I am
deliberating in the light of some end. If I then deliberate about what
was in the former case the end, I shall now be treating it as a means,
with alternatives, to some further end. Thus, necessarily, deliberation
is of means, not of ends, without there being any commitment to a moral
psychology of a Humean kind.

The form of the deliberation involved Aristotle characterizes as that of
the practical syllogism. The major premise of such a syllogism is a
principle of action to the effect that a certain sort of thing is good
for, befits, satisfies a certain class of person. The minor premise is a
statement, warranted by perception, that here is some of whatever it is;
and the conclusion is the action. An example which, although its content
is mysterious, makes the form of the practical syllogism clear is given
by Aristotle: Dry food is good for man-major premise; Here’s some dry
food- minor premise; and the conclusion is that the agent eats it. That
the conclusion is an action makes it plain that the practical syllogism
is a pattern of reasoning by the agent and not a pattern of reasoning by
others about what the agent ought to do. (That is why a second minor
premise-e.g., And here is a man-would be redundant, and indeed
misleading, since it would distract from the point.) Nor indeed is it a
pattern of reasoning by the agent about what he ought to do. It is not
to be confused with perfectly ordinary syllogisms, whose conclusion is a
statement of that order. Its whole point is to probe the sense in which
an action may be the outcome of reasoning.

A probable first reaction to Aristotle’s account will fasten upon just
this point. How can an action follow from premises as a conclusion?
Surely only a statement can do that. To remove this doubt, consider some
possible relations between actions and beliefs. An action can be
inconsistent with beliefs in a way analogous to that in which one belief
can be inconsistent with another. If I assert that all men are mortal,
and that Socrates is a man, but deny that Socrates is mortal, I become
unintelligible in my utterance; if I assert that dry food is good for
man, and I am a man, and I assert that this is dry food, and I do not
eat it, my behavior is analogously unintelligible. But perhaps the
example is bad. For it may be that I can provide an explanation which
will remove the apparent inconsistency. How? By making another
statement, such as that I am not hungry, having just finished gorging
myself on dry food, or that I suspect that this dry food is poisoned.
But this strengthens, not weakens the parallel with ordinary deductive
reasoning. If I allow that a warm front’s approach causes rain, and that
a warm front is approaching, but deny that it is going to rain, I can
remove the appearance of inconsistency in this case also by making some
further statement, such as that before the warm front reaches here it
will be intercepted. So that actions can be consistent and inconsistent
with beliefs in much the way that other beliefs can be. And this is
because actions embody principles. It is in holding this that Aristotle
lays himself open to the charge of “intellectualism.” To understand this
charge, let us consider it first in a crude form and then in a more
sophisticated one.

The crude version of the attack is that made by Bertrand Russell.18 It
is because his actions embody principles, conform or fail to conform to
precepts of reason in a way that those of no other

species do, that Aristotle defines man as a rational animal. Russell’s
comment upon this is to invoke the history of human folly and
irrationality: men just are not rational in fact. But this is to miss
Aristotle’s point massively. For Aristotle is in no sense maintaining
that men always act rationally, but that the standards by which men
judge their own actions are those of reason. To call human beings
irrational, as Russell rightly does, is to imply that it makes sense and
is appropriate to judge men as succeeding or failing in the light of
rational standards, and when Aristotle calls men rational beings, he is
simply pointing out the meaningfulness and appropriateness of the
application of predicates which refer to such standards. However,
Aristotle is committed to more than this. For he has to maintain that
men characteristically act rationaly, and what this implies is that the
concept of human action is such that unless a piece of behavior fulfills
some elementary criterion of rationality, it does not count as an
action. That is, unless implicit in the behavior there is a purpose of a
recognizably human kind, unless the agent knows under some description
what he is doing, and unless we can detect some principle of action in
his behavior, what we have is not an action at all, but merely a bodily
movement, perhaps a reflex, only to be explained in terms of other
bodily movements, such as those of muscles and nerves. That Aristotle is
right about this appears if we consider another kind of criticism of his
intellectualism, implied in the injunctions of all those moralists who
believe that reason is a misleading guide, that we should rely on
instinct or on feeling. This appeal to feeling as a moral guide is
central to the Romantic period; it emerges again in modern times in the
appeal to dark, visceral emotion of D. H. Lawrence’s Mexican period; and
in its most detestable form it is expressed in the Nazi cry to think
with the blood. But these injunctions are intelligible only because they
are backed up by reasons; and these reasons are usually assertions to
the effect that too much reasoning leads to a calculating,
insufficiently spontaneous nature, that it inhibits and frustrates. In
other words, it is argued that our actions, if the product of too much
calculation, will exhibit undesirable traits or will produce undesirable
effects. But to argue like this is to meet Aristotle on his own ground.
It is to suggest that there is some criterion or principle of action
which cannot be embodied in deliberate action, and thus that deliberate
action would be to that extent irrational. And to argue thus is to
accept, not to dissent from, a central thesis of Aristotle’s
rationalism.

Does Aristotle in any case believe that every human action is preceded
by an act of deliberation? Clearly if he does believe this, what he
believes is false. But he does not. It is only acts which are chosen (in
a specially defined sense of chosen which involves deliberation) which
are preceded by deliberation, and Aristotle says explicitly that “not
all voluntary actions are chosen.” What does follow from Aristotle’s
account is that we can assess every action in the light of what would
have been done by an agent who had in fact deliberated before he acted.
But this imagined agent cannot, of course, just be any agent. He has to
be ὁ ϕρόνιμος, the prudent man. Once again translation raises
difficulties. Φρόνησιϛ is well translated in medieval Latin by
prudentia, but badly in English by prudence. For later generations of
puritans have connected prudence with thrift, and especially with thrift
in monetary matters (it is the “virtue” embodied in life insurance), and
so in modern English prudent has something of the flavor of “cautious
and calculating in one’s own interest.” But ϕρόνησις has no particular
connection either with caution or with self-interest. It is the virtue
of practical intelligence, of knowing how to apply general principles in
particular situations. It is not the ability to formulate principles
intellectually, or to deduce what ought to be done. It is the ability to
act so that principle will take a concrete form. Prudence is not only
itself a virtue, it is the keystone of all virtue. For without it one
cannot be virtuous. A man may have excellent principles, but not act on
them. Or he may perform just or courageous actions, but not be just or
courageous, having acted through fear of punishment, say. In each case
he lacks prudence. Prudence is the virtue which is manifested in acting
so that one’s adherence to other virtues is exemplified in one’s
actions.

Prudence is not to be confused with a simple faculty for seeing what
means will bring about a given end. Aristotle denominates that
particular faculty cleverness and holds that it is morally neutral,
since it is of equal use to the man who pursues praiseworthy and to the
man who pursues blameworthy ends. Prudence includes cleverness; it is
the cleverness of the man who possesses virtue in the sense that his
actions always flow from a practical syllogism whose major premise is of
the form “Since the end and the best thing to do is. . ” It is a
conjunction of a grasp of the true τέλος of men with cleverness. For
Aristotle the role of intelligence is to make articulate principles on
which a man whose natural dispositions are good will have already been
acting unconsciously, so that we are less likely to make mistakes; the
role of prudence is to know how a given principle (which will always be
of a certain degree of generality) applies in a given situation. There
is, therefore, after all a point in the argument at which Aristotle
clashes with irrationalists such as D. H. Lawrence and with Tolstoy. For
Aristotle holds that an explicit and articulate grasp of principle will
help to insure the right sort of conduct, while Lawrence’s praise of
spontaneity and Tolstoy’s adulation of peasant ways of life rest on the
contention that being explicit and articulate about principles is
morally crippling. This clash has more than one root. To a certain
extent Aristotle and Lawrence or Tolstoy disagree as to what the right
sort of conduct is; and to a certain extent they disagree about what the
actual consequences of being articulate are. But once again we must note
that although one can be a Lawrentian or a Tolstoyan without
inconsistency, what one cannot consistently do is to offer an explicit
and articulate rational defense of their doctrines. And the fact that
both Lawrence and Tolstoy exhibited all the intellectualism which they
used their intellectual resources to condemn strongly suggests that an
Aristotelian position of some sort is unavoidable. Moreover, it is only
when one is explicit and articulate about principle that one is able to
mark clearly the cases where one has failed to do what one should have
done. And because this is such a strong point in favor of Aristotle’s
position, we may well be puzzled that for Aristotle failure constitutes
a problem. But it does.

Aristotle begins from Socrates’ position, discussed in an earlier
chapter, that nobody ever fails to do what he thinks to be best. If a
man does anything, then his doing it is sufficient to show that he
thought it the best thing to do. Consequently moral failure is logically
impossible. This, says Aristotle, flies in the face of the facts. But,
for Aristotle, that men should fail to do what they believe they ought
to do still constitutes a problem. His explanations are several. A man
may, for example, know what he ought to do, in the sense of being
committed to a principle of action, but ignore his principle because he
is not exercising his knowledge, as may happen when a man is drunk or
mad or asleep. So a man carried away may do what in one sense he knows
he ought not to do. Or a man may fail to recognize an occasion as one
appropriate to the application of one of his principles. What we need to
underline here is, however, not the adequacy of Aristotle’s
explanations. We can set out a wide range of different kinds of case in
which there is a gap between what an agent professes and what he does.
What is interesting, however, is that Aristotle, and in this he is very
close to Socrates, feels that there is something special to be explained
in the facts of moral weakness or failure, that such weakness or failure
constitutes a problem. This suggests strongly that Aristotle’s initial
assumption is that men are rational beings in a much stronger sense than
we have hitherto ascribed to him. For the suggestion is that if men
always did what they thought best, there would be nothing to explain.
Yet any account of men as agents which only introduces the facts of
weakness and failure by a kind of afterthought is bound to be defective.
For human desires are not straightforward drives to unambiguous goals in
the way that biological instincts and drives are. Desires have to be
given goals, and men have to be trained to reach them, and the point of
having principles is in part to detect and diagnose failure in the
attempt to reach them. Thus fallibility is central to human nature and
not peripheral to it. Hence the portrait of a being who was not liable
to error could not be the portrait of a human being. The portrait of the
Jesus of the Gospels needs the temptations in the wilderness and the
temptation in Gethsemane in order that we can be shown, at least in the
intention of the authors, not merely a perfect man, but a perfect man.

Aristotle’s halfhearted admission of fallibility is connected not merely
with a philosophical blindness to the importance of this human
characteristic but also with a moral attitude to prosperity of a kind
that can only be called priggish. This emerges clearly in the course of
his account of the virtues. Aristotle’s list of virtues falls clearly
into two parts, a division obviously not perceived by Aristotle himself.
There are, on the one hand, traits such as courage, restraint, and
agreeableness which it is hard to conceive of as not being valued in any
human community. Even these, of course, fall on a scale. At one end of
this scale there are norms and traits which could not be disavowed
totally in any human society, because no group in which they were absent
could fall under the concept of a society. This is a matter of logic.
When Victorian anthropologists sailed round the world they reported the
recurrence of certain norms in all societies as an empirical
generalization, just as a comparative anatomist might report similarites
in bone structure. But consider the case of truth telling. It is a
logically necessary condition for any group of beings to be recognized
as a human society that they should possess a language. It is a
necessary condition for a language to exist that there should be shared
rules, and shared rules of such a kind that an intention to say that
what is, is can always be presumed. For if when a man said, “It is
raining” we could not have such a presumption, then what he said would
not communicate anything to us at all. But this presumption, necessary
for language to be meaningful, is only possible where truth telling is
the socially accepted and recognized norm. Indeed, lying itself is only
possible where and on the assumption that men expect the truth to be
told. Where there is no such expectation, the possibility of deception
disappears too. Thus the recognition of a norm of truth telling and of a
virtue of honesty seems written into the concept of a society. Other
virtues, although not logically necessary to social life, are obviously
causally necessary to the maintenance of such life, given that certain
very widespread and elementary facts about human life and its
environment are what they are. Thus the existence of material scarcity,
of physical dangers, and of competitive aspirations bring both courage
and justice or fairness on the scene. These are virtues which, given
such facts, appear to belong to the form of human life as such. Other
virtues again appear unavoidable for recognition by any society in which
fairly widespread human desires are present. There can be exceptions,
but as a matter of fact they will be rare. So agreeableness is a general
human virtue, although we may come across an occasional people, such as
the bad-tempered Dobuans, who may not rate it as such. But toward the
other end of the scale there are virtues which are more or less
optional, so to speak, which belong to particular contingent social
forms, or which are matters of purely individual choice. The
non-Aristotelian, but Christian virtues of loving one’s enemies and of
humility, with the practice of turning the other cheek, appear to belong
in the latter category; the English and much more Aristotelian public
school virtue of being “a gentleman” in the former. These differences
Aristotle does not recognize, and so we find side by side in Aristotle’s
list virtues which anyone would find it hard not to recognize as virtues
and alleged virtues which are difficult to comprehend outside
Aristotle’s own social context and Aristotle’s own preferences within
that context.

The two Aristotelian virtues which demand attention in this respect are
those of “the great-souled man” (μεγαλόμνχος) and of justice. The
great-souled man “claims much and deserves much.” It is for Aristotle a
vice to claim less than you deserve, just as much as it is to claim
more. It is particularly in relation to honor that the great-souled man
claims and deserves much. And since the great-souled man has to deserve
most, he must have all the other virtues too. This paragon is extremely
proud. He despises honors offered by common people. He is gracious to
inferiors. He repays benefits so as not to be put under obligations, and
“when he repays a service, it is with interest, for in this way the
original benefactor will become the beneficiary and debtor in turn.” He
speaks his mind without fear or favor, because he has a poor opinion of
others and would not care to conceal his opinion. He runs into few
dangers, because there are few things which he values and would wish to
preserve from harm.

It is because Aristotle conceives of him as not failing that Aristotle
endows the great-souled man with no sense of his own fallibility. The
great-souled man’s characteristic attitudes require a society of
superiors and inferiors in which he can exhibit his peculiar brand of
condescension. He is essentially a member of a society of unequals. In
such a society he is self-sufficient and independent. He indulges in
conspicuous consumption, for “he likes to own beautiful and useless
things, since they are better marks of his independence.” Incidentally,
he walks slowly, has a deep voice and a deliberate mode of utterance. He
thinks nothing great. He only gives offense intentionally. He is very
nearly an English gentleman.

This appalling picture of the crown of the virtuous life has an almost
equally distressing counterpart in one aspect of Aristotle’s account of
justice. Much of what Aristotle says about justice is illuminating and
far from objectionable. He distinguishes between distributive
justice-fairness-and the corrective justice which is involved in redress
for a harm done. He defines distributive justice in terms of the mean:
“To do injustice is to have more than one ought, and to suffer it is to
have less than one ought,” and justice is the mean between doing
injustice and suffering it. But when Aristotle comes up against the use
of δίκαιος as meaning either “fair” or “right,” or “in accordance with
the laws,” he asserts without argument that although everything unlawful
is unfair, everything unfair is unlawful. It is less clear in the Ethics
than it is in the Politics19 that Aristotle is prepared to believe that
the positive laws of existing states can be more than marginally a
variance with what is fair and right. “The laws aim either at the common
interest of all, or at the interest of those in power determined in
accordance with virtue or in some such way; so that in one sense we call
just anything that effects or maintains the happiness or the components
of the happiness of the political community.” Aristotle goes on to
describe the law as enjoining virtue and forbidding vice, except where
it has been carelessly enacted. And this must remind us of Aristotle’s
complacency with the existing social arrangement. It is perhaps no
accident that he also believes that some men are slaves by nature.

By contrast, Aristotle appears to advantage in his inclusion of
friendship as among the necessities of the man who achieves or is to
achieve the good. He distinguishes the varieties of friendship -those
between equals and unequals; those based on shared pleasure, mutual
usefulness, or common virtue-and produces a typical catalogue, whose
details perhaps matter less than the fact that the discussion is there
at all. But the self-sufficiency of Aristotle’s ideal man deeply injures
and deforms his account of friendship. For his catalogue of types of
friend presupposes that we can always ask the questions, On what is this
friendship based? for the sake of what does it exist? There is therefore
no room left for the type of human relationship of which it would miss
the point totally to ask on what it was based, for the sake of what it
existed. Such relationships can be very different: the homosexual love
of Achilles for Patroclus, or of Alcibiades for Socrates; the romantic
devotion of Petrarch to Laura; the marital fidelity of Sir Thomas More
and his wife. But none of these could be included in the Aristotelian
catalogue. For the love of the person, as against the goodness,
pleasantness, or usefulness of the person, Aristotle can have no place.
And we can understand why when we remember the great-souled man. He
admires all that is good, so he will admire it in others. But he needs
nothing, he is self-contained in his virtue. Hence friendship for him
will always be a kind of moral mutual admiration society, and this is
just the friendship which Aristotle describes. And this again
illuminates Aristotle’s social conservatism. How could there be an ideal
society for a man for whom the ideal is as ego centered as it is for
Aristotle?

The exercise of virtue is, of course, for Aristotle not an end in
itself. Virtues are dispositions which issue in the types of action
which manifest human excellence. But the injunctions “Be virtuous,” “Be
courageous,” “Be great-souled,” “Be liberal” do not tell us what to do
in the sense of what to aim at; they rather tell us how we should behave
in the pursuit of our aim, whatever it is. But what should that aim be?
What, after all this, does εὐδαιμονία consist in? What is the τέλος of
human life? A claim which Aristotle takes with immense seriousness, but
nonetheless finally dismisses, is that of pleasure. On this subject he
has to argue against two kinds of opponent. Speusippus, who was Plato’s
immediate successor as head of the Academy, had argued that pleasure was
in no sense a good. Eudoxus the astronomer, who was also a pupil of
Plato, held by contrast that pleasure was the supreme good. Aristotle
wished to deny the position of Speusippus without laying himself open to
Eudoxus’ arguments. His arguments for the goodness of pleasure, or at
least for the goodness of some pleasures, are partly a refutation of
Speusippus’ position. To argue, for example, that pleasures are bad
because some are harmful to health is like arguing that health is an
evil because sometimes the pursuit of health conflicts with the pursuit
of wealth. More positively, Aristotle points to the fact that everyone
pursues pleasure as evidence that it is a good, and he advances another
argument to the effect that pleasure is taken in what he calls unimpeded
activity. By unimpeded activity he means activity which achieves its
end, which is well done. Everybody, he argues, takes pleasure in
unimpeded activity; everybody wishes his activities to be unimpeded;
everybody therefore must see pleasure as a good. But in fact pleasure
appears to be common to all forms of activity, and to be the only factor
common to all; Aristotle finds himself for a moment close to the
position of Eudoxus, and some scholars have held that in Book VII of the
Ethics this is the position which he in fact takes. But, in Book X at
any rate, he produces arguments against this Eudoxian position, although
even here he is clearly puzzled by the relation of pleasure to the τέλος
of human life. The reason why he is puzzled is evident. Pleasure clearly
satisfies some of the criteria which anything which is to play the role
of such a τέλος must satisfy, but equally clearly it fails to satisfy
others. We take pleasure in what we do well (unimpeded activity again),
and thus taking pleasure in an activity is a criterion of doing it as we
wish to do it, of achieving the τέλος of that action. A τέλος must be a
reason for acting, and that we would get pleasure is always a reason for
acting, even if not always a finally conclusive one. Pleasure, too, is
not only sought by almost everybody, and therefore appears to be a
universal τέλος but it cannot be a means to anything else. We do not
seek pleasure for the sake of anything further to be got out of it. At
the same time, pleasure has characteristics that make it appear not to
be a τέλος. It does not complete or terminate an activity; that is, the
pleasure we get from doing something is not a sign that we have reached
our goal and should therefore stop. Rather, getting pleasure is a reason
for continuing the activity. Moreover, there is no particular action or
set of actions which can be specified as ways of getting pleasure.
Pleasure comes from many different kinds of activity, and so to say that
pleasure was the τέλος would not of itself ever give us a reason for
choosing one of those kinds of activity rather than another. But to do
this is the function of a τέλος. And finally the pleasure that we take
in an activity cannot be identified separately from the activity itself;
to enjoy or take pleasure in doing something is not to do something and
to have an accompanying experience of something else which is the
pleasure. To enjoy playing a game is not to play the game, and in
addition, to experience some sensations, say, which are the pleasure. To
enjoy playing a game is simply to play well and not to be distracted, to
be, as we say, thoroughly involved in the game. Thus we cannot identify
pleasure as a τέλος external to the activity, to which the activity is a
means. Pleasure, says Aristotle, in a memorable but unhelpful phrase
supervenes on the τέλος “like the bloom on the cheek of youth.”

Different activities, different pleasures; which activities then? The
activities of the good man. But which will these be? “If happiness
consists in activity in accordance with virtue, it is reasonable that it
should be activity in accordance with the highest virtue; and this will
be the virtue of what is best in us.” What is best in us is reason and
the characteristic activity of reason is θεωρία, that speculative
reasoning which deals with unchanging truths. Such speculation can be a
continuous and pleasant-it is, Aristotle says brusquely, “the
pleasantest”-form of activity. It is a self-sufficient occupation. It
has no practical outcome, so it cannot be a means to anything else. It
is an activity of leisure and peacetime, and leisure is the time when we
do things for their own sake, since business affairs are for the sake of
leisure and war is for the sake of peace. Above all, since it is
concerned with what is unchanging and timeless, it is concerned with the
divine. Aristotle follows Plato and much else in Greek thought in
equating changelessness and divinity.

Thus, surprisingly, the end of human life is metaphysical contemplation
of truth. The treatise which began with an attack on Plato’s conception
of the Form of the Good ends not so far away from the same attitude of
contempt for the merely human. External goods are necessary only to a
limited extent, and the wealth required is only moderate. Thus the whole
of human life reaches its highest point in the activity of a speculative
philosopher with a reasonable income. The banality of the conclusion
could not be more apparent. Why then is it reached? One clue is in
Aristotle’s concept of self-sufficiency. A man’s activities in his
relations with other men are for Aristotle in the end subservient to
this. Man may be a social-cum-political animal, but his social and
political activity is not what is central. Yet who can live with this
degree of leisure and wealth and this degree of disengagement from
affairs outside himself? Clearly only a few people. This however could
not appear as an objection to Aristotle: “For it is the nature of the
many to be moved by fear, but not a sense of honor, to abstain from what
is bad not on account of its baseness but for fear of the penalties;
for, living on their emotions, they pursue the appropriate pleasures and
the means to these pleasures, and avoid the opposite pains, but they
lack even a concept of the noble end of true pleasure, never having
tasted it.” So, Aristotle concludes, they could not be attracted or
changed by ethical theorizing. The tone is that of Plato’s Laws.

Aristotle’s audience, then, is explicitly a small leisured minority. We
are no longer faced with a τέλος for human life as such, but with a
τέλος for one kind of life which presupposes a certain kind of
hierarchical social order and which presupposes also a view of the
universe in which the realm of timeless truth is metaphysically superior
to the human world of change and sense experience and ordinary
rationality. All Aristotle’s conceptual brilliance in the course of the
argument declines at the end to an apology for this extraordinarily
parochial form of human existence. At once the objection will be made:
this is to judge Aristotle against the background of our values, not of
his. It is to be guilty of anachronism. But this is not true. Socrates
had already presented an alternative set of values in both his teaching
and his life; Greek tragedy presents other, different possibilities;
Aristotle did not choose what he chose for lack of knowledge of
alternative views of human life. How, then, are we to under, stand this
union in the Ethics of philosophical acumen and social obscurantism? To
answer this we must look at his work in a wider perspective.


