1. Introduction
===============

1.1 Fruits and Religions
------------------------

Comparative studies of cultures, religions or praxis involve much more
than applying a method. They are not just about confronting similarities
and underlining differences. Behind such projects is the belief that a
comparative perspective would provide both a better understanding of the
compared systems and contribute knowledge that would not otherwise be
attained. Nevertheless, the nature of the ‘additional knowledge,’ and
the extent to which such knowledge is a unique outcome of the
comparative study, are still to be explained. Furthermore, comparative
projects also run the risk of being held hostage to biased paradigms,
simplistic preconceptions, preoccupations with self-understanding and
even unconscious commitments to a political agenda. A comparativist
should be alert to hidden traps along the way and anticipate stumbling
across them throughout her study.

A comparativist should also be simultaneously mindful of both the
inducements of the project and the comparability[^1] of the subject
matters. In the context of comparing legal systems, those problems
commence with two inquiries: (1) what curiosities and premises are
motivating the comparison; and (2) what type of justifications,
preconditions, constraints and limitations apply to such a comparison?*A
fortiori* , if we accept the conventional jurisprudential assumption
that the law, as a unique social-political phenomenon, has universal
characteristics, then comparing legal systems, either diachronically or
synchronically, is like comparing fruits.[^2] The following discussion
will address these questions by referring to the foundations of legal
reasoning in both Jewish and Islamic jurisprudential thought. Following
our study, we will offer some general reflections on the relatedness of
Jewish and Islamic legal systems and their comparability.

1.2 Provoked Comparison
-----------------------

The comparison of Jewish and Islamic legal traditions has attracted
scholars since the very early stages of Oriental studies in Western
academies.[^3] The Jewish-Islamic comparative perspective has also
played a major role in various areas of Islamic studies and consequently
shaped the leading scholarly paradigms. Nevertheless, only recently have
scholars began to demonstrate sensitivity to the methodologies of these
comparative studies.

The intellectual motives that have typically guided such comparative
projects can be classified into three distinct categories. The first
seeks to discover or locate influences; the order of influence, or other
consequential exchanges such as the borrowings or adoptions of ideas
between the two legal systems. Underlying the exploration of influences,
however, are often aspirations to claim originality or to demonstrate
how later ideas and praxis were derived from earlier sources. Such a
comparative approach, even when undertaken*bona fide* , is not free of
suspicion concerning its objectivity, viz, that it serves agendas that
celebrate the originality and thus the superiority of the source over
its descendants. In the case of Islamic studies, such a conception has
often been adopted by those who view of the formative period of Islam as
best understood by reference to Jewish, Christian and other
environmental influences upon the Prophet Muhammad and his
believers.[^4] Such a conception is explicitly evident in the work that
is considered the cornerstone of modern Oriental scholarship – A.
Geiger’s (1810-1874)*Was hat Mohammed aus dem Judenthume aufgenommen?*
This pioneering study, and many others like it, illustrates the
prevalence of the vocabulary of ‘influence’ and ‘borrowing’ in
supporting political and ideological efforts to reinvent the image of
Jews and their civic conditions in modern Europe.[^5] However, tracing
the influences of the Jewish legal tradition on the Islamic one is not
always asymmetrical. Alongside the efforts to situate Islam as a
daughter-religion[^6] against the Judeo-Christian backdrop, many studies
concerning early medieval Rabbinic literature are motivated by a desire
to demonstrate the considerable impact of Islamic law and legal thinking
on Jewish legal literature, either Rabbinic or Karaite, of that
period.[^7] Generally speaking, the ideological motives for exploring
influences and for seeking original sources were obviously related to
the 19th century philological zeitgeist, the diachronic focus on
historical developments and the endeavor to reconstruct the ‘original’,
either the text or the author’s intention.[^8]

A second motive is related to the nostalgic image of the scholastic
environment in which Jewish thinkers and jurists jointly collaborated
with their Islamic counterparts. Inspired by the historical image of the
‘Golden Age’ in which medieval Jewish learning centers in Iraq, Iran,
the Maghreb and Andalusia were highly respected and coexisted peacefully
under Islamic regimes, the aim of such a perspective is to reaffirm such
dignified historical realities and perhaps even encourage similar
visions in the present time.[^9] Pastoral accounts of this type are very
common in descriptions of medieval philosophy and mysticism, in which
those subjects are portrayed as identity-blinded disciplines with the
capacity to transcend divisive elements and religious borders. Affected
by the spirit of the European Enlightenment, these disciplines were
taken as a common foundation for universal reflections of a higher order
and as a means to bridge the particularities of each religion. The
extent to which such collaborations truly took place, or rather have
been projected by modern scholars, should be examined in relation to
each case independently. Against this background, the discussion below
indicates that collaborative milieus shared legal, as well as
theologico-legal perceptions. As we shall see, alongside the kindred
theological principles underlying both legal systems, Jewish and Islamic
jurists often felt they were participating in the very same projects.
Hence, the distinctive positive contents of the two legal systems did
not stop them from developing unified conceptual language and similar
self-understanding. However, this perspective implicitly presumes a
political vision as well. By highlighting images of collaboration and
shared knowledge, the relatedness and common ground between both
communities are stressed by ignoring the hierarchical relations as an
essential component.[^10]

Contrary to the previous motives, the third aim is to increase
sensitivity towards essential differences within the compared legal
systems and to underline the peculiarities of each. As such, comparison
serves as a methodological tool by which particular features of each
legal system are revealed. The comparative perspective makes it easier
to observe latent and marginal features. A better understanding of both
legal systems is achievable through a conceptual analysis of their
notions, institutions and practical solutions. While the previous
motives focused on the common ground between the two systems, the
current comparative perspective, sometimes described as ‘new
comparativism’,[^11] seeks to develop self-understanding and to increase
awareness of their essential variations. Such a perspective is
indifferent as to whether an actual encounter between the traditions
occurred. The comparative method is likely to be an imaginary set-up by
which a certain legal system is more clearly reflected. In that respect
a comparative perspective might be evaluated as a kind of thought
experiment.

In fact, referring to actual encounters and common ground is entirely
justified when addressing medieval Jewish and Islamic jurisprudential
thought. Moreover, since actual interactions between Jews and Muslims
took place on various stages, both deliberately and unconsciously, it
would be wrong to avoid descriptions of influence or borrowing. Even a
strong commitment to a critical postcolonial approach should not*a
priori* avoid the vocabulary of influence. Such a restriction would
artificially limit the investigational scope and thus be unjustified.

Against the above approaches, our following analysis will refer to
jurisprudential consciousness as the object of our comparative study and
as its source of justification (henceforth: comparative jurisprudence).
We will concentrate on the conscious ideas, principles, concepts,
beliefs and reasoning that underlie the legal institutions and
doctrines. More precisely, we will examine the jurists’
self-understanding and the ways it reflects the relationship between
Jewish and Islamic legal systems.[^12]

The comparative jurisprudence approach not only favors jurisprudence as
an appropriate lens for comparing legal systems, but also defines
jurisprudence with a focus on consciousness – i.e. on the agent’s
internal point of view. In contrast with the common conceptions of law,
by either naturalists or positivists, it proposes to consider the
perceptions of the law as relevant factors. In terms of historical
observations of Jewish and Islamic legal traditions, the organizing
questions would go beyond influences or borrowing to inquire how the
jurists, judges or law-makers understood their engagements with the
corresponding legal system.[^13]

1.3 Making Jewish and Islamic Laws Comparable
---------------------------------------------

Many of the comparative studies of Jewish-Islamic legal traditions are
largely led by curiosity about influences and borrowings, and are not
necessarily troubled by wider questions of comparability. In fact, the
comparison of Jewish and Islamic legal systems can be justified on
various grounds – historical and jurisprudential on the one hand, and
perceptional on the other hand.

Historically, the existence of medieval Jewry under Islamic political
and cultural domination provided cultural and intellectual encounters
and interactions of scholars of both milieus.[^14] The sharing of a
common language, cultural codes and habits naturally served as a vehicle
for exchanges of legal doctrines, institutions and perceptions. In that
respect, a comparison of both legal systems is anticipated on factual
grounds and part of the effort to explore past realities. From a
jurisprudential point of view, the comparability of Jewish and Islamic
legal systems is justifiable because of similar theological and
structural apparatuses. In a way, both legal systems are committed to
‘religious legalism.’ In contrast with antinomian religiosity, often
ascribed to the theology of St. Paul, both Jewish and Islamic
mainstreams are law-centered religions, i.e. religions that acknowledge
the subordination to the law as the most meaningful expressions of
religious life.[^15] Hence in both theology was essentially intertwined
in legal theory.[^16] Consequently, the implementation of the
divine/earthly distinction within a legal system, according to which the
law as the articulation of divine imperatives is also subject to human
manipulation, invited a dualist conceptualization of the law. Therefore,
both systems are structured in various dualistic fashions, either as a
dual stratum (vertical dualism) or as a bipolar scheme (horizontal
dualism), which provides coherent meaning to the seemingly oxymoronic
idea of ‘divine law subject to human reasoning.’

Against the historical and jurisprudential understandings for comparing
Jewish and Islamic laws, their comparability could also be reasoned in
reference to the self-understanding of the jurists who acted within
these legal systems. Indeed, throughout the ninth to the twelfth
centuries, Jewish jurists were largely inspired by Islamic jurists,
their literature, doctrines and institutions. The extent to which this
inspiration was acknowledged or covered by their rhetoric is an
interesting question that has much to do with the aim of presenting the
Jewish legal legacy as ancient and purely transmitted. But even when the
analogies to Islamic law are not emphasized, the Jewish references to a
similar legal vocabulary indicate the acknowledgment in a comparative
perspective. Therefore, the comparability of Jewish and Islamic law
systems also rests on the comparative consciousness of the Jewish
jurists when they reflected on their own system.


