2. Legal Reasoning: Structure and Theology
==========================================

It follows that Islamic Law everywhere strives to go back to direct the
pronouncements of the founder, thus veritably developing a strictly
historical method, while both Talmudic and Canon Law seek to make their
points by means, not of historical fact-finding, but of logical
deduction (logischer Ableitung). For deduction is subconsciously
determined by the goal of the deduction, that is to say the present, and
therefore it gives contemporary power over the past. Investigation, on
the other hand, makes the present dependent on the past. Even in this
seemingly pure world of law, then, one can still recognize the
difference between the commandment to love and the obedience to law.

Franz Rosenzweig[^17]

Interestingly, Rosenzweig observes legal reasoning as a typological
differentiator between the three monotheistic legal systems – Islamic,
Talmudic[^18] and Canon law. He portrays two types of confronting legal
theories: on the one hand, Islamic law is based on*nostalgic
jurisprudence* , is highly committed to historical facts,[^19] and
accordingly celebrates obedience to law as the supreme value. On the
other hand, Talmudic and Canon law, as future-oriented systems, are
based on*deductive reasoning* , much less constrained by the law and
hence emphasize the virtue of love as the ultimate divine commandment.
Rozenzweig’s observations are, however, peculiar and incompatible with
common scholarly accounts on both Jewish and Islamic legal systems.
First, against the view of mainstream Rabbinic theology as legalist by
nature, he describes Jewish law in Christian and antinomian terms as an
expression of the ultimate commandment to love. Second, and perhaps even
more irreconcilable with our usual understanding, is his presentation of
Islamic law in opposition to the use of deductive reasoning. While one
can deny viewing Jewish law as based on a future-oriented jurisprudence,
it is much more difficult to agree with Rosenzweig’s observation that
Islamic law is not deductive. In fact, his position is a total denial of
the fourth root Sunni jurisprudence, which is the jurist’s independent
reasoning –*qiyas* or*ijtihād* . Being freed from Judeo-Christian
idealism,[^20] we will focus on the significance of legal reasoning in
medieval Rabbinic jurisprudence through a comparison to its role in
Islamic jurisprudence.

Generally, Rabbinic jurisprudence in the Middle Ages may be examined in
reference to three axes. The first one pertains to the relationship
between Talmudic and post-Talmudic reflections on legal concepts. One
focus of post-Talmudic efforts was to reconcile and harmonize Talmudic
and post-Talmudic rulings. The second axis illustrates the complex
relationships between a rationalism that celebrates human reasoning as
an essential component of any legal activity, and traditionalism, which
insists on taking the law as an outcome of divine revelation and
therefore opposes reliance on human reasoning in legal matters. The
third axis is the Rabbinate-Karaite[^21] polemic, which reached its
climax in the first half of the tenth century.

There is some evidence to support the view that legal reasoning was
indeed a controversial topic in the Rabbinate-Karaite polemics,[^22]
though our analysis suggests a revision of this view and hence its
moderation. On the other hand, legal reasoning was at the heart of the
rationalist-traditionalist tension, to which Jewish legal historians
have paid very little attention.[^23]

2.1 The Qiyas (Legal Analogy)
-----------------------------

The Arabic term*qiyas* (قياس) in its legal sense can refer, in various
contexts, to any of the three legal concepts – judicial analogy, general
deduction or syllogism.[^24] Legal*qiyas* is at times considered the
archetype of all forms of legal argumentation.[^25] In particular, it
indicates the various types of argumentations that legal scholars use in
their independent reasoning –*ijtihād* (اجتهاد‎),[^26] and for this
reason it occupied a central place in the*uṣūl al-fiqh* literature.[^27]
Following Shafi’ī’s[^28] discussion,*qiyas* revolve around the
fundamental typology of (1) cause-based*qiyas* and (2)
resemblance-based*qiyas* . Cause-based*qiyas* is a means for extending
an existing norm to cases which where is no explicit instruction or
precedent in the known law. Accordingly, the expansion of the law is
based on an existing causal component (cause, reason or meaning) shared
by both the existing law and the new case.[^29] Resemblance-based qiyas,
on the other hand, is based on the isomorphic resemblance of the two
cases.[^30] These two types of*qiyas* thus illustrate distinct
associations between an existing law and a new case: while in
cause-based*qiyas* a shared element associates the two cases, in
resemblance-based*qiyas* the isomorphic likeness allows their
association. That is, cause-based*qiyas* connects the two cases by means
of a third factor - the underlying cause, while resemblance-based*qiyas*
connects the two to one another intrinsically.

2.2 Epistemology and Legal Theology
-----------------------------------

There are two people in the same state and under the same king, living
two lives and under two jurisdictions, clergy and laity, spiritual and
carnal, sacerdotium and regnum.

*Stephen of Tournai* [^31]

The identification of the law with the ‘Word of God’ is indeed a central
principle for both Judaism and Islam. Consequently, a great degree of
correlation between legal propositions and theological principles is
anticipated. From the very outset, Medieval Jewish and Islamic laws
emphasized the transparent relationship between the positive contents of
the law and the perception of God as the ultimate legislator. Thus, in
many respects, knowing the law and applying it correctly are equivalent
to the reception of divine revelation. As such, legal epistemology is
reliant upon its theological assumptions, so that the epistemological
prepositions are mixed together with the theological claims about the
nature of God and His relation to the believers. This aspect singles out
the uniqueness of these legal systems in that the source of legitimacy
in Jewish and Islamic laws is epistemological rather than institutional.
Due to the association of legal theology and epistemology, many of the
debates about legal reasoning are associated with theological
discussions about the nature of human reasoning from a theological point
of view: is legal reasoning essentially no more than an interpreting
faculty, or is it, alternatively, an autonomous source of
knowledge?[^32] To illustrate the dependency of epistemology on theology
and its implications on the theoretical structure of the law, we shall
refer to a metaphor that is commonly mentioned in Islamic
jurisprudential discussion to support legal reasoning.

2.3 Orientating the Sacred Place
--------------------------------

The example commonly brought to justify legal reasoning and the
multiplicity of opinions among jurists is the dilemma of finding the
direction of prayer – the*qiblah* – for believers who cannot visually
locate Mecca.[^33] While the obligation of facing Mecca applies to every
Muslim believer with no temporal or spatial limitations, performing this
duty might involve certain practical difficulties when Mecca is beyond
the believer’s sight. In that case, the worshipper must make a special
effort and use his own judgmental faculties in order to determine the
correct direction.[^34] The traveler who seeks the direction of Mecca
needs available signs by which he can find the proper direction.[^35] In
that respect, these circumstances exemplify both the epistemological
problem and its solution. Determining the correct direction illustrates
the ascertainment of the right answer, and the traveler’s predicament is
analogous to the confusions that may beset the jurist who seeks the
right answer for the case that confronts her. This metaphor concretizes
the idea that, since the objective law is not always known to the
believers, the place at which certainty ends is the point of departure
for the jurist’s independent reasoning. Legal reasoning in this sense is
not the jurist’s privilege, but rather a mandatory religious duty under
conditions of insufficient knowledge. From this metaphor we can derive
the following presumptive approaches, which are not entirely
epistemological principles or theological postulations; they present a
combined matrix in which the epistemological dimension is an inherent
component of legal theology.

**1. Metaphysical realism:** The first approach relates to the
metaphysical dimension of legal norms. It assumes that legal answers are
characterized by ‘strong objectivity.’[^36] In other words, it asserts
that the metaphysical existence of a legal norm is independent of human
ability to conceive it. According to this principle, every legal
question has a definite answer; there is a relevant answer for every
possible normative state of affairs. A specific case for which there is
seemingly no existing law is nothing but a cognitive blindness and not a
limitation of the law itself.[^37] The incorporation of realist
metaphysics within the context of revealed law implies that the divine
law reflects God’s concern with every possible set of earthly
circumstances. For that reason, the religious value of the law is not
exhausted by the subordination to the word of God, but primarily in the
fact that through the law God reveals his concrete intentions about the
world. As such, legal knowledge that uncovers God’s will is of no lesser
value than theological knowledge that reveals God’s nature and his
guiding principles.[^38]

**2. Incomplete revelation and limited legal knowledge:** Despite the
above, the law known through revelation does not include the rulings for
all possible circumstances. Hence, this entails the distinction between
the law known by revelation, i.e. the law inscribed in the*Qur’ān* or
revealed in the*Sunna* (henceforth: the*revealed law* ), and the law
derived from it (henceforth: the*derivative law* ). This distinction
acknowledges the structured limitation of legal knowledge. Therefore,
the part of the law that is not known by revelation is concealed and
hidden from human eyes, just as the holy mosque and the city of Mecca
are indiscernible to the remote traveler. Legal knowledge therefore is
first obtained through revelation and thence derived by legal reasoning
(*ijtihād* ), interpretation (*tawil* ), and analogy (*qiyas* ).
Similarly, this premise makes it clear that legal reasoning expresses
the religious virtue of human efforts in discovering the implicit word
of God.

**3. Gnostic gist:** [^39] The third approach is related to the previous
two. It asserts that notwithstanding the incompleteness of revelation
and the restrictions of legal knowledge, God in His goodness would not
leave his believers in doubt and confusion. To this end, He conceals
within the revealed law hints and traces without which the believers
cannot discover the correct legal answers. This theological stance
reemphasizes the juxtaposition of epistemology and theology.[^40] It
concretizes the idea that God’s grace is translated to epistemological
and methodological aid.[^41] Thus, the theoretical justification of
legal reasoning is in fact a combination of skeptical epistemology and
gnostic theology. Legal reasoning is therefore no more than a structured
component of the Divine law that is designed to include human reasoning
as an interpretative tool.

These three approaches illustrate that religious legalism is inherently
linked to a dual-stratum structure or the division of the entire body of
law into two categories: (1) the law known through explicit revelation;
and (2) the implicit, derivative law known through the jurists’
intellectual efforts that captures the dialectic notion of divine law in
human hands. Legal norms of the first category are transparent and
knowable to the entire community of believers, certain, and therefore
indisputable. Conversely, propositions of the second category are
subject to a wide range of interpretations. Therefore they are not only
disputable but epistemologically at best only plausible. The
dual-stratum structure also projects far-reaching sociological
implications. It decisively supports the privileged status of the legal
experts. In terms of sociological theory, such a structure provides the
preconditions for the necessity of clerical expertise. Put differently,
this structure represents the endeavor to reserve legal exegesis for an
exclusive group of experts.


