3. Rabbinic Attitudes towards Legal Reasoning
=============================================

Generally, Jewish medieval jurists did embrace legal reasoning as a
legitimate means in applying religious legal norms. In what follows we
will first describe rabbinic criticism of legal reasoning and then the
rabbinic embracement of legal reasoning. Among Jewish medieval thinkers,
only two are known to us as opponents of the use of legal reasoning –
the head of the Suraian academy in the first half of the ninth century,
Sa’adya b. Yosef Gaon (882-942 CE) and the Spanish physician, poet and
philosopher Yehudah Halevi (1075-1141 CE). We will portray Sa’adya’s
arguments against the use of the*qiyas* .[^42] Traditionally, scholars
who have dealt with his objection to the*qiyas* have tended to view his
stance as deriving from the heated debates he had with the Karaite and
from his endeavors to defend traditionalism.[^43] Sa’adya condemns the
Karaite enthusiasm with the*qiyas* as resulting from secondary rather
than from substantive considerations*.* [^44] Accordingly, he suggests
that the Karaite’s stance is caused by their mistaken response to the
incompleteness of the revealed law and consequently the bound legal
knowledge – “The reason that stimulated the opponents [=Karaites] to
believe in intellectual capacity (al-ra’y) and analogy (qiyas), is that
they found things which required knowledge whether permitted or
forbidden, and which are not written in the Torah, and likewise [matters
which their] quantities and qualities are inexplicit.”[^45] Subsequently
Sa’adya also notes the gnostic assumption: “Nevertheless, they know that
it is impossible to say of the Creator, may He be exalted and praised,
that he left the people perplexed. On the contrary, there is no doubt
that He placed before them that which could lead them to their
quest.”[^46] Yet it is still doubtful whether these quotations reflect
Sa’adya’s principled objection to*qiyas* . Unlike the above polemic
context, in a treatise dedicated to jurisprudential analysis Sa’adya
expands the discussion of the*qiyas* , from which discussion emerges a
deeper and richer picture of his objections. According to our proposed
reading, his objection to application of judicial analogy derives from
his rationalistic theology, and not from the debate with the Karaites.

As a rationalist, Sa’adya is also concerned with the limitations of
rational methods in order to fully respect the independency of
reasoning. Paradoxically then his objection to the*qiyas* is the result
of his rationalistic insistence. The gist of this paradox is the
acknowledgment of reason as a valid source of religious knowledge on the
one hand, while acknowledging the fundamental identification of the law
with the revealed Word of God on the other. This dialectic invites the
heuristic distinction between legal norms which are acquired by reason –
rational laws (Ar. ‘*aqliyyāt* , Heb.*sikhliyot* ) – and those given
through revelation – revelational laws (Ar.*sam’iyyāt* , Heb.*shimi’yot*
).[^47] Sa’adya limits*qiyas* only to rational laws and denies its
relevance for revelational laws. Hence paradoxically his keen insistence
on the validity of human reasoning as source of religious knowledge
ultimately reduces the applicability of rational faculties in the
framework of religious law. This being so, Sa’adya’s legal theory
presents a new perspective on the conceptual meaning of judicial
analogy.

3.1 Holistic Jurisprudence and the Intelligibility of the Divine Law
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Sa’adya’s legal theory is primarily an organic one. In this world view,
in which “no things have existence except by way of combination,” the
internal relations among the components of the divine law are not
contingent, and in practice they determine the possible manipulations
within the law. The legal theory that Sa’adya presents in the beginning
of Kitāb Tahsil Ashar’i’ Asama’iyah[^48] (henceforth: K*itab Tahsil* )
Sa’adya describes the internal relations within the law by ontological
categories - substance and accident - by which he characterizes the
relationship between the general rules and particular cases.[^49]

From viewing the relationship between the whole and its particulars as
essential, Sa’adya derives the principle of ‘unity of knowledge’ or, in
his words, “the source of wisdom is one”[^50] or “the root of knowledge
is one”.[^51] The significance of this principle may be seen on two
levels. First, knowing the substance as a whole entails knowledge of the
substance’s appearances or accidents. Second, the same essential
relations between the whole and its particulars also exist between the
subject of knowledge and the modes of its cognition: “And that which we
said regarding substance and accident also applies to the things that
are apprehended by the senses. Each one of them is apprehended by the
same sense by which its totality is apprehended. There is no sound which
is not apprehended by the sense of hearing, nor any color that is not
apprehended through the sense of sight.”[^52] This being so, the
relation between substance and accidents is the relation between the
whole and its parts, and therefore poses a three-fold correlation
between the*subjects* of knowledge, the*status* of knowledge and
the*modes* of cognition.[^53] This correlation between the metaphysical
core of the law and its epistemological modes leads Sa’adya to examine
the justification for judicial analogy against the background of the
distinction between the rational and the revelational laws.

As mentioned above, Sa’adya establishes his legal theory on the
distinction between rational and revelational laws.[^54] The basis of
this distinction lies in the idea that the intelligibility of the
rational laws is absolutely independent, whereas knowledge of the
revelational laws depends on revelation. This distinction apparently
touches the very heart of the Sa’adianic attitude towards legal
reasoning. Thus, the negation of the*qiyas* is an outcome of exhausting
the epistemological implications of the distinction between rational and
revealed laws. In that respect, Sa’adya’s objection to the use of*qiyas*
with regard to revelational laws strengthens the metaphysical weight of
the rational/revelational distinction. Sa’adya’s reflections upon the
rational/revelational distinction suggest that its source lies in the
fact that different kinds of legal knowledge apply to different kinds of
laws. That is to say, the distinction is not the result of the
limitations of human ability to comprehend the laws, but rather of a
substantive distinctiveness of the rational laws from those that are
revealed. Thus when defining the jurists’ rational activities, such as
exegesis (*tawil* ), analogy (*qiyas* ), and personal preferences
(*istihsan* ), attention should be paid to the metaphysical set-up of
rational and revelational laws and its application should therefore be
limited to the rational laws. Sa’adya disapprovingly portrays the
application of revelational laws to new cases by*ijtihād* or*qiyas* as
separating the particulars from their holistic structure. Applying
exegesis to the revelational laws is represented as an arbitrary method
that substitutes the original study. For this reason, the multiplicity
of opinions and schools do not enjoy the same legitimacy that is granted
them in the dual-stratum model.

3.2 Against the Dual-Stratum Paradigm
-------------------------------------

From Sa’adya’s statements in*Kitab Tahsil,* we know that this treatise
originally contained ten arguments against the use of*qiyas* .[^55]
Unfortunately, the extant manuscript contains only three of those ten
arguments,[^56] and they reflect the rhetorical transition from
negating*qiyas* on theoretical grounds to indicating the weaknesses of
the theories that justify it. In fact, Sa’adya’s objection to legal
reasoning can be understood as a criticism of the distinction between
revealed and derivative laws (the dual-stratum paradigm), which should
be substituted by a generic, bipolar distinction between rational and
revelational laws. Below, we shall briefly summarize Sa’sdya’s arguments
against the dual-stratum paradigm.

**Normative Differentiation:** Sa’adya argues that from the
revealed/derivative distinction one needs to derive implications
regarding the decisiveness of the different laws. Accordingly, the
revealed/derivative distinction should entail different levels of
severity vis-à-vis cases of violating the laws. That is, since
derivative laws attained by analogies are no more than human attempts to
discover the correct answer, it would be inappropriate to treat the
violations of laws equivalently. It makes no sense to punish a person
who violates a derivative-law prohibition as harshly as a person who
violates a revealed-law prohibition. In particular, Sa’adya claims that,
in order to be consistent with the dual-stratum paradigm, it is not
justified to impose severe penalties, such as capital punishment, on
violations of derivative laws, the validity of which are only probable.

**Justification of Controversy:** A further weakness of the dual-stratum
paradigm is what might be referred to as ‘the ease of justification of
controversy.’ Returning to the metaphor of seeking the right direction
of prayer, multiplicity of opinions is expected and hence
justified.[^57] However, according to Sa’adya, an*a priori*
justification of controversies with regard to derivative law confuses
between an*ante factum* justification and a*post factum* acceptance of
the multiplicity of opinions. Since the derivative law is neither more
nor lessthan an attempt to find the right answer, one must tolerate the
differences of opinion as a necessary evil, but not as something
justified*ab initio.*

**Master–Disciple Relations:** Another argument against the dual-stratum
paradigm pertains to the social structure, which is liable to be upset
in its wake. Justifying judicial analogy in practice implies acceptance
of the personal legal reasoning of each legal scholar in its own
right.[^58] Consequently, the hierarchical status of the master in
relation to the disciple is likely to be upset. Sa’adya refers in that
respect to the botanical metaphor of roots and branches in order to
reflect the didactic relationship between mentor and student, thereby
pointing out that a legal theory that justifies legal reasoning unravels
the established relationships between mentor and disciple.

The analysis of Sa’adya is a response to the classical Sunni theory of
legal reasoning and demonstrates the extent to which medieval Jewish
jurisprudential thought naturally took part in the legal discourse of
that time. His criticism of the dual-stratum paradigm is not based on
Biblical verses or principles peculiar to Jewish thought, but rather on
general philosophical arguments that could equally be made by an Islamic
jurist. Indeed, jurisprudence for Sa’adya is a formal discipline that
transcends the particular content of each religion, and therefore allows
a shared terminology and conceptual vocabulary. In the discussion below,
we will focus on modes of borrowing by which Jewish jurists favored
Islamic jurisprudential concepts above traditional categories of Jewish
law.


