4. Legal Reasoning and Judicial Error
=====================================

The reception of foreign legal institutions is not a matter of
nationality, but of usefulness and need. No one bothers to fetch a thing
from afar when he has one as good or better at home, but only a fool
would refuse quinine just because it didn’t grow in his back garden.

*Rudolf Jhering* [^59]

Despite Sa’adya’s opposition to legal reasoning, the similarities
between the Islamic theories of legal reasoning and the Jewish theories
are salient. Moreover, as shown above, even Sa’adya’s criticism is
expressed within the Islamic jurisprudential discourse as a view of an
insider.

Indeed, the dual-stratum structure also suggests a new perspective on
the phenomenon of judicial error. Erring in reference to legal norms of
the first category, principally defined as revealed norms, would simply
be considered a deviation from the existing and obligatory laws. On the
other hand, with regard to the second category, which encompasses all
derivative propositions, it would be difficult to identify valid
criteria as to what precisely is a true proposition and what is an
erroneous one. If legal reasoning itself is responding to the ingrained
limited knowledge of the law, how can we indubitably identify the
correct proposition and distinguish it from the erroneous one?[^60]

Thus, even though it entails a realistic metaphysics as discussed above
and presumes right answer to every legal problem, creating a legal norm
by legal reasoning is not measured in terms of deviation from the
‘right’ answer. Likewise it ascribes a different religious evaluation to
the phenomenon of judicial error. Indeed, in the Sunni legal tradition,
a special religious virtue is given to the jurist’s very process of
legal reasoning. Accordingly, the scholars’*ijtihād* is appraised
independently as to the results of these endeavors.[^61] Hence,*ijtihād*
is also measured as a religious deed by which the believer’s obedience
is tested.

The religious value of a mistaken judgment is well-articulated in the
famous tradition that states “He who is mistaken in his personal
judgment deserves reward, while he who judges correctly deserves a
double reward”*.* [^62] In that respect, another aspect of the reliance
on legal epistemology and theology is reflected: judicial error derived
by means of*ijtihād* is not only tolerated, but also enjoys a positive
reward since the very quest for the word of God itself is a desirable
norm. In fact, the dual-stratum paradigm enables the possibility of
judicial error and its being a test of religious obedience. A further
expression of this meaning can be seen in the words of Abu Hamd
al-Ghazali (d. 1111 CE), when he explained the problem of judicial error
in relation to this dualistic structure with the analogy to
alms-giving:[^63]

… Everything that depends on an effort of personal interpretation is of
this sort. For example, for legal almsgiving the recipient may be poor
in the personal judgment of the donor, whereas secretly he is wealthy.
This mistake is not sinful because it was based on conjecture. … In this
way the prophet and religious leaders were forced to refer the faithful
to personal interpretation, despite the risk of error. The prophet –
peace be upon him – said, ‘I judge by appearances, it is God who looks
after what is hidden.’ This means, ‘I judge according to general opinion
taken from fallible witnesses, though they may be mistaken.’ If the
prophets themselves were not immune to error in matters of personal
judgment, how much more so ourselves?

Ghazali argues against viewing the instructions of the Imam as the
ultimate solution to the problem of the incorporated restricted legal
knowledge, and instead advocates the*ijtihād* as the preferable method.
For him,*ijtihād* explicitly derives from the fundamental nature of
legal knowledge as partly revealed. Hence, fallibility is a substantive
and essential feature of the divine law itself. In that respect,
alms-giving perfectly exemplifies the shift from the result of the
ruling to the preceding intention – “since he is not punished, except in
accordance with what he thought.”

4.1 The Talmudic Typology of Judicial Errors, Sherira b. Hanina and Moses Maimonides
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Medieval Rabbinic theory of judicial error should be understood against
the background of the Talmudic reflections on this phenomenon. The
Talmud suggests the distinction between two types of judicial errors:
(1) a tolerable error, termed a discretional error (*ta’ut beshikul
hada’at* ) and which should not be reversed if occurred, as opposed to
(2) error regarding the explicit teaching of the sages (*ta’ut bedevar
mishnah* ), which should be reversed and is considered a cause for
compensation if it caused damage.[^64] The casuistic definitions of
these categories underline the scholastic perception of the law,
according to which the law is identified with the teachings of the
sages. Hence, adjudication is perceived as no more than a declaration of
the existing law; and accordingly, a deviation from the sages’ teachings
is intolerable and thus must be reversed and is subject to
compensational remedies.[^65] On the other hand, when a judge deviates
from those teachings that are not explicitly fixed, but only determined
by second-order principles, his error is tolerable and his decision
remains.

Although the account of Sherira b. Hanina[^66] on judicial error is
based on the Talmudic typology of tolerable and intolerable errors, the
meaning that he ascribes to these categories reflects a remarkable
departure from the Talmudic meanings and a deep absorption of the
Islamic theory of*qiyas* into Jewish jurisprudence. In that respect,
Sherira’s embracement of Islamic jurisprudential concepts completely
modifies the traditional setting of the law and the meaning of legal
reasoning. Consequently, he provides innovative accounts of what the law
is, what adjudication is, and what judicial error concerns. Following
the conceptual vocabulary of the law, he departs from the scholastic
perception of the law and instead favors the objectivist notion of law
combined of roots and branches. Judicial reasoning, accordingly, is
about drawing analogical linkages between roots and branches.

Moreover, Sherira not only adopts Islamic theory of legal reasoning in
preference to the Talmudic one, but he also introduces a conceptual
development by suggesting a typology of judicial errors:[^67]

In one of these two things judges err: either this legal case has a
root, [which has] a tradition or ruling, and this judge did not know it
has some resemblance [to that root], and [instead he] analogizes it to a
different root – by that he errs in*dvar mishnah* .

Or else, [when] this case is definitely a branch that has nothing in
similar with, and that judge analogizes it to a root, which is not
similar and has nothing in common with – by that he errs in*shikul
hada’at* .

This typology of judicial errors clearly ignores the Talmudic notion of
error as a deviation from, or contradiction of, the teachings of the
sages. For Sherira, judicial error is the failure to draw analogical
links between roots and branches. The difference between tolerable and
intolerable errors is therefore articulated according to the botanic
metaphor and the relations of roots and branches. By viewing judicial
error as a fallacy of analogical reasoning, Sherira expresses a position
that seeks to impose constraints on its use and therefore to limit the
range of legal solutions that may thereby be obtained. Not only does he
reject the view of analogical reasoning as that of the jurist’s personal
preference, but he also proposes a new approach according to which
executing judicial analogy requires substantive correlations between the
root and its branches. Such an attitude towards legal reasoning supports
the use of judicial analogy, but also limits the range of possible
outcomes. In fact, Sherira aspires to constitute conceptual criteria to
distinguish between valid and erroneous analogies.[^68] Perhaps such a
perception is best understood as an objectivist approach.[^69]
Accordingly, the jurist who carries out judicial analogy has to be aware
of the potential and existing resemblances and not contradict them. For
Sherira, judicial analogy is perhaps the most important tool for the
jurists. We can summarize Sherira’s position as a keen endeavor to
provide relevant meaning to the Talmudic typology of judicial error in
accordance with the Islamic theory of*qiyas* . Such relevancy is
possible with an objectivist attitude that allows the peculiar
juxtaposition of ‘erroneous analogy.’

The great medieval thinker and jurist Moses Maimonides (1135-1204 CE)
was also aware of the tension between the notion of error and analogy,
though he took a different position on this problem. As a typical
rationalist, in theology and in law, Maimonides supported the use
of*qiyas* . When dealing with the Talmudic typology of judicial errors,
he displays much sensitivity with regard to the wide range of
possibilities that can be achieved by embracing legal reasoning. His
approach to this issue expresses a sophisticated combination of
fundamentalism[^70] on the one hand, and reductionism on the other. Let
us then see his interpretation to the Talmudic categories of judicial
error:[^71]

First, I will explain that judicial error may occur in one of two
things, either with reference to [authoritative] transmitted text, as he
forgot the language or he didn’t learn it, and this is called an error
in*dvar mishnah* . And the second, when he errs in a thing depended on
analogy; as if the thing is possible as he stated, nevertheless the
[common] practice contradicts it, and this is called an error in*shikul
hadaat* .

Like Sherira, Maimonides too adopts the dual-stratum paradigm by
identifying the Talmudic categories with the distinction between*nass*
[^72] and*qiyas* . Unlike Sherira, at least*prima facie* , he is still
loyal to the essence of the Talmudic typology; he preserves the notion
of judicial error as a departure from an authorized norm. However, his
definitions of the different circumstances are not in precise reference
to the scholastic perception of the law. Yet he maintains the
distinction between deviation from a fixed authorized norm and deviation
from a norm that is fixed on the base of secondary principles. In that
respect, Maimonides fairly appears as a fundamentalist, consistent with
the Talmudic approach. Against this impression, however, his
reductionism is revealed when he immediately proceeds to insert ‘legal
reasoning’ into the category of*ta’ut beshikul hada’at* , and further
when he historicizes the Talmudic typology:

[And] this was [relevant] before the editing of the Talmud, but in our
times the possibility of this occurring has diminished, for if one
issues a ruling, and we find the opposing view in the Talmud, then he
errs in*dvar mishnah* ; and if we do not find the opposing view, and his
inferences seems probable according to the inferences of the divine law,
although there are reasons against his ruling it is impossible to
determine his [= the judge’s] error, for his analogy is possible.

Firstly, Maimonides reduces the distinction between the two errors to
modal terms – propositions from the transmitted text are necessary
truths, their epistemological status is certain and absolute, and thus
rendering any deviation is impermissible and intolerable; whereas
propositions based on legal reasoning are only possibly true, their
epistemological status is probable, and therefore error regarding such
statements is not to be reversed. Secondly, by contextualizing the
Talmudic typology in a limited historical framework, Maimonides
eliminates the possibility of discretional error (*ta’ut beshikul
hada’at* ), and in fact abolishes the relevancy of the typology of
judicial errors to post-Talmudic legal rulings.[^73]

Compared to Sherira’s absorption of the*qiyas* theory, legal reasoning
for Maimonides widens the range of possible discretion. To that extent,
Maimonides understands analogical reasoning as rhetorical means rather
than logical tool. The canonization of the Talmud is for him a watershed
moment in Jewish legal history,[^74] a crucial event to the legitimacy
of legal reasoning. Accordingly, rulings of post-Talmudic laws by
analogical reasoning are not likely to be erroneous because “it is
impossible to determine his [=the judge’s] error, for his analogy is
possible”. That, of course, reduces the Talmudic typology as only one
type of error is possible – deciding against an explicit ruling in the
Talmud. This illustrates the Maimonidean fundamentalist-reductionist
nexus: limiting the possibility of judicial errors to the Talmudic
material in fact elevates the Talmud to the level of revealed law
(*nass* ) while at the same time also annulling the possibility of
judicial errors regarding post-Talmudic cases. This being the case,
whereas Sherira stresses restrictions in order to limit the range of
possible analogies and rules out laws based upon erroneous analogies,
Maimonides denies the very possibility of post-Talmudic judicial errors
by viewing the sealing of the Talmud as an opening moment for nearly
unrestricted judicial reasoning.[^75]


