5. Concluding Reflections: Comparability and Identity
=====================================================

… more importantly, to the historian of religion, chasing origins is of
doubtful value because locating a “source” tells us next to nothing
about why Muslims bothered with it. Rather than asking: Where did it
come from? It is more fruitful to ask: What is it about this question
that fascinated Muslim controversialists? And one might also ask: What
aspects of Islam itself made this an interesting question?

Kevin Reinhart[^76]

The above accounts make the case for comparing legal reasoning in Jewish
and Islamic laws, and for asserting that the prevailing role of legal
reasoning in medieval Rabbinic legal thought should be understood
accordingly. In that regard, our analysis supports the ‘comparative
jurisprudence’ thesis according to which a jurisprudential analysis
utilizes better understanding of distinct legal praxes. Indeed, by
referring to the jurists’ constitutive imagination we comprehend the
inherency of the dualistic conceptualization to religious legalism, and
the variety of Rabbinic attitudes towards the legitimization of*qiyas*
and its limits. While Sherira adopts the semantic inventory of
the*qiyas* in preference to the Talmudic typology of judicial errors,
Maimonides aims to harmonize the Islamic theory of the*qiyas* with the
Talmudic categories, and consequently reduces the Talmudic distinction
(*devar mishnah* /*shiqul ha-da’at* ) to the Islamic one (*nass*
/*qiyas* ). By focusing on legal theory we remapped the Rabbinical
stances on the use of*qiyas* . Against a well-recognized stream of
Rabbinical jurists who celebrated the use of*qiyas* as a significant
component of any judgment and lawmaking, Sa’adya limits its relevancy
only to rational laws. Also, in jurisprudential terms, we observed the
consistency of a rationalistic worldview and the objection to the*qiyas*
(Sa’adya) and conversely the traditionalist commitment and the
embracement of legal reasoning (Sherira).[^77]

All this indicates that the above-examined jurists not only were
well-acquainted with Islamic jurisprudence, but also represent a
comparative consciousness, i.e. awareness of the comparability of both
legal systems. Accordingly, the comparison of Jewish and Islamic legal
theories from an etic perspective is justified by the comparative
consciousness at the emic level.[^78] Additionally, our analysis teaches
that the modes which a jurist uses to view a legal system as comparable
and comparison as a cognitive procedure are crucial to understand his
perspective. To comprehend better the nature of the comparative
consciousness we suggest the distinction between two comparative
attitudes –*substantiating comparison* and*incorporating comparison* .
The first views comparison as a means to confirm the uniqueness of the
compared object by underlining the differences between the objects.
Thus, the aim of comparison is to reveal the peculiar aspects of the
compared objects. Conversely, incorporating comparison is taken as a
tool to establish or to expose cross-references between the compared
objects.

These distinctive attitudes can be demonstrated through two different
accounts on the hybrid background of the Judeo-Arabic literature. Those
accounts are provided by two inspiring Jewish thinkers who lived in two
distinct historical and cultural contexts – the medieval Spanish writer
Moses Ibn Ezra (1055-1140 CE) and the modern Zionist poet Hayim Nachman
Bialik (1873-1934 CE).

H. N. Bialik, committed to a strong nationalist view, pugnaciously
condemns all literary expressions of Jewish thoughts in languages other
than Hebrew. In fact, presenting Jewish ideas in languages other than
Hebrew is, for him, not only alien to the Jewish*volksgiest* , but
rather a betrayal – an act of apostasy that threatens the nation’s very
existence. Accordingly, Bialik refers to historical evidence that
refutes such linguistic loyalty as rare exceptions. The three
counterexamples are: (1) the Alexandrian Jewry, represented by Philo (20
BCE – 50 CE), which integrated Second Temple Jewish traditions with
Hellenic cultural and intellectual values; (2) the medieval Judeo-Arabic
literature; and (3) the modern Jewish Enlightenment, represented by the
German Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn (1729-1786 CE), who saw in
the political emancipation an invitation for a genuine integration into
the European culture. While denouncing the intentional ideal of cultural
integration advocated by the Jewish Enlightenment (the*Haskalah* ), the
cultural hybridity of ancient Jewish Hellenism and medieval Jewish
Arabism is described as exceptional and marginal; historical mistakes or
mere responses to communicational needs of the masses.[^79] Obviously
Bialik explicitly embraces the nationalist worldview according to which
language and law are not only outcomes of national history but also
derivations of its very nature. In that respect, Bialik reflects a
Zionist conviction that the two national enterprises – the revival of
the Hebrew language and the parallel attempts to revitalize the Halakhic
heritage to become a modern state law – manifest the essential nature of
the nation. Consequently, Jewish jurisprudence was taken as
self-defining project, in which the comparative perspective helped to
particularize Jewish law as rooted in the nation’s soul. With such a
monothetic approach the compared objects are viewed as elements of a
wider holistic framework that stands as the collective identity.
Therefore, comparative law is a process of reconfirming national
separatist identity and mainly about stressing differences vis-à-vis
other national legal systems.

In contrast, the medieval courtier Moses ibn Ezra provides a different
account of himself and his entourage as conscious assimilators into the
Arabic culture. In his view his Jewish identity is absolutely consistent
with the hybrid consciousness of Judo-Arabic writers:

… since our monarchy was revoked and our people spread [all over] and
the nations inherited us and the sects enslaved us, we followed their
patterns, lived their lives, pursued their virtues, spoke their language
and tracked them and all their ways. As written:*But they mingled with
the nations and learned their practices* .[^80] And later on said:*so
that the holy race has intermingled with the peoples of the lands*
,[^81] apart from matters of law and religion. And because of the exile
and the changes of natural climates, the master of necessity has brought
us to be like them.

In an elegant style, Ibn Ezra neutralizes criticism of the Israelites’
assimilation among the Canaanites and the intermingling of the exiled
Jews with indigenous peoples. Instead he proposes viewing their
acculturations as natural and necessary processes. Therefore we have
here two contradicting views as to the medieval jurists’ state-of-mind:
The modern separatist disapproval of writing in the*lingua franca* and
imitating foreign patterns, and the medieval acknowledgment that deep
integration into the vernaculars is unavoidable and hence not viewed
negatively. Obviously, as a matter of method, we believe that when
trying to comprehend the relation of Halakhah to a foreign legal system
through its jurisprudence, self-accounts and their state-of-mind should
be preferred to later and external interpretations.[^82]

For Sa’adya, whether to approve the*qiyas* or not is an epistemological
question that is dependent on the metaphysics of the divine law. The
Sa’adyian phenomenology of the divine law is indeed an original
jurisprudence. In that sense, one may perhaps speak of two basic
models - vertical versus horizontal - on whose basis the different legal
theories are formulated. According to the horizontal model, and
consistent with the synthetic approach to the sources of religious
knowledge, the basic division of religious law is into rational norms
and revealed norms. This approach assigns reasoning and intellectual
activity an equal status to that of revelation. The vertical model,
however, is the dual-layered paradigm in which legal reasoning occupies
a secondary place*vis-à-vis* the knowledge known through
revelation.[^83]

In the light of the above analysis, we can refer back to the theoretical
justification of Jewish and Islamic legal systems. It appears that the
comparability of Jewish and Islamic laws stands apart from the rationale
of comparative law or comparative jurisprudence in general. Comparison
as an activity in legal studies proceeds from generalizations and not
the other way around. It requires a certain amount of “idealism,” as
there is human intentionality built into the law as social-cultural
phenomena. Legal concepts are thus recognizable by humans and as such
expressed by language. A sharable legal language presupposes a more or
less shared view of the implementation of the law, and entails
communicability because of the generality of the concepts. In that
respect, Jewish and Islamic legal traditions are not only comparable
from an etic perspective, but also from an emic perspective. Their
comparability is justified and even to be expected, because the actors
in these systems, during the Middle Ages, saw these systems as
comparable, and shaped their legal thought out of this observation.
Regarding Jewish and Islamic jurisprudence, the internal point of view,
is not only a methodological tool that enables the comparison of these
systems, but rather a comparative perspective in its own right.
Comparison of Jewish and Islamic laws is therefore not only plausible,
but in fact a necessary starting point for a proper understanding of
their development in the Middle Ages.

Cite as: Joseph E. David,*Legal Comparability and Cultural Identity: The
Case of Legal Reasoning in Jewish and Islamic Traditions* , vol. 14.1
ELECTRONIC JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LAW, (May 2010),
\<http://www.ejcl.org/141/art141-2.pdf\>.


