Chapter 3 : Meeting 2 the Tragedy of Hadith Prohibition; Roots and Reasons
==========================================================================

Meeting 2: The Tragedy of Hadith Prohibition; Roots and Reasons
Abstract Some Examples of Hadith Prohibition:

1. Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Muslim, al-Darami (the teacher of Bukhari),
al-Termethi and Nasaei narrated in their Isnad from Abu-Sa'eid
al-Khodri: The Prophet (P) said: "Do not quote me in other than the
Quran. So, whoever has written anything from me other than the Quran,
shall erase it."

2. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrated from Zaid Ibn Thabet: "The Messenger of
Allah (P) prohibited us from writing anything from him and he erased
them."

3. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrated from Abu-Horayra: "We were sitting writing
what we had heard from the Prophet (P), when the Prophet (P) arrived. He
asked what we were writing. We said: What we have heard from you. He
said: Are you (compiling) a book besides the Book of Allah? We said: (we
write) what we hear from you. He said: "Write the Book of Allah. Write
only the Book of Allah. Are you writing other than the Book of Allah?
Write only the Book of Allah." Abu-Horayra said: Following the
instruction of the Prophet (P) we collected our writings and burnt them
in a fire."

As we shall explain in this lesson 'the Ahadith of Prohibition' are
undoubtedly either fabricated to justify the mistakes of the Caliphs or
they were special instruction for specific people such as Abu-Horayra.
Remarkably, although-according to Abu-Horayra- the Prophet (P) had
prohibited him to write any Hadith, the Sunni books of Hadith is largely
filled with his narrations. In fact, in the Sunni books of Hadith no one
has narrated from the Prophet (P) more than Abu-Horayra!

**Stages of Prohibition of Hadith**

1. During the Time of the Prophet (P) Al-Darami in the introduction of
his 'Sunan' and al-Hakem in his 'al-Mostadrak' narrated from Abdullah
the son of Amr Ibn 'As: I used to write whatever I heard from the
Messenger of Allah (P) until the Qoraysh prohibited me and said to me:
Do you write anything you hear from the Prophet (P) whilst he is also a
human who has rage and pleasure? I then stopped writing the Hadith until
I informed the Prophet (P) about what the Qoraysh had told me. He
pointed to his mouth with his finger and said: "Write. By the One my
life is in His Mighty Hand, none other than truth has come out of
this."

2. In the last days of the life of the Prophet (P) "Ibn Abbas said:
when the Prophet (P) was at his dying bed there where some men around
him, among them, Omar Ibn Khattab. The Messenger of Allah (P) said to
them: Bring me a book to write something for you that you may never go
astray. Omar said: Surely the pain has inflicted the Messenger of Allah
and the Book of Allah is with you. The Book of Allah suffices us!
Following his (Omar) words those who were at the house disputed amongst
themselves. Some agreed with Omar and when the dispute and voices rose
the Messenger of Allah (P) said: Stand up and leave me for it is not
appropriate to dispute at the presence of a Prophet (P)."

3. During the reign of Abu-Bakr Al-Thahabi under the biography of
Abu-Bakr narrated: "After the demise of the Prophet (P) Abu-Bakr called
people and said: You have been narrating many Ahadith from the Prophet
(P) yet you dispute among yourselves about them. People who come after
you will dispute more about them. Thus, from now do not narrate any more
Hadith from the Prophet (P). Whoever asked you anything tell them:
Between us and you is the Book of Allah, thus accept its Halal as Halal
and accept its Haraam as Haraam."

Al-Thahabi also narrated the following event from Aiysha; the daughter
of Abu-Bakr: "My father has compiled 500 Hadith from the Prophet (P).
One night (during his caliphate) he was uneasy and did not sleep the
whole night. In the morning he called me and said: My daughter bring me
those Ahadith that I have with you. I brought them to him and he burnt
them all. He then said: I am worried lest I die and there has been any
Hadith that I have narrated it from the Prophet (P) through a person
that I assumed him to be honest and trustworthy whereas he is not. I do
not wish to carry the responsibility of a wrong narration on my neck!"

4. During the reign of Omar Ibn Sa'd narrated from Orwa: Omar decided
to write down the Ahadith of the Prophet (P). He sought the opinion of
the Companions about the matter to which they positively consented.
Nonetheless, Omar thought about it over for a month and then announced:
I had in mind to write down the Ahadith of the Prophet (P). Yet, I
remembered the nations who were before you; those who wrote their books
and abandoned the Book of Allah. By Allah! I will never mix the Book of
Allah with anything else." Ibn Sa'd continued: "Omar took an oath from
people to bring all the books of Hadith that they had compiled. When the
Companions brought their books he set them all on fire."

5. During the reign of Othman Othman sent Abu-Thar on exile to Damascus
for the so-called crime of narrating the Prophetic Hadith. Subsequently,
Mo'awiyah; the then ruler of Damascus, boycotted Abu-Thar and did not
allow anyone to communicate with him. Eventually Abu-Thar the
distinguished companion of the Prophet (P) died lonely in the wilderness
of Rabatha.

6. During the reign of Mo'awiyah "Mo'awiyah wrote an official letter
with the same content to all his delegates announcing that whoever
narrates anything in virtue of Abu-Torab (Imam Ali) or his family, he is
not under the protection of the government." Ibn Abil-Hadid furthered
that during that time the people of Kufa suffered the most.

**Analysis of the Motivations Behind the Prohibition of Hadith**

1. The best evidence of this claim is that many Companions including
Abu-Bakr had books of Hadith. Is it possible that the Prophet of Islam
(P) has forbidden something yet many Companions disobey him and do
otherwise?! The narrations concerning prohibition of Hadith indicate to
us that the Companions in general were into the good tradition of
collecting the Ahadith of the Prophet (P). It was due to this tradition
that when Omar sought their opinion about compiling the Hadith they all
consented.

2. If they were truly concerned about the forged Hadith would it not be
more reasonable to form a committee of Hadith investigation and then
compile the Ahadith that there was enough trustworthy testimonies on
them? Moreover, Abu-Bakr had accompanied the Prophet (P) for many years,
could he then not at least keep the Ahadith that he had heard directly
from the Prophet (P)? Why did he have to burn all of them?! Is it
possible that he meant to hide something from the next generations lest
they used it against him?

Abu-Bakr asserted that he was concerned about the further future
disputes amongst the Muslims and hence decided to uproot the problem by
eradicating the Prophetic Hadith! Today and for many centuries Muslims
suffer various sectarianism primarily due to the fact that the
collection of the Prophetic Hadith was prohibited over the first century
of the advent of Islam.

3. In our opinion, the main root for prohibition of the Hadith must be
sought in the critical issue of the caliphate after the Prophet (P). The
following are some proofs for this opinion:

3/1: As mentioned earlier it was Qoraysh-not the Prophet (P)- who
forbade Abdullah son of 'Amr Ibn 'As to narrate the Prophetic Hadith.
The reason mentioned in the narration is interesting: "The Prophet (P)
is only a human and has rage and pleasure." This expression is used only
when the speaker has spoken about the virtues or vices of someone else.
Surely, the Prophet of Islam (P) did not speak in favour of the Qoraysh
or else they would never abandon Abdullah from narrating it. Thus, it
seems more likely that Abdullah had collected some Ahadith that could be
used against the party of Qoraysh.

3/2: Omar had ordered the Companions of the Prophet (P) to lessen the
narrations from the Prophet (P) except if it was about the practical
laws of Islam. This again indicates that the main concern of Omar was
about the Ahadith that dealt with the virtues of his opponent, i.e. Imam
Ali (a.s). This claim can be proven by studying the trend of the Hadith
prohibition at the time of Mo'awiyah who -unlike Omar- explicitly
abandoned any narration concerning the virtues of Imam Ali (a.s).

3/3: The fabricators of the law of Hadith Prohibition did not apply it
to their sincere and loyal friends, nor would it apply to themselves.
Among those selected people on whom the law of Hadith prohibition did
not apply was the mother of the believers; Aiysha the loyal daughter of
Abu Bakr. During the reigns of Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman she was the
official spokeswoman of the government. Similarly, Omar freely
fabricated some narrations concerning himself such as "The Agreements"
(al Mowafiqaat).


**Chapter 4 : Meeting 3 The Evil COoncequences Of The Hadith
Prohibition**

Meeting 3: The Evil Consequences of the Hadith Prohibition Abstract

1. Narration not quotation The following are some examples of the
defects of not narrating the actual words of the Prophet (P): a. Asr
Prayer or Zohr Prayer:

Bukhari in his Sahih narrated from Ibn Omar saying: "The Messenger of
Allah (P) said on the Day of Ahzab: None shall offer their Asr prayers
but at Bani-Qorayzah." Muslim in his Sahih narrating from the same
narrator said: "The Messenger of Allah (P) said on the Day of Ahzab:
None shall offer their Zohr prayers but at Bani-Qorayzah."

Ibn Hajar; the best interpreter of Sahih Bukhari (died in 852 A.H)
under the interpretation of the above Hadith said: "In all versions of
Bukhari 'Asr prayers' is written, whereas in all versions of Muslim
'Zohr prayers' is written. This is despite the fact that both of them
narrated from the same source and through the same chain of narrators!"
He then in justification of the difference asserted: "Bukhari used to
write down the Ahadith from his memory and was not committed to a verbal
narration."

b. Different Formula of The Testimony

Sadly, the Sunni scholars today are left with nine different versions
of the formula for Tashahud (testimony) in their daily prayers. They
narrate different formulas from different companions. For instance, the
narration of Ibn Mas'oud is different from the narration of Ibn Abbas
and they are different from the narration of Omar Ibn Khattab. All three
are different from the narration of Abu-Sa'ed al-Khodri all of which are
different from the narration of Ayesha, etc.

Today the Tashahud of the Hanafi and Hanbali based on a narration from
Ibn Mas'oud is as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
التحيات لله و الصلوات و الطيبات . السلام عليك ايها النبي و رحمة الله و
برکاته. السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين. اشهد ان لا اله الا الله و
اشهد ان محمدا عبده و رسوله.
</p>

The Malikis Tashahud however, following a narration from Omar Ibn
Khattab is as follows: التحيات الزاکيات لله الطيبات الصلوات لله.

Imam Malik preferred this narration, for Omar had recited it publically
on the pulpit and no one objected! The Shafe'is on the other hand,
relying on a narration from Ibn Abbas say in their Tashahud:

التحيات المبارکات الصلوات الطيبات لله. السلام عليک ايها النبي و رحمة
الله و برکاته. السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين. اشهد ان محمدا رسول
الله. Problems of Narrations

The most important problem of narration -not quotation- is that very
often it may lead to a different meaning and results in distortion of
the religion. Sometimes, the narrators cannot remember the context of
the Hadith or cannot remember the actual wordings etc. Thus, they fail
to narrate the concept of the Hadith accurately. Consider the following
examples:

a. Abu-Horayrah narrated from the Prophet (P): "If there is any evil it
is in three things: the house, the woman and the horse!" The problem of
this narration is that firstly it contradicts the numerous prophetic
narrations in which the Messenger of Allah (P) prohibited pessimism.
Secondly, when Ayesha was informed about this narration she commented:
what the Prophet had said was: "The People of Jahilliyah used to say if
there is any evil it is in three things" But Abu-Horayrah was not there
to hear the first part of the Hadith. b. Bukhari in his Isnad narrated
from Ayesha who asked the Prophet (P) concerning the plague:

He said, "That was a means of torture which God used to send upon
whom-so-ever he wished, but he made it a source of mercy for the
believers, for anyone who is residing in a town in which this disease is
present, and remains there and does not leave that town, but has
patience and hopes for God's reward, and knows that nothing will befall
him except what God has written for him, then he will get such reward as
that of a martyr." [^12] The determinists Ash'aries have referred to this
narration to prove their dogma of determinism.

With the spread of such narrations the followers of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s)
refer to their Imams (a.s) to clarify their accuracy. Al-Kolayni in an
authentic Hadith from al-Halabi narrated: He asked Imam Sadiq (a.s) if
it was permissible for the people of a town afflicted by plague to
travel from one suburb to another or from that town to another? The Imam
(a.s) replied: "It doesn't matter! Verily, the Messenger of Allah (P)
prohibited that for his advanced guards who were in war with the enemies
and were afflicted by the plague. They fled from the plague. Then the
Messenger of Allah (P) said: Whoever flees from it (plague) is like the
one fleeing from war. He said so (only) to discourage his army from
vacating their bases." [^13]

**2. Fabrication of Hadith
**
It is narrated from the Prophet (P): "Whoever misquotes me deliberately
his seat shall be placed in Fire." Many Shi'a and Sunni narrators have
narrated the above Hadith. Ibn Jouzi claims that the Hadith is narrated
through more than one hundred companions of the Prophet (P). Some
scholars such as Bukhari and Nasaei have even narrated it without the
term 'deliberate'. According to them whoever misquotes the Prophet (P)
whether deliberately or not will be placed in Paradise . [^14]

The late Allama' Amini mentioned the names of forty three narrators who
had fabricated 408686 Hadith some of whom had fabricated up to one
hundred thousand Hadith. His eminence further says: "The fact the Abu
Dawood narrated only 4800 Hadith from five hundred thousand Hadith
available to him, Bukhari narrated only 2761 Hadith from among six
hundred thousand Hadith, Muslim narrated only 4000 Hadith from among
three hundred thousand Hadith, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrated 30,000 Hadith
from seven hundred and fifty thousand Hadith and Ahmad Ibn Forat
narrated only 300,000 from among one million and five hundred thousand
Hadith one can tell how actively the fabricators were working in that
time." [^15]

Allama' Askari in his book "one hundred and fifty forged companions"
proved hundreds of names, places, wars, poems and narrations that Sayf
Ibn Omar had fabricated which they have no real existence at all!

The Most Famous Fabricators

1. Mo'awiyah

Ibn Abil-Hadid quoting from Abu Abdillah Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad known as
Naftoya; the historian of the fourth century said: "Most of the
fabricated narrations in virtues of the companions were forged during
the reign of Mo'awiyah." [^16] The following are some examples of those
fabrications: a. In a very famous Hadith it is narrated from the Prophet
(P): "I am the city of knowledge and Ali is the gate of it. Whoever
intends to access the city shall enter through the gate." [^17]

The agents of Mo'awiyah manipulated the above Hadith in the following
forms:

"I am the city of knowledge and Abu Bakr is its base, and Omar is its
walls, and Othman is its ceiling and Ali is its gate." [^18] The
fabrication of this narration is so obvious. May be the cities of
Mo'awiyah had ceilings! b. It is also narrated from the Prophet (P):
"Hasan and Husain are the masters of the youth of Paradise ." In order
to dismantle the heavenly status of Hasanayn (a.s), the agents of
Mo'awiyah fabricated the following Hadith claiming that Imam Ali (a.s)
has narrated it from the Prophet (P): "Abu Bakr and Omar are the masters
of the aged people of Paradise from the beginning to the end save the
Prophets and the Messengers." [^19]

It is so obvious that the people of Paradise are all young. There is no
room for the masters, for the aged, for there is no aged person in
Paradise . c. Mo'awiyah offered one hundred thousand Dirhams to Samorah
Ibn Jondab to claim the Ayah "of the people" (2:204) is revealed
concerning Ali Ibn Abi Talib! Samorah refused until Mo'awiyah increased
the amount to four hundred thousand Dirhams and Samorah accepted the
deal! [^20]

2. Abu Horayrah To demonstrate the amount of the fabricated Hadith
produced by him it is sufficient to have a comparison between the
numbers of the Ahadith found in the Sunni books of Hadith from Imam Ali
(a.s) and that of Abu Horayrah. Imam Ali (a.s) was brought up in the
house of the Prophet (P) from the age of two, and he was the first
person who declared his testimony after its advent. All Muslims are
unanimous that none of the companions of the Prophet (P) were so
virtuous as that of Imam Ali (a.s). Nonetheless, according to Soyouti
only 58 Ahadith are narrated from Imam Ali (as.) and that is mainly on
trivial issues. Ibn Jazm further confirmed that only 50 Ahadith of what
is narrated from Imam Ali (a.s) is authentic (to their standard).
Bukhari and Muslim together have only narrated about 20 Ahadith from
Imam Ali (a.s). Interestingly, very often the Sunni narrators fabricated
a Hadith against the teachings of Ahlul-Bayt (a.s) relating it to Imam
Ali (a.s) to use it against their followers. Examples of these Ahadith
are what they have misquoted from the Imam concerning the permissibility
of wiping on the shoes (for Wudu) [^21] or prohibition of temporary
Marriage.

On the other hand, from Abu Horayrah who had only met the Prophet (P)
for less than two years, they have narrated 5374 Hadith! Thus, Abu
Horayrah in the Sunni books of Hadith is the most narrating narrator.

When Mo'awiyah rebelled against the legal government of Imam Ali (a.s),
Abu Horayrah; who could not satisfy his stomach under the just
leadership of the Imam, joined the camp of Mo'awiyah. Mo'awiyah provided
him with a palace made of agate stones in addition to a piece of land.
He also married him to Bosrah; the daughter of Ghazwan. In return he
asked Abu Horayrah to fight Ali (a.s) with his tongue (not his sword).
Mo'awiyah asked Abu Horayrah to fabricate Ahadith in virtues of
Mo'awiyah and the first caliphs. The following are some examples of
those fabrications:

1. Ibn Asakir and al-Khatib narrated from Abu Horayrah: "I heard the
Messenger of Allah (P) saying: Verily, Allah trusted three people for
His revelation; myself (the Prophet), Gabriel and Mo'awiyah!" [^22]

2. Bazzaz narrated from Abu Horayrah from the Messenger of Allah:
"Verily the sun and the moon are two bulls in Fire on the Day of
Judgment." Hasan said to Abu Horayrah: What is the sin of those two (to
suffer in Hell)? Abu Horayrah said: I narrate from the Prophet (P) and
yet you ask me why?! [^23]

3. The following is the strangest narration one could ever imagine.
Bukhari narrated a Hadith from Abu Horayrah. After he narrated the
Hadith to people, they asked him: O Abu Horayrah did you hear this from
the Prophet (P)? Abu Horayrah who was confident about the naivety of his
audience said: No, this is from the pocket of Abu Horayrah! [^24]

For further information about Abu Horayrah and his mischief in Islam
please study the two following scholarly works:


1) Abu Horayrah written by the late Allama Sharafu-Ddin al-Ameli
2) Sheikh al-Modhayrah written by the late Abu Rayyah
3. Ka'bul-Ahbar and other Jewish and Christian monks

During the reign of Mo'awiyah some Jewish rabbis and Christian monks
who had converted for their hidden agenda were employed by Mo'awiyah.
Ka'Bul-Ahbar, Tamim al-Dari, Wahab Ibn Monabbah, Abdullah Ibn Salam and
Sayf Ibn Omar were the main figures in this category. They imported
numerous distorted biblical myths into the Islamic traditions thus
causing distortion in many stories of the Quran. The scholars of Hadith
refer to these narrations as 'Israelites'. Very often these narrations
are expressed to the public by Abu Horayrah who studied under
Ka'bul-Ahbar.

**4. Ibn Abil-Ouja and other atheists**

The fourth group of people who deliberately and with evil intention
fabricated Hadith were the atheists such as Ibn Abil-Ouja. Ibn Athir in
his book of history under the events of the year 155 A.H. narrated: When
Ibn Abil-Ouja was taken to the cross for execution he said: you are
killing me whilst I have entered 4000 Hadith in your books by which I
have shown many Halal things as Haraam and many Haraam things as Halal.
I have shown the days that you are supposed to fast as feasting days and
the feasting days as fasting days!" [^25]

Motivations Behind Fabrications

1. To support a particular school

For instance, the followers of Imam Shafe'i fabricated a Hadith
relating it to Abu Horayrah claiming that the Prophet (P) said:

<p dir="rtl">
يکون في امتي رجل يقال له محمد بن ادريس اضر من ابليس و يکون في امتي رجل
يقال له ابوحنيفه هو سراج امتي.
</p>

"There shall be a man in my Ummah who will be called Muhammad ibn
Idris, he is worse than Iblis. And there shall be a man in my Ummah who
will be called Abu-Hanifa, he is the lantern of my Ummah!" [^26]

2. To Support a particular political ruler

For instance Abu-Horayrah fabricated the following narration:

<p dir="rtl">
ان الله ائتمن علي وحيه ثلاثة: انا و علي و معاوية.
</p>

"Allah concerning His revelation trusted three: I (the Prophet (P)),
Gabriel and Mo'awiyah!" [^27]

3. To Distort Islam

For instance, the Christians fabricated a Hadith in which Jesus is
shown as the only infallible person who is free from the original sin!
Bukhari narrated from Abu Horayrah:

<p dir="rtl">
کل ابن آدم يطعن الشيطان في جنبه حين يولد غير عيسي بن مريم ذهب يطعن فطعن
في الحجاب
</p>

"Satan hits the side of all the children of Adam at birth save Jesus
son of Mary. He went to hit him too but he hit a veil."


